THE HVMILIATION of the SON of GOD, BY HIS BECOMING the Son of man, by
taking the form of a Servant, and by his sufferings under Pontius Pilat, etc.

OR THE EIGHTH BOOK OF COMMENTARIES UPON the Apostles CREED:

CONTINVED BY THOMAS JACKSON DR. in Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty in
ordinary, and President of Corpus Christi College in OXFORD.

Divided into four Sections.

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his shop
under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. MDCXXXV.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL Arguments of the several Sections and Chapters
contained in this BOOK.
SECTION. I. OF the Humiliation of the Son of God, and the end why he did so
humble himself in the general. Page 3.
1. Chap. In what sense the Son of God is said to have humbled himself. 3 2.
That the dignity from which the Son of God had descended, and unto which the
Son of man was to be exalted, were testified by many signs and documents
during the time of his humiliation. 9 3. Whether our sins could have been
remitted without the humiliation of the Son of God, is a point not determinable
by men: That the manner of the remitting our sins by his humiliation, was the
most admirable way, which Wisdom, Justice, or Mercy could require. 17 4. From
what beginning the Devil is said by S. John to sin. Whether sin consist in
mere privation, or have a positive entity, or a cause truly efficient, not
deficient only. 29 5. Of the first sin of Angels and man, and wherein it did
especially consist. 41
SECTION. II. OF the more special qualifications, and undertakings of the Son
of God for dissolving the works which the Devil had wrought in our first
Parents, and in our nature, and for cancelling the bond of mankindes servitude
unto Satan. 51
6. Chap. Of the peculiar qualifications of the Son of God for dissolving the
first actual sin of our first Parents, and the relics of it, whether in
them, or in us their sinful posterity. ib. 7. Of Legal servants, and of the
analogy betwixt their Civil estate, and the estate of wicked men. 63 8. The
Son of God was properly a servant to his Father, yet not by birth as he was the
son of his handmaid, but by voluntary undergoing this hard condition for the
redemption of man. 69 9. Gods servant Job the most illustrious Type of the Son
of God, as he was invested with the form of a servant. 81 10. How the Son
of God did conquer Satan at those weapons, wherewith he had conquered our
first Parents. 89 11. A parallel between Jobs second temptation, and the Son of
Gods sufferings in our flesh before the hour of his Agony or his Cross. 97
12. Of Christ's full satisfaction for the sins of men, and whether to this
satisfaction the suffering of Hell pains were necessarily required: And of the
Circumstances of his Agony. 111 13. The bloody sacrifice of the Son of God, was
all sufficient to make full satisfaction for the sins of the world, without his
suffering of any supernatural or unknowen pains. 138 14. That our Savior in
his Agony (at least) did suffer pains more then natural, though not the
pains of Hell or Hellish pains: That the suffering of such pains was not
required for making satisfaction for our sins, but for his Conquest over Satan.
152 15. Christ's suffering of the unknowen pains, or of pains greater then ever
any of his Martyrs or others in this life have suffered, requisite for his
qualification, as he was to become the high Priest of our souls. 163
SECTION. III. OF the harmonicall parallel between the predictions or types of
the old Testament, and the Evangelicall relations, concerning our Saviors
triumphant coming unto Jerusalem, and of his entertainment there, until the
institution of his Supper. 172
16. Chap. Of the King of Sions coming to Jerusalem, and how the manner of his
coming was for circumstance of time, prefigured by the Law or rite of the
Paschall Lamb; and for other circumstances, expressly foretold by the Prophet
Zachary. ib. 17. A Comment or Paraphrase upon the first eight verses of the
ninth of Zachary: And of the connection betwixt them and the ninth verse, in
which the manner of our Saviors coming to Jerusalem was most expressly
foretold. 179 18. The fulfilling of Zachariah his Prophecy, Cap. 9. ver. 9.
recorded by all the Evangelists; but most fully and most punctually by S.
Matthew. 196 19. Of the meaning or importance of [ Hosanna to the Son of
David.] 213 20. At what time and upon what occasions the 118. Psalm was
composed; And at what solemn Feast especially used. 219 21. That the Messiah
was to be proclaimed King of Sion at some one or other of their great and
solemn Feasts, was a prenotion or received opinion amongst the Jews. 234 22*
That the honor done to our Savior at his coming to Jerusalem, did (though
not in the distinct apprehension of the multitude or of his Disciples)
concludently declare him to be the Son of God, or the God of their Fathers. 245
SECTION. IV. THe Evangelicall relations of the indignities done unto our
Savior by sinful men, and of his patience in suffering them, respectively
prefigured and foretold by the Prophets and other sacred Writers: Or a Comment
upon the Evangelicall History, from the institution of his Supper unto his
death and burial. 256
23. Chap. Of the betraying of our Savior, of his apprehension, and dismission
of his Disciples: And how they were foretold or prefigured in the old
Testament. ib. 24. Of the predictions or prefigurations of our Saviors
sufferings after his apprehension in the high Priests hall, etc. 270 25. The
unjust proceedings of the high Priest and Elders against the Son of God, were
punctually foretold by the Prophets. 284 26. The false accusations made by the
Priests, and Elders against the Son of God, when they brought him before Pilat,
foretold by our Savior himself and by the Prophets. 292 27. Of such
repentance as Judas found: of his casting down the thirty pieces of silver in
the Temple: and of the difficulties or variety of opinions, by which of the
Prophets it was foretold. 301 28. The clear resolution of the third difficulty
proposed: of the fearful end of Judas, and how it was both forepictured, and
foretold. 317 29. Of the Harmony betwixt the Evangelists narrations or history
[from the time our Savior was sentenced to death, until his expiration upon
the Cross:] and the Mosaicall prefigurations or Prophecies concerning his
death and sufferings. 327 30. That the Son of God should be offered up in
bloody sacrifice, was condudently prefigured by the intended death of Isaac.
349 31. That the Son of God should be offered upon a tree or cross, was
prefigured by Moses his erection of the brazen Serpent in the wilderness. 355
32. That the Son of God should suffer without the gates of Jerusalem,
prefigured by the sacrifice of the atonement. 364 33. At what hour of the day
our Savior was crucified, at what hour taken down from the Cross, and of
the mysteries ensuing his death. 370
FINIS.
PErlegilibrum hunc, [cui titulus est, The humiliation of the Son of God, etc.]
in quo nihil reperio quo minus summa cum utilitate imprimatur.

Ex Aedibus Fulham: June 22. Sa: Ba^^er R. P. Episc: Land: Cap. domest.

Errata.
Page 27. line 7. for else be read else there be p. 60. l. 4. for (...) but:
(...) read (...), but (...) p. 70. l. 24. for the first way r. the fittest way
p. 95. l. 27. for nor r. not p. 283. l. 21. for unto by him r. unto him by

THE HVMILIATION OF THE SON OF GOD: OR The eighth Book of Commentaries upon
the Apostles CREED.
THat the man CHRIST JESUS was truly and properly the Son of God, not from
his conception, birth, or circumcision, but from eternity: That the Son of
God was so made man in time, that whilst the man Christ Jesus was conceived,
borne, and circumcised; He who was the Son of God, and God our Lord from
eternity, was conceived, borne and circumcised in our flesh, has been, though
not the entire subject, yet the maine scope of a former Treatise. Unto which by
the assistance of this JESUS, and his holy Spirit, we now endeavor to annexe
this present Treatise or Eighth Book of Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed;
the subject and scope whereof is to show, that the same God, and our Lord, who
was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, etc. did, (according
to the Scripture before extant) suffer under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, etc.

Besides that which has been delivered concerning this Jesus and our Lord, all
that we are in these Comments to prosecute or meddle with (until we come unto
the article of his coming to judge the Quick and the Dead, and the
accomplishment of a Treatise already begun, concerning the Holy Catholic
Church) will fall under these generals, The Humiliation, The Exaltation, And
Consecration of the Son of God to the everlasting Priesthood.

Of his Humiliation, his death and sufferings: Of his Exaltion, his
resurrection from the dead, his ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right
hand of God, were the periods, or accomplishments: Of his Co^secratio^ to his
everlasting Priesthood, his Agony, and bloody death, his rest three days and
three nights in the grave, and resurrection thence, were the principal, though
not the only parts. To begin with his Humiliation.

SECTION I. Of the Humiliation of the Son of God, and the end why he did so
humble himself in the general.
CHAP. I. In what sense the Son of God is said to have humbled himself.
1 ALbeit, the humiliation of the Son of God our Lord be not expressly mentioned
in the Apostles Creed, yet is it so emphatically expressed in Canonical
Scriptures (whence the Articles of our Creed are taken, by whose rules they are
to be interpreted,) that no man which admits the Scripture to be a rule of
Christian faith and practice, can deny this humiliation of the Son of God to
be a fundamental point of belief, and rule of manners, and practice truly
Christian. As to omit other Texts for the present, that one of our Apostle S.
Phil. ^. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Paul shall suffice, Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind; let each esteem others better than themselves. Look not
every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let
this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. If we consider this
humiliation of Christ our Savior in its general or abstract notion, not as
restrained unto particular circumstances of his death and sufferings, it is in
some sort more peculiar to him as he was and is the Son of God, than the
matter of any other article following in this Creed. For when we say (as we
must believe) that the only Son of God was borne, was circumcised, did suffer
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried, these and the like
speeches can be no other ways verified of him, as he is God, than per
communicationem idiomatum: That is, the matters signified by these and the like
speeches had their beginning and real existence in his humane nature. For that
alone was really capable of weakness, sorrow, infirmity, and of death: Yet in
as much as the whole humane nature it self was but an Appendix of his divine
person, (no person distinct from it) whatsoever Christ Jesus did do or suffer
in this nature, was done, and suffered by the eternal Son of God. The Son
of God was truly humbled, in, and according to this nature in all his
natural, and more than natural sufferings, from his birth to his death. Yet
may we not say, that this Son of God did humble himself only in these or the
like undertakings, whereof the humane nature alone was really capable. That
exinanition, or nullifying of himself, mentioned by our Apostle ( Phil. 2.7.)
did not take its beginning from or in the manhood, but in and from the divine
person of the Son of God. For it was no physical passion or natural
affection, no passion at all, either natural or supernatural, yet a true and
proper humiliation more than civil, though better resembled by humiliation
civil, than by natural. His obedience did not merely consist in his patient
suffering, but in the submission of himself to his Fathers will, before he
suffered. Most willing he was to take upon him the form of a servant, before
he actually took our nature upon him for our redemption; before the Angel
Gabriell was sent unto the blessed Virgin; before the Psalm. 40. ver. 6, 7, 8.
Psalmist had said on his behalf, Sacrifice and offering thou would not:
but a body have thou prepared me; in burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin
thou have had no pleasure: then said I, lo I come; in the volume of the book
it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O God. This unconceiveable
manner of his unexpressible willingness to do his Fathers will, was the very
life and soul of that most admirable obedience of his humane will to do and
suffer whatsoever he did or suffered in our flesh: That, which gave the
infinite value, and everlasting efficacy to his everlasting sacrifice, which
was offered once for all.

2. For taking a true, though an imperfect scale (for such is the best that man
can take) of his humiliation and obedience, we are to scan the meaning of our
Apostle in the forecited place more particularly. He was, says our Apostle,
(...), in the form of God; the original implies the very essence or nature
of God. As much as we are taught to believe in the Nicene or Athanasius Creed,
where it is said, He was of one substance with the Father, etc. He was so in
the form of God, or so truly God, that he thought it no robbery, (no
usurpation of any dignity which was not his own by right of nature) to account
himself equal with God. It was no robbery so to account himself, because he
knew himself so to be. Yet says the Apostle, (...), he did (as it were) empty
himself, or sequester this his greatness, and became less, or lower than the
sons of men, (...), by taking upon him the essential state or condition of a
servant: being first made substantially man, that he might be for a time
essentially and formally a servant. For though every man be not a servant, yet
every servant must be a man. Now the Son of God being thus found in the form
and garb of a man, and in the formal condition of a servant, He humbled
himself yet lower, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross. And that was a kind of death unto which by the Roman Laws, (whereunto
he yielded obedience) none but slaves, or malefactors of servile condition were
liable. And how ever, many of this state or condition, were put unto this
ignominious death; yet none besides the man Christ Jesus did ever suffer it out
of obedience or willingly, but for want of power to resist or eschew it. Had it
been in the power of the most abject slaves that ever did suffer it, to have
called in but half so many Roman soldiers to their rescue, as Christ Jesus
could have commanded of celestial Angels, they would have sold their lives at
a dearer rate, than the Emperors did, which were slain in battle or mutiny.

3. But the man CHRIST JESUS, who was also the true Son of God, and who in
that he was the wisdom of God, did better know the horror or pains of a
lingering death before he had experience of it as man, than any creature man or
Angel, can do: when HE was afflicted and tormented, yet he opened not his
mouth; but was brought (unto his Cross) like a Lamb unto the slaughter, and
as a sheep before his shearer is dumb, so opened he not his mouth. Isa. 53.7.
This far exceeded all obedience of any man whether free borne, or a slave. His
patience in all his sufferings did far exceed the patience of dumb creatures,
of Lambs themselves, of worms, or meaner sensible passives. For none of them
does dye a violent death without striving or reluctance, without endeavor to
annoy such as afflict or torment them: Whereas this Lamb of God, to show
himself to be the mirror of patience and obedience, did pray for his
persecutors, after the pangs of death more then natural, had seized upon him;
after he had been buffetted, spit upon, scourged, and every way most
disgracefully abused; whilst he endured the lingering and cruel torments of
the Cross, exasperated with bitter scoffs and revilings of his unrelenting
persecutors, (uncessantly pouring vinegar in stead of oil into his wounds,)
gave not the least signification of discontent, either by word or gesture
toward God or man; unless some happily will put a sinister interpretation upon
that exclamation when he was ready to dye, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? But of the purport of this exclamation, by Gods assistance, in its
due time and place. In the interim without prejudice to any man's person or
authority, I rest persuaded that this speech bears no character of
discontent, much less of despair. To conclude this point, As there never was
any sorrow like to his sorrow in his sufferings, so was there no obedience, nor
ever shall be any obedience, like to his from the beginning to the end of his
sufferings. This did farther exceed all his sorrows, than his sorrows did the
pains and sorrows of other men.

CHAP. 2. That the dignity from which the Son of God had descended, and unto
which the Son of man was to be exalted, were testified by many signs and
documents during the time of his humiliation.
1. Unto this admirable lowliness of obedience, God awarded a correspondent
degree of exaltation. For so the Apostle infers in the words immediately
following, Philip. 2.9. etc. Wherefore (or for this cause) God also has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name; that at the name
of JESUS every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth: and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The same Apostle, Romans 14.9. tells us,
To this end Christ both dyed, rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of
the dead and living. As man he was made Lord from his resurrection, but as the
Son of God, and a distinct person from his Father, he was Lord from eternity:
as to omit other places before cited, our Apostles inference in the 14. of the
Romans, ver. 10.11. will make clear to any Christian that can take it into
due consideration, We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. How
is this proved, or whence had our Apostle himself this revelation? From the
Prophet Isaiah Chap. 45. ver. 10. For there it is written, As I live says the
Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess unto God.
Christ then not as man, but as God, was that Lord in whose name the Prophet
speaks this, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me.

2. Had this Lord the only Son of God taken our nature upon him, though
adorned even from the first moment of its assumption with such majesty and
glory, as now it is; yet the assumption of it would have been an humiliation
of the Son of God, not physical, but rather (as I said) civil, or ad modum
civilis humiliationis, an incomparable and unparalleld affability, an
incomprehensible loving kindness. But for this Lord to be incarnate for us of
a Virgin, to take our nature upon him charged with mortality and infirmities,
to surcharge our ordinary humane conditions with the extraordinary estate of a
servant; to burden this hard servitude with pain and torture, with disgrace
and ignominies, more than servitude humane is capable of; This was that
unexpressible humiliation and incomprehensible loving kindness toward us
miserable men, which our Apostle so emphatically sets forth for our pattern
in submitting our wills to his most holy will, as he did his unto his Fathers.
And our Lord himself requires that we should be humble, as he is humble: not
according to the measure of his humiliation, for that is as impossible for us,
as to be as perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, or as holy, as he is
holy; Yet must we be truly holy, as our heavenly Father is holy, and sincerely
humble as the Son of God our Lord and Savior was humble. Our humiliation or
obedience to his will, though it must be true, not hypocritical; yet in this
life at the best, and in the best of men is imperfect in comparison of the
obedience of heavenly Angels, though theirs be but finite. But the depth of the
humiliation of the Son of God is, as he is, immensurable, truly infinite.
Higher than God he could not be, but so high he was in glory and dignity from
eternity: yet lower than man, than the most abject of the Sons of men, he
vouchsafed for a time to be, that we might be at least made equal to the
Angels; even Lords and Kings unto God, of slaves by birth and condition unto
infernal Tyrans.

3. But could he not have thus advanced us without any depression or
humiliation of himself? could not we sons of men be made happy without the
misery and sorrow of the Son of God? The answer to this Quaere will find place
hereafter. That which for the present deserves our consideration, is that in
all the several degrees of his humiliation, God the Father was still pleased
to exhibit some visible documents, or sensible manifestations of that glory and
dignity, whereof his Son for a time had divested himself, and of that glory
unto which as man for his faithful service done in our nature he was to be
exalted. His birth, we know, was mean in the eyes of men, his entertainment
at his first coming into the world, (for lodging especially,) more despicable
than the lodging or entertainment of poenitentiary Pilgrims. Yet then
welcomed into the world by an host of Angels sounding out gratulatory Hymns
unto God for the comfort of us miserable men, for whose sakes he who was their
supreme Lord, did vouchsafe to descend thus low; and while they congratulate
us, they do truly adore him. But seeing the ditties of their congratulatory
hymns were heard only by some few, and those men of meaner rank in Jury; God
would have his glory proclaimed by those wise and potent men, which had seen
his star in the East, and from the glorious appearance or secret significations
made to them of it, came in person, first to Jerusalem, then to Bethleem, to
tender that homage and service to this Infant, which they scorned to perform
to Herod, or Augustus Caesar, of whose greatness no doubt they had heard, but
did not admire or esteem it in comparison of this late borne King of the Jews.
These and other glimpses of that glory which was due unto him perpetually as
man, though publicly manifested, did not so much affect the stubborn hearted
Jews, as the meanness of his ordinary condition or state of life did offend
them. No question but that voice which came from heaven at his Baptism, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, was heard by more than by John
Baptist, and both testified and proclaimed by him to them that heard it not;
and yet forgotten by most within three years space: so deeply forgotten, that
they did not call to memory, at least not lay it to heart, upon the second
publication of his glory. For some few days before his sufferings, the like
encomiasme of that glory which was due unto him as he was the Son of God, was
proclaimed from heaven, upon his prayers to this purpose, when his soul was
heavy and troubled with expectation of approaching sorrows, John 12 26. etc. If
any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my
servant be. If any man serve me, him also will my Father honor. Now is my
soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for
this cause came I unto this hour. Father* glorify thy name. Then came there a
voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it
again. This document of his glory was more public than the former, and the
end and scope of it more solemnly avouched by himself, ver. 29.30. The people
therefore that stood by and heard it, said, that it thundered: Others said, an
Angel spoke to him. JESUS answered, and said, This voice came not because of
me, but for your sakes.

4. Yet even this gleame of his glorious brightness, wherewith the peoples
eyes were for the present dazeled, was shortly after so overclouded with the
ignominies and indignities done unto him at his attachment, arrainment and
execution, that his very Disciples had almost quite forgotten it. For so two of
them give this and other glorious documents of his dignities for lost, after
they had heard the news of his resurrection. We trusted (say they) that it had
been he, which should have redeemed Israel. Luke 24.21. And what reason or
pretense had they not to trust so still? Only because the chief Priests and
Rulers had delivered him to be condemned to death, and had crucified him. ver.
20. A strange drowsinesse had fallen upon them, in that they could not foresee
that the day of his glorious Reign over Israel thus foretokened by these and
the like scattered rays or dawnings, was to be ushered by a troublesome night
of sorrows and sufferings; and with this stupidity himself upbraids them. Then
he said unto them, O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets
have spoken: Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to have entered
into his glory? Luke 24.25, 26. Now all the sufferings, and other Eclipses of
this Sun of righteousness, were as clearly foretold as his future glory;
both by express testimony and typical matter of fact. By express testimony,
Isaiah 53.1, 2, 3. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a
root out of a dry ground: He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall
see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised, and
rejected, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were,
our faces from him. He was despised, and we esteemed him not.

5. But were those other interposed flashes of this day stars brightness
exhibited at his birth or first arising; at his Baptism, and at his passion as
clearly foretold as the Eclipse of it in his sufferings? That the Angelical
song or service of Angels at his nativity were foretold by the Psalmist, Psalm.
97.7, I ever took it, following the paths of the ancient, as a plain case
void of scruple, until Ribera stumbled me in my course with a criticisme upon
the Apostles allegation of this passage, Heb. 1.6. And again when he brings
in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God
worship him. So our English, so Erasmus, and some of the most accurate Greek
Interpreters according to the sense and meaning of our English. But this
learned Commentator renders it thus, (I must confess verbatim according to the
original) Et cum iterum introducit primogenitum in orbem terrae; When he
brings his first begotten again into the world, the words in the original
are thus, (...), not (...). Upon this ground this good Writer takes liberty to
dissent from the best Commentators that had gone before him, and peremptorily
denies this place to be meant of the Son of Gods first coming into the world.
And it cannot be denied, but that this 97. Psalm contains a remarkable
Prophecy, that the Son of God, or God of Israel should be made Lord and King,
and Judge of the world by peculiar right. This is one of those many places
which (as in the former book has been observed) cannot be meant of any, save
only of him who was truly God, and yet could not be punctually fulfilled,
save only of God incarnate. But Ribera should have considered that one and the
same passage in any Psalm or Prophecy might have been fulfilled in God
incarnate at several times, and alike literally refer to several
manifestations whether of his glory or of his sufferings. Yea sometimes See the
seventh book. cap. 17.. 5.
one and the same place or proposition may literally and punctually refer both
to his humiliation and exaltation, as that of the 8. Psalm. ver. 5. Thou have
made him little lower than the Angels; and have crowned him with glory and
honor. Now if one and the same passage or prediction may be punctually
fulfilled of God incarnate at several times, or at his nativity, his baptism,
his transfiguration, and resurrection, etc. much more may several passages in
one and the same Psalm, or other prophecies be respectively fulfilled, some of
his Nativitie or resurrection; other of his coming to judgment. It is then no
concludent proof, which Ribera brings in prejudice of the Ancient to
strengthen his own opinion, that the testimony alleged by the Apostle, Hebr.
1.6. out of Psalm 97. cannot be literally meant of our Lord and Saviors
Nativitie; because the chief scope of that place, is to foretell his coming to
judge the world, when he shall be attended with an host of Angels. For if this
attendance and obsequie be performed unto him, as is probable, by the whole
host of Heaven; the celebration of his Nativitie, or first coming into the
world by a band or company of these heavenly soldiers (how many, or how few,
God only knows) might be and certainly was a pledge or praeludium. Nor does
the placing of the words in the original necessarily argue but that the word
(...) may have the same sense that it had in former places, that is, only a
repetition of testimonies without express reference to Christ's first or second
coming.

In that 40. of Isaiah In the 7. Book, and 28. Chap.
before expounded, some passages (if not one and the same) literally refer to
the incarnation, or first manifestation of the Word in the flesh, others to the
declaration of him to be the Son of God at his Baptism, which John Baptist
acknowledged to be the end and tenor of his Embassage. Where and in what
manner that transcendent glimpse which was exhibited in the (...) of his
humiliation, Ioh. 12.28. was foretold, and fore-signified in its proper place.
But the former quaere here opportunely presents it self again; seeing such
glory as these glimpses did portend, was due unto him perpetually, what
necessity or urgent convenience was there that he should be made so low, and
so strangely humbled.

CHAP. III. Whether our sins could have been remitted without the
humiliation of the Son of God, is a point not determinable by men: That the
manner of the remitting our sins by his humiliation, was the most admirable
way, which Wisdom, Justice, or Mercy could require.
1 PEremptorily to avouch that God could not have remitted the sins of our
first Parents without full satisfaction, nor advanced their sinful seed unto
glory without the disgraceful sufferings of his only Son, would by some,
and well might be censured for a saucy doctrine: A doctrine, more derogatory
from the Omnipotent Majesty, than it would be to prerogatives Royal, to deny
Kings or free Princes invested with it, the exercise of that most princely
virtue, Clemency, or to grant a prohibition against them in case they should
freely forgive offenses committed against themselves, or afterward honor the
parties thus freely forgiven upon their extraordinary thankfulness for such
gracious favors. This benignity no loyal Subject will grudge or repine at,
when it is practiced by his liege Lord and Sovereign; and shall we deny the
like freedom to infinite Majesty, whereof benignity, and graciousnesse
infinite, is (to speak after the manner of men) a special branch or dimension.

2. Yet on the other side resolutely to determine that the sins of our first
Parents could have been remitted without satisfaction, or their seed advanced
to glory without the humiliation of the Son of God; would be a rash, if not
an unsound resolution. For albeit we take it for granted, that earthly Princes
of the best temper may freely pardon any offenses against themselves, and
crown this special favor with the advancement of the persons so offending,
to higher place and greater honor than formerly they did enjoy: yet will it
not hence follow, that the Omnipotent and most just Judge might have done the
like. For, he is not of Majesty or of gracious goodness only, but of justice
truly infinite; the immutable and indispensible rule of justice and goodness.
And he alone who is wisdom truly infinite, can determine whether the
remission of men's sins without satisfaction, or the award of glory without
some interposition of merits, do not imply some contradiction to the rule of
justice infinite, which they do not imply to infinite Majesty or benignity.
The greatest Majesty on earth may more justly pardon offenses done against
themselves, than they can do the like offenses against the public Law it
self, or the community of men under their government. For earthly Princes how
great or good soever they be, are no living laws of goodness, no living rules
of justice. This is the praerogative of the Almighty Lord to be both a most
righteous Judge, and the very Law or Idaeall rule of righteousness.

3. Not Princes only, but every private person, or public Magistrate (so
they sit not in the seat of Justice) may pardon a crime for its nature
capital, if it be only committed against themselves; as if a servant should
take his masters purse, not by violence, but unwarily laid aside, and deny the
finding, taking, or restoring of it; the master may without wounding his
conscience dismiss the party delinquent of his service, without calling his
life in question, although the crime be by humane law capital. Nor should the
master, I take it, by this clemency incur the danger of the humane Law, if he
be as well content to lose the money, as the delinquents service. In this case
he may do to the worst of his servants as he desires it may be done to him,
if his case or condition were the same. But if of a private master, he should
become a public Judge, and show the same favor to him that had been his
servant, being arraigned for the like offense committed against another; he
should hereby grievously transgress both the Law of God and man. The true
reason whereof is not because the former rule [ Of doing as he would be done
unto] does hold, as one of late (out of the spirit of contradiction rather than
judgment) has taught; not universally or always, but ad plurimum, for the
most part, or now and then, or more certainly in private men than public
Magistrates. For they especially are most strictly tied to that fundamental
rule of justice and equity of doing as they would be done unto. But seeing, as
the great Casuist Gerson somewhere observes, Every Judge sustaines a double
person; one of his own, as he is subject to the like infirmities with other
men; another of the Public Weal, or Community wherein he lives. Hence it
is, or should be, that how merciful or gracious soever he be by natural
disposition, or grace; yet when he ascends the seat of Justice, he must lay
aside his private person, all private considerations, and arm himself with
the public. Now the object of the observance of the former rule, of doing as
he would be done unto, is not the person or party accused or arraigned, but
the persons whom he wronged, or may hereafter wrong. The greatest Judge in
this case must do to the Common Weal, whereof he himself is a member, as he
desires is should be done to himself in like case, that is, to right them when
they are wronged, and to protect them from further danger, by putting wholesome
laws in execution, for cutting off noisome members of public Society.

4. But what of all this? God is no member of any Community, being in himself
far greater, and better than the whole Universe of things visible and
invisible; and for this reason not bound to conform himself to any of the
former rules; which greatest Princes are by his Law bound to observe. However,
he is immutable goodness it self, more than the rule of all those rules of
mercy, justice, and goodness which he enjoines us to follow. It is most true,
he can do whatsoever he will, yet cannot any thing be willed by him that is
contrary to goodness, justice, or mercy. Though his mercies exceed the mercies
of the best of men; yet some sins there are which exempt men from
participation of his mercies, sins unpardonable to mercy it self: So says
our Savior, Mar. 3.28, 29. Verily I say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven
unto the sons of men, and blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall blaspheme.
But he that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, has never forgiveness,
but is in danger of eternal damnation. And S. Matthew more fully, Chap. 12.
ver.31. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men* but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. It
is not the sole infinity of that Majesty against which we sin, that makes
the sin so unpardonable. For the Father is of infinite Majesty, the Son is
of infinite Majesty, and the holy Ghost can be no more: their Majesty and
glory is coeternall, and coequall. The sin here meant then cannot be any
special sin more offensive against the person of the holy Ghost, then
against the person of the Father, or the Son. Nor is it (whatsoever else it
be) any one sin specifically distinct from other sins, as murder is from
lust, or lust from pride and envy, but rather a confluence of many grievous
sins: It always presupposes a great measure of long continued contempt of
Gods special favor, gifts, or goodness. Those whom our Savior in the
forecited places forewarnes, as being at the pit brink of this infernal
bottomless sin, were as S. Mark tells us, Scribes that came down from
Jerusalem, Mark. 3.22. and as S. Matthew adds, Pharisees too, Matthew. 12.24.
Both of them had seen or heard our Saviors miracles which were so pregnant
that they could not deny the truth of them. The particular miracle which
occasioned this discourse, was the healing of one possessed of a Devil,
insomuch that being blind and dumb before, he both spoke and saw; and all the
people were amazed, and said, Is this the son of David? And when the
Pharisees heard it, (or as S. Mark adds, the Scribes which came down from
Jerusalem) they said, this fellow does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub,
the Prince of Devils, Matt. 12.22. Mark. 3.24. And S. Mark giving the reason
why our Savior, after he had called the Scribes and Pharisees to him, and
debated this controversy with them, did forewarne them in special of this
dangerous sin, adds, Because they said, he has an unclean spirit, Mark.
3.30.

5. Into this fearful sin, or rather high measure of sin, of whose danger
our Savior so graciously forewarnes these Scribes and Pharisees; those convert
Hebrews to whom S. Paul wrote that excellent Epistle, were ready without his
like admonitions to fall. It is impossible (says he) for those men who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the power of the
world to come: If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance:
seeing they crucify unto themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame. For the earth, which drinks in the rain that comes often upon
it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing from God. But that which brings forth thorns and briers, is
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.4, 5,
etc. Others perhaps in those times had either incurred this sentence here
denounced, or stood in greater danger than these Hebrews did, of whom our
Apostle at this time had good hope; But beloved, we are persuaded better
things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak. For
God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have
showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered toward his Saints, and do
minister, Heb. 6.9.10. Of our Apostles punctual meaning, or sense in these two
verses last cited, as of all the rest unto the end of the Chapter, I shall have
occasion hereafter to treat. Of the former verses, I have no more for this
present, or hereafter (for ought I know) to say, then this; That their meaning,
if any be disposed to scan them more exactly, may (I take it) be best
illustrated by the type or parallel exhibited in the days of Moses, in those
men which were excluded by oath from the land of Canaan, Number. 14.20, 21, 22,
23. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word. But as truly as
I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord. Because all
those men, which have seen my glory and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and
in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not
hearkened to my voice; Surely they shall not see the land which I swear unto
their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it. All these,
which were all the Males of Israel above twenty years of age, save Caleb,
Joshua, and Moses, (who was in part involved in this sentence) did bear a true
type, or shadow of those who offending in like manner against Christ and his
Gospel, we call Reprobates, yet not so true types of such a sin against the
holy Ghost, as those which went to search the land of Canaan. And the men which
Moses sent to search the land, who returned and made all the Congregation to
murmr against him, by bringing up a slander upon she land. Even those men
that did bring up the evil report upon the land (after they had seen the
goodlinesse, and tasted the pleasant fruits of it) died of the plague before
the Lord. But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
were of the men that went to search the land, lived still: and many happy days
after that time, Numb. 14.36, 37, 38.

6. Very probable it is, though I will not determine pro or con, that the
irremissible sin whereof our Savior and S. Paul speak, for which there
remains no satisfaction, was if dot peculiar, yet Epidemicall unto those
primitive times, wherein the kingdom of heaven was first planted here on earth
by our Savior: and the holy Catholic Church was in erection by the ministry
of the Apostles, or in times wherein the extraordinary gifts of the holy Spirit
were most plentiful, and most conspicuous. Even in those times, into this
woeful estate none could fall, which had not tasted of the heavenly gift, of
the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, and had not been
partakers of the holy Ghost. Nor did such men fall away by ordinary sins, but
by relaps into Jewish blasphemy, or heathenish Idolatry, and malicious slander
of the kingdom of heaven, of whose power they had tasted. God was good to all
his creatures in their creation, and better to men in their redemption by
Christ: of this later goodness all men werein some degree partakers. The
contempt, or neglect of this goodness was not irremissible: the parties thus
far offending, and no further, were not excluded from the benefit of Christ's
satisfaction, or from renewing by repentance: but of the gifts of the Spirit
which was plentifully poured out after our Saviors ascension, all were not
partakers. This was a special favor, or peculiar goodness, whose continued
contempt, or solemn abrenuntiation by relapse either into heathenisme, or
Jewish blasphemy was unpardonable; not in that it was a sin peculiarly
committed against the person of the holy Ghost, but because it did include an
extraordinary opposition unto the indispensable law of justice, or goodness,
which God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are.

7. Some sins then there be, or some measure of them, which being made up, no
satisfaction will be accepted for them. It is impossible according to the
sacred phrase, that the parties thus delinquent should be renewed by
repentance. But whether according to this dialect of the holy Ghost, that grand
sin, whereof our Savior, and the Apostle speaks be absolutely irremissible
until death has determined their impenitency which committed it; or only
exceeding dangerous in comparison of other sins, I will not here dispute:
much less dare I take upon me to determine either branch of the maine question
proposed: As [ whether satisfaction were absolutely necessary for remitting the
sins of our first Parents, or their seed?] Or, [ whether the Son of God could
have brought us sinners unto glory by any other way, or means than that which
is revealed unto us in his Gospel?] It shall suffice me (and so I request the
Reader it may do him) to show that this revealed way is the most admirable for
the sweet concurrence of Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and whatsoever other branches
of goodness else be, which the heart of man can conceive; more admirable by
much than wisdom finite could have contrived, or our miserable condition
desired, unless it had been revealed unto us by God himself.

8. For demonstration of this conclusion, and for deterring all which pretend
unto the privilege or dignity of being the Sons of God, from continuance in
sin, no principle of faith, or passage in the sacred Canon can be of better
use then that 1. Ioh. 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil: for the
Devil sins from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. However, the words
which several translations do render, one and the same word in the Original
((...)) be of different signification in point of Grammar; yet is there no
contradiction betwixt them upon the matter. Our later English which I alleged
reads [that he might destroy] the former, that he might dissolve the works
of the Devil. Neither of them much amiss, and both of them put together, or
mutually helping one another, exceeding well. Some works of the Devil, the
Son of God is said more properly to dissolve, others more properly to
destroy. Sin it self, as the Apostle tells us, is the proper work of the
Devil, his perpetual work; for he sins from the beginning. And for this
cause the man that commits sin is of the Devil, the Devils workman, or
day labourer, so long as he continues in known sins. Sin, the best of men
daily do. But it is one thing to sin and do a sinful Act, another to be
(...) (the phrase used by our Apostle) a worker, or doer of evil, operarius
iniquitatis: Such workmen the sons of God, or servants of Christ cannot be,
at lest so long as they continue sons or servants.

The points most questionable in those forecited words of S. John, now to be
discussed in this preamble to the manner how the Son of God did dissolve, or
destroy the works of the Devil, are two. The first, from what beginning the
Devil is said to sin, or to continue in sin. The second, what special
works of the Devil they were, which the Son of God did or does undo, or
for whose dissolution, or destruction he was manifested in our flesh.

CHAP. IV. From what beginning the Devil is said by S. John to sin. Whether
sin consist in mere privation, or have a positive entity, or a cause truly
efficient, not deficient only.
1 THe word Beginning, is some times taken universally and absolutely, as it
reaches to the first moment of time, or to the first beginning of heaven and
earth, of all things visible and invisible, which have beginning of being. See
the 7 book cap. 26. 34.
From this utmost extent of the word beginning, S. John in the beginning or
entrance into his Gospel strongly inferrs, that (...), the Word by whom all
things were made, was truly God, without beginning or end of days, because he
was in the beginning, that is, had a true and real existence, when all things
whether visible or invisible, which were created by him, did but begin to be.
But the beginning mentioned by the same Apostle in the forecited place, 1. John
3.8. may not be stretched so far as to make it pitch upon the first beginning
of time, or of all things made or created. First, it is neither certain nor
probable that any of the Angelical substances were created, or begun to be
before all other creatures. Secondly, it cannot be certainly known whether
the blessed Angels which keep their station, and the collapsed Angels, were
all created in the same instant: or if it were certain or granted that some of
them were created before others, though all of the same day; yet could there be
no certainty or probability that the collapsed Angel which is become a Devil
(or prince of Devils, who S. John says, sinned from the beginning) was created
before all other Angels, or with the first that were created. Most probable it
is (in my opinion) that the Angels were all created in the fourth evening and
morning, together with the Sun and Moon, and the Stars of the Firmament,
two days before man was created. Thus much those words of God unto Job, (Chap.
38. ver. 4.) seem to import. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of
the world, etc. or when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons
of God shouted for joy? If by the sons of God in this place the Angels be
meant, then Lucifer, by which name we commonly describe the Devil, was then
the son of God, an Angel of light, and did with the whole host of heaven
praise, laud, and magnify his Creator: whenever he was created, God
created him righteous and just.

2. Now albeit he was the first of all Gods visible creatures that became
evil: though sin it self did take its beginning from him, yet undoubtedly
he had a perfect being before sin did begin to be in him: he did not, he
could not sin in the same point of duration in which he was created. Some
therefore for this reason refer the beginning mentioned in S. John to the
beginning of sin, as if his meaning in their construction were thus: Satan
sins perpetually from the beginning of sin, which had its first beginning
in him. But though this be true, yet if we stretch the beginning of our
Apostle thus far, it will not close so well with his collection or
inferences: For the Devil in the same place is instiled, a sinner from the
beginning especially, if not only, with reference to those works which the
Son of God was to dissolve or destroy. But the Son of God did not manifest
himself on purpose to dissolve the works which the Devil had wrought in
himself, or in the collapsed Angels his associats; but the works only which
they had wrought in man. For this cause says the Apostle, He took not on him
the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. As
the Devil is a liar, and father of lies since the beginning, so he was a
sinner not only in himself, but the beginner or begetter of sin in man. And
since he first begot sin in him, he sins still as a worker, or
foster-father of sins in man's posterity.

3. Whether our first Parents did sin upon the same day whereon they were
created, is to me uncertain: and for this reason I will not dispute either
upon the improbabilities or probabilities of the affirmative opinion which is
maintained by many, of whose opinion I had rather make some good use, than move
any controversy about it. Most certain it is, that the old Serpent and his
associats were sinners themselves, before they seduced our first Parents to
that first and heinous sin of mankind. Whether one or more of them had
possessed the visible Serpent, which Moses says was subtiler then all the
beasts of the field, (as the fittest instrument or organ) for accomplishing
their design against poor innocent man; his ruin was projected before he or
they could accomplish it. Most probable again it is that they had grievously
sinned against their God and Creator, if not before, yet at least from the
Creation, or first beginning of man, whose estate they envied: yet whether they
were irreversibly cast out of Gods gracious presence before the accomplishment
of this their project against man, is not so certain. More probable to me it
is, that the accomplishment of this wicked project, which they could not hope
to effect but by slandering their Creator, did make up the measure of their
former sins unto an unpardonable height; unto an height more unpardonable
then the sin against the holy Ghost is in men during this life. For we read
not of any curse or woeful Sentence pronounced, much less peremptorily
denounced against the old Serpent and his associats, until God had convented
this visible Serpent, and the woman whom he had beguiled. But the curse
denounced against that visible Serpent did fall upon the whole Legion of
unclean spirits, which had possessed it, or used it as their instrument,
though perhaps possessed but by one.

4. In this seduction of our first Parents (if not before) the Devil committed
sin, no less then rebellion or high treason against his maker. In this
alone, if not otherwise, he proudly sought to be like God, in that he made man
of a servant or son of God, to become his slave, or vassal. He was of Julius
Caesar's mind, or rather Julius Caesar of his; and more affected to be Lord
Paramount over earth and the visible creatures in it, then inferior, or
Compeere to any Celestial creature. And no marvel or matter of wonderment it
is, if this combination of rebellion against God, and of envy against man, by
God appointed the supreme Lord of all visible creatures, did make the breach,
of Satan's allegiance to his Creator so irreconcilable, that the true and only
Son of God would not vouchsafe to become his Lord Redeemer, as he is of men,
whom he seduced. But whether S. John's meaning in the forecited place be, that
the Devil sins from the beginning of sin in man, or from the beginning of
sin in himself: From the one, or from the other beginning, he still
continues to sin against God and man without end or intermission.

5. But is sin in man in deed and truth the work of Satan? If truly and
properly it be a work, it is something or more then something, as being the
work of him who does not busy himself about small matters. It must be a thing
either visible or invisible, and if it be comprehended under either part of
this division, why are we taught to believe that God the Father Almighty is
the Maker not only of heaven and earth, but of all things visible and
invisible in them? If all things were made by him, what could be left for Satan
to work or make? The appearance of this difficulty moved that acute and learned
Father S. Austin sometime to say, that sin was nothing, and oftentimes to
allot it a cause deficient only, denying it any true positive efficient. And
many good Writers since his time, in our days especially, overswaid with this
Fathers bare authority, will have sins of what kind soever, to be privations
only, no positive entities. But they consider not that the self same
difficulties, besides other greater more inevitable inconveniences, will press
them no less, who make sin to be a mere privation, or to have a cause
deficient only; than they do others who acknowledge it to have a positive
efficient cause, and a being more then merely privation.

6. What then be the special inconveniences, wherewith their opinions are
charged which make sin either nothing, or but a mere privation? First we
account it a folly in man, a folly incident to no man, but an
Heautontimorymenon to be angry or chasing hot for nothing. Hence seeing the
Almighty Judge does never punish either man or Devil, but for sin; we shall
cast a foul aspersion on his wisdom and Justice, by maintaining sin to be
nothing. But fewer in our times there be, (though some I have heard out of the
Pulpit, which under pretense of St. Augustins authority) make sin to be
mere nothing. But many there be who hold it to be a mere privation, which is
a mean between mere nothing, and a positive entitie. Yet admitting, (not
granting) the nature of sin to consist formally in privation: mere
privations for the most part have causes truly efficient, fewer, causes merely
deficient, if there can be any causality in deficiencie. Blindness,
deafness, dumbness, are privations; and yet more men lose the sense of
hearing, sight, or feeling, (in some particular members) by violent blows, or
by oppression of raging humors, than by mere defect, or decaying of spirits.
And where one man drops into his grave for mere age (as ripe apples do from
the trees they grow on to the ground without blasts of wind or shaking) a
thousand die a violent, or untimely death by true and positive efficient
causes, either external, or internal.

7. That which either has deceived, or emboldned many Divines to allot sin a
being only privative, is a Philosophical or metaphysicall Maxim most true in
it self, or in its proper sphere, but most impertinently applied to the point
now in question. The Maxim is, Omne ens, qua ens, est bonum: Every entity in
that it has a being, is good. Most true, if we speak of transcendentall
goodness, or bonum entis: for every thing which has a true being, is
accompanied with a goodness entitative. But the question amongst Divines is,
or should be about moral goodness, or that goodness which is opposed to [
malum culpae] that evil which we call sin. Now if every positive entitie,
or nature were necessarily good, according to this notion of goodness: every
intelligent rational creature should be as impeccable as his Creator, and we
should truly sin, (if to speak untruly be a sin) when we say the Devil
is a knave, or any man dishonest. For if every nature, or entity (as such) were
morally good, it were impossible any nature or positive entity should be evil
qualified, should be laden with sin, that is, with that evil which is
opposed to goodness moral, or to holiness; whether this evil be a mere
privation, or positive entitie. For in as much as the sight, or visive faculty
is the property of the eye, or in as much as this proposition is true: Oculus,
qua oculus videt; this conclusion is most necessary, [when the eye has lost
the sight, or visive faculty, it is no more an eye, unless in such an
equivocall sense, as we say a picture has eyes, though not so properly.] If a
man cannot see (as we say) stime, but with one eye, we account it no solecisme
to say he has lost the other. The case in the former instances is more
clear: If Satan or man were morally good because they have a positive entity
or nature; neither of them could possibly be morally evil, neither of them
sinful creatures, albeit we should grant sin to be as mere a privation,
as blindness is.

8. It is a maxim in true Logic (that is, in the faculty or science of
reasoning absolutely true) and therefore true in Divinity also (for truth is
but one, and it is her property not to contradict her self, though examined in
several subjects;) Quicquid convenit subjecto qua tale, non potest abesse sine
subjecti interitu. No natural property can cease to be, or perish, but
together with the subject which supports it. Whence if that Angel which is now
the Devil had been truly good, qua Angelus, or if goodness (moral) had
belonged unto him, as he was a positive entitie, or rational creature, he had
ceased to be either a rational creature, or any thing else, when he lost his
goodness.

9. Of sins of omission, it is most true, that they find place in our
nature, rather by deficiency than efficiency; and yet even this deficiencie for
the most part, is occasioned by some formal positive act or habit. For this
cause it is questioned among Schoolmen, Whether there is or can be any sin
of mere omission, that is, not occasioned by the commission of some other
sinful acts precedent, or linked with some such act present. To deny all
sins of mere emission in nature already corrupted, would be more probable
than in the first sin whether of man or Angel. Neither of them could possibly
have committed sin, or done that which they ought not to have done, without
some precedent omission of that which they ought to have done. But of this
elsewhere more at large; and somewhat of it briefly in the next Chapter.

10. Sure I am, that the work which Satan wrought in our first Parents and in
our nature, had a cause truly efficient, has a being more than merely
privative. For it was a work so really great and so cunningly contrived, that
the strength and wisdom of the Son of God was required (as being only
all-sufficient) to dissolve or destroy it; and is it possible that any so great
a work could be wrought by deficiencie, or a defective worker? Not Satan only,
but his instruments are as positive, as industrious efficients, as effectual
workers of iniquity, as the best man which ever lived (the man CHRIST JESUS
only excepted) was, or is of righteousness. But it is true again, that
neither Satan nor his instruments can produce or make any substances or
subjects: these are all the works of God whether they be visible, or invisible.
What shall we say then, that God did create any naked substances, and leave it
free for Angel or other his creatures to invest them with what accidents or
qualities they pleased? No; if God had created any substances without
accidents, they should have been morally neither good, nor bad: For all other
natures besides the incomprehensible Essence, who only essentially is, and
whose essence is goodness it self, though they were made actually good, yet
their goodness was mutable: it was but an accident or quality, no essential
property. What shall we say then to the proposed objection, that sin if it
be any thing, either visible or invisible, must be of Gods making, not the
work of Satan, seeing we acknowledge God to be the Maker of all things visible
and invisible?

11. The punctual answer is, That this universal, [ God made all things
visible, and invisible] must be extended only to those things which are
properly said to be made or created. Now substances only whether visible or
invisible, are the immediate and direct effects and proper object of creation.
Accidents had their beginning as appurtenances to their subjects, by resultance
only. That goodness which God approved in man, did result from his nature,
not qua talis, but as it was the immediate work of God: it had no making or
creation distinct from the creation of man. He that moulds a bullet, or makes a
material sphere, makes both round; and yet we cannot say that he makes
rotundity or roundnesse, by any work or action distinct from the making of the
bullet or sphere. Facta sphaera simul sit rotunditas: That which the Artificer
intends, is a sphere; yet cannot he possibly make a sphere, but rotunditie will
by resultance arise with it, or from it. In like manner, when God made man, he
made him after his own Image and similitude: this was the mould in which he
was cast; and being cast into this mould, he could not but be good.

12. The humane nature, as framed by God, was like a musical instrument
exactly made and exactly tuned, both at once; not first made, and then tuned.
That body of earth into which the Almighty Creator first inspired the breath of
life, was not first a man in puris naturalibus, and afterward adorned or
beautified with original justice. That spirit of life, which God inspired into
him, did so tune and season the whole mass or substance, that his reasonable
soul or spirit did forthwith hold exact harmony with the Creators will. His
inferior faculties or affections, held exact consort with his reason. All this
was the work of God, and with this harmony was God delighted; yet this harmony,
though most exact, was mutably exact. The goodness or excellency of this sweet
harmony in the humane nature became the object of Satan's envy, and the
mutability of this excellency became the subject of his temptations: a subject
capable of inticements unto evil. The only mark which Satan aimed at, was to
deface or dissolve this work of God, and in stead of this sweet harmony to
plant a perpetual discord in the humane nature; a discord, an enmity betwixt
the soul and spirit of man and his God; a discord, an enmity, or civil war
betwixt man's conscience and his affections. Satan then did deface, or dissolve
the work of God, and the Son of God was manifested to dissolve his works in
man, and to destroy his power.

CHAP. V. Of the first sin of Angels and man, and wherein it did especially
consist.
1 WIth the nature of sin in general, or according to that extent proposed
in the beginning of the former book, I meddle not in these present
Commentaries, but have reserved them to another work already begun in a Dialect
more capable of such school nicities or disquisitions, than our English is.
About the nature or specificall quality of the sin of Lucifer (so it has
pleased the Ancients to style that prince of the collapsed Angels) some
question there is amongst Divines, and the like about the quality or nature of
our first Parents sin: as whether one or both of them were pride or
infidelity. But infidelity in its proper use and signification, is rather a
symptom, or concomitant of many sins precedent, than any one sin; a
distrust of Gods mercy for pardoning sins committed. It is to my capacity
unconceivable how the first sin of what creature soever should be
infidelity; or how the first degree of infidelity could find entrance into man
or Angel, without some positive forerunning sin. But if by infidelity those
Divines, whose expressions in this point I cannot approve, mean no more than
incogitancie or want of consideration, we shall accord upon the matter. For
without the omission of somewhat which they ought to have done, neither man nor
Angel could have sinned so positively and grossly, as both of them did. Both
were bound to have made the goodness of their Creator in making them such
glorious creatures as they were, the choice and most constant object of their
first thoughts and contemplations. But through want of stirring up that grace
of God, which they received in their creation, or by not exercising their
abilities to reflect upon the goodness and greatness of their Creator, they
were surprised with a desire of proper excellency, or of greater dignity than
they were capable of. By this means that sin which was begun by incogitancy,
or want of reflection upon the true object of their bliss, was accomplished in
pride. For pride naturally results in men from too much reflection upon their
own good parts. And whilst they compare themselves with themselves, (as our
Apostle speaks) they become unwise, or which is worse, whilst they compare
their own good parts with others mean parts (whether such indeed, or to their
apprehension) they slide without recovery into that soul sin of hypocrisy.
All men by nature, (that is from the unweeded relikes of our first Parents
pride) are prone to overvalue themselves, and to thirst after greater dignities
than they deserve, or are qualified for. This pride or ambition in the Angels
was presently seconded with envy (as soul a vice, as pride it self, and its
usual compeere and companion) against the new and last-made visible creature
man, and envy did as speedily bring forth that malicious practice against our
first Parents, which (as was said before) in probability did make their sin
more unpardonable than the sin of our first Parents was.

2. But admitting both their first positive sins, to have been for nature or
specificall quality, desire of proper excellency, whose branches are pride
and ambition: this position admitted, will beget a new question or
disquisition, to wit, What manner of proper excellency, or what degree of pride
it was, for which their just Creator did punish them? Some are of opinion, that
the height of that proper excellency, at which the Angels (at least one Angel)
did aim, was personal union with the Son of God or God himself. But this
opinion, without prejudice to the Authors or abettors of it, is very
improbable, because the mystery that the Son of God should become a creature,
or take any created substance into the unity of his person, was not for ought I
have read, or can gather from any passage in Scripture, revealed either
explicitly or implicitly before the fall of man, or before his convention for
his Apostasy from God; which was not until the first day of the second week
at soonest, when the world was (as we say) in facto, not in fieri only, as it
respectively was in the first week, or seven days. When this opinion, that
the assumption of any creature into unity of person with the Son of God, or
with any person in the blessed Trinity, was either known or probably conceived
by man or Angel before the fall of man, shall be sufficiently proved, I shall
yield assent to their opinion as probable, who think the first sin of Lucifer
was a desire or longing after personal union with the Son of God or God
himself. No question but the old Serpent had sinned more grievously in the
same kind than our first Parents did, when the woman by his cunning and malice,
and the man by her prevarication did taste the forbidden fruit, in hope or
expectation to be made thereby like to Elohim, or God himself.

3. But was it possible that either the collapsed Angels, or man by their
suggestion, should attempt or desire to be equal with God, or to be Gods
Almighty? To be in all points coequall with God, was perhaps more than Lucifer
himself did desire: yet that even our first Parents desired to be in some
sort or other equal with God, is probable from the Apostles character of the
Son of God [ He being, says he, in the form of God, thought it no robbery
to be equal with God.] This to my understanding implies, that the robbery or
sacrilege committed by our first Parents for which the Son of God did humble
and engage himself to make satisfaction, was their proud or haughty attempt to
be equal with God, at lest in knowledge of good and evil. And yet, as was said
before, the collapsed Angels had doubtless sinned more presumptuously, before
they tempted our first Parents to the like sin. Neither man nor Angel could
have affected equality in any one attribute with their Creator, much less in
all or most, so they had made his glory, power, or majesty, the chief or
principal object of their first contemplations. But how far the previal
sin of omitting this duty, might let loose their strong and swift
imaginations unballanced with experience, or what entrance it might work for
that desperate and positive sin of Ambition, or seeking to be equal or like
to God for power and wisdom; God, and they only know, if happily they now know,
or perfectly remember the manner of their first transgressions. Many things,
many learned and wise men do, and attempt more, through incogitancy, want of
consideration (or ad pauca respicientes) which by men of meaner parts would be
suspected for a spice of madness, if they had taken them into serious
consideration before.

4. There is no Christian man, I am persuaded, this day living (unless he be
stark mad) who if this interrogatory were propounded unto him in express
terms; [ whether do you think your self altogether as wise, as God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost,] but would answer negatively, I am not. And yet
how many writers in our time, through forgetfulness to put this or the like
interrogatory to themselves, when they set pen to paper, have continued for
many years together grievously sick of our first Parents first disease,
whatsoever that were; yet not sick of it in explicit desires or attempts to be
every way equal with God, but in implicit presumptions that they are
altogether equal with him in wisdom and knowledge, at lest for the governing
of this universe from the beginning of it to the end, and for the dispensing of
mercy and justice toward men and Angels, before they had any beginning of
being, and for ever, even world without end after this visible world shall be
dissolved. To give a true and punctual answer to all their presumptuous
contrivances, or to accept their challenges in this kind, would require more
skill in Arts then most men are endowed with, and a great deal more time than
any wise man or skillful Artist can be persuaded to mispend. It would be a
very hard task for the cunningest needle woman or other Professor of manual or
finger-mysteries, to unweave or dissolve a spiders webb, thread by thread,
after the same manner which she did weave it: And yet a mean houswife or
child may with a wing or besome in a moment undo all that the spider has
wrought in a whole year. And so may every Novice in Arts unbuble all, that
some great Clerks or Schoolmen have been twenty or thirty years in contriving
or working, (as in setting forth maps or systems of the manner of Gods decrees
before all times, or disputes about election or reprobation, as they are
immanent acts in him) with that common but useful exception, aut nihil, aut
nimium. Their conclusions might (for ought I know) be unanswerable and sound,
upon supposition that they are every whit as wise as God. But this being not
granted them, or the contradictory being granted, [ that the omnipotent Creator
is (...) wiser then they are:] the most elaborate and longest studied
Treatises, which it has been my hap upon these Arguments to see, afford no
document of greater strength or cunning than is exhibited in the spiders web.
The Authors of them tell us only (and herein we believe them) what they
themselves would have done, if they had been delegated to make Decrees or Acts
for the government of men and Angels, or what God should have done if they had
been of his privy counsel, when he made all things visible, and invisible.
But what God does, has done, or will do according to the sole counsel of his
most holy will, that, they show us not, nor go about to show, whilst they
run the clean contrary way to that which God our Father, and the Church our
mother has prescribed us to follow. Now the way which the English Church from
the warrant of Gods word, to this purpose prescribes, is to admire, not to
determine the equity of Gods Decrees before all times from contemplation of the
manner of their execution or sweet disposition of his providence in time. It is
a preposterous presumption to determine the manner how they have been, or shall
be executed, by prying into the projection or contrivance of the Almighty
Judge, before man or Angel or any thing besides God himself had any being.

5. He sinned grievously that said in his heart, or secret unexamined thought,
similis ero altissimo (whether this be meant of Nebuchadnezzar or some other
earthly Tyrant only, or literally of one or more of them, and mystically of
Lucifer.) But they sin no less for the act, which say in their hearts, or
presuppose in their implicit thoughts altissimus est similimus mihi: the most
high God has determined nothing concerning men or Angel, otherwise than we
would have done, if we had been in his place. They preposterously usurp the
same power which God in his first Creation did justly exercise who though not
expressly, yet by inevitable consequence, and by implicit thoughts make a God
after their own image and similitude. A God not according to the relikes of
that image wherein he made our first Parents, but after the corruptions or
defacements of it, through partiality, envy, pride and hatred toward their
fellow creatures. But of the original of transforming the Divine nature into
the similitude of man's corrupted nature, I have In the 5th. book of
Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed, or a Treatise containing the original of
unbelief, etc. See the former Treatise, chap. 44.45. etc.
elsewhere long ago delivered my mind at large. And I would to God some (as I
conjecture) offended with what I there observed (without any reference or
respect either to their persons or their studies) had not verified the truth of
my observations in a larger measure, than I then did conceived they could have
been really ratified, or exemplified by the meditation or practice of any
rational man. This transformation of the Divine nature, which is in some sort
or degree common to most men, is (in the least degree of it) one of those works
of the Devil, which the Son of God came into the world to dissolve by
doctrine, by example, and exercise of his power. But what be the rest of those
works besides this? All (I take it) may be reduced to these general heads.
First, the actual sins of our first Parents. Secondly, the remainder or
effects of this sin whether in our first Parents, or in their posterity, to
wit, that more than habitual, or hereditary corruption which we call, sin
original. Thirdly, sins adventitious or acquired, that is, such vicious acts,
or habits, as do not necessarily issue from that sin which descends unto us
from our first Parents, but are voluntarily produced in particular men, by
their abuse of that portion of freewill which was left in our first Parents,
and in their posterity, and that was a true freedom of will, though not to do
well, or ill, yet at lest inter mala: to do less, or greater evil, or to do
this or that particular, ill, or worse. Original sin is rather in us ad
modum habitus, than an habit properly so called. All other habitual sins or
vices are not acquired but by many unnecessitated vicious acts: But to
distinguish between vice and sin, or between vicious habits and sinful
habits, is (to my capacity) a work (or attempt rather) of the same nature, as
if one should go about to divide a point into two portions; or a mathematical
line into two parallels.

6. Nor are these sins enumerated, nor sin it self formally taken the only
works of the Devil which the Son of God came to destroy, but these sins
with their symptoms, and resultances. For the Devil sins from the
beginning in continual tempting men to sin, although his temptations do not
always take effect. He sins likewise in accusing men before their Creator,
or soliciting greater vengeance than their sins in favorable construction,
deserve. Now that neither his temptations, nor accusations do always find
that success, which he intends, this is merely from the mercy and loving
kindness of our Creator in sending his Son to dissolve the works of Satan.
The general symptom or resultance of all sin original, or actual, is
servitude or slavery unto Satan, and the wages of this servitude is death: not
this hereditary servitude only, but death which is the wages of it, is the
work of Satan. Yet a work which the Son of God does not utterly destroy
until the general resurrection of the dead. Nor shall it then be destroyed
in any, in whom the bonds of the servitude and slavery unto sin have not been
by the same Son of God dissolved, whilst they lived on earth. He was first
manifested in the flesh and form of a servant to pay the ransom of our
sins, and to untie the bonds and fetters of sin in general. He was
manifested in his resurrection to dissolve or break the reign of sin within
every one of us. For as the Apostle speaks, He died for our sins, and rose
again for our justification. And he shall lastly be manifested, or appear in
glory utterly to destroy sin, and death. CHRIST (says the Apostle) was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he
appear the second time without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9.28.

SECTION 2. Of the more special qualifications, and undertakings of the Son
of God for dissolving the works which the Devil had wrought in our first
Parents, and in our nature, and for cancelling the bond of mankindes servitude
unto Satan.
CHAP. VI. Of the peculiar qualifications of the Son of God for dissolving
the first actual sin of our first Parents, and the relics of it, whether
in them, or in us their sinful posterity.
1. THe qualifications or undertakings of the Son of God for dissolving or
remitting such actual sins, as do not necessarily issue from our first
Parents, and for bringing them and us unto greater glory than they affected,
do challenge their place or proper seat in the Treatise designed to his
exaltation after death, and his consecration to his everlasting Priesthood. We
are now to prosecute the points proposed in the title of this Section, and in
the first place such points as were proposed in the title of this Chapter.

2. The rule is universally true in works natural, civil, and supernatural,
but true with some special allowances, Vnum quodque eodem modo dissolvitur,
quo constituitur. Though the constitution and dissolution of the same work
include two contrary motions, yet the manner or method by which both are
wrought is usually the same; only the order is inverted. And we should the
better know how man's first transgression was dissolved by Son of God, if we
first knew how it was wrought by Satan, or wherein the sin it self did
properly consist. Infidelity or disobedience it could not be, for these are
symptoms of sins already hatched. Whatsoever else it was, the first
transgression was pride, or ambitious desire of independent immortality. Now
the Son of God begun his work where Satan ended his; dissoluing this sin of
pride, by his unspeakable humility. And to take away the guilt of man's
disobedience or infidelity, which were the symptoms or resultances of his
intemperate desires; the Son of God did humble himself to death, even to the
death of the Cross, reposing himself in all his sufferings upon God. The
first man was the only Favorite which the King of kings had here on earth,
the only creature whom he had placed as a Prince in Paradise, a seat more
than royal or monarchical, with hopes of advancement unto heaven it self. It
was a plot as malicious, as cunning, in Satan to dispossess man of his present
dignity, and to throw him down from this height of hope to hellish slavery; to
make him a creature more miserable than the earth, water, or other inferior
element, harbored any. Yet was his misery if we found the very depth of it,
not commensurable to the excessive measure of his pride. The ground or bottom
of his pride was lower than the lowest part of the earth, as low as nothing:
the height of it reached above the highest heavens. Man, who as St. Augustine
says, was but terrae filius, and nihili nepos, the son of the earth, and
nephew of nothing. Man, who if he had looked back to his late beginning, might
have said to the silly earth-worme, Thou art my sister, and to every creeping
thing, Thou art my brother; became so forgetful of his original, that he
sought (by the suggestion of Satan) to become like his Almighty Creator, who
out of the same earth had made him so much more excellent than all earthly or
sublunary creatures, as they were than nothing. But let the first man's pride,
or Satan's malice in hatching it, and the rest of that sinful brood, receive
all the degrees of aggravation which the invention of man can put upon them:
yet the medicine prepared by the Son of God, will appear more ample, than
the wound is wide; and more sovereign than it is dangerous. Satan's cunning in
working man's fall does no way equalize the wisdom of the Son of God in
dissolving this work. It is not probable, as was observed before, that Satan
could so far infatuate the first man as to make him affect to be every way
equal with his God, but only to be like or equal unto him in some
prerogative, as in the knowledge of good and evil; and probable it is he did
desire, that his immortality and sovereignty over other creatures might be the
one independent, and the other supreme. Now these and all other branches of
pride, whereof we can imagine the humane nature by the Serpents suggestion to
be capable, are more than countervailed, every way overreached by the first
degree of the humiliation of the Son of God. He was not only like but
equal to the Father, not in some one or few, but in all the prerogatives of
the Divine nature. He was (says the Apostle) in the form of God, and
(therefore) thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Yet he vouchsafed to
become, not like to man only, but truly man, more then equal to other men in
sorrows and sufferings.

3. Whatsoever equality or similitude with God it was, at which the first man's
pride through incogitancy did aim, it was not effected, but affected only, by
way of trial. He could not out of a deliberate choice or settled resolution
assure himself that he should become such as he desired to be. But the Son
of God, who was truly God, out of unerrable, unchangeable, infinite wisdom,
determined with himself to become truly man. How man, whilst man, should
become more than man, truly God: neither the wit of man, nor the subtilty of
the Serpent could have devised; although (by divine permission or grant) they
had been enabled to accomplish, whatsoever to this purpose they could devise or
imagine. But the Wisdom and Son of God found out a way, by which he might
still continue God, and yet become as truly man as he was God: a way by which
the diversity of these two natures might still remain unconfused without
diversity of persons or parties. Though man's ambition had reached so high, as
to aspire from that condition of being wherein God had estated him, to be
absolutely equal with God: yet his ambition had not been equal to that
humiliation which the Son of God did not only affect, but attain unto. For
although he became a man of the same nature that Adam was of, or any man since
has been, yet was he a man of a lower condition; of as low condition as any
earthly creature could be: for as the Psalmist in his person complains ( Psalm.
22.6.) He became a worm and no man, the reproach of men; one whom the very
abjects amongst men did think they might safely tread upon with scorn.

4. For the Son of God to be made man, to be made a man of this low estate
or condition (whencesoever he had taken his humane substance) was a
satisfaction all-sufficient to the justice of God for man's pride; a dissolution
most complete of the first work, that our first Parents suffered the Devil to
work in our nature; if we respect only the substance of it. But that no part
of Satan's work, no bond or tie of circumstance wherewith he had entangled our
nature, might remain undissolved: the Son of God was made of a woman; and
this was to secure the woman, or weaker sex, that he came to dissolve the
works which Satan had wrought in them. For as the Apostle says; The first
woman was in the transgression, not the man; the man at lest not so deep in
the same transgression as the woman. She alone (for ought we read) committed
the robbery, in taking the forbidden fruit from off the tree, her husband was
the receipter only: And by swallowing it by the Serpents suggestions she
first conceived and brought forth death, without her husbands consent or
knowledge. Her transgression was twofold: Trust, or confidence in the Serpents
promise: want of credence (through pride) to Gods threatenings. To dissolve this
work of the Devil, so far as it was peculiar to the woman; the Son of God
was conceived of a woman, without the knowledge or consent of man. Satan used
the Serpent for his proxy to betroth himself unto our nature: the holy Ghost
by the ministry of an Angel winnes the blessed Virgins assent or accord to
become the mother of the Son of God. Seeing the first woman became the mother
of sin whilst she remained a virgin, though then a wife; the Son of God
would have a virgin for his mother, yet a virgin wife; a virgin affianced to a
man. And thus as the first woman, being not begotten but made of man, did
accomplish Satan's plot in working his fall, and corrupting our nature: so the
Son of God being made man of a woman, does dissolve this work by purifying
what she had corrupted, and by repayring what the first man, and woman had
undone.

5. There is a tradition concerning the Messiah conception, and his mothers,
fathered upon an ancient Jewish Rabbin by Petrus Galatinus, but as I
conjecture, rather a Commentary upon his own fancy, or some Monkish Legendary
whom he was pleased to grace. The abstract of this Legend, with his Comment
upon it, is thus. There was one special part of Adams bodily substance
privileged from the contagion of the first sin, and this propagated by one
special line unto posterity, until it came to the mother of the Messiah, who
from the virtue of this preserved portion of Adams nature, was conceived
without original sin, as being made out of this substance after such a manner
as the Messiah or Son of God was made of a virgin. Sit fides penes Authorem.
We know the blessed Virgin was the daughter of Abraham, and the daughter of
David, but not by any portion of Abraham's or David's body altogether exempted
from such alterations, as the Elementary virtues of which all men's bodies are
made, are subject unto. Nor was the body of the Messiah to be made of any such
portion of Adam perpetually exempted from the contagion of sin original, unto
the time wherein the blessed Virgin was affianced to Joseph. The first
exemption of any portion of the humane nature, or substance of Adam after his
fall, was granted and wrought by the immediate hand of God in the conception of
his Son by the holy Ghost, which was immediately upon that sweet assent of the
blessed Virgin unto the Angel Gabriel, Ecce ancilla, etc.

Capnio.
Vellem expressius audire, an veteres He^ braeorum senserint matrem Messiae in
peccat-originali concipiendam non fuisse. Galatin. Quamvis ex his quae diximus,
satis (utarbi tror) aperte colligatur, hanc priscorum Iudaeorum fuisse fidem,
nedum opinionem: hoc tamen manifestius ex verbis praedicti Rabbenu haccados
habetur: qui eodem in libro (...) Gale razeia, cum ad septimam Antonini
Consulis urbis Romae petitionem inter caetera dixisset, propter matrem vero
ejus scil: Messiae ait David, Psalm. 80. (...) hoc est, and a^acum quam
plantavit dextratua. Dixissetque ei Antoninus, Cur matter Dei comparatur abaco,
curve dicit, eam a dextra Dei plantatam? Respondit sic Ille, Similis facta est
abaco matter Dei. Quandoquidem sicut a^acus est armarium, quod Principes
conficiunt ad coll^canda vascula auri and argenti, ut gloriam suam, atque opes
omnibus ostendant; Ita matter Regis Messiae erat armarium, quod Deus construxit,
ut in eo sedeat ipse Messiah ad ostendendam gloriam Maiestatis suae cunctis
mortalibus. Per id autem quod ait plant^tam esse a dextra Dei, ostendit eam
primam esse creaturam Dei in genere humano: sicut dictum est, Micheae. Cap. 5.
(...) id est, Et egressus eius ab aeternitate, and a diebus seculi. Dicit enim
egressus numero multitudinis. Qui^ sunt duo Messiae egressus. Vnus Divinitatis,
quae est aeterna ideoque dicit ab aeternitate. Alter humanitatis, quae in sue
matris extat substantia, quae creata est ab hora creationis mundi. Haec ille,
quem Iudaei Magistrum nostrum sanctum nuncupant. Ad quorum declarationem
notandum est. Quod opinio quorundam veterum Judaeorum fuit, matrem Messiae non
solum in mente Dei ab initio, and ante secula creatam fuisse, ut paulo superius
dictum est: verum etiam materiam eius in materia Adae fuisse productam,
ipsamque gloriosam Messiae matrem principalem extitisse, cum eius amore (ut
dictum est) mundus creatus sit. Nam cum Deus Adam plasmaret, fecit quasi massam
ex cuius part nobiliori accepit intemeratae matris Messiae materiam, ex
residuo vero eius and superfluitate Adam formavit. Ex materia autem immaculatae
matris Messiae facta est virtus, quae in nobiliori loco and membro corporis
Adae conservata fuit. Quae postea emanavit ad Seth, deinde ad Enos, deinde
succidaneo ordine ad reliquos usque ad sanctum Iehoiakim. Ex hac demum virtute
beatissima matter Messiae formata fuit. Et idcirco eam Zach. cap. 4. suae
prophetiae (...) hoc est petram primariam, recte appellavit. Ex qua ut antiqui
Judaeorum exposuerunt, excidendus erat Messiah. Neque quidem abs re, cum
tempore, gradu, and excellentia primaria futura esset. Ex qua quidem opinione
aperte concluditur, carnem gloriosae matris Messiae non fuisse peccato
originali infectam, sed purissimam a divina prouidentia praeservatam. Quocirca
nec anima eius hujusmodi peccatum in conceptione* contractura erat. Petrus
Galatinus. lib. 7. per totum caput tertium.

6 If it were lawful to moralize such fables (as I take this of Galatinus to
be no better) the best moral I can make of it, would be this. However there
had been many intermediat generations (as many as S. Luke relates if not more)
between our father Adam and the conception of the Son of God: yet was our
Savior in some respects the immediate Successor of Adam, the only second
Adam: His immediate Successor not in sin, but of that purity of nature wherein
the first Adam was created; and yet withal immediate successor unto that curse
which Adam by transgression had incurred, but was not able to expiate nor to
bear, save only by the everlasting death of himself and his posterity. And
for this reason (if I mistake not) the Son of God does call himself, as no
son of Adam before him did, The Son of man, by peculiar title. Yet was this
a title, as Mihi vero ratio cur ita sese vocaverit, duabus ex rebus p^tenda
esse videtur: altera quod solus ipse and Ezechiel, (imo Daniel etiam aliquando)
ita vocetur, ut Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 18 notavit: altera quod solus ipse se
ita vocet. Nam alij in novo Testamento nunquam cum filium hominis appellant. Ex
priore re intelligimus posse eadem, aut simili de causa, qua Ezechielem filium
hominis appellari. Cur autem Ezechiel ita vocatus sit, cum multas illic
opiniones reconsuerimus, illam R. Abraham maxim probavimus, vocari ^um filium
hominis, quia semper cum Angelis l^quebatur; qui eum, ut a se, qui homines non
erant, sed videbantur, distinguerent, fi^um hominis appellabant. Nec enim ipse,
sed cum Angeli ita vocant. Simili fortasse ratione Christus, quia Deus erat,
and filius Dei, quasi a^it^esi quadam cum de se, ut homine, loquitur, fi^ium
hominis vocat. Non quod al^u^, sed quod aliter filius Dei, quia Deus, and
fili^s hominis, quia homo esset, quemadmodum Augustinus indicavit. Exposteri
reprobabilem conjecturam ducimus ^um se non honoris, sed abjectionis ca^a^ ita
vocare, sicut apud Prophetam vermem and opprobrium hominum appellat, Psalm. 21.
ver. 7. Nisi enim nomen abjectionis esset, alij etiam eum aliquando eodem modo
vocavissent. Sed observamus Ezechielem nunquam a se, sed abalus: Christum
nunquam ab aliis, sed a se fil^um hominis appellari. Ideo ergo se filium
hominis appellat, ut significet se, cum in forma Dei esset, nec rapinam
arbitraretur se esse aequalem Deo, exina^^sse tamen semetipsum, formamque servi
accepisse, and habitu inventum, ut hominem, Phil. 2.6, 7. Maldonat in cap. 8
Matthaei ver. 20.
Maldonat well observes, not of honor, but of abjection; of greater abjection
than the like title given to Ezekiel not by himself, but by the Angels: And
yet Ezekiel is called by the Angel not (...) but: (...) Of the difference
betwixt these two titles which are both exorest in our English by Son of man,
I refer the Reader to the 49. Psalm ver. 2. and the Commentators upon it. As
the Son of God was immediate Successor unto Adam, so he was the immediate
heir unto the blessing promised to Abraham, more than heir, the Author and
foundation of it: He was likewise immediate Successor unto David, and his
kingdom: the only body in whom the shadow of Gods mercies unto David for the
good of Israel, and Judah was to be fulfilled. If he had been immediate
Successor unto David only, this might have occasioned some suspicion or
distrust, that he had been the Redeemer of the Jewish nation only, or of the
sons of Jacob. Had he been immediate Successor unto Abraham only, this
might have occasioned the like surmise or fancy, that he had been manifested
only to dissolve the works which Satan had wrought in Abraham's seed according
to the flesh, which was much more ample than the seed of Jacob. But in as much
as the Son of God did in time become the son of man, the immediate
Successor unto Adam, the only second Adam (though not the first, or second man
from Adam,) This gives us to understand that he was the next of kindred to all
men, as they were men, whether Jews or Gentiles. He to whom the redemption of
all mankind did by right of kindred, without partiality, or respect of persons,
equally belong. And for this reason he did not take any created party or
person into the unity of his divine person, but the mere nature of man, or
seed of Abraham, as sequestered from all personal respects or references.

7. Thus was the Son of God to be qualified that his undertakings for
mankind might be universally beneficial. But the Basis of his humiliation
and undertakings in our flesh, That, from which (being annexed to the dignity
of his person) the intensive infinity of the satisfaction for the sins of the
world, and our redemption from the servitude of Satan did result, was the form
of a servant, which he voluntarily took upon him. A mystery not much looked
after, much less into, by any Divines, whom it has been my hap to read. The
most do scarce make it so much as a comely metaphor, or significant expression
of somewhat more than the state or condition of a man. But that the form of a
servant was a qualification of the Son of God distinct from his manhood may
thus be concludently proved. The nature and essential form of man did arise,
and does remain in him since his resurrection from death: so did not the form
or condition of a servant; that, lies dead and buried for ever. By his
resurrection from death, he did not only of a mortal man, become immortal;
but from the estate or condition of a servant, (without the interposition of
ought besides his death) was made both Lord and King of all things created by
him. It will therefore be no digression to treat of the form of a servant
more at large in this method and order. First, wherein the essential state or
condition of a legal servant, does consist. Secondly, of the exact
correspondencie or identitie of form between legal servitude, and servitude
to sin and Satan. Thirdly, of the formal identitie betwixt the state and
condition of the Son of God, whilst he was in the form of a servant, and
the two other forms and conditions of servants, to wit, legal servants, and
slaves to sin. The only difference betwixt these three sorts of servants, is
in the matter of their servitude: the form or essential condition is one, and
the same in all three. Of the state of legal servants, and of our servitude
unto sin, I have after a popular or vulgar way more copiously discoursed upon
several occasions. The brief or extract of so much of these discussions, as
to my present memory is pertinent to this instant Treatise, must be the subject
of the next discourse.

CHAP. VII. Of Legal servants, and of the analogy betwixt their Civil
estate, and the estate of wicked men.
1 OF legal servants there were two sorts, one whom we call hired servants or
apprentices, whom a Latinist would rather call Famuli then Servi. Others were
Servi, servants properly so called, such as we would properly term slaves or
bondmen. Of slaves and bondmen, their Lords and Masters had a fuller power or
dominion than any Master has over his hired servants. Not the actions only or
bodily employment, but the persons of slaves or bondmen are at their Masters
disposal; they had the same right of dominion over them, which men have over
lands which they hold in see simple, a power to alienate, to sell or set them
to any other. And for this reason a slave or bondsman is in Scripture called the
Inheritance of his Master. Of hired servants the actions or employments only
are at their Masters disposal, their persons are free: nor are their actions
or employments perpetually at their Masters disposal, but only so long as the
Covenant lasts, and so far only as is covenanted between them. The
greatest interest that their Masters can have in them is only such as a man
has in lands and grounds which he renteth of others: the fruits are entirely
his which renteth the grounds: the soil or inheritance is the Lords or owner
of it. The labors or employments of an hired servant are his Masters only,
his person is in nullius bonis, it is not the goods or chattell of another:
What he can earne or get is his own, so that he is as much a free man, as a
servant. The true and original difference between both these kinds of
servants, and a free man, is this: A free man has power to dispose of his
actions or employments for his best advantage: A servant (whether by Covenant,
or a bondsman) albeit he has a reasonable will to desire his own good or
preferment, yet has he no power or right to dispose of his own actions, or
employments, for compassing that good, which as he is endued with reason, he
could project and forcast. For of his employments or expense of time, he must
give an account unto his Master. In respect of legal or civil freedom, that
usual definition is warrantable; Liber est qui vivit, ut vult: He is legally
or civilly free which may employ his labors or expend his time, as he
pleases, for his own good, without the control or check of others. And he is
a legal servant qui non vivit, ut vult, which cannot bestow himself or time
according to his own desire or will, but as his Lord or Master shall appoint.
His Master by legal right may impose a necessity upon him, either of not doing
that which he desires to do, or of doing that which he desires not to do.
A servant may desire to pleasure himself or his friend by his day labor, or
other expense of time, but if this he do without his Masters consent or
approbation, he wrongs his Master, who if he please, may constrain him to
do his business, and neglect his own, or his friends. Again, a servant may
have a desire or resolution, not to gratify or pleasure another (suppose his
own, or his friends enemy) by his service or employments, and yet if he be
his Masters friend, he may compel him to do that party whom he mislikes,
that good office, or service, which he would not. Briefly, every servant has
a freedom of will in matters civil, but no arbitrium, no freedom of power,
or right to dispose of himself, or of his actions for accomplishing that which
he may freely will: he must frame his course of politic or civil life ex
arbitrio Domini.

2. From this difference of estate, or condition of a free man, and a servant,
the Heathens did by light of nature rightly infer; that every vicious man
(though a Lord, though a Prince, or Monarch) was a true slave to his own lust,
or lewd desires: that every wise, and temperate man, though a bondsman for his
legal state and condition, was a true free man. The Roman Orator in his
Paradoxes (as he entitles them) to this purpose, was an Orthodox. And the
Arguments which the Slave in the Satyricall Poet brings to prove his Master to
be a greater slave than himself, are unanswerable, Tune mihi Dominus, rerum
imperiis hominumque Tot tantisque minor; Are you a Lord, and I a slave, when as
you may be commanded by more men, and by more desires, than I am subject unto?
The slave acknowledged no more Masters than this one, whom if it would please
but to say the word, his freedom might without difficulty be obtained, if the
Praetor of the City would but vouchsafe (by his Masters leave) to lay his white
rod upon him, and cause him to be turned once or twice about with some few
other Ceremonies, he could be turned out of a slave into a free Citizen, in the
space of an hour: whereas, if his Master had been turned round, (till his
senses had failed him) in case the Praetor would have laid his rod an hundred
times upon his head, he could not have wound himself out of those bonds of
servitude wherein his lusts had ensnared him. This slave had observed, that his
Master would often commend the frugality and temperance of the ancient Romans,
and often desire that he, and other modern Romans, might live as they did:
yet if any great man, or good neighbor would invite him to a luxurious feast,
or if any foolish pleasures, with whose excess he had been formerly stung,
should proffer themselves, he had not so much power to resist or restrain
them, as this slave had to neglect his designs or commands, when they did
displease him. And for his Master to be drawn thus every day to do that which
in his retired and sober thoughts he did most dislike and condemn, was in his
judgment a greater slavery than any bodily servitude. If the reasons which
these and other Heathens often used to prove vicious men to be the only true
slaves, had not been the dictates of the law of nature written in our hearts,
or reasons unanswerable; the Apostles of Christ, yea Christ himself would not
have used the like. Know ye not (says S. Paul, Romans 6.16. as if it were a
shame in this point to be ignorant) that to whom ye yield your selves servants
to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey: whether of sin unto death, or
of obedience unto righteousness. And S. Peter tells us of some, who whilst
they promise liberty unto others, they themselves were servants unto
corruption,: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into
bondage, 2. Pet. 2.19. So our Savior says, Ioh. 8.34. Whosoever commits
sin, is the servant of sin. And of him no doubt our Apostle S. John learned
that doctrine; He that commits sin, is of the Devil: a servant of his.

3. But albeit the wiser sort of Heathens did by light of nature know, that
every vicious man was a slave or servant to his own lusts or desires: yet the
greatest danger which they apprehended from the servitude, was but fear of
satyricall censure for preposterous baseness in subjecting reason, to
sensuality. That their own desires, lusts, or affections, were maintained and
cherished by a foreign enemy, as so many rebels to wage war against their
immortal souls, or that their consciences being subdued by lust, should be
everlastingly subject to so cruel a Tyran as the Devil is, were points
wherein the Prince of darkness had blinded the eyes of the wisest Heathen. And
would to God we Christians, to whom the Lord has revealed thus much, could
see or hear so much concerning this doctrine, as would make us perfectly
understand, or lay to heart the inestimable danger wherein we stand, whether
in respect of the fast hold which this Tyran by our corrupted nature and
custom has got of us, or of the miserable usage which will follow, if he and
sin finally prevail against us. But this is a common place, for which every
man may find a fitter Text in his own heart, then any other man can choose for
him, and matter of more ample and pertinent discourse upon it, than reading of
many books can suggest unto him. All that I have here to say concerning this
point is, to request the Reader to examine his own heart, and calculate his
non-performances of what (I presume) he often seriously intended, and perhaps
has vowed. His duty it is to open the wounds of his conscience, either to God
alone in secret, or to such as God has appointed for the Physicians of his
soul and conscience. My purpose is to prepare the plaster or medicine, and to
inform him how to apply it.

CHAP. VIII. The Son of God was properly a servant to his Father, yet not by
birth as he was the son of his handmaid, but by voluntary undergoing this
hard condition for the redemption of man.
1 TO free us from this miserable servitude unto sin, (which alone does wound
our conscience) the Son of God did freely and voluntarily take upon him the
form of a servant. The parts of his peculiar service were in general two: The
one, to conquer Satan, who was by right of conquest our Lord: The other, to
reconcile us to grace and favor with God; to make us first servants, then
sons, and lastly kings and priests to his, and our heavenly Father. These two
parts of his peculiar service unto his Father, (for unto him alone he was a
servant) exhibit the most admirable pattern of justice, mercy, and loving
kindness, as well in God the Father, as God the Son, that the wit of man or
Angels can contemplate. First it was a pattern of justice, never after to be
paralleled for God the Father to exact satisfaction for our sins, at the
hands of his dear and only Son. Unto this unmeasurable act, or exercise of
justice upon the Son of righteousness, his mercy toward us miserable
sinners was fully commensurable. For whatsoever he suffered for our sakes, was
from his Fathers and his own mercy and loving kindness toward us. Again, so
infinite was the justice of our gracious God, that even whilst he showed his
mercy, and loving kindness toward us, he did vouchsafe to give (as we say)
the Devil himself his due, and to observe the law of Arms or Duel with this
Prince of Rebels, his subject by right of Creation, but professed enemy by
resolution. Albeit this grand Rebel after his revolt from God, had conquered
man, and made him (by treachery) of Gods servant and son, a mere slave unto
himself; the righteous Lord would not deprive this mighty Lion, and greedy
Wolf of his prey, by any other means, than by right of conquest gotten over
him by man. He did not arm a legion of Angels, nor summon the whole host of
visible creatures against him, nor use his omnipotent and absolute power to
destroy or annihilate him, or as then to shut him up in the everlasting prison.
The exercises of such power whether immediately by the omnipotent Creator
himself, or by his creatures, had been more than Satan's matches, upon equal
terms, or weapons. Exercise of strength was not the first way in the wisdom
of God to conquer pride, ambition, or vain glory, though these must be
quelled with the power and strength of the Son of God, whom it pleased the
Father at the first onset to weaken, by laying our first Parents infirmities,
and their posterities upon him. These were the weapons by which he foiled the
old Serpent, and obtained the victory by managing our weakness and
infirmities, better then our first Parents did those great abilities, wherewith
their Creator had endowed them to resist temptations. The weapons which the old
Serpent used in the conquest of our first Parents, and by which he retained
their posterity in continual slavery, were their own desires and affections;
these he improved so far that they became unweeldy. And he having gotten (as
we say) the better end of the staff, did wrest our wills at his pleasure, to
do those things which God forbids us to do, and make us furious executioners
of his cunning contrivances against our own souls. The particularities of his
sleights or cunning for bringing us into thraldom inextricable, (unless the
Son of God set us free) are elsewhere deciphered. These two are the maine
generals: First, the extension of our natural desire of things within their
bounds good and pleasant. Secondly, the improvement of our fear of things
distasteful to nature, as of death, disgrace or torture. Now that the Son of
God might thus beat him at his own weapons, it was necessary that he should
first take upon him the form or essential condition of a servant: for without
this, first voluntarily undertaken by him, the rule of justice could not
possibly have suffered him, to have suffered so much as he did, for our
redemption. Wherein then did the state, or condition of a servant, which he
took upon him formally consist? Or when did he first become a servant? from
the first moment of his birth or conception?

2. I cannot brook their opinion, who think our Savior was by birth a legal
servant, as being filius ancillae, the son of an handmaid or bondwoman. This
gross heresy has been well refuted by some late Schoolmen, whose names I
now remember not, nor the names of the Authors or abettors of this opinion. The
mother of the Son of God was indeed ancilla, an handmaid, but to him only
whose service is perfect freedom. So the Psalmist in the person of the Son
of God (to be manifested in our flesh) or as his type, directs his prayer,
Psalm. 116.16. O Lord truly I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid.
CHRIST (as all Christians grant) was the Son of Gods Handmaid, after such a
manner, and in such a sense, as never any man besides him was. For he was the
promised woman's seed, and the son of a woman in such a sort, as he was not
the son of any man. Again, he was the servant of God, after such a peculiar
manner, as neither man or woman had been, or ever shall be. But how does this
peculiar service of his fit our servitude unto sin? Even as the medicine does
the disease, or as the plaster does the wound for which it is prepared. In the
Son of God made man there were two distinct wills; the one truly Divine, the
other truly humane. To deny this distinction of wills in Christ, were to
revive the heresy of the Monothelites so called, because they held but one
will in Christ; to wit, the Divine. An error into which they happily fell (as
many since their time have done into a worse) by not distinguishing between
voluntas, and arbitrium. Our Savior CHRIST whilst he lived here on earth,
had a reasonable will of the same nature, or quality our will is of (sin
excepted.) And by this will he could not but desire his own particular good;
as health, welfare, and other lawful contentments of the humane nature, which
are requisite to true joy or happiness. But in as much as the Son of God
from the beginning of man's servitude unto Satan became our Surety, and to make
satisfaction for our sins did in the fullness of time take our nature upon him:
he did wholly submit his reasonable will, all his affections and desires unto
the will of his heavenly Father. And in this renouncing of the arbitrament of
his will, and in the entire submission of it unto the will of his Father, did
that form of a servant, whereof our Apostle speaks, formally consist. For
unto the essential definition, or constitution of a servant, these two only
concur. First, the use of reason. (for fools, infants, or reasonlesse
creatures cannot be servants) Secondly, Carentia arbitrii proprii, want of
right or arbitrary power to dispose of their bodily actions or employments,
according to the desire or lawful choice of their reasonable will. So then the
general definition, or abstract form of a servant is univocally the same, 1
in legal servants, 2 in servants to sin, and 3 in the Son of God, during the
time of his humiliation here on earth, or whilst he became hostage for our
Redemption, But the service of these three sorts of servants is in the concrete
most different. And the difference arises from the matter or subject in which
they are respectively deprived of proper right, or arbitrary power to dispose
of themselves, or of their actions. A legal servant wants power to dispose of
his employments or bodily actions in matters temporary concerning this life.
Servants to sin (such all the sons of Adam are by nature) want power to
dispose of their actions, or course of life in matters moral, spiritual, or
such as concern their consciences. All, and every one of us have a desire to
be happy, and yet all of us until we be freed by the Son of God from this
natural servitude, are by the prince of darkness usually diverted from this
strait way which leads to happiness, unto the crooked bypath which tend to
death, and inextricable misery. The Son of God although according to his
humane nature, he had a reasonable will and desire of happiness, which could
never in any particular become exorbitant, or diverted from that which is most
holy and just: yet even he in the days of his humiliation wanted power to
reap the wages of righteousness, or fruits of holiness. Though joy and
comfort was as pleasant to him, as to any man besides, though complete
happiness was due unto him, as he was a most just and righteous man
personally united to the Son of God: yet having taken upon him the form of a
servant he did with unspeakeable patience, and obedience, bear all the
griefs and sorrows which Satan and his instruments, by divine permission,
could invent against him, and cheerfully undergo the heaviest burden which
his heavenly Father was pleased to lay upon him for our redemption.

3. From this peculiar condition of a servant which the Son of God did
voluntarily take upon him, that maine objection which some modern Arrians or
Photinians make against the absolute satisfaction of our Lord Redeemer, for our
sins, may easily be answered, or rather will dissolve it self. God (say
these men) could not without tyrannical injustice require full satisfaction
for the misdemeanors of all wicked and naughty men from one most just, and holy
man. To slay the righteous with the wicked, that be far from thee, O Lord,
was the saying of Abraham to God, Genesis 18.25. But farther surely it is, and
always has been, from the Judge of all the world, (who is the eternal living
rule of justice it self) to put the innocent and righteous, to the lingering
and cruel tortures of an ignominious death, for redeeming wicked and cruel
men from deserved death; or to purchase not the impunity only, but the
advancement of wilful rebelle, by the severe punishment of his dear, and
only obedient Son. The 7. book of the Commentaries upon the Creed. cha. 25..
3, 4, etc.
This objection (as was in the former Treatise intimated) would pierce deep,
if we were disarmed of those Christian principles which these modern
heretics have cast aside, to wit, the plurality of persons in the Trinity,
and the Oneness of person in the Son of God, CHRIST JESUS, God and man; even
whilst he was invested with the form of a servant. We believe, and confess
as they do, there is but one God; and yet in this God, we acknowledge as they
do not, unum and alium, one person of the Father, another of the Son,
another of the holy Ghost, such a distinction of capacities that the Father,
not the Son exacts satisfaction for man's violation of the eternal and
indispensable rule of equity and justice: that God the Son, not God the
Father, did become man's surety, and undertake to make full satisfaction for all
his sins.

4. Now he that will make satisfaction to another must have somewhat to give of
his own, so his own, as it is not the others to whom it is given. What then
had the Son of God to give by way of satisfaction unto God the Father, or to
the holy Ghost, which was so his own, as it was not theirs? Only that part of
our nature which he took from the substance of his mother into the unity of
his Divine person. In all other parts of our nature, over all other parts of
this universe, God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost had the same interest, or
right of dominion with the Son. Now this part or our nature being thus
assumed into the unity of the Second Person: The Son of God, and the Son
of the blessed Virgin do not differ, as party and party. There is unum and
aliud, one nature of the Godhead, another of the manhood, non unus, and alius,
not one person of the Godhead, another of the manhood. The Divine nature in the
person of the Son, is the only party which undertook our redemption: the
humane nature assumed into the unity of his Person, was but his qualification,
an appendance, or appurtenance, no true part of his Person. And (as heretofore
has been observed) albeit the flesh of the man Christ Jesus was Caro humana,
non divina, The 7. book of Commentaries upon the Creed. Chap. 30. 10. etc.
flesh of the same nature and substance with our flesh: yet were his flesh and
blood more truly the flesh and blood of the Son of God, than of the man
CHRIST JESUS: the humane body more truly and properly his own, than our
bodies are ours. Now our flesh, and bodily parts are said to be our own, not
so much because they are parts of our nature, as because they are appurtenances
of our persons, or because we have a peculiar personal right or power so to
dispose of them, as to make them no parts of our nature. We account it no
unnatural part in wise men to cut off any rotten or putrified member, rather
than suffer the whole body besides utterly to perish. In some certain cases,
public Societies, or Communities of men (none of which have the like peculiar
authority over the meanest free private member, as every owner of a body
natural has over his teeth, his toes, his fingers, or other less principal
part necessary for some uses only: not for the preservation of the whole) have
by public consent designed sometimes some principal members of the
Community, sometimes members less principal, not condemned of any crime, as
sacrifices for redeeming others from present danger, or for securing posterity
from servitude, or oppression. And when outrages have been committed by great
Armies, the Authors or principal Incentives of the mutiny being unknown, or
not convicted by legal proof, the expiation has usually been made by
decimation. Every tenth man has by wholesome discipline of war been punished
according to the demerits of the crime committed. But albeit every tenth man
since Adam had been by him and his successors consent devoted to death, or
lingering torture far worse than death: their execution could have made no
expiatio^, no satisfaction unto God for the transgressions of the whole
Community. The attempt of the medicine would have increased the malignity of
the universal disease. Yea albeit the Son of God could have been by man
entreated to practice this cure which is used by private wise men for
preservation of their natural bodies, or by great Commanders for preventing
mutinies or loss of Armies: all this had not been sufficient to have redeemed
the world, or the whole Community of men from utter ruin and destruction; or
(which is worse then both) from everlasting servitude unto Satan. Men by art,
or rather Artists, by the guidance of Gods providence, have found out remedies
against venomous diseases by medicinal confections of venomous ingredients.
The poisonous bitings of the Scorpion are usually cured by the oil of
Scorpions: and of the flesh of some Serpents, Physicians make sovereign
antidotes for preventing poison, or for curing venomous diseases. But the
venom which the old Serpent had diffused, not through the veins only, but
through the whole nature of man, was not curable by this course of physic. The
old Serpent was to be destroyed, but not to become any ingredient in this
Catholic medicine, whereby the humane nature was to be cured. That, by the
wisdom of God was taken out of the nature and substance wounded, not from the
substance which did wound or sting. But this part of the nature wounded, which
was to be the medicine for the rest, was first to be perfectly cured, and
thoroughly purified by personal unition to the Son of God. And being thus
purified, and cleansed from all spot of sin, it was disfigured and mangled
that the blood of it might be as a balsamum, and quintessence to heal the
wounds, and sores of our corruption. If it were the will and pleasure of the
Son of God to submit his most holy body unto the good will, and pleasure of
his most holy Father; if with his consent and approbation it were bruised, and
mangled: here was no wrong done to any man, but on Gods part rather a document
of his unspeakable love unto mankind: Love unexpressible on God the Fathers
part that would suffer his only Son to take upon him the true form of a
servant, and undergo such hard service for us: Love unexpressible on God the
Sons behalf that did so willingly expose his humane body to pain and
torture for our redemption. Here was no wrong at all either to the Son of God
from God the Father, or to the humane nature of Christ from the Godhead, or
Divine person of the Son; rather all indignities, and harms which were done
unto the man CHRIST JESUS by Satan, and his instruments did redound unto the
Son of God. The humane nature was the only subject of the wound and pain.
The Son of God was the only subject (if we may so speak) of the wrong, the
only party or person wronged by Satan and his instruments; but no way wronged
by the Father, much less by himself, as having free power to put that part of
our nature which he assumed, unto what service soever his Father would require.
Concerning this last qualification of the Son of God, I have nothing more to
say in this Treatise, save only how it was foretold, or foreshadowed. The
predictions that the Son of God, or the Messiah, should become a servant, are
frequent in the old Testament, and will here and there interpose themselves in
some ensuing discussions of his undertakings for dissolving the works of Satan.
The next inquiry is, how it was foreshadowed, or typically foretold.

CHAP. IX. Gods servant Job the most illustrious Type of the Son of God, as
he was invested with the form of a servant.
1 THe form of a servant which the Son of God did take upon him, was
foreshadowed by all those holy men (Prophets or other) which are by sacred
Writers instiled the Servants of God. A title not usually given to many Kings
or Priests, not once (I take it) by God himself unto Abraham; though he were
the greatest of holy men, which were but men; the father of the faithful,
whether Kings, Priests, or Prophets: the only Prophet, Priest, or other, which
(to my remembrance) was instiled the friend of God. Moses, Aaron, and David,
are sometimes instiled the servants of God, by God himself. Yet were these
three (respectively) more illustrious types of the Son of God, as he was to
be made King, Priest, and Prophet, than of him as he took the form of a
servant upon him. Of CHRIST JESUS as he was in a peculiar sort the servant of
God, Job the most remarkable pattern of patience (before this Son of God was
manifested in the flesh) is the most exact type or shadow; not for his
qualifications only, but in his undertakings. Jobs conflicts with Satan, and
wrestlings with temptations are more expressly recorded, and more emphatically
expressed, than any man's besides, before the only Son of God became the Son
of man, and servant to his heavenly Father. Satan by special leave obtained
from God (but so obtained by God as challenger) did combat or play his prizes
with this servant of God, at two the most prevalent weapons, which his cunning
and long experience upon all advantages, which the weakness of men (from the
fall of Adam) did afford him, could make choice of. And these two weapons were;
[hope of good things, and fear of evils temporall] which this great usurper
did presume were at his disposal, either by right of that conquest which he
had gotten over the first man, or could obtain by Gods permission to ensnare
the first man's posterity. The direct and full scope of all our hopes is
felicity; and so is misery the period of all our fears. Unto felicity three
sorts of good things are required, Bona animae, bona fortunae, bona corporis.
The endowments and contentments of the reasonable soul; health with ability,
and lawful contentments of the body; competency of means or worldly
substance, which are subservient to both the former endowments and contentments
of soul and body. No misery can befall man, but either from the want of some
one or more of these three good things which are required to happiness (as the
Philosophers conceived it) or from their contraries. All the evils which men
naturally fear, are either evils incident to the body; as sickness, pain,
torments, death, want or loss of goods, or worldly substance, loss of good
name, disgrace or ignominy, imputation of folly, which are no less grievous to
the rational part of man, than pain or grief are to the part sensitive; more
grievous by much to ingenuous men, than loss of goods, than want or penury.
For as an heathen Satyrist well observed; Nil habet infoelix paupertas durius
in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
The shrewdest turn that poverty can do to any mortal creature, is to expose
him unto contempt or scorn. By fear of all these three evils Satan drives
most men into his snare of servitude; as many, if not more, as he draws into
the same snare by hope of good things. By every one of these three evils, by
the very least of them, if we take them single, he had caught so many as he
thought sufficient to make up this general induction: [ That none could escape
his snares or springes, so he might be permitted by God to take his
opportunities for setting them.]

2. Job was a man as happy as any man before him had been, according to that
scale of happiness which Philosophers could hope for in this life, or could
make any probable ground of better hopes for the life to come. There was a man
(says the Text) in the land of Vz, whose name was Job, and that man was
perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil. This is a
fuller expression than any Philosopher could make of the principal part of
happiness, that is of a mind richly endowed with all kind of virtues moral;
and more than so, with spiritual graces. And there were borne unto him seven
sons, and three daughters; these were more than bona corporis, more than parts
of his personal constitution, which besides these was exceeding good. His
substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand Camels, and five
hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she Asses, and a very great household
(or husbandry, great store no doubt of servants which were part of his worldly
substance) so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the East. Here
was a great measure of those things which Philosophers call bona fortunae,
goods of fortune, or (as we now say) goodly means, fair revenues. Job was a
richer man for those times in respect of others, than any man this day living
is in respect of our times. Yet this goodly Cedar in his full height was sound
within, and straight without, unshaken by any blasts of former temptations,
until the Lord himself appointed him to be a Dueller with Satan. The
challenge made by Satan is very remarkable. There was a day when the sons of
God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.
And the Lord said unto Satan, whence come thou? Then Satan answered the Lord
and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in
it. And the Lord said unto Satan. Have thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil? ver. 6, 7, 8. Satan would not believe the
Lords commendations of this righteous man: for he answered the Lord, and said,
Death Job fear God for naught? Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about
his house, and about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the
work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But put forth
thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy
face. After the Lord had permitted Satan to try the utmost of his skill at this
first weapon [losse of goods, and loss of children.] Job by his Antagonists
confession came off with honor: he still continued Gods faithful servant. He
arose (says the text) upon the heavy news of his universal loss of goods
and children) and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the
ground, and worshipped and said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away:
blessed be the Name of the Lord. In all this Job did not sin, ver. 20, 21,
22. Yet is not Satan his Antagonist daunted with this baughle, but craves leave
to try his skill at another weapon; for so it follows: Again, there was a day
when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan
came also among them to present himself before the Lord, etc. And the Lord
said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and
escheweth evil? and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou
movedst me against him, to destroy him without a cause. And Satan answered the
Lord and said, Skin for skin, yea all that a man has, will he give for his
life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he
will curse thee to thy face. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold he is in
thine hand, only save his life, Chap. 2. ver. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6. Having this
license granted him, he foreslowes no time for putting it in speedy execution.
So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord and smote Job with sore
boiles, from the sole of his foot unto his crown: and he took him a
potsheard to scrape himself withal, and he sat down among the ashes, ver.
7, 8.

3. In the first temptation (which was loss of goods) Job did not sin so
much as in word. So far he was from sinning in word, so far from murmuring
at this sudden change, that he sets a copy not of patience only, but of
thanksgiving for temporal crosses or calamities. In the second temptation,
which was more terrible, he so far a while resisted, as if he had purposed to
make an atonement for Adams sin, in rashly yielding to his wives suggestion.
For when Jobs wife did seek to misperswade him, Do thou still retain thy
integrity? Curse God and die; he thus replied: Thou speak as one of the
foolish women speaks. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil? ver. 9, 10. Yet that Job in the continuance of this
second temptation did not sin, is more than the word of God will warrant us
to avouch. Certainly he was a sinner, and did actually sin in this
temptation, though not in so high a degree, as his miserable comforters
supposed him to have sinned, long before this misery did befall him. They
thought the excess of his afflictions in respect of the ordinary afflictions
which other men did suffer, did presuppose an excess of sin in him, and that
his present sufferings did convince him of former hypocrisy, which is the
worst of sins. Yet some ground they had of this persuasion or suspicion: for
few or none within their memory, or before their times had fallen into such a
depth of misery, as Job now had done, without some excessive height of sin in
some one kind, or other. Yet Jobs friends in the extent of their collections
did if not grossly sin, yet fowly err in their particular application. For
Jobs case was extraordinary: his temptations were without all former example.
In respect or order of time, he was the first and most remarkable pattern of
patience, which the Scripture has proposed unto us. No righteous man, or true
servant of God before him had been so afflicted either in body, in loss of
goods, or esteem with men, with friends especially, as this most upright and
faithful servant of God was. The titles given him by God himself of
perfectness and uprightness extraordinary, if we compare them with his
extraordinary temptations and grievances, do argue, that he was the servant
of God after a more peculiar manner than others had been; a remarkable servant
not only in respect of his sanctity and integrity, but as a special type and
figure of the Son of God, who was in succeeding ages to take the form of a
servant upon him, and in this form to be exposed to more terrible combats with
Satan, than Job had been, although as man he were more upright and righteous
than Job. And besides such Saints of God, as were peculiar types of the Son
of God, or of the man CHRIST JESUS in the days of his affliction; That
induction made by Eliphas, Job 4. ver. 7, 8, 9. was universally true in respect
of those times, and these ensuing. Remember I pray thee, who ever perished
being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? Even as I have seen, they
that plough iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. By the blast of God
they perish, and by the breath of his nose-thrills are they consumed. That of
the Psalmist (whether David or some other) was universally true, not of his
times only, but of aftertimes also, though true of later times with the
former allowance or exception, of such as were special types of Christ in his
affliction. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread, Psalm. 37.25.

CHAP. X. How the Son of God did conquer Satan at those weapons, wherewith
he had conquered our first Parents.
1. THat the Son of God was manifested to dissolve the works of the Devil,
our Evangelist S. John has taught us: and S. John Baptist had told him, and
others as much before. I knew him not (says this his forerunner) but that he
should be manifested unto Israel, therefore I come baptizing with water, And
John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a Dove
and it rested upon him, Ioh. 1.31, 32. But did this manifestation declare, or
manifest his purpose to dissolve or destroy the works of the Devil? Yes.
Immediately upon his baptism, he gave Israel and the world just proof, that
the end of his manifestation, was to take away the sins of mankind, and for
this reason he began to untwist that triple cord, wherewith our first Parents,
and in them their whole posterity were bound by Satan. For albeit the first
sin found entrance into our nature by incogitancy, and had its period or
accomplishment in pride; yet were not pride or incogitancy the only strings of
that snare, wherein Satan had taken us. The bonds and ties by which he took,
and holds us captive, are mentioned by S. John in his first Epistle, 2. Chap.
ver. 15, 16. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world. If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in
the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life,
is not of the Father, but is of the world. From these three heads or sources,
all the overflowing of ungodliness may be derived; and these found entrance
into this visible world through our first Parents folly, and Satan's subtilty.
For albeit the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
took their distinct specificall being, or live-shape from the first sin, yet
were the seeds of all these sins sown by Satan in our first Parents souls
and senses, before the body of sin with its members were framed, or animated.
There was an extravagant desire of the eye, an irregular appetite of the flesh,
by which the Serpent tolled on the first woman to eat the forbidden fruit; and
the eating of it did hatch this threefold brood in kind. The woman (says
Moses Genesis 3.6.) saw (through false spectacles of Satan's making) that the tree
was good for food: (here was the embryon or seed of the lust of the flesh) and
that it was pleasant to the eye; (here were the first lineaments of the lust of
the eye) and a tree to be desired to make one wise: (this was the inchoation
of the pride of life) And she took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and
gave also to her husband, and he did eat: and by their eating, the former
desire of forbidden food was turned into the lust of the flesh: The curiosity
of the eye was turned into the lust of the eye; and the desire of knowledge or
proper excellency, was changed into the pride of life. So that the truth of S.
James his observation, Chap. 1. ver. 13, 14. was remarkably experienced, in the
manner of our first Parents fall. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God. For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts be any
man. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
entised. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin,
when it is finished, brings forth death. Now to dissolve these three
temptations or cords of vanity, wherewith our first Parents were taken
captives: the Son of God, immediately upon his Baptism, was led by the Spirit
into the wilderness to be tempted.

2. Our first Parents being placed in Paradise (a place furnished with variety
and plenty of food) by too much indulgence unto their appetite, or by
incogitancie to bridle it by reason, could not abstain from that fruit which
only was forbidden them. Power they had to have abstained: but they did not
use it, when they had no necessity, no urgent provocation to eat at all, much
less to eat of that fruit. The Son of God made a man more subject to bodily
harms by long forbearance of meat, than our first Parents were: after forty
days continuance in a vast and barren wilderness, wherein no food or fruit
did grow, could not in his hunger be tempted to eat any food which the
ordinary providence of God did not reach unto him. Ingeus iedam necessitas,
Necessity (as we say) has no law: there is no fence against it: Cogit ad
turpia, it makes men, otherwise honest, to do many things which are not
comely. And, for this reason the great tempter at the first bout, assaults our
Savior with this fiery dart of necessity. If thou be the Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread. As if he had said, Long fasting has made it
apparent that thou art a man subject to weakness and infirmity; and (if thou
be withal the Son of God) thou can, and a necessity is laid upon thee, as
man, to provide thy self of food, for without food man cannot live. Yet this
fiery dart (though steeled and pointed with the tempting delight of manifesting
his own worth or excellency) is wholly diverted by that shield of Faith: It
is written, Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God: So Moses had said unto Israel, I fed thee
with Manna, to teach thee, that man lives not by bread, but by every word
which proceeds out of the mouth of God, does man live. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Israel then did live for a long time both by Manna, and by the word of God; on
which, without Manna, they would not have relied. Manna was as the body, and
the word of God spoken by Moses, as the soul, or spirit of that food, by which
they lived: both Manna, and that word of God, make but an Emblem or type of the
eternal Word of God, who is the food of life; Life it self; and yet at this
time (as man) was an hungered. So then, as he was the Son of God, he was
able of stones to make bread, and as he was a man subject to infirmities, he
had just occasion at this time to use his power. Yet as man invested with the
form of a servant, he could not be induced to use this power. For as he often
professes, he came not to do his own will; no not in things lawful and most
agreeable to nature: but the will of him that sent him, though that did enjoyne
him to do or suffer things most displeasant to nature. This was the time,
wherein he was by his Father appointed to conquer the irregular appetite of the
sense of taste, and the lust of the flesh.

3. Our first Parents being Gods Vicegerents here on earth, Lords of all his
visible creatures, not therewith content, by Satan's inticements aspired to be
like unto God, higher than Angels, than other powers or principalities. The
Son of God, albeit he were by nature Lord of men, and Lord of Angels; cannot
be allured to exercise his command over them, albeit they were commanded to
attend him. Satan's pretense in his second assault was very fair, and seemed to
be countenanced by Scripture. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self
down, for it is written; He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and
in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone. Psalm. 91.11, 12.
Fitter occasion to any man's seeming could not be offered for the exquisite
verification or exact fulfilling of this Prophecy, than by this adventure to
throw himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple. But the Son of God, who
gave the Law, being now made under the Law, submits himself unto that legal
precept; Thou stalt not tempt the Lord thy God; and with this Scripture retorts
Satan's attempted blow upon himself. But what temptation of God had it been in
the Son of God to have thrown himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple,
to have given proof that he had been that just man, over whom God had given
his Angels charge? Some there be, who reply, that Satan did allege this
Scripture impertinently, imperfectly. For the Psalmist says, He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. Now the ways of men
are not in the air, but upon the earth. This interpretation I neither much
dislike, nor altogether approve; because our Savior does not tax Satan for
his impertinent, or imperfect allegation of the former Scripture. Nor do I see
any reason why flying in the air might not be one of the ways of the Son of
God made man, as well as walking upon the Sea in a tempest; if so it had
pleased him, or his heavenly Father, by whose appointment or disposing he did
do or suffer all things. Now it was his Fathers will, that by his walking on
the water he should manifest himself to be the Son of God, able to command
either wind or water. It was likewise his Fathers will, that at this time as
man he should conquer the pride of life, or that deeply implanted desire in
all men of proper excellency, or advancing themselves before due time. By this
free resignation of his authority over the Angels, he makes satisfaction for
our first Parents pride in seeking to advance themselves above the Angels.

4. Again, Paradise did afford our first Parents as full satisfaction for the
delight of the eye, as it did for food: and yet desire of that food which they
needed not, found entrance into their hearts or fancies by their eyes. But the
Son of God being made the Son of man, having neither place to lay his head,
nor any prospect for the present to please his eye; had all the kingdoms of
the earth, and their glory represented unto him, with proffer of their sale or
donation rather, only upon condition that he would do that homage unto this
great Prince of the world, which many Princes do to Kings or Emperors: or
Emperors themselves had done to Popes or Prelates. The pretense was fair, and
the temptation the strongest of all the three. For what man, who is but mere
man, would not adventure upon any practice for the gaining the Kingdom or
Monarchy which their Ancestors had foolishly lost. Now Adam was Lord and
Monarch of this visible world, until he suffered himself to be conquered by
Satan, who did remain de facto, if not by right of conquest, the Prince of it,
and Lord of men; until the Son of God made man did throw him out of
possession. But that hour of his was nor yet come: so far was he from
affecting the kingdoms of this world, that he was yet acting the part of a
servant in it; but a servant to his father only, not to men or Princes in this
world. Of how mean a condition soever he were as man, yet he disdained to
worship men or Angels though but with civil worship, for any preferment: and
therefore dismisses this great Usurper thus with indignation, Avoid Satan.
Satan, it seems had a prenotion or suspicion that Christ was that Just and
holy man, whom the Psalmist describes, Psalm. 91. Or such a Son of God, as
they were which appeared before the Lord, when he was permitted to tempt Job.
That he was the only Son of God, or equal with God, was more than he then
knew.

5. These three temptations wherein our Savior foiled Satan, are paralleled to
the first temptation of Job, which was loss of worldly substance; more
generally all the evils which the Son of God did suffer in our flesh, or
whilst he was conversant with men in the form of a servant, did bear
Analogy to the Evils which Job did suffer, but for particulars more in
number, and more grievous: there was no evil that comes ab extra which he
suffered not in greater measure, than Job did any. As for loss of goods or
worldly substance, Job made no reckoning: the Son of God, though heir of all
things, did not vouchsafe so much as to grace these by being owner, or
possessor of them: He renounced the world, and all things in the world before
he came into it: he would not be entangled or meddle with them, that he might
please him, who had chosen him to be his soldier, his only champion in this
great conflict with the Prince of darkness. But to parallel Jobs other
temptations with our Saviors.

CHAP. XI. A parallel between Jobs second temptation, and the Son of Gods
sufferings in our flesh before the hour of his Agony or his Cross.
1 Job was smitten with sores, from the crown of his head, to the soles of his
feet; his disease was more than natural, at least incurable: for he was thus
smitten by Satan. But was the Son of God thus smitten? durum est affirmare.
Satan had no power thus immediately to smite him. For bodily diseases, we do
not read of any that did take possession of his sacred body: we read that he
cured all manner of diseases, but never stood in need of the Physicians help
for himself. No disease did breed in his body being free from sin; and being
anointed to cure all, he did not, he could not take any by contagion. But
though he cured all manner of diseases, or all the diseased which were brought
unto him; yet we do not read that he cured all in Judea which were diseased.
For so none should have died in that land during the time of his three years
pilgrimage through it, from his baptism to his death. Albeit he cured many of
diseases natural, yet not all that were naturally diseased, though weak, or
sick unto death. For he was not manifested to dissolve or destroy the works of
nature, albeit he gave proof by many experiments that he was able to destroy or
divert the whole course of nature. But we read, That JESUS of NAZARETH being
anointed by the Holy Ghost, went about from his baptism to his death, doing
good and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, Acts 10.38. And many
were so oppressed which were not possessed. Many diseases, which to us would
have seemed natural or casually bred, were as immediately procured by Satan, as
Jobs plagues were; and in these bonds of bodily affliction Satan had held them
longer than he held Job. Such was that woman's disease, whose cure being wrought
by the Physician of our souls upon the Sabbath day, the Ruler of the Synagogue
did malign as an ungodly work: but the Son of Gods reply does justify as
well the truth of our assertion, as the lawfulness of his practice. Hypocrite,
does not each one of you on the Sabbath day loose his Ox or his Ass from the
stall, and lead him away to the water? and ought not this daughter of Abraham,
whom Satan has bound, lo, eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the
Sabbath day? Luke 13.14, 15. This bodily disease was a work of Satan, which the
Son of God came to dissolve. Satan had thus bound her to the end that he
might by these bonds draw her to some unlawful practice for her ease; as to
ask counsel of some cunning woman, or to adventure upon the pretended
mysteries of some unhallowed Art. Of diseases merely natural, the cunning
Tempter makes use or way by them for his temptations, though he have no finger
in the inflicting of them; yet he moves such as are grievously afflicted with
them, to repine or murmr against God: and all such repining, or impatiency in
sickness, though occasioned by sickness merely natural, is a work of Satan
which the Son of God came to dissolve or prevent. But how did he dissolve or
prevent them, by taking them upon him? Though Satan could lay these and the
like bonds of bodily afflictions upon this woman, and upon many others both men
and women in Judea in these times; could he therefore lay the like upon the
body of the Son of God? It is certain he could not. How then did the Son
of God in bodily maladies or grievances either parallel Job, whom Satan had
smitten, or those miserable creatures, whom he loosed from Satan's bonds? He
did not parallel them at all in the matter of the disease, or bodily grievance;
that could not breed in his body, it could not be produced in it by Satan: yet
did he parallel Job, and all the parties whom he cured though smitten or bound
by Satan, in the grief or pain of the disease, whose matter could not fasten
upon him. He which commands us by his Apostle, to weep with them that weep,
did out of all question exhibit a more real pattern of this precept, than the
Apostle could practice. Yet says the Apostle of himself, and he said it
without hypocrisy, without boasting, Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is
offended, and I burn not? Such was his care of all the Churches, that every
man's grief was in some measure the Apostles grief; every man's infirmity did
in some portion weaken him: yet was it not foretold of this Apostle by any
Prophet, that he should bear our griefs, or take our infirmities upon him.
This was the peculiar Character of the Son of God manifested in the flesh,
expressly foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 53. ver. 4. and the
accomplishment of it related by S. Matthew, Chap. 8. ver. 16, 17. The manner of
his curing others of their sicknesses and infirmities, was by taking them upon
himself, not in kind, but by sympathy. As the eye takes the form or shapes
of objects visible without participation of the substance whence they flow: so
our Savior took the grief or pain of every disease which he cured, without
the matter or corruption which did breed grief in the diseased patient. In all
men's griefs he was grieved; in all their pains he was tormented. He wept
with those that wept, and mourned with such as mourned. Who did groan, and he
was not troubled in spirit; who did sigh, and he was not sad in heart? He
took their sighs and sorrows at a lower key, than they themselves did, which
had matter of affliction or sorrow in them. Yet do we not read that he
sighed, groned, or often wept when he cured others: but the reason was because
such as besought his help, did not beseech him with sighs, with tears or
groans. At the raising of Lazarus from the dead he wept and groaned: what was
the reason? Not to prejudice the allegories and mysteries, which some ancient
Fathers have hence observerd; the principal reason according to the literal
sense why at this time he wept, was because Mary and her comforters came to him
with weeping eyes. So says the Text, Ioh. 11.13. When Jesus saw her weep, and
the Jews also weep which came with her; he groaned in the spirit, and was
troubled in himself and said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto him,
Lord come and see: and Jesus wept. Lazarus no doubt had sighed and groaned in
his absence, had wished his presence with these, and other like expressions of
sorrow: and now that he finds Lazarus dead, and Mary's cheeks for his decease
bedewed with tears, he sympathizeth with her in her present grief, and by
tuning his heart to Lazarus his dying pangs or throbs, he loses him from the
bonds of death, and freeth Mary and her good friends from matter of grief and
sorrow by taking her sorrow upon him.

2. And as the care of all the Churches which he had planted, was not the least
part of S. Paul's grief and vexation: so the sorrow which the Son of God did
conceive for such as would not seek unto him for help, for such as did not
sorrow for their sins, was a great part of his sufferings. Thus he wept for
Jerusalem, whilst Jerusalem went mad with mirth, and resolved to banquet al
her guests at that great Passover with his blood. When he was come near, he
beheld the City, and wept over it saying, If thou had known, even thou, in
this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid from
thine eyes, Luke 19.42. These tears were shed in public for the City and
Nation, but how many more he shed in private, or with what sighs he deplored
their estate, that would not implore his help, that would not feel their
misery, being bound by Satan as well in body, as soul; this I leave to the
Readers consideration and conjecture. Even when the full weight of bodily
misery did seize upon him, when he was bearing the Cross unto the place
wherein he was crucified, he pitied Jerusalem more than he would suffer
others to pity him. Weep not for me ye daughters of Jerusalem, but weep
for your selves. Thus he did more than bear our griefs: for he was grieved at
their miseries, which did not grieve for themselves: Nihil miserius misero non
miserante seipsum. But in all these sufferings by sympathy, there was no
violence, they were not mingled with disgrace or scorn. Albeit his cures were
often slandered by the Scribes and Pharisees, yet were they still magnified by
the parties cured, or by the people. But when his hour was come, the hour
wherein he was to enter combat with the enemy of mankind, he was not one
minute free from violence or indignity. The greatest evils which can befall
men in this mortal life, are tortures of body, indignities, or disgrace: and
it is disputable whether a wise man would not rather choose death it self, than
either lingering torture, perpetual disgrace, or a foul indignity. But we
need not dispute this question in the case of the Son of God: disgrace and
pain, indignities and torture, did not come single upon him: one of them was
another second, whilst the conflict betwixt the Serpent and the woman's seed
continued. As it is the property of some biting Serpents to make way or
entrance by their venomous teeth for the infusion of more deadly poison from
some other parts of their body: so this generation of Vipers, which persecuted
the Son of God, used the civil power of Pilat, and the Roman soldiers to
open his veins, and lance his flesh, that their tongues might instill the
poison of Aspes into his glorious stripes, and bleeding wounds. But with the
bitter taunts and indignities offered unto him, even whilst he was upon the
Cross, I am not to meddle in particular: they have proper seasons allotted for
their memorial. It suffices therefore to observe, that the obedience and
patience of the Son of God in these most grievous sufferings were so
absolute, that we must borrow the patience of Job, not in the second
temptation by bodily grievance, but in his first temptation by loss of goods,
or worldly substance, for a scale to set it forth. In all his sufferings, in
all that his enemies tongues or hands could do, or say unto him, this servant
of God did not sin so much as in word, but offered the sacrifice of prayers
and supplications with the sacrifice of his soul, and spirit for his
persecutors.

3. Yet admit Jobs patience in his bodily afflictions had been more perfect
than in the first temptation it was, for loss of bodily goods; and his
obedience most complete both without mixture of impatiencie, without stain of
disobedience: the full measure of both had not been equivalent to the least
scantling of the obedience, or patience of the Son of God made man; for those
acts though otherwise equal, are always best which are done ex officio.
Prayers or solemn services officiated by a Priest, and justice awarded by a
Magistrate, are more acceptable unto God, and more beneficial unto men; than
if the same Act or Offices were more accurately performed by private men
without a calling. Now Job, and other holy men became pro modulo, in some sort
the servants of God by obedience. It was the greater measure of their
obedience, which made their service more acceptable. But the obedience of the
Son of God made man, did result or issue from the form of a servant which
he voluntarily and on purpose took upon him, that he might in it, and by it,
perform obedience more than sufficient for dissolving the force and strength
of that disobedience and rebellion, which the Devil had wrought in the Father
of mankind, which with its curse became hereditary to his sinful posterity.
The first Adam was created in the image of God, not in respect of holiness
only, but in respect of sovereignty and dominion. The second Adam though he
were the Son of God, was molded in the form of a servant, even from his first
conception. For as the Apostle says; he who was in the form of God, did empty
or annull himself, taking upon him the form of a servant. This was the
terminus ad quem, the intrinsecall term of the Son of Gods first
humiliation; for as was said before, the Son of God did not humble or empty
himself only in his manhood, or according to his manhood, after it was
assumed; but in the very assumption of the manhood thus molded in the form of
a servant. His humility as man was the humility of a servant, it was not
affected but a native branch of his present calling. His obedience was not
forced by constraint or fear, it was more than a branch, the very essence of
his calling. For he took upon him the form of a servant, it was not put upon
him against his will, as it was upon Job. Nor was his obedience as man more
excellent than any other man's had been in respect of its root or original
only, as being the formal effect of his calling, that is of the form of a
servant which he took upon him, but most complete in respect of the end or
final effect. For having annulled himself by taking upon him the form of a
servant, he further humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even to
the death of the Cross. Other servants may with their earthly Masters consent*
be set free; and supreme authority may in some cases command their Masters to
set them free. But the form of a servant was so closely united, or wedded unto
the Son of God manifested in the flesh, that it could not be cut off or
divorced from him, save only by death, and by the death of the Cross which
was a servile death, and the accomplishment of his service. But in what
peculiar acts was the obedience or exercise of the form of a servant, which
the Son of God took upon him, most conspicuous or more remarkable, than they
have been in other men?

4. It is a great deal more usual to our Savior than to any Prophet, to any
sacred Writer, or other Messenger of Gods will, to tell his hearers that he
came not of himself, but was sent, that being sent he came not to do his own
will, but the will of him that sent him; that he spoke nothing of himself,
but as his Father had appointed him, so he spoke, and so he did. What was the
reason, that he that spoke as never man spoke, and did those works which none
besides could do, should so often use these or like speeches to his Auditors.
Sure, his speeches unto this purpose are neither apologeticall, nor preventive:
as if his authority had been more questionable, or his practices more
suspicious, than the authority and practices of the Prophets, and other holy
men had been. And what was it then that gave occasion to this peculiar form of
speech, or made the use of it so familiar and frequent? All his speeches to
this purpose are but the characters or expressions of the form of a servant,
which he took upon him. His whole course of life, his undertakings and
encounters with this stubborn people, or with Satan and his instruments, might
have testified to any considerate, unpartiall man, that no man being left free
to himself would have adventured upon them out of the deliberate choice of an
humane or reasonable will. Specially his last sufferings were such as no wise
man, how godly soever, would have undergone, unless they had been put upon him
by authority supreme and irresistible. We may further observe, how the form of
a man, and the form of a servant, which had laid quiet for three and thirty
years without any Crisis of their difference, did upon the approach of his
death and passion begin to struggle, but without all strife or hostile
dissension, as Esau and Jacob toward the time of their birth had done in their
mothers womb: Even in the height of that triumphant and more than royal
entertainment, which the multitude made him at his entrance into Jerusalem, as
if he had then come to take possession of the Crown of his father David, even
whilst his ears were filled with these and the like acclamations, Hosanna to
the Son of David: He began to be troubled in spirit, whilst the form or
nature of man did suggest one thing, and the form of a servant correct what
the form of man did suggest, and sway him another way. What shall I say?
Father save me from this hour: Ioh. 12.27.
So the reasonable soul of man could not but wish, it could not but apprehend
this hour as an hour of evil: and evil, as evil, cannot be desired by the
will of man. Reason cannot but desire or wish the prevention or removal of it.
But though he were the Son of God, yet as the Apostle speaks, He learned
obedience by the things which he suffered. Heb. 5.8.
He resolves not to do according to his own liking, but as his Father should
appoint him. And hence he instantly overballanced the former natural desire
or inclination of the form of man with the serious consideration of his office
or present calling, as he had taken upon him the form of a servant. For as it
were recalling himself, he adds; but therefore came I unto this hour, to
wit, that he might suffer all the evils incident to man in this world.

5. Afterward, when his agony came upon him, his wonted natural inclination
of the form of man, or sway of the reasonable soul became more strong: and
hence he puts his former wish or intimation, [Father, what shall I say? save me
from this houre] into the form of a prayer; Father, if it be possible let this
cup pass from me: and yet overswaies this natural inclination or desire as
he was man, with a stronger desire or delight to do the office of a servant,
and counterchecks that prayer which he had conceived as man, with a prayer
which he had conceived ex officio, with a prayer of consecration,
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou willest: as if he had said, Though it
be just and reasonable which I desire; so just, as thou would not deny the
like to any other man in my case; yet seeing I am thy servant, and the Son of
thy handmaid in such a manner as no other man has been, I wholly submit my
self unto thy will, and consecrate my self unto thy service, how hard soever
it shall prove. Abraham, we know, waxed bold with God by often reiterating and
renewing the form of his petition for Sodom. First he prayed that God would
spare the City for fifty righteous men, then for forty, then for thirty, and
lastly descends to ten: His boldness was grounded upon a dictate of nature or
common principle of faith, that it was far from him who was to do justice to
all the world, to slay the righteous with the wicked. Suppose, God had said to
Abraham at his first petition thus, Abraham at thy request I will for this time
spare the men of Sodom, upon condition that thou, and such as supplicate for
them will become their bail, and stand between them and that storm of fire
and brimstone which must shortly go out against them from my fiery presence;
would this hard condition have been accepted by Abraham, or accepted with
patience? Would he not have opposed this former principle with greater
vehemency and passion, [To slay the righteous for the wicked, that be far
from thee, O Lord: shall the Judge of all the world thus far transgress the
rule of justice?] Yet may we not think, that righteous Abraham, though instiled
the friend of God, was so much less sinful than the most sinful man in
Sodom, as the man CHRIST JESUS was more righteous than Abraham. And what then
could restrain this just and holy One for making the same plea for himself,
which Abraham for himself might have made, which without offense unto his
Lord, he did often make on the behalf of so many righteous men, not as were,
but as he supposed possibly might be in Sodom? Only this; the Son of God who
is equal with God, to the end and purpose that he might dissolve the works
which the Devil had wrought in our nature, had taken our nature upon him, had
made his humane flesh, and humane blood, the flesh and blood of God himself,
though not as parts of the Divine nature, yet as appurtenances of the Divine
person, and was not only found in the fashion of man, but was invested with
the essential form of a servant. And it is the perfection of a servant, not
to do his own will, but the will of his Lord. Now the body or humane nature
of the Son of God was not a servant to his Divine person, but to the person
of his Father, whose will he was in the humane nature to perform, whatsoever
the performance of it should cost him. For unto this purpose only, and no
other, did he take both the nature of man and form of a servant upon him,
that he might in them and by them accomplish the will of his Father. As for
his body, that, during the time of his humiliation, was in bonis patris; the
goods and possession of the Father; as every servant (properly so called) is
the goods and inheritance of his Master. His sufferings in this nature were to
be extended until the full price of our redemption was paid. The just measure
of these his sufferings, and full price of our redemption, he did (as he was
man) learn by experience.

CHAP. XII. Of Christ's full satisfaction for the sins of men, and whether to
this satisfaction the suffering of Hell pains were necessarily required: And
of the Circumstances of his Agony.
1 THe undertakings of the Son of God for man's Redemption did for the most
part consist in his sufferings. Though he were a Son (says the Apostle, Heb.
5.8.) yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. Though he were
always a Son, the only Son of God; yet suffer he did not any longer than
whilst he was in the form of a servant. Of all true service or Apprentiship,
obedience is the special property: the greatest perfection whereunto the
condition of a servant, or one under legal command can pretend. Now the
perfection of obedience cannot by any means either be better exemplified or
approved, than by patience in suffering. Servants (says S. Peter, 1. Pet.
2.18, 19, etc.) be subject unto your Masters with all fear; not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward: For this is thank worthy, if a man
for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory
is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently?
but if when you do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps: who
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously: who his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree.

2. By this unspeakeable obedience of the Son of God in vouchsafing to suffer
for us, with unimitable patience what he had in no degree deserved: we who
were by natural condition slaves to Satan, were fully redeemed unto the
liberty of the sons of God. Of what kind soever his sufferings were, such
and so many they were, and all so patiently sustained by him, that he made a
full and perfect satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, as the ancient
and our English Liturgy expresses. And that he made a full and perfect
satisfaction for all the sins (whether of disobedience or impatience in
sufferings) of all those men who are in any degree redeemed by him, is not
questioned by any Christian whether in truth or profession only, who grant
that the Son of God did make any true and proper satisfaction for the sons
of men. Concerning the extent of man's redemption by the Son of God, or for
his full satisfaction for their sins, we shall, if God give leave, discourse
hereafter. But whether unto this full and perfect satisfaction which he
undertook to make for men, if not universally (as our Church teaches) yet as
all reformed Churches agree, indefinitely taken: it were necessary, requisite,
or expedient that the Son of God should in our nature undergo the same
penalties or sufferings in kind, which without his satisfaction for them, all
mankind should have suffered, is a question which of late years has troubled
even those reformed Churches, which agree upon this general; that his
satisfaction was most full and all-sufficient. The heat of this contention is
unto this day rather abated, than extinguished. Now the pains which all the
sons of Adam, and Adam himself, without full satisfaction made by the Son
of God, should in justice have suffered, were the pains of Hell, perpetual
durance in that unquenchable fire, which was of old prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Whether this fire, be it material or immateriall, or more then
equivalent perhaps unto material fire, did seize upon the humane soul or body
of the Son of God, or upon both, either in his Agony in the garden, or upon the
Cross, is the point or problem now in question. The affirmative part of this
problem has been averred by some in their public writings under the title of
the Holy Cause; so dignified for no other reason, as I conceive, but because it
was in those days maintained stiffly by such as deemed themselves more holy
than other men, at least more Orthodoxall in points of sacred doctrine than
their Fathers in Christ, and (by confession of their own consciences) more
learned than themselves. Others taking this for granted that Christ did suffer
all the pains of the damned, have been so far overswaid with their adherence
unto this doctrine, as to misdeem that Article in the Apostles Creed concerning
Christ's descending into Hell, or ad inferos, to incline this way; as if to
believe Christ did descend into hell, had been all one, as if he had suffered
the pains of hell in his Agony, in the garden or upon the cross. But if this
had been any part of the true meaning of that Article; the Apostles, or
whosoever were the first Composers of the Apostolic Creed, as we now have it
in the Latin, and especially in the English would have expressed themselves in
plainer terms. For if by [Hell] in that Article the pains of Hell had been by
them meant or intended, they would not have said that the Son of God descended
into hell, but rather that hell had ascended up unto him, whether in the garden
or on the Cross. That the Son of God our Savior Christ did truly descend
into the nethermost Hell may with greater ease, and more probability be proved
out of the Canonical Scriptures as well of the old Testament, as of the New;
than his suffering the pains of hell, can be inferred from either Testament, or
from the Apostles Creed. That Christ did after his death or dissolution of body
and soul descend into hell, such as maintain his suffering the very pains of
Hell, do generally deny. But to omit this incongruous paradox, or this
preposterous expression of it, that Christ's descention into hell should
intimate his suffering of Hell-paine before his death, it shall suffice to
examine the reasons which have been or may be brought, that he did or was to
suffer such pains whenever or in what place soever. All the reasons which
can be alleged that he did suffer such pains, must either be drawn from the
event, or some experiments recorded in the new Testament, or from some
predictions in the Old, or from a necessity or expediencie whether in justice,
in equity, or out of his abundant love to mankind, that he was to suffer them.

3. No necessity or expediency of such sufferings can be (as I conceive)
pretended, but either for satisfying Gods justice, or for his full and absolute
conquest over Satan, or for his consecration to his everlasting Priesthood,
that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things concerning
God, or a sweet comforter of all such as suffer whether in body or soul for
his sake. The (...) of the former question, that he did suffer the very pains
of Hell, must be proved or attempted from his speeches, gesture, or other
experiments related by the Evangelists in their accurate descriptions of his
Agony, and sufferings upon the Cross. To begin then with the relation of his
Agony. That is related at large by S. Matthew and S. Luke, which is scarce
mentioned by S. John, whose special part in penning this sacred tragedy, it
was to remember that divine discourse with his Disciples, being at his last
Supper with them, and his repair to the garden beyond Cedron, which he had so
often frequented before, that the opportunity of this place made Judas of a
secret thief* an open Traitor.

4. The manner and circumstances of the Agony it self are most fully related by
S. Luke cap. 22. ver. 39, etc. And he came out, and went as he was wont, to the
mount of Olives, and his disciples also followed. And when he was at the place,
he said unto the^, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. And he was withdrawn
from the^ about a stones cast, and kneeled down and prayed, etc. Not to dispute
about the phrase here used by S. Lu. (...), as whether it imports some violent
withdrawing by impulsion, or some extraordinary instinct, or whether in true
construction it be no more than thus, he did voluntarily withdraw himself:
questionless he was by the one means or other now led the second time to be
tempted. The temptation was grievous and more extraordinary then his former
temptation in the wilderness. Thus much is intimated by that peremptory
monition to his Apostles, [ Pray that ye enter not into temptation:] partly
from the manner of his prayer for himself; Father if thou be willing, remove
this Cup from me. The question is what Cup this was, whose removal he
desired? It was a deadly cup as all agree; but of what death? natural, or
supernatural? death of body only, or of soul? Had the Cup which he so feared
to drink, been only a death natural, or such as other men had or may taste
of, his serious reiterated deprecation of it, would in some men's collections
argue less courage or resolution in him than many others though generous, yet
but mere men, have exhibited either at the approach or onset of death, or in
the very conflict with deadly pangs, or terrors. Or if Peter at this time had
not been amazed with heaviness of spirit, he might thus have crowed over his
Master, dulce bellum inexpertis, when I forewarned you to be good unto your
self, and not to let these things come upon you; all the thanks I had for my
pains was this, Get thee behind me Satan: for thou savourest not the things
which are of God, but the things which be of men. Matt. 16.22.
And yet now thou prayest unto thy Father that these things, which I advised
thee to beware of, may not fall upon thee. Wherein then, I beseech thee, did I
offend, unless it were in foreseeing or foretelling, that in time it would
repent thee of thy forward resolution? But admit this Cup whose removal he
now prays for, were more than either the fear or feeling of a natural death,
though accompanied with more grievous symptoms than any man before him had
either felt or feared: was it possible that the horror of it should not be
duly apprehended by him from the time, wherein he had resolved to suffer those
things which Peter counseled him not to suffer? If he were ignorant how
dearly his future sufferings would cost him, why did he undertake to make
satisfaction for our sins by them? For to undertake any business of greater
consequence out of ignorance, or out of knowledge in part commendable, without
due and constant resolution; how ever the success fall out, does always
prejudice, if not elevate the just esteem of the undertakers discretion. The
undertaker in this great business of man's Redemption, was the Son of God,
whose wisdom no man can too highly estimate, whose undertaking for us all men
besides himself do esteem too low. Shall we say then he was not ignorant
of any thing that should befall him; yet ignorant of them as man, or that he
was ignorant of them in part, in part did foreknow them? Surely as he was God,
he did know all things before they were, before they could have any title to
actual being. For infinite knowledge (such is the knowledge of the Deity, and
of every Person in it) can neither be ignorant or nescient of any thing whether
future, present, or past, or of any thing possible to have been, or possible to
be either for the present or future. If the least degree of knowledge of any
thing past, present, or future could accrue or result de novo unto the Divine
nature, either in it self, or in any person in it, whether ab extra, from
occurrences which happen in the revolution of time, or from the supposed
determination of his own will from eternity; we should hence be enforced to
deny that the wisdom or knowledge of the Divine nature, or of any Person in it
were absolutely infinite. For that unto which any thing can accrue, or be
added is not truly infinite for the present, or in it self; can be no
otherwise infinite than by succession, or by addition of somewhat to it besides
it self. If it were true which some avouch, that God does not, or rather
cannot foreknow contingents future, otherwise than by the determination of his
own will: this supposed determination of his will (being indeed but a fancy or
transformation of his will to the similitude of ours) does make his knowledge
absolutely infinite, being of it self only capable of true infinity, by this
addition.

5. That God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is of wisdom and knowledge
truly infinite; not by occurrences ab extra, from the Creation, but in
himself, I firmly believe. As for the manner how he does know, or foreknow
things future, contingents especially, is a point which I could wish were not
at all or more sparingly disputed, as being assured, that this point of all
others now questioned, cannot possibly be determined by any man or Angel,
unless he be every way as wise as God, or somewhat wiser. God (the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost) I verily believe did more perfectly know the degrees and
qualities of all the sufferings of our Savior in the flesh, than he himself as
man did either know or foreknow them. Yet did not the Divine nature, or any
Divine person, as Divine, know them by experience or painful feeling as the
man CHRIST JESUS did, but by a knowledge as supereminent to the knowledge of
sense or humane reason, as the Divine nature is to the nature humane: or as
ubiquitary being or immensity is to circumscriptive or local presence. The
Divine nature, whether we consider it in the Person of the Father, Son, or
Holy Ghost, could learn nothing which they knew not before, by the sufferings
of the Son: yet the Son himself as man did learn obedience by the things
which he suffered in the flesh. Whatsoever may be thought or said of other
knowledge communicated to the man CHRIST JESUS by the virtue of the Personal
union: yet his sensible or experimental knowledge, as of pains and sorrow
whether incident to body only, or to both body and soul, was not from his
cradle infinite, was not so complete at his baptism, as at his last Supper,
nor then so exact as in the garden, or upon the Cross it was. A growth or
increase in this kind of knowledge is granted by such of the Schoolmen, as
did not know or consider, what it was for the Son of God to be in the form
of a servant, but took this to be all one, as to be in the form of a
mortal man. But such as duly consider his peculiar estate or condition,
whilst he was in the form of a servant, will easily conceive his voluntary
renouncing that full measure of knowledge which he now has as man, and his
obedient submission of his manhood unto the feeling of our infirmities, to have
been a necessary part, or rather the very depth of that humiliation, or
exaninition of himself, whereof the Apostle speaks. For it is one special
good quality of a servant, not perfectly to know his errand, not to be too
inquisitive after the particular contents of it, before he be sent; but to
expect instructions from him that sent him, though it be in an Embassage.

6. If we take it then as granted, that our Savior as man did from his
infancy most clearly foresee, or distinctly know, that he was to redeem
mankind, by tasting the bitter cup of death for them; it will not hence
follow, that he should at all times know, either the true quality, or exact
measure of the pains which he was at the time appointed by his Father to
suffer, for accomplishing this great work undertaken by him. For of all things
that can be known by men, the knowledge of pains either for quality, or the
distinct measure of them, is least possible without experimental knowledge, or
sensible feeling of them. Many Physicians have learnedly discourst of the
several sorts of fevers, and calculated their degrees more mathematico, as
Mathematicians do the quantity of figures or solid bodies, or revolutions of
the Heavens. But the real pains or languishments of hecticall, pestilentiall,
or other fevers, the most learned Physician in the world cannot distinctly
know or calculate, unless he feel them. Or in case by sensible experience he
knew the nature or quality, or several degrees of every fever; he is not
hereby enabled distinctly to apprehend the maladies which attend the Gout
until he feel them. Or suppose he knew these maladies from the highest to the
lowest degree, this will not indoctrinate him to know the extremities of the
Stone so perfectly and distinctly as his meanest Patient does which has
sensible experience of it, though in a middle degree. Our Savior long before
his last resort unto the garden of Gethsemane, was a man of sorows, had
plentiful experience of humane infirmities or bodily maladies. For he had felt
the grief and pain of all the diseases which he had cured by most exact and
perfect sympathy with the diseased. His heart was tunable to every man's heart,
that did seriously impart his grief of mind or affliction of body unto him.
Only in laughter or bodily mirth he held no consort for ought we read with
any man. But the grief and sorrow which in the garden he suffered, could not be
known by sympathy. The protopathy was in himself, and no man, not the
Apostles themselves could so truly sympathize with him in this grief, as he
had done with them, or the meanest of their brethren in other grievances or
afflictions. For never was there on earth any sorrow like unto the sorrow,
wherewith the Lord had afflicted him in this day of his wrath. Yet was his
obedience more than equal to his sorrow, and this obedience he learned by his
sufferings.

7. But if in this hour, or any other he learned obedience, this seems to
argue that he was either disobedient before, or at lest wanted some degree or
part of obedience. For no man can be said to learn that lesson, which he has
already most perfectly by heart. To this we say, That how ever the Son of
God, or the man Christ Jesus, did never want any degree or part of habitual or
implanted obedience; yet the measure of his actual obedience was not at all
times the same. The obedience which the Apostle says he learned, was
obedience passive; and all passive obedience does properly consist in patient
suffering such things as are enjoined by lawful authority, or in submitting
our wills and affections, not our bodies only unto the just designs of
Superiors. Our Savior at all times wholly submitted his humane will unto his
Fathers will, had always undertaken with alacrity whatsoever his Father had
appointed him to undertake or undergo: but his Father had never called him to
such hard service as in this hour was put upon him. Now if obedience passive
consist in patience of suffering, it must needs increase, as the hardness of
the sufferings increase; in case the hardest service be borne with equal
patience, or undertaken with the same measure of submission unto his will which
enjoines them, that meaner services are. Again, if the true measure of bodily
pains or sorrow of mind cannot otherwise be known than by experience, the
Son of God himself as man, and in the form of a servant, was to learn
obedience, at lest some new degrees of it by gaining experience of unusual
pains and sufferings. And such questionless were those anguishes, whether of
soul or body which he suffered in the garden. That he had often prayed before
this time, we read; and no doubt had always tendered his petitions to God as
to his Father with such humility of spirit, as became an obedient Son, and
faithful servant, as did best befit the Ideall pattern of all true obedience.
But we do not read, nor have we any occasion or hint, to conjecture, that at
any time before this he did so humble himself in prayer, as at this time he
did, whether we respect the form or tenor of his supplications, or his voice
or bodily gesture in the delivery of them. All the circumstances of these his
supplications, are accurately recorded by the Evangelists. He was withdrawn,
or did withdraw himself, from his Apostles about a stones cast. And yet in
this distance his Apostles though drousie and heavy, did hear him pray
distinctly, who had taught them and us to pray for our selves in secret, so
secretly as that none besides our heavenly Father might hear them. As for his
gesture or posture of body, that, at the first delivery of his prayer and
supplications was (...). So S. Luke Cap. 22. ver. 41. He went forward, says
S. Mark, a little and fell on the ground and prayed, Mark. 14.35. So he might
do and fall on his knees as S. Luke relates. But S. Matthew adds, he went a
little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father if it be
possible let this cup pass from me. That he thrice used this form or tenor
of prayer, whether at each time he used the same posture of body, or rather
falling on his knees than on his face; is not so clear though most probably
he did so. Now that which these three Evangelists do intimate or imply in the
accurate relations of these circumstances, is more expressly recorded by S.
Paul, Heb. 5.7. to wit, that in the days of his flesh he offered up prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears. And no wonder if streams of
tears gushed from his eyes, when his whole body (as S. Luke informs us) did
distill blood. The full importance of this sacred passage of S. Paul, Heb. 5.
from the fourth verse to the ninth, seeing it contains matter of deeper
mysteries than most Interpreters (which I have read) have taken any great
pains to sound, must be part of the subject of another following Treatise,
concerning his consecration to his everlasting Priesthood. Thus much in the
mean time I take as granted that the forecited seventh verse of the fifth
Chapter to the Hebrews does in special refer unto the supplications made by
our Savior in his Agony: and will be the best Comment I know upon the
Evangelists, for clearing that point now in question [what Cup it was, for
whose removal he thrice so earnestly prayed.]

8. He offered up these his prayers, says the Apostle, unto him who was able
to save him from death. This is exactly parallel to the preamble which our
Savior used before the full ingruence or paroxysme of his Agony; Abba, Father,
all things are possible to thee, take away this Cup from me, etc. No man
doubts but that his Father was able to save him from dissolution of body and
soul, that is, from death it self, whether it had come by course of nature,
or by violence. But from this death it is plain he did not save him. Of this
cup or kind of death he tasted to the full, in the utmost extremity, upon the
Cross. How then is it true which S. Paul in the forecited place adds, that
after he offered up prayers with strong crying and tears, he was heard in
that he feared: Or (as others read) for his piety. Whether reading we follow,
this, or that, the just importance of our Apostles words (...) is thus much at
least, that he was delivered from that which he so much feared, though with a
pious fear: for out of such a fear he offered up his prayers with strong
crying and tears. The Cup then which he so earnestly prayed might pass from
him, was not the cup of violent death simply considered, nor as accompanied
with all the indignities done unto him by the Jews, Romans, and others the
very next day. For what then did he at this time so earnestly pray? for speedy
release or deliverance from the heaviness of soul, or anguish of spirit,
which now had suddenly seized upon him. The very first draught of this Cup had
cast him into a bloody sweat, and had he been enforced to have taken a second,
or third deep draught of it; or if his present anguish had been for some few
hours continued, he had prevented the cruel tortures of the Cross, and the
indignities done unto his person by the Jews or Roman Soldiers. This was that
Cup which Peter counseled him not to taste of, for whose removal he never
prayed, as being fully resolved to pledge the utmost extremity of their malice,
with a far greater measure of patience. And for this reason when Peter drew
his sword for his rescous (as he intended) he checks him again, as he had
done, Matthew. 16.23. Put up thy sword into the sheath: the Cup which my Father
gives me, shall I not drink it? Ioh. 18.11. But that cup which he so earnestly
did pray might pass from him, did certainly vanish with his Agony, and his
Agony did endure no longer than he offered up his supplications and prayers;
about the space of an hour. There remained no sign or symptom of it after
the Traitor had delivered him up into his enemies hands. Or if we ponderate S.
Lukes relation of his Agony aright, his prayers were heard upon the first, or
second uttering of them. Seeing ease, or deliverance from the ingruence of
pains, is all that they pressed for the present desires: it is all one whether
the burden be lessened, or his strength to bear it be increased. His ease
and comfort is either way the same. Admit then the heavy burden laid upon the
Son of God in the days of his flesh, had continued the same or perhaps
increased from his first entering into the garden: yet his prayers were heard in
that an Angel was sent, whether to strengthen him or to comfort him, Luke
22.43. The word in the Original is often used for such internal strength, as
men recover by some comfortable refection, when they are faint for want of
meat, or by gathering their spirits after they have been dissipated or dejected
by sudden fear or amazement. It would perhaps be accounted impertinent to make
inquiry what Angel it was, which was sent to comfort or strengthen the Son
of God in that extremity of his Agony. Yet many of the Ancients, and of modern
Interpreters not a few, are of opinion that it was the same Angel which did
annunciate his birth and conception, and that was the Angel Gabriel. Who though
perhaps he did not take his name from his foreseen deputation to his
function; yet did he never brook it better in any former acts of his
ministry, then in the performance of this present service. His name imports as
much as the strength of God, and at this time he strengthens the man CHRIST
JESUS who then was, and now is the Son of God: as truly God as man. Now if
he who was the Son of God, did receive strength or comfort from an Angel; it
is no paradox or soloecisme to say, that he learned obedience by the things
which he suffered, or that these present sufferings were unknowen to him as
man, until he felt them. For no reason can be to my apprehension conceived,
why he who was the Son of God might not be capable of some growth in
knowledge, experimental especially, as well as in bodily quantity or strength
of body. Concerning the nature and quality of those sufferings wherein he was
strengthened or comforted by an Angel, as whether they were natural or
supernatural; or if supernatural, whether they were the very pains of Hell,
or such as we should have suffered without his satisfaction, cannot be
inferred either from the unusual form of his prayers uttered with strong
cries, or from his gesture in the garden.

9. Some there be who take his bloody sweat in that grievous Agony to be a
symptom of infernal pains. But from what grounds either in Philosophy or
Divinity, I know nor. If the pains of Hell or hellish pains (so some
distinguish) be procured by the fire of Hell (be that material or
immateriall) bloody sweat can be no probable effect of the one or other fire.
Nor is such sweat any (...) or demonstrative sign of pains more grievous than
may be inflicted by agents, or suffered by patients merely natural. For
however in colder Countries bloody sweats be as rare in men's bodies, as
showers of blood in the air: yet as a good Philosopher has long ago
observed, to sweat blood is not unusual to Italians, Curaeus.
yet usual only (as I take it) to men of that Climate in some peculiar
diseases. The most remarkable instance which I have read of bloody sweat in a
man not oppressed with any disease, is of a Captain Capta Dragonera, Magio
negotiu^ datum, ut Montemmarinum munitissimu^ locum aggrederetur. Igitur secu^
ducto Augusto Saluciaru^ principis not^o filio, eo tendit: evocatoque quasi ad
colloquium praesidiariorum duce ab Augusto, quicum arctissima intercedebat
amicitia; Magius ex compacto superveniens eum comprehendi jussit, and ut locum
dederet, hortatus; cum nihil proficeret: postremo minas addidit and ipsum
vinctum quasi ad supplicium in oppidi conspectum deduci imperavit, tam
miserabili spectaculo victi oppidani, ut ducem suum periculo eximerent,
deditione^ fecere. 0bservatu^, tam indignae mortis vehementi metu adeo
concussum animo eum suisse, ut sanguineum sudore^ toto corpore funderet. Th^an.
lib. 10. page 221.1.
an Italian (if I mistake not) who being surprised by the subtilty of his
Enemy, whom he had trusted too far upon a tryste of Parley, and thereby
enforced either to yield up the Fort which he had stoutly maintained, or
otherwise to be presently hanged: the consideration of this perplexity
wherewith through his own folly he had entangled himself, did make such
deep impression into his generous spirits, that it squeezed blood out of his
veins. Our Savior (no doubt) as man, had a more full apprehension of all the
malicious disgraces and cruel indignities which his enemies could put upon him,
than this Captain had. The measure of his bodily sufferings and personal
wrongs were in number far more, and for quality far more grievous than ever
were intended to this Captain, or to any other mortal man by their enemies.
And though the death of the Cross was in it self an ignominious and cruel
death, yet in our Saviors particular that was most true, mortis modus morte
pejor; the manner of his apprehension, of his double arraignement, and
conviction, of his usage before he was brought to the place of execution, and
all the time whilst the malice of Jew and Gentile was wreaked upon him was more
grievous then the death of the Cross it self without these grievous
concomitants could have been. To scan these briefly, and in order. The very
manner of his apprehension made some impression of sorrow and indignation in
him, as appears by the character of his speech, Luke 12.32, etc Then Jesus
said to the chife Priests and Captains of the Temple, and the Elders which
were come to him, Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves?
when I was daily with you in the Temple, ye stretched forth no hand against
me, but this is your hour, etc. And so no question did their binding of him in
bonds by all probability and circumstances more grievous and more disgraceful,
than ordinary felons, thieves, or murderers, in those days were liable unto,
especially before legal conviction. For Judas who had bargained with the high
Priests and Elders for making delivery of him into their hands, had forewarned
them, Matt. 26.48. Lead him away safely; as if he had said, Be sure ye make
him fast. Whether the Traitor thus spoke out of a desire to have him put to
death, or only to secure himself against all quirks of Law concerning his
bargain in case JESUS (as he often had done) should escape out of their hands,
I will not peremptorily determine: albeit I am not ignorant that diverse of the
exquisitest Interpreters, and other good writers are of opinion, that Judas
betrayed him, not so much out of malice, as out of covetousness: being
persuaded he was able to quit himself from any restraint, that they could lay
upon him. In the mean time, however it fared with his Master, or with them to
whom he delivered him; he resolved to free his gainefull bargain from further
question. And this may be the probable reason of his relentance after he saw
his Master condemned to death, without all hope of reskue or reprivall. So it
often falls out, that when the events fall out worse than the Projectors
intended, albeit their first intentions were in themselves wicked, the
consideration hereof brings them commonly to such remorse, as causes despair
sooner than any degree of true repentance. And for Judas to make his gain, or
to redeem the loss which he had suffered by the wast of ointment as he
interpreted it, powered upon his head, by the delivery of his Master, although
he did not at all intend his death; was an odious treason, which is always
the proper fruit of a base and covetous mind. And both branch and fruit, the
covetousness, and the treason might be a corrasive to our Savior, and in part
occasion his Agony. So might the malicious disposition, and ignominious
proceeding of the Priests and Elders against him, be more grievous to him than
the pains of death or public disgraces which he suffered by them. The
suborning of false witnesses against him were more distasteful to his righteous
soul, than all the sufferings and scornful revilings which they bestowed upon
him. But amongst all the indignities which Satan, and his instruments could
invent, these were the most grievous. First their begging of Barabbas his
pardon, when Pilate would have dismissed or reprived JESUS. This was a cruel
kind of mercy, the true effect of preposterous zeal, and Pharisaicall
hypocrisy. For this custom of showing mercy, or begging pardon for some
prisoner at the great Feast of the Passover was first instituted in the
remembrance of the mercy which God had showed unto their Fathers in delivering
them out of Egypt. And in requital of this extraordinary favor, which the
Lord God of Israel had showed to their Fathers, they deliver him to be
crucified by the Gentiles, being set up by Pilate an heathen Governor in
competition for this poor favor with Barabbas, a notable rebel, thief, and
murderer. Another indignity was the sudden execution of this most unjust
sentence, not giving him such competent time as other prisoners had to dispose
of himself, and of his estate, or to make preparation for death. For this
Session was not called for him but for others who had been in custody before,
yet he is cast into the bargain as a fragment or refused remnant, as a party
no more considerable than a Cutpurse taken in the manner in open Court whilst
others are arraigned. Now all these indignities and many more, as the
Evangelists tell us CHRIST did foresee before his Agony seized upon him. And
might not the foresight or due apprehension of them, and of the lingering death
which these did usher in, or both put together, more probably cause that Agony
and sweat in the garden, then the apprehension of death and indignities
approaching, or then the extremity of some diseases do the like effects in
other men?

10. As for the sweating of blood in some diseases, that is never occasioned by
any apprehension of the disease occurrent, but only by the ingruence of the
disease it self, whereof it is an effect or symptom. Or if it be objected
that our Savior might have a deeper apprehension of his death approaching,
than any other man had of diseases before they did actually seize upon him. Yet
is there no reason to suspect, that he had not the same apprehension long
before he entered into the garden, or that this apprehension whether of death or
indignities, should not be improved by sensible experiments of the violences
after done unto him in the high Priests hall, by the Roman Soldiers, or by his
scourging at Pilates command which was more cruel than others condemned to die
the death of the Cross did suffer; because Pilate hoped that the sight of his
gory stripes might quench the malicious heat of the Jews, and acquit him from
further condemnation. Yet in all his ensuing sufferings we do not read or
find that he had any symptoms of that anguish which came upon him in the
garden: He did not so much as pray unto his Father for any release from the
tortures and indignities, which he actually felt by sensible experience; but
rather for his enemies which had procured them. Or if his bloody sweat in the
garden had been occasioned (as in all probability it was not) from any
foresight or apprehension of his indigne usage by the Jews, and by the Roman
Soldiers, whilst he was in hold or upon the Cross; it could not be any
symptom of hellish or infernal pains.

11. Yet that he suffered such pains upon the Cross has been avouched too
confidently by some, and more peevishly maintained by others. One especial
ground pretended for this ill sounding doctrine is, that exclamation uttered by
him a little before his death; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The
collections which many learned writers of the Romish Church have drawn from
Calvin's Comments upon these words, are too plentiful to be here inserted; and
the imputations which they lay upon him and his followers unanswerable, if he
meant or spoke as they express his meaning, to wit, that these words should
argue a sensible experience of Hell pains, or the worst symptoms of such
pains, as either despair, distraction of mind, or discontent. I should be
very sorry to read them in Calvin, or in any other writer of the reformed
Churches, very unwilling distinctly to call to memory some passages in late
English Writers which to my remembrance incline too much this way. All I can
say in Calvin's defense, if he peremptorily affirm, that our Savior did
suffer the pains of Hell upon the Cross, is this. If it be an heresy (as the
Romish Church does make it, and I cannot gainesay them, if it be stiffly
maintained:) the heresy was broached by a great and learned Romish Cusanus.
Cardinal before Calvin wrote. And when the Pope, who is the pretended Judge
of all heresies, shall condemn his books for heretical, or his opinion in
this particular for an heresy; I shall be ready to persuade the Church of
England (as far as I am able) to do the like. The true importance of our
Saviors exclamation or proclamation rather upon the Cross (for he uttered
it, voce magna, with a proclamatory voice,) will come to be scanned in the
next Treatise. But if Satan either by his own strength, or by special
permission from God the Father, did tempt our Savior upon the Cross, whether
immediately or mediatly by the malicious stratagems of the Jews, and by the
profaneness of the Roman Soldiers so far as to proclaim his own despair
or diffidence of Gods favor toward him, or to the least degree of impatience
or discontent; it would be hard to make any construction of our Saviors
prediction, Ioh. 14.30. The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in
me; or as some have more fully expressed the Hebraisme, nothing against me. As
certainly he had no matter to work upon, no occasion of solace either to
himself or to his infernal associats, as if they had moved him to the least
degree of diffidence or impatience. For our Savior questionless was more then
certain by a more excellent certainty, than the certainty of faith, that he
should be saved from the second death; that he should never fall away from Gods
favor, nor be for a moment forsaken of him. Otherwise, he had been a less
faithful servant of God, less mindful of special revelations made to him as
man, then they are who believe their own special election or predestination,
only upon application of Gods general promises to themselves in particular.
For besides the internal revelations made to him as man, he had many public
assurances, such as others besides himself did hear; none of which he did
ever distrust or doubt: much less could he fear lest his Father should be so
far displeased with him, as ever to forsake him. Now his pains upon the
Cross were grievous, and the indignities done unto him, to flesh and blood
intolerable: yet his apprehension of celestial joys due unto him, was never
interrupted. And out of this never interrupted apprehension, or rather view of
these joys, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, as our Apostle
tells us, Hebr. 12.2. Not only his apprehension of these, but his most
circumspect observance of all opportunities to do his Fathers will, and to see
all the Scriptures concerning him fulfilled; was never more conspicuously
remarkable, whilst he was upon the Cross, than in his last conflict with
death. The fulfilling of the Prophecies concerning his sufferings, requires a
peculiar Treatise. For his extraordinary circumspection about that very point
of time wherein he uttered these words, Eli, Eli, lamasabacthani, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? that is abundantly testified by S. John who was
an ear witness of his speeches. Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus his
mother, and his mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas and Mary Magdalene:
When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the Disciple standing by whom he
loved; he says unto his mother, Woman, behold thy Son. Then says he to the
Disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that hour that Disciple took her unto
his own home, Joh. 19.25, 26, 27.

CHAP. XIII. The bloody Sacrifice of the Son of God, was all sufficient to
make full satisfaction for the sins of the world, without his suffering of
any supernatural or unknowen pains.
1 BUt however the former pretended conclusion concerning Christ's suffering the
pains of Hell, or any of their symptoms, cannot be inferred either from his
bloody sweat in the garden, or from any speeches of his or any effect related
by the Evangelists: yet the favorers of this conclusion rather than they would
give it over endeavor to prove it by reason drawn from the final cause of
all his sufferings. The suffering of the pains of hell (say they) was
necessarily required to the full satisfaction for all our sins, which all
good Christians confess he did bear both in his Agony and upon the Cross.
But the very foundation of this assertion is very weak, and the superstructive
worse: most derogatory to the infinite worth of Christ's bloody Sacrifice.
First, it is not required by the rules of equity, whether Divine or humane,
that satisfaction for wrongs done should always be made in kind, or by way of
counterpassion. It is in many cases more full and more sufficient when it is
made by equivalencie, than if it were made in kind. As in case a man in his
rage should cruelly beat his neighbor, or butcher his cattle: to permit the
party which suffered the wrong whether in his person or in his goods, to
exercise the like rage or cruelty upon his person or live-goods, which did the
wrong, could be no true satisfaction either to the law, or party wronged, but
rather beastly revenge. The best satisfaction which in this case could be
awarded to the party wronged, would be to give him such contentment in one
kind or other, as might in reason, though not to passion, be as beneficial
and useful to him, as the effects of his fury and rage which did the wrong,
were in just estimation hurtful: and yet such withal, as should make the
offender, as unwilling to do the like wrong again, as the party wronged or
any in his case would be to suffer it. This is the only true satisfaction
which in the same or like case could be justly made to the Law, whose true
intendment always is to make all men willing to do to others, as they desire
should be done unto them: unwilling to do any thing to others, which they
would not have done unto themselves. Our father Adam had wronged our common
nature, and all of us had offended our Creator more grievously, than any man
can wrong another. Now in that our God and Creator is withal the eternal rule
of justice, or rather Justice it self; it was requisite that satisfaction
should be made unto him in the fullest degree. For one man, for all men which
had done this wrong, to make satisfaction to infinite Majesty either in whole
or in part was impossible. Though all mankind had been condemned to suffer
uncessantly both in body and soul, they might by this means have been
continually making satisfaction, but never have made it; albeit their
sufferings had been endless. Therefore was this great work undertaken by the
Son of God made man for us.

2. Suppose then all this had been foreknown, before our Savior was incarnate,
ever since the fall of our first Parents, and the sentence denounced against
them; it would have been a more grievous sin in our first Parents or in any
of their posterity, than the sin of the old Serpent in seducing them or us to
yield to his suggestions, to have besought God the Father, that his only Son
should make satisfaction for us in the very same kind, which we should have
made, but could never make, that is, by suffering the pains of Hell. That the
man Christ Jesus might suffer such pains as the damned shall do, was perhaps
the desire of Satan, that which the great Enemy of mankind did most earnestly
labor to effect. And if thus he did but desire, this was the greatest actual
sin, which either he or his infernal associats ever had committed, or can
commit. Whatsoever they might desire, all that our heavenly Father could
require of his only Son after he became our surety, was to make full
satisfaction for all our sins against his Deity, or the eternal rule of
justice. But all this he knew might be accomplished by his only Son after a
more excellent manner, than either by exercising his wrath due unto us, or by
suffering Satan whose redemption his Son did no way undertake, to wreake the
utmost of his malice or foehood against mankind upon him. For my self amongst
others, I must confess, I could never understand the language of many
professed Divines, who would persuade us that the full vialls of Gods wrath due
unto our sins were powered upon his Son. Whatsoever their meaning be, which
I presume is much better, than I can gather from their expressions, the manner
of speech (to say no worse) is very improper, and to me unpleasant. For how was
it possible, God the Father should be wroth with him in whom alone he was
always well pleased. But wrath or anger against any one, are always the
effects of some displeasure precedent: and no satisfaction can be made whilst
displeasure is taken, or wrath kindled against the party which seeks to make
satisfaction or reconciliation. Now the infliction or permission of Hell pains
to be inflicted upon any, is the award not of Gods judgment, but of his wrath
and fury.

3. If it be objected that our sins were infinite, though not for number yet
for quality, because committed against an infinite Majesty; and consequently
that no satisfaction according to the exact rule of justice could be made
without punishment, or penalties truly infinite: the answer is as
Orthodoxall, as easy or common, That the satisfaction made for us by the Son
of God, was more truly infinite, than the sins of mankind were. For it was
absolutely infinite. Non quia passus est infinita, sed quia qui passus est erat
infinitus. The person or party who made satisfaction for us, or party which
undertook the satisfaction, was both in Majesty, and in goodness, as truly
infinite, as the Majesty and goodness whom we had offended, and by whom exact
satisfaction was required: both of them were both ways absolutely infinite. J
omit the weakness of such calculatory arguments, as this; [Our sins were
absolutely infinite, because committed against an infinite Majesty,] as too
well known to most students, and often enough, if not too often deciphered in
other of my meditations. For this being admitted, all sins should be equal,
because all are committed against the same infinite Majesty and goodness. As
for the true measure of our sins and ill deservings, that must be taken from
the measure of Gods displeasure against them: and that is but equal to the
several degrees of our disobedience to his most holy Laws and Commandments.
This then we verily believe, that the full height and measure of all
disobedience and rebellions against God, was neither higher or greater than the
obedience which his Son performed in our flesh, or whilst he stood in the
condition of a servant: that our heavenly Father was never so much displeased
at all our disobediences, as he was well pleased with the obedience of his
only Son, or with their obedience that are truly ingraffed in him, and are
made partakers of his obedience in his sufferings. Both parts of this
conclusion may with facility be evinced in the judgment of all men which have
subscribed unto, or do admit the principles in Divinity, whether Legal or
Evangelicall.

4. It was a maxim undoubted in the time of the Law, that obedience was better
than sacrifice: the corrollary or consequence of which maxim does amount to
this point, that obedience without sacrifice, was always better than sacrifice
without obedience. Yet such sacrifices, as were appointed by God, being offered
out of the spirit of obedience, were always more acceptable than obedience
alone. Such sacrifices as were appointed by God himself, unless they were
offered in obedience and out of conformity to his Law, were abominable. The
principal part of obedience, which the Law required, was the humble confession
of the parties sins, for whose sakes they were offered. This confession was
made over the heads of the beasts which were offered: the parties offering them
always acknowledging either expressly by their tongues, or implicitly in heart,
that they had better deserved a cruel death than the dumb creatures, which
they sacrificed had done. Briefly, Legal sacrifices were then acceptable, when
their offerers put on such affections, as David makes expression of, when he
saw the people plagued for his sins, or at lest when the punishment of their
own sins came suddenly upon them through his folly. Lo, I have sinned, and
I have done wickedly: but these sheep what have they done? 2. Sam. 24.17.
Yet even whilst the best of Gods people thus affected did offer the best
kind of Legal Sacrifices (bullocks whilst their horns and hoofes began to
spread,) their sacrifice and obedience did but lovingly meet, they were not
mutually wedded or betrothed. But whilst the Son of God did offer up
himself for us upon the Cross, his sacrifice and obedience were more strictly
united, than man and wife, than man's soul and body. For betwixt these there is
often times dissension or reluctance: so was there never betwixt Christ's Divine
person who was the offerer, and the humane nature which was the offering. His
humane nature and will before it was sacrificed, and whilst it was sacrificed,
was more obedient to his Fathers will, than our first Parents senses or
affections in their integrity were unto their reasonable souls. When he
comes into the world (as our Apostle interprets the Psalm. 40. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
Psalmist) he says, Sacrifice and offerings thou would not, but a body have
thou prepared or fitted for me. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin
thou had no pleasure: then said I, lo, I come (in the volume of the book it
is written of me) to do thy will O God. This will of God accomplished through
the sacrifice of his Son, was that will of God, by which we are sanctified,
and if sanctified, then justified; yet not justified without satisfaction
before made. Of the full meaning of this place, and of the true reconciliation
of the Seventy Interpreters (whom the Apostle follows) with the Psalmist or
the Original, by Gods grace hereafter. Thus much is pertinent to our present
purpose, that the body which the Son of God assumed to do that will of his
Father, which could not be accomplished by any other sacrifices (though
numberless and endless) was a body fitted for all kinds of calamities and
crosses, which are incident unto mortality: a body more capable of pain, or
deeper impressions from the violent occurrences of all externalls, which are
natural; than any other man's body was, or had been. A body as it were molded
and organized of purpose to be animated or actuated with the spirit of
obedience and all manner of patience in suffering, which can be required in a
faithful servant. Servants (says S. Peter 1. Pet. 2.18, 19.
) be obedient, etc. For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. CHRIST JESUS who was the pattern of
all obedience required in servants, not only whilst he was to deal with
malicious unreasonable men, but in the very (...) of his Agony, (when his heart
within him was become like melting wax through the vehemency of that fiery
trial) did set the fairest copy of that obedience, which S. Peter requires
should be taken out (how rudely soever) by every servant of God, under his
own hand. Even in this Agony when his mortal spirits did faint and languish,
the spirit of obedience was much stronger in him, than the pulse of pain and
sorrow. It did not intermit or abate when his pains and anguish did increase.
Being in Agony (says S. Luke) he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. These
words I refer if not to the third, yet certainly to the second paroxysme of
his Agony; one or more of which fits did wring blood from his sacred body,
being otherwise full of health. But most probable it is from S. Lukes relation.
Chap. 22. ver. 44. that he sweat blood both in the first and second fit, and
that in all the three he delivered his supplications (...) kneeling, or
falling upon the ground. The form of his prayer and manner of deportment in it,
(as was said before) exhibit a true document or demonstrative argument, that
besides his Divine will, he had a will truly humane, a reasonable will in
that he did desire or deprecate the removal or asswagement of his present
sufferings, with greater fervency of spirit and devotion, than any sons of
Adam could deprecate the pains of Hell, if they should be beset with them, or
feel their approach. And yet withal, he wholly submits his humane body,
soul, and will unto his heavenly Fathers will, who by his consent had free
power to dispose of them in life and death, as he pleased. Out of this fervent
spirit of obedience consecrated unto Gods service by his most devout prayers,
he was delivered from the pains and terrors, which he both feared and felt in
the garden.

5. As for his sacrifice upon the Cross, albeit we subduct the worth of it in
it self considered (which infinitely exceeds the worth of all other
sacrifices;) it was most properly, and most really the sacrifice of a broken
heart, or contrite spirit. For after his natural strength was spent, and his
bodily spirits diffused with his blood; he lastly offers up his immortal
spirit, his very soul unto his Father. Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit: and having said thus he gave up the ghost, Luke 23.46. The spirit of
obedience did not expire with bodily spirits, it did accompany his soul into
Paradise: it was not put off with the form of a servant, but clothed upon
with glory and immortality. Shall we yet doubt, whether the sacrifice upon the
Cross being offered out of such unexpressible obedience were fully sufficient
to make abundant satisfaction for all our disobediences; albeit we should
subduct his obedience and patience in that grievous Agony in the garden?

6. If any man be disposed to move further doubt about this point; the
Apostles authority, or rather his reason will put the point out of question,
Heb. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. But Christ being come an high Priest of good things to
come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to
say, not of this building: Neither by the blood of goats and calves; but by his
own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God? The form and manner of his dispute in this passage, as in most
others throughout this Epistle, is allegorical: but allegories in true
Theology always include arguments of proportion, and are as firm as any
Geometrical or Mathematical demonstration. The terms of proportion in this
argument are especially four. First, sins merely ceremonial, that is such
errors and escapes, as are evil because forbidden, not evil in themselves.
The second, the remedy appointed for such sins, and that was the blood of
bulls and goats, etc. The third, sins properly so called, that is, all
offenses or trespasses against the Law of nature, or against the Law of God.
Things not evil only because forbidden, but rather forbidden because evil in
their own nature. The fourth term is, the antidote or preservative against
such sins, as in their nature poison our souls: and this sovereign
preservative is only the blood of Christ. The Apostle takes it for granted,
that the sacrifice of bulls and goats were sufficient to make satisfaction for
sins merely ceremonial; and the blood available so far to sanctify the
parties offending against the Law of Ceremonies, as that they might be admitted
into the Congregation, or stand recti in curia, after the sacrifice was once
offered. Of this purification concerning the flesh by the blood of such
sacrifices, that which the Romanists say of the Sacraments of the new
Testament, might be more probably said; Conferebant gratiam ex opere operato.
The ceremonial sin was taken away by a ceremonial offering. From this
known maxim concerning the law of Ceremonies, or Legal sacrifices S. Paul
takes his rise unto the high mystery of the Gospel, to wit, that the offering
which the Son of God did make upon the Cross, was more sufficient, as well
for making full satisfaction unto God for all sins committed against his Law,
as for purifying the conscience of offenders from dead works; more effectual
to make men partakers of the true celestial Sanctuary, than the blood of
beasts was for making them legally clean. Purification from sin or
sanctification always presupposed full satisfaction for the sins committed.
To cleanse men from sins merely ceremonial, or to sanctify them according to
the flesh the bloody sacrifice of bruit beasts was sufficient, although they
suffered no other pains than natural, albeit they felt no force, or assault
of any agents, but merely natural, much more is the blood of Christ of force
sufficient not only to make a full atonement for us, but to cleanse us from
all sins, although he suffered no pains supernatural, although he had
suffered no force or impression of any agents more than natural. All this is
but a branch of our Apostles inference. For albeit sins committed against the
Moral Law of God, do in a manner infinitely exceed sins committed against
the Law of Ceremonies only: yet are not the sins of the one kind so much
more heinous, than the sins of the other, as the blood of Christ does for
virtue exceed the blood of bulls and goats. Nor is there that odds of
difference betwixt sins Moral, and sins Ceremonial, which is between the
Priests of the Law, and the high Priest of our souls, the Son of God. And
yet the maine ground of our Apostles inference does not simply consist in the
superexcellency of the high Priest of our souls, or of the sacrifice which he
offered, in comparison with legal Priests and their sacrifices, but withal in
the admirable union of our high Priest and his sacrifice. For admit it as
possible, first, that there might have been some matter of sacrifice, as pure
and spotless, as the body of our Savior; more pure and glorious than the
Angelical substances: Secondly, that this pure and spotless sacrifice had
been offered by a Priest for dignity equal to the Son of God (as by the Holy
Ghost the third Person in Trinity:) yet his offering or service could not have
been so acceptable unto God, as our Saviors offering or service was; because
the infinite worth of the Priest or Person sacrificing, could not in this case
have conferred any worth or virtue truly infinite upon the sacrifice or
offering made by him, though as holy and glorious as any created substance can
be; unless it had been so personally united to him, that in offering it, he
had offered himself, as our Savior did. This is the maine stem or rather
the root of our Apostles emphaticall inference or surplus in the forecited
place. How much more shall the blood of Christ who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God.

7. Answerable to this hypostaticall or personal union between our high
Priest and his sacrifice, was that union between his obedience to his Father,
and his mercy and compassion toward men. Obedience, mercy and sacrifice were
so united in his offering, as they never had been before his own death was the
internal effect of his mercy toward us, and obedience to his Father the
period of his humiliation of himself: He humbled himself and became obedient
unto death, even unto the death of the Cross. That we know, was a cruel and
servile death; but no part of the second death, not charged with the pains of
Hell: otherwise our Apostle would have mentioned them, as the accomplishment of
his obedience, or of his service; which, without them did exceed the very
abstract or pattern either of service or obedience. Quid est servitus, nisi
obedientia animi fracti, and arbitrio carentis suo? Servitude (says In his
Paradoxes
Tully) is nothing else but the obedience of a broken or dejected mind,
utterly deprived of all power or right to dispose of it self, or of its
actions. It is indeed dejection of mind, a broken estate, or baseness of
condition; which make men willing to become servants unto others, or inforceth
them to resign all their right and power unto their Masters will. But it was
no dejection of mind, no want of any thing in heaven or earth, but only the
abundance of mercy and compassion toward us miserable men, which moved the
Son of God to renounce this world before he came into it, and to deprive
himself of all that right and interest, which every other man has over his
own body and soul, by voluntary resignation of his entire humane nature unto
the sole disposing of his Father. Other servants were obedient unto their Lords
upon necessity, or dejection of mind: he voluntarily became a servant to his
Father, that he might accomplish the office of a servant in the sacrifice of a
broken and contrite spirit. This was the internal effect of his service and
obedience, and this sacrifice thus offered was all-sufficient to make
satisfaction for all the disobedience of men; for the sins of ten thousand
worlds of men.

CHAP. XIV. That our Savior in his Agony (at least) did suffer pains more
than natural, though not the pains of Hell or Hellish pains: That the
suffering of such pains was not required for making satisfaction for our
sins, but for his Conquest over Satan.
1 BUt albeit the bloody sacrifice of the Son of God were, as God himself
is, all-sufficient to these purposes; may we hence collect that he suffered
no pains more than natural, or of no other kind than his Martyrs, Apostles,
or Prophets have done? God forbid. Between pains natural and the pains of
Hell, there is a mean; to wit, pains altogether supernatural in respect of
the Agent, and somewayes more than natural in respect of the Patient: and such
pains out of all question the Son of God did suffer in the garden, though not
upon the Cross. Nor were these his sufferings superfluous, though no way
necessary for paying the full ransom or price of man's redemption or
reconciliation unto God. Most expedient they were, if not necessary to other
purposes: As first, for his absolute conquest over Satan. Secondly, for his
consecration to his everlasting Priesthood. Of his conflict with Satan in the
garden (a place suitable to that wherein he had conquered our first Parents,)
Jobs second temptation was the type or shadow. His Father exposed him to the
second temptation, as he had unto the first temptation in the wilderness, and
permitted Satan to exercise the utmost of his power against him: only over his
soul or life he had no power. These were taken from him by the malice of men,
and by the death of the Cross, not by the immediate power of Satan. That the
conflict in the garden was extraordinary; that in this hour the decretorie
battle betwixt the old Serpent and the woman's seed was to be fought (at least
the brunt of it;) the letter of the Scripture is to my apprehension very
plain: As first from that speech of our Saviors after his Maundy, Ioh. 15.13.
Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the Prince of this world comes:
with greater violence surely than at any time before had been permitted him to
use. For our Savior uttered these words immediately after Satan had entered into
Judas: at which time his Commission to enter the lists with the holy seed of
the woman was first to be put in execution. It has always seemed to me a
mystery or secret, whereof no reason can be given in nature, how Satan gains
greater power of doing mischiefs and harms to men by secret compact with
others of their own nature, as with Witches, or other of his own worshippers;
than is permitted him to use by his own immediate power or strength. Judas,
though he was no Witch, yet was he a worshipper of Satan, one who had made
Mammon his God, for whose service he had resolved to betray his Master into the
hands of his enemies. It is pregnant again from that saying of our Savior
immediately upon the cessation or intermission of his Agony and bloody sweat,
that Satan's assaults were at this time extraordinary; When I was daily with you
in the Temple, you stretched out no hand against me: sed haec est hora vestra,
and potestas tenebrarum, But this is your hour, and the hour appointed for
the powers of darkness to try their strength against me. But after they could
get no advantage of him by grapling with him in the garden, being not able to
move him to the least signification of any impatience, or overture of
discontent, as Satan had done Job in his second temptation; they leave him unto
the malice of his mortal Enemies, being assured they should get advantage
enough over their souls, and prevalently tempt them to cruelty and hatred
toward this holy One, more than natural. The hour of his terrible combat
with Satan was but newly expiring, when thus he spoke to the chief Priests and
Elders. And howbeit this word hour sometimes imports more than an hour (as
we say) by the clock, some larger indefinite time or season: yet that in the
forecited place it is to be taken for a just hour, and no more, many
circumstances of the Text persuade me: (this especially) when he says to his
Disciples, Could ye not watch with me one hour? As if he had said, Of all
the time that I have been with you, this was the only hour, wherein your
watchfulness and attendance on me had been on your parts most requisite, and
to me most acceptable. And the effect of his petition as S. Mark Mark. 14.35.
expresses it, was thus, that if it were possible the hour might pass from
him. This was the hour wherein he tasted the bitter cup, whose present
bitterness upon his prayer was, if not altogether taken away, yet assuaged;
and the hour it self, wherein he was to taste of it, perhaps shortened.

2. This conflict with Satan, and the issue of it, our Savior apprehended at
his triumphant ingresse into Jerusalem immediately after his future
glorification was avouched by a voice from heaven three days before he entered
into his Agony. Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me
from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father glorify thy
Name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it,
and will glorify it again, etc. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall
the Prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lift up from the earth,
will draw all men unto me, Ioh. 12.27, 28, etc. In what sense, or how far the
world at this time was judged, exhibits plentiful matter of controverse
Divinity, not immediately emergent from the positive points of Divinity now in
hand. And for this cause I must request the ingenuous Reader for the present to
take a matter which before was proposed, into deeper consideration. The point
is briefly this; Our first Parents in the self same fact by which they became
rebellious, ipso jure, committing high treason against their God and Creator,
did subject themselves, and their posterity, unto the tyrannical dominion of
Satan. His vassailes and slaves all of us were by right most sovereign amongst
the sons of men, by right of conquest in Duel. Now albeit the Conqueror was a
Traitor and rebel against God; although he did first commit or at least
accomplish this his rebellion and treason, by withdrawing our first Parents
from that allegiance and obedience which by law of nature they and we ought
perpetually to have borne unto our Maker: Yet so observant of all rules of
equity and just form of proceedings, was he who is goodness, equity, and
justice it self; that unto Satan the professed Rebel against him, and
implacable Enemy toward man, he did vouchsafe the benefit of the Law of Arms
or Duel. Now seeing Satan, being not Omnipotent but of power, force, and
subtilty limited, had thus subdued our first Parents, whom their Creator had
endowed with freedom and power sufficient to dispose of their actions for the
future good of themselves, and their posterity: his gracious goodness would
not take us out of this Rebels hands by the Omnipotent power or irresistible
force of his Godhead. Man being conquered by his sometimes fellow creature, was
in the wisdom of Divine equity, to be rescued from this bondage by a
Creature, by a man of the same nature and substance, subject to all the
infirmities (sin excepted) to which we are subject: as taking his substance
from that man whom Satan had conquered. As Satan did not appear in his own
shape or likeness, when he subdued our first Parents (for so no question they
would have been more wary to have closed with him;) but disguised in the
similitude of a Serpent, which was a creature more subtle than all the beasts
of the field, yet a creature every way far inferior to man: So the Son of
God did not enter this combat with Satan in the glory and strength of his
Godhead, but in his Godhead as it were disguised or clothed upon with the true
nature and substance of man, and of a man whom Satan upon trial before had
known to be thoroughly subject to the infirmities of mortality. Otherwise he
had more wit, than to have entered the lists with him in the second conflict.

3. How much dearer this conflict with Satan cost our Savior, than Jobs second
temptation cost him; he only knows, and this knowledge he learned by
patience and obedience in suffering these pains of what kind soever they were.
The ancient Greek Liturgies express them best by (...), the unknown
sufferings. Such I take it, as no man in this life besides our Savior alone
did suffer, nor shall ever any man suffer the like in the life to come, in
which, the pains of Hell shall be too well known unto many. But that our
Savior in this life should suffer such pains is incredible: for this being
granted, the powers of darkness had prevailed more against him, than Satan did
against Job. For the actual suffering such pains includes more then a taste,
a draught of the second death, unto which no man is subject, before he die the
first death: nor was it possible that our Savior should ever taste them either
dying or living, or after death. This error, it seems, has surprised some
(otherways good Divines) through incogitancie, or want of skill in
Philosophy. For by the unerring rules of true Philosophy, the nature, quality,
or measure of pains must be taken, not so much from the force or violence of
the Agent, as from the condition or temper of the Patient: Actus agentium sunt
in patiente rite disposito. The fire has not the same operation upon Gold, as
it has upon Lead; nor the same upon green wood, which it has on dry. Or if a
man should deal his blows with an eeven hand between one sound of body, and
of strong bones; and another sickly, crasie, or wounded: the pains though
issuing from the equality of the blows, would be most unequal. That which
would hardly put the one to any pain at all, might drive the other into the
very pangs of death. Goliath did look as big, did speak as roughly, and every
way behave himself as sternly against little David, as he had against Saul,
and the whole host of Israel: Yet his presence though in it self terrible,
did make no such impression of terror upon David, as it had done upon Saul,
and the stoutest Champions in his host. And the reason, why it did not, was
because David was armed with the shield of faith, and confidence in the Lord
his God; a secret Armor which was not then to be found in all the Kingdom of
Israel besides. But a far greater then Goliath, associated and seconded with
a far greater host, both for number and strength, than the Philistines in
David's time were able to make; more maliciously bent against the whole race of
Adam, than the Philistines at this or any other time were against the seed of
Abraham, was now in field. And all of us are bound to praise our gracious God,
that in that hour we had a Son of David far greater than his Father to
stand between us and the brunt of the battle then pitched against us. For if
all mankind from the East unto the West, which have lived on earth since our
Father Adams fall unto this present time, or shall continue unto all future
generations, had been then mustred together, all of us would have fled more
swiftly, and more confusedly from the sight or presence of this great Champion
for the powers of darkness, than the host of Israel did from the Champion of
the Philistines, when he bid a defiance unto them. All of us had been routed
at the first encounter without any slaughter, been committed alive to
perpetual slavery and imprisonment. But did this Son of David obtain
victory in this Duel with the Champion for the powers of darkness, at as easy
a rate as his Father David had done over Goliath? No: If we stretch the
similitude thus far, we shall dissolve the sweet harmony between the type
and the Antitype. The conquest which the Son of David had over Satan and the
powers of darkness (whether in the garden or upon the Cross,) was more
glorious then that which David had over Goliath, or Israel over the
Philistines. David was Master of the field sine sanguine and sudore multo,
without blood, or much sweat. The Son of David did sweat much blood before
he foiled his potent Adversary. And the present question is not about the
measure but about the nature and quality of the pains which the Son of David
in this long Combat suffered, in respect of the pains which David or any other
in the behalf of Gods people had suffered. As the glory of our Savior Christ
is now much greater, than the glory of all his Saints which have been or shall
be hereafter: so no doubt his sufferings did far exceed the sufferings of all
his Martyrs. But all this and much more being granted, will not infer that he
suffered either the pains of Hell or hellish pains (poenas infernales, aut
poenas inferorum:) such pains as the power of darkness in that hour of
extraordinary temptation had cast all mankind into, unless the Son of David
had stood in the breach. Admit the old Serpent had been in that hour permitted
to exert his sting with all the might and malice he could, against the promised
woman's seed, that is, the manhood of the Son of God: yet seeing (as the
Apostle says) the sting of death is sin (not imputed but inherent) it was
impossible that the stinging pains of the second death should fasten upon his
body or soul, in whom there was neither seed nor relic, neither root or
branch of sin. Or again, admit hell fire (whether material or immateriall)
be of a more violent and malignant quality, than any material fire which we
know, in what subject soever it be seated, is; and that the powers of
darkness with their entire and joint force had liberty to environ or begirt
the Son of God with this fire or any other instruments of greater torture,
which they are enabled or permitted to use: yet seeing there was no fuel
either in his soul or body, whereon this fire could feed; no pains could be
produced in him for nature or quality truly hellish, or such as the damned
suffer. For these are supernatural, or more than so, not only in respect of
the Agents or causes which produce them, but in respect of the Subject which
endures them. Satan finds always some thing in them, which he arms against
them; some inherent internal corruption, which he exasperates to greater
malignity, than any external force or violence could effect in any creature
not tainted with such internal corruption, from which the promised woman's seed
was more free than his crucified body was from putrefaction. The Prince of
darkness and this world could find nothing which he could exasperate or arm
against him.

4. In respect of Divine justice, or of those eternal rules of equity which
the Omnipotent Creator does most strictly observe; it was not expedient only
but necessary that the Son of God should in our flesh vanquish Satan, and
vanquish him by suffering evils, even all the evils incident to our mortal
nature. There was no necessity, no congruity that the Son of God should
vanquish this great Enemy of mankind by suffering the very pains of Hell or
hellish torments. These properly taken, or when they are suffered in kind, are
the proper fruits and necessary effects of Satan's victory over sinners; the
final wages of sins unrepented of or not actually expiated by the blood of
our Redeemer. In all other tribulations, distresses, or persecutions, which are
not the wages of sin, We are, (as our Apostle says Romans 8.35, 37.) more then
Conquerers through him that loved us, if so we endure them with patience. But
how more than Conquerers in these which are in themselves evil and distasteful
to our nature? Therefore more than Conquerers, because these afflictions
suffered with patience, do testify our conformity to the Son of God in his
most grievous sufferings: and the dissolution of the works of Satan in us, does
seal unto our souls a full Acquitance from hell pains, from which
questionless our high Priest was free in that great Combat with Satan and his
infernal powers. Otherwise, he had not been full Conqueror over hell and the
second death, which is no other than the pains of Hell, or hellish torments.
Nor could the sufferings of such torments be any part of the Son of Gods
qualification for dissolving those works of Satan, which cannot be dissolved
but by the exercise of his everlasting Priesthood, which was the last end or
final cause of his sufferings or consecration by afflictions.

CHAP. XV. Christ's suffering of the unknowen pains, or of pains greater than
ever any of his Martyrs or others in this life have suffered, requisite for his
qualification, as he was to become the high Priest of our souls.
1 THe Son of God was to suffer all the afflictions, which we in this world
can suffer, in a far higher degree than we can suffer them: to be more
strongly tempted by all the means by which we are tempted unto sin, whether
by fear of evil, or by hope of things good and pleasant unto nature; that he
might (even to our apprehension) be a more faithful and merciful high Priest
in things concerning God, than ever any before him had been, or can be. But
Satan, we know, tempts no man in this life unto sin either with the fear
or sufferings of any evil or vexations, whereof our mortality can have no
experience. He labors to withdraw no man from Gods service by giving them any
taste or touch of the pains prepared for the damned in the life to come. Such
as are in the deepest bonds of thraldom to him, would quickly abandon his
service, if he should tender them such a true symbol or earnest of their
everlasting wages, or such a momentany taste of Hell pains, as the Spirit of
God in this life exhibiteth to some of his children of their everlasting joys.
And it is questionable whether our nature whilst mortal be capable of such
pains, or whether the first touch or real impression of them would not
dissolve the link or bond between man's mortal body, and his immortal soul
in a moment. For as flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, but
this mortal must put on immortality, ere we can be partakers of celestial
joys: so it is probable that our corruptible bodies must be made in another
kind incorruptible, before they can be the proper Subjects or receptacles of
Hell pains. But though no man in this life be tempted to ill, or withdrawn
from the service of God, by sufferance of such pains; yet in as much as many
are often times tempted to despair of Gods mercies by the unknown terrors of
Hell, or representations of infernal forces: there is no question but the
Son of God, not in his Divine wisdom only, by which he knows all things,
but even as man, had a more distinct view of all the forces, and terrors of
Hell, more full experience of their active force and attempts, than any man in
this life can have; to the end that he might be a faithful Comforter of all
such unto the worlds end, as shall be affrighted or attempted with them. If
we consider then only the attempt, assault, or active force by which Satan
seeks to withdraw us from God unto his service, not the issue or impression
which his attempts makes upon us sinful men: there was no kind of temptation
whereto the Son of God was not subject, whereto he did not submit himself
for our sakes, that he might have full experience or perfect notice as man, of
all the dangers whereunto we are obnoxious. By that which was done against the
green tree he knows what will become of the dry, if it be exposed to the
like fiery trial. It was requisite that this great Captain of Gods warfare
with Satan, and of our salvation, should have a perfect view of all the forces
which fight against us; that he might be a faithful Solicitor to his
Almighty Father for aid, and succor unto all that are beset with them, unto
all that offer up strong cries unto him, as he in the days of his flesh did
unto his Father, and was saved from that which he feared.

2. The greatest comfort which any poor distressed mortal man can expect, or
which our nature is capable of in oppression and distress, must issue from
this maine fountain of our Saviors Agony and bloody sweat, of his Cross and
Passion. For whatsoever he suffered in those two bitter days, he suffered, if
not for this end alone, yet for this especially, that he might be an
All-sufficient Comforter unto all such as mourn; as having sometimes had more
than a fellow feeling of all our infirmities and vexations, as one who had
tasted deeper of the cup of sorrow and death it self, then any man before him
had done, or to the worlds end shall do. It would be a great comfort to such
as have suffered shipwreck, to have an Admiral, a Dispenser of Alms unto
Seafaring men, who had sometimes suffered shipwreck, or after shipwreck had
been wronged by his neighbors or natives. And so, it would be to a man eaten
out of his estate by usury or vexations in Law, to have a Judge or Chancellor
who had been both ways more grievously wronged; a just, or upright man, whose
heart would melt with the fellow-feeling of his calamities. Experience of
bodily pains or grievous diseases inclines the Surgeon or Physician to be
more compassionate to their Patients, and more tender of their welfare than
otherwise they would be. And for these reasons, ever since I took them into
consideration, and as often as I resume the meditations of our Saviors death,
I have ever wondered and still do wonder at the peevishness, or rather
patheticall profaneness of some men, who scoff at those sacred passages in our
Liturgy, By thy Agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, etc. Good
Lord deliver us; as if they had more alliance with spells, or forms of
conjuring, than with the spirit of prayer or true devotion. Certainly they
could never have fallen into such irreverent and uncharitable quarells with the
Church our Mother, unless they had first fallen out, and that foully with Pater
noster, with the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments. For I dare
undertake to make good that there is not either branch or fruit, blossom or
leaf in that sacred garden of devotions which does not naturally spring and
draw its life and nourishment from one or other of the three former roots, to
wit, from the Lords prayer, or from the Creed set prayer wise, or from the ten
Commandments. And he that is disposed to read that most Divine part of our
Liturgy with a sober mind and dutiful respect, shall find not only more
pure devotion, but more profound Orthodoxall Divinity both for matter and
form, then can be found in all the English Writers which have either carped
or nibled at it. Not one ejaculation is there in it, which has the least
relish of that leven, wherewith their prolix extemporary devotions who distaste
it, are for the most part deeply sowred. But here I had ended my Treatise of
the qualification and undertakings of the Son of God for dissolving the works
of Satan, had not a new Quaere presented it self to my meditations in the
latter end of these disquisitions; and the Quaere, is this:

3. Why our Savior in his Agony, or his other sufferings upon the Cross
should not tender his petitions unto God in the same form or tenor wherein the
Psalmists or other holy men which were types or figures of him in his
sufferings, had done theirs in their anguish or distress; or in the same form
which he once, and no oftener than once did use upon the Cross, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? The ancient style of prayer used by Gods servants or
Ambassadors, as well in their humble supplications, as in their gratulatory
hymns, but especially in their fervent and patheticall ejaculations for
deliverance from present dread or danger, was (...) or (...) my God, and my
Lord; or my Lord, and my God. Besides the observations before made to this
purpose out of The 7. book of these Commentaries upon the Creed, chap. 36. par.
3, 4, etc.
Masius, or rather out of the Liturgy of the Ancient Jews avouched by him, and
of the Primitive Church (well observed by Faber) many passages in the Psalms
which did respectively both forepicture and foretell his Agony and sufferings
upon the Cross, are most pregnant. Of the ingratitude of his people toward
him, of the indignities and cruelties done unto him by the Jews; no Psalmist
(the Author of 22. only excepted) has a more lively punctual representation,
than that which is Psalm. 35. and 38.40. David in the very (...) or paroxysme of
the grievances which he suffered from such of Saul's followers as he had well
deserved of, delivers his petitions in this form: Avenge thou my cause, my
God and my Lord, (...)
Psalm. 35.23. Judge me according to thy righteousness, O JEHOVAH, my Lord,
Psalm. 35.24. and 38.16. (whether David or some other were the Author of it)
Quia ad te expecto, tu respondebis Domine, Deus mi. And again, Psalm. 40.6.
Multa fecisti tu JEHOVAH, Deus meus, etc.

4. (...)
But when the hour was come wherein all these Prophetical ejaculations of the
Psalmists were to be exactly fulfilled in our Savior Christ: and by him, he
preferres his supplications stilo novo in a form or style unusual before, but
familiar and usual to him when his passion and death drew nigh, as Ioh. 12.
Father, (not Lord God) what shall I say? save me from this hour, etc. And
Ioh. 17. Father glorify me, etc. He used the same form in his Agony thrice,
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And in the last words,
which he uttered in the form of a servant, he said not, My God, my God, or
my Lord God; But Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. This variation
between this most faithful Servant of God and other holy men, Gods faithful
servants, in the form of their supplications or gratulatory ejaculations
conceived and uttered upon the like occasions, suggests thus much unto us (if I
mistake not) that of all Gods servants or holy men, the man CHRIST JESUS only
was his true Son not by adoption as others were, and we now are, but his
Son by right of inheritance; and yet being such a Son, was for a time as
truly his Servant, as his Son. He who always had been (...) or God the
Lord: He whose title it was to hear his peoples prayers, and unto whom all
flesh shall come, Psalm 65.2. does now tender his prayer, not to (...) not unto
(...) for that had been to prefer a petition unto himself, whereas he was
now to prefer his petition unto his Father whose Servant he now was as man,
but did not thereby cease to be as truly his Son. Had he been his Son by
creation only, or in respect of the admirable integrity and superexcellencie
of his performances as man; he had doubtless tendered his petitions in the
same style or form, which other godly men, and Gods faithful servants before
had used, though much better than they did. But however he was the Servant of
God after a more peculiar manner than any other had been; yet he presents his
supplications in such a style as has relation to himself, rather as he was a
Son than as a Servant. The eternal Son of God was the party supplicant unto
the eternal Father for his mortal servant. For he was a servant only
according to his humane nature, and according to that only as it was mortal,
whereas he still remains Mediator betwixt God and man, not as man only, much
less as a mortal man, but according to his eternal person, and his immortal
manhood. This his manhood is now dignified with the real and actual title of
Lord. He was our Lord and Mediator before he assumed our flesh into the unity
of his Person: but then Mediator according to his Divine Person, or as God
only. When he is instiled by the Prophets (...) or God the Lord, this later
title was more Prophetical than historical, and did import as much as that he
who was then Jehovah our God, at the time appointed should come to be our Lord
by peculiar right of dominion purchased by his sufferings for our redemption.
And for this reason I take it, his Apostle Thomas being convinced of
incredulity unto the report of his resurrection, supplicates to him for pardon
in the same style or form, as the Psalmist and other godly men had done in
their distress; My Lord, and my God, Ioh. 20.28.
which is the full and punctual expression of (...) or, (...) For now he was
not only spe, but re, become both Lord and Christ.

SECTION 3. Of the harmonicall parallel between the predictions or types of
the old Testament, and the Evangelicall relations, concerning our Saviors
triumphant coming unto Jerusalem, and of his entertainment there, until the
institution of his Supper.
CHAP. XVI. Of the King of Sions coming to Jerusalem, and how the manner of his
coming was for circumstance of time, prefigured by the Law or rite of the
Paschall Lamb; and for other circumstances, expressly foretold by the Prophet
Zachary.
1 AN Apostle has said it, and we must believe him, that our Savior Christ
was Agnus occisus ab origin mundi; the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world. And other Scriptures abundantly testify, that he was to be slaughtered
in time, to the end that he might take away the sins of the world. About the
indefinite or illimited truth of both these propositions, there is no
controversy amongst good Christians. The limitation notwithstanding of both
these undoubted truths require some further disquisition; the limitation of the
later a larger Treatise: The maine Quere concerning the former is briefly this.
[From what beginning of the world our Savior is said to be Agnus occisus, the
Lamb slain,] as whether from the first beginning of time, or from the first
day of the Creation. To stretch the beginning of the world thus far, is more
than the rules of true Theology will warrant. For it was neither necessary or
expedient, that the Son of God should be slain, or that any bloody
sacrifice should have been offered, if our first Parents had preserved or
retained their original integrity. By the beginning of the world, then in our
Apostles meaning, we are, I take it, to understand the sinful world, as it is
coevall or confederate with the flesh, or the first entrance of sin into it
or rather into our nature. From the fall of our first Parents, at least from
their convention before their Almighty Judge and Creator; the Son of God was
first destinated, and afterward consecrated to be the Lamb of God, which was
to take away the sins of the world. And of his death and passion, or other
undertakings to this purpose, as well the sacrifice which righteous Abel
offered out of the flock, as the bloody sacrifice of himself, being butchered
by his ungracious brother Cain, were true types or shadows. So was the Paschall
Lamb, which was solemnly offered every year, once in token, afterward in
memory of the Israelites miraculous delivery out of Egypt. The first
institution, and observance of this solemnity, was given as a pledge or
assurance unto Gods chosen people, that the destroyer should not hurt one of
them, when he smote all the first borne of Egypt, both of man and beast. The
same solemnity was afterward continued in memory of that mighty deliverance,
which Israel had from Pharaoh and his host. Howbeit even this miraculous
deliverance was but a shadow or typical assurance of that great deliverance
which the Son of God in our flesh, and all Gods people, in him and by him,
had from the powers of Hell and darkness, in that great Passover, wherein
this true Lamb of God predestined to this purpose from the beginning of this
world, was actually consecrated and solemnly upon his consecration, offered.

2. A question there is, but soberly handled by some good sacred Antiquaries;
whether the Law of the Paschall Lamb delivered by Moses, were to be solemnized
according to all the rites and circumstances, which were enjoined, and
punctually to be observed at the time of Isreal's departure out of Egypt. One
branch of this Law it was, that every household which was capable of eating it,
should take it from the flock four days before the offering of it. This
separation was his consecration, and this rite or ceremony, as some good
Writers tell us, was observed throughout the generations, if not in the Lambs
offered by every private family, yet in the Lamb designed or chosen for the
public sacrifice in that great Festival, which was brought into the City
four days before the offering of it, with great pomp and solemnity. But be
it that the solemnity of bringing the Lamb four days before the Passover,
was to be observed only in Egypt: this will no way impair the sweet harmony
between the Legal type and the Evangelicall mystery; but rather give it a
better luster: For that Passover which was celebrated in Egypt was the most
illustrious peculiar type of this great Passover, wherein the Son of God was
sacrificed for the sins of the world. Other succeeding legal Passeovers were
but remembrances of that great deliverance whereof the first Passover in
Egypt was the pledge, or pre-assurance. And we in like sort were once for all
delivered from the powers of Hell and darkness, by the visible blood of the
new Covenant; of which deliverance, we are more strictly enjoined to continue
a memorial, until our Mediator and Redeemer come to judgment. Now to declare
unto the world, that JESUS the Son of God and of David, was the Lamb of God
ordained from the beginning of the world to effect this mighty deliverance, and
to fulfill the mysteries forepictured by the Passover in Egypt; He came unto
Jerusalem (the place appointed for this and other grand Festivalls) four days
before the Passover wherein he was sacrificed, and was brought in with
greater pomp and solemnity, than any Paschall Lamb, than any Prince of Judah
at any time before had been. His attendants were more, and their respects and
salutations tendered in more submissive manner, and the titles given to him
much loftier than either David his father or Solomon in all his royalty had
been accustomed unto. The history of his coming is very remarkable of it
self, and the circumstances as they are variously related (yet without
clashing or contradiction,) by all the four Evangelists, most considerable.

3. For the circumstance of time, which was four days before the Passover,
that is determinately and punctually set down by two Evangelists, and may be
evidently inferred out of all four. The special occasions of a great
concourse of people out of several Nations or Provinces, which at this last
Passover did expect his coming, or went out of Jerusalem to meet him or wait
upon him, after another guise, than at any the three former Passeovers since
his Baptism had been seen; are most fully expressed by S. John Chap. 11. ver.
45. Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which
Jesus did, believed on him. But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees
and told them what things Jesus had done. John 12.9, 17, 18. Much people of the
Jews knew therefore that he was there; and they came, not for Jesus sake only,
but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead. The
people therefore that was with him, when he called Lazarus out of his grave,
and raised him from the dead, bare record. For this cause also the people met
him, for that they had heard, that he had done this miracle, etc. The original
occasion of this great concourse, as appears in these passages, was the
irrefragable testimony of his raising Lazarus from the grave, wherein he had
laid four days. The special occasions which moved the whole multitude of his
Disciples (that is such as for the present did believe in him) to entertain,
and did occasion others to entertain him with those extraordinary
acclamations, or other expressions of joy and exultation, (recorded by all the
Evangelists) are most punctually expressed by S. Luke, Chap. 19. ver. 37, 38.
And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the
whole multitude of the Disciples began to rejoice, and praise God with a loud
voice, for all the mighty works that they had seen, saying, Blessed be the
King that comes in the Name of the Lord, peace in heaven, and glory in the
Highest. These acclamations of his followers and Disciples were so loud, and
their exultation (in such sinister construction, as Michal made of David's
dancing before the Ark) so lavish, that they exasperated the Pharisees (who
were but a small part of the multitude, who did attend or observe his approach,)
unto more uncivil behavior toward this their King, than Michal did use
toward David her Lord and husband. Luke 19.39. And some of the Pharisees from
among the multitude said unto him, Master, rebuke thy Disciples: As if they had
said, Thy Disciples play the fools: and unless thou inhibit their folly, they
will make thee a laughing stock to wise men. But his reply unto them for this
their advise, though for terms and language, more mild and gentle; yet for
the matter or mystery implied, was more sharp than David's was to Michal: Verse
40. He answered, and said unto them, I tell you, that if these should hold
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out. For this was the time wherein
Jerusalem, and the daughter of Sion had been commanded some hundreds of years
before, to rejoice after an unusual manner. And the just occasions of this
extraordinary point of time above all others, did require such a solemn and
public testification, that if men, women, and children had been silent, the
very stones in the street, the edifices and pavements in Jerusalem and Sion,
must have supplied their defect. For these were appurtenances of the City,
which had been peremptorily enjoined to shout for joy whenever their promised
and long expected King should come unto her. As the occasions of this
extraordinary concourse of people, and of their unusual exultation, are most
fully expressed by S. John and S. Luke: so the final cause of both, or sweet
disposition of Divine providence in this whole business, is most punctually
expressed by S. Matthew, Chap. 21. ver. 4, 5. All this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet saying; Tell ye the Daughter of
Sion, Behold, thy King comes unto thee meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a
Colt the foale of an Ass. The Prophet, or one of the Prophets at least, which
did foretell all that now happened, was Zachariah, Chap. 9.9. whose words are
more full than the Evangelists. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion, shout O
daughter of Jerusalem: Behold thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and
having salvation Or said himself, etc.
lowly and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the foale of an Ass: So our
ordinary English Translations render the place, word for word: but whether this
Translation or others, Greek or Latin do fully and punctually express the
Prophets meaning, is in the next place to be discussed.

CHAP. XVII. A Comment or Paraphrase upon the first eight verses of the ninth
of Zachary: And of the connection betwixt them and the ninth verse, in which the
manner of our Saviors coming to Jerusalem was most expressly foretold.
1 THis testimony of the Prophet Zachary, (as was observed before The 7. Book
of Commentaries. ca. 6.
) is merely prophetical, that is, was literally meant of the Messiah alone,
never verified, much less fulfilled of any King or Prophet: it was a mystery
without a type. Other passages in this ninth Chap. such especially as come
after this ninth ver. may admit a mystical or allegorical sense: and I should
like well of that allegory, which Ribera and Rupertus have made upon the
former verses, if they had first given us the true and literal sense. But
setting aside such passages as the Evangelists or Apostles have expounded unto
us, the best Comments which are extant upon this or most other Prophecies
revealed or written, since the building of the second Temple by Zerubbabel, are
for the most part made to our hands by unpartiall unsuspected Historians, that
is, by Jews or Heathens, so we Christians would take the pains to peruse, and
diligently compare their narrations of matter of fact, with sacred Prophetical
predictions. For the true and literal sense of this whole ninth Chapter of
Zacharias, besides the ninth verse, an ordinary Scholar may better inform
himself from Arrianus, Quintus Curtius, and Josephus, or others which write of
Alexanders wars, than from Ribera, Rupertus, or all the professed Christian
Commentators, which have not had the hap to consult these Heathenish or Jewish
Historians. And some passages in the later part of this Chapter there be, unto
which the History of the Maccabees (though Apochrypha for matter of faith) may
give great light for the right understanding of them. My purpose is only to
touch upon some few such passages in the first part of this Chapter, as are
conducent to the point in hand, that is, to make a clear and ocular
demonstration how this Prophecy avouched by S. Matthew, and others in this
ninth Chapter of Zachary, were fulfilled.

2. The burden of the word of the Lord in the Land of Hadrach, and Damascus
shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the Tribes of
Israel, shall be toward the Lord. And Hamah also shall border thereby, Tyrus
and Zidon though it be very wise. And Tyrus did build her self a strong hold,
and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold, as the mire of the streets.
Behold the Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the Sea, and
she shall be devoured with fire, Zechariah, 9.1, 2, 3, 4. Josephus in his
book of Jewish Antiquities, briefly relating the swift success of Alexander
in his war, relates the events in the same order and method, which the
Prophet Zachariah had foretold them in. That he first overran Syria and took
Damascus, and afterward besieged Tire, which held out nine months against
those forces which had conquered the Persians, Syrians, and other Eastern
parts in less space. As for the Writ drawn for the execution of Tire, you see
it is punctually drawn by the Prophet Zachary; but who shall assure us that it
passed the Seal, or was executed according to the tenor of his Commission. By
her power in the Sea, the Prophet meant, as the Oracle in like case did, her
wooden walls or multitude of ships: and these as Curtius tells us, being
almost all sunck or taken, their chief Fort was surprised by the Macedonian
Army. After her walls were scaled, the greatest part of her defendants summa
tectorum obtinebant, saxa, and quod in manibus fors dederat ingerentes
subeuntibus, did anoy the Assailants from the tops of their houses with stones,
or whatsoever came first to hand. So this their last and desperate fury did
blow the fire of Gods wrath which was kindled against them, from the Prophet
Zacharies time. For as this Heathenish Writer adds, Alexander exceptis qui in
templa confugerant, omnes interfici ignemque tectis injici jubet, commands that
all should be slain besides such as fled into the Temples, that their dwelling
houses should be burnt. This great Conqueror in all this war, though he
expressly knew not his Commission, was but Gods Sheriff: and (though intending
no such thing) did see the execution should be according to the Prophets
sentence. How much Tyrian blood was shed in this siege, as Curtius says, may
in part be hence gathered; besides all that died in that miserable Sea Fight,
or those fierce skirmages about the walls after the Macedonians had made entry
both by Sea and Land; six thousand of such as bare Arms were forthwith
slain, two thousand hanged on gibbets along the shore, that Askalon, as it
follows in the Prophet, ver. 5. might see it, and fear, and the hopes of
Ekronbe confounded. And as Arrianus, Josephus, and some other tells us. Tire
being thus miserably ransackt, the other Cities of Syria or Palestina, yielded
without resistance. Only the strength of Situation, store of provision, the
resolution and fidelity of the Governor to Darius the Persian Emperor,
emboldned Gaza to hold out for a time, as stoutly, as Tire had done. For that
part which God had appointed her, and her King or Governor to act, was not
fear, but sorrow. Askelon shall see it, and fear, Gaza also shall see it, and
be very sorrowful, and Ekron for her expectation shall be ashamed, and the King
shall perish from Gaza, and Askelon shall not be inhabited, ver. 5.

3. The greater danger the Conqueror himself did in the assault of Gaza
incur, the more grievous was her ransack, and the greater was the cruelty
practiced upon the conquered. Alexanders wounded body did exasperate his
heroical mind to imitate Achilles (his pretended Progenitor) as much at this
time in despightfull revenge, as at other times he had done in valor. For by
Alexanders appointment Batis, as Curtius instiles him, the Governor of Gaza or
Deputy King for Darius, being yet as full of life and spirit, as of bleeding
wounds, was dragged by the heels after a Chariot through the streets, as
Hector had been by Achilles about the walls of Troy. Thus does confidence in
causes accursed by God, inevitably bring their undertakers to those disastrous
ends, whereto the just will of the Almighty Judge had for their sins
appointed them. All this, and much more which Curtius and Arrianus relate
concerning the desolation of Gaza (we need not be afraid to speak it) came to
pass, that the word of the Lord spoken by Zachariah might be fulfilled. The
King shall perish from Gaza, etc. ver. 5. Yet would I not have these words
concerning Gaza, and her Governor, being for quantity indefinite, restrained to
this particular time or accident. For that were to make this disaster the
complete object of the literal sense, of which it is at the most but a
principal part. This woeful accident might, and I take it, did portend the
like in success of time, and I have ever held those Interpreters short
sighted, rather than overseene, who think the several passages in this
Prophecy must literally refer only to the wars of Alexander, or of the
Maccabees. For multitude of like events, though different only in time, not in
proportion to Prophetical predictions, can neither argue any diversity in
their former object, nor any plurality of literal senses. All in their order
may be alike literally meant by the same Prophet, all alike properly signified
by the same words. No man questioneth whether (...) in Greek, or homo in Latin,
have more significations then one, although in strict propriety of speech they
denote or signify as well men now living, as those that died a thousand years
ago.

4. Hitherto we have seen how God by Alexander begun to pull down the pride
of Tire, and of the Philistines: not with purpose utterly to destroy them, as
he did the old world, but rather by this castigation or contusion, to prepare
and fit them for that mixture with the Jews their ancient Enemies, which was
foretold by the Prophet Zachariah, ver. 6, 7. And a That is, it should be a
quiet habitation for bordering Nations or a mixed people.
bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the
Philistines, And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his
abominations between his teeth: but he that remains, even he shall be for
our God, and he shall be as a Governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Iebusit. The
literal truth of this last cited passage, we may see experienced after the
wars of Alexander and of his Successors with the Maceabees, partly in that
great place which Herod of Askelon held amongst the Jewish Nation, partly in
the Philistines Proselytes, who were admitted as Communicants with the sons
of Abraham in their Sacraments and Sacrifices, partly in the admission of the
Jews as free Denizens into the Cities of Palestina, and in such quiet
cohabitation of the Philistines and these modern Jews, as had been between
the Jebusits and their Ancestors. Every part of this observation might be
concludently proved out of unpartiall Historians, Heathenish or Jewish, which
wrote before our Lord and Savior was borne. Diverse parts of it are abundantly
proved out of the Author of the first Book of Maccabees, Chap. 10. ver. 88, 89.
Now when King Alexander heard these things (to wit, the victory over Azotus,
and the submission of Askelon upon the ransack of it,) he honored Jonathan yet
more, and sent him a buckle of gold, as the use is to be given to such as are
of the Kings blood: he gave him also Accaron with the borders thereof in
possession. Chap. 11. ver. 60, 61. Then Jonathan went forth, and passed through
the Cities beyond the water, and all the forces of Syria gathered themselves
unto him, for to help him: and when he came to Askalon, they of the City met
him honorably. From whence he went to Gaza, but they of Gaza shut him out:
wherefore he laid siege unto it, and burned the suburbs thereof with fire and
spoiled them. Chap. 13. ver. 33, etc. Then Simon built up the strong holds in
Judea, and fenced them about with high Towers and great walls and gates and
bars; and laid up victuals therein. Moreover Simon chose men, and sent to
King Demetrius, to the end he should give the land an immunity, because all
that Tryphon did, was to spoil. Unto whom King Demetrius answered and wrote
after this manner; King Demetrius unto Simon the high Priest, and friend of
Kings, as also unto the Elders and Nation of the Jews, sends greeting. The
golden Crown, and the scarlet Robe which ye sent unto us, we have received,
and we are ready to make a steadfast peace with you, yea and to write unto your
Officers to confirm the immunities which we have granted. And whatsoever
Covenants we have made with you, shall stand; and the strong holds which you
have builded, shall be your own. As for any oversight, or fault committed unto
this day, we forgive it, and the Crown tax also, which ye owe us, if there
were any other tribute paid in Jerusalem, it shall no more be paid. And look
who are meet among you to be in our Court, let them be enrolled, and let there
be peace betwixt us. Thus the yoke of the Heathen was taken away from Israel in
the hundred and seventieth year. Then the people of Israel began to write in
their Instruments and Contracts, In the first year of Simon the high Priest,
the Governor and Leader of the Jews. In those days Simon camped against Gaza,
and besieged it round about, he made also an Engine of war, and set it by the
City, and battered a certain Tower and took it. And they that were in the
Engine, leapt into the City: whereupon there was a great uprore in the City,
insomuch as the people of the City rent their clothes, and climbed upon the
walls with their wives and children, and cried with a loud voice, beseeching
Simon to grant them peace. And they said, Deal not with us according to our
wickedness, but according to thy mercy. So Simon was appeased toward them,
and fought no more against them, but put them out of the City, and cleansed the
houses wherein the Idols were: and so entered into it with songs and
thanksgiving: yea he put all uncleanness out of it, and placed such men there
as would keep the Law, and made it stronger than it was before, and built
therein a dwelling place for himself. They also of the Tower of Jerusalem were
kept so strait, that they could neither come forth, nor go into the Country,
nor buy, nor sell: wherefore they were in great distress for want of
victuals, and a great number of them perished through famine. Then cried they
to Simon, beseeching him to be at one with them, which thing he granted them,
and when he had put them out from thence, he cleansed the Tower from
pollutions. And entered into it the three and twentieth day of the second
month, in the hundred seventieth and one year with thanksgiving, and branches
of Palm Trees, and with Harp and Cymbals, and with Vials and hymns and songs;
because there was destroyed a great Enemy out of Israel. He ordained also that
day should be kept every year with gladness. Moreover, the hill of the Temple
that was by the Tower, he made stronger than it was, and there he dwelt
himself with his company. He that will compare these and many other passages
in this grave Writer with the ninth of the Prophet Zachariah, will perceive
there may be good use of books not Canonical, for the right understanding of
sacred Writings most Canonical; and that this book though Apocryphal, did not
deserve to be left out in the new impressions or binding up of our Bibles. But
to return unto the Prophecy of Zachariah.

5. The manifest accomplishment of all the strange alterations foretold by him
in this ninth Chapter, might well occasion the Jews to expect the coming of
their promised King shortly after. And amongst all the signs which the times
intercurrent between Alexanders conquest of Syria, Tire, and Palestina, and
our SAVIORS death, did exhibit; this to me is most remarkable, that after so
many terrible blasts of Gods wrath thus overturning every Castle and strong
hold about Jerusalem, sweeping most Cities of their ancient Inhabitants, as the
whirle wind does their streets of dust; the Temple of Jerusalem should all
this while hold up her head: that Temple whose foundation, and superstructions
had been accused of sedition, and rebellion, whose demolition had been solemnly
vowed by such Tyrants as had power given them over the City and strong holds of
Jerusalem, power to practice all kind and manner of savage cruelties on the
Citizens bodies, and to expose their carcasses to the birds of the air. The
consideration hereof does plainly testify such a powerful arm and watchful
eye of the Almighty to defend his house as in the eight verse of this Chapter
is literally charactered. And I will encampe about my house because of the
army, because of him that passes by, and because of him that returns: and no
oppressor shall pass through them any more, for now have I seen with mine
eyes. He that could rightly spell the several passages in the forementioned
Authors, and the disposition of Divine providence overruling the projects of
Alexander and his Successors, in all these wars according to the literal
predictions of the Prophet Zachary, and put them right together, could not
suspect that which Josephus has registered in the latter end of the eleventh
Book of Jewish antiquities, concerning Alexanders reconciliation to Iaddah the
high Priest of the Jews, and the extraordinary favors done unto that Nation,
which not long before had mightily offended him.

6. But this prediction of Gods special providence in protecting his Temple
against such as pretended mischief unto it, was literally fulfilled, not only
in the times of Alexander, but in the attempts made against it by Nicanor,
Antiochus, and other of his professed enemies, though not fully to be
accomplished until the glory of this Temple came. For the Temple built by
Zerubbabel sub auspiciis of Ieshue the high Priest, did continue and flourish
until JESUS the high Priest of the Covenant, into whose body the life and
spirit of it was to be transfused, did visit and cleanse it. It must be granted
that Herod the great did take down the Temple built by Zerubbabel, not with
purpose to demolish it, but to make it more glorious to humane view, than
Solomon's Temple had been. And this friendly dissolution of it, with purpose to
reedifie it, did prefigure the dissolution of Christ's body and soul, and their
reunition in glory and immortality. And I could willingly yield my assent unto
Rupertus and Ribera, that the first verses of this Chapter were truly
fulfilled in that victorious passage of the Gospel throughout the Cities of
Syria and Palestina before mentioned: So they or their followers would grant
me, that the swift victory of the Gospel, was as well occasioned, as portended
by Alexanders speedy conquest of these Regions. For God did plague these
neighbor Nations before the desire of all Nations came unto this Temple, that
Jerusalem might take warning by them, and repent her of her sins. I have cut
off their Nations, their Towers are desolate: I made their streets waste, that
none passes by: their Cities are destroyed; so that there is no man, that
there is none inhabitant. I said, Surely thou (Jerusalem) wilt fear me, thou will receive instruction, so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I
punished them, but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings, Zephaniah
3.6, 7. That this Prophecy unto what other times soever it be concludently
appliable, does in special refer unto the calamities brought upon the
Nations by Alexander the great, is apparent from Zephan. 2.4, 5. But to return
to the literal meaning of the Prophecy now in handling: zach. 9.9
that, as I take it, is, as if the Prophet had spoken in more words to
Jerusalem thus. Thine eyes in the generations following shall behold the
flourishing pride of sundry Nations, each endeavoring to overtop others in
height of glory and temporal state; each driving to keep others under by
humane policy and strength of war. And whilst the sight of their mutual
Conquests shall possess thy thoughts, thou will be ready in the pride of thy
heart to say, Jerusalem and Judah, one day shall have their turn, and in that
day shall the sons of Jacob, the seed of Abraham and David, be like the
Monarchs of Greece or Persia, far exalted above the Kings of other Nations:
every one (able to bear Arms) glistring with his golden shield, and leading
the Princes of the Heathen as prisoners bound in chains, and their Nobles in
fetters of iron. The beauty, and riches of their costly Temples shall deck the
Chariots of my children, which their captives shall draw in triumph. But thou
should remember that the promised Prince of peace, of benignity, and
Justice, should not be sought amongst the tumultuous hosts of war. Or can
thou hope, that the desire of all Nations, should be thy Leader or General to
destroy themselves. It is glory and honor enough for thee; glory and honor
greater than the greatest Conqueror on earth could ever compass, that the King
of kings, and Lord of lords, shall be anointed and proclaimed King upon the
hill of Sion: that the inviolable decrees of everlasting peace shall be given
to all the Nations under heaven from thy Courts. And therefore whilst horses
and Chariots, or other glorious preparations of war shall present themselves
to thy view, suffer them to pass as they come, and rest assured that thy King,
of whose coming thou have often been admonished by the Prophets, is not
amongst them. The manner of his coming unto thee, so thou will mark it, bodes
far better tidings to thee, and all the Nations besides, than can accompany
the prosperous success of wars, or any victory which is stained with blood.
What King of Judah or Israel did ever levy an Army though in just defense of
their Country and people, on so fair terms, that no poor amongst them were
pinched with taxes for the supply? What victory did they ever obtain so good
cheap, that many of their children were not enforced to sit down with loss,
many wounded, others maimed, and some always slain? But lo, now I bring thee
unusual matter of exultation, and uncouth joy. For behold, thy King comes
unto thee (whenever he comes) attended with justice for his guide, and
salvation for his train. He shall execute judgment without oppression, he
shall save thee (so thou will be saved) without destroying any; able and ready
to make thy lame to go, to give life to the dead without hazard either of life
or limb to any who rests within thy territories. Such shall be the manner of
his coming, and such his presence, that the silliest wretch amongst thy
children, may think himself more happy, than any King of Judah or Israel which
was before him; so he will conform himself to his garb or demeanor. For he
comes unto thee poor and lowly, riding upon an Ass, and a Colt, the fool
of an Ass, to weane thee from the vain hopes of the Heathen, from which the
Prophets have so often dehorted thy forefathers. Some put their trust in
horses, some in chariots: but thy confidence must be in the Lord thy God, who
will always be thy King to defend thee, to protect thee, and strengthen thee,
through his weakness. For by the weakness of his appearance, he will cut off
the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow
shall be cut off, and he shall speak peace unto the heathen: His Dominion
shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the Earth, Zach.
9.10. The mark whereat the Prophet Zachariah in this place aims, is the very
same with that which the Prophet Haggai his coaevall had set up a little before
him; Neither of them (as I take it) conscious of the others predictions. Yet
now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong O Ieshua son of
Iosedech the high Priest, and be strong all the people of the Land, says the
Lord, and work, (for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts) according to the
word that I covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit
remains among you: fear ye not. For thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once,
it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea,
and the dry land. And I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations
shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The
silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts, The glory of
this later house shall be greater than the former, says the Lord of Hosts.
And in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts, Haggai 2.4, 5,
etc. And the Prophet Zachariah had touched (before) on the same string, Chap 2.
ver. 10. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Sion: for lo, I come and I will dwell
in the midst of thee, says the Lord. And many Nations shall be joined to the
Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of
thee, and thou shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto thee, etc.
Every branch of these forecited Prophecies were exactly fulfilled according to
their plain literal sense in our Saviors triumphant ingresse into Jerusalem,
and visitation of the second Temple, which by the bounty of Herod the great,
and of many other Nations, was made (even to secular eyes) more Vide Riberam in
secundum Haggaei.
beautiful and glorious, than the Temple of Solomon was. The extraordinary
contributions of several Nations, and Princes of the Roman Empire for the
beautifying of this second Temple, and Herod's special care in the right
employment of his own and others expenses upon this glorious work, might have
taught the Jews, had they not been blind, to expect that the desire of all
Nation, their promised King, was speedily to come unto it: yet not to come in
such pomp, specially of war, as they expected, but in such humility and
meekness of spirit, as the Prophet Zachariah in the ninth Chapter and tenth
verse has expressed. And so, it had been foretold in the building of
Zerubbabels Temple. Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the
Lord of Hosts. Who art thou O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall
become a plain, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with
shoutings; crying, Grace, grace, unto it, Zach. 4.6.

7. Some parts of the forecited Prophecy there be which were not to be
fulfilled in the exquisit literal, but especially in the mystical or
spiritual sense, until our Saviors resurrection from the dead, or the
accomplishment of his consecration to be King, Priest, and Temple to all the
Israel of God. But of these by Gods assistance in the Article of his
Resurrection. That, which we are now to follow, is the fulfilling of the ninth
verse of the Prophet Zachariah.

CHAP. XVIII. The fulfilling of Zachariah his Prophecy, Cap. 9. ver. 9.
recorded by all the Evangelists; but most fully and most punctually by S.
Matthew.
1 THere was not any sacred prediction from the first promise of the woman's
seed until this time, more capable of being counterfeited by subtle
prete^ders to the Crown of David, than this particular was: and yet the
fulfilling of it, so we would take all circumstances related by the Evangelists
into serious consideration, or scan the true Grammatical sense of the Prophets
words aright, is as concludently punctual, as the accomplishing of any
Prophecy besides; any passage in the 53. of Isaiah, or the 22. Psalm not
excepted. God by his all-seeing providence did prevent the reduction of that
possibility or facility rather of imposture, whereunto this Prophecy above
others was exposed, into act. For from the day of our Saviors triumphant
coming into Jerusalem, neither City nor people had any just occasion of such
joy or exultation as now they expressed; scarce any quiet hour from this neglect
of that great salvation, which now was proffered, until the destruction of the
City and Temple, and the dispersion of the Jewish Nation throughout the world.
Among many other circumstances related by the Evangelists, all worthy of our
serious consideration, this one in my mind is most remarkable; that the Owners
of the Ass and of the Colt, or the neighborhood then present, should suffer
them to be untied and carried away before they saw the Disciples warrant so to
do, subscribed by their Masters hand. But warrant they had none save only
Parroll. And if any ask why you do so, say, The Lord has need of them, etc.
Matt. 21.3. and Mark 11.3. Had not this Lord, whose authority they avouched
been a greater King than his Father David; had not his power and authority, not
over their goods only, but over their minds and consciences, been more than
Monarchical: he could not so plainly, and so peremptorily have
fore-prophecied de futuris contingentibus, or given his Disciples full
assurance that the Owner of these juments should do, as he foretold they would
do. This was an Oracle of the same God, of the same power, and authority,
which informed David, that the men of Keilah would betray him into Saul's hands,
if he did commit himself to their trust. The men of Keilah were prevented from
doing that, which the Searcher of all hearts saw they were intended or bent to
do. But these men did as the Lord foretold they should do, when they intended
no such matter.

2. If we compare the Evangelicall relations concerning the manner of our
Saviors coming to Jerusalem with the Prophets predictions, they agree so well
that Zachariah in this particular may share well with Isaiah in that title of
the Evangelicall Prophet. Yet in the manner of the Evangelicall Stories
concerning this point, there is some variation in words, but no contradiction
or contrariety in sense. Go unto the village (says S. Matthew) over against
you. And straight you shall find an Ass tied and a Colt with her: loose them
and bring them unto me, Matt. 21.2. S. Mark relates the same story thus; Ye
shall find a Colt tied, whereon never man sat, loose him and bring him, Mar.
11.2. See Luke 19.30. This variation of words has raised a doubt amongst
Interpreters as well of the Prophet as of the Evangelists, whether our Savior
did ride part of the way upon the Ass, and part upon the Colt, or all the way
upon the Colt alone. Such as think our Savior did ride only upon the Colt,
labor to salve the truth of the Prophetical prediction and S. Matthews
relation, how it was fulfilled by a Synecdoche usual, as they allege, in the
Hebrew Dialect. To say the King of Sion should come riding upon an Ass, and
upon the foale of an Ass, is a speech as justifiable in grammatical sense, as
that Jonas should be sleeping in the sides of the ship (so are the words of
the Prophecy) whereas he could not sleep but in one side of the ship at one
time. But as for Synecdoches, metonymies, or other like words of Art, grammar,
or rhetorique, unless they be reduced to some logical or rational maxim,
they edify no better in Divinity, than an Allegory or mystical
interpretation, which is not grounded upon some historical relation of matter
of fact, according to the plain literal or grammatical sense. The (...) or
the only foundation of this Synecdoche here pretended, must be that logical
rational maxim [ ad veritatem indefinitae propositionis sufficit veritas
untus particularis] Unto the truth of an indefinite proposition, the truth of
one particular is sufficient. He that can prove Socrates to be a learned man,
may without impeachment affirm, that man is learned, or men are learned: for
the expression of any particulars indistinctly apprehended (or confusedly
known) by the plural, is usual not in the sacred only, but in modern
Languges, We English men do not commit any solecisme when we say, the Noble
Sidney was slain in the Low Countries: albeit in strict propriety of speech,
he was slain but in one of those Countries or Provinces. A man that had been
present, or had a distinct Geographicall apprehension of the place where he was
wounded, would have named it in the singular, as at Zutphen. So it was said,
Judges 12.7. That Ieptha died and was buried in the Cities of Galead; that is,
as our English very well renders it, in one of the Cities of Galead, but in
which one of them, that, it seems the Author of that sacred history did not
think worthy to be taken into particular consideration, being a point wherein
posterity without loss might be altogether ignorant. And certainly it was
ignorance of their own Dialect, or the spirit of slumber, which occasioned
some Nunquam cohabites impiis, eo quod fieri non possit, ut non ex illorum
conversatione and tu impius evadas. Quod si m^raris: Considera quid acciderit
Iiphtah Gileaditae, qui licet iustus esset, tamen quia habitavit in tribu
Epharaijm, and ipse ab eis ad impietatem pertractus fuit. Cum enim videret quod
filios and filias suas idolo Baal comburere^t: inde quoque and ipse abiit,
similique modo filiam suam occidit. Item cum videret eos operam dare
homicidiis, factus est and ipse homicida, abiens and interficiens 40. duo
mill^a, ob quod facinus tanquam impius punitus, non meruit sepulturam, juxta id
quod dicitu^; Et sepultus est in civitatibus Gilead, Iudic. 12. Qui locus
Scripture docet, di p^sa sin^e ^ossa ejus in omnibus civitatibus Gilead. In
quocunque enim loco videbant ejus ossa, sepe^^ebant ea. Ben. Syrae. Sentent.
Mor. 6.
Jewish Writers to gather from this plural expression, that Iephtha's bones
were scattered throughout all the Cities of Galead, or respectively intombed in
many several places. The Evangelists use the like speech when they say: The
malefactors which were crucified with our Savior did revile him; whereas in
such distinct apprehension as S. Luke had of this circumstance, one of the two
only did revile him, or at least continue in this wicked mind; but the party
reviling being not so distinctly known by name or by other circumstances (as
Barabbas was) to the other Evangelists as unto S. Luke, they make their
expressions in the plural. It is a general rule worthy of every Commentators
actual consideration, that albeit every Evangelist relate nothing but the
truth, yet no one of them relates the whole truth concerning our Saviors life
and actions, his death and passion: nor do they always observe the order and
method of all circumstances, or occurrences, as will appear hereafter. The
manner of our Saviors coming to Jerusalem, might be, and no doubt was more
distinctly represented to the Disciples senses, than it had been to the Prophet
Zachariahs spirit. For lumen propheticum erat aliqualiter aenigmaticum; the
light of prophecy was not always distinctly evident, but indefinitely. And
this might be the reason why the Prophet foretells that our Savior should
come riding both upon the Ass, and the Colt, when as Mark and Luke, in the
forecited places and S. Ioh. chap. 12. ver. 14.
three Evangelists mention only the Colt. And albeit S. Matthew mention both,
yet it may be replied, that he historically in that passage avoucheth nothing
of his own observation, but only relates the Prophets words which he saw
now fulfilled, although our Savior had rid only upon the Ass, or upon the
Colt.

3. But however the Prophets words in themselves considered, or compared only
with the historical narrations of their fulfilling as they are extant by S.
Mark, S. Luke, and S. John, may admit the presumed Synecdoche, or plural
expression in steed of the singular: ye^ to my understanding or observation,
none of these three Evangelists affirmative for Christ's riding upon the Colt or
foale of the Ass, is so exclusive, as S. Matthews relation of the same story
is inclusive. Nor is S. Ieroms, Maldonat's, or others inference from the
expression of these three Evangelists so concludent, that he rode upon the
Colt alone, as the inference which may be drawn from S. Matthews relation
that he rode upon both. Ye shall find an Ass tied, and a Colt with her:
loose them and bring them unto me: And if any man shall say ought unto you, ye
shall say, The Lord has need of them, and straightway he will send them. He
further adds, All this was done that is might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the Prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter, etc. All the other three
Evangelists affirmatives will not infer this negative, that our Savior did
not ride upon the Ass at all. The historical, literal, or legal tenor of
our Saviors Commission directed or given to his two Disciples, whom he
authorized to take them, imply that he had instant use of both, though more
special, or permanent use of the Colt or foale. And the execution of this
Commission necessarily inferres as much; And the Disciples went, and did as
Jesus had commanded them. And brought the Ass and the Colt, and put on them
their clothes, and they set him thereon: or as the Original has it, upon
them, (...), Matt. 21.6, 7. His dismission of the Damme upon some short trial,
and longer use of the young one (as sundry of the Ancient with good Modern
Interpreters observe) did admirably prefigure the instant rejection of the
Jews, and the speedy admission of the Gentiles here promised. The Gentile
though never accustomed to the yoke of Mosaicall Laws, by whose rites the
anointing and consecration, the coming of this great King was foreshadowed;
did beyond expectation willingly submit himself unto the Gospel or Kingdom of
heaven here on earth, as the young Colt which never had been backed before this
time, did gently bear our Savior, notwithstanding all the noise and cry which
had been made by the promiscuous multitude. When as the Jew resembled or
typified by the old Ass, which had been used to the yoke and saddle, became
(as it is probable, she did) resty and skittish ready to kick, and spurn, and
endeavoring to throw her Rider. And in type or prognostic of this mystical
truth, it is not improbable, that our Savior relinquisht the Ass after he
had assayed her, and took her Colt, and rode on him into Jerusalem, though no
man had sat upon him before.

4. However, the fulfilling of the later part of this Prophecy, whether it was
fulfilled by Synecdoche, or in the plain literal, and legal construction of
the Prophets words; was most clear and evident unto the Apostles and Disciples
senses. But whether the former part of this Prophecy concerning the titles of
this King was so clearly fulfilled, admits some question which cannot be
determined without further discussion of the grammatical sense, or
Prophetical importance of these words (...) The best and choicest Translations
vary much partly about the signification, partly about the pointing of these
words. And no Interpreter which I have read (though I have consulted many) does
give me any tolerable satisfaction for their Emphaticall or Prophetical
importance, save one or two. I shall for this reason crave pardon with humble
submission of my opinion unto the judgment of the learned, to proffer more
variety of Translations and Interpretations, then I have been accustomed, unto
the Readers choice. The vulgar Latin renders it thus; Ecce Rex tuus veniet tibi
justus, and salvator: ipse pauper, etc. Behold, thy King comes, a just King,
and a Savior: he is poor, etc. referring the Hebrew pronoune to pauper.
Iunius accords in part with the vulgar, Iustus and salute praeditus: with whom
our later English accords, save only that it referres the pronoune (...) unto
justus and salvator, he is just and having salvation: whereas Iunius
altogether omits the expression of it, and the vulgar referres it to that which
follows, he is poor, he is lowly or meek. The Translator of the Kings Bible
referres it unto justus, Iustus ille and salvator, that Just and Savior. Arius
Montanus in his Interlineary referres the same pronoune unto the first clause,
Iustus, etc. But whereas others read, Salvator ille, he has it, Salvatus
ipse: So does our former English, he is just, and saved himself. But Cramerus
the Lutheran, ut Hunnii discipulum agnoscas, charge that Translation which
our former English follows (as his Master Hunnius had Calvin in many others)
with Judaizing, at least for giving advantage to the captious Jew. For what
argument can it be either of glory to a great King, or of joy unto Subjects, to
foretell that he himself should be servatus or salvatus. This expression
implies danger unto himself more directly, then saving health unto others: it
supposes peril or hazard antecedent, but does not necessarily argue victory
for the consequent. And yet the words in the Original are formally passive.
But Cramerus with some others would out of the grammatical rudiments which
they had learned, instruct us, that Verbs of this form or conjugation
sometimes admit a signification merely active, otherwhiles neither merely
active or passive, but reciprocal, as the Septuagint renders this place (...),
that is, saving himself. So does our later English in the marginall note. Yet
if the Original in this place might be (as Cramerus would have it)
reciprocal, the basis of these two contrary significations should be the
passive. And though both versions saving himself, and saved himself meet in
one point; yet it had been more handsome to have said salvatus a seipso, then
servans seipsum. And so Vatablus in his annotations upon this place tells us,
it may be rendered. Vertere potes (says he) and servetur, sub: a se, pro
servans se. But Masius a man more skillful then the vulgar Grammarians, has so
far impeacht these grammatical curiosities about the peculiar force or value
of Conjugations, that it is not safe to put a matter of so great a consequence,
as the fulfilling of a Prophecy concerning Christ, upon their verdict. And
however many other Verbs in this form, to wit, in Niphal be rather equivalent
to actives, then truly actives, neuterpassives, or reciprocals: yet their use
though it were more frequent then it is, cannot prescribe against the proper
and natural signification of the word (...) in this place, which for ought I
find is always a mere passive. Wherefore to wave these grammatical
curiosities, this observation (I take it) is more real, and of better use.
That as vulgar Philosophers usually ascribe the variety of effects unto the
agents or efficients, which arises wholly from the matter or Patient. So
Grammarians often labor to salve the regular use, or importance of words from
the diversity of forms or conjugations in their derivatives, or multiplicity
of significations in the primitive, when as all the variation proceeds wholly
from the nature of the subjects unto which one and the same word in one and the
same form or signification is applied. As for instance, when Melchisedeck
says, Benedictus sit Deus Abrahami, and Benedictus sit Abraham a Deo, etc.
Blessed be the God of Abraham, and blessed be Abraham of the most high God:
the formal signification of the Latin [ benedictus] and the English [ blessed]
is one and the same: but the use, or importance much differ, whilst applied
unto God and unto Abraham. For Abraham or man to be blessed of God, or to have
good words bestowed upon him by divine goodness, always imports some real
donative whereby he becomes more happy then he was before. For in God
benedicere is benefacere, his good word or blessing is always operative of
some real good to the party whom he blesses. But for God to be blessed by
man, or which is all one, for man to bless God, can import no more then a
testification of his love and loyalty toward his Creator, that he no way
envieth, but heartily congratulateth his eternal happiness, and could wish if
it were possible, that it might be greater, or that he could express his
loyalty and thankfulness better unto him, who is worthy of all praise, honor,
glory, and blessedness, etc.

5. In like case admitting the proper and formal signification of the Hebrew
(...) to be always one and the same, Zach. 9.9
and punctually rendered by Arias Montanus [salvatus;] yet the importance of it,
whilst our Savior is the Subject and we the Agents, will much differ from
the importance of it, whilst we are the Subjects or passives, and he the
Agent or Donor. Salvatus applied unto us, always implies some real salvation of
soul or body or of both, and is as much in English as to be saved or redeemed
from death and danger. The same word again applied to the King of Sion by his
Subjects, or by us sinful men unto our Savior and Redeemer, can imply no more
then our congratulation of his dignity, or an acknowledging of his power to
save, or our hearty prayers that he would bestow his saving health upon us. If
Arias Montanus or other Translators of the Hebrew had been tied to have used no
other then Ciceronian or Terentian phrases, it would perhaps have been a
solecisme, to have put the Latin salvatus for salutatus. But the Latin
Translators often times use a phrase or dialect more ancient by much then Cicero
or Terence, whose language though (unto such as peruse few other Writers then
Tully or Terence, or others a little before or after them) it may seem harsh;
yet is it more expressive of the Hebrew (the ancientest of Languages) then the
modern Latin, as salvatus in this place is more significant, and holds
better analogy with the propriety of the Latin Tongue, then if he had said
salutatus. He whosoever he be, to whom we say, sis salvus, or jubeo te
salvere, may according to the fundamental rules of Grammar Latin, though not
according to the custom of Critics or Refiners of that Language, be more
properly said to be salvatus then salutatus. And I make no question, but
Montanus and others did use it in this sense, as the most punctual expression
of the Original, unless they had said salvandus. However, he is properly
said to be salvatus or salutatus, who is either really saved from danger or
unto whom we wish all health and safety. The passive juratus is in its formal
signification one and the same, whilst it denotes the party, or person, or
matter by which we swear or protest, or the parties which make oath, not
only according to the Hebraismes, or Ellenismes used by most Translators, but
in the elegancie of the Latin or Roman refined dialect. So an elegant Statius.
Poet expresses Amphiaraus his scrupulosity, or rather observance of decorum,
in not swearing by Apollo, but old Chaos in that region of darkness; Testor
inane Chaos: quid enim hic jurandus Apollo? If he had sworn by Apollo, Apollo
had been juratus, yet not juratus in that sense as a Jury with us are said
jurati, that is sworn men, or men which take an oath being administered unto
them: for it must consist of swearing men, or of swearers: a new title given by
some Roman regular Catholics, (as they call themselves) unto such Seculars of
their own Profession, as will take the oath of Allegiance, or acknowledge it
to be administered unto them by lawful Authority. And yet I take it, he that
takes a voluntary oath may be truly said to be juratus, not only to swear,
but to be sworn, and that not in vulgar or legal English only, but in pure
refined Latin, as in that of Prudentius; Tentavit Geticos nuper delere Tyrannos,
Italiam patrio veniens juratus ab Istro.
According to the custom of refined Latin it would perhaps be a solecisme to
say a man that dies of poison were venenatus, albeit venenatus be a proper
Latin word, not obsolete, whilst it denotes arrows or bullets, but in our
English we speak as properly when we say a man was poisoned, as when we say
a poisoned bullet, a poisoned shaft. And so no question according to the true
intent of the Prophet Zachariah our Savior was as properly said to be (...)
that is saved, or saluificated, whilst the multitude cried Hosanna, or wished
all health unto him; as we are said to be (...), or saved by him. And if
Montanus had as fully expressed this whole phrase (...) as he does the word
(...) salvatus, little could have been added to it by way of Comment.

6. But to take the full importance of the whole phrase, or matter signified
according to the sublimitie of the Prophetical dialect or expression; that, I
take it is thus. However the promised King of Sion was to come unto her so
lowly in person, so poorly attired, so meanly furnished of strength or
visible pomp, as might cause her Inhabitants rather to deride, then respect
him: yet even in this plight or garb, he should be entertained with general
applause, with louder acclamations, then had been used at the Coronation of
David or of his Successors. The ancient form of such solemn acclamations had
been: Vivat Rex, etc. Let the King live: but to our Savior the multitude cry,
Hosanna, Hosanna to the Son of David. And this peculiar kind of salutation
or acclamation, is punctually foretold by the Prophet, and grammatically
expressed by the Hebrew. For Hosanna, whether we take it as precatory or
congratulatory, is an active which does as exactly fit the passive (...) as ego
saluto te, does tu es salutatus a me, I salute you, and you are saluted of me.
If Arias Montanus had said salvatus ille for salvatus ipse, the Translation had
been a more full expression of the Majestic original phrase. The full
expression or Prophetical importance of the whole phrase (if I mistake not the
emphasis of the Hebrew pronoune (...) especially when it comes in the Vide
Hebraicum contextum Prove. 19.21
rear or after the Substantive to which it referres) will amount to this
height and higher, Ecce Rex tuus venit, Rex ille justus, etc. Et pro justis
celebrandus. And I know not whether Castellio his version of this place do not
imply as much, Ecce Rex tuus venit, qui est justus and victoriosus. It had been
an ancient tradition or common prenotion amongst this people before the Prophet
Zachariah was borne, that their King or Christ should be the Son of David,
and David's Lord; A Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, who was King of
Salem by office, and by title King of righteousness, or the righteous King.
Now the Prophet forewarnes this people, that the glorious King, whom
Melchisedeck did by office and title foreshadow; should come to Sion and
Jerusalem, not attended with horses and chariots, but as became the righteous
and pacificall King (for so much his other title (...) imports) riding on an
Ass, and the foale of an Ass, and have both his titles proclaimed though not
by express words, yet by hieroglyphick or sacred heraldry. His lowliness,
which is the only ground of pacificall disposition, was lively represented by
the manner of his approach, riding upon the foale of an Ass, which in an
instant had learned gentle conditions from his lowliness and peaceable temper,
who first did sit upon him. His righteousness was really proclaimed by the
congratulations, and presents of the people; Much people (says S. John) that
were come to the Feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
took branches of Palm trees, and went forth to meet him, (as yet not hearing
whether he came on foot, or horseback) and cried Hosanna, blessed is the King
of Israel, that comes in the Name of the Lord, John 12.12, etc. And S. Mark
tells us; Many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down
branches of the trees, And strawed them in the way. And they that went before,
and they that followed, cried saying, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord. Blessed be the Kingdom of our Father David, that
comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna, in the Highest, Mark 11.8, 9, 10.
Matt. 21.8, 9. Now the Palm tree was as well in profane, as in sacred
Heraldry, as true an Emblem or hieroglyphick of righteousness or Justice, as
the sword is of Authority, and power. Hence says the Psalmist, Iustus ut palma
florebit, the just shall flourish like a Palm tree. Why rather like this tree,
Quod vero ponderibus resistat and in adversu^ incurvetur, facere idem Iudices
debent, atque reluctabundi seductores pellacesque omnes detrectare, neque
mulieribus, neque vio^etiae ced re. Pierius in initio sui lib. I.. de hierog.
and inquit Aristot. Si super arboris ejus lignum magnum quantumlibet pondus
imponas, Palma minime deorsum cedit, nec infra flectitur, sed adversus pondus
^esu^git and sursum nititur in adversum fornicata
then any other? then like the Oak or Cedar? Pierius (to my remembrance)
gives us the ground, or reason of this sacred allusion: and it is this; For
that the Palm tree the more it is wronged, or pressed down, the less it is
diverted from its natural course, but grows higher, and spreads the more.
And was for this reason, a fit Emblem of this righteous and victorious King,
whose incomparable exaltation did grow from his unparalleld humiliation and
depression.

CHAP. XIX. Of the meaning or importance of [Hosanna to the Son of David.]
1 THe diversity of Interpretations of many principal passages in Scripture,
is for the most part as great, as the multiplicity or variety of importances,
or significations of some one single word, in some large sentences and
passages. The best is, that this word Hosanna, has but two importances, which
can breed any matter of difference, between Interpreters of Scripture, or any
variety of Interpretations. Yet discord between Interpreters usually arise,
without any difference, only from variety of significations in words more then
compatible; yea most consonant between themselves; As some there be, who would
have this word Hosanna, to be merely precatory or optative: as much as, The
Lord send help or salvation; Others would have it to be merely (or especially)
congratulatory: Whereas both opinions agree very well, though their several
Authors, or Abetters have censured each other. That Hosanna in the intention of
the Multitude, which carried or spread branches of Palms or Olives in the way,
should (at least in the direct sense) be merely congratulatory, is probably
alleged from the whole phrase, or structure of speech: for they did not cry,
as the blind man in the way did, (...), Mark 10.48.
(...). O Son of David, have mercy upon me or save me: but (...), Hosanna to
the Son of David in the Highest. Both clauses import matter only of
co^gratulatio^. Caninius first, and after him Beza amongst others, have out of
their Rabbinicall learning well observed, that the branches of Palms, of
Olives, or other trees which this people used in their solemn Feast of
Tabernacles, or the like, in which they used the comprecations of the 118.
Psalm, came by custom and concurrence of time to be called Hosanna; by such
a manner or trope of speech, as the English and French do call the buds or
flowers of Hawthorne, May. According to this importance, or signification of
the word [ Hosanna,] the meaning of the multitude or Disciples was, that they
did bear these boughs, and use these congratulations in honor of the Son
of David, now coming unto them in triumph.

2. Some go a great way further, and would persuade us that the people, or
multitude being sorry that they had so slighted our Saviors presence, or
invitations in the last feast of Tabernacles ( John 7.) to which this solemnity
of carrying branches was (at the least) originally proper, did seek to redeem
their former neglect, and regaine the opportunity of tendering their allegiance
unto him, not as he was the Son of David only, but as the God of their
Fathers, who had brought them out of Egypt into the land of Canaan, and
redeemed them from Babilonish captivity, to honor him with solemn feasts, and
other services in Jerusalem. But that the multitude, (either all, or most, or
any) should have a more distinct explicit apprehension of his Deity, or of the
great mystery of salvation which he was now to accomplish, then his Disciples
and Followers had, is very improbable. That his very Disciples (though Actors
in this business) had no such distinct apprehension of the great mystery
imported by this solemnity, is unquestionable. For S. John, upon a distinct
review of all the circumstances of this Solemnity, whether congratulatory, or
precatory or both, tells us These things understood not his Disciples at the
first, but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were
written of him, and that they had done these things unto him, Chap. 12.16.

3. Amongst the things which are written of him, this was one, that he should
be acknowledged and publickely proclaimed for the Son of David, (...), the
often promised and long expected Messiah, and Redeemer of the whole world. And
all this was acknowledged and proclaimed by the multitude, as well by the form
of prayer which they used, as by their real congratulations. First that the
word Hosanna was uttered by way of prayer by the multitude, is clear from that
passage in the Psalmist, whereunto the word Hosanna with the matters of fact,
which did accompany it, do refer. For so it is agreed upon by all sides,
that (...) Psalm 118.25. is a solemn and formal prayer; Save now I beseech
thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity: to wit, unto the
Son of David, and unto his people by him. And thus far at least, the
apprehension or intention of the people, when they cried Hosanna to the Son of
David, did reach. For they thought this was the day, which the Lord had made;
and did therefore rejoice and were glad in it, as in the day of their long
expected redemption from the hands of all their enemies. As they heard these
things, he added, and spoke a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and
because they thought that the kingdom of God should immediately appear, Luke
19.11. This prenotion, that the kingdom of God was now to be manifested did
facilitate the assent or obedience as well of the owner of the Ass, and the
Colt, whereon he rode to Jerusalem, as of the Master of the family wherein he
did eat his Passover, unto the intimation or direction of our great Lord and
Master. The one story concerning their present obedience, we have Matt. 21.5.
The other more at large, Luke 22.7. to the 14. Nor did they err in taking this
to be the day of their Redemption; but in the confused notion of the enemies,
from which they were to be redeemed. They expected only a deliverance from
the tyranny of the Romans, and other hostile Nations, over whom they hoped the
Son of David should exercise royal and temporal Jurisdiction. And it is no
wonder, if the multitude, whether of inhabitants of Jerusalem or strangers
which went out to meet him and congratulate his approach, did apprehend no more
then thus, seeing the two Disciples which accompanied him toward Emaus upon the
day of his resurrection, had no better a notion of the redemption promised then
this, though even this notion did fleet or vanish, after they had seen him put
to death: We trusted that it had been he, which should have redeemed Israel,
Luke 24.21. This argues, that their former trust was for the present
extinguished, till he by opening the Scriptures unto them, did revive and
kindle it.

4. Again, when they cry Hosanna to the Son of David in the Highest, not from
heaven: this no way argues that their salutation should not be formally
precatory: especially if Maldonats observation be without exception, that (...)
be equivalent (according to the Hebrew dialect) unto ab excelsis from the
highest Heavens. However taking the word [ Hosanna] as in its primary
signification, forasmuch, as the Lord send help, or grant salvation; and the
Greek (...) according to the native Greek, in the highest: the natural
meaning, or literal expression of the congratulation will amount to this, that
God would be pleased to ratify their petitions for prosperity of the Son of
David in heaven, not doubting but that God so doing, his blessings upon him and
them might be established here on earth. For so they further express
themselves in the Psalmists words, Blessed be the King that comes in the
Name of the Lord: Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest, Luke 19.38. But
though Maldonat with other judicious Commentators do clearly evince this
form of congratulation, Hosanna, to be precatory: yet was Maldonat more to
blame, then such as think it only to have been congratulatory, when he
avoucheth that this solemnity of carrying branches of Palms and Olives, had no
special reference to the feast of Tabernacles: and more to blame, when he
thinks that the feast of Tabernacles had nihil commune cum Christo, no type
or figure of this solemnity, or that this solemnity did include no
Emblematicall acknowledgement or testification, that CHRIST JESUS was as truly
the Son of God, as of David: as well David's (...) Lord, as his Son.

CHAP. XX. At what time and upon what occasions the 118. Psalm was composed;
And at what solemn Feast especially used.
1 FOr giving such, as it may concern, more full satisfaction in the points
late handled: and for setting forth the sweet harmony, betwixt the Prophetical
song and the peoples acclamations and cry at this great and last solemn
Festivity: the best method I can conjecture, would be to make diligent enquiry
at what time, and upon what occasions the 118. Psalm was first written, and at
what solemn Feast it was principally used. Mollerus a man of commendable
pains in this particular search, and one who had read very many, tells us
that the major part of learned Interpreters whom he had perused, are of
opinion that this Psalm was composed by David himself, upon occasions of his
victory over his enemies, and freedom from disturbance or danger from the
house of Saul, upon the death of Ishbosheth. And for strengthening this
conjecture, he refers us to the 2. of Sam. 6. And Coppen, a most Ingenuous
and exact Examiner of such Commentators, as he had read, seems rather to
incline this way, then to the contrary. The maine stream of Interpreters would
carry me with them, did not the nature of the Subject now in hand, permit a
peculiar liberty of dissenting from a major part, though otherwise most learned
Interpreters. And having conferd this 118. Psalm as well for circumstances, as
for matter and for the character of speech or language with the history of the
2. of Sam. 6. as with the 18. and 68. Psalm, which, it is evident, were both
written at the time and upon the occasions, which Mollerus conjectures this
118. Psalm was composed; I find no congruity either of matter or style
betwixt them. Many passages in the 118. Psalm there are, which literally
refer unto the gates or building of the house of the Lord, not to the Ark or
Tabernacle, which were only extant in the time of David. For he lived not to
see the chief corner stone, whether the highest, or the lowest of the Temple
laid or placed; much less to see the gates, at which the righteous was to
enter, set up. Besides, although this 118. Psalm was written by the same
Spirit, by which David wrote; yet the language or character of this Psalm does
argue, it was composed in a different age from that, wherein David lived and
wrote the 18. and 68. Psalms. And as far, as my observation leads me, in
the same age and upon the same occasions, that the Psalms of degrees (all save
one) were first composed and first used. And those Psalms (it is to me clear)
were written after this peoples return from Babylon, and, as is most probable,
after the death of Zerubbabel, when the glory of the house of David, was for a
time eclipsed by the splendour of the house of Aaron. And certainly, if this
Psalm had been composed by David himself, or any of his Successors, or other
Prophet in this Nation, while the first Temple was standing, there would have
been thankesgiving in special expressed for the house of David, as well as for
the house of Aaron. But the form of thankesgiving in the first place runs
thus; O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; because his mercy endures
for ever. Let Israel now say, that his mercy endures for ever. Let the house
of Aaron now say, that his mercy endures for ever. Let them now that fear the
Lord say, that his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 118.1, 2, 3, 4. Nor is there
any express mention in special, of the house of David, or of his Successors
unto the end of this Psalm: though many passages in the same Psalm cannot
according to the true literal sense be applied to any Person or Community,
save only to the Son of David, who was also David's Lord. The thanksgivings
are uttered or delivered not in the name of any one Person or Family, but in
the name and behalf of the whole Community, as well Priest as people. And yet
the same thanksgivings are punctually directed unto God the Lord: or as the
multitude, not by distinct apprehension of their meaning, but by the
disposition of Gods divine providence expound the Psalm, unto GOD Incarnate,
the Son of David.

2. But as I am not prone to be carried with a general stream of
Interpreters, against probable discoveries of a safer course: so am I unwilling
to be singular, or to venture upon narrow passages without a Pilot. And a more
skillful Pilot in this case, I could not have wished for, then Theodoret, an
ancient Father of great judgment, and well deserving the style of Theodoret
the wise or discreet. Now this grave and most discreet Author in this
particular argument, whereof we treat; at what times, and upon what occasions
the Psalms were written: conducts me thus far, that this 118. Psalm was
written after Israel returned from Babylon. Though the other stream which
Mollerus, and others follow, be much broader; yet this narrow cut, which after
Theodoret I take, will appear (I hope) upon due sounding deeper and safer.
Theodorets judgment is thus; Et hic etiam hymnus est ab iis qui salutem a Deo
consecuti sunt, allatus. Iudaei namque post reversionem, cum omnes finitimi in
unu^ coacti essent, atque etia^ gentes alias and barbaras conflassent; deinde
cum plagis a Deo illatis, profligati essent, secundum Ioelis and Ezechielis and
Micheae and Zachariae vaticinationem, hunc hymnum de gratiarum action Deo
afferunt.

This is one of those hymns which were composed by such as obtained salvation
or deliverance. The Jews (after their return from Babylonish captivity) when
all bordering Nations with other barbarous people at their instigation were
gathered against them, after they saw them plagued by God, and their malicious
projects defeated according to the Prophecies of Joel Ezechiel or of Zachariah
offer up this Psalm of thanksgiving unto the Lord.



3. However S. Ierom, Mollerus, and others do for particular circumstances of
the Composers, time, and occasions of this Psalm, follow another current, then
Theodoret did; yet we all meet in the maine or Ocean, whereinto this Psalm and
others do exonerate themselves. For thus Mollerus concludes his Preface to
this Psalm: There is no question but that this Psalm (as most others of
David's) had more special reference to Christ, whose Person he did represent,
or typifie, and whose portraiture he sought to set forth; then unto David
himself. And hence it was that as often as this Psalm was recited in the
Jewish Synagogues, it was always accommodated to the Messiah, and reckoned
amongst the solemn prayers and supplications for his coming unto them, as
Hierom testifies. Now seeing by its frequent recital, it was so well known to
the vulgar sort, hence was that gratulatory versicle, or song [ Hosanna] taken
up by them, at that time wherein Christ was entertained by the multitude,
according to the state or custom of their King or expected Messiah

Nec dubium est, Davidem in hoc Psalmo, ut in plerisque aliis, magis ad
Christum, cujus personam gerebat, quam adse respexisse, ejusque in se imaginem
exprimere voluisse. Atque inde factum est, ut quoties post illud tempus hic
Psalmus in Synagoga a Iudaeis logeretur, ad Messiam fuerit accommodatus, and
inter eas preces, quibus adventus ejus petebatur, relatus; ut testatur
Hieronymus. Cumque ex assidua repetitione popule esset notissimus, hinc sumptus
est versiculus in pompa illa, in qua Christus tanquam Rex hujus populi f^iit
exceptus, ut scribitur Matthew. 21. Mollerus in argumento hujus Psalmi.



4 Now seeing it is confessed by all, as well expressly by the Jews, as by matter
of fact related by the Evangelists, that this 118. Psalm did contein a
peculiar prophecy or testimony prophetically typical of the promised Messiah
his coming to Jerusalem, to ratify or fulfill whatsoever was foretold or
portended by this Solemnity, wherein it was first used: no time, or season can
with greater probability be allotted, no occasion more fitly pretended for the
first composing of it, then the extraordinary joy of the whole Community of
the people of Juda and Israel, as well Priests as Laics, upon the erection or
finishing of the second Temple. For within the compass of this season, Haggai
had prophesied that the desire of all Nations should come unto that Temple. The
precise time according to exact calculation of his coming to Jerusalem, and of
his death there, had been notified by Daniel not long before. The sacred
history of the times, wherein Zerubbabel, Ieshua, Haggai, and Zechariah lived,
bear plentiful record, that the people of Judah, Benjamin, or Israel had no
just cause, or great occasions of rejoicing according to that scale of joy and
gladness, which is charactered in the 118. Psalm, immediately after their
return from Babylonish captivity. For both neighbor Nations, and the
principal Officers of this side Euphrates, of those kings unto whom they were
subject, did partly by violence, partly by malicious suggestions for diverse
years prohibit the erection of the Temple, and the re-edifying of Jerusalem.
More fear, then joy did possess this great people, when they begun to erect
the Altar of the Lord, as may appear from Ezra 3.4. And that was diverse months
before the foundation of the Temple was laid: at which time indeed there was
much joy, especially amongst the people, and younger sort; Yet joy mixed with
many tears of the Ancient, especially Priests and Levites, which had seen the
former Temple, (at least the foundation of it.) Ezra 3.12, 13.

5 However, it is probable that this 118. Psalm was in part composed upon the
sight or view of the first foundation of the second Temple. For Ezra tells us
that the Priests and Levites, after the ordinance of David King of Israel, sung
together by course in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord, because he is
good, and his mercy endures for ever toward Israel. And in this form of
thanksgiving the 118. Psalm begins and ends, O give thanks unto the Lord, for
his mercy endures for ever. Let Israel now say that his mercy endures for
ever. ver. 1. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy
endures for ever. ver. 29. I am not forgetful, nor can the Reader be ignorant
that there is another Psalm, videlicet 136. in which this form of praise is
more perpetual, as being the close or fall of every verse. But that Psalm (as
I have many inducements to conceive) was composed long before the foundation of
the Temple was laid. But other Psalms of thanksgiving there are besides these
two, which were composed upon special occasions, and afterward continued in
their solemn feasts with further additions, and amplifications, as the like
occasions of public joy did minister. For later Prophets, or men otherwise
inspired by the holy Ghost for that purpose, to intersert, or add more plain
or fuller expressions of David's, or former Prophets intent or meaning in their
form of thanksgiving, or to paraphrase upon them, was never unlawful,
although they had added the same curse, to such as should add unto, or
diminish their writings, which is annexed unto the law of Moses, and the book
of the Revelations. For no addition is forbidden, but such as includes a
vitiation of the text, or such as pretends Divine authority, when it has it
not.

6 But however this 118. Psalm or most part of it might be begun upon the
occasions forementioned by Ezra; yet some passages in it there are, which in
particular refer unto some one of the three great and anniversary solemnities,
as that; This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad
in it. Save now O Lord I beseech thee, etc. ver. 24, 25. Now after the
foundation of the Temple was laid, there was no solemn feast, in which this
peoples expression of joy and thanksgiving was so remarkable or so
peremptorily required, as in that feast of Tabernacles or booths recorded by
Nehemiah, cap. 8. A feast of Tabernacles there was some few months after the
foundation of the Temple was laid by Zerubbabel and Ieshua the son of
Iozadeck, recorded by Ezra 3.4. etc. But that feast of Tabernacles was
solemnised* secundum quid, only in respect of the peculiar daily sacrifices,
which the Law in that month appointed to be offered There is no mention in Ezra
of their dwelling in boothes, either in their public streets, upon their
public houses, or in the Courts of the Lords house, which was not at that
time builded. This part of that great solemnity had not been observed from the
days of Joshua the son of Nun, until Nehemiah had put his peremptory
commission for re-edifying Jerusalem, in execution. Nehemiah which is the
Tirshatha, and Ezra the Priest the Scribe, and the Levites that taught the
people, said unto all the people; This day is holy unto the Lord your God,
mourn not, nor weep: for all the people wept, when they heard the words of
the Law, etc. And they found written in the Law, which the Lord had commanded
by Moses, that the Children of Israel should dwell in boothes in the feast of
the seventh month. And that they should publish, and proclaim in all their
Cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the Mount, and fetch Olive
branches and pine branches and myrtle branches and Palm branches and branches
of thick trees to make booths. So the people went forth, and brought them, and
made themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their
courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water
gate of Ephraim. And all the congregation of them that were come again out of
the captivity, made boothes, and sat under the boothes: for since the days of
Joshua the son of Nun, unto that day, had not the Children of Israel done so,
and there was very great gladness. Also day by day from the first day unto the
last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven
days, and on the eighth day was a solemn Assembly according unto the manner,
Nehem. 8.9, 10, 11. etc. This great day of the feast was that anniversary
solemnity, wherein our Lord and Savior, after the revolution of many years
(how many I leave to the calculation of Chronologers;) did make that solemn
proclamation unto the people assembled at the feast of Tabernacles, John 7.37.
In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If
any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes on me, (as
the Scriptures have said) out of his belly shall flow rivers of running water.
But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him, should
receive. For the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified.

7 It is very observable, which is recorded by Saint John, Chap. 7.14. That
about the midst of the feast, Jesus went into the temple and taught: and so
taught, that the Jews marveiled, saying, How knows this man letters seeing he
never learned? But to my apprehension, it is more observable, and wants not a
mystery (though for the present I cannot sound it;) why our Savior should
begin to teach in the Temple in the midst of the feast, not from the first day
until the last, as Ezra the Priest and Scribe had done in the same feast
mentioned by Nehemiah. His friends and kinsfolks had advised him to be at
Jerusalem to show himself at the beginning of the feast: Now the Jews feast of
Tabernacles was at hand. His Brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence,
and go unto Judea, that thy Disciples also may see the works which thou do.
For there is no man that does any thing in secret, and he himself seeks to
be known openly^ If thou do these things, show thy self unto the world, etc.
Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come; but your time is always
ready, etc. Go ye up unto this feast. I go not up yet unto this feast, for
my time is not yet come. When he had said these words unto them, he abode still
in Galilee. Howbeit after his teaching three or four days at the least, and
his solemn invitation of all men to come unto him in the great day of the
feast; he was not publicly acknowledged for the Christ; but so acknowledged by
some, and with demurre or contradiction of others, Then the Jews sought him at
the feast, and said, Where is he? And there was much murmuring among the people
concerning him. For some said, he is a good man; Others said, nay, but he
deceives the people. Howbeit no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the
Jews. John 7.11, 12, etc. But this verdict of him, was given up before he
taught in the Temple. After which time their suffrages varied, not only one
from another, but from themselves. For upon that part of doctrine which he
delivered from the 15. verse to the 25. Some of them of Jerusalem said, Is not
this he whom they seek to kill? But lo, he speaks boldly, and they say
nothing unto him: Do the Rulers know indeed, that this is the very Christ?
Howbeit we know this man, whence he is: But when Christ comes, no man
knows whence he is. Then cried Jesus in the Temple, as he taught, saying, Ye
both know me, and whence I am, and I am not come of my self, but he that has
sent me is true, whom ye know not. But I know him: for I am from him, and he
has sent me. Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him,
because his hour was not yet come. And many of the people believed on him, and
said, when Christ comes, will he do more miracles then these, which this man
has done? John 7.25. etc. But in the great and last day of the feast, many of
the people, after they had heard his solemn invitation, said, Of a truth, this
is the Prophet: Others said, this is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ
come out of Galilee? Has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the
seed of David, and out of the town of Bethleem, where David was? So there was a
division among the people, because of him. And some of them would have taken
him, but no man laid hands on him. ver. 40, 41, etc. For when the chief
Priests, and Pharisees asked of the Officers, whom they had employed upon the
demurr or debatement of the people to attach him, verse 32. Why have ye not
brought him? The only answer they could get, was this, Never man spoke like
this man. verse 45 46.

8 But however, in this great feast he suffered such contradictions of sinful
men, open contradictions one to another, and secret contradictions in most
individuals to their own consciences. For as he had told them John 7.28. That
they both knew him, and whence he was, and that he came not of himself. Albeit
their passions would not permit them so to acknowledge him. Yet his
entertainment for the present, was not so harsh and churlish (at the peoples
hand especially) as it was at the next solemn feast, in which he again did
publish his Commission, to wit, in the feast of the Encoenia or dedication of
the Temple, immediately ensuing the forementioned feast of Tabernacles. There
was a division (says Saint John) again among the Jews for these sayings. And
many of them said, He has a devil, and is mad: why hear ye him? Others said,
these are not the words of him that has a devil. Can a devil open the eyes
of the blind? And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the Dedication, and it was
winter. And Jesus walked in the Temple in Solomon's porch. Then came the Jews
round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou make us doubt? If thou
be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye
believed me not. The works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of
me, etc. Ioh: 10.19, 20, etc. Upon this avouchment, that God was his Father,
and that he and his Father were one, the Jews took up stones to stone him.
Jesus answered them, many good works have I showed from my Father: for which of
these works do ye stone me? The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we
stone thee not; but for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man make thy
self a God. But he escaped out of their hands, and went away again beyond
Jordan, into the place, where John at first baptized. And there he abode, and
many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle, but all things that John
spoke of this man were true. And many believed on him there. verse 39, 40, etc.
more then had done at Jerusalem, unto which he did not come, till the great
and last feast of the Passover, albeit he were invited, or advised to repair
thither, rather then to remain in Herod's dominions. Luke 13.31. Then came
certain Pharisees (Inhabitants of Jerusalem, or their Accomplices) saying unto
him, Get thee out, and depart hence for Herod will kill thee. And he said unto
them, Go, tell that fox, etc. It cannot be, that a Prophet perish out of
Jerusalem, etc. verse 33. He finally resolves them, Ye, (to wit) of Jerusalem,
Behold your house is left unto you desolate: Ye shall not see me until the
time come, when ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the
Lord. verse 35. And after this manner he was saluted by Men, Women, and
Children: by all sorts (unless it were the Scribes and Pharisees) at his
coming to this great and last Passover, whereof I now treat. However their
crucifying of him some few days after, whom they acknowledged for their Lord
and Messiah, did both deserve and portend that utter desolation of City and
Temple, which he had foretold in the words immediately going before, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thee, etc. Behold your house is
left unto you desolate. But of the full importance of these words, I have
delivered my opinion elsewhere more at large. That Christ after the feast of
the Dedication mentioned John 10, did remain where John at first baptized,
until some few days before the Passover; is clear from that remarkable
story concerning the raising of Lazarus from death. John 11.1. etc. When he had
heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place,
where he was. Then after that, says he to his Disciples, Let us go into Judea
again. His Disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone
thee; and go thou thither again? Jesus answered, Are there not twelve
hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not; because he
sees the light of the world. But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth,
because there is no light in him.

9 It is observable, that immediately before, or in the time of these great and
solemn feasts, his fame was published for some rare miracle. When Christ
comes (says the people) in the feast of Tabernacles, will he do more
miracles then this man has done? John 7.31. The late miracle which occasioned
the contradiction or variety of opinion at the feast of the Dedication of the
Temple, was the restoring of one, who had been blind from his birth, to
perfect sight. You have the story at large John 9. The last and greatest
miracle, which he did about Jerusalem immediately before this last Passover,
and that which occasioned him to be proclaimed the Christ, not by himself as
at other times, nor by his Disciples only, but by the unanimous consent of
that mighty Assembly, besides the Priests and Scribes and Pharisees, was the
raising of Lazarus to life after he had been four days dead. And thus far
I can assent unto some modern Writers, that the Multitude then assembled,
especially the strangers did purposely seek at this feast to redeem their
former contempt or slight esteem of him at the Feast of Tabernacles and
Dedication before mentioned, by their forwardness to entertain and salute
him, as their glorious King, the long expected Son of David.

CHAP. XXI. That the Messiah was to be proclaimed King of Sion at some one or
other of their great and solemn Feasts, was a prenotion or received opinion
amongst the Jews.
1 FRom the Evangelicall history of our Saviors appearances at the solemn
Feast celebrated at Jerusalem, and from the debates between his Auditors,
especially in the last year of his presence there; the Intelligent Reader will
easily collect without further aduertisment, that it was a common prenotion or
received opinion amongst this people, that their expected Messiah should be
manifested or acknowledged at some one or other of their anniversary Feasts; of
which the Passover was the principal, or (as Chrysostom with some other of
the Ancients instile it) Metropolitan. But in which of these three solemn
Feasts, the Son of David should be proclaimed King, and made (by God) their
Lord, and Christ, was if not to all, yet to most of them, even to his followers
(whether Apostles or Disciples) uncertain, until the event did determine the
doubt unto such of them, as God did grant eyes to see, and ears to hear, and
hearts to understand the mysteries of salvation; respectively prefigured by
these three solemn Feasts, and really accomplished in this great Feast of the
Passover, wherein they crucified JESUS of NAZARETH (their late proclaimed
King,) and in the Feast of Pentecost next following. The full intent, and
purport of this last observation, as well the affirmative, as negative part, to
wit, [ the certainetie that he was to be proclaimed King at some one of those
Feasts: and the uncertainety at which of those he should be so proclaimed] is
included in those words of S. John before cited to another purpose; These
things understood not his Disciples at the first; that is, they did not lay
them to heart, nor rightly apprehend the melodious harmony between the
solemnity of that time, and the events forepictured by that, and other
solemnities. But when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these
things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him, Chap.
12.16. that is, they first considered, and then remembered, that his glorious
exaltation was foretold, typically prefigured by that solemn Feast, and really
acknowledged by the multitude.

2. That the solemnity of dwelling in booths, used in the Feast of Tabernacles,
or the exigence or occasion in whose remembrance that Feast was instituted
(which was their special relief from extremity of heat and thirst in the
wilderness;) had special reference to the Feast of Pentecost: is too apparent
to be contradicted by any good Christian, from that of our Savior, John 7.37.
In the last day, that great day of the Feast (to wit, of the Tabernacles) Jesus
stood, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, etc. This spoke he of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive. For the holy Ghost was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. But shortly after his
glorification, the Spirit of God, the true water of life, was powered out more
plentifully upon all flesh capable of it, then water had been unto Israel in
their extremity of thirst in the wilderness; or then that water, which was
used (I know not whether by precept or tradition) to be powered out upon the
Altar in the Feast of Tabernacles, especially upon that great day of the Feast,
wherein our Savior spoke these words. But in what place of Scripture it was
foresignified, that waters should flow out of their bellies that believed on
him, is not pertinent to our present purpose. Gods special protection, not of
Israel only according to the flesh, but of his universal Church from
spiritual enemies, under the shadow of his wings, was more peculiar then the
Palm trees or Willows of the brook, or boothes made of them, could afford to
the sons of Jacob, against the parching heat of the Sun, after our Savior
was glorified. As for those words forecited, Levit. 23.43. I made the children
of Israel to dwell in boothes, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt:
they refer (if good Writers be not mistaken) to Exodus 12.37. The children of
Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth; that is a place of boothes, or
Tabernacles, or as to a Northern Borderer might be more fully expressed, to a
place of Shields or Summer houses. Yet (if I be not mistaken) the forecited
place of Leviticus concerning the occasion of instituting the Feast of
Tabernacles or Shields has reference also to that of Exodus 15.27. And they
came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and seventie Palm trees, and
they encamped there by the waters.

3. Out of the former discussion it is apparent, that the feast of Tabernacles
had reference unto the feast of Pentecost, and that the commandments of
carnal rejoicing in that feast, were spiritually accomplished in the Pentecost
next following our Saviors passion. But what special reference had the same
feast of Tabernacles unto the solemnity of the Passover? Surely the same,
which other solemn feasts of the Seventh month (which was a month of legal
solemnities,) had. Now that the feast of Atonement or Expiation, which was the
tenth day of that month, (next after the feast of Trumpets, and some four
days before the feast of Tabernacles) was punctually accomplished at the feast
of the Passover, wherein our Savior was crucified; Maldonat himself, the
most rigid Opposer of the harmony betwixt these solemnities, and the last feast
of this Passover, would not have denied, if this interrogatory had been put
unto him. It is true, that the mysteries foreshadowed at this Feast by the
escape Goat, by the washing of the high Priest, and by some other Ceremonies,
were fulfilled in die suo, that is upon the tenth day of the seventh month, in
which our Savior (as with the consent of best modern Writers I have elsewhere
observed See Christ's answer to John.
) was baptized. But for the mysteries prefigured by the Sacrifices, whose blood
was brought into the Sanctuary upon the tenth of the seventh month; these were
not accomplished, until the entrance of our Redeemer CHRIST JESUS, into the
most Holy place, was visibly signified by the rending of the Veil in the
Temple. It is most true again, that the legal feasts of Trumpets, which was
the first solemnity of the seventh month, was Evangelically fulfilled by S.
John Baptists Proclamation and Baptism in the beginning of the same month.
But as for the feast of Tabernacles, albeit the solemnity thereof was in part
fulfilled at our Saviors appearance, and Proclamation of his celestial
Embassage by himself, upon the great day of that Feast, as was but now
observed: Yet the full accomplishment of the solemnities then used, or of the
mysteries prefigured by their public rejoicing in that feast especially, was
not exhibited, until our Saviors triumphant ingresse into Jerusalem four
days before the feast of the Passover, wherein he suffered for us. Many
amongst the multitude, at the feast of Tabernacles immediately before, did
acknowledge him for the expected Messiah, or for the Prophet, whom God had
promised to raise up amongst them like unto Moses. None of them then did either
out of express apprehension of his Deity, or by Emblematicall significations
of their allegiance unto him, acknowledge or proclaim him to be the God of
their Fathers, who had spoken to Moses in the wilderness: or that very God,
unto whose honor, the feast of Tabernacles was first instituted, and so
continued to their posterity. This acknowledgement was first made (though
unwittingly) by the multitude, which came to greet his welcome, when he came
from Bethany to Jerusalem over the Mount Olivet. But how was he at that time
(though unwittingly) so acknowledged by the multitude?

4. Although man be a reasonable and projecting Creature; yet the cunningest
contrivances of wisest men, are always moderated by the Al-seeing wisdom of
their Creator. And the execution of their projects, although they reach unto,
or hit the mark proposed by them, do often glance or fall upon some other
Object, then they thought of. And oftentimes, as well the intention, as
contrivance for its execution, are put upon them by secret instinct. As in that
good woman, which powered the precious ointment on our Saviors head, whilst
he sat at meat in the house of Simon the Leper. Matt. 26.7. Few I think upon
good consideration, will suspect any further intent, then a longing desire to
testify her love, her loyalty, and observance of him, as a gracious man and a
special Benefactor. Yet in the disposition of Divine providence, working in
her by secret instinct, to testify her love rather in this kind, then in any
other; she did exhibit an undoubted presage of his death and burial
approaching, as our Savior himself interprets the fact: When his Disciples
saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste? for this
ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor. When Jesus
understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she has
wrought a good work upon me. For ye have the poor always with you, but me
ye have not always. For in that she has powered this ointment on my body,
she did it for my burial. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall
be preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman has
done, be told for a memorial of her, Matthew. 26.8, 9, 10, etc. As he was
willing to receive the accustomed funeral rites of his Country, at this
woman's hands, before his death: so was it his pleasure to have his Coronation
over the kingdom of David, the Dedication of his glorious Temple, his triumph
over the grave, death, and hell, solemnly celebrated, before his resurrection
from the dead. For it was lawful for this Lion of Judah to triumph over death,
before the victory, which was to be purchased by his death. The honor done
unto him at this solemnity, and the severity of his sentence against Jerusalem
in the midst of this Jubilee, (me thinks) exhibits such a glimpse of his second
appearance in Majesty unto judgment, as the transfiguration on the Mount did
of his glory, after his resurrection. He had told the Jews, John 5.23. As the
Father raises up the dead, and quickens them: Even so the Son quickens
whom he will. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
unto the Son: that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has
sent him. A full proof of his power to pierce the monuments by his word, and
to make the graves give up their dead; had been a few days before this
solemnity, exhibited in his raising of Lazarus: which as was before observed,
did specially occasion the multitude assembled at Jerusalem to meet and
congratulate him, not as the Son of David only, but as David's Lord. For,
greater honor (though they intended not so much) had not been done, either by
David before the Ark of the Lord, or by their Forefathers unto God himself in
the feast of Tabernacles.

5. That the feast of Tabernacles was a feast of joy, instituted to the honor
of that God, who had redeemed Israel from Egyptian bondage, who had protected
them in Succoth, and in the wilderness in their whole journey toward Canaan;
is a point unquestionable either amongst good Christians or malignant Jews.
That the carrying of Palm branches in triumphant manner, skipping, dancing, or
singing, was the peculiar character or expression of that joy, wherewith this
people was commanded to rejoice before the Lord their God in this feast of
Tabernacles above all others, may be ratified by the tradition and practice of
the Jews, whilst they had liberty, and opportunity to celebrate this feast,
especially from Nehemiah his time. And in as much as the great multitude
assembled at the feast of Passover, wherein our Savior did accomplish the
laws and rites of the Paschall lamb; did present him with this kind of honor
accustomed in the feast of Tabernacles: they evidently declare unto the world,
though not by express confession, or distinct apprehension of his eternal
Deity (as was said before;) yet by gesture, and deportment put upon them by
secret instinct, that this JESUS whom they thus welcomed in the Mount of
Olives, was that very God and Lord of hoasts, who had given them victory over
Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea, who had protected them and refreshed them
in the wilderness in all their distresses, and in their whole journey to the
land of Canaan: that very only God in memory of whose gracious goodness
toward them, the feast of Tabernacles was first instituted by Moses, afterward
more solemnly celebrated by Joshua, and upon some interruption in matter of
ceremonies, revived, or restored by Nehemiah.

6. As for the doctrine of the later Jews (such I mean, as from our Saviors
time, have recollected the practice of their Forefathers in this feast of
Tabernacles;) I refer the ingenuous Reader to the Commentators upon Leviticus
23. and upon Nehemiah. The garb and gesture of the Jews in bearing of Palm
branches at the feast of Tabernacles, (if we may believe these men's
relations;) was not much unlike the deportment of the ancient Grecians after
victory, whether in serious wars or in Olympic games: or rather the
deportment of the ancient Grecians was by superstitious imitation borrowed from
the laws, and customs of the ancient Hebrews. The practice of the Grecians,
and most other Nations in their victories is recorded by Pausanias.

Wreathes or branches of Palms, are a set reward for many Prizes; and in every
place does adorn the right hand of the Vanquishers: which custom is said to
have had its first original after this wise. It is reported that Theseus being
returned from Crete, did institute certain games at Delos in the honor of
Apollo, and did reward the Victorers with Palms: Of which Palms Homer also
makes mention in those verses, wherein he recites the mournful Oration of
Ulysses to the daughter of Alcinous.

(...) Pausanias in Arcadicis Lib. 8.

That the bearing of Palm branches in their right hands, was a general
Emblem (amongst most Nations) of victory; I willingly assent to this learned
Antiquary, for Palmam obtinere is as much in Latin Writers as Victoriam
obtinere. But that this devise should take its original from Theseus, I cannot
be persuaded; because the sacred story of the old Testament, and the Prophecies
or Visions in the New, do testify this custom to be more ancient then
Theseus amongst Gods people, and an Emblem of the victory of Gods Saints over
death and the grave. To omit other places, that of S. John, Apoc. 7. is most
pregnant: After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could
number, of all Nations and kinreds and people, and tongues stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and Palms in their
hands. And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb verse 9.10. This manner of congratulation used
by the Saints, is but a more distinct and full expression of the peoples voice,
when they cried Hosanna to the Son of David, which as was observed before,
was both precatory and congratulatory: and did withal, according to the
propriety of the Hebrew, import thus much; Lord grant salvation to the Son of
David, that he may save us. So that both the people (though they unwittingly
and more unconstantly) and the Saints of all Nations expressly and constantly
do honor the Son, even as they honor the Father.

CHAP. XXII. That the honor done to our Savior at his coming to Jerusalem,
did (though not in the distinct apprehension of the multitude or of his
Disciples) concludently declare him to be the Son of God, or the God of their
Fathers.
1 THe former Assertion concerning the real exhibition of that honor unto the
Son of David, at this memorable Passover, which by the intendment of the
Law, Levit. 23. was directed unto God alone in the feast of Tabernacles, is
more remarkably implied in the undoubted accomplishment of the feast of
Dedication, next before the same Passover: especially if we compare the often
mentioned congratulations of the people crying [ Hosanna to the Son of David]
with our Saviors actions and doctrine (both of them being accurately recorded
by the Evangelists) between his entering into the Temple, and the time of his
Agony. The feast of the Dedication, or Encaenia in the ninth month heretofore
handled in part, was a Feast instituted in imitation of the feast of
Tabernacles, whose anniversary celebration was immediately and peremptorily
commanded by God himself; Moses at that time being his sole Agent or
Ambassador: whereas the feast of Dedication or Encenia was instituted by the
visible Church at a time, wherein there was no Prophet in Israel, no man endued
with the spirit of Moses; nor no immediate or extraordinary Revelation from God.
For a little before the institution of the feast of Dedication, the Author of
the 74. Psalm had thus complained; We see not our signs, there is no more
any Prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long. And this
Psalm, as best Interpreters are of opinion, was composed in the time of
Antiochus his raging tyranny over Jerusalem, over the people of God, and his
Temple. Both parts of this observation may be confirmed by the Author of the
first Book of Maccabees; Then Judas appointed certain men to fight against
those that were in the Fortress, until he had cleansed the Sanctuary. So he
chose Priests of blameless conversation, such as had pleasure in the Law: Who
cleansed the Sanctuary, and bare out the defiled stones into an unclean
place. And when as they consulted what to do with the Altar of burnt offerings
which was profaned; they thought it best to pull it down, lest it should be a
reproach to them, because the Heathen had defiled it. Wherefore they pulled it
down, and laid up the stones in the Mountain of the Temple, in a convenient
place, until there should come a Prophet to show what should be done with
them, 1. Maccab. 4.41, 42. etc. And after they had cleansed the Sanctuary, they
restored the holy vessels, and furnished the Temple of the Lord. On the five
and twentieth day of the ninth Month (which is called the Month Casleu) in
the hundred forty, and eighth year, they arose up betimes in the morning, and
offered sacrifices according to the Law upon the new Altar of burnt offerings,
which they had made. Look at what time, and what day the Heathen had profaned
it, even in that day it was dedicated with songs, with citherns, and harps,
etc. ver. 52. Moreover Judas and his brethren with the whole Congregation of
Israel ordained that the days of the Dedication of the Altar should be kept in
their season from year to year by the space of eight days from the 25. day
of the month Casleu with mirth and gladness, ver. 59. The manner of
celebrating this Feast, is more fully expressed by the Author of the second Book
of Maccabees Chap. 10.5, 6, etc. Upon the same day that the strangers profaned
the Temple, on the very same day, it was cleansed again, even the 25. day of
the same month, which is Casleu. And they kept 8. days with gladness, as in
the feast of Tabernacles; remembering that not long before they had held the
feast of Tabernacles, when as they wandered in the mountains and dens like
beasts. Therefore they bare branches, and fair boughs and Palms also, and
sang Psalms unto him that had given them good success in cleansing his
Temple. They also ordained by a common Decree, that every year those days
should be kept of the whole Nation of the Jews. And so it was continued unto
the last year of our Saviors pilgrimage here on earth.

2 It has been long ago well observed by the learned and judicious Hooker,
and (if my memory fail not) touched upon by his Ancient, the learned Examiner
of the Trent Council: that albeit the feast of the Dedication was not
instituted by Moses, nor ratified by any of his Successors in the Prophetical
function; yet was it graced by our Lord and Saviors presence and observation
of it, as appears from John the 10. So far was he from censuring sacred
solemnities, though not immediately instituted by God but by the ordinary
authority of the visible Church: so long as their institutions did not vitiat,
but rather enlarge their laws and ceremonies registered by Moses (or to use the
phrase of the Hebrew Rabbis) did not contradict the stations of Mount Sinai.
For he came to Jerusalem at this feast (though celebrated in the Winter) and
taught the people, not to take the solemnity for a will worship, but to
expound the true intent and prefigurations of it, to try whether they would
acknowledge him to be that God who had given their fore-Elders good success in
cleansing the Altar and Sanctuary, from the pollutions of the heathen. But so
far was his own people from acknowledging thus much, that they took up stones
to throw at him for his Doctrine. Yet at the feast of the Passover next
ensuing, they did by matter of fact or Emblematicall expressions of their
loyalty toward him (being thereunto led by secret instinct beyond their
actual apprehension) acknowledge him for their very God, who had given them
victory over Antiochus, over Gorgias, and other relics of his malicious
Associats or instruments. For thus much their bearing of branches of Palms, of
Olives, or other trees used in the honor of God, at the feast of Dedication,
or that other of Tabernacles, and their crying Hosanna unto him did
concludently import by way of such benign interpretation of their meaning, as
loving Fathers make of their lisping childrens expressions, or other
significations of their desires by bodily and visible gesture, though not by
articulate voice. Immediately after he had in the substance of man received
from them those honorary presents, which were due to God alone, he went into
the Temple to cleanse and purify it from the abuses of Money changers or
Merchandisers, wherewith upon politic pretenses or sophismes of state for
present gain, it was at this time no less polluted by the seed of Abraham,
then it had been by Antiochus, or other heathens before the feast of the
Dedication was instituted. Once before, (as we read John 2.) he had reformed
the like abuses, but then in the Name and Authority of his Father: but now he
visits the same Temple, and gives sentence in his own Name, It is written,
(not my Fathers house, but) my house shall be called the house of prayer, but
ye have made it a den of Thieves. Mat. 21.13.

3 This second reformation, he executed so peremptorily, that the chief
Priests and Elders of the people came the next morning into the Temple, as he
was teaching, and demanded of him, By what authority do thou these things?
Mat. 21.23. To this question he answers only by a cross interrogatory, unto
which they could not reply; I will ask you also one thing, which if ye tell
me, I likewise will tell you, by what authority I do these things: The
baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned
among themselves, saying, If we shall say from heaven, he will say unto us, why
did ye not then believe him? But if we shall say of men, we fear the people:
for all held John as a Prophet. And they answered Jesus and said, We cannot
tell. And he said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these
things. If they had (as their consciences did suggest unto them) acknowledged
the Baptism of John to have been from heaven, they must withal have
acknowledged him to have been the second Adam, or Redeemer of Mankind; to
have descended from heaven truly heavenly; not the Son of David only, but
the true Son of God, their Lord, and God; as the little children the Evening
before (though not perhaps by express apprehension) had proclaimed him: and so
proclaimed him that the chief Priests and Scribes could not contradict his most
divine exposition of their meaning, or rather of the Psalmist, whose
prophetical hymn God had appointed them now to act; When the chief Priests
(says Saint Matthew) saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children
crying in the Temple and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore
displeased, and said unto him, Hear thou, what these say? As if they had
thus meant, We see thou art ready to play at small games, rather then sit out,
being thus content to solace thy self with the applause of little children,
which know not what they say: as lately thou did with the congratulations of
Idiots and Fishermen thy followers. But children and fools (such as they
accounted our Saviors followers) do often times speak the very truth: and he
who was truth it self, does justify these little children, as Gods Ambassadors
for this purpose. For so he replies, Yea, have ye (who boast so much of your
skill in Scripture) never read, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
have perfected praise? And he left them as silent for any matter of just reply,
as he had done their father the Devil, when he sent him away with that Item
or Scriptum est, Avoid Satan: for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And however the malice of these chief
Priests and Scribes did in the next morning revive, yet the testimony alleged
by him in justification of the children, was so pregnantly concludent of his
purpose, that Satan himself had he been present, could not have replied unto
it.

4 For that 8. Psalm, as the Jews cannot deny, was composed in honor of the
God of Israel: that it was also prophetical, and to be fulfilled in time, is
to all Christians apparent from our Apostles allegation of another place to the
like purpose Hebrews 2.6, 7. of whose fulfilling hereafter. The first part of
the prophecy, (that (...) God their Lord, In the 7. Book, last Chapter of the
last section.
which as has been before observed, was the peculiar title of God the Son,
or of God to be manifested in the flesh) was never punctually fulfilled, until
the children cried Hosanna to the Son of David, in the Temple. In these
congratulations, they did by divine instinct, or disposition of the All-seeing
providence, proclaim the expected Son of David to be (...), that very God their
Lord, in whose praise this Psalm was conceived. The Babes then did spel the
Prophets meaning not amiss: But our Savior, and the present circumstances of
the time, did put their lisping syllables together, more rightly, and fully
answerable to the meaning of the Prophetical vision. For so it follows in
the same Psalm, that this God their Lord, did therefore ordain his praise out
of the mouths of babes and sucklings, because of his enemies; that he might
still the Enemy and Avenger. Psalm 8.2. And so the malicious Priests and
Scribes were put to a Non plus upon our Saviors allegation of this prophecy
in justification of himself, and of these Infants, whose testimonies they
sought to elevate, and to impute the acceptance of it to his folly. Now albeit
our Savior left them at this Non plus for the present, yet within a day or two
after, he puts the very Pharisees, the most learned of them, to a greater
non plus, by another testimony, parallel to this of the 8. Psalm, While the
Pharisees (says S. Matthew) were gathered together, Jesus asked them, saying,
What think ye of Christ? Whose Son is he? They say unto him, The Son of
David: He says unto them, How then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool? If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? And
no man was able to answer him a word: neither durst any man (from that day
forth) ask him any more questions. Matthew. 22.41, 42, etc. All this argues a
full conviction of their consciences: and that unless they had suffered their
splenatick passions to conquer their consciences for the present; or had not
hoodwinked their intellectuals with malicious habits of their hearts: they must
of necessity have confessed as much, as the little children (in this
expression) before had done, to wit, that he was not only the promised Son
of David, but that the promised Son of David was to be David's Lord, this
whole peoples God, and Lord. For it is observable, that David in the beginning
of the 110. Psalm says not, Iehova said unto Iehova, but Iehova said unto
Adonai, Sit thou on my right hand; not thereby denying, that this Adonai was to
be Iehova, but that he was to be (as the Author of the 8. Psalm says) both
his God and his Lord: It is again (to my present apprehension) observable,
that after Nehemiah had revived the solemnity of the feast of Tabernacles, and
moved the people to renew the Covenant, which their forefathers had made, for
faithful observance of Gods Laws given by Moses: they nuncupate this their
solemn vow unto (...) to the Lord our God. And the rest of the people (to wit,
all besides those, who had sealed to the Covenant before, with Nehemiah,) the
Priests, the Levites, the Porters, the Singers, the Nethinims, and all they
that had separated themselves from the people of the Lands, unto the Law of
God: their Wives, their Sons, and their Daughters, every one having knowledge
and understanding. They clave to their Brethren, their Nobles,, and entered into
a curse, and into an oath, to walk in Gods Laws, which were given by Moses the
servant of God, and to observe, and do all the Commandments of the Lord our
Lord, and his judgments and his statutes, Nehem. 10.28, 29, etc. But this
solemn vow and Covenant confirmed by oath of keeping Gods Laws, was more
shamefully broken by this perverse and gainsaying generation, then those Laws
themselves had been by Antiochus or other Heathen, which had never sworn unto
them. For the chief Priests, the Scribes, the Elders, notwithstanding the
former convictions of their consciences, hold on to persecute this God their
Lord, unto whose honor their forefathers had dedicated this vow, with greater
cruelties and more malicious indignities, then Antiochus had used toward the
meanest of his people; and so at length to bring that curse annexed to the
former vow, upon themselves and upon their children unto this day.

5. Thus much of the Prophecies or foresignifications of his triumphant
ingresse into Jerusalem, and of his entertainment there, until the Feast of
the legal Passover, whose mystery he did accomplish by his death: Points not
handled either so fully, or so punctually, as was requisite, by any
Commentators, Postillers, or others whom I have read. And this has emboldned
me to enlarge my meditations upon this small part of my Comments on the Creed.
As for the Prophecies, types, or other foresignifications of what he did, or
suffered from the time of his sacred Supper, until his resurrection from the
dead, these have been so plentifully and so punctually handled by many,
especially by the learned Gerard, that much cannot be added without a great
deal of superfluous pains. And yet I know, it will be expected, that I say
somewhat of this argument.

SECTION 4. The Evangelicall relations of the indignities done unto our Savior
by sinful men, and of his patience in suffering them, respectively prefigured
and foretold by the Prophets and other sacred Writers: Or a Comment upon the
Evangelicall History, from the institution of his Supper unto his death and
burial.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the betraying of our Savior, of his apprehension, and
dismission of his Disciples: And how they were foretold or prefigured in the
old Testament.
1 OF the sweet Harmony between the institution, occasion, and celebration of
the legal Passover, and the continuation of the Lords Supper or Sacrament of
his body and blood instituted in lieu or rather in remembrance of the
accomplishing of it; I have in other meditations delivered my mind at large.
And if if it shall please the Lord God to grant me life and health; what I
have either uttered in Sermons, or otherwise conceived concerning this
Argument, shall be communicated to this Church wherein I live, (if not to
others) in the Article of the Catholic Church, which did begin to be on
earth from our Saviors resurrection, or from his ascension into heaven and
descending of the Holy Ghost. At the accomplishment of the Legal Passover by
the institution of the grand mystery or Sacrament prefigured by it; our Lord
and Savior was betrayed by his unfaithful friend and servant Judas, yet by
his prodition consecrated to be that Lamb of GOD, which the Paschall Lamb did
prefigure; that Lamb of God, which was to take away the sins of the world, of
which sins the annual offering of the Paschall Lamb, or other legal
Sacrifices whatsoever, were but anniversary commemorations, or remembrances
that sin did still reign thorowout the world. The treason of Judas was
expressly foretold, (and perhaps prefigured by treason practiced against the
Psalmist) Psalm. 41.9. Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which
did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me. By whom, or upon what
occasion soever, this Psalm was composed, certain it is, the Psalmist
according to the literal and historical sense did act his own part with
sensible feeling of present infirmities, which did mystically prefigure more
just occasions, which the promised Messiah should have to take up the same
complaint. Judas did eat of his bread: did swallow the very soppe, which was
prepared for himself at that very time, when by the instigation of the Devil,
he resolved to betray him. So that this Psalm (as has been observed before)
was fulfilled in CHRIST both according to the mystical, and the most punctual
exquisite literal sense. So was that other complaint, whether of the same
Psalmist, or of some other; For it is not an open enemy that has done me this
dishonor: for then I could have borne it. Neither was it mine adversary that
did magnify himself against me: for then peradventure I would have hid my
self from him. But it was even thou my companion, my guide, and mine own
familiar friend. We took sweet counsel together: and walked in the house of
God as friends, Psalm. 55.12, 13, etc. Judas had often accompanied our Savior
whilst he taught in the Temple, but especially at this last feast of the
Passover, wherein he did for four days together frequent the Temple, from
morning till evening, disputing with the learned, and catechizing the vulgar
and ignorant. And our Savior to notify this Prophecy to be exactly fulfilled
by Judas, saluteth him in the name of a friend, while he comes to betray him.

2. His treachery against his friendly and loving Lord, was much the fouler, by
reason of the long communion with him both at table and at sacred offices. This
treachery was expressly foreshadowed by Achitophels treason against David; of
whom it is probable, the former complaints were literally meant. Both the
treasons were abominably wicked, but Ahitophels more generous, Judas most
basely wicked: for he had no provocation to meditate revenge upon his Master,
who had never done him, nor any living soul wrong, but went about doing good
to all, and healing all that sought to him for help, though possessed with
Devils. But this kind of healing, Judas did not seek, but rather through
entertainment of greedy and covetous projects, did invite the Devil to enter
into his heart, at that very time, wherein the door of saving health and
entrance into the kingdom of heaven was to be set open to all. Ahitophel had
some pretense, or provocation to revenge himself upon his Master, by reason of
the indignity done unto his family, and staining of his blood by David, in
defiling his near kinswoman or Niece, Bathsheba. Yet was Ahitophels malice
toward David's person more bitter: for he sought his life, and resolved to
wreak his foehood upon him in the highest degree; and had achieved his
purpose, so Absalom would have hearkened so well to his second advise, as he did
to his first. His first advise, which was full of revengefull retaliation for
David's folly with Bathsheba, we have recorded the 2. of Samuel 16.20. Then
said Absalom to Ahitophel, Give counsel among you what we shall do. And
Ahitophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy fathers concubines, which he has
left to keep the house, and all Israel shall hear, that thou art abhorred of
thy father: then shall the hands of all that are with thee, be strong. So they
spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house, and Absalom went in unto his
fathers concubines, in sight of all Israel. Moreover Ahitophel said to
Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise, and
pursue after David this night. And I will come upon him, while he is weary,
and weak handed; and I will make him afraid: and all the people that are with
him shall flee, and I will smite the King only. And I will bring back all the
people unto thee: the man whom thou seek, is as if all returned: so all the
people shall be in peace. And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the
Elders of Israel for a while. But after Ahitophel saw this his second and more
deadly project, defeated by the contrary counsel of Hushai; he gave his
enterprise and himself for lost: and in deep melancholy (yet willing to set
his house in order) went immediately, and hanged himself. Judas in like manner,
after the chief Priests, and Elders had dashed his plot, which was only to
gain some money, and their favor for his grateful service without any desire
of blood; did cast away the hire of his treason, and himself with it. But of
his casting down the money in the Temple, and the manner of his fearful end,
there will be fitter occasion to say somewhat Chap. 26.
hereafter.

3. David after he had been assuredly informed of Absaloms conspiracy against
him, forsook Jerusalem: and he, and all his train or necessary attendance
went on their bare feet, with their heads covered and weeping, over the brook
Kidron, and along the mount of Olives, 2. Sam. 15.23, 30. And thus the Son of
David a little after he saw Judas resolved to betray him, or rather after it
pleased him to take notice of the Conspiracy against him, between Judas and
the chief Priests and Elders, marched the same way with a lesser train,
accompanied only with his Disciples, but with more full assurance of their
deliverance from present danger, then David's great train had: because he
carried the true Ark of the Lord in his breast, whose type or shadow, David
being uncertain or doubtful of the event, sent back again to Jerusalem with
the Priests that did wait upon it. Yet he himself went over the brook Kidron
with a sadder heart, then David his father had done. David, and his train,
though much greater, and better able to resist the violence of the Pursuer,
then his train was; marched further in that night wherein they fled from
Absalom, then the mount of Olives. The Son of David took up his station in a
garden, near about the mount of Olives, and there expected the encounter of
the Arch-Ahitophel (which had vanquished the first Adam in a garden) now
attended with a greater host of infernal Associates, then Ahitophel did
require of Absalom for the surprisall of David, and his train, about the same
place or not far beyond it, 2. Sam. 17.

4. When I behold my Savior in that heavy plight and dejected posture,
described by the Evangelist, prostrating himself on his knees and face to the
earth, yet sending out these ejaculations unto heaven; Father if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me. Me thinks I see the exquisite
accomplishment of the Psalmists complaint, charactering his own woeful case
for the present, yet by way of prophecy or prefiguration of more just cause,
which the promised Messiah should have of uttering the like complaint, who was,
as he saw to partake more deeply of his grievances and afflictions, though not
of his passion or impatience in them. For this Son of Righteousness, was
willing to suffer with all submission to his heavenly Fathers will, whatsoever
any of his forerunning shadows had suffered, either immediately from the hand of
God, or by the violence of men; and to suffer them without any token of
grudging or impatience. The complaint of the Psalmist, who did foreshadow the
dejected estate of the Son of God, in that hour of temptation, we have set
down, Psalm 38.14. My sins are gone over my head, and they are like a sore
burden too heavy for me to bear. But the heavy burden, not of the Psalmists
sins alone, but of the sins of the world, were now laid upon the Son of
man in the garden, and did deject him to the ground. But how patiently soever
he did bear or fall down under this burden; yet he stood in need of comfort
from heaven, as his forerunners in far less anguish had done. And if we
would take St. Lukes relation of the Angels coming to support and comfort him
in this his weakness, into serious consideration; we may have a brief, yet a
most true and punctual Commentary upon that Prophecy, Psalm 8. Thou have
made him for a little while, lower than the Angels, to wit, as he was the Son
of man: though never ceasing to be the Son of God. For the most valiant
General that is, which stands in need of Support or help from his meanest
Soldier, is for the time being, lower then he is, which lends him his hand,
or helps him up being thrown down or prostrate. Now this our chief Leaders
Agony, and the time between his apprehension and his death, was the only time
that little while, whereof the Psalmist speaks, wherein CHRIST JESUS, as man,
was made lower then the Angels, lower then the ordinary sons of men. For he
was, as another Psalmist in his Person complains, a worm, and no man. But
immediately after this bitter Agony, the strength and vigor of the Son of
righteousness, which for a time was eclipsed or overcast with a bloody sweat,
did break forth afresh, and though in the night time, did no less dazell and
astonish the armed band, which came with Judas to apprehend him, then the light
which shone at midday did S. Paul, when he was armed with authority to attach
his Followers. For immediately after, that Cup which he prayed against, was
passed from him; He knowing all things (says St. John) that should come upon
him, went forth, and said unto them that came to apprehend him, Whom seek ye?
They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto them, I am he. And
Judas also which betrayed him, stood with them. As Soon then, as he had said
unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground. Then asked he
them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered,
I have told you, that I am he. If therefore, ye seek me, let these go their
way. That the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke, Of them which thou
gave me, I have lost none, Joh. 18, 4, 5, 6, etc. Here was a true document
both of his royal and spiritual power: of his royal power, in that he could
command them to forbear any violence toward his Disciples; yea not to oppose
violence offered unto one of their company. For Simon Peter (as St. John says)
having a sword, drew it, and cut off one of the servants of the high Priests
right ear: the servants name was Malchus, 10, 11. verses etc. St. Luke
records, that he touched his ear and healed him: so far was he from all
desire of revenge upon his enemies. This was an act of his power spiritual: so
was that likewise in protecting his Disciples from danger, as well of soul, as
of body. For as S. John (to my apprehension) intimates, if they had been put
unto the same fiery trial, unto which he himself was exposed, they had
denied him and their former faith. Therefore he commanded his Apprehenders to
let them go their way, that the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke (some
few hours before,) Of them which thou gave me, have I lost none, John 18.10.
So he had said, John 17.11. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in
the world, and I come to thee Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those
whom thou have given me; that they may be one, as we are. While I was with them
in the world, I kept them in thy Name: those that thou gave me I kept, and
none of them is lost, but the son of perdition. Either Judas was never one of
them, whom his Father had given him, or at least, at this time, had given
himself to his Father the Devil.

5 But as one, and the same prophecy, may be often filled by events much
distant in time: so may diverse prophecies, much distant for time, be
accomplished in one and the same event, in the same point of time; as in this
dismission of JESUS his Disciples, both his own praediction (as Saint John
tells us) was fulfilled, and another prophecy likewise, as we may gather from
S. Mark, or rather from our Saviors exposition recorded by the Evangelist Mark
14. Jesus says unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night.
For it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered. This smiting of the Shepherd, was amongst other prophecies, both
foretold, and prefigured, (as is probable) by the death of Josiah: unto which
most referr that of Jeremiah, Lamen. 4.20. The breath of our nose-thrills, the
Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits; of whom, we said, under his
shadow, we shall live among the heathen. Some there are, which referr this
complaint, unto the Captivity of Zedekiah, but not so pertinently or
considerately, as most other of their meditations or observations would
occasion the Reader to expect. For the Prophet Jeremiah, did never conceive
such hope of Zedekiah or Iehoiakim, as the deep strain of this particular
threne or throb does import. No son of good Josiah, was either in life or
death, such a type of the Lords promised Anointed, as himself had been. From
the hour of his death, until the return of his people from Babylonish
Captivity, Jerusalem and Judah did not see one joyful day: the light of Gods
Countenance did not shine upon them, as the history of the Old Testament,
especially of the Books of Kings and Chronicles do sufficiently testify. Nor
did this Nation from the day of our Saviors death, enjoy one quiet or secure
day: not one hour, wherein there either was not apparent danger, or some
secret breeding of new calamities: nor shall they enjoy any, till it please him
whom they crucified, to restore them again to the land of their Inheritance,
from which they are scattered: or at least, to their spiritual state, from
which they are fallen.

6 That the forementioned lamentation or threne, did in the literal and
historical sense refer unto the untimely death of good Josiah; that the
calamities which ensued upon his death, did typically portend just matter of
greater sorrow for the death of the Lords Anointed (...) [the Messiah:] that
one place of the Prophet Zachariah (to omit others) persuades me: They shall
mourn for him, as one who mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne. In that
day shall there be a great mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.
Zachar. 12.10, 11. etc. For in the valley of Megiddo, Josiah was slain, as it
is recorded, 2 Chronicles. 35.22, 23. And all Jerusalem, and Judah mourned for
Josiah, and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men, and the
singing women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day, and made them
an ordinance in Israel: and behold they are written in the Lamentations. This
disaster occasioned, by his own oversight or forwardness to fight with Necho,
befell Josiah, after he had wrought that remarkable reformation in the house of
the Lord, and after he had celebrated the Passover, with such solemnity, as
had not been seen before in Jerusalem, nor after. It was the eminency of Josiah
his zeal and fidelity, in setting forth that solemnity and other services of
God, which occasioned this people, even the Prophets first to conceive, that
they should prosper under his shadow, and after these hopes had failed, to
lament his death in such passionate expressions, as the faithful amongst his
people, even our Saviors Disciples did his death. But we trusted, that it had
been he, who should have redeemed Israel. Luke 24.20. The extremity of sorrow
upon our Saviors death, foreshadowed by the Lamentations for Iosiahs loss,
was fulfilled pro illa vice, in that compunction of heart and spirit, in Saint
Peter's Auditors, Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in
their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? But the full accomplishment of those mournful
Lamentations for our Saviors death, whether foreshadowed or foretold or
inchoated, whether in the Old Testament, or in the New; is not to be expected
before the conversion of the Jews, which will not be public or National,
until they seriously and publicly repent them of their own sins, and of
the sins of their forefathers, for putting the Lord of life and King of
glory, to a bitter and shameful death. Nor is the Nation of the Jews only,
but all the kinreds of the Earth to bewail him and repent: for all were causes
of his death. Behold he comes (says Saint John) with clouds; and every eye
shall see him: and they also which pierced him: and all kinreds of the earth
shall wail because of him. Rev. 1.7.

7 A fitter Subject for meditations, to make either a private Christian truly
wise, or wise men (especially Governors, whether Ecclesiastical or civil)
truly Christian; I could not commend unto the one, or other, (though bound so
to do upon my deathbed,) then the sacred history, concerning the estate of
Judah, from the death of good Josiah, to the end of the Babylonish Captivity;
and the history of Josephus and others, who have decipherd the estate of the
Jews, since they put the Lord of life to death. This parallel between
Jerusalems two progresses to her first and second destruction, was the maine
theme of my first ministerial meditations, the contents whereof would be too
laborious to collect, and their expressions too long to be interserted in this
Treatise. To return therefore to the former path, from which I have somewhat,
though not impertinently digressed.

8 Of that glory of Christ, which shall be revealed, when every eye shall see
him, when they that crucified and pierced his body, shall mourn after such a
manner, as Zachary and St. John in the places forecited import: He himself
in the hours of his greatest humiliation (immediately after his agony in the
garden, and (as I take it) before Judas did deliver him up to the high Priest
and Officers) did exhibit some rays or glimpses by striking the Armed band,
which came to attach him, backwards down to the ground, with the sole words or
breath of his mouth. And again by the deliverance of his followers from such
rage and tyranny, as they practiced against him, that the words of the Prophets
(not their projects) and his exposition of their meaning might be fulfilled, I
will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. This prophecy we
have Zachar. 13.7. The accomplishment of this prophecy, was in part exemplified
by the scattering of his Apostles and Disciples, upon his apprehension and
death. And so were the words immediately following in the Prophet, punctually
verified and really exemplified, in recollecting them again after his
Resurrection, and the feast of Pentecost next ensuing. The full accomplishment
of the prophecy, as it concerns the scattering of the flock or sheep was not
publicly declared or exemplified before the destruction of the second Temple,
and dispersing of the Jewish Nation. The other parts of the same prophecy, must
be afterward accomplished in the conversion of the Jews.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the predictions or prefigurations of our Saviors sufferings
after his apprehension in the High Priests hall, etc.
1 ALL these rays or glimpses of the Sun of Righteousness, did interpose
themselves in the days of his humiliation and obscurity, before he was led
bound to Caiaphas the high Priest. But after Judas of a close Ahitophel or
cunning traitor, became an open Dalilah, and had betrayed his Master into
their hands with a kiss: this Sampson the Sun of righteousness, became like
another man, or like the moon in eclipse. More weak and impotent for any
attempt of resistance or escape, then Samson was, after the razor had gone over
his head, and taken off the Ensign of the Nazarite. These enemies of the God
of Israel, did sport themselves more cruelly, with the bodily miseries and
calamities of the true Nazarite, then the Philistines had done themselves with
Sampson, until he resumed his former strength by dying. So then Sampson in his
strength and weakness or dejected estate, was a lively type of JESUS of
Nazareth in both his estates and conditions of life, whilst he lived here on
earth. No type at all, not so much as a shadow of Christ's humility and
patience in all his sufferings, but rather a foil by his impatience to set a
luster upon the unparalleld meekness of this true Nazarite of God by an
Antiperistasis. Sampsons last prayers unto the God of his strength were, that
he would give him power at the hour of his death, to be revenged on his
Enemies, for the loss of his eyes. Jesus of Nazareth, the true Nazarite of
God, when he came unto the cross on Mount Calvarie, the stage and theater for
his enemies sport and triumph over him in this solemn feast, prays heartily,
even for those that hoodwinckt him, and bid him prophecy, saying, Who was it
that smote thee? And for the Roman Soldiers, which were the Executioners of
their malicious merriment, he prays for both in such a sweet and heavenly
manner, as no Prophet had ever done for his Persecutors, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. He did not so much as either lift up hand or
voice, or conceive any secret prayer against one or other of his persecutors,
during the time of his lingering, but deadly pains; as knowing, this was the
time wherein his body was to be made as an anvile, that he might do the will
of his Father by the Sacrifice of himself, and sufferance of all other
indignities, more bitter to a mere man, than twenty deaths, though of the
cross. The effect or purpose of Gods will in this sacrifice (as our Apostle
instructs us) was our Sanctification. But the will of God, which he was now to
do, was his will passively taken, to wit, for the body of CHRIST offered up
once for all, as our Apostle interprets the meaning of the Author, or rather of
the Holy Ghost, who did inspire the Author of the fortieth Psalm with the
spirit of Prophecy.

2. As in perusing many other Psalms, so in this, I cannot but bewail the
negligence of most Interpreters, as well ancient as modern, for not inquiring
more accurately after the Author, but especially the historical occasions of
composing it. I had many years ago sundry probable notions or conjectures,
that this Psalm, though inscribed a Psalm of David, or revealed to David Vide
Genebrardum in Psalm. 3.
(for this inscription will well bear both senses) as some other Psalms which
have the same Inscription; were (if we may believe good Authors) penned or
paraphrased upon by Jeremiah, for the peoples use in the Babylonish captivity.
But these conjectures, and the perusal of such notes, as I had then gathered
concerning the Author of this Psalm, I now wave, or rather altogether omit.
But whether the Author of this Psalm (suppose David) did act his own part, as
having some special Commission from the Lord to instruct the people, that to
do Gods will in some peculiar service then required, was better then
sacrifice, much better then burnt offering: or whether he spoke this divine
vision or rapture, in the person of the Messiah alone; this (however) is most
certain that the 6, 7, and 8. verses of that 40. Psalm, do contain a
concludent Prophecy of the abolition of legal sacrifices, by the sacrifice of
Christ's body. The argument or demonstration is most divinely gathered, and
irrefragably pressed home to this purpose by our Apostle, Heb. 10. from the 4.
verse to the 11. It is not possible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats should
take away sins. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says,
Sacrifice and offerings, thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me:
in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou have had no pleasure. Then
said I, Lo, I come (In the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do
thy will, O God. Above, when he said, Sacrifice and offering and burnt
offerings and offering for sin thou would not, neither had pleasure
therein, which are offered by the Law: then said he, Lo, I come to do thy
will (O God:) he takes away the first, that he may establish the second. By
the which will, we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of JESUS
CHRIST once for all.

3. The only difficulty about the reconciliation of the Psalmist in the
original, and the Translation of the Seventy, which the Apostle follows, Heb.
10. and his approbation of it, makes it to me in this particular, altogether
as Authentic as the Hebrew, or a better expression of it, then modern
Interpreters without him could make. The resolution of this difficulty, will
much depend upon the literal meaning or importance of the Hebrew phrase (...)
Some Latin Interpreters render it thus, aures perfodisti mihi: others, aures
perforasti mihi: others, aures aperuisti mihi, thou have dug through,
boared, or opened my ears. And some of these conceit an allusion in the
literal sense, to the legal custom of boaring the ears of such, as were
content to continue perpetual servants to their present Masters, and not use
the privilege of the year of Iubilee. But this conjecture is rejected by many
modern Writers, and in particular to my remembrance by Pineda. Aures perfodere
(says the Tigurine Note upon this place) symbolica oratione est in servitutem
mancipare, as much, as to make one a perpetual servant. This Interpretation I
take, supposes the former allusion to such as were made perpetual servants by
boring their ears. But our Savior, although for a time he took the form of
a servant upon him, and was qualified for the performance of the hardest part
of this service, by opening the ear; yet was he not made, nor did he become a
perpetual servant, but shortly after to be made both Lord and CHRIST.

4. Ribera (who doubtless had read very many and with great judgment,) says,
Of all the Interpreters which he had perused, Genebrard comes nearest to the
meaning of the Holy Ghost. To exhibit Genebrards Interpretation in his own
words: Aures mihi aperuisti, id est, corpus, per Synecdochen, e Paulo Heb. 10.
Mihi aptasti corpus humanum in vtero virgineo. Rabbini non satis percepta
metaphora, Aures fodisti sive aperuisti mihi, ad tuae obtemperandum voluntati
aurem revelasti, retexisti* ab aure abstulisti velum and tegmen, ut acutius
audiret. Effecisti ut te audirem, ac tuae voluntati libens parerem. Me docilem
and obsequentem ad audiendum reddidisti. Chald. Aures ad auscultanda tua
praecepta formasti mihi. Nostris congruenter. Quia enim agitur de corporatione
sive incarnatione Domini, est metaphora simul and Synecdoche, ad quorum
troporum difficultatem explanandam Apostolus appositissime posuit Corpus
aptasti mihi. Est enim primum metaphora a figulis, qui manu fodicant and ducunt
argillam, e qua cupiunt vas aptare, currente rota, Quare Deus and figulus, and
fictor, and plastes nuncupatur, ut alludatur ad Genes. 2. quando ex humo
humanum corpus duxit. Est deinde Synecdoche, pars pro toto, aures pro corpore:
Sed aurium praesertim meminit, quia de obedientia agebatur.



The sum of his exposition is, that the Psalmists meaning is most Elega^tly
expressed by the Apostle, if we admit of a Synecdoche in the Psalmist and a
Metaphor both in the Psalmist and Evangelist. The Metaphor, aures perfodisti,
is borrowed from the Potter, who first works or kneads the clay, or earth,
whereof he makes his vessel, as if perfodere were as much as fodicare. And so
God who is styled the former or fashioner of al things, did work or frame the
body of Christ in his mothers womb, as he had done the first man's body of red
earth or clay. The Synecdoche consists in this, that he mentions the ear for
the whole body: for though the whole body were so formed by GOD, yet the
Psalmist makes mention only of the ear, because he treats there of
obedience.

5. What further improvement of Genebrard his expression either Ribera, or
others of that Church, whereof they were members, have made; I leave it to the
diligent Readers further enquiry. Genebrards expression in his own words, is
somewhat fuller, then that which Iunius has in his parallel between the
Apostle and this Psalmist; but neither any whit dissonant from the other. If
either of them or Ribera had diligently read some Writers of Reformed Churches
(their Ancients in time) upon the 10. of the Hebrews, any one of them might
have spoken more fully and punctually to the question, then all of them do.
For if we take it as granted, which the Tigurine note upon the forecited
fortieth Psalm imports, to wit, that to open the ear, is a speech
symbolicall: the symbolicall sense of it, is best expressed by the Prophet
Isaiah, in that portion of Scripture, which was appointed by the ancient
Catholic Church, and retained by our Orthodoxall English, for the Epistle on
Tuesday (in hebdomade sancta) or week before Easter. The exegeticall
exposition of the Hebrew, to open the ears, made by the Prophet, implies a
qualification or rather consecration of the whole body, for suffering all manner
of grievances, that could be inflicted upon it: and that this qualification
was to be wrought by the ear, as it is the sense of discipline, whether active
or passive, whether of understanding or of patience in suffering. Nor are the
Seventy Interpreters in this point to be blamed, (especially the Translation
being so well approved by our Apostle, Heb. 10.) for their variation in words
from the Hebrew, but rather to be admired for their divine expression of the
intent, and meaning of the Holy Ghost, as well in the fortieth Psalm, as in
the tenth to the Hebrews. The Psalmist doubtless did foretell, and the Prophet
Isaiah did perhaps both foretell and forepicture the indignities done unto our
Saviors body in the high Priests Hall, by the Jews: and in the Common hall or
Sessions house, by the Roman Soldiers, and upon the Cross by both. This
Prophet more particularly foretold his undaunted patience and resolution, in
suffering whatsoever they did, or could inflict upon him. To parallel the
Prophet with the Evangelists, the Prophets words are these; The Lord God has
opened mine ears, (aperuit aures, not aures perfodit, or perforavit) and I was
not rebellious, neither turned away back. I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off my hair. I hid not my face from shame and
spitting. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded;
therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know, that I shall not be
ashamed. He is near, that justifies me, who will contend with me? Let us
stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold the
Lord God will help me: who is he that shall condemn me? Lo, they all shall
wax old, as does a garment: the moth shall eat them up, Isaiah 50.5, 6, etc.
This resolution or undaunted patience (which is the effect or consequence of
opening the ear) does fully import corpus aptatum, not an humane body, only
framed or fashioned in the womb, as Christ's was, but a body qualified, or
fitted by the discipline of the ear, for all manner of sufferings, as the body
of a servant, to do his Masters will, though by suffering the most cruel
death or torture, that could be inflicted upon him. And such was the body of
Christ, wherein he executed that part of his Father will, by which we are
sanctified once for all. But the circumstances precedent and subsequent to the
Prophetical passages, will occasion the attentive Reader to dispute with
himself, at least to move the like question to that, which the Eunuch proposed
to Philip, as whether he spoke all this only in the person of Christ, or
respectively both of Christ, and of himself? That the Prophet when he composed
that divine passage, had an explicit prevision of the indignities, which
should be done unto his Lord; and of his admirable resolution to suffer them
with inimitable patience; there is no question but (as has been oftentime
observed before) the spirit of the most Evangelicall Prophets (of which rank
Isaiah was a special one) were usually elevated unto raptures or previsions of
our Saviors sufferings, by their own like sufferings. They had not only a
clear foresight, but a true feeling of them (though in a far less measure,
and lower degree, then Christ himself had;) Ye stiffnecked, and uncircumcised
in hearts, and ears (says St. Steven) ye do always resist the holy Ghost:
as your fathers did, so due ye. Which of the Prophets have not your fathers
persecuted? And they have slain them, which showed before of the coming of
the just one; of whom ye have been now the betrayers, and murderers, Acts
6.51, 52. If these later Jews did to our Savior CHRIST, as their fathers had
done to the Prophets his forerunners; then the Prophets did suffer the like
indignities of the former generation, as Christ did of the latter. They were
not only forerunners or foretellers of him, but types or shadows of him in all
his sufferings. No Prophet was more cruelly dealt with, then the Prophet
Isaiah. None did partake more deeply of the royal Son of David's affliction,
then this Prophetical son of David: for Isaiah was of the royal blood a
near kinsman to wicked Manasses, who caused him to be sawed to death, if we
may believe Ecclesiastical Stories.

6. Isaiah, in the beginning of this 50. Chapter, brings in the Lord thus
debating with the unbeleeving, rebellious people of his time, Where is the bill
of your Mothers divorcement, whom I have put away? Or which of my Creditors is
it, to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have you sold your
selves, and for your transgressions is your Mother put away. Wherefore when I
came, was there no man; When I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand
shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold,
at my rebuke I dry up the sea: I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish
stinketh, because there is no water, and dies for thirst. I clothe the heavens
with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. Verse 1, 2, 3. etc. But
in the 4. verse he alters the person, if not of the Speaker, yet of him to
whom he speaks; The Lord God has given to me the tongue of the learned, that
I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. He wakeneth
morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ears to hear, as the learned. This was
the Prophets own comfort in particular, and in this qualification, he was a
type or shadow of that (...), who had thus qualified him. And so no doubt he
was in that resolution, which he took upon him from the opening of the ear,
verse 4. before cited. In both places it is remarkable, that he does not
instile the God of his strength, and comfort by the Name of (...) or by the
Name of 4 letters only, but thus (...), The Lord God has given me the tongue
of the learned: the Lord God has opened mine ear. And this, as was observed
before, was the peculiar title of God the second person in the Trinity, or God
to be incarnate: unto whom the Prophets his forerunners in all their anguishes
and distresses, did under this peculiar title direct their prayers, as then
seeing that this Lord God was to bear their sorrows; and to be partaker of all
their infirmities, that he might be a faithful Comforter, and such an high
Priest as our Apostle describes Hebr. 2. They entreated him by the foresight of
his future sufferings, as the faithful now do beseech him to be compassionate
toward them by the memory or experience of his afflictions past. There is no
incongruitie then to say, that this prophecy of Isaiah was literally and
respectively meant of himself, as of the type: but really fulfilled of (...)
whom he praises, not only in the mystical, but also according to the most
exquisite literal sense. For however, this Lord God had opened his ear, yet
the resolution, which he professed was greater, then he had occasion to put
in practice, at least with such undaunted patience, as our Savior did. Yet do
we never read, that our Savior in the days of his humiliation or hour of
his agony, did direct his prayers unto GOD, under the title of See Cap. 15.
par. 3. and 4.
(...) his Lord, and God, but unto God as his Father. And this is to me a
pregnant argument, that not only the forecited place of Isaiah, but many other
hymns or Psalms, especially in or after David's time, were literally meant of
the Prophets, which composed them, especially in respect of this circumstance
of the person or party to whom they prayed, seeing our Savior in his prayers
to God did never use the same title they did. The Prophet David himself had
many and just occasions in his own person to conceive that excellent prayer,
Bow down thy care, O Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and needy, etc. Psalm.
86. Yet were the occasions, and matter of this Psalm really accomplished in the
Son of David, whom David here as in the 110. Psalm twice instileth his Lord
and God, as verse 12. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, and
I will glorify thy Name for evermore. And verse 15. And thou, O Lord, art a
God full of pity and compassion, and gracious, long suffering, and plenteous
in mercy and truth. Moses had said the same in effect long before: only he
does not give the title of Lord, nor intimate such a clear distinction of the
persons in the Trinity, as David in this 110. Psalm did. For David (as was
observed before) had a clear prevision, that albeit the Messiah or promised
seed was to be his Son, yet was withal to be the Son of God: therefore to
be that (...), unto whom he and other holy men did continually pray in their
calamities, and so much magnify, either for their comfort or strength to
endure their grievances.

7. But to return to the forecited place of the Prophet Isaiah, the words
immediately following the forecited place, verse 8. [ He is near that
justifies me: who will contend with me? etc. Behold the Lord God will help me:
who is he that shall condemn me?] were literally, and respectively meant not
only of Christ's forerunners, but of his followers: and are so applied by our
Apostle, Romans 8.30.31. If God be for us, who can be against us? And again
verse 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies: who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. The Apostle
in this had the same confidence in Christ the Lord and in his sufferings, which
the Prophet Isaiah had in the Lord his God, to whom he directs his prayers. And
so may all others have, that faithfully believe in him: that is, all such, to
whom their own consciences can testify such a true conformity unto Christ in
his sufferings, as our Apostle Paul and the Prophets were conscious of in their
Souls and Spirit. And any other mark of Election, besides this, I know none:
nor will it be easy for the Reader whosoever he be, to find any other in the
day of trial or temptation.

8. The Evangelicall parallel to the Prophet Isaiahs prediction, we have in
part Luke 22.63, 64. And the men that held Jesus, mocked him, and smote him,
and when they had blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked him,
saying, Prophecy, who is it that smote thee? Thus they dealt with him in the
high Priests Hall, before his examination or sentence given against him. And so
again they used him at his examination John 18.19. The high Priest asked Jesus
of his Disciples and of his doctrine: Jesus answered, I spoke openly to the
world, etc. Why ask thou me? Ask them which heard me, what I have said unto
them: behold they know what I said. And when he had thus spoken, one of the
Officers which stood by, struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying,
Answerest thou the high Priest so? Unto this indignity he replies with such
meekness and patience, as no Prophet in like case ever used, only thus, If I
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou
me? To the like indignities done unto by him the Roman Soldiers and by Herod,
he makes no reply at all. So that however the forecited words of the Prophet
Isaiah, and of the Psalmist, Psalm 40. and the 86. might be respectively
verified of themselves; yet were they never exactly fulfilled, save only of
that (...) that Lord to whom they direct their prayers. None of them ever had a
body so fitted, or their ears so opened by the Lord God, as this Lord God
himself had, a temper of body and mind not moveable to any passion either by
indignity of speeches which he heard, or by the blows which he suffered.

CHAP. XXV. The unjust proceedings of the high Priest and Elders against the
Son of God, were punctually foretold by the Prophets.
1 BUt was it any where else foretold besides in those passages of the Prophet
Isaiah and the Psalms forecited, that the Lord of glory or God the Redeemer of
Israel should suffer all those indignities, should be despightfully arraigned,
unjustly examined, and sentenced to death by his native subjects and by the
Gentiles? If thus much had not been both foretold and foreshadowed both by
Moses and other Prophets, our Savior would not have censured those two
Disciples whom he did vouchsafe to accompany to Emaus, saying, We trusted
that it had been he, who should have redeemed Israel. His tax of this their
present distrust or dull belief, is more sharp, then any reply or answer,
which he made unto such malicious Infidels, as from the time of his
apprehension did deride, beat, scourge, and crucify him, for avouching he was
the God of Israel or King of the Jews. For unto these two Disciples he said; O
fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself, Luke 24.25, 26. I can no way
dislike, but rather approve of Maldonats and other learned Commentators wishes
upon this place, that, if so it had pleased the Lord, the Evangelist had
related unto us, either the places which he expounded to them, or his
expositions upon them. But (as I have heretofore advertised the Reader, and
shall take occasion hereafter to put him in mind) it seemed not expedient to
the wisdom of God, to have the full exposition, either of our Savior or the
Apostles themselves, upon those Scriptures which they allege, extant upon
undoubted record: but rather to exhibit us certain hints or just matter of
sober and serious search of the Scriptures, which they allege. Amongst other
sacred passages, which our Savior expounded to those two Disciples, I make no
question, but the eighty second Psalm was one. To omit all enquiry who was the
Author of the Psalm, whether Asaph (whose inscription it bears) or David
himself: or what special occasions, the Author of it, whosoever he was, had
to compose it, whether his own experience in suffering wrong: or some
observation of gross partiality or corruption in the course of Justice toward
others: the Psalm it self is Prophetical, and was never so punctually
verified at any time before or since, as it was at our Saviors examination by
the high Priest and Elders, and at his arraignment before Pontius Pilate; yet
the full accomplishment of the last clause will not be, until the final day
of Judgment: God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty (says the
Psalmist) he judges among the Gods. How long will ye judge unjustly, and
accept the persons of the wicked? Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice
to the afflicted, and needy: deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the
hands of the wicked, Psalm 82.1, 2, 3, 4. Here was a fair caveat put into the
Courts of Justice by the Psalmist, not to pass sentence upon the Messiah for
saying he was the Son of God, or for making himself equal with God: not to
accept of the person of Barabbas before him, who now as GOD did stand amongst
them. But besides this caveat of the Psalmist, the circumstances of time, and
the manner of their own proceedings against him, did warn them, as Pilats
wife did him, to beware how they had any thing to do with that just and holy
man. And our Savior himself vouchsafes to be the remembrancer, that however
he now stood to be Judged by them, yet he was that very God, which the
Psalmist foretold should be their Judge, and the Judge of the whole world: For
so the Psalmist concludes; Arise O God, and judge the earth: for thou shall
inherit all Nations, verse 8. This universal Inheritance and power to judge
the earth, was bestowed upon our Savior at his resurrection, after they had
judged him for saying he was the Son of God.

2. After they had sought many false witnesses against him, but could find none
whose testimonies did agree, or if they agreed, did reach home to convince him
of any capital crime: they sought to entrap him by his own confession, which
being judicially made and taken, they knew to be a full and legal conviction.
The high Priest, failing in his intended subornations against him, said unto
him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God, Matthew. 26.62, 63. And unto this interrogatory
ministered unto him, by the high Priest ex officio, not in a criminal cause,
but in a point of belief or doctrine, he vouchsafes a full and punctual
answer, as to his competent Judge quoad haec; such an answer, as he did not
vouchsafe either to Herod, when he was brought before him, nor to the high
Priest and Elders, when they examined him before the two false witnesses, which
at the last cast were brought against him: These circumstances we have related
in the forecited place of St. Matthew: At the last came two false witnesses,
and said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and build
it in three days. The high Priest said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what
is it which these witness against thee? But Jesus held his peace, Matthew.
26.60, etc. And S. Luke tells us, Chap. 23.9. When Herod questioned him in many
things, he answered him nothing. But as soon as the high Priest adjured him by
the living God to tell him the truth, whether he was the Christ, the Son of
the living God; Jesus says unto him, thou have said. Nevertheless I say unto
you, hereafter shall you see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high Priest rent his
clothes, saying, He has spoken blasphemy: what further need have we of
witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his blaspemy: what think ye? They
answered, and said, He is guilty of death, Matthew. 26.65, 66. All these
circumstances are related by S. Luke, but not in the same order, which S.
Matthew does, for (as has been heretofore observed) albeit we are bound to
believe, that every Evangelist wrote nothing but divine truth, yet every one of
them, did not record the whole truth, with all its circumstances, nor relate
either our Saviors answers or his enemies practices against him, in the same
order of time, in which they were made or exhibited. St. Matthew referres, or
rather intermingles the fulfilling of Isaiahs Prophecy for spitting in his
face, for buffeting him, and smiting him with the palms of their hands, with
the relation of his answer to the high Priest, and his Associats censure
against him: Then did they spit in his face, etc. Matthew. 26.67, 68. S. Luke
tells us that they which held him overnight, when Peter denied him, did mock
him and smite him, etc. Luke 22. ver. 63, etc. And again that the high Priest
put the forementioned Interrogatory to him, in the morning, after Peter had
denied him. And verse 66. this is most probable, that the high Priest and his
Accomplices being hypocrites, would at least be careful to observe the outward
or visible form of Justice, which was not to examine men, or produce witnesses
against them after midnight or in the Evening. For this was one of the gross
abuses practiced by their idolatrous forefathers; the full measure of whose
grosser sins, this last generation did make up by a precise and rigid
reformation of them. The consciousnesse of their curiosity, and care to eschew
their forefathers open sins, was the principal root of their Pharisaicall
hypocrisy.

3. But we need not to rely upon probabilities, concerning the time wherein
they examined our Savior: for that is plainly and assertively set down by S.
Luke 22. As Soon as it was day, the Elders of the people, the chief Priests,
And Scribes came together, and led him into the Council, saying, Art thou the
Christ? tell us. And he said unto them; If I tell you, you will not believe.
And if I ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go, verse 66, 67, etc.
St. Luke although he most exactly observes the order of the process, and
circumstance of time, omits the adjuration of the high Priest, and the
production of the false witnesses against him. But to recompense this omission,
he interserts one reply of our Savior to the adjuring interrogatory, which
St. Matthew expresses not, but unto which his other expressions must have
special reference, if we will make true Grammatical construction of them. For
upon this interrogatory, Art thou the Christ? tell us, as S. Luke has it, he
said unto them, If I tell you, you will not believe, and if I also ask you, you
will not answer me, nor let me go. And here S. Matthews ellipticall
expression of the answer following, does somewhat raise or quicken St. Luke
more full expression; St. Luke says, Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on
the right hand of the power of God. Ver. 69.
St. Matthew relating the same answer, says, Nevertheless I say unto you,
hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting, etc. Matthew. 26.64.
This adversative particle, Nevertheless, referres to that of S. Luke which S.
Matthew omits, If I tell you, you will not believe me, etc. Though there be
some variation in the words, yet they agree as well as a sharp and a flat in
music: whatsoever is omitted by either is but as a rest in song. The full tone
or harmony betwixt them, amounts to this: However ye will not believe what I
say: nor deal ingenuously with me, yet at your peril be it: For I must tell
you the truth which you know in part, but will not know; but which hereafter ye
shall more then believe. For ye shall see the Son of man sit on the right
hand of the power of God, etc. This they knew well to be a seat only for the
Son of God, and therefore, whereas before they had only interrogated,
whether he was the Christ, they put the second interrogatory to him, as St.
Luke relates them plainly and distinctly, though St. Matthew put them both
into one; I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ the Son of God, Matt. 26.63. Then said they all, Art thou then the
Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am, Luke 22.66, and the 70.
And upon this confession they proceed against him. Now this answer or
confession implies these two fundamental points of belief: The first, that
this JESUS of Nazareth, whom they now convented, was the Christ. The second,
that although he was the Son of man, yet being the CHRIST, he was likewise
the Son of God, not by adoption but by nature or primogeniture. For unless
this had been the meaning of their Interrogatory and of his answer, they could
not have condemned him of blasphemy, for avouching himself to be the Messiah:
that is, the Son of God in such a sense, as Abraham or David or Adam in his
integrity had been, or any of the pure Angelical Substances are. They took it
as granted, nor did he deny it, that he made himself such a Son of God, as
was equal with God. And this to their apprehension was blasphemy; a capital
crime, and so they censure it. So then here was God standing in the
Congregation of the Mighty. These earthly Gods did judge him, and he again
judges them: at lest he declares himself to be that Judge, which was to
judge them and the Gentiles too. But as the Psalmist in this forecited Psalm
had fore-prophecied, They know not neither will they understand: they walk on
in darkness; all the foundations of the earth are out of course. They indeed
were Gods, and all of them children of the most High: yet all to die like men,
and fall, as former great ones had done. But not the sons of God after such a
manner as he was, who albeit he was to die like man, yet not to fall like one
of the Princes, but to rise again by power of the Godhead to judge the earth.

CHAP. XXVI. The false accusations made by the Priests, and Elders against the
Son of God, when they brought him before Pilat, foretold by our Savior
himself and by the Prophets.
1 AS the Son of man, and the Son of God was willing to bear our sorrows,
and take all our infirmities upon him; to the end he might be a faithful
Comforter of all such, as mourn: so it was his pleasure likewise to suffer
this most gross and detestable civil wrong from the earthly powers of
Justice, that he might be most exquisitely qualified, even according to his
humane nature, to do right unto such as suffer like wrong: and justice upon all
unjust Judges, especially upon such as persecute others, as he was persecuted
for bearing testimony unto the truth or fundamental mysteries of our
Salvation. But however these earthly Gods, or Rulers of the Jews did sentence
him to death for blasphemy: yet were they not by divine providence permitted
to put this sentence in execution according to that manner of punishment, which
Gods Law did award to Blasphemers. For by the award of that Law he should have
been stoned to death. But as S. John instructs us in this remarkable point of
Gods special providence; When Pilate willing to free himself from guilt of
innocent blood, bid them take him, and judge him according to their law, they
replide, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. John 18.31. How true
or pertinent this answer was, I will not here dispute. But thus they answered,
as the same Evangelist there tells us, that the saying of Jesus might be
fulfilled, signifying what death he should die, and by whom. This saying or
prophecy of our Savior to which St. John refers, is punctually set down by S.
Matthew 20.17, 18 Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve Disciples apart
in the way, and said unto them; Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son
of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes; and they
shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and
to scourge, and to crucify him. Unto this death of the cross they brought
him, by their importunate, and subtle solicitations of Pilat, to proceed
against him upon another capital crime, then they by their pretended law had
condemned him for. For they pronounced him as worthy and guilty of death (by
their law) for blasphemy: whereas, now before Pilat they frame a new accusation
against him, for rebellion against Caesar; because he professed himself to be
King of the Jews, as in truth he was, for royal pity and compassion toward
them: but without any purpose to move the people to take arms, or to exercise
any royal authority over them, or any others upon earth, because his kingdom
was not of this world.

2 Whilst the high Priest and Elders sat as Judges in their own
Councell-house, they suborned false witnesses against him: but whilst they
accuse him before Pilat, they themselves become the most malicious and falsest
witnesses that ever were produced, or offered themselves voluntarily to
testify in open Court against any living man, in a cause criminal or
capital. All these malicious practices against him, were clearly foretold by
the Psalmist his forerunner in the like sufferings, and in particular (I take
it) by David himself Psalm 35. False witnesses did arise, they laid to my
charge things that I knew not. They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling
of my soul. But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth, I
humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. I
behaved my self, as though he had been my friend or brother, I bowed down
heavily as one that mourns for his mother. But in mine adversity they
rejoiced, etc. ver. 11, 12, 13. etc. Thus did the Composers of this Psalm and
of some others, to the like effect complain: every man respectively in their
own persons, and upon just occasions. And however they did not in their
murmuring complaints, yet in the causes or occasions of the sufferings, they
did really prefigure juster occasions and more grievous matter of complaint, on
the behalf of their expected Redeemer. And he must have uttered the like
complaints in a far higher strain, if he had been but a mere man, not
armed with patience or long suffering truly divine. The indignities done unto
him by Pilat and the Roman Soldiers, by Herod and his men of war, were
perspicuously foretold by David Psalm. 2. Why do the Heathens rage, and the
people imagina vain thing? This parallel between the prophecy of David, and
the historical events answering to it, not the Apostles only, but other
inferior Disciples did unanimously acknowledge upon the deliverance of Peter
and John and the rest of the Apostles from such violence intended against them
by the Rulers, and Elders of the Jews, (as had been practiced by them upon our
Savior,) for working of a miracle in his name: When they had further threatened
them, they let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of
the people: for all men glorified God for that which was done. For the man was
above forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing was shown. And being
let go, they went to their own company, and reported all that the chief
Priests and Elders had said unto them. And when they heard that, they lift up
their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art. God which have
made heaven and earth, and the sea and all that in them is: who by the mouth of
thy Servant David have said, Why do the heathens rage, and the people imagine
vain things? The Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered
together against the Lord and his Christ. For of a truth against thy holy
child JESUS, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilat, with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together for to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy Counsel determined before to be done. Acts 4.21, 22. etc.

3. All of our Saviors Persecutors, whether Jews or Gentiles, per dicta and
facta male ominata, did read their own doom and the doom of all such, unto
the worlds end, as shall continue the course that they begun. The Roman
Soldiers clothing him in a purple robe, by putting a crown of thorns upon his
head, and by crying, All hail unto the King of the Jews, did act that part in
jest or comicall merriment, which they must one day act in earnest, and more
then tragical sorrow. For he had sworn it long before, That all knees should
bow unto him, and in that day, they which crowned him with thorns, shall see
him crowned with Majesty and glory. Herod in sending him back to Pilat in a
white or candid robe, did bear witness of his innocence and integrity: and
withal of Herod his fathers scarlet sins, in putting so many poor Innocents
to a bloody death, upon the notice of his Nativitie. And as for Pilat and the
Roman state, by whose authority he was scourged with rods here on earth; he
whose seat is in the heavens, did even then laugh them to scorn, and since
has broken the whole race of Roman Caesar's, with a rod of iron, and dashed them
and their Monarchy to pieces, like a Potters vessel. What more shall be done
against these cruel Actors, or Abetters of their cruel practices against this
King of Kings; I leave it wholly (with all submission) to his sole
determination. But that the Indignities done unto him by the Jews, by the Roman
or other heathen Governors; and the visible revenge, which has since befalne
them, were punctually foretold by David, Psalm 2. the testimony before cited,
Acts 4. is a proof most authentic and most concludent.

4. Yet of all the sufferings which he suffered under Pontius Pilat, besides
the indignities done unto him in the extremities of his pains upon the Cross,
(at which Pilat was not present;) the rejection of him by the Jews, when this
heathen Governor out of a good nature or well meaning policy, had proposed him
with an infamous thief or murderer, was far the worst, and does deserve the
indignation of all that loved him. And this circumstance is pressed home to them
by S. Peter, Acts 3.13, 14. The God of Abraham and of Isack and of Jaacob; the
God of our Fathers has glorified his Son JESUS, whom ye delivered up, and
denied in the presence of Pilat, when he determined to let him go. But ye
denied the holy One, and the lust, and desired a Murderer to be granted unto
you, and killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised up from the dead, etc.
In this preposterous, and sacrilegious choice, they did the Devil a more
peculiar and more immediate service, then their Idolatrous forefathers had ever
done, either in adoring the brazen Serpent, (which was the most perverse
Idolatry, that ever they committed) or in sacrificing their sons and daughters
to the infernal spirits. In those services, they declare themselves to be
servants to Devils: In this sinister choice they prove themselves to be the
Devils own sons: and exactly fulfill our Saviors prophecy or discovery of
their inclinations, before they themselves did know them. For when Jesus had
told such Jews as did in a sort believe on him, that they were servants to
sin, and could not be made free, but by the Son, who abides in the house
for ever: they cholerickly reply, that they were the sons of Abraham. Our
Savior rejoynes, Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father you will do, he was a murderer from the beginning. John 8.30. etc.
and the 44. And so they now desire Barabbas, one whose name imports the son
of their father: and by quality, the son of the Devil, an infamous murderer,
to be delivered unto them, in memory of their deliverance out of Egypt: and
importunately solicit the murder of the Son of God, of that very God, who
had delivered them out of Egypt: who spoke to Moses in Mount Sinai; that Lord
God, unto whom Joshua and all the Judges that succeeded him, were but Generals
in the time of war; unto whom in time of peace or counsel for direction of
public affairs, the best of the Priests and Prophets unto the days of
Samuel, were but Deputies. For the Lord God of Israel all that time was their
immediate and proper King. Governors and Deputies they had successively many,
but none endued with royal Authority, besides him. No matter of consequence
whether of war or peace, was undertaken by their Governors without special
revelation or answer from him by Vrim and Thummim, until Samuels old age; Then
all the Elders of Israel, gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto
Ramah, and said unto him, Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy
ways: now make us a King to judge us, like all the Nations. But the thing
displeased Samuel when they said, give us a King to judge us: and Samuel prayed
unto the Lord, 1. Sam. 8.4, 5. This unseasonable ill aboding desire, did
displease the Lord unto whom they prayed, as much as it did Samuel. And yet so
far is he from forcing obedience by irresistible coaction, that he persuades
Samuel to descend to their importunat suit, but first to make protestation
against it; Now therefore hearken to their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly
unto them, and show the manner of the King, that shall reign over them. ver.
9. This protestation against their petition, and his patheticall forewarning of
them, what hard usage they should find under the King, whom they would choose,
are set down at full from the 10. of this Chap. unto the 19. Nevertheless the
people refused to obey the voice of Samuel, and they said, Nay, but we will
have a King to rule over us, that we may be like all Nations, and that our King
may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles. And so after Samuel
had rehearsed their resolution in the ears of the Lord their present King,
notwithstanding the protestation, and their forewarning concerning their future
Kings manner of government, they are permitted for the hardness of their
hearts, to go to a free Election of a new King. Yet the calamities and
oppressions which Samuel forewarnes would follow upon this their not approved
Election, was scarce so much as verified in the days of Saul, of David, or
Solomon: never exactly fulfilled by any King of their own nomination, or by
any King imposed upon them, until they solemnly and openly disclaim their
Native King; (that very God whom Samuel in all this business had consulted)
and cried, We have no King but Caesar. After this nomination of Caesar for
their King, whatsoever calamities foretold by Samuel, were in any part verified
by their own unruly Kings, were most exactly accomplished by the race of
Caesar's, unto whom they solemnly dedicated that allegiance, which was due to
Jesus their ancient Lord and King. At the same time, and not before, were the
words of the Lord unto Samuel Chap. 8.7, 8. exactly fulfilled. The Lord said
unto Samuel, hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto
thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them. According to all the works which they have done, since I
brought them out of Egypt, even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me,
and served other gods; so do they also unto thee. But of the fulfilling of this
prophecy, both according to the literal sense, and prefigurations or matter of
fact: and how the Priests and Scribes with their projects against our Savior,
did bring Jacobs dying curse, or ominous predictions against Simeon and Levi
upon themselves, and their posterity; more has been said in the Commentaries
of the first Book Sect. 3. Chap. 11. par. 9, 10. etc.
of the Creed, then I now exactly remember: more at least then I will trouble
the Reader with a repetition of what he may find there published.

CHAP. XXVII. Of such repentance as Judas found: of his casting down the
thirty pieces of silver in the Temple: and of the difficulties or variety of
opinions, by which of the Prophets it was foretold.
1 ONe historical relation concerning Judas and his fearful end, there is,
which is by S. Matthew, (who of all the four Evangelists cites the testimony
of the Prophecy, wherein part of it was foretold) left somewhat ambiguous for
the circumstances of time, wherein it happened. Some perhaps would at the first
sight, conceive from St. Matthews words, that Judas did cast down the hire of
his treason in the Temple, immediately after the chief Priests and Elders had
bound our Savior, and led him to Pontius Pilat the Governor. But if we
consider other circumstances of time related by S. John, and S. Luke, it is
far more probable that Judas was not touched with sorrow or grief: whether of
mind or of body or of both, until our Savior was sentenced to the death of
the Cross by Pontius Pilat. For the first thing, which the chief Priests and
Elders did, after they themselves had past sentence on our Savior, was the
delivery of him to the Secular power, and their importunat solicitation of
Pilat to put their sentence in execution. It was a memorable document of deadly
hypocrisy in the Priests and Elders, that they would not enter into the
Common Hall or public Court of Justice to indite him there, being immediately
after to celebrate the usual service for that day in the Temple. It was again
an extraordinary courtesy in Pilat toward them, that he would vouchsafe to
take their accusations in the pavement or Court adjoining to the Pretorium. But
as well the courtesy of the one, as the hypocrisy of the other, friendly
conspired to accomplish the will of God, which was to have his only Son made
that day a sacrifice of atonement for the sins both of the Jews, and
Gentiles; whereas if Pilat had stood upon points of Authority or prerogative:
it is more then probable, the Priests and Elders would rather have deferred
their accusations for that instant then have entered into the Pretorium or
Common Hall. But having once obtained their desire in the Pavement, they
immediately returned into the Temple, where Judas attended them. And having
resolved (as he thought) to have set his house or worldly business in such
order, as Ahitophel had done his; he went forth and hanged himself. So that
albeit Judas had seen his Master dead in law, that is, sentenced to death by
the high Priest and Pontius Pilat, upon the Jews importunat accusations and
testimonies against him: Yet the Traitor having no witness produced against
him besides his own conscience, No Judge or appointed Executioner besides
himself: did die an accursed death, before his Master had made an atonement for
the sins of the world. So the Psalmist by way of imprecation had foretold;
Let sudden destruction come upon him unawares (or as others) let destruction
come upon him, and let the net, that he has made for others, catch himself:
into that very destruction let him fall, Psalm. 35.8. How this imprecation
though not directed against Judas alone, did punctually fall upon him, will
better appear anon in the discussions, how the imprecations reiterated in the
109. Psalm, were most punctually fulfilled in him. That which for the present
I intended to advertise the Reader of, is briefly this; That if we refer the
time of Judas death, unto this point of time intimated, the parallel betwixt
St. Matthews relation of his fearful end, and other sacred passages in the
Evangelists and Apostles, will be more clear. St. Matthews relation ye have
in the 27. Chapter. 3. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he
was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver
to the chief Priests and Elders, saying; I have sinned in that I have betrayed
the innocent blood: And they said, What is that to us? See thou to that. And
he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and departed, and went and
hanged himself. And the chief Priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is
not lawful to put them into the Treasury, because it is the price of blood.
And they took counsel, and bought with them the Potters field to bury
strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood unto this
day. (Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremiah saying,
And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued,
whom they of the children of Israel did value: and gave them for the Potters
field, as the Lord appointed me.)

2. But where this casting down of the thirty pieces of silver in the Temple,
was foretold or by whom, there is, and has been great variety of opinions
amongst learned Interpreters, as well Ancient as Modern; so great, that many
of them have rather soiled, then any way cleared the meaning of the Evangelist:
and left the investigation of the truth, more difficult to the ingenuous and
sagacious Reader, then if they had not meddled with it, or left it (untoucht) to
his private search. The first difficulty is about the Grammatical signification
of some words in the Original. The second pitcheth upon a misnomer of the
Prophet, as whether that Prophecy, which the Evangelist said was fulfilled in
this fact of Judas, was uttered or written by Zachariah, or the Prophet
Jeremiah, or respectively by both. The third, admitting thus much was either
only foretold, or both foretold, and forepictured either by Jeremiah or by
Zachariah or by both, whether they spoke in their own persons or in the person
of Judas or of Christ or of both. The first difficulty or rather discord about
the literal sense of the Prophets words, as they are related by the
Evangelist, has been occasioned partly by the Translation of the Septuagint,
and partly by the Author of the vulgar Latin. For whereas we read as well in
St. Matthew, as in the Prophet Zachariah, And I cast them ad figulum, to the
Potter; the vulgar Latin has it, And I cast them ad Stataarium, to the Statue
maker in the house of the Lord. The Septuagint thus, (...) cast them into the
furnace or to the metal-melter. The Greek might import (though not so directly
as the Latin) a Potters furnace. But if we take Statuarius (which is the
expression of the vulgar Latin) in its proper sense, for a Statue maker
whether in stone or of metal wrought with tool or molten, there could be no
use of such an Artificer in that Temple, wherein all Statues or Images of what
stuff soever they could be made were most strictly forbidden; Or in that
people among whom the erecting or making of them was a crime capital. To avoid
this absurdity in their Authenticated Translation, the Sectaries of the Romish
Church by the [Statuarie] would have us understand GOD himself, who is the
former or fashioner of all things. And for this Interpretation, they allege
some ancient Greek Fathers, but whose Authority, they themselves will slight,
or pass such censures upon their Authors, as they will not permit us in like
case to do, whenever they make against their pretended Catholic tenets. The
most learned Interpreters in the Romish Church, do partly bewray, and sometimes
openly profess, that this Interpretation is too far fetched, and far wide
from the meaning of the Prophet (whosoever he was,) as he is alleged by the
Evangelist. What then could move so many of them to embrace, or rather not to
disclaim these roving collections? Only the authority of the Trent Council,
which has so fettered them in this and other like points, that they dare not
say that their reasonable Souls are (under God) their own: but are content to
sacrifice learning, reason, and common sense to many illiterat resolutions of
wilful, partial, and corrupt men in that Council assembled. If the ingenuous
Reader will not believe me in this particular, let him take the pains to
satisfy himself, by observing how Ribera and Castrus with some other men very
well learned, and ingenuous (so far as they durst) have utterly lost
themselves in their Commentaries upon the 11. of Zachary.

3. Concerning the second difficulty, many both in the Romish and reformed
Churches, will in no case admit of a misnomer in the Evangelists writing, but
will have the words cited by him to be the Prophet Ieremiahs own words, though
no where extant in his own works, which now we have. Yet in some other works of
his, which no Christian living this day, has seen: but of which S. Hierom had
seen an Hebrew Copy, as he himself relates; but unto which it does not appear
that he gave any credit, it being imparted to him by one of the sect of the
Nazarens. The words of the pretended prophecy answer so punctually and
identically to every apex or title of S. Matthews quotation or paraphrase upon
the Prophet; as we may more then suspect, justly presume that passage which S.
Hierom relates, to have been squared on purpose to S. Matthews allegation,
after the publishing of this Gospel. For such supposititious or bastard books,
were obtruded upon the Church before S. Hieroms or Origens days.

Amongst many Interpretations upon this 11. of Zachariah, which Iunius in his
parallels has diligently recited, he approves only of one or two: the one,
that Zachariah was binomius, had two names, Jeremiah and Zachariah, a thing not
unfrequent in sacred histories, especially where their names, whether they be
two or more, have but one signification or importance. Now the etymology of
Jeremiah and Zachariah, according to his Interpretation of them, have the very
same signification. The other which after this, Iunius likes best, is that
Zachariah had the Prophet Jeremiah for his Master or Instructor, though not
viva voce, yet partaker of his spirit by tradition or undoubted relation of his
prophetical predictions, from such as had been acquainted with Jeremiah,
during the time of Zedechiahs reign, or in the beginning of the Babylonish
captivity. This good Writer was afraid lest Jeremiah should have lived too
long, if he had been acquainted with Zachariah, upon his return from Babylon,
or about the building of the second Temple, as some others before Iunius had
avoucht, whose opinion in the maine point he likes well of, to wit, that albeit
the testimony alleged by S. Matthew be distinctly found in the Prophet
Zachariah, yet is ascribed by the Evangelist himself purposely to Jeremiah,
because Zachariah had learned it from Jeremiah, as Daniel had done the end of
the captivity.

4. For my part, if I could be fully persuaded (as I am not to the contrary)
that the reason why S. Matthew did purposely ascribe these words in the Prophet
Zachariah, unto Jeremiah, was because the Prophet Zachariah had Jeremiah in
this and many other Prophecies for his Instructor or guide; I should think it
no soloecisme to say, that Zachariah had been acquainted with Jeremiah himself,
either about the beginning of the Babylonish Captivity, or that Jeremiah had
lived until this peoples return to Jerusalem and to the Inheritance and
possessions of their forefathers. For that diverse of that generation, wherein
Jeremiah prophesied, and whilst the first Temple was standing, did live so
long, as Iunius thinks it improbable Jeremiah should live, is clear from that
of Ezra 3.12. Many of the Priests and the Levites, and chief of the Fathers,
who were ancient men, who had seen the first house; when the foundation of the
house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice: and many shouted
aloud for joy. Howbeit, I am not of opinion, that men in those days did by
strength of nature make up so many years here on earth, as this history
implies these many Priests and Levites did, but rather that God by his special
providence and goodness, did at this time reiterate or renew that Covenant of
life, which once he made to Phinehas and Eleazar. And Jeremiah and Baruch the
son of Neriah, had this special privilege bestowed upon them, that their
lives should be given unto them for a prey, See Jer. 45. ver. 5. and 39
in all places whither soever they went. Again, it is very probable, seeing
Jeremiah during the time of his imprisonment did by the appointment of the Lord
buy the field of Hananeel his uncles son, and cause the Evidences subscribed
to be put up by Earuch in an earthen vessel, that they might continue many
days: that he expected to see the return of this people from captivity unto
the possessions of their Fathers: that he himself did hope to enjoy the
benefit of this his bargain, which he made in a strange time, as worldlings
would think. But so he made it for the confirmation of this peoples faith in
Gods promises, that fields and possessions, which then lay desolate, should be
repossest by this people and their posterity: and Inheritances should be sold
and alienated to the next of kindred, (as this of Hananeels was to Jeremiah)
according to the Law.

5. Maldonat in his Comments upon St. Matthew is very free, and not afraid, as
Iunius and other good Writers are, to admit of a misnomer, neither occasioned
by the Evangelists forgetfulness, nor from mistake of letters, or
abbreviatures by the Transcribers, but rather by a voluntary intersertion of
the Prophet Jeremiah his name by some bold Transcriber or Interpreter, when as
the Evangelist had only said, The Prophet, (as his usual manner is) without
any intimation what Prophet it was, leaving that wholly to the diligent Readers
search or observation. For so he does in that remarkable Prophecy; Behold a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, etc. he says no more, then all this
was foretold by the Prophet, without any mention or intimation of Isaiahs name:
nor does he name the Prophet Hosea, when he records the fulfilling of his
Prophecy, Out of Egypt have I called my Son, Matt. 2.15. And in verse 23. of
the same Chapter, he shall be called a NAZARENE. He giving the reason why
Joseph, by the disposition of the Divine providence did divert his intended
return unto Bethleem, where Christ was born, and took up his dwelling in
Nazareth, says this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophets, not so much as intimating the name of any one Prophet, by whom
this was foretold. And if the curious Reader would observe his allegations of
Prophetical testimonies, throughout his whole Gospel, he shall find the
Prophets name, (whose testimony he most faithfully records) concealed or
omitted three times as often, as it is expressed. And in those few places,
wherein the Prophets name, whose authority he alleges, is expressed, it may
without any danger be questioned whether they were so expressed or interserted
by Interpreters or Transcribers. For the addition of names, or change of some
vowels, does no way vitiate the divine truth of Prophecy; though the custom
of later Interpreters or Translators, be far more commendable to express
the Prophets name, or the Chapter and verse, to which the Evangelical story
referres, in the margin, not in the body of the Text, However the misnomers of
persons or places inserted to the body of the discourse, does no way corrupt
the true sense, and meaning, either of historical or Prophetical truth: the
error is imputable only to the Transcriber or Interpreter, not to the Author.

6. But for this place now in question, I know it is objected by good Writers,
(both as well of the Reformed, as Romish Church) that the most ancient copies
of St. Matthews Gospel now extant, have the name of Jeremiah, not of Zachariah:
and therefore it is a presumption at least, that the name was not interserted
by any Interpreter or Transcriber, but expressed by the first Author himself. Yet
this is a presumption only, no just proof, because there may be for ought we
know, more ancient copies of S. Matthew, then any man of later years has
seen or published to the world; as of later years some copies of the
Septuagint and of St. John's Gospel, have been communicated unto the Christian
world, which are more ancient, then those which in former ages were most
common. Again, no man can make such proof, that any Greek Manuscript of S.
Matthew now extant is more ancient then the Syriack Testament, in which the
name of the Prophet Jeremiah is not to be found, although the substance of S.
Matthews Text concerning the fulfilling of this Prophecy be plain, and full.
Lastly, I think, scarce any of the Romish Church would affirm, that such
Manuscripts, as they have seen, are more ancient, then their first vulgar
Latin Translation of the Books of Moses. And now, if it be no prejudice to the
substance of truth in their most ancient Translation, to intersert names, and
places, not so much as heard of in Moses his time, nor added by the Seventy
Interpreters: or other expressions of the Hebrew names (used by Moses) by the
Grecians: but new names imposed by the Grecians upon places otherwise called in
more ancient times: it can no way disparage the true sense or meaning of S.
Matthew, although very ancient Interpreters or Transcribers have interserted
the name of Jeremiah instead of Zachariah into the body of his Text. But where
does the most ancient vulgar Translator make any such intersertion of names
into the body of Moses his writings? To omit other places, so he does Numb.
34.11. where we read, as the Hebrew verbatim has it, And the coast shall go
down from Shepham to Riblah, the ancient vulgar Latin makes this intersertion,
Vide Nebrisensis quinquagenam. C. 14.
de Sephama descendent termini in Reblata contra fontem Daphnen; The coast or
border shall descend from Sephama to Riblah over against the fountain called
Daphne, that is, to that Antioch where Christ's followers were first named
Christians. It is not probable that the first Author of the vulgar Latin was
more ancient, then that Hebrew copy of those Apocryphal books ascribed to
Jeremiah, by the sect of the Nazarenes. Now this testimony alleged by St.
Matthew, being extant in that Apocryphal book before any Latin Translation of
the Bible; and more ancient then any Greek transcript of S. Matthew, as yet
publicly known: the Interpreters Greek or Latin might with the same
confidence intersert the Prophet Jeremiah his name into the body of the text,
as the vulgar Latin does the name of the fountain Daphne into the history of
Moses. The most ancient and best Authority, which the Author of the vulgar
Latin can pretend for this intersertion, is from the Author of the 2. Book of
Maccabees. I could not therefore condemn Maldonat for speaking inconsequently
either to the truth it self, or to the Authority of the Romish Church, wherein
he lived, for his ingenuous free opinion concerning this misnomer in the text
of S. Matthew, which is a far grosser error in Transcripts or instruments of
the Law then of the Gospel.

7 But whether we admit of Maldonats or Iunius opinion, as the more probable:
the third difficulty proposed will not be dissolved by one, or both; And that
was, how the Author of the prophecy, whose accomplishment S. Matthew records
(were it Jeremiah, Zachariah, or some other) should sustain the person of
Judas the Traitor, and the person of our Savior CHRIST, who was betrayed, of
whom the forecited Prophecy was to be literally fulfilled. That it was
fulfilled by Judas fact, is granted by all: but how it was fulfilled of our
Savior, is a question, which most Interpreters leave undetermined. For the
resolution or determination of it, there might be another question premised, to
wit, whether he or they, whosoever they were, who did foretell Judas his
casting down the thirty pieces of silver to the Porter in the Temple, did
fore-signifie this by way of vision, or did withal fore-picture it by like
matter of fact. But the resolution of this latter question (neither altogether
impertinent, nor absolutely necessary) might be referred to the determination
of the like question, moved by Interpreters upon that of Hosea 1.2. Go, take
unto thee a wife of whoredoms, and children of whoredoms: for the land has
committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord However they have determined
or shall determine that question concerning Hosea, as whether indeed he did
take a wife of fornication unto him, or only spoke symbolically, (as if his
sayings were to be construed for his deeds) neither part of the determination
will determine the present difficulty, how either Jeremiah or Zachariah should
represent either our Savior Christ or Judas, either by word or deed. The
shadow of this seeming stumbling block, has affrighted some learned
Commentators out of the right way, into which they had upon good deliberation
entered. To instance in one, it was well observed by Castrus upon the 11. of
Zachariah.

Nihilominus sicut Zacharias in sua persona referebat Christum, ita and facto
suo. Nam quemadmodum pro suo munere pastoritio exigebat pretium, fidem, and
pietatem ex cord, and datum est pretium vile, triginta argenteorum: ita
Christus postalabat a Iudaeis pro suo Evangelizandi munere, ut sibi crederetur,
and ut Deus coleretur: At illi pretio triginta argenteorum eum estimaverunt. Et
sicut Propheta indignatus quod tam vili pretio fuisset aestimatus, and pretium
projecit, et eos qui pretium illi dederunt: ita Christus projecit Iudaeos, and
tradidit Romany devastandos. Ne vero dicamus Zachariam Iudae personam and
Christi simul retulisse, videtur verius diversam esse prophetiam Zachariae and
Jeremiae. Nam and Hieronymus super 27. Matthaei sic ait, Legi nuper in quodam
Hebraico volumine, quod Nazareae sectae mihi Hebraicus obtulit, Jeremiae
apocryphum, in quo haec ad verbum scriptareperi.

Zachariah, he grants, did represent Christ both by personal office and by
matter of fact. Zachariah did demand faith, and hearty piety of his flock for
his prophetical pains amongst them, and they tender him a base reward, thirty
pieces of silver: So Christ required of the Jews for his Evangelicall function
amongst them, only this, that they would believe him, and worship God: and
they value him at 30. pieces of silver. Again, as the Prophet with indignation
renounced both the base stipe^d which was offered to him, and the flock which
did tender it: so Christ cast off the Jews which had thus disesteemed him, and
delivered the^ over to be destroyed by the Romans. But (says this Author) lest
we should grant that the Prophet Zachariah did by the same fact or resolution
represent both the person of Christ and of Judas, it is more probable that the
prophecy of Zachariah is different from that of Jeremiah, which S. Matthew
alleges. For Hierom upon the 27. of S. Matthew tells us, he had lately read a
book of Jeremiah in the Hebrew tongue, which one of the sect of the Nazarens
had imparted unto him, in which he found S. Matthews allegatio^ word for word.
Thus far Castrius.

Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. He begins his verdict in the spirit
of wisdom and discretion, continues it perplexedly, and concludes it
according to the foolishness or forgetfulness of the flesh. For that
inconvenience which he so much feared, will be never a whit the less, albeit
we grant him, that S. Matthews words, do not refer to the forecited place of
Zachariah, but to those books of Jeremiah, which S. Hierom had seen; or to any
other Prophet whatsoever, whether his works be extant or lost. And thus being
blencht in his right course by the shadow, he falls foul upon that very
stumbling block, or rather a far worse then that, which he sought to avoid.
For by his conclusion the often forementioned allegation of S. Matthew cannot
be literally, or concludently referred to any Prophet at all.

CHAP. XXVIII. The clear resolution of the third difficulty proposed: of the
fearful end of Judas, and how it was both forepictured, and foretold.
1 SHall we say then that either Zachariah or any other sacred Author of the
Prophecy alleged by S. Matthew did represent both the person of Judas the
Traitor, and of JESUS CHRIST whom he betrayed? There is no necessity to avouch
thus much: nor would it be any absurdity to grant all this and somewhat more.
The parallel between the Evangelist, and the prophecy of Zachariah, as now it
is extant, (whether in the Hebrew or Septuagint) whether he only foretold the
event, or foreacted it also by like matter of fact, (which latter is more then
probable,) is most exact. For Zachary (as he himself affirms) did require his
stipend for his prophetical function, and they weighed him thirty pieces of
silver, Zachary 11.12. But this stipend, after he had received it, was so
contemptible in the sight of the Lord, that he said unto him, Cast it unto the
potter, a goodly price, that I was prized at of them. And so he took the
thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the Potter in the house of the Lord.
In thus undervaluing the Prophets person and pains, they did undervalue the
goodness and person of that Lord, whose Ambassador he was. Judas in like sort
goes to the high Priests, and asked of them, What will ye give me, and I will
deliver him unto you? and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.
Matthew 26.15. This was the highest price, which this last and worst generation
of Israel, did set upon the chief Shepherd of their souls; not the hire or
stipend for his pains: for these they set at naught. And by this act they did
exactly fulfill both the Prophet Zachariahs words, and the measure of their
forefathers sins, in undervaluing his ministerial labors and person. The
same Lord which commanded Zachariah to cast his contemptible stipend unto the
Potter, did now cause Judas to throw down the price, for which he sold and
delivered his Lord and Master unto the chief Priests and Officers, in the same
house of God or Temple, after he had seen that it was the price of his Masters
blood, not the stipend only of his treachery. That Judas did thus far
repent, as to acknowledge his sin in saying, I have sinned in betraying
innocent blood, this was the Lords doing, or (as the Evangelist says) that
which the Lord appointed him to do. Matthew 27.12. And no Christian need be
afraid to say, that Judas was moved or appointed of the Lord, as Zachary was,
to cast down the thirty pieces of silver in the Temple, to the end, that his
prophecy, and his fact might be exactly fulfilled. Their forefathers in
offering unto Zachariah thirty pieces of silver for his hire, did forepicture
that their ungracious posterity would set as low a price upon the Lord himself.
And those words of the Lord unto the Prophet, verse 13. A goodly price that I
was prized at, have the same sense, and importance with the like words (before
cited) Chap. 26 parag. 4.
unto Samuel, They have not cast thee off from being King, but me. If we
compare the 13. verse of the 11. of Zachary with the 12, and consider the
alteration of the persons speaking, they will bear this sense or importance;
or rather require this construction; Be content to forgo thy stipend: for they
have not only undervalued thee and thy ministerial pains, but they have
undervalued me. For as this present generation has done by thee, so and much
worse will their ungracious posterity deal with me. This is the very brief or
abstract of S. Matthew Chap. 27. ver. 9, 10. ( Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by the Prophet saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver,
the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did
value: and gave them for the Potters field, as the Lord appointed me.) These
last words cast a scruple or rather a stumbling block in many Interpreters
ways, how the Prophet Zachariah should be appointed of the Lord to buy the
Potters field. But this is presently taken away, if we consider, that the
Evangelist in the 9 and 10. verses does make a paraphrase or exegeticall
exposition upon the Prophets words. Now it was ever lawful, yea the office of
the Apostles and Evangelists, not only to quote the Prophets, but to
paraphrase upon or expound as well the literal as mystical sense of their
words, or portendments of their facts. And if we consult the Prophet himself in
the original, or in the Translation of the Seaventie; that exposition which we
have made as well of his words, as of S. Matthews paraphrase, is most naturally
emergent out of the Grammatical signification of the words, and the persons
speaking. When the Prophet speaks unto the people in his own person, he
says, If ye think good, give me my stipend or hire, Zach. 11.12. (...) says
the Septuagint
not my price, as some render the Original. But when the Lord speaks thus unto
him, Cast it to the Potter, he says not a goodly stipend, that I was rewarded
with, but a goodly (...) gloriosum pretiu^, quo appretiatus sum. Zach. 11.13.
(...).
price, that I was prized at of them. And this distinction of the words
persuades me, that the Prophet did really demand, and they did really pay his
stipend. And in this their undervaluation of his person, and pains, they did
portend their posterities disesteeme of the great Prophet the Lord himself.

2. One scruple yet remains, which if I did not, every observant Reader of the
Prophet would cast in his own way: and it is this; what the Prophet had to do
with any Potter in the house of the Lord? Some interpreters without any mention
of this scruple, give this reason why God commanded the Prophet to throw his
stipend to the Potter, because his person or profession was as contemptible, as
the stipend was. But if this was the true reason the party to whom he threw
it, was not contemptible only for the meannesse of his person or profession,
but contemptible amongst others of his own trade. For the word in the
Original has a note of demonstration prefixed unto it: not a Potter, but the
Potter. This scruple (if I mistake not) is already cleared in the former Book.
See the 7. book of Comme^ts on the Creed.
For as Vatablus with the consent of some ancient Hebrew Rabbis observe, the
ancient reading of the Hebrew was (...) unto the Treasury, or unto the
Treasurer. But in succession of time there happened a variation in reading, not
by negligence of Transcribers or Translators, but by Gods special providence,
[(...) for (...)]. And this substitution of one letter for another, or
alteration of the signification of the words, did most divinely character the
devolution of the thirty pieces of silver, designed by Judas to the Treasury
or Corban, unto the buying of the Potters field to bury strangers in it. Both
Judas, for casting them down for the Temples use; and the chief Priests, in
otherwise disposing of them, did as the Lord had appointed them. Neither of
them did amiss in all this. The height of their sin was in buying and
selling the Lord of life, specially at so low a price. This the Lord did not
appoint, or ordain them to do: yet did he ordain their most wicked deeds,
and direct their malicious intentions to an happy end: to the redemption of all
our souls, and to the fulfilling of this Prophecy. And so he did ordain
Judas his resolution to make away himself, unto the confirmation of our faith,
and to the fulfilling of another Prophecy, not much observed (for ought I
read) by most Interpreters. The first and last act that Judas did, after he
had cast down the thirty pieces of silver in the Temple, is recorded by S.
Matthew, 27.5. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and
departed, and went and hanged himself.

3. This last act was prefigured, (as most have observed) by the fearful end
of Ahitophel. But was the manner of his dying, (which was somewhat more
fearful, then Ahitophels) any where else foretold? Yes, it was most
remarkably foreprophecied Psalm 109. with its circumstances, or sad
consequences. First, that the imprecations throughout that Psalm were
literally meant of Judas, though his name be not expressed in it, is clear from
St. Peter's speech unto the Assembly of Christ's Disciples, for proceeding to the
election of another Apostle, in Judas his place; And in those days Peter stood
up in the midst of the Disciples and said, (The number of the names together
were about an hundred and twenty) Men, and Brethren, this Scripture must needs
have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost by the mouth of David spoke before
concerning Judas, S. Matthew adds, and says it was called the field of blood
unto this day: which argues that he wrote his Gospel a long time after S. Peter
made his Comment upon the Psalmist.
which was guide to them that took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had
obtained part of this ministry. Now this man purchased a field with the
reward of iniquity, and falling headlong he burst asunder in the midst, and
all his bowels gushed out: and it was known unto all the dwellers at
Jerusalem, insomuch, as that field in their proper tongue is called Aceldama,
that is to say, The field of blood. For it is written in the Book of Psalms,
Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein. And his
Bishopric let another take, Acts 1.15, 16, 17. Albeit the chief Priest did
bargain for the field to bury strangers in, yet in as much, as the money
wherewith they bought it, was Judas his goods, not theirs; St. Peter held it no
soloecisme to say, that this man, (to wit, Judas) did purchase a field with the
reward of iniquity. And seeing this field was purchased of a Potter, it is but
one and the same manner of speech, which S. Matthew uses (by way of paraphrase
upon the Prophet Zachariah,) that Judas did cast down the thirty pieces of
silver to the Potter in the house of the Lord. S. Matthew relates only Judas
his hanging of himself: S. Peter adds further, that falling headlong, he
burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. It seems, or rather
it is evident, that either the rope or the gallow tree did break: the later is
more probable, if any heed be to be given to an old tradition, that he made
choice of an Elder tree for the gallows; a very brittle wood, and such as
bears no good fruit, unless it be that which is called the Jews-eare. But
although we be bound to believe, that most of the imprecations in this Psalm
were literally, and concludently meant of Judas; yet it may be questioned,
whether they were literally meant of him alone, or directly intended against
his person by the Prophet David. And however it was lawful for the Prophets to
pray directly against particular persons living in their own time (which for
any Christian living to do is most abominable:) yet for the particular
imprecations of this and some other Psalmists, which were not fulfilled till
after ages, I cannot but highly approve of Genebrards resolution upon this
Psalm. The extract of his resolution is, that however David might have just
occasions to supplicat for revenge upon some enemies to him, and to his
Government, and to the God of Israel whose Deputy he was: Yet his direful
imprecations throughout this Psalm, aims at the whole host of impiety, or
the body of impious men. And seeing Judas was the chief or highest member of
that huge body with whom he fought: the curses which he sent forth at random
(in respect of future ages) did fall perpendicularly and most punctually, in
fullest measure, upon this eminent Traitor to his King and Country; to his
Lord God.

4. All the imprecations throughout this Psalm are Prophetical, and have been
(at least respectively) long ago fulfilled; but in which of them, the manner of
this Traitors fearful end was in particular punctually foretold, is not so
clear, as that the ordinary Reader will easily see it. Nor can he be much
helped by any discoveries of most Interpreters. Many besides Judas have hanged
themselves: many have been surprised by sudden death, or smitten by Gods
revenging arrow, with sore diseases in a moment. Yet have we read of none, in
whose death, self intentions and secret acute diseases did so concur as they
did in Judas. His own intention was only to hang himself, and this he
effected. But certainly there was somewhat more in it, then could naturally
follow from this attempt; as that he should burst asunder in the middle, that
all his bowels should gush out, and hasten his death before the ordinary time
of expiration by the ordinary course of nature in such, as die that unnatural
and accursed death, which he sought after. But the Psalmist had thus prophesied
and prayed against him, Psalm 109.17. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto
him: as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him. As he
clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment; so let it come into his
bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. Yet do we not read, nor have
we any occasion to suspect, that Judas being a Companion of the blessed
Apostles till his death, and a continual follower of Christ the blessed whilst
he lived on earth; was accustomed to swear, curse, or blaspheme. His demeanor
amongst them (doubtless) was civil, not profane. How then were the Psalmists
words punctually verified of him; He loved cursing: he delighted not in
blessing? The meaning is, (as in many other places of the Psalmists) that
however he did not openly swear, curse, or blaspheme, or bewray his hate to
goodness: yet in his heart he did abhor the ways, which tend to peace and
happiness, and set himself not immediately or directly to cursednesse. How then
is he said to have loved cursing? Because through avarice, and stiff adherence
to sinister private ends, which he had secretly proposed unto himself; he was
diverted from the ways of peace and happiness, (which is the end, that all
men in the general seek and wish for) unto the crooked paths which wind to
cursednesse and malediction. As his addiction to these paths was secret and
hid, so was the disease whereof he died. It gathered secretly, though suddenly
within his body. It soaked like oil into his bones, and into his bowels like
water. And as a good Author (whose words, and name I now remember not) has
conjectured, he died of a dropsy more acute and sudden, then that disease
naturally is. Yet however it bred within him, by causes natural or
supernatural, it might be the true and natural cause of his bursting in the
middle, and of the gushing out of his bowels. Of his sudden disease and
destruction, other Psalmists had likewise prophesied. See Psalm. 55.16.
Now that these and the like Prophetical imprecations might be exactly and
remarkably fulfilled in him; the righteous Lord would not suffer him to die
merely of strangling or suffocation, but smote him with these secret and
sudden diseases; of what kind soever they were.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Harmony betwixt the Evangelists narrations or history
[from the time our Savior was sentenced to death, until his expiration upon
the Cross:] and the Mosaicall prefigurations or Prophecies concerning his
death and sufferings.
1 THere is no knowledge comparable to the knowledge of CHRIST, nor is there
any other part of this knowledge more useful then the contemplation of his
Cross. A Theme of which no private Christian can meditate too often, or too
much, so he follow the directions of the learned for his practice. Of this
argument a great many Interpreters have writ very much, and a good many very
well, both for the doctrinall part, and for the useful, which must be
grounded upon the doctrinall. The expressions of my meditations upon this
point, or (which is all one) the use or application of this grand Article of
belief, (for whom he died) or what is to be done by them, who intend to be
true partakers of this common salvation purchased by his Cross: These and the
like I must defer, until I have set down (as God shall enable me) the
doctrinall points of his humiliation (whereof the Cross is the period,) and
his exaltation, which was accomplished by his ascension. That which must
confirm and cherish our belief, as well of his cross, as of his resurrection
and ascension; is the clear harmony between the Evangelicall histories
themselves, and the predictions or prefigurations of what they jointly or
severally relate, recorded in the books of Moses and the Prophets, or the
historical volumes of the old Testament.

2. He bearing his Cross, (says S. John) went forth unto a place called in
the Hebrew Golgotha, Chap. 19.17. When they had mocked him (says S. Mark) they
took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out
to crucify him; and they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming
out of the Country, (the father of Alexander, and Rufus) to bear his Cross,
Chap. 15.20. Betwixt these two relations of S. John and S. Mark, there is some
variation, no contradiction, no such appearance of contradiction, as might be
picked between S. Matthew and the other Evangelists about his riding unto
Jerusalem upon the Ass, and the Colt, as S. Matthew says: or (as the others
express) upon the Colt only. But that appearance of contradiction (as has
been set down before) will easily vanish, to him that peruseth the Prophet
Zachariah and the Evangelists, with an observant and clear eye. For he might
ride part of the way upon the one, and part upon the other. In like manner
seeing his progress from the Common hall unto Golgotha, was divisible, as the
local distance between them was, our Savior himself might bear his Cross
some part of the way, or for a while: and Simon the Cyrenian perhaps a greater
part of the way, or for a longer time. Again, seeing the Cross it self was
not only divisible but actually divided, our Savior might bear one part of
it all the way, and Simon another for the most part of the way between the
Praetorium and Golgotha. Nor is it probable that either of them should for any
time, or for any portion of the way bear both the whole Cross, and the
Chapter whereon the title of his accusation was engrost by Pilar [ Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews.] That our Savior did bear his Cross out of the
Praetorium or place of Judicature, is clear from the forecited place of S.
John. And it is more then probable, that he did bear it all along the City,
till he came to the public gate, where the Soldiers meeting with Simon
coming out of the Country, compel him to go back again with them, and
bear the Cross to Golgotha. And as they came out (says S. Matthew) or rather
as they were coming forth (not from the Praetorium or Common Hall, but from
the gates of the City) they found a man of Cyrene, him they compeld to bear
his Cross. It is clear again from S. Luke 23.26. that Simon did bear the
Cross, JESUS going before him. Whether our Savior did faint under it at the
gate through feebleness of body, or by long watching, I will not dispute, much
less determine; though some good Writers give this reason why Simon was
compeld to bear it, being first laid upon our Savior. But whether for this
reason or some other, they took it from our Saviors shoulders, and laid it
upon Simons; there was a mystery in it, and at least, an Emblematicall
expression of what our Savior before had said, If any man will be my
Disciple, let him take up his cross, and follow me. For this Simon
questionless either had been one of Christ's Disciples before, or at this time
became one, as his two sons Alexander and Rufus were, when S. Mark did write
his Gospel. But it is very probable that they knew him for one of his
Disciples, and for this reason compeld him to bear his Cross, being not
willing of himself to do them any service in such a wicked employment. Now
though this man did meet JESUS, when he was going out of the gate, (as we
would say) by mere 2chance or fortune, that is, without any intention or
forecast on his part so to do; yet even this contingency was determined, and
the thing it self intended by Divine providence, that we might have a visible
pattern set by this man, (though against his will) of that duty or service,
which the Apostle prescribes to all that intend to be Christ's true Disciples.
Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without
the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the gate, bearing his
reproach, Heb. 13.12, 13. We must do that willingly which this man was
compelled to do; that is, renounce our intended ways, and follow him, as this
man did, bearing his Cross.

3. After he was come to Golgotha, but before he was nailed to the Cross; they
gave him wine mingled with gall (as S. Matthew says) or (as S. Mark) with
myrrh. With what intention they ministered this bitter cup unto him, he best
knows: Not for his comfort (as I conjecture) but rather to add gall unto
wormwood, or to make the potion more loathsome unto him by these two bitter
ingredients. For thus much the Psalmists words, (which were now in part
fulfilled of him) imply: I looked for some to take pity, but there was none,
and for comforters but I found none. They gave me also gall for my meat, and
in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69.20, 21. Whether the
other two which were crucified with him, had the like cup ministered unto them,
is uncertain: but the Evangelists take no notice of what was done to them.
Myrrh mingled with wine being in some cases a strengthener, might be offered
to them, that they might die more courageously: and our Saviors mingled with
myrrh and gall, that the Psalmists complaint might be more remarkably
fulfilled in him, posuerunt fell in escam meam. When he had tasted of this
bitter cup; (says S. Matthew) he would not drink, 27.34. They gave him to
drink (says S. Mark) wine mingled with myrrh, but he received it not, 15.23.
To taste of it, and not to drink of it, (as S. Matthew says) was not to
receive it, or not to accept of it: so that there is no appearance of
contradiction betwixt these two Evangelists; both of them relate the same
truth: but neither of them the same truth fully. S. Mark omits the mingling of
the wine with gall; S. Matthew the mingling of it with myrrh, and his not
receiving of it: or rather to taste of it, not to drink of it, was both to
receive it, and not to receive it.

4. That the Lord was crucified betwixt two malefactors, all the Evangelists
agree without any variation in words: but the circumstance or order of time
wherein they were crucified, is not so punctually set down by any of the
Evangelists, as the circumstance or order of place. They were crucified all
together, one near to another; yet one after another in respect of time. Then
were there two thieves crucified with him (says S. Matthew) one on the right
hand, and another on the left, 27.38. This seems to imply that our Savior was
the first that was crucified. So does S. Marks relation, Chap. 15.27. And with
him they crucified two thieves, one on the right hand, and another on the left.
Nor does S. Luke any way vary from these two Evangelists, Luke 23.32, 33. And
there were also two other malefactors led with him to be put to death. And
when they were come to the place which is called Calvary; there they crucified
him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and another on the left. The
crucifying of the Son of God between two notorious malefactors, (as bad, if
not worse then Barabbas was) upon a cross, (as is probable) somewhat higher
then the other two, was so plainly foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 53.
that his Prophecy needs no other Comment, then that which S. Mark has made
upon this circumstance of place, wherein he was crucified. And the Scripture
was fulfilled which says, And he was numbered with the transgressors, or, as
the vulgar has it, Et cum sceleratis reputatus est; He was not only
sentenced to death, but reputed also by the multitude as a notorious
Malefactor; and for this reason crucified in the middle, and upon an higher
Cross. For this prerogative, or preeminence of place in capital punishments,
was by the custom of those times, and by other Nations since, allotted to the
principal offenders or Ringleaders in mutinies, treasons, or rebellions. Now
our Savior (as the superscription of his Cross does witness,) was put to
death for high treason. This is Jesus of Nazareth (or Jesus the Nazaren) the
King of the Jews. This was the entire title, or full inscription, as the Reader
will easily conceive, if he compare the four Evangelists together, albeit none
of them taken alone does express so much.

5. It might more easily be questioned then resolved (for the Evangelists say
nothing expressly one way or other) whether Pilat himself did write this title,
or caused it to be written by some under-Officer of the Court: or whether it
were first written in the Court of Justice, or at the place of execution. Pilat
(says S. John) wrote a title, and put it on the Cross, and the writing was
JESUS of NAZARETH King of the Jews. John 19.19. The superscription of his
accusation was (says S. Mark) The King of the Jews, Chap. 15.26. To me it
seems probable that this title was written or dictated by Pilat in the place
of Judicature, because I find no probable reason to conjecture that Pilat
should be present in person at the place of execution. It is probable again
from S. Matthew, that the table or chapter, wherein this title was written,
was not set up till after he was crucified: Sitting down, they watched there,
and set over his head his accusation written, This is Jesus the King of the
Jews, Matt. 27.36, 37. And S. John's words Chap. 19.20. to my apprehension do
more then intimate, that few or none besides Pilat himself did know of this
inscription, before the Cross was pitched, and our Savior nailed unto it.
This title (says he) then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus
was crucified, was nigh to the City. To what these last words should refer I
cannot conjecture, unless it be to give us notice, that the Jews which read
this title might speedily inform the high Priests what Pilat had written, and
they as speedily entreat Pilat (as they boldly did) to correct or amend this
superscription: for so it immediately follows in the Evangelist; Then said the
chief Priests of the Jews to Pilat, Write not, the King of the Jews, but that
he said, I am the King of the Jews. But Pilat answered, What I have written, I
have written, verse 23. The same Lord who had made Caiaphas not long before to
prophecy, did now guide Pilats hands and thoughts (though not to prophecy,
yet) to proclaim unto the world in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that this
harmless man whom they had first condemned in their own Consistory for
blasphemy against God; and afterward indicted of high treason against Caesar;
was indeed their true and lawful King: a greater and more just King then
Caesar himself was; and (as the Centurion afterward confessed) the very Son
of God. Whether the title and inscription of the crimes, and names of the
parties crucified were usual amongst the Romans, or used at this time only,
and that over our Saviors head alone, I leave unto the Readers search, or to
such as have leisure to study Roman rites or Antiquities.

6. Pilat in all probability did write, or cause to be written this
superscription, to avoid the calumniations of the Jews before the Roman Caesar,
unto whose accusations he had been the more liable, if he had suffered the
crime pretended by them to have slept, or buried it in silence without any
public Record, that he had punished JESUS of NAZARETH, as a traitor to the
Roman Emperor. After this inscription of his accusation was set up over his
head, they that passed by reviled him wagging their heads, saying, Thou that
destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self. If thou
be the Son of God come down from the Cross. Likewise also the chief Priests
mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders said: He saved others, himself he
cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the
Cross, and we will believe him: he trusted in God, let him deliver him now,
if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God, Matt. 27.39, 40, etc.
All these, and the like indignities done unto him betwixt the time of the
inscription over his Cross until the sixth hour, are so clearly and
punctually foretold by the Author of the 22. Psalm, that it might well be
questioned, whether the Psalmist did speak all this in the person of Christ
alone, or respectively of himself: that is in other terms, whether this Psalm
was merely prophetical as that 53. Chap. of Isaiah (for ought I conceive) is:
or typically prophetical. I rather assent unto their opinion, who grant this
Psalm to be meant (for the most part at least) of David himself; or of the
Author of it, whosoever he was, according to the literal or historical
sense, though more exactly by much to be fulfilled according both to the
mystical and exquisite literal sense in that Son of David, of whom David
himself and most of the Prophets in their extremest sufferings were but types
or shadows. Unto whose Poetical or hyperbolicall expressions of their
personal grievances in their several generations, the personal sufferings of
the Son of God were in succession of time to be commensurably fitted, after
such a manner, as a body in his grows is to the garment which in its infancy
was far too wide for it. Some passages in this Psalm there are, which cannot
in any sense befit our Savior, but the Psalmist alone; some again which fit
our Savior much better then they did this Psalmist or any other prophetical
type or shadow of him. Such are the casting of lots upon his vesture; the
piercing of his hands and feet. But what occasions soever this Psalmist had to
utter the like complaints, there is no character either of desperation or
murmuring against his God in these his afflictions throughout this whole
Psalm: Much less was there any inclination either to despair or impatience,
in the Son of God in whom alone this Psalm was exactly fulfilled. Neither
was this Psalm, or any other to be fulfilled in him, or by him according to
the characters of impatience or least intimation of doubt or despair in this
Psalmist; but according to their cheerful embracements of their present
afflictions and crosses, according to their confidence and hope of deliverance
from them, and exaltation or restoration into Gods most special favor after
them. All the delineations or characters of heroical qualities in the
Psalmists, were to be substantially and exactly fulfilled in the Son of God.
The conclusion of the latter part of this Psalm from the 21. verse to the end
is full of hope and comfort on the Psalmists own part; and a divine Prophecy
of the victory, which the Son of God, of whom he was the type or shadow,
should obtain over death, pains, and sorrows more grievous then he himself
did suffer. In this vision of the Son of Gods victory over all these, David
did foresee and rejoiced to foresee his own redemption from the present griefs
and sorrows of heart, with which he was compassed. Briefly, this 22. Psalm
from the beginning to the end lies under the self same observation with the Sea
the 7. book of these Commentaries. sect. 3. cap. 28. sect;. 5.
sixteenth Psalm, which without all question was penned by David himself.

7. But seeing it is to be confessed by all, that the most part of our Saviors
sufferings upon the Cross, whether inwardly in body, or in cursed speeches,
revilings, and taunts; are most clearly foretold in that 22. Psalm: This
ministered to me an occasion of a new quaere, why our Savior (during all the
time of his lingering pains upon the Cross) should rehearse only the first
words of this Psalm: and why them only, after all the rest, which did
literally and exactly concern him, had been visibly and audibly fulfilled in
his bodily sufferances, grievous pains, and other indignities done unto him.
Why did he not repeat that part of this Psalm, [ They pierced my hands and my
feet,] when they first nailed him unto the Cross? or why not the 18. verse,
They parted my garments, etc. at that instant, wherein the Soldiers cast lots,
whose his vesture should be? or why not the 7. and the 8. verses of the same
Psalm, All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out their lips:
they shake their heads, saying, [He trusted in the Lord;] at that very time,
when they that passed by, and the Priests and Elders that stood by the Cross,
reviled him, wagging their heads? All these indignities were done unto him
before the sixth hour, and in the open Sun: whereas he did not utter the
words of complaint, wherewith the Psalmist begins his Psalm, until the
ninth hour. When the sixth hour was come, (says S. Mark) there was darkness
over the whole land until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi lamasabacthani, which is being
interpreted, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? Mark. 15.33, 34. S.
Matthew relates the same story, in the same order, and circumstance of time,
only with this variation in words, Eli, Eli lamasabacthani? Matt. 27.46. S.
Mark it seems, relates the words in the Syriack or Chaldee then usual: S.
Matthew in the same syllables our Savior spoke them, and as they are in the
Psalmist; for Eli comes nearer to the name of Elias then Eloi: and might more
easily occasion that mistake in the multitude, which both the Evangelists
relate; then if he had cried Eloi: for that was the usual appellation of God
in those times. Some of them that stood by (says S. Mark) when they heard it,
said, Behold he calls Elias, Mark 15.35. Some of them (says S. Matthew) that
stood there, when they heard that, said, This man calls for Elias. And
straightway, one of them ran and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar,
and put it on a reed, and gave it him to drink: the rest said, Let be; let us
see, whether Elias will come to save him, Matthew. 27.47, etc. Between S.
Matthew, and S. Mark in this last clause, concerning vinegar which was given
unto him; there is some variation in words. And one ran (says S. Mark) and
filled a sponge full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink,
saying, Let alone, let us see whether Elias will come to take him down, Mark
15.36. S. Mark appropriateth that speech unto the party, which ran to give
him vinegar, which S. Matthew ascribes to the rest of the multitude seeking
(as his words seem to import) to inhibite him from doing that which he did.
This variation in words betwixt these two Evangelists, has occasioned a
question more proper to the Schools of Physic then of Divinity, as Whether
the drinking of vinegar be more effectual to prolong life, or hasten death in
bodies fainting, specially for want of blood. S. Marks relation seems to
imply that the intention of the party, which rann to give him vinegar, was to
prolong his life for a while, to try whether Elias would come, and take him
down from the Cross. But from S. Matthews relation of the same story, it is
probable that the multitude which heard him utter these words. My God, my God
why have thou forsaken me? did presume that vinegar would shorten his life;
and for this reason, as much as in them lay, did inhibite the other to give him
vinegar, lest it might have been replied, that Elias would have come to releeve
him, if he had not hastened his death. But vinegar as it is thought by Galen
himself, (if some good Commentators do not misquote him) mingled with hyssop,
is a strengthener; and that the vessel of vinegar which S. John says stood by
the Cross, was set there on purpose to keep such as were crucified from
fainting. However, there is no contradiction between the Evangelists. For the
multitude did therefore inhibite him, that ran for vinegar, lest by thus
doing, he should prolong his life; as if they had said. Seeing he calls for
Elias, stay thine hand, and see whether Elias will come to recover him in his
fainting. And he which gave him vinegar, after he had given it him, did
conform himself unto the rest, as if he had said; I have done this kindness
for him to prolong his life a while, let us see whether Elias will come and
take him down, and free him from the Cross. The truth is, that albeit he
which made such have to minister vinegar unto him, did do this feat at the
same time, or about that instant wherein our Savior cried out, Eli, Eli
lamasabacthani; yet this exclamation did no way cause him to make such speed,
but rather moved the rest which heard these words (perhaps better then he
did,) to dissuade him from doing that which he intended upon another occasion.
That which moved him to do, as he did, was another speech of our Saviors
uttered by him, when he was on the Cross; either immediately before, or
immediately after he cried out, Eli, Eli, etc. though not with such a loud
voice, as he uttered that. And this speech is mentioned only by S. John
19.28, 29. Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled said, I thirst. Now there was a vessel full of
vinegar, and they filled a sponge full of vinegar, and put it upon hyssope, and
put it to his mouth. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It
is finished. So that the intention of him that filled the sponge with vinegar,
and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth, was to quench his thirst
whereof he complained. But whether St. John means the same thing by hyssop,
which the other two Evangelists mean by the reed: or whether (...) in the
Ecclesiastical Greek, be the same with that which we call hyssop, or rather
rosemarie, which is rather a frutex, then an herb, and better resembles a
reed then hyssop; let professed Critics, or such as have leisure to peruse
Herbalists, or such as write of plants, determine. Many probabilities there
are, and to my remembrance alleged by Gerard (not the famous Herbalist) but
that learned Divine yet living, which half persuades me that the Hebrew (...)
whence (...) in Ecclesiastical Greek seems to be derived, was the branches or
stalks of Rosemary. But these are points, wherein a man may be altogether
ignorant without any detriment; or very skillful without any great advantage to
the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, and of him crucified. But unto this Ocean of
celestial knowledge, the fulfilling of every prophecy, of every legal
ceremony, of every historical type or shadow, makes some addition.

8. Amongst other prophecies or testimonies typically prophetical, which
remained to be fulfilled after our Savior cried out with a loud voice, Eli,
Eli lamasabacthani; that complaint of the Psalmist, 69.22. was one; They gave
me also gall for to eat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. He
says not, They gave him gall to eat in his hunger: and for this reason happily
he would not receive the wine which was mingled with gall by way of scorn or
mocking (at S. Luke instructs us, 23.36.) as being then neither hungry nor
thirsty. But S. John informs us, he received the vinegar offered unto him
at the ninth hour, because he was in extremity of thirst. At this hour and
not before, that of the Psalmist 22. was remarkably fulfilled in him; My
strength is dried up like a po^sheard, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws: Thou
have brought me to the dust of death, verse 15. As after his fasting forty
days in the wilderness, he was tempted with hunger: so after his lingering
pains upon the Cross, he was truly thirsty: and upon this sensible
experience of the greatest bodily grievance that can befall a man, he said, I
am athirst, but not with a loud voice or exclamation. Whether he first said, I
am a thirst, and then cried out with a loud voice, My God, My God why have thou
forsaken me? Or first cried out. My God, my God why have thou forsaken me?
and then said, I am athirst, I will not dispute, because I cannot determine.
The later of the two seems to me more probable. However; neither his speech
nor exclamation intimate any touch of impatience, much less of despair; but
only a desire to give the world notice that this 22. Psalm was specially
meant of him; and that all which was meant of him concerning his humiliation or
indignities done unto him upon the Cross, were now fulfilled; and that there
remained one or two sayings of the same or some other Psalmist to be fulfilled
before his death, especially by receiving the vinegar. For when he had
received it, (says S, John) he said, Consummatum est, It is finished; as if he
had said, Now my sufferings and indignities are at an end. Yet besides the
bodily thirst, wherewith he was at the ninth hour more deeply touched, then
with hunger in the wilderness, there was a thirsty desire of his soul to be
dissolved from the body, and to be with his Father. And in this his last
extremity, that other complaint of David was most exactly fulfilled, I stretch
forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty land.
Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails: hide not thy face from me, lest
I be like unto them that go down into the pit. I remember the days of old, I
meditate on all thy works; I muse on all the works of thy hands, Psalm. 143.6,
7. David was delivered from the pit which he feared, but our Savior was
speedily heard for that he prayed; which was, that his body might go unto the
grave, and his soul and spirit unto his Father. And albeit S. John instructs
us, that after he had received the vinegar, and said, It is finished; Mat.
27.50 Mat. 15.37
he gave up the Ghost: Yet S. Matthew, and S. Mark tell us, that he cried
again with a loud voice, and so gave up the Ghost. The articulation of this
loud voice or cry, is registered only by S. Luke 23.46. And when Jesus had
cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thine hands I commend my
spirit. And having said thus, he gave up the Ghost. And in this cry or speech,
another Scripture or prayer of David was exactly fulfilled, Pull me out of the
net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength. Into thine
hands I commend my Spirit, Psalm. 31.4, 5. But how was this fulfilled in him?
Surely as the Prophet, or the Holy Ghost by whom he spoke, did mean it. How
then was it meant of him? Not merely Prophetically, but typically of the
Psalmist, and more really and punctually of him. The Psalmist in his own
person, or as acting his own part, did commend his Spirit to God his Redeemer,
in hope to be redeemed from death, or danger of body intended against him. The
Redeemer of Mankind using the same words desired bodily death, or dissolution
of body and soul, commending his soul or spirit by a dying wish into his
Fathers hands.

9. The 143. Psalm (as the inscription of the Septuagint informs us) was
composed by David, when his Son Absalom with his accomplices did pursue him:
and the sixth verse, I stretch out my hands, etc. is signed with a Selah, a
note, or character as I take it, (not of music only) but of some greater
mystery to be fulfilled. The mystery in this particular was this, that as
David after he had in his own person prayed for deliverance, and was heard;
so was the Son of David instantly after he had received the vinegar,
delivered from the torments of death or bodily pains. When Jesus therefore had
received the vinegar (says S. John) he said, It is finished: and he bowed
his head, and gave up the Ghost, 19.30. If we consider either the 143. Psalm,
or the 31. as literally meant of David: there is no intimation of any
distraction of mind in him; much less was there any inclination to any
distraction, discontent or distrust, in JESUS the Son of GOD, in whom
whatsoever was commendably acted by David in his distress, was most punctually
and exquisitely fulfilled of this our blessed Savior in all his sufferings.
His memory was most fresh, and his patience most remarkable, when his mortal
spirits were expiring.

10. That ejaculation, Psalm. 31.6. Into thy hands I commend my spirit; was
(says Maldonat) meant of Christ in another sense, then it was of David: rather
fulfilled of Christ in a more exquisite sense, then it had been verified of
David. David according to the literal and historical sense being in
distress, commends the tuition or safety of his soul unto God, directing his
prayer for speedy deliverance from that bodily danger, wherewith he was beset,
unto Adonai Iehova unto the Lord of truth, or the Lord God his Redeemer. Pull
me out of the net, that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my
strength, etc. Thou have redeemed me, O Lord of truth, Psalm. 31.4, 5. The Lord
God Redeemer of mankind directs his prayer unto his Father, Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit, after he had suffered all the disgraces, pains,
and tortures, whereof any mortal body was ever capable. This delivery, or
surrender of his life, and soul viva voce, at the very moment or point of
death, into his Fathers hands, did move the heathen Centurion to say, Of a
truth, this man was the Son of God, Mar. 15.39. When the Centurion (says S.
Luke) saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a
righteous man, Luke 23.47. This is in effect the very same which S. Mark says.
For, in that the Centurion did acknowledge him for a righteous man; he did
necessarily in his heart acknowledge him to be the Son of God, because he
had so professed of himself. That righteousness, which the Centurion ascribes
unto him, was the truth of his confession before Pilat, when he was examined
upon this interrogatory, [ Art thou then the Son of God?] now more fully
proved and declared unto the world by the strange manner of his death.

11. The confession of this heathen man, was more Christian, then the
questions, which some Schoolmen have moved upon the delivery of his soul viva
voce into his Fathers hands. For so, some have questioned, whether he were
homicida sui, or made away himself by actual dissolution of his soul from his
body, before the violence and cruelty of the tortures whereto his Enemies put
him, could by course of nature work this divorce. Surely, if he did any way
prevent the death intended against him by the Jews, or shortened his own
natural life, though but for a moment; they had not been so true, and proper
murderers of him, as the Apostle intimates, and we Christians believe they
were. For albeit Abimelech had received a deadly incurable wound by the hands
of a woman; yet he died by the hands of his Page or Armor-bearer: And a
certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelechs head, and all to
brake his scull. Then he called hastily unto the young man his Armor-bearer,
and said unto him, Draw out thy sword and slay me; that men say not of me, A
woman slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died, Judge. 9.53,
54. But as some Schoolmen have in the disquisition of this point gone too
far: so others have acutely resolved the difficulty, and elegantly reconciled
the difference in opinions. Mors Christi non fuit vere miraculosa, erat tamen
miraculum in morte Christi. Christ did no way make away himself, or die by
miracle, but by course of nature; Yet was it a true miracle, that his life and
spirits being so far spent, he should have speech and memory so perfect, as
to make delivery of his soul into his Fathers hands viva voce, at the very
moment of his expiration. The Jews, and Romans did truly, and properly take
away his life; and yet he did as truly and properly animam ponere, lay down
his life for his sheep, in that he patiently submitted himself to their
tyrannical cruelty: and more sweetly and placidly resigned up his soul into
his Fathers hands at the instant of death by course of nature, or perhaps a
little after it, than a sheep does his fleece unto the shearer or his owner.
In this resignation or bequeathing of his soul thus placidly into his Fathers
hands, in his inimitable patience in all his sufferings, whether of torture or
indignities, there was a most exact concurrence, (or coincidence rather) of all
former sacrifices and obedience; more then the quintessence of those
sacrifices, wherewith God was always best pleased, that is, the sacrifice of a
contrite spirit, and broken heart not humbled, but humbling it self unto death.
The most full and proper satisfactory sacrifice, that could be required by God
or desired by man: a sacrifice so complete, as no wisdom besides wisdom
truly infinite, could have conceived: no person besides the person of him that
was truly God, could have offered or performed.

CHAP. XXX. That the Son of God should be offered up in bloody sacrifice, was
concludently prefigured by the intended death of Isaac.
1 THat the Son of God should be thus offered as a true and proper bloody
sacrifice, was concludently prefigured by the sacrifice of Isaac intended by
his father Abraham: That the Cross whereon he offered himself, should be the
very Altar of Altars, the body which the legal Altars did foreshadow; and that
this Cross should be erected without the gate of Jerusalem, was foreshadowed
by other matters of fact recorded by Moses. To begin with the first type, to
wit, Isaac. The place appointed by God himself for the sacrifice of Isaac, was
either the Mount, whereon the Temple stood, or some Mount near unto it, if not
Calvary it self. And when Abraham came near to the foot of the Mount (which of
the Mountains of Moriah soever it were) he laid the wood for the burnt offering
on Isaac his son Genesis 22.
. Isaac then bare his cross unwittingly, and was afterward willing by gentle
persuasions to die upon the wood, which he bare. For if he had detested or
abhorred the fact intended upon him, he was of years and strength sufficient
to have resisted his father, he being at least twenty five years of age, and
Abraham one hundred twenty five. Now our Savior (as the Evangelists record)
went forth bearing his cross unto a place called in Hebrew Golgotha, either a
place where the sculs of dead men were laid, or rather for the form or fashion
of it like a scull: But here some curious Inquisitor, or one disposed to
examine or scann the relations of the Evangelists, as Lawyers do later
evidences by more ancient deeds; would interpose this, or the like exception, [
Non concordat cum originali.] For our Savior CHRIST (as the Evangelists
record) was really sacrificed, actually crucified, and put to death, but so was
not Isaac as Moses tells us. But all this will infer no more, then all good
Christians must of necessity grant, to wit, that the Evangelicall records are
more than mere exemplifications of Moses. For that which was verified or truly
foreshadowed in Abraham's readiness to sacrifice his only son; and in his
sons willingness to be sacrificed by him: was to be really, and exactly
fulfilled of God the Father, who had bound himself by promise to give his only
son unto Mankind, and in the willingness of this his only son JESUS
CHRIST, to be offered up in sacrifice for the sins of the world. Our Apostle
is not afraid to say, that Abraham by faith offered up his only son (that
very man upon whose life or death, the fulfilling of the promises made to
Abraham and his seed, did depend:) accounting or being resolved, that God was
able to raise him up even from the dead, from whence also he received him in a
figure. Heb. 11.17, 18. Isaac then was a true figure both of Christ's death and
resurrection. And Abraham first in stretching forth his hands to slay his only
son; and secondly in being prohibited by God from accomplishing his
resolution: did accurately foreshadow those fundamental truths, which we
Christians believe concerning the true and bodily death, and resurrection of
our Lord and Savior. Abraham (by benign Interpretation of the mind or
resolution for the very fact or deed) did both sacrifice his only son, and
receive him from the dead.

2. But was there no more then a tentation or trial of Abraham's faith in that
story of Moses, Genesis 22? If no more then so, the tempting or trial it self
might seem superfluous. For God who knows all things, as well possible as
determinate or future, did most infallibly know what Abraham would do upon his
command, what he would leave undone upon express prohibition. This only
concludes that the omnipotent and all-seeing Father of power did not stand in
need of the determination of Abraham's will, either to foresee or determine that
which upon this actual obedience of Abraham, he did first bind himself by
oath to perform: That which long before he had decreed ad extra, and in his
general expression of his mercy and loving kindness; he had promised to do.
We had his promise before Mankind was actually propagated or multiplied upon
the earth, that the woman's seed should bruise the old Serpents head, which had
seduced her. The like comfortable words were at sundry times interposed by God
himself to Noah and Abraham.

3. But upon this present fact of Abraham, the same Lord interposeth his oath,
(and it was the first oath which we read, that God did make) for the
fulfilling of the general promise in one of Abraham's seed, Because thou have
done this thing, and have not spared thine only son; by my self have I
sworn, -- that in thy seed all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed. But
did not this God of mercy and consolation infallibly know that Abraham would be
ready to do all that he commanded him to do? Yes certainly and more then
so, that Abraham should not do all which he first commanded him to do. Why
then did he command him to sacrifice his only son Isaac? To this end that he
might have Abraham's full consent to offer up one of his seed, but not Isaac;
for the accomplishing of the blessing promised to mankind from the date of the
curse pronounced against the first woman. Inasmuch as Abraham was willing to
sacrifice his only son, the son of his old age, whom he loved more dearly,
then he could have done any one or more sons, or then he could have loved him
if he had been the son of his middle age: his consent for the sacrificing of
any other either of his or Isaacs posterity, whosoever he were, was evidently
included in this his extraordinary obedience. And yet so graciously and
lovingly did God deal with Abraham, that albeit he was the Lord of all, and
Abraham's most gracious Lord in particular; that he would not seize upon any of
Abraham's seed for a sacrifice of atonement betwixt himself and the whole world,
without Abraham's consent. This gracious Lord then by interposing the
forementioned oath, [ that in Abraham's seed all the Nations of the Earth should
be blessed] was abundantly merciful not to Abraham only, but unto all
mankind by him. And yet as Rupertus (out of S. Chrysostom if my memory fails
me not) observes, this abundant mercy was not diluta misericordia, that is,
this mercy though incomparable, was well placed, and the accomplishment of it
assured upon most just and equitable, though not upon any valuable
considerations. Quaesivit Deus titulum in Abrahamo, says this Author, etc. God
from the first promise made to mankind did expect a fit occasion to confirm
it by solemn oath, and found out Abraham a man ( quoad haec) according to his
own heart for accepting this league or covenant betwixt him and man upon
earnest given or resolved to be given by Abraham. For God had before determined
to give his Son for the redemption of men, and now finding Abraham most
willing and ready to give him his only Son, and finding also Abraham's only
son obedient unto death: he binds himself by solemn oath, that he would give
his only Son; and that his only Son being made the seed of Abraham, should
be more willing then Isaac was to be offered up in bloody sacrifice for the
redemption of Mankind. But the contents or importances of Gods covenant made
by oath unto Abraham, were they to be handled alone, would require a larger
volume and longer disquisition, then I dare in these years and in this
weakness project. So much of them as I conceive to be pertinent unto these
Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed, shall be intermingled (by Gods
assistance) in the explication of the articles following.

4. But taking all that has been said for granted, to wit, that God by
demanding Isaac in sacrifice, or by pressing Abraham to be the Sacrificer, did
bind himself by oath to offer up his only son in such a bloody sacrifice,
as Abraham had destinated Isaac unto: Yet the captious Jews, or other Infidels
would thus except, that Abraham never intended, nor was he by God commanded to
offer up his only son Isaac upon the cross: for that did not only imply a
bloody, but an accursed kind of death. This indeed is the maine stumbling
block to the Jew, who perhaps would not so much as have scunnered at the Altar,
if our Savior had been offered upon it, specially in the Temple, or in the
Courts adjoining. The next quaeries then, for satisfaction of the Jews or other
Infidels (if God at any time shall vouchsafe them eyes to see, or ears to
hear) are, in what sacred writings acknowledged by them, the bloody sacrifice
of Abraham's seed, or his sufferings upon a tree or cross without the City of
Jerusalem, not in the courts or precincts of the Lords house, were either
foretold or foreshadowed.

CHAP. XXXI. That the Son of God should be offered upon a tree or cross, was
prefigured by Moses his erection of the brazen Serpent in the wilderness.
1 THat the death of the Messiah or Son of God upon the Cross, was
prefigured by Moses his lifting up of the brazen Serpent upon a pole, (perhaps
a cross) in the wilderness: this Son of God did instruct his timorous
Disciple Nicodemus, who came to him by night, more fully, then he did such as
were his daily followers, until the time approached wherein he was to suffer
this ignominious death. His sacred Catechism to this Disciple, is exactly
registered by S. John, and uttered by him some years before that last feast of
Tabernacles whereat Nicodemus was present. Ioh. 7. No man (says our Savior
unto him) has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even
the Son of man which is in heaven: and as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up. While the Son of man
was lifted up, the Son of God was likewise lifted up, that is, by way of
sacrifice, or atonement. That the efficacy of this atonement should proceed
from virtue or power of himself as he was the Son of God, he himself
instructs us, ver. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life: for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn it, but
that the world through him might be saved. The end then of his coming into the
world was to save it, and the end of his lifting up upon the cross was to draw
all men to look upon him, as the Israelites, who were stung with fiery
serpents, did upon the brazen Serpent, which Moses erected in the wilderness.
To this purpose he afterward expounds himself, when he repeateth his
Catechism made to Nicodemus, unto the people, Ioh. 12. And I, if I be lift up
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. He did and does draw all men unto
him, not drag any after him. Such as will not be gently drawn by him, their
perdition is from themselves: and however all shall not in the issue be saved
by him, yet he is the Savior of all, though especially of such as believe,
that is, of such as out of the sense and feeling of their sins, (which are
the stings of death,) seek that remedy for their souls from meditations upon
the cross or upon him crucified, which Gods people in the wilderness did for
their bodies by looking upon the brazen Serpent erected by Moses.

2. That bodily salvation which they enjoyed by observing of this divine
prescript, was not procured by the material Serpent on which they looked, but
by the virtue of that invisible power whose spiritual efficacy was in times
following to be more visibly manifested in the accomplishment of that grand
mystery, which this strange temporal healing did prefigure: and that was the
future cure of our Souls; our deliverance from the tyranny of the old Serpent
by the Son of God becoming the Son of man, and vouchsafing to be lift up
from the earth upon the Cross. For it was requisite that upon them exercising
tyranny, should come penury, which they could not avoid; but to these it should
only be showed how their Enemies were tormented. For when the horrible
fierceness of beasts came upon these, and they perished with the stings of
crooked Serpents, thy wrath endured not for ever. But they were troubled for a
small season, that they might be admonished, having a sign of salvation to
put them in remembrance of the commandment of thy Law. For he that turned
himself toward it, was not healed by the thing which he saw, but by thee which
art the Savior of all, Wisd. 16.4, 5, 6, 7.

3. Shall we say then that the brazen Serpent was a true picture or type of
Christ? So, many have from the forecited place of S. John concluded; and of
these many, not a few have sought out diverse properties of brass, and of
Serpents, more then accurate naturalists before had known, to salve up the
apparent incongruity betwixt the picture and the body, which they would have it
to represent. But when they have said all they can, or others more then they
could for them, the congruity will be no better then si gryphes jungantur
equis. For what correspondencie or convenience can there be between the
Serpent, and the woman's seed? Shall we attempt to foreshadow light by
darkness? or make a league betwixt Christ, and Beliall? All that which our
Saviors exposition upon Moses his fact will concludently infer, is briefly
this, that the mystery of his suffering upon the Cross was prefigured by the
erection of the brazen Serpent: and by the comfort which the wounded Israelites
found by looking upon it.

4. Ahitophels treachery against his Master David did truly foreshadow the
betraying of David's Lord by Judas; yet no man will hence conclude, that
Ahitophel was a type of Christ or of his death, but rather of Judas and his
fearful end. Nor was the brazen Serpent any other ways a type of Christ's
person, then Ahitophel was, that is no type at all: yet a more excellent type
of that old Serpent whom the woman's seed was to vanquish, then Ahitophel was of
Judas. And the erection of this Serpent upon a pole or tree, was a prophecy or
speaking picture that the victory of the woman's seed or Son of God over
Satan, should be accomplished upon the Cross. This Interpretation I learn from
our Savior himself, John 12.31. Now is the judgment of this world, now shall
the prince of this world be cast out. Now, that is, when the Son of man
shall be lift up. The Cross then was the scene or stage, wherein the long
duel was to be determined; and the destruction of the old fiery Serpent upon
the stage was excellently foreshadowed by the lifting up of the brazen Serpent
in the wilderness, which questionless did better represent a dead, wounded,
or bruised Serpent, then a live or active one. This interpretation or display
of that sacred Emblem, is most consonant to the historical circumstances and
occasions, which Moses had to make, and set up the brazen Serpent upon a pole
to the view of all the people. God from the fall of our first Parents did by
way of punishment, as well upon the woman and her seed, as upon the Serpent and
his seed, which had seduced her, denounce a perpetual enmity between them.
Now albeit this enmity did principally consist between the woman's seed (...),
that is our Savior, and the old Serpent, that is the Devil and their
followers: Yet this spiritual enmity was visibly represented to the world by
that antipathy which in course of nature is usually experienced between men
and bodily Serpents. And this enmity (specially on the Serpents part) was never
more remarkable then in the wilderness when the murmuring Israelites did tempt
the Lord their God after the same manner, as the first woman had done, that is
by lusting after meats for that time and place forbidden; by loathing Manna and
heavenly food which God had plentifully provided for them. And they departed
from the mount Hor by the way of the red Sea, to compass the land of Edom: and
the people were sore greeved, because of the way. And the people spoke against
God, and against Moses, saying, Wherefore have ye brought us out of Egypt to
die in the wilderness? for here is neither bread nor water, and our soul
loatheth this light bread. Wherefore the Lord sent fiery Serpents among the
people which stang the people, so that many of the children of Israel died.
Therefore the people came to Moses and said, We have sinned for we have
spoken against the Lord, and against thee: pray unto the Lord, that he take
away the Serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people. And the Lord said
unto Moses, Make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall
come to pass, that every one that is bitten when he looks upon it, shall
live. And Moses made a Serpent of brass and put it upon a pole, and it came to
pass, if a Serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the Serpent of brass,
he lived, Number. 21.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.

5. The importance or implication of the history, is, that as God had now
brought that curse upon them, which had been denounced against the woman's seed
from her first sin: so in case they would not tempt the Lord their God by
renewing their first Parents sin, they should in good time see the curse
denounced against the old Serpent, that is the crushing of his head, as exactly
fulfilled as the punishment upon the woman's seed had been by the fiery
Serpents in biting their heels: That the same Lord who had now saved them from
the poison of these lesser bodily Serpents, would in his good time deprive the
old Serpent of his deadly sting, and destroy death it self by dying upon the
Cross. The experience of woes or calamities threatened against disobedience, is
usually given by Gods Ier. 32.42.
Prophets as a pledge or earnest for the accomplishment of the good things,
which he has promised to the penitent.

6. That which specially did first persuade me thus to display the Emblem of
the brazen Serpent, was the demolition of it by good Hezekiah, who
questionless would never have done to it as he did, had he known or taken it
to have been the type or figure of his expected Redeemer, rather then of his
Enemy. The good King by this zealous fact did foreshadow the future
accomplishment of that grand mystery, which the erection of the brazen Serpent
was appointed to represent, to wit, the dissolution of the old Serpents
Kingdom over this world. The adoration of this Serpent, whilst it stood
uncrusht, was not only an abuse of things indifferent, but the most
preposterous idolatry which this rebellious stiffenecked people did at any time
practice. For in worshipping it, they did worship him, whose quality and person
it did represent. And for this reason Hezekiah was moved with greater
indignation against it, then against any other idol, statue, or relics of
idolatry which came in his way. He took away the high places, and brake the
images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, that
Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense
unto it, and he called it Nehushtan, 2. Kings 18.4, 5. A name questionless
implying much more, then the mere grammatical expression (which most
Interpreters use) imports. Nor had this good Kings words or fact been worth
the registring, if he had only called a brazen Serpent broken to pieces a
piece of brass. But the full importance of this word, as of many others in the
original, whether in the Greek or Hebrew, will not be easily found in ordinary
Lexicons or Nomenclators. Every good Interpreter should have a Lexicon either
of his own, or others gathering peculiar unto Divinity, specially for words
used in a technicall, Emblematicall, or proverbiall sense. However Nechosheth
signifies no more ordinarily then brass: Yet Nehushtan in this Emblematicall
speech, or fact of Hezekiah (as I should guess) imports no less, then our
English foul feend, the old Dragon or Satanas. As these Idolaters in Hezekiahs
time did adore the picture or type of the old Serpent: so this last generation
having forsaken the God of their Fathers, did choose Barabbas the son of the
Serpent, and renounced the Son of God for being their Lord, and so make up
the full measure of their forefathers iniquity, and brought a greater plague
upon their posterity, then any which did befall their Ancestors in the
wilderness, whether by the biting of Serpents, or other of Gods judgments or
punishments.

7. To this effect I took occasion to expound this fact of Hezekiah obiter and
upon another text in a learned audience many years now ago, without the tax of
any (as far as I could hear) and with better approbation of some then
present, then I expected, because the exposition was new and uncouth. And yet
as I have found since, conceived before by a learned man, though no professed
Divine. But (as the proverb is) bystanders sometimes see more then they who
play the game. And I must freely confess that for the explication of many
places in Scripture I have learned more, or been better confirmed in mine
opinions by the Lawyers then by the professed Divines of the French Nation, one,
or two excepted. The man to whom I am in this particular beholden, is Hotman,
And that which in his history deserves to be had in special memory, he
demolished and cast down the brazen Serpent, which Moses by Gods command had
set up in the Desert, that such as were slung by the biting of Serpents, might
be healed by looking thereon, when he perceived the superstitiously-bent
people thereunto idolatrously to attribute Divine honor. For there was not in
that Image any Divine efficacy, but this being the time of Infancy of Gods
worship, Moses the Schoolmaster of the Hebrews, by this Image did prefigure
Christ's triumph over the conquered Serpent, when by the name of Serpent (
Scilicet in 3. Cap. ejus libelli.
as is said at the beginning) he intimated the subtle enemy of Mankind.

Quodque in ipsius historia singulari memoria dignum est, serpentem aeneum,
quem Dei monitu Moses in solitudine statuerat, ut qui serpentum morsu ulcerati
essent, eo conspecto sanarentur, excidit atque disjecit, cum animadvertisset
populum superstitione imbutum divinos statuae honores tribuere. Non enim ei
simulachro vis ulla divinitus inerat, sed cum haec divinae religionis esset
pueritia, Moses hebraeae gentis paedagogus, eo simulachro futurum Christi de
Serpente devicto trophaeu^ designabat, cum serpentis nomine callidu^ (ut a
principio dictum est) humani generis hostem significaret. Hotman in
consolatione e sacris literis petita, de factis Ezechiae, page 128.



CHAP. XXXII. That the Son of God should suffer without the gates of
Jerusalem, prefigured by the sacrifice of the Atonement.
1 BUt before Gods people could be capable of this cure of their souls by
looking upon him who did vanquish the old Serpent, or before he came to be the
Author of so great salvation: he was to make full satisfaction for their sins,
whose weight had otherwise pressed all Mankind down to hell. This full
reconciliation or atonement betwixt the just unpartial Judge and sinful men,
was made upon the cross. But some will demand in what part of Moses writings
this was foretold or prefigured? It was most exquisitely foretold and
prefigured, partly in the alienation of the primacy from the month Tisri unto
the month Abib. Until the law was given, Tisri had absolute precedence, being
the month wherein according to all probability the world was created. But upon
the deliverance of Abraham's seed from the tyranny of Egypt, the month Abib by
Gods special command had both precedence and preeminency: Yet not absolute
precedence, but precedence in respect of that which was more preeminent, to
wit, for the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical account; as for their accounts
temporal, September or Tisri did still retain precedence. And for this reason
I take it our Savior was first proclaimed the Messiah by John Baptist in the
month Tisri, but afterward declared to be the Son of God by his
resurrection from the dead in the month Abib. At his Baptism he had fulfilled
one part of the mystery prefigured in the legal feast of atonement, which was
celebrated upon the tenth day of the month Tisri. In his sufferings upon Mount
Calvary he did fully accomplish that which was prefigured by the legal
sacrifices in the day of Atonement, and that which was inchoated by himself at
the day of his Baptism. At his See Christ's answer to John.
Baptism he fulfilled the mystery of the escape goat bearing these peoples
sins into the wilderness, and there vanquished the great Tempter who had
first vanquished them and their forefathers. At the feast of the Passover in
the month Abib he accomplished the mystery prefigured by the other goat, whose
blood was brought by the high Priest into the Sanctuary. Thus much we learn
from our Apostle, Hebr. 13.10. etc. We have an Altar, whereof they have no
right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle. For the bodies of those beasts,
whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the high Priest for sin, are
burnt without the camp. Wherefore Jesus 2also, that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth
therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. The true meaning or
purport of this passage, and the connection of it with the former, the Reader
shall find more at large in a Sermon to be annexed (by Gods assistance) with
others to this present and the former Treatise. All in this place intended by
me, is to satisfy such as will be satisfied, that our Saviors sufferings upon
the cross were a most true and proper sacrifice: a sacrifice fully
satisfactory for the sins of the world: the accomplishment of all the
sacrifices of the law: the only sacrifice whereof the anniversary sacrifices
used in the feast of atonement, were but shadows, no true images. Again, that
the anniversary sacrifices of the Passover which were in the month Abib, and
those in the feast of Atonement were to be jointly accomplished at one and the
same time, to wit, in the first month after this peoples delivery out of
Egypt; is employed in the alteration of the account upon their deliverance. For
that alteration portendeth that in the very same month, in which they were
delivered, there should be in after times a more general deliverance of Gods
people, whose memory should deserve the precedence of all feasts and
solemnities. Such was that feast of the Passover, wherein our Savior suffered.

2. As for all the circumstances of place, or time, or the like wherein other
legal sacrifices were offered; the mysteries prefigured by them could not
possibly be accomplished in one and the same time, and place by any sacrifice;
not by the sacrifice of the Son of God himself, though all-sufficient for its
substance. For if he should have fulfilled the sacrifice of Atonement in the
feast of Atonement, and the sacrifice of the Paschal lamb in the month Abib, or
in the place where it was offered; he must have dyed oftener then once, and in
more places then one. For the mystery prefigured by the Paschal lamb, that was
accomplished in due time on the day appointed for that sacrifice. So was the
Altar whereon he was offered, that is, the cross, the accomplishment of the
figurative place whereon the first Paschal lamb was offered, and that was the
lintels or door posts of the Israelites houses, on which the blood of the
Paschal lamb was sprinkled. But the slaughter of the Paschal lamb in the first
institution, was intra pomaeria, within the doors or precincts of private
families, or within the compass of public places of meetings. So that in
respect of the place wherein the true Paschal lamb, and the true lamb of God
was slain or sacrificed, there is some disparity; yet a full harmony between
the substance of both sacrifices, and the circumstances of time wherein they
were offered. But this defect, or rather this variation concerning the
circumstance of place, wherein the Paschal Lamb and the Lamb of God, who takes
away the sins of the world were offered, is most exactly recompensed by the
circumstance of place wherein the body of the he goat, on which the Lords lot
should fall, and other sacrifices in the day of Atonement were by a most
peremptory law to be consumed. And that place was without the camp, whilst the
posterity of Jacob had no Temple or no fixed place of worshipping God, but a
mooveable Tabernacle. Also the bullock for the burnt offering, and the goat for
the sin offering (whose blood was brought to make a reconciliation in the
holy place) shall one carry out without the host to be burnt in the fire with
their skins and with their flesh, and with their dung, Vide Chytraeism in hoc
caput.
Lev. 16.27. This is the Apostles meaning in the forecited place Hebr. 13.
Jesus, also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered
without the gate, that is, without the city, yet near the suburbs of
Jerusalem, whose type or figure was the camp of the Israelites in the
wilderness, or at that time wherein the Tabernacle was moveable. For the
Tabernacle was but a model or pattern of the Temple in Jerusalem, as the camp
of the Israelites in the wilderness was of Jerusalem it self.

3. And however their GOD, and supreme Lawgiver did by a peremptory law enjoyne
his people, that no manner of bloody sacrifice should be offered, or at least
no public solemn feast be celebrated save only in Jerusalem, after the Ark
was brought into it and placed in the Temple: Yet the circumstance of the
place, wherein our Savior was sacrificed, was exactly foreshadowed by the
place wherein the anniversary sacrifices in the feast of Atonement during the
time of this peoples progress in the wilderness or moveable Tabernacle, were
offered, and that was without the camp, or trenches of that great Congregation.

4, The sum of all the forementioned prefigurations or predictions, whether
of our Saviors offering up of himself according to his Fathers will and
appointment, or of the times, and places wherein he was offered; is this, that
this his offering up of himself was a true and proper sacrifice; a more full
satisfaction for all the sins or tranagressions of men against the moral law
of God, then the sacrifices in the feast of atonement or the Passover or other
anniversary solemnities, were for sins whether of omission or commission
merely against the law of ceremonies. This is most divinely expressed by our
Apostle Hebr. 9.13. Sect. 2.
as has been handled more at large before.

CHAP. XXXIII. At what hour of the day our Savior was crucified, at what
hour taken down from the cross, and of the mysteries ensuing his death.
1 ABout the time of the year, as in what month, and in what day of the
month, the Lamb of God was offered or did offer up himself in bloody
sacrifice, there is no question of moment, or none at least which may not
easily be resolved. But as concerning the time of the day, or hour wherein he
was offered, there is more then variety of opinions amongst the learned: some
appearance of contradiction between two, over whom were they now alive, no
authority now on earth could have any power either of arbitration or
jurisdiction. It was the third hour (says S. Mark,) and they crucified him,
etc. 15.25. designing the time after he was brought to Golgotha, and refused to
taste of the wine mingled with myrrh; Whereas S. John speaking of the time a
little before Pilat gave sentence, says, It was the preparation of the
Sabbath, and about the sixth hour. John 19.14. That the various relations of
these two Evangelists (if we take them as they are extant in most copies)
should be reconciled, there is a necessity. And if either of their own
writings were to be corrected by the other; S. John's Gospel (as Maldonat well
observes) were to be corrected by S. Marks. For S. Marks assertion is
punctual and precise, and between the ancient Manuscripts and modern
exemplifications of his Gospel, there is no variation: but in S. John's there
are. For in some copies yet extant, and in some which Nonnus in his Poetical
paraphrast did follow, there is express mention of the third hour, not of the
sixth. Whence it is probably conjectured by some, that the sixth hour was
inserted by the Transcribers of S. John's Gospel for the third, upon a mistake
of the figures or numericall characters; the numericall character of the sixth
hour being not much unlike the numericall character of the third hour. And
yet it cannot be denied that in some ancient Manuscripts of the Greek Testament
now extant, the numbers of hours or days or years are expressed in entire
words, not in figures or numericall characters. But whether this manner of
expressing numbers was usual ab initio, or in the times when S. John wrote, or
used at all by him, is not so clear. For several ages or revolutions of times
have their several manners of expressions, specially for quoting of Scriptures
or deciphering of numbers. And sometimes later ages agree better in this point
with the most ancient, then middle ages do. The determination of this
particular, as whether in S. John's time, numbers were expressed at large, or in
figures, I refer to professed Antiquaries.

2. But admitting that S. John did write expressly, about the sixth hour (not
in figures:) Many learned men of several Churches and Religions, have wittily
attempted to salve the appearance of contradiction betwixt him and St. Mark, by
reducing the manner of measuring the day unto the scale or manner of measuring
the night, which they divide into four parts or watches, every watch
containing three hours according to the Sun-diall; So as the first great hour
answerable to the watch by night, did begin at six in the morning, and continue
till nine which with them was called the third hour; and this third hour
answerable to the second watch of the night containing likewise three diurnall
hours, did continue until the midday, or twelve of the clock, at which time
their sixth hour did commence, and continue til their ninth hour, which is
our three a clock in the afternoon, at which time it is without question that
our Savior did yield up the Ghost. So that when S. Mark says, our Savior was
crucified at the third hour, that is, about nine a clock in the forenoone, and
before twelve, which was the sixth hour; and when S. John says he was
sentenced to death by Pilat about the sixth hour: we must take his meaning to
be thus, that he was so sentenced, as long before the sixth hour, which is
our twelve a clock, as after the third hour, which is our nine. So that the
precise time of his crucifying should be about half an hour after ten of the
clock. For if we admit or allow the former scale of dividing the day into the
first, third, sixth, and ninth hour, it might as truly be said, our Savior
was crucified about the sixth hour, as about the third hour, if he were
crucified at half an hour after ten. For so some Collegiat statutes which
enjoine the shutting of their gates at eight in Winter, and nine in Summer, and
opening them about six in Winter, and five in Summer; have been by legal and
authorized construction adjudged to be rightly observed, so they were shut
within half an hour after eight in Winter, or half an hour after nine in
Summer: or opened half an hour after six in Winter, and half an hour after
five in Summer. So that such as approve the former reconciliation of S. Mark
and S. John, did very cautelously pitch upon the point of time mentioned, that
is, half an hour after ten in the morning for the crucifying of our Savior,
or for the point of time wherein Pilat did sentence him to death. For this was
the just middle point between the third hour, and the sixth hour, and did
equally refer to both. This reconciliation of the two Evangelists, would have
better satisfied me, if the Authors or followers of it had not attempted to
have given a reason for it, which I can no way approve, but rather suspect the
opinion it self for the improbabilitie of the reason alleged by them.

3. The reason which Maldonat (a man free enough to admit misnomers or mistakes
in Transcribers of the Gospel) alleges for his opinion [that our Savior was
not crucified precisely at the third houre] (as S. Mark says;) is because in
his judgment so many businesses or debatements as did interpose in that
morning, wherein our Savior was sentenced unto the death of the Cross, could
not be dispatched before the third hour, that is nine a clock in the
forenoone. But in my opinion (which I submit to better judgments) more
businesses by many then the Evangelists relate, might have been determined
according to the course of civil Justice (especially before such as examine
them summarie and de plano) within less time then S. Mark and the other
Evangelists allot to the examination, arraignment, and adjudication of our
Savior to the death of the Cross. Vt primum exortus est dies, As Soon as it
was day (says S. Luke) the Elders of the people, and the chief Priests and
Scribes came together, and led him to their Council, etc. Luke 22.66. The time
then of their Assembly to examine him (albeit we account the beginning of the
day only from the Sunne-rising not from the dawning) was at six a clock in the
morning, (if not before.) And after they had examined him, the whole multitude
of them arose, and led him unto Pilat and begun to accuse him, Luke 23.3. And
this in all probability was before their second hour, or seven a clock with us
in the morning. Now the time of our Saviors circuiting from Pilat to Herod,
and back again, and all the debatements betwixt Pilat and the Jews, which are
related by the Evangelists, could not in that tumultuous Congregation take up
more time then an hour and an half. So that our Savior might not only be
sentenced to death by Pilat (as S. John relates) but actually crucified, or
lifted up upon the Cross precisely and punctually at the third hour, as S.
Marks words import.

4. If we thus reconcile S John, (or rather the Transcribers of his Gospel)
unto S. Mark, and his Gospel, as in all copies now it is extant; the harmony
between the type and the antitype, or the proportion between the picture and
the live substance represented by it, will be most exact. For, we are to
consider that the Son of God by the sacrifice of himself once for all, was to
accomplish not only the anniversary sacrifices of atonement of the Passover,
etc. but the continual daily morning and evening sacrifices. The hour
allotted for the morning sacrifice was the third hour, or nine a clock in the
forenoone; the hour appointed, and accustomed for the evening sacrifice, was
the ninth hour, or three a clock in the afternoon: and at this hour (as the
Evangelists jointly record) our Lord Redeemer did accomplish his sacrifice.
Jesus (says S. Matthew) when he had cried again with a loud voice (and that
was about the ninth hour) gave up the ghost. Et ecce aulaeum Templi fissum
est, and behold the veil of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom. 27.46, 50, 51. One special importance of the word Ecce in this place
as in many others, is the present exhibition of that which was promised or
portended. The mystery foreshadowed or portended by the anniversary sacrifices
of the Paschal Lamb, by the daily morning and evening sacrifices, by those
sacrifices of the Atonement whose blood was brought by the high Priest unto the
Sanctuary; was in brief this, that all these rites or solemnities should expire
upon the death or sacrifice of the true Lamb of God: and thus much, and more is
sealed unto us by that speech of our Savior a little before his death,
Consummatum est, All is finished, John 19.30. Now the rending of the veil
immediately after our Savior had commended his Spirit into his Fathers hands,
did betoken that now, and not before, the entrance or passage into that most
holy place, which was prefigured by the material Sanctum Sanctorum, was set
open not to Priests only, but to all true believers: That the celestial
Sanctuary (whether that be coelum empyr aeum the seat of our future bliss, or
some other place) was now instantly to be hallowed, or consecrated by the blood
of the high Priest himself, as the terrene Tabernacle or Sanctuary was by the
legal high Priest with the blood of bullocks or goats, etc.

5. Whithersoever the soul of this our high Priest went that day, wherein he
offered the sacrifice of himself, (as whether into the nethermost hell, or into
the place where the souls of the righteous men did rest,) there is or should
be no question among good Christians but that he was that evening in Paradise.
For, so had he promised unto the penitent Malefactor who was crucified with
him, with an asseveration equivalent to an oath, Amen dico tibi, hodie mecum
eris in paradiso, Verily I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. As for those sophistical Novelists (to say no worse) who thus
mispoint the words of his promise, Amen dico tibi hodie, mecum eris in
Paradiso, Verily I say unto thee this day, thou shall be with me in Paradise,
to wit, sometimes hereafter, as at the general resurrection of the just
(though not this very day,) they declare themselves to be in this particular as
in most others, more unfit to interpret sacred Oracles, then Apes to be
principal Actors in stately doleful Tragedies. For our Lord and Savior did
most graciously grant this poor soul more then he durst petition for; and
with better expedition, then he could hope for, to wit, a present estate of
blessedness, whereas he requested only to be remembered with some mercy or
favor without indenting any point of time (after our Savior had entered into
his Kingdom.) And his entrance into that Kingdom was not upon the same day
wherein he suffered, nor within forty days after. The Kingdom of heaven was
not set open to any believers, not to Abraham himself upon our Saviors passion
or resurrection, whether that Kingdom import the same place wherein Abraham
before that time was or some other. For it is one thing to say that the souls
of righteous men deceased were in heaven before our Savior ascended thither:
another to say they were in the Kingdom of heaven, or Citizens of that
Kingdom, which upon the day of our Saviors victory over death was not
erected. And he who denies the souls of the Patriarchs to be partakers of the
Kingdom of heaven before our Saviors death, cannot be concluded to grant that
they were either in Limbo or in any other region under the earth, or under the
stars.

6. But to waive further dispute about this point for the present: Our Saviors
soul upon the same day wherein he dyed, was in paradise: and so was the soul
of the penitent Malefactor, yet not at the same instant (perhaps not within the
compass of the same hour wherein our Saviors soul went thither) in what
region soever whether of heaven or earth this paradise was seated. For it is
evident out of the Evangelicall histories, that our Savior did surrender his
soul into his fathers hand before either of them who were crucified with him,
did expire. For as was before recited out of S. Matthew 27.50. immediately upon
the ninth hour our Savior yielded up the Ghost. This testimony alone, or this
at least with the like, Mark 15.37. had been sufficient to prove the Article of
our Saviors death. But for the more full satisfaction of all posterity as well
of Jews as of Gentiles, God would have the death of his only Son to be
remarkably recorded, by the solemn testimony of the Roman Centurion taken upon
examination before Pilat: And now when the even was come (that, I take it, was
betwixt five and six of the clock:) because it was the preparation, that is,
the day before the Sabbath; Joseph of Arimathea an honorable Counsailer, who
also waited for the Kingdom of God, came and went in boldly to Pilat, and
craved the body of JESUS. And Pilat marvailed if he were already dead, and
calling unto him the Centurion, he asked him, whether he had been any while
dead. And when he knew it of the Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. Mark
15.42, 43, etc. That our Savior died before the other which were crucified
with him, is more apparent from the parallel testimony of S. John, 19.31, 32,
etc. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should
not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath day, (for that Sabbath day was an
high day:) besought Pilat that their legs might be broken, and that they might
be taken away. Then came the Soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other which was crucified with him. But when they came to JESUS and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs.

7. And thus we may observe that as well the malignant Jews, as Christ's
Disciples of the Jewish Nation, and the Roman Soldiers, though unwittingly did
strangely combine for the accomplishment of diverse prophecies or prefigurations
concerning the death of the Son of God. Had he not died before the other two
which were crucified with him, his legs had been broken with theirs, and his
body had not been interred before the setting of the Sun, as is probable from
Pilats demand to the Centurion [ whether he had been any while dead] before he
would give Joseph leave to bury his body. Now if his body had not been interred
before the Sunset, or at least before the stars appeared, the mystery
prefigured by the imprisonment of Jonas three days and three nights in the
belly of the whale could not by any Synecdoche have been exactly fulfilled by
his blessed rest in the grave: but of this hereafter, Again, if the breaking of
his legs had not been prevented by his dying before the other two which were
crucified with him; the harmony betwixt the manner of his death, and the death
of the Paschal Lamb could not have been so exact: for no bone of it was to be
broken, Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12, Nor should that which David spoke of himself,
(but of himself as he was the type of Christ) when he was in some peril of
breaking his legs or arms, or some better joints, have found its
accomplishment in the circumstance of our Saviors death. These things were
done (says S. John) that the Scripture might be fulfilled, A bone of him shall
not be broken. John 19.36. This allegation of S. John (if my observation fail
not) referrs as literally and properly to that saying of David, Psalm. 34.20.
(when he was driven by Saul into the cave of Adullam) as unto the rite of the
Paschal Lamb before cited, He keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken.
This was not a mere historical narration, but a speech typically
prophetical, that is, first verifyed of David, and afterward to be more
exactly accomplished in the Son of David. Of the same rank was that which
follows, Evil shall stay the wicked, and they that hate the righteous shall
be desolate. The Lord redeemeth the soul of his Servants, and none of them
that trust in him, shall be desolate. verse 21, 22. The truth of this
observation was never so punctually proved, or exemplifyed as in the death of
the two Malefactors which were crucified with our Savior. Though neither of
them had any interest in the former promise [ He keeps all his bones, not one
of them is broken;] yet the soul of the one who trusted in the Lord, was
instantly redeemed, and taken up into Paradise by him: the soul of the other
which did hate and revile him, was (to say no worse) left desolate.

8. Again, the law concerning the taking down of such as were hanged on a tree
(though not strangled,) before the night went over them; had not been
accomplished in our Savior, unless the day wherein he dyed had been the
preparation to the great Sabbath. For it was not the zeal of the Jews unto the
due observation of this law, but fear of polluting this great Sabbath which
moved them to become petitioners unto Pilat, that the bodies of all that were
then crucified might be taken down, and carried away before the beginning of
the Sabbath, which was in the twilight following. The law which out of this
fear they occasioned to be observed and fulfilled, is extant, Deuteron. 21.22,
23. And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and be be to be put to
death, and thou hang him on a tree: his body shall not remain upon the tree,
but thou shall in any wise bury him that day: for he that is hanged is accursed
of God: that thy land be not defiled, which the Lord thy God gives thee for an
inheritance. That this law had a special reference or pre-aspect unto our
Saviors death upon the cross, S. Paul has taught us, Galat. 3.13. Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it
is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Lastly, however the
Centurion and the Soldiers apprehended no necessity of breaking our Saviors
legs, as being persuaded that he had been a good while dead, and fit to be
buried: Yet one of them to make all (as we say) sure, pierced his side while he
was yet hanging upon the cross, with a spear, striking him (as by the posture
of his body is probable) under the short ribbs through his very heart:
otherwise he might have broken one, or more of his bones. And this, as S. John
instructs us, was done that another Scripture might be fulfilled, And they
shall look on him whom they have pierced, John 19.37. The prophecy which by
this accident was exactly fulfilled, we have Zachar. 12.8, 9, etc. In that day
shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among
them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as
the Angel of the Lord before them. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will seek to destroy all the Nations that come against Jerusalem. And I
will pour upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of Grace and supplications; and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, etc.

9. This sacred passage lies punctually under that line or rule for
interpreting sacred oracles, which in these commentaries has been often
heretofore mentioned: that is, it is a passage which cannot be literally
verifyed of any person besides God himself, nor could it have been fulfilled in
God himself otherwise, then as he was incarnate, made subject to death, and
violent percussion after death. But whether this passage either according to
the literal sense of the Prophet, or to the intention of S. John in avouching
the fulfilling of it, amount to any more then has been said, or (in
particular) to infer [that real communication of properties between the
divine and humane nature of Christ,] which some of the most learned in the
Lutheran Church would from this place (in special) press upon us; is a
disquisition more proper to the Article of the holy Catholic Church, then to
this Treatise of the Humiliation of the Son of God. That humiliation (as I
conceive) did expire with his death; or at least when he was taken down from
the cross after his sacred sides had been so pierced, as S. John relates by
that rude Roman Soldier, whose name by unwritten tradition was Longius, but a
name (as I suppose) mistaken for the weapon wherewith he pierced him, which was
(...).

The Conclusion of this Treatise.
IT follows in the Apostles Creed that he was buried, that he descended into
hell. In what sense soever we take this word buried, the historical truth of
it is most punctually recorded by the Evangelists. The only quaere which this
article, or this part of the article will admit, is, whether by his burial we
are to understand the interring or depositure of his body in the monument: or
rather his imbalming by Joseph or Nicodemus, who did accomplish that work which
the good woman before his death did foresignify, or begin by pouring out that
precious ointment on his head. This quaere has been long ago proposed by some
learned men in the Vide Petrum Ramu^ in Commentariis de side Capite 130. de
Christi sepultura. Et Tremellium in editione Syriaci Testamenti.
French and German Churches, who seem to deny the local descension of his
soul into hell, either into the place of the damned, or into Limbum patrum.
But this truth they have denied or questioned with better moderation and
discretion, then such of our Native English as either have questioned or
opposed our Churches meaning in this Article. For by his descending into hell,
these men would have us understand the interring or depositure of his body in
the monument or sepulcher wherein no man had been laid before, being before
imbalmed, as the manner of the Jews was to bury, John 19 40. But for pleading
one way or other of Christ his descension into hell, at this time, or in this
place, I have excluded my self in the Sea the 2. page of this Treatise.
general division of this and the ensuing Treatise, which was concerning the
humiliation and exaltation of the Son of God. Now unto whether member of this
dichotomie or general division, the burial, interring, or descension of the
Son of God into hell, should be referred; I am not as yet resolved by any
Catholic consent: But in my private opinion, I think rather to the Exaltation
or Consecration of the Son of God to his everlasting Priesthood. And unto
this Treatise principally intended by me in these long Commentaries upon the
Apostles Creed, I must crave pardon to referr all those other modern
Controversies concerning the extent of our Saviors sufferings, for whom he
dyed; for whom he rose again; whether the redemption purchased by his blood,
was universal to all mankind, or to the elect or predestined only; or
(seeing redemption is a term importing matter divisible,) what part of
redemption purchased by Christ, was common to Adam, and all that came after
him; what part more proper to such as under the law were circumcised, or in the
time of the Gospel baptized; what part of the same redemption, is peculiar to
the Elect or predestinate.

In the mean time I conclude this Treatise concerning the humiliation of the
Son of God, with that excellent prayer for the peace of the Church, first
conceived in Latin by Erasmus, and afterward set forth Ao Dni M. D. XLV. both
in Latin and English, as a part or appendix of that Primmer or Liturgy which
K. Henry the 8. caused to be published by the Supreme Authority of the Church
of England, with diverse other godly prayers yet retained, as appertinences if
not as genuine parts of our Communion book. Why this prayer for the peace of
the Church should be left out, I suppose the moderat and devout Reader will
wonder with me.

DOmine IesuChriste, qui omnipote^tia tua fecisti omnes creaturas, visibiles,
invisibiles, and divina sapientia tua gubernasti disposuistique omnia ordinate,
qui ineffabili bonitate tua custodis, defendis, promovesque omnia, qui profunda
misericordia tua reficis ruinosa, renovas collapsa, vivificas mortuos: digneris
(precamur) ad extremum, in dilectam sponsam tuam Ecclesia^, dulcem illum and
misericorde^ vultu^ tuum, quo coelestia omnia terrestriaque, and quae supra
coelum infraque terram sunt pacificas, conjicere: digneris teneros
misericordesque oculos in nos convertere, quibus Petrum semel, magnum Ecclesiae
tuae Pastorem aspexisti, and continuo rediit secum in memoriam, and
poenitentia^ ductus est; quibus dispersam semel multitudinem perlustrasti, and
misericordia commovebaris, quod boni Pastoris defectu errabant quasi oves
sparsae palantesque. Tu satis vides, bone pastor, quot varia luporum genera in
ovilia tua irruperunt, e quibus unusquisque clamat, Hic Christus est, hic
Christus est: ita ut, si fieri posset, in errores deducerentur electi. Tu vides
quibus flatibus, quibus fluctibus, quibus tempestatibus misera navis jactatur,
in qua pusillus grex tuus de submersione periclitatur. Quid autem nunc restat,
nisi ut prorsum submergatur, omnesque nos pereamus? hujus tempestatis causa est
nostra iniquitas and depravata vita; hoc nos videmus and confitemur, justitiam
tuam cernimus, and injustitiam nostram lame^tamur: sed ad misericordiam tuam
provocamus quae (secundum Psalmum Prophetae tui) exuperat omnia, opera tua:
multa supplicia sustinuimus, multis bellis fracti, multis jacturis bonorum
consumpti, tot morborum pestiumque generibus flagellati, tot fluctibus
quassati, tot perterrefacti; and nullus tamen nobis ita fatigatis, and
inusitata malorum vi debilitatis, portus perfugiumque apparet, sed quotidie
magis magisque graves pluresque poenae imminere cervicibus nostris videntur.
Non hic de tua asperitate conquerimur, misericordissime Domine, sed tuam potius
misericordiam intuemur, quod long graviores plagas commeriti sumus. Nos vero
abs te, misericordissime Domine precamur, non quid meritis nostris dignum sit
consideres aut perpendas: sed potius quid deceat misericordiam tuam, sine qua
ne Angeli quidem in coelo consistere possunt, nedum nos vasaluti infirma.
Miserere nostri Redemptor noster, qui facillime exoraris, non quod nos
misericordia tua digni sumus; sed hanc gloriam nomini tuo dato. Ne patiaris
Iudaeos, Turcas, reliquosque qui vel non noverunt te vel gloriae tuae invident,
perpetuo de nobis triumphare, and dicere; Vbi Deus, ubi Redemptor, ubi
Servator, ubi Sponsus illorum est? Haec contumeliosa verba and convitia in te
Domine redundant, dum ex malis nostris bonitatem tuam existimant, nos
derelinqui putant, quos emendari non cernunt. Cum semel in navigio dormires,
and tempestas subito exorta minaretur mortem omnibus qui in navi erant, ad
clamorem paucorum Discipulorum excitabaris, and continuo fluctus quieverunt,
ventus cessavit, tempestas in magnam tranquillitatem conversa est; Aquae mutae
Creatoris vocem agnoverunt. In hac autem long graviore tempestate, in qua non
paucorum hominum corpora in discrimen veniunt, sed innumerabiles animae
periclitant; ad vocem universae Ecclesiae tuae, Domine, precamur ut vigiles,
quae nunc in periculo submersionis est. Tot jam millia hominum clamitant,
Domine, serva nos, perimus, tempestas haec humanam potentiam superat, immo vero
conatus eorum qui illi praesidium ferrent, in contrarium avertuntur. Quod haec
praestabit, solum verbum tuum est: Verbo solum oris tui dicito, Tempestas
cessa, and confestim tranquillitas expetita apparebit. Quot millibus impiorum
pepercisses, si in civitate Sodomae vel december inventi fuissent: nunc vero tot
millibus hominum gloriam nominis tui amantium, and propter decorem domus tuae
gementum, non horum precibus adductus iram remittes, and consuetarum
antiquarumque misericordiarum tuarum recordaberis? an non divina sapientia tua
nostram stultitiam in gloriam tua^ convertes? an non malorum improbitatem in
Ecclesiae tuae bonum commutabis? cum enim misericordia tua solet omnia
sublevare, cum res nobis immedicabilis esse videtur: nec potentia aut sapientia
humana corrigi potest. Tu solus res etiam inordinatissimas in ordinem adducis,
qui solus author conservatorque pacis es. Tu antiquam confusionem quam Chaos
appellamus formavisti, in qua sine ordine, sine mode, perturbate discordia
semina rerum jacebant, and admirabili serie res natura sua pugnantes, vinculo
perpetuo copulavisti and colligavisti. Quanto quaeso, major confusio est haec,
ubi nulla charitas, nulla fides, nulla copulatio amoris, nulla legum, nulla
Magistratuum reverentia, nulla opinionum consensio, sed quasi in
perturbatissimo choro, unusquisque diversum canit. In coelestibus planetis
nulla est dissensio, elementa suas seeds tenent, unumquodque constitutum sibi
officium facit: and sponsam suam cujus causa omnia facta sunt, continua sic
dissensione perire and labefactari permittis? Malosne spiritus seditionis
authors atque administros, in ditione tua sine ulla reprehensione ita regnare
permittes? potentemne illum iniquitatis ducem, quem semel dejeceras, castra
invadere and milites tuos spoliare sines? Cum hic in hominibus versabaris,
vocem tuam fugiebant daemones. Emitte quaesumus Domine, Spiritum tuum qui e
pectoribus omnium nomen tuum profitentium, malos spiritus, magistros
intemperantiae, avaritiae, vanae gloriae, libidinum, scelerum, discordiae
abigat. Crea in nobis, Rex, and Deus noster, cor mundum, and Spiritum sanctum
tuum in pectoribus nostris renova, nec Spiritum sanctum tuum auferas a nobis.
Restitue nobis fructum salutaris sanitatis tuae, and Spiritu principali
corrobora Sponsam, Pastoresque ejus. Hoc Spiritu reconciliasti coelestia
terrestribus, hoc formasti ac reduxisti tot linguas, tot nationes, tam diversa
hominum genera in unum corpus Ecclesiae, quod corpus eodem Spiritu copulatur
capiti. Hunc Spiritum si in omnium hominum cordibus renovare digneris, tum
externae hae quoque miseriae cessabunt: aut si non cessaverint, ad fructum
saltem, utilitatemque diligentium te traducentur. Siste hanc Domine Jesus,
confusionem; hoc horribile Chaos in ordinem adducito: expande Spiritum tuum
super aquas male fluctuantium opinionu^. Et quia Spiritus tuus, qui juxta
Prophetae sententiam continet omnia, scientiam etiam habet vocis: effice ut
quemadmodum omnibus qui in domo tua sunt, unum lumen, unus Baptismus, unus
Deus, una spes, unus Spiritus; sic una^ quoque habeant voce^* unam cantilena^,
unu^ sonu^, una^ catholicam veritate^ profitentes. Cum in coelum gloriose
ascendisti, demisisti de caelo res preciosissimas; dedisti dona hominibus,
varia munera spiritus divisisti: renova Domine de Coelo veterem bonitatem, da
nunc Ecclesiae labefactatae and inclinatae, quod illi emergenti, and exorienti
initio dederas; Da Principibus Magistratibusque gratiam timoris tui: ut ita
Rempublicam suam gubernent, quasi statim tibi Regi Regum rationem reddituri. Da
sapientiam semper assistricem illis, ut quodcunque optimum factu fuerit, and
animo provideant, and factis persequantur. Da Episcopis tuis donum prophetiae,
ut sanctas Scripturas non ex suis ingeniis, sed tua inspiratione declarent and
interpretentur. Da triplicem illis charitatem, quam a Petro requirebas, quando
illius curae oves tuas commisisti. Da Sacerdotibus tuis temperantiae,
castitatisque amorem. Da populo tuo studium sequendi mandata tua, and
promptitudinem obediendi iis, quos tu super illos constituisti. Ita fiet, ut si
largitate tua principes ea imperent, quae tu praecipis; pastores eadem doceant,
populus utrisque pareat: veteris Ecclesiae dignitas, tranquillitasque cum
ordinis conservatione ad gloriam Nominis tui restorescat. Ninivitis pepercisti
morti addictis, statim ut ad poenitentiam conversi fuerant: and domum tuam
inclinantem jam and corruentem despicies, quae vice sacci gemitus, vice cinerum
lachrymas profundit? promisisti remissionem conversis ad te: at hoc donum tuum
est, ut quis cum toto cord suo ad te convertatur, ut omnis bonitas nostra ad
gloriam tuam redundet. Tu factor es, refice opus tuum quod formasti: Tu
Redemptor es, serva quod emisti: Tu Servator es, ne sinas perire qui tibi
innituntur: Tu Dominus es and possessor, vendica possessionem tuam; Tu caput
es, opem fer membris; Tu Rex es, da nobis legum tuarum reverentiam: Tu princeps
pacis es, aspira nobis fraternam charitatem: Tu Deus miserere supplicum tuorum,
sis (ut beatus Paulus loquitur) omnia in omnibus, ut universus Ecclesiae tuae
chorus consentientibus animis and vocibus consonantibus gratias de misericordia
inventa agant Patri, Filio, and Spiritui sancto, qui pro perfectissimo
concordiae exemplo personarum proprietate distinguuntur and conjunctione
naturae adunantur, quibus laus, and gloria ad omnem aeternitate^. Amen.

LOrd JESUS CHRIST, which of thine Almightinesse made all Creatures both
visible and invisible, which of thy godly wisdom governest and set all
things in most goodly order, which of thine unspeakable goodness keep,
defendest, and furtherest all things, which of thy deep mercy restorest the
decayed, renewest the fallen, raisest the dead: vouchsafe (we pray thee) at
last to cast down thy countenance upon thy welbeloved Spouse the Church; but
let it be that amiable and merciful Countenance wherewith thou pacifiest all
things in heaven, in earth, and whatsoever is above heaven and under the earth:
vouchsafe to cast upon us those tender and pitiful eyes, with which thou
did once behold Peter that great Shepherd of thy Church, and forthwith he
remembered himself and repented; with which eyes thou once did view the
scattered multitude, and were moved with compassion, that for lack of a good
Shepherd they wandered as sheep dispersed and straied asunder. Thou see (O
good Shepherd) what sundry sorts of Wolves have broken into thy sheep-cotes,
of whom every one cries, Here is Christ, here is Christ: so that if it were
possible, the very perfect persons should be brought into error. Thou see
with what winds, with what waves, with what storms thy silly ship is tossed,
thy ship wherein thy little flock is in peril to be drowned. And what is now
left, but that it utterly sink, and we all perish? Of this tempest and storm
we may thank our own wickedness and sinful living; we epsy it well and
confess it, we espy thy righteousness, and we bewail our unrighteousness:
but we appeal to thy mercy which (according to the Psalm of thy Prophet)
surmounteth all thy works: we have now suffered much punishment, being soussed
with so many wars, consumed with such losses of goods, scourged with so many
sorts of diseases and pestilences, shaken with so many floods, feared with so
many strange sights from heaven, and yet appear there no where any haven or
Port unto us being thus tired and forlorn among so strange evils, but still
every day more grievous punishments, and more seem to hang over our heads. We
complain not of thy sharpness, most tender Savior, but we espy here also thy
mercy, forasmuch, as much grieuouser plagues we have deserved. But O most
merciful Jesu, we beseech thee, that thou will not consider ne weigh what is
due for our deservings, but rather what becomes thy mercy, without which
neither the Angels in heaven can stand sure before thee, much less we silly
vessels of clay. Have mercy on us, O Redeemer, which art easy to be
entreated, not that we be worthy of thy mercy, but give thou this glory unto
thine own Name. Suffer not that the Jews, Turks, and the rest of the Panims,
which either have not known thee, or do envy thy glory, should continually
triumph over us, and say; Where is their God, where is their Redeemer, where is
their Savior, where is their Bridegroom, that they thus boast on? These
opprobrious words and upbraidings redound unto thee, O Lord, while by our
evils, men weigh and esteem thy goodness: they think we be forsaken, whom
they see not amended. Once when thou sleptst in the ship, and a tempest
suddenly arising threatened death to all in the ship, thou awokest at the outcry
of a few disciples, and straightway at thine Almighty word the waters couched,
the winds fell, the storm was suddenly turned into a great calm: the dumb
waters know their makers voice. Now in this far greater tempest, wherein not
a few men's bodies be in danger, but innumerable souls: we beseech thee at the
cry of thy holy Church, which is in danger of drowning, that thou will awake.
So many thousands of men do cry, Lord save us, we perish, the tempest is past
man's power: yea we see that the endeavors of them that would help it, do
turn clean a contrary way. It is thy word that must do the deed, Lord Jesu.
Only say thou with a word of thy mouth, Cease o tempest, and forthwith shall
the desired calm appear. Thou would have spared so many thousands of most
wicked men, if in the City of Sodom had been found but ten good men. Now here
be so many thousands of men, which love the glory of thy Name, which sigh for
the beauty of thy house; and will thou not at these men's prayers let go thine
anger and remember thine accustomed and old mercies? Shall thou not with thy
heavenly policy turn our folly into thy glory? Shall thou not turn the wicked
men's evils into thy Churches good? For thy mercy is wont then most of all to
succor, when the thing is with us past remedy, and neither the might nor
wisdom of men can help it. Thou alone bring things that be never so out
of order, into order again: which art the only Author and maintainer of
peace. Thou framedst that old confusion, which we call Chaos, wherein without
order, without fashion confusely lay the discordant seeds of things, and with a
wonderful order the things that of nature fought together, thou did ally
and knit in a perpetual band. But how much greater confusion is this, where is
no charity, no fidelity, no bonds of love, no reverence neither of laws, nor
yet of rulers; no agreement of opinions, but as it were in a misordered quire,
every man sings a contrary note. Among the heavenly Planets is no dissension,
all four Elements keep their place, every one do their office whereunto they
be appointed. And will thou suffer thy Spouse, for whose sake all things were
made, thus by continual discords to perish and go to wrack? Shall thou suffer
the wicked spirits, which be authors and workers of discord, to bear such a
swinge in thy Kingdom unchecked? Shall thou suffer the strong Captain of
mischief, whom thou once overthrewest, again to invade thy tents and to spoil
thy soldiers? When thou were here a man conversant amongst men, at thy voice
fled the devils. Send forth we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Spirit which may
drive away out of the breasts of all them that profess thy Name, the wicked
spirits, masters of riot, of covetousness, of vain glory, of carnal lust, of
mischief, and of discord. Create in us, O our God and King, a clean heart, and
renew thy holy Spirit in our breasts, pluck not from us thy holy Ghost. Render
unto us the joy of thy saving health, and with thy principal Spirit,
strengthen thy Spouse and the Herdmen thereof. By this Spirit thou reconciledst
the earthly to the heavenly: by this thou did frame and reduce, so many
tongues, so many Nations, so many sundry sorts of men into one body of a
Church; which body by the same Spirit is knit to thee their head. This Spirit,
if thou will vouchsafe to renew in all men's hearts, then shall also these
foreign miseries cease, or if they cease not, at least they shall turn to
the profit and avail of them which love thee. Stay this confusion, set in
order this horrible Chaos (O Lord Jesu;) let thy Spirit stretch out it self
upon these waters of evil wavering opinions. And because thy Spirit, which
according to thy Prophets saying contains al things has also the science of
speaking: make, that like as unto all them which be of thy house, is all one
light, one Baptism, one God, one hope, one Spirit: so they may also have one
voice, one note, and song, professing one Catholic truth. When thou did
mount up to heaven triumphantly, thou threwest out from above thy precious
things, thou gave gifts amongst men, thou dealtest sundry rewards of thy
Spirit. Renew again from above thy old bountifulness, give that thing to thy
Church now fainting and growing downward, that thou gave unto her shooting
up, at her first beginning. Give unto Princes and Rulers the grace so to stand
in awe of thee, that they so may guide the Commonweal, as they should shortly
render account unto thee that art the King of kings. Give wisdom to be
always assistant unto them, that whatsoever is best to be done, they may espy
it in their mind, and pursue the same in their doings. Give to the Bishops the
gift of prophecy, that they may declare and interpret holy Scripture, not of
their own brain but of thine inspiring. Give them the threefold charity which
thou once demandedst of Peter, what time thou did betake unto him the charge
of thy sheep. Give to the Priests the love of soberness and of chastity. Give
to thy people a good will to follow thy Commandments, and a readiness to obey
such persons as thou have appointed over them. So shall it come to pass, if
through thy gift thy Princes shall command that thou requirest, if thy Pastors
and Herdmen shall teach the same, and thy people obey them both: that the old
dignity and tranquillity of the Church shall return again with a goodly order
unto the glory of thy Name. Thou sparedst the Ninevites appointed to be
destroyed, as soon as they converted to repentance: and will thou despise thy
house falling down at thy feet, which in stead of sackcloth has sighs, and
in stead of ashes tears? Thou promisedst forgiveness to such as turn unto
thee, but this self thing is thy gift, a man to turn with his whole heart unto
thee, to the intent all our goodness should redound unto thy glory. Thou art
the maker, repair the work that thou have fashioned. Thou art the Redeemer;
save that thou have bought. Thou art the Savior; suffer not them to perish
which do hang on thee. Thou art the Lord and owner; challenge thy possession.
Thou art the head; help thy members. Thou art the King; give us a reverence of
thy Laws. Thou art the Prince of peace; breathe upon us brotherly love. Thou
art the God, have pity on thy humble beseechers: be thou, according to Paul's
saying, all things in all men, to the intent, the whole quire of thy Church
with agreeing minds and consonant voices for mercy obtained at thy hands, may
give thanks to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which after the most perfect
example of concord, be distincted in property of persons, and one in nature, to
whom be praise and glory eternally. Amen.

FINIS.
A CATALOGVE OF the several Treatises heretofore published by the Author.
THe Eternal Truth of Scriptures and Christian belief, in two Books of
Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed.

The third Book of Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed, containing the
blasphemous positions of Jesuits and other later Romanists, concerning the
authority of their Church.

Justifying Faith, or the faith whereby the just do live, being the fourth
Book upon the Creed.

A Treatise containing the original of unbelief, misbeliefe, or
misperswasions concerning the Verity, Unity, and Attributes of the Deity: with
directions for rectifying our belief or knowledge in the forementioned points,
being the fifth Book upon the Creed.

A Treatise of the Divine Essence and Attributes the first and second parts,
being the sixth Book upon the Creed.

The knowledge of Christ Jesus, or the seventh book of Commentaries upon the
Apostles Creed, containing the first and general principles of Christian
Theology, with the more immediate principles concerning the knowledge of
Christ: divided into four Sections.

The humiliation of the Son of God: or the eighth Book of Commentaries upon
the Apostles Creed.

A Treatise of the holy Catholic Faith and Church.

Christ's answer to John's question: or an Introduction to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified: delivered in certain Sermons.

Nazareth and Bethlehem: or Isreal's portion in the son of Jesse, And mankinds
comfort from the weaker sex, in two Sermons preached at S. Mary's in Oxford.

FINIS.

