CHRIST'S ANSWER UNTO JOHN'S QVESTION: OR, An Introduction to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

Delivered in certain Sermons in the famous Town of New Castle upon Tine.

By THOMAS IACKSON, Dr. of Divinity, Vicar of Saint Nicolas Church there, and
Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

JOHN 5. 39. Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me. LONDON: Printed by G. P. for
John Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop under Saint Peter's Church in
Corne-hill, 1625.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, Richard, by Divine providence, Lord
Bishop of Durham, my very honorable good LORD, and Diocesan.
Right Reverend and Honorable,
BEing here detayned, upon occasions made known in part unto your Lordship, I
thought my self bound in duty and conscience to render an account, as well of
my time spent in this my absence, as whilst I was present at my charge. Though
this I cannot for this time perform, save only in part. These papers which I
now consecrate to your Honors protection contain only the first fruits of my
Labors in that worthy and famous Congregation, which it pleased your Lordship
about a year ago, (for which I ever rest yours bounden) to commit unto my
trust. Yet these being all that I took with me to peruse in my absence, which I
well hoped should have been much shorter, these are all that I could at this
time present your Lordship withal, humbly beseeching they may be accepted as
an undoubted pledge of my duty and observance to your Lordship, and of my
unfeigned desire and resolution to set forward that worthy and religious
Congregation (from which I have received much true comfort and many kindnesses)
in the ways of truth, as well by my pen in my absence, as by my voice whilst
I am present. So, commending this Introduction to your Lorshippes patronage,
and your Lordship to the gracious patronage and protection of the Lord Jesus, I
humbly take my leave.

From my Study in Corpus Christi College in Oxon. December. 20. 1624. Your
Lordships, in all duty and service, THOM. IACKSON.

A brief view of the principal parts of the Discourse following.
I. The meaning or purport of John's Question, [Art thou He that should come, or
do we look for another? Math. 11. ver. 3.] Page 2, 3, and 4.

II. What did move John to make this Question. Pa. 5, 6, 7, and 8.

III. What satisfaction the answer here made by our Savior, might give 1. To
ordinary or indifferent Auditors: Wherein are discussed, Page 10. to the 19. 1.
Wherein true blessedness (which our Savior here promises to all) does
consist. Page 20. Parag. 14. to Page 30. Parag. 19. 2. How the miracles heard
and seen by John^. Disciples, do prove that JESUS, who wrought them, was the
Author and Donor of all these good things or degrees of goodness, wherein true
blessedness, in the opinion and judgment as well of Heathen Philosophers as of
Christians, does consist. page 30. parag. 19. to page 40. parag. 22.
2. Unto John: Wherein are discussed. 1. The manner how the faith of the
Patriarchs, and of the Prophets themselves, was grounded upon divine
predictions, and ratified by the events answering unto them: That even the
Patriarchs and Prophets themselves, might err in their apprehensions or
applications of Gods Word revealed unto the^, until their apprehensions were
rectified by new Revelations, or their applications corrected by the exhibition
of the event or effect foretold. page 43. parag. 24. to page 66. parag. 34. 2.
The particular places of Scriptures, from whence the Pharisees had their
prenotions concerning Baptism; and on which John's faith or belief concerning
our Saviors person or office, or his own ministry, was grounded: with the
signs of the time that did expound them. page 75. para. 37. to page 145.
parag. 66. 3. What correspondencie the two places of Scripture, to which our
Savior in this answer refers John, have with the former places wherein
John's faith was grounded, and with the signs of the time, or miraculous events
here related page 145. parag. 65. to page 178. parag. 81.




III. How the general Conclusion, Blessed is he who soever shall not be
offended in me, is inferred from the premises. What it is to be offended in
Christ. Which be the special roots of this offense: and how they may he
avoided. Page 178. parag. 81 to the end.

CHRIST'S ANSWER unto JOHN'S QVESTION: OR, An Introduction to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
MATTHEW. 11. VER. 4, 5, 6. Go, and show John again those things, which ye
do hear and see. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the Gospel preached unto them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be
offended in me.
THis is life eternal (says our Savior, Ioh. 17. v. 3.) that they may know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The knowledge of
the only true God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, are so inwrapt and
linked together, that he which has the later, has the former, according to
the saying of our Savior; He that has seen me, has seen my Father. Ioh.
14. 9. This knowledge of Christ, and of him crucified, was all that our blessed
Apostle Saint Paul esteemed or determined to know amongst the Corinthians, and
all that I shall desire to know amongst you, and is, as I hope, if not the
only, yet the special point which any of you desire to be made known unto
you by my Ministry, whether public or private. What it is to know Christ, and
the virtue of his Cross, which be the special or most useful branches of
this knowledge, and in what rank or order the several branches grow, shall by
Gods assistance and your desired patience, be discussed at large hereafter, in
unfolding of that forecited saying of our Apostle to the Corinthians in his
first Epistle, cap. 2. verse. 2. Which if God permit, shall be the maine subject
or theme of my meditations in this place.

You will give me leave to make my entry or passage into a subject so large,
so ample, and so useful, by degrees and leisure. Now, ere we can attain unto
the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, whom God has sent, and of him crucified,
we are to inquire upon what grounds we believe or know, that the man Jesus,
whom the Jews did crucify, whom we preach, and on whom we believe, was he,
whom God has sent, or he, whom God before all Worlds had ordained to send into
the world. For albeit God in sundry ages sent many messengers unto his Church,
though such as he sent, did come in person, and discharge their function: yet
when we read of Him that was to be sent, or of him that was to come, [Hee
which was to be Sent,] or [Hee which was to come,] were from the beginning
known and proper attributes of the Messiah.
without further addition, circumlocution, or paraphrase; we must take these as
titles, which may not be communicated unto many, as being truly meant but of
one, which is Christ the Lord. And under these general or royal titles, the
promised Seed or Messiah was apprehended and known by the best of Gods
servants, as well before the Law was given, as whilst the Law was ready to
expire and determine.

2. Thus we read, Exodus 4. verse 13. that Moses, after many pretenses and
excuses to avoid the Embassage unto Pharaoh for the deliverance of Gods people,
lastly concludes with this request, "O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand
of him whom thou will send; which is so much in the interpretation of the
Ancients, as if he had said; Lord, I know, thou have ordained from the
beginning, to send an authentic messenger unto the world, for the deliverance
of thy people; one that shall speak as never man spoke, and do those works
which no man besides can do. And I beseech thee to send him at this time unto
Pharaoh, to let thy people go, for this is a work worthy his pains. I know,
some later Writers reject this interpretation, but their exceptions against the
ancient Interpreters are not concludent, and therefore not to be admitted,
especially when the better sort of later Writers, with whom I accord, do
embrace the interpretation of the Ancients. Again, although God had sent John
Baptist on as great an Embassage as this of Moses, He was sent as a Messenger
to prepare the ways of the Lord; yet he does not affect, but does utterly
disclaim this title of being him, whom GOD has sent, as knowing it to be
peculiar unto the Savior of the World: for so he speaks of him, in
opposition unto himself, Ioh. 3. verse. 34. For he whom GOD has sent,
speaks the words of God: for God gives the Spirit not by measure unto him.
For this reason, John, who was sent from God as a messenger to prepare his
ways, who never doubted of his miraculous birth and conception, John, who had
heard and seen him declared by voice and vision from heaven unto Israel, even
after he himself had proclaimed him to be the Lamb of God, which was to take
away the sins of the World; yet for a period or vp-shot of all that he
desired to know concerning Jesus his person; his office, his actions in this
life, compriseth all in this short Interrogatiue; Art thou he that should
come, or do we look for another?

3. Unto this question or demand, being the entire tenor of John's solemn
Embassage, and the sum of all which he desires to know concerning Christ,
our Savior vouchsafes no other answer than what has been read unto you;
Jesus answered, etc.

Now if we consider that ample testimony which our Savior in the words
following my Text, did give of John in the audience of the multitude; to wit,
that he was a Prophet, yea, and more than a Prophet, that of all that were
borne of women, there was none greater than John: Charity and Christian modesty
will constrain us to presume, that this question, Art thou he that should
come, or do we look for another? being thus solemnly by John proposed, was
no idle but a serious and useful question; fit not only for him, but for
posterity to be resolved in. Again, if we consider that this answer which I
have read unto you, was made by our blessed Savior, we stand bound upon our
allegiance to believe, that as the question was serious and useful, so the
answer was pertinent, full, and satisfactory. All this is most plain, in the
general, but if we descend unto particulars the difficulties are two.

[1.] First, from what affection or disposition of Two general Queries. the
one concerning John's Question, and the other concerning Christ's answer. Which
may be taken for the two general parts of this ensuing Discourse.
mind this question should proceed, or what it was that should occasion John
to make it.

[2.] Secondly, in what manner and how far our Saviors answer, or the words
which I have read unto you, do fit the occasions which moved John to make the
question, or fully satisfy the question it self.

4. Concerning the first point, to wit, From what affection or disposition of
mind this question should proceed, or what should mo^e John to make it, there
is greater variety or diversity then opposition or contrariety of opinions
amongst the Learned. Vid. Maldonat in hunc locum.
Justin Martyr and Tertullian were not afraid to say and deliver in writing to
posterity, that John himself did at this time truly doubt and distrust,
whether he, that wrought these miracles here mentioned in my Text, were the
promised Seed or no; and that out of this doubt or distrust in himself, he
sent this message unto our Savior, Art thou he that should come, or do we
look for another? Tertullian in his fourth book against Marcion, goes
further, and says, That after our Savior did enter upon his Prophetical
function, and took upon him to instruct the people publicly by word and
miracle, the Spirit of God which was given to him not by measure, beginning now
to dilate and show it self unto the world, did withdraw or call in that
portion of the spirit of Prophecy, wherewith John Baptist had formerly bin
endued, (to prepare the ways of this his Lord) as great flames draw flying
sparkles to them, or suck out the lesser lights or candles that are near
them. As if John Baptist himself, when he said, Oportet illum crescere, me
autem decrescere, had unwittingly or otherwise prophesied, that the Spirit of
Prophefie should decrease in him, as it did increase or more amply manifest it
self in our Savior. Yet this interpretation, I must tell you, though avouched
by two of the most ancient Fathers, whose writings are now extant, is slenderly
seconded by later Writers, whether of Romish, or reformed Religion. Maldonat, a
learned Jesuit, does thus censure them, or rather the times wherein they
lived; In illa nimirum aetate, nondum satis culta theologia hujusmodi spinas
aliquando proferebat: that is, that goodly garden of God, which we call
Divinity, was not in that age so well dressed, but that it did sometimes bring
forth such thorns and brambles as these were. Should the best of our Writers
or Preachers speak on this fashion of the Ancient Fathers, the Romish Church
would take it as a sufficient testimony to condemn us for Heretics. Howbeit
we will not condemn it, as an heresy in her Children for speaking or writing
thus, but rather wish they would be constant to themselves, and impartial
toward us; to permit us that liberty, which they take in refusing the
authority of the most Ancient Fathers, especially in the interpretation of
Scriptures. Others there were, and these very ancient too, which disliking
Justin Martyr's and Tertullians interpretation of this place, would qualify it
thus; John the Baptist did not question nor doubt, whether Jesus whom he had
baptized, were the Son of God, the promised and long expected Messiah or no,
but vtrum esset ad inferos descensurus, whether he were to taste of death
himself, or whether he would come to rescue the dead from the power of Hell
and the grave. Et in hanc sententiam (says the same Maldonat) maxima pars
veterum concesserunt: the greatest part of the Ancient Fathers were (by his
confession) of this opinion, concerning the interpretation of this place. But
will he therefore subscribe unto them, or rest upon their interpretation? No;
he has no reason so to do, seeing the Fathers themselves did follow this
interpretation, because as then, no better was found out. We have gained thus
much from this learned Jesuit for some after disputes, that latter ages may
find out some better exposition of prinpall passages of Scripture, than most
of the best and ancientest Fathers knew.

5. What then is that better exposition of this place, whereunto he and most of
his fellows subscribe? It is this: John did not move this question out of any
doubt or distrust of his own, but only for the better instruction of his
Disciples, in whom he could hardly beget any true conceit o^ estimate of our
Saviors worth. So factious they were for their Master, that they disdained or
enuyed, that our Savior should have more followers then he had. So it is
storied, Ioh. 3. verse. 25, 26. There arose a question between some of John's
Disciples and the Jews about purifying: and they came unto John and said unto
him, Rabbi, He that was with thee beyond Iordane, to whom thou barest witness,
behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come unto him. Now seeing John, as the
Authors of this interpretation think, could not assuage this humor in his
Disciples, (which he earnestly labors in the forecited place) but the more he
debased himself in comparison of Christ, the more worthy they thought him of
greater honor: he therefore now sends them unto Christ himself, whose
instructions being graced with miracles, he presumed would be more effectual
in them, than all the exhortations he could bestow upon them. The maine stream
of later Interpreters, as well Protestants as Papists, run this way. And if
the question did arise from distrust or diffidence, these imperfections were in
all likelihood more incident to the affectionate Scholars, than to the
sanctified and prudent Master.

6. Others there be, but not so many to my remembrance, as to make a few, which
would derive the former question, Art thou he that should come, etc? not from
any doubt, much less from any diffidence or distrust either in John, or in his
disciples; but rather from joy of heart in John, as if it were rather, vox
exultantis vel iubilantis, quam dubitantis. And it cannot be denied, but that
men oft-times make patheticall expressions as well of present joy as of dislike
or discontent by way of Interrogation. Thus honest housekeepers or hearty
Hoasts will sometimes welcome their grateful and long expected guests with
this or the like salutation, Are you come? when they cannot truly doubt
whether they are come or no, if they will believe their own senses. We see the
wisest men not apt to give swift credence unto extraordinary good news, lest
their sorrow should prove greater, if the report should prove false. And
naturally, when excessive joy either springs too fast, or grows too rank,
we seek to allay or snip it by a fictitious or imaginary distrust of those
truths whence it grows, of which we cannot make any real or constant doubt.
So he says in the Poet,

H^rret adhuc animus, manifestaque gaudia differt,
Men's stupet and tanto cunctatur credere vot^.
7. I dare not take upon me to determine which of these four several
Interpretations is the best, but surely the second, though most followed by the
Ancients, is farthest wide from the Evangelists meaning. And me thinks it were
easy to find out a fifth, which might challenge as great a share or portion of
probability as any of the former can do. For my own part, as I dare not
impeach John himself of any doubt or distrust, as Justin Martyr and Tertullian
do; so I cannot account it any sin in John, or any impeachment to his
dignity, if at this time he sought the confirmation of his former belief in
Christ by new documents, or some fresh supplies of inward comfort to allay the
tediousnes of a hard lingering durance, from his mouth, that was the fountain
of comfort, and had the words of eternal life.

PART II. Christ's Answer. How it is satisfactory to the Question.
8. But from what disposition soever the former question, Art thou he that
should come, etc. did arise, whether from joy or exultation in John, or from
distrust or diffide^ce in his Disciples, or partly from the one, and partly
from the other; (nor are the diverse opinions concerning this point,
incompatibly opposite:) there yet remains a question of greater difficulty
and of far more useful enquiry, for right unfolding the contents and pith of
my Text. The question is this, How this answer of our Savior could possibly
either confirm or ratify John's former belief of Christ's person, office, or
actions, or add any increase to his knowledge or comfort, or lastly give any
part of satisfaction to the distrust or diffidence of his Disciples; seeing
there is nothing more contained in this answer, than John and his Disciples
undoubtedly knew before. For so it is said in the second verse of this Chapter;
When John being in prison had heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his
Disciples, and said unto him; Art thou he that should come, or do we look
for another? Now what works done by Christ could John hear of in Prison,
which were not truly miraculous, which were not the very same with those,
which our Savior in my Text informs John to have bin wrought by him, as
restoring of the blind to their sight, the lame to their limbs, the sick to
health, the dumb to speech, the dead to life, etc? And that which most
increases the difficulty, amongst other works of Christ, which, John's
Disciples being present (as it seems by Saint Luke, Chap. 7. verse 27.) relate
unto him, his raising up of the widows son of Naim from death to life to
the great astonishment of the spectators, was one. Now who did ever know a man
truly dead, as this widows son was, who was not withal more than deaf,
more than dumb, more than blind of both his eyes, more than lame of arms and
legs, of feet and hands? Wherefore, in as much as John knew before, that
Christ had raised him up that was dead, and made him sit up, and speak, and
delivered him to his Mother; he could not be ignorant, that he had made one
that was more than dumb to speak, one that was more then halt to go, one
that was more than blind to see. What satisfaction then could this answer give
either to John or to his Disciples, both of whom knowing thus much before;
especially seeing the one of them at least, as most Interpreters think did
distrust or doubt, whether Christ (notwithstanding all this) were He that
should come; and both of them could not but expect some ratification or
confirmation of their former belief from his answer?

For clearing this difficulty or exception, we are to examine these two points.
The general division of the second Quere, proposed Parag. 3.


[1.] First, what the particulars here avouched by Christ, and solemnly
testified by John's Disciples might naturally and literally import to any
indifferent understanding Auditor.

[2.] Secondly, what they might intimate or suggest unto John, as no question
but this answer did give more full satisfaction unto John, than it could do
to any other for that time, without his Paraphrase or Comment upon it.

9. Touching the former point, we say, The very The first member o^ the
general division, what satisfaction our Saviors answer might give to any
indifferent Auditor.
particulars thus solemnly avouched and authentically testified, include in
them even unto ordinary sense and reason, as much as could be expected in the
promised Messiah, or long-expected Redeemer of Israel. Thus much they
manifestly include, if we rightly make the deductions, according to the true
Logical extent of their natural sense. For although it be a rule most
infallible, that the truth of an indefinite proposition may be salued or
supported by the truth of one particular; as if a man should bargain with a
day-laborer, promising him in these indefinite terms, to give him so much for
his work, as other neighbors did, though some of them gave twelve pence, some
ten pence, and others but eight pence: the Law would upon these terms or
agreements award him no more than eight pence, because it can constrain the
hyrer only to make good his covenant to the hired, and his covenant is
performed, if he make his promise true. Now, if but one or two Neighbors give
but eight pence, and he gives as much, it is evident he gives as much as his
Neighbors do, and this is enough to salve the truth of his promise, according
to Law and Logic: although to use the benefit of either to a poor man's
prejudice, would ill beseem a man of better note and fashion. In like manner,
although our Savior had only raised the Widows Son of Naim Mem. 1.
from death, or at least, if he had given sight to one or two blind men only,
or if he had cleansed but one or two Lepers, and made only one or two lame men
to go, this indefinite answer to John's question, The blind receive their
sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the
dead are raised up, Mat. 11. v. 5. had been so true, as no Grammarian or
Logician had been able to impeach it of falsehood. But though it be certain
that an indefinite proposition is oft-times true, if one or two particulars be
true, yet oft-times such indefinite speeches include a multitude of
particulars, and sometimes an universality or the whole number of all the
particulars, which the words can literally comprehend or signify. As for
example, if a man should bid his friend take heed how he deals; for the world
is naught, and men are cunning: no man would conceive his meaning to be, that
there were but one or two naughty or cunning men in the world: but rather that
the world were in a manner full of them; and that no Society or Corporation
were free from such men. Again, if a man should advise his friend not to rely
upon men's words in matters of great consequences, without some real assurance,
because men are mortal; no man would conceive his meaning to be, that this or
that man were mortal, but that all were mortal.

10. That this indefinite speech of our Savior, The blind receive their
sight, and the lame walk, etc. did (as we say) de facto, include not only
some few, but a mul^itude of all or most particulars specified, is apparent
from the 7. of Luke, verse. 21. At the same hour (when John's Disciples came
unto him) he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil
spirits, and unto many men that were blind, he gave sight. As this indefinite
speech did de facto include a multitude, so it did de potentia include an
universality; that is, as there were many blind men received their sight, many
sick that were cured, so all of every sort here specified, might have been
partakers of the like benefit, if the default had not been in themselves or in
their friends. There was not a man throughout all the Tribes of Israel so
blind, but might have had his perfect sight restored unto him, so he had
demeaned himself toward Christ, as these other blind men did. Not one man
throughout all the Land so deaf, so dumb, or lame, but that if their friends
would have brought them unto him, and have supplicated for them, being not able
to supplicate for themselves, they might have had their perfect hearing, their
speech or limbs restored unto them. All the Lepers might have been cleansed;
all possessed with Devils, might have been dispossessed, and freed from their
tyranny, so they would have but humbled themselves under Gods hands, and
sincerely acknowledged their imperfections and infirmities to have bin the
fruits of their sin or offenses against God their Creator and Redeemer: for
thus to be humbled, was to become poor in spirit.

11. What is it then which John, or his Disciples, or the whole Nation of the
Jews could expect of Him that was to come, their promised and long-wished-for
Messiah, whereof these good beginnings related, were not sure pledges and full
assurances? Most of this people, and with them John's Disciples, were Mem. 1.
sick of their forefathers disease: they desired in their hearts a King to
fight their battles, a man of as goodly presence as Saul was, for personage as
lovely as Jonathan, a man as valiant in battle as Judas Maccabaeus, as
victorious as David, as Samson, or Gideon. But what King of Judah or Israel did
ever Ieuy an Army, without ungrateful exactions from his people? Which of them
did ever enrich himself or the State by foreign spoils, without
impouerishing many of his native subjects? Whilst some of them might sing
these or like public songs, Saul has slain his 1000. and David his 10000.
many a poor widow in private laments the loss of her dearest husband with
sighs and tears; many Rachels mourn for their children, and cannot be
comforted, because the Conqueror cannot restore them to life again. Finally,
the whole glory and pomp of war, when they are at the height, and at the
best, are but like a bright and furious flame, which must be continually
nourished with man's blood, as a Lamp is with Oil, or the Fire with Wood. The
best war that ever was undertaken, was but malum necessarium. It was well
observed by the wiser sort of Heathen, that no war was ever just, but when it
was necessary. And, as another says, Bellum gerimus vt pace fruamur, The only
right use and end of war is to procure an honorable and secure peace. If
such peace may be had without war, they are but fools and unhappy men, unfit
members of the world, that will undertake war and kindle dissentions betwixt
Nation and Nation. Ye have heard perhaps of the Philosophers Dialogue with
Pirrhus that great warrier, to this purpose: When this great Nimrod had
swallowed as many several Kingdoms or Nations in hope, as the Jews could
expect their Messiah should in one age conquer; the Philosopher asked him, What
he meant to do after he had conquered the Romans? Then, said he, I will
conquer the Gauls and Spaniards; and when he had done with them, he would
bend his forces against Africa. But when you have conquered them, and as many
more as you intend to conquer, what do you last resolve upon? His answer was,
to live merrily and at ease, in plenty and pleasure. Why, quoth the
Philosopher, this you may do already, without either hazard of your own, or
your followers lives: for none of these Nations which you intend to vanquish,
are likely to endanger you, so you will not begin with them. The present Nation
of the Jews were of Pirrhus his temper, and sought after that, as it were by a
round or circle, which was in a manner put into their hands, so they would but
have looked near about them, and not have set their proud imaginations upon
such rouing proiects as Pirrhus did. Such amongst them as were thus affected,
would no^ acknowledge our Savior to be the Messiah, or him that was to come,
because he was a man of peace, a man of a meek and humble spirit. If another
should have come (as shortly after many false Christ's did arise,) which would
have animated them unto war against the Romans, the most of them, such as
loved peace especially, would quickly have been weary of him. What then? was
there nothing, which both sorts, the proudest and humblest, the peaceable and
contentious did alike affect, and hope to see accomplished by their promised
and long expected Messiah? Mem. 1.
Saint Augustine tells us of a Mimicke or Iester (a kind of artificial fool)
which undertook to tell every man in the Town or City where he dwelt, what
he thought or desired, when they were assembled to try his skill in the
public Markets: all he had to say was this, [vultis vos omnes vili emere, et
caro vendere:] All of you desire to sell dear, and buy good cheap. But as
this reverend Father observes, there was more Mimick wit, than solid truth in
this conceit. For many come to Markets, which neither have mind to buy nor to
sell, but to look on. Amongst such multitudes as mind buying and selling,
some good men there be, which would desire to use a conscience in both: but,
says the same Father, if he had said, All of you, as well the buyer as the
seller, as they that come only to hear or see, desire to be happy; his speech
had been vncontrollably true. For happiness only is that which all men
naturally desire.

12. There is no petty good, but is desired by some or other; That is the
chief or prime good (as the ancient Philosophers have defined it) which is
desired by all. Did they collect this only as men, or does not the Scripture
either say or suppose the same as a ground of truth? Yet once, it is a little
while, and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry
Land. And I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come,
and I will fill this House with glory, says the Lord of Hoasts. Haggai. 2. 6,
7. In what sense our Savior Christ (for of our Savior Christ this place is
vndoubredly meant) should be instiled the desite of all Nations, is a question
which has perplexed some good Preachers, and may exercise the wit of a good
Interpreter. First, how could the Gentiles which were far more than a mayor
part of all Nations (here intimated) be said at that time to desire him, in
whom they did not in any sort believe, whom they did not at all expect? For how
should they expect him, how should they believe in him, of whom they had not
heard? The Jewish Nation indeed or seed of Abraham had heard of him, and did
expect him, and yet as the Prophet had foretold, so it came to pass, that
when they saw him, they saw no beauty in him, that they should desire him.
Esaias 53. verse. 2. And was it possible, that he should be the desire of all
Nations, whom no Nation did desire? Yes. In as much as God had consecrated him
to be the only Fountain of that happiness, which all men, which all Nations
naturally do desire, and which is all that any man of what Nation soever, Jew,
Gentile, Greek or Barbarian can desire; he is truly instiled by the Prophet,
The desire of all Nations. To say, that as many as desired happiness, did
desire our Savior Christ, can seem no paradoxe, if we consider (what no
Philosopher will deny) that even such as follow poisoned pleasures, seek after
happiness and life in these bypath, which lead to death and misery. Though
most men take the highway to death and misery, yet no man desires to dye or to
be miserable, but their contraries.

13. So that our Saviors answer, though it seemed doubtful in the premises,
is in conclusion as perfect, as if he had directly and expressly said: Go,
tell John that I am he that was to come, and that you are not to expect
another, seeing whatsoever you can expect or desire in any one or more, whom
you may Mem. 1.
imagine yet to come, That you may have in me alone: for true blessedness is
all that you or any man can desire, and Blessed is He whosoever shall not be
offended in me. Matthew. 11. 6. Esaias 53. verse. 2. But though John and his
Disciples could desire no more of him that was to come, than to be truly
blessed in him: yet might they desire some further proof than his bare
assertion or authority, that they might be truly blessed in him. For this
blessedness whereof he speaks, was none of those things which they did
hear or see, seeing it cannot be known by corporal sight or hearing. It is
like that new name spoken of in the Revelation, which no man can read, but he
which has it. All this is true, yet not withstanding all this, the things
which they did hear and see, were undoubted pledges and visible assurances of
this invisible blessedness which here he promises, and of which every man
might have undoubted experience in himself, so he would not be offended in
him. For though our Savior with far better reason might, yet did he never
exact such absolute belief unto his words, as the Pope or visible Church of
Rome do to theirs, to whatsoever they shall decree, without either express
warrant or testimony of Gods Word written before, or experimental knowledge in
themselves. This will better appear in the second point proposed, which was,
what these words did intimate or suggest to John.

The points now to be inquired after, are two:

[1.] First, what is it to be blessed and happy in Christ, or wherein this
happiness or blessedness which here he promises, does consist.

[2.] Secondly, how these particulars here mentioned, the blind receive their
sight, the lame walk, etc. do induce or infer this universal conclusion,
Blessed is he whosoever is not offended in me.

14. The former will draw the later after it: and in Wherein the blessedness
here promised does consist.
discussion of the former, I must crave pardon to acquaint you with the
opinions of such of the Heathen as sought to be wiser than the rest (that is,
of their Philosophers) concerning happiness or felicity. Not that I rely upon
their saying or authorities; but seeing the problem proposed is general, to
wit, [what satisfaction this answer could give to any impartial Auditor,
whether Jew or Gentile:] I must give such satisfaction as is fittest to such
perhaps as are toomuch addicted unto the Philosophy of the Heathen. Besides, it
will be a good means for us to find out the right and safe way, if we shall
observe where others have gone wrong, or plunged themselves.

To the former. The very name or common notion of blessedness, happiness, or
felicity, does import as much as [Summum bonum] the chief or supreme good, or
Crown of goodness; That, (as we said before) which all men naturally do
desire, and which is all, that any man can desire, That which is only able to
satiate all the desires or appetites of the humane soul. It is agreed upon as
well by the wisest of the Heathens, as of Christians, that [bonum] and
[appetibile] are terms conuertible; that is, They mutually fit the one the
other, as the measure and the thing measured; whatsoever is good, is desirable;
and whatsoever is desirable; is good to the party which desires it, at least
as for the present he stands affected: and that only is truly good which
ought to be desired. For the rectifying Mem. 1.
of our desires, the Heathens went thus far aright, [That the desires of
sense, or the inferior part of the soul, were to be guided and directed by
reason:] We Christians know, that even reason it self must be regulated by the
Word of God, or rule of faith; otherwise it will outray farther in its desires,
then sense, without the check or control of reason, could do. The things
which we may desire, are of three sorts:

1 Profitable, 2 Pleasant, or 3 Honest.


All these three branches of Goodness, or rather these several sorts of good
things are required unto true happiness; yet so, as true happiness or the chief
good consists properly in the fruit of the third branch or stem, to wit, of
Bonum Honestum, in its full growth or maturitie. This chief or prime good is
not only desired for it self and for no other end, but it is the end for
which all things else, whether they be inferior branches of Bonum Honestum,
Virtue or honesty, or whether they are pleasant or profitable, are desired.
Every branch of Bonum Honestum, of Virtue or honesty, though it be to be
desired for the chief and prime good, yet is it to be desired in it self, and
for it self; so to be desired for it self, that we must be content to loppe
off all the other branches of pleasure and profit, rather than hinder the
growth of this. Godliness, says the Apostle, is great gain, and it has bin an
old Proverb amongst you, It is a good sport to be honest. The issue of that
sport, delight, or gain, whereby our growth in godliness or honesty may be
prejudiced, is loss and grief. Things pleasant are to be desired in
themselves, and for themselves; yet so far only, and at such seasons, as
their desire may not hinder the pursuit of things good and honest. Our desire
of these latter, must give bounds or limits to the desire of the former. Things
pleasant may be desired in greater measure, than for themselves they can be
desired, in case they bring advantage to the course of honesty, of piety or
virtue. Things merely profitable, are not desirable at all for themselves or
in themselves, but only so far as they are conducent to the purchase of
delights lawful and honest, or of honesty it self. For which reason, profit,
as the more judicious Schoolmen determine, is no true and proper branch of
goodness, nor are things merely profitable, truly and inherently good, but
good only by extrinsecall denominatio^ or by accident. Of this rank is
Physic, which no man desires for it self, or in such manner or measure as he
desires wholesome food; it is in its nature distasteful to sense, yet to be
desired as a means for procuring health, which all men desire for it self,
because it is truly good and pleasant, and yet withal to be desired, as a
means profitable for the exercise of piety, and performance of virtuous
actions: of this rank likewise is that which most men, upon a common error,
most of all desire, to wit, gold or coin, or other externals, before we have
occasion to use them. These are not good in themselves, save only with
reference to the procuring of things pleasant or honest. In Countries wherein
gold is not by custom referred to this use, men esteem it no more than Aesops
Cock did the Pearl. Thus we have read of a Mem. 1.
dumb dialogue between a poor Indian and a wandering Spaniard, that in his
hunger offered gold for a Pullet, which the Indian attempting to chaw with his
teeth, restored it again, with this intimation; That he could eat his
Pullet, but he could not eat the gold: Othervse of this metal he knew none,
and being not useful, it was not good to him, though of more worth to one of
us, than all the quick goods which the poor Indian had.

15. But more per^inent to our present purpose is that division of goodness or
good things which the Philosophers have made unto our hands in this very
argument whereof we treat. For unto felicity or true happiness, they require a
threefold rank or order of good things. The first was (as they call them)
[Bona fortunae,] the goods of fortune, which we call means and maintenance, as
moneys, lands, goods, possessions, reuenews, or whatsoever other externals. The
second, [bona corporis] as health, strength, agility, beauty or comelines of
body. The third was [bona animi,] the endowments of the soul or mind, which
they comprehended under the names of virtue moral and intellectual: of whose
several parts some did answer in proportion unto health or welfare of the
body, as Justice, Sobriety, Temperance, in which the health of the soul did
even in their judgment more specially consist, as the strength or agility of
the soul did consist in valor, wit, or resolution. As for Arts and sciences,
these they accounted as the attire, or external comeliness of the soul.
Their chiefest errors in these disquisitions were, that they thought (at least
some of the wisest of them) that this felicity or happiness might be complete
in this life. Howbeit some of them did think, that no man was to be accounted
or adjudged happy before his death. Not that these men, for ought we can
gather, did hope for any extraordinary happiness after death; but that such
happiness or prosperity as man is capable of in this life, and such as they
observed some men to enjoy, was so brickle and uncertain, as no man could
safely pass his sentence of them whether they were happy or no, until they
had finished their course of life. But the greatest error in this argument
(wherewith the greatest Philosopher himself was overtaken) was, that this
happiness might be attained unto by good education, or by the wit and industry
of man: for he denies it to be the free gift of God. But we Christians believe
and know, that if all good things be the gift of God, then the chief or
supreme good must be the extraordinary and special gift of God. And yet
withal we must consider, that God who gives all good things freely, never
casts such precious pearls as this unto swine Although it cannot be
purchased by man's industry, yet God gives it only to the industrious, only to
such as seek after it with the best faculties and endeavors of their souls,
content to forgo all things else, for the purchase of it. But of this
hereafter.

16. Yet herein Aristotle and other Heathen Philosophers were more
orthodoxall, than some rigid Stoicall Christians, in that they thought no man
could be truly happy without health of body, or whilst he continued in want
and penury, much less whilst he continued in such pains and torments as:
Regulus or other like virtues or good patriots did endure rather Mem. 1.
then they would wrong their conscience or undo their Country. He that shall
accuse these Heathens as carnally minded in this, considers not, that in thus
accusing them, he condemns the generation of the just. Our Apostle Saint Paul
had greater peace of conscience, than Regulus or any other Roman could have.
That part of happiness which consists in the health and welfare or other
endowments of the soul, was as complete and perfect in him during this life,
as any man, whilst clothed with mortality, can expect: yet says he of
himself, and others, even of all that were alike minded as he was; If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable; 1. Cor.
15. verse. 19. What occasions soever other good Christians of these times had to
join with him in this complaint; his own occasions, to speak, to think and
write, as here he does, are elsewhere by him specified at large, and are most
just. Are they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more: in labors
more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths
often: of the Jews five times received 1 forty stripes save one; Thrice was I
beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck: a night and
a day have I bin in the deep, In iournying often, In perils of waters, In
perils of robbers, in perils by my own Countrymen, in perils by heathen, in
perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in
perils among false brethren: In wearines and painefulnes, in watchings often,
in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those
things which are without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all
the Churches; who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn
not? 2. Cor. Cap. 11. verse. 23. to the 30.

17. These grieuances of body and perplexities of mind were of themselves
rather branches or degrees of misery than of felicity; things in their own
nature not to be desired but avoided, as being in that rank of evils which we
call [malu^ poenae,] such as all punishments or chastisements, whether justly
or iniustly inflicted, are. For whatsoever is contrary to that which is truly
good, must needs be so far truly evil, as it is contrary unto that, which
is in its nature good. Now all [malu^ poenae] that is, all punishments,
chastisements, or bodily grieuances, are directly contrary to the second branch
of goodness forementioned, which the Schools call [Bonum Iucundum,] the
goodness of lawful pleasure, of harmless delight, of blameless ease or
contentment, all which are degrees or branches of felicity. But though these
grieuances before mentioned by our Apostle, were in themselves truly evil,
yet was it good for him, as it is for all men else, to suffer them for the
Gospels sake, or for the confirmation of others faith. Both parts of this true
doctrine or assertion are avouched by the same Apostle, Heb. 12. verse. 11. No
chastening for the present seems to be joyous but grievous; nevertheless
afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them which
are exercised thereby. So that no chastening or bodily grieuance, which
befalls us for Christ's or the Gospel's sake, is so true or great an evil in
one sense, as it is good in another, to wit, in the first rank of goodness
before mentioned, that is profitable or useful. All persecutions, whether in
body, Mem. 1.
goods, or name, have the same reference or proportion unto the soul, or to
its welfare, health and happiness, that bitter and unpleasant Physic has unto
the body. Now there is no man, but will be willing to lay down his bodily life
as a wearisome burden, rather than to live continually under the Physician's
or Chirurgian's hands without any ease or intermission: And yet even the
bitterest and most unpleasant Physic, such as in it self is to be loathed,
is good, and by all wise men to be desired, so long as there is certain hope,
that it may be a means to ease their bodies-of lingering pain or torture, or
procure the restoration or long continuance of former and wonted health. In
like manner, our Apostle Saint Paul would have wished never to have professed
the Christian Religion, rather than to have lived eternally in such
persecutions, as he sometimes suffered, because they were in themselves evil,
and distastefull unto the humane nature: notwithstanding he rejoices and
glories in them, as they have reference to that exceeding weight of glory and
crown of righteousness, for the attaining whereof they were, though not causes,
yet as means ordained by God, useful, and for those times necessary. And
therefore our Savior says, Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. And again, Blessed
are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you for my sake. Matthew. 5. 10.
11. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted
they the Prophets, which were before you. verse. 12. So then such as suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, are blessed, [spe, non re,] whilst they
suffered persecution; That is, they are not in the actual possession of that
blessedness, which they hope for, nor can they expect, (as our Apostle in the
forecited 15. Chapter to the Corinthians, 19. verse. teaches us) that their
hopes of blessedness in Christ, shall be accomplished in this life, because
neither the endowments of the mind, nor of the body, whose perfection and
accomplishment are necessary to true and perfect happiness, can be perfected
and accomplished, until this corruptible have put on incorruption, and these
our mortal bodies become impassible and immortal. As for those external
comforts or supplies, which are necessary to that small portion of happiness,
which we have in this life, as meat, drink, apparel, and the like, we shall
have no need nor use of them in the life to come. In that life we shall be so
fully happy within our selves, and in the fruition of God, as we shall need
nothing without us, nothing besides Gods presence, and the fruition of our
selves. The want or penury of any thing useful in this life, is a degree or
part of misery: but not to need them, not to want them, is a portion of true
felicity. And for this reason happily it is, that amongst all the good works
and miracles which our Savior did, we never read, that he made any needy
beggars exceeding rich in worldly riches, because riches are neither useful
nor necessary to that happiness, whereunto all his miracles do lead and draw
us: but as he did neither make, nor promise to make his followers rich, so he
would not suffer any of them, whilst he lived here on earth, to continue in
want or penury. These evils or degrees of misery in this life, he often
prevented by miracles, Mem. 1.
when they were ready to befall them.

18. Here we are by the way to consider, that whilst our Savior was bodily
present with his Disciples and followers, none of them were in want or need,
but he instantly relieved them. If any fell sick, he presently cured them: if
they were in danger by Sea, they could no sooner cry out, Master, we perish,
but he as soon checked the wind with the breath of his mouth, and turned the
storm into a calm: he did not suffer them so much as to weep or mourn, but
rather ministered continual matter of joy and comfort unto them: Nay, as we
read Mark. 2. verse. 18. It was a solaecisme for them to fast, whilst he was
with them. When John's Disciples, or the Pharisees came unto him, and demanded of
him, Why do the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy Disciples
fast not? Jesus said unto them, Can the Children of the Bridegroom fast,
whilst the Bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the Bridegroom with
them, they cannot fast: but the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be
taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days. Thus you see a
great difference betwixt the estate of his Disciples, whilst he was with them,
and whilst he was taken from them: the one was an estate of joy and
contentment, without bodily grieuance or molestation; the other had his joy and
internal comfort mixed with sorrow of bodily discontentments. What was then the
reason of this difference? Surely it was our Saviors will and pleasure in
affording these contentments, which did accompany his bodily presence here on
earth, to exhibit a perfect Map or Model of that fullness of all joy and
contentment, which we shall be made partakers of by his bodily presence with
us in heaven. So then, for conclusion of the first point, and for more
commodious passage unto the second, our Savior by the miracles here mentioned,
and the like, did openly and evidently declare himself to be the Author, Lord,
and free doner of all these three ranks or sorts of good things, which the
Heathen by light of nature saw to be requisite or necessary for the attainement
of true felicity, or in the fruition whereof in full and perfect measure, true
and perfect happiness did consist.

19. First, for these externals, which the Heathens How the particular miracles
here mentioned, infer this universal conclusion, Blessed is he, whosoever
shall not be of^ended in me.
call [Bona fortunae] (as meat, drink, apparel, or means necessary for
maintenance of life) without which we can rather receive no contentment, than
be thoroughly contented with them; albeit our Savior gave them in less measure
than worldly minds desire them, yet his bounty in bestowing of them, did
herein far exceed the magnificence of greatest Princes, in that he herewith
pleasured his Disciples without any grieuance unto others. This was a
foundation of public happiness, which no Monarch or State-founder could ever
lay, in that, no man did ever fare a whit the worse because his followers or
favorers, (how many soever they were) did fare the better. For thus our
Savior plentifully fed multitudes of people in the Wilderness, without
occasioning any dearth or scarcity of bread or victuals unto such as remained
in the towns or villages. The relics or offalls of the Feasts that he made,
were always greater than the provision it self. Once we read of his feeding
five thousand men with seven Barly-loaues, and two Fishes, and the Mem. 1.
fragments or broken meat was seven Baskets full, Mark 8. verse. 20. Another
time of his feeding five thousand men with five loaves, when there remained
twelve baskets full of fragments. Nor did this his bounty extend only in cases
of necessity or for preventing want or penury, but unto matter of delight or
decency. For as he fed thousands of people in the Wilderness, where no food
was to be had for them without miracle; so, to grace the marriage feast at Cana
in Galilie, he turned water into wine, not of the worst sort, but of the
pleasantest and cheerefullest taste. Thus when tribute or pole money was
unjustly exacted of him, he did not demand a benevolence from those men on
whom he had wrought those mighty cures, or whom he had otherwise benefited
extraordinarily; He supplyeth himself and Peter with this necessary from a
Fish, which had no more use or need of money whereof the Roman Caesar had
want, than the poor Indian had of the Spaniards gold. So that albeit he sent
his pole money to Rome with others, yet was there not one penny less in Jury
than there was before.

20. But to come to the second sort or rank of good things, which the Heathens
by light of nature saw necessary unto felicity, as [bona corporis;] what
greater bodily happiness could befall the blind or lame, than for the one to
be restored unto his perfect fight, the other to the right use of limbs? What
could the deaf more desire than to be able to hear, or the Lepers than to be
cleansed from their leprosy? What so great a bodily blessing, if any at all
besides could be bestowed upon the dead, as to be restored to life again? Yet
those and many like blessings our Savior bestowed upon all that were not
offended in him, by his mere word, thereby showing himself to be the Lord and
disposer of all the blessings or parts of happiness which concern the body.
And John's Disciples might hear and see the parties here mentioned, made thus
far truly happy by him. Happy they were in respect of all other men, happier
by much than those men which still continued blind or lame, or leprous, or
deaf, or in that estate of death, from which our Savior raised these dead
here mentioned. Again, happier they were than such men as never had been
blind, or lame, or leprous, or deaf, or never had tasted of bodily death. For
albeit the blessings of life, of health, of strength, of soundness of limbs,
were in themselves (if we measure them by themselves) the selfsame in both:
yet these mentioned in my Text, knew much better how to value or prize these
bodily blessings aright, or how to use them to their right end by their former
long want or absence, than others could do by their continual presence or
fruition of them. Again, happy they were in respect of themselves, or their
former estate, much happier in that they were now able to walk, whereas before
they had been lame; much happier, in that whereas now they see, they had
sometimes bin blind; that whereas now they are cleansed, they had sometimes
bin Lepers; in that such of them as now live, had been sometimes dead. For,
although the habit be in it self much better than the privation, as sight is
much better than blindness, health much better than sickness, soundness of
limbs much Mem. 1.
better than lamenesse, life much better than death; vet sometimes the
sufferance of want or privation of things in their nature good and pleasant,
may be more profitable or useful for attayning some greater good, than the
present possession or fruition of good things. Now it was not the habit or
present fruition of life and health, not the right use of limbs and bodily
senses, but the former want or privation of them, which was as the root or
stock wherein the third part of that happiness which consists in the health or
welfare of the soul was ingrafted. If some of these men had always inioyed
their perfect sight, it is more than twenty to one but that their own right
eyes had offended them; and better it were they should have been plucked out,
than have offended them: but best of all, that they had none to offend them, or
draw them from Christ the Fountain of happiness, unto other vanities. If
others of them had been always sound of body and limbs, their own right
hands or feet would have bin as a stumbling-blocke to them in the way of life,
and have hindered them from coming to Christ. If others of them had not bin
smitten with leprosy or other like grievous diseases, they had not sought to
Christ as to their Physician: and not finding him so happy a Physician as they
found him for the body, they would not so earnestly have sought unto him, as
the only Physician of their souls; although he be usually found of none but
such as seek him. Finally, unless the Lord had humbled all of them with some
one or other bodily grieuance, or with want and poverty, they had not become so
humble in mind, or poor in spirit, as now they are; and not being such, they
had not been capable of the greatest miracle or best blessing here bestowed,
that is, they had not been (...), for so it is remarkeably said in the Text,
(...), the dead are raised, (...), and the poor (as our later English
translation reads it) have the Gospel preached unto them: much better I must
confess than some of the ancient Fathers, which expound the original (...),
(being, as the Latins say, a Verb common, or, as the Grecians say [verbum
medium,] that is, sometimes active, sometimes passive) according to its active
signification in this place; and render it thus, the poor preach the Gospel.
But as Maldonate well observes, for the poor to preach the Gospel, was never
any matter of wonder, and therefore no part of our Saviors message unto John,
as being no point worthy so great a Master as our Savior was, solemnly to
teach; or so great a Scholar as John was, solemnly to learn. And howsoever
the word in the Original be rendered by Interpreters, the thing signified by
it, is the greatest miracle in this Catalogue. That the Gospel should be
preached unto the poor, as Maldonate would have it, was [valde mirum] a great
and real wonder. And why so great or real a wonder? Because, says he, to
have the Gospel preached unto them, was as much as to have a promise to be
made Kings, as he rightly proves from diverse places of this Gospel by Saint
Matthew. [Quid autem admirabilius quam pauperem Regem fieri?] What more
admirable or wonderful, than for poor men and beggars to be made Kings? He
further adds, that although the Gospel were equally and indifferently
preached to all, yet it Mem. 1.
pleased our Savior only to mention the poor, both because that was most
strange and unusual according to the custom of the world, that the poor
should have the promise to be made Kings; and withal, that he might show
himself to be the Messiah or the Anointed of the Lord, who, as the Prophet
Esaias had foretold, should preach the Gospel to the poor. Thus far
Maldonate. But under correction, the original phrase (...) imports a great
deal more than either Maldonate expresses in Latin, when he says,
[Euangelium praedicatur pauperibus,] or than is expressed in our latter
English, the poor have the Gospel preached unto them. Our former English
comes somewhat nearer the Original, when it says, the poor receive the
Gospel. But the vulgar Latin, though it miss it many, yet in this particular
best expresses the meaning of the Evangelist, if the Romish Priests and
Jesuits, which hold it to be Authentic, did understand the meaning of it, or
improve it to the best sense; for so it renders the Original verbatim
[Pauperes Euangelizantur.] For right unfolding the contents of this speech, or
taking the full value of the Original, we are to observe that Verbes passive,
whether in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or English, may include or import a
twofold passion; the one merely Grammatical or intentionall; the other
real, either natural or supernatural. One and the same Verb may sometimes
include the former only, sometimes the latter, according to the diversity of
the matter or subject whereunto it is applied. To give instance in that speech
of Melchizedeck, Genes. 14. 19. Blessed be Abraham of the most high GOD,
possessor of heaven and earth. And blessed be the most High God which has
delivered thine enemies into thine hand. Now, though the word in the Original
be the same, though it be for signification as truly passive, when it is said,
Blessed be the most High God, and when it is said, Blessed be Abraham of the
most High God: yet we must always note this difference in the thing it self,
that whenever God is blessed by man, as here he was by Melchizedeck, man's
blessing can produce no real passion or alteration in God: it can add no
degree of bliss or happiness to him. But whenever man is blessed by GOD,
his blessing always adds some increase of blessedness either in his goods,
in his body, or in his soul. Again, if one man give another poison, the other
may be said to have poison given him, or to be Gra^matically passive. But it is
one thing to have poison given him, and another to be poisoned. This latter
includes a real passion or bodily mutation, though from better to worse, from
life to death. He that has a medicine given him, is in common speech termed a
Patient, and is Grammatically passive. But every one that is thus far passive
as to have a medicine given him, is not instantly medicined, cured, or healed;
for this includes a real operation or amendment of that which was amiss in
the body. In like manner, in as much as our Savior preached the Gospel
equally and indifferently to all, all that heard him, might be alike truly
and literally said to have had the Gospel preached unto them, if we respect
only the Grammatical sense and signification of the word. But it is one thing
to say that all had the Gospel preached unto them; and another thing to say,
all Mem. 1.
were Euangelizati. For this latter was peculiar only to the poor in spirit:
They only took this stamp or impression of the Gospel, which was preached to
all. Briefly, the original phrase does literally and naturally import as true
or real an alteration or transmutation in the souls of such as were poor in
spirit, as the former miracles here mentioned, did in the bodies of the
blind, the lame, the deaf, the Leprous, or dead. Now it is not said that the
blind had their sight proffered or promised unto them, or that the lame were
only made to walk, or the Leapers cleansed only in hope, or by way of
promise. But all of them were truly and actually cured of their infirmities of
body; and so no question were the poor in spirit as truly cured, as truly
healed of their infirmities of their souls. They had been as truly dead unto
the life of the spirit, as those whom Christ is here said to have raised up,
were unto the life of the body. But now they are raised up to newness of life,
enlightened to see the truth, and enabled to walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. And whereas before they had been the bond slaves of sin,
wherewith their souls were more foulely stained or tainted than these Leapers
bodies were with leprosy, they are now freed and cleansed from the guilt and
reign of sin, and made the servants of righteousness. Thus much is included
in these last words, [Pauperes euangelizantur;] and this transmutation of their
souls was, or might have bin, as conspicuous or obseruable to John's Disciples,
as the changing of Saul's mind or spirit was unto the Israelites, after Samuel
had anointed him King. 1. Sam. cap. 10. ver. 9. This Interpretation of this
place is made unto our hands by our Savior himself, the best Interpreter of
his own words: for so he says, Luke 6. ver. 20. Blessed be ye poor,
(setting his eyes on his Disciples) for yours is the Kingdom of God. This
blessing of Interest in the Kingdom of God here bequeathed by our Savior unto
the poor, is in effect the same with these words in my Text, [Pauperes
euangelizantur;] of which, their Interest in the Kingdom of God is the true
real and formal effect. For the Gospel is called the Kingdom of God,
because it instateth such as receive the impression of it, that is, the
Euangelizati, in the Kingdom of God or of heaven. The Kingdom of God in
Scriptures is twofold, and has two importances. Sometimes it imports the
Kingdom of Grace, which the poor in spirit attain unto it in this world:
Sometimes it imports the Kingdom of Glory, which no man shall attain unto
but in the world to come. The Kingdom of Grace there bequeathed had two parts;
the one ordinary, to continue throughout all ages, which did consist in the
reign or sovereignty of the spirit over the flesh: the other extraordinary,
yet usual in that time, and did consist in the reign or sovereignty of such
poor men, as Christ's Disciples were, over Satan and his angels. And this part
of the Kingdom of grace, or this effect of it, was more conspicuous and
visible unto others, and was one of those works or miracles which John's
Disciples might hear and see, and make faith or true relation unto their
Master. Now the blessedness here promised by our Savior, or so much of it as
men are capable of in this life, consists in the former part of the Kingdom
of Grace, that is, in the sovereignty Mem. 1.
of the spirit over the flesh. Both parts of this observation are set forth
unto us by our Savior, Luke 10. verse. 17, 18, 19. The Seventy returned again
with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us through thy name.
And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I
give unto you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power
of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding in this
rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice because
your names are written in heaven. All the poor which are here said to be
Euangelizati, were thereby instated in the Kingdom of Grace, and made the
sons of God, as it is written, Ioh. 1. ver. 12. As many as received him, to
them gave he power [(...), a privilege or faculty] to be the sons of God,
and heirs apparent unto the Kingdom of Glory. This is all one, as to have
their names written in the Book of life.

21. But here the Jesuit, at least the Moncke or begging Friar (who takes the
poverty which he voweth, to be an Evangelical perfection, containing in it a
title of merit to the blessedness here mentioned;) would reply, that by the
poor mentioned, Lu. 6. v. 20. the poor in spirit only are to be understood,
though not expressed, because the poor in spirit are expressed by Saint
Matthew, who relates the selfsame story, Chap. 5. which Saint Luke does in
that 6. Chap: but in as much as the story or relation here in my Text, is not
the same with either of the former two, it will not so clearly follow, that
the poor in spirit are here only to be understood. Yet it is a rule in
Logic, and it is a rule of reason, [Quaecunque conueniunt in al^ quo tertio,
conueniunt etiam inter se.] From which rule it will clearly follow, that if as
well these words of my Text, as those of Saint Luke, chap. 6. verse. 20. be but
Evangelical expressions of one and the same Prophetical prediction, in which
the poor in spirit are to be understood, this my Text must be meant of the
poor in spirit, as well as those other words of Saint Luke or Saint Matthew.
But of the consonancy of the Evangelist and the Prophet, by Gods assistance
hereafter.

22. You have heard, and I make no question but you do believe, That
whatsoever your hearts can desire, even the fulness of that true happiness, which
is all that you or any man can desire, is only to be sought in Christ, in whom
it may be found by all. For confirming your particular Interest in him, and in
the blessedness which here he promises: the right receiving of this blessed
Sacrament is of all other means most effectual. For your better preparation
to the due receiving of it, it will be available to consider the doctrine
which my Text affoords; that although Christ be a fountain of happiness
infinite, and inexhaustible; although his death (whose memory we celebrate,
whose virtue in this Sacrament we seek) be, as it were the opening of this
fountain; yet are the streams of bliss and happiness which issue from him by
his death, deriuable only unto such as are not offended in him. Though the
Gospel, as our Apostle speaks, Romans 1. ver. 16. be the power of God unto
salvation, yet, as my Text says, the poor in spirit only take the impression
of it. Even power it self, and goodness infinite, sufficient in it self to
save all, Mem. 2.
though in number infinite; is effectual only in such as are of an humble and
contrite heart. Of their humiliation or contrition, or their poorenes in
spirit, which is here mentioned in my Text, that might be truly said, which
our Savior does of Thomas the Apostle his faith: Thomas, thou beleeuest
because thou have seen, happy are they which have not seen and yet believe.
The most of these men were therefore poor and humble in spirit, because the
Lord had humbled, broken, or chastised them, some with bodily blindness, others
with lamenes, some with deafenes, others with leprosy, or like grievous
sickness, some with death. Howeuer, beco^ming once truly humble and poor in
spirit, though by these and like means, all of them were truly happy in
Christ: but much happier and more blessed shall they be, whom the Lord having
not so grievously chastised in body, yet do become as humble and poor in
spirit, as they were. The best consideration I can commend unto you, for
working this humiliation and contrition of spirit, is this, that as the
Ceremonies of the Law were but shadows of these things which are now
fulfilled in Christ; so all the bodily calamities, which Christ here cured in
so many several bodies, were but as so many sensible types or shadows of
more grievous maladies in every man's soul; although by nature we do not
feel them. Some of them were dead in body, and all of us, as our Apostle
says, are by nature dead in trespasses. Now if we do as truly and heartily
bewail this deadnes of our souls, as the poor Widow of Naim did the bodily
death of her only son; then, as our Apostle says in the same place, We are
quickened in Christ, and he will deliver our souls unto us safe and sound, as
he did him unto his mother. Some of those were blind in body; all of us were
dark in mind, even from the womb: and if we supplicate unto him with like
earnestnes to enlighten our minds, as these poor men did to receive their
bodily sight, we shall be as happy in this cure, as they were in the other.
Some of them were halt and lame, and not able to go; and we, after we have
seen and known the ways of God, are more unable to walk in them, than they
were to run a race. Some of them were Leapers in body; so are we all by
nature Leapers in souls. But whatsoever lamenes, infirmity or disease has
befalne our souls by Adams transgression or by our own corruption, he is both
able and willing to work more miraculous cures upon our souls, than he did
upon these pooremens bodies, so we entreat him as earnestly and heartily as
they did.

23. None of you, I hope, conceiueth Christ's bodily presence to be either
necessary or expedient for curing or healing your souls. No man's faith in
Scripture is more commended than the Centurions, which did not desire our
Saviors bodily presence, when he offered it, for the healing of his servant.
His answer was, Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should come under my roof,
but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. Matthew. 8. 8. If this
acknowledgement were a document of lively faith, and Christian modesty in this
Centurion; what can it be but arrogance and unbelief in the Romanist, to
think himself worthy, not only of Christ's bodily presence under the roof of
his house, but under the roof of his mouth, Mem. 2.
yea in his stomach? But far be all such unclean and carnal thoughts from
any here present. Let us steadfastly believe, that Christ's Word is now as
powerful in heaven, as it was on earth; yet have we not only his Word, but
the visible pledges of his body and blood for the healing of our souls.
Whateuer other defect there may be in our preparation for receiving these
pledges of his passion, let us be sure, that our intention to humble our
selves, and amend our lives, be sincere and without hypocrisy.

The second Member of the general division, proposed in the former Discourse,
Parag. 8. What satisfaction this Answer of our Savior did give to John.
24. VErbum sapienti sat est. A man of understanding and experience, in part
acquainted with any business on foot, perceives more by a word or Hint, than
another of less understanding or experience, altogether unacquainted with the
same business, would do by instructions given in Folio. Now John, we know, was
a man of extraordinary understanding and experience in matters spiritual,
specially such as concerned Christ, to whom he was the immediate forerunner,
unto which office he was qualified or set apart from the womb, yea, sanctified
unto it even in the womb, as you may read, Luke 1. verse 41. As this
qualification made him more docile or capable of good instructions than other
children were, so his father Zacharias was better able to instruct him in the
knowledge of Christ, of whose Kingdom and Office he had prophesied, than any
other Priest or son of Aaron could. For Zacharias was, for ought that we can
gather, the only Prophet then in Israel, at least the spirit of Prophecy,
which for a long time had bin as a fountain dried up, did first break forth
in him. After that John himself came to maturitie of age and understanding, he
was directed by special commission from his God, to usher Christ into the
world, to induct him into his Prophetical function, to declare him to be the
Redeemer of Israel, to proclaim him to be the high Priest of our souls, that
was to make the full atonement for the sins of the whole world. Now unto
John, thus well qualified and instructed in matters concerning Christ, and in
particular acquainted with the carriage of all businesses concerning Christ's
baptism or other actions until his imprisonment; this Answer of our Savior
Christ, (especially being framed out of that Prophets words which had penned
John's Commission, for being Christ's messenger or preparing his ways, more then
600. years before either of them was borne) would suggest or imply a great
deal more, then it could do unto any other man not so well qualified or
instructed as John was, and not so well acquainted with the particular passages
of Scripture whereon John's faith was grounded, nor with the signs of the time,
by which his faith in the Messiah was confirmed.

Now for your better edification in this point, give Mem. 2. Branch 1.
me leave to break this portion of the Bread of life which I have in hand,
into three parts:

The first, The general means by which every Three branches of this second
member.
man's faith or belief in Christ is wrought or grounded, or by which it is or
may be confirmed.

The second shall be the unfolding of those particular places of Scripture on
which John's belief was grounded, as also the signs of the time by which his
faith before his imprisonment, (or before the framing of this question) was
ratified and confirmed.

The third, What correspondency, concord or consonancy the particulars here
mentioned, and those places of Scripture whereunto our Savior in this answer
referres John, or the signs of this very time wherein this answer was made,
have unto the other parts of Scripture, or signs of the time by which John's
former faith had been established and confirmed. Of these three in their order
by Gods assistance.

25. Concerning the first point, we all beleeueand know that Gods Word is the
only rule on which our faith must be grounded, by which we must be builded up
as the house by line or level. The first Branch. Concerning the manner how our
belief in Gods Word, or in Christ is grounded to the 36. parag.


In this general we and the Church of Rome agree: The first breach or point of
difference betwixt us and them is, Whether this Word of God by which the Temple
of God must be raised, be partly written and partly unwritten? We say, that
the whole rule or Canon of Faith is written or contained fully in the Books of
the Old and New Testament. They grant these Books to contain part of the
rule, but the other part, which in effect they make the principal, is (as they
say) contained in unwritten traditions, of whose truth or true meaning the
visible Church for the time being, is the sole Judge. This indeed is the roof
or covering of their Edifice, which (as elsewhere we have showed, and by Gods
assistance shall more fully show hereafter) does utterly raze or overthrow the
foundation it self, whereon they would seem to put it, to wit, the written
Word of God, and the truths concerning Christ contained in it. But our purpose
is not at this time to show you, in what manner they overthrow the foundation
of Faith or Word of God, but rather the manner how our faith is grounded on it.

26. Now though it be true which we lately said, that faith must be grounded
only on the written Word; this saying notwithstanding must be restrained unto
the time since. GODS Word unto his Church or people by his appointment was
committed unto writing. Wherefore you must remember or take notice, that there
was a time wherein no part of Gods Word was written: for Moses was the first
that committed Gods Words to writing, the first that made a Register or Record
of what God had spoken unto the Patriarchs. Now, the belief of the Patriarchs
was grounded on Gods Word though then unwritten, after the same manner as ours
is on the written Word. For (as you will easily conceive) it is not the writing
of Gods Word which makes it to be the ground or rule of faith. Yet here
happily you will demand, To what other end then was it written? To this we
answer, That the writing of it by such special Registers as God had appointed
for that purpose, Mem. 2. Branch 1.
and the strange preservation of the Records written by them, is to us an
infallible argument that what they have written, is the Words of God, not the
words of men. And this, to know that the words which we believe or give
credence unto in matters concerning our happiness or salvation, are the words
not of any mortal man, but of the immortal God, is the first ground of faith.

27. Unto the right grounding of our faith in this The prediction not of any
but of some special events, argues the Authors of the Prediction to have bin
inspired by God.
first po^nt, two things were ever required: The first, prediction or
foretelling things to come: The second was, the event or experiment answering
to the prediction. Yet is it not the prediction of any event that shall fall
out, though for a long time after, that can argue the prediction it self to
have been Gods words, or the fore-teller of such events to be a Prophet. For
the Astronomers can foretell you the Eclipses of the Sun or Moon for many
years before they fall out or happen; yet no man takes their skill as an
argument that they are true Prophets, or that they are enlightened by the Spirit
of God, by which the Scriptures were written, or the mysteries contained in
them were foretold. But if an Astronomer could as distinctly foretell what
kind of weather every month or every day for two or three years following
should bring with it, as he can foretell what day or hour the Sun or Moon
shall be eclipsed, or in what degree or measure either of their bodies should
be obscured or hid from our sight; you would conceive of him as a man more than
ordinary, and that he could not know this by ordinary skill or art, no not by
the black art it self, or by dealing with the Devil. He that could
certainly foretell all the particular changes of weather, or the alteration
of States and Kingdoms, or the several Eclipses or illuminations of Gods true
visible Church here on earth for the next Generations that are to come; might
justly challenge the reputation of a Prophet or Messenger sent from God, at the
hands of all such as had heard or read his predictions before the truth of them
was sealed by their manifest undoubted events. What then is the reason why the
certain and known prediction of some events, whose truth afterward becomes
visible and manifest unto the world (as the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, or
the conjunction of Planets, which shall fall out some forty years hence or
more) should not as infallibly argue the assistance of the divine Spirit, or
revelations immediately made from God, as the foretelling of all change of
weather, or matters of greater consequences do, as matters of States or
Kingdoms, or Gods visible Church? The reason is, because God by his
everlasting Decree has appointed the Sun and Moon their constant and
certain course, and privileged them from all impossibility of impediment or
disturbance in their several courses, which either man or infernal spirits
can attempt against them: whereas by the same everlasting Decree, He has
ordained such variety or inconstancy in the air or other inferior Elements,
as no wit of Man or Devil can comprehend all the possible changes of weather,
which may happen within some few years following. For though Satan and his
angels be enstyled Prince of the Air by Gods Saints, yet does not this title
any way Mem. 2. Branch 1.
import that they have absolute independent power or Monarchical Soueraignety
over the air, but only that He who is supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth, of
all the World, and of all in it, often times permits those infernal spirits,
for the iniquity or sins of men, to exercise such power in the air, as he
never permits them to use or exercise in the higher Region, whence they are
utterly banished or excluded. So that albeit they often times know much, and more
than man by means natural can do, concerning the alteration or change of
weather; yet can they know no more concerning these or like effects, than God
permits them to know, or suffers them in his just judgments to effect or
work. Again, for the managing of civil affairs, of government of States or
Kingdoms, GOD, by his everlasting Decree, has left unto men such variety of
choice, such a contingency in their consultations, such a freedom of will in
contriuing or proiecting their several ends, as it is impossible for any man
living in this Age, though he should consult with Witches or familiar spirits,
to prognosticate or foretell what the success or final issue of what he
himself at this present proiects or plots, Vide Acts 1. 6, 7.
shall be an hundred or two hundred years hence. From this faculty or rather
facility in foretelling things of this nature, which for diverse Generations
after shall certainly come to pass, the Lord himself does plead, and prove
his Title of infinite wisdom, that He is the only wise immortal God, that
besides him there is none that can do or say as He does. Produce your cause,
says the LORD, (unto the Heathen gods and their worshippers:) Bring forth your
strong reasons, says the King of Jacob. Let them bring them forth, and show us
what shall happen: Let them show the former things what they be, that we may
consider them, and know the latter end of them, or declare us things for to
come. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye
are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed: and behold it
together. Behold, you are of nothing, and your work of naught: an abomination
is he that chooses you. Isay 41. verse. 21, 22, 23, 24. And again, chap. 47.
verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Sit thou in silence, and get thee into darkness, O
Daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shall no more be called the Lady of
Kingdoms: I was wroth with my people, I have polluted my Inheritance, and
given them into thine hand: thou did show them no mercy; upon the ancient
have thou very heavily laid the yoke. And thou said, I shall be a Lady for
ever: so that thou did not lay these things to thine heart, neither did
remember the latter end of it. Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to
pleasures, that dwell carelessly, that say in thine heart: I am, and none
else besides me, I shall not sit as a Widow, neither shall know the loss of
Children, and widdowhood; they shall come upon thee in their perfection, for
the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine
enchantments. This speech (you must consider) is directed in particular to the
Chaldeans, who were the most curious Inquisitors after things to come; the
cunningest Southsayers, (as they took and professed themselves) in the world.
And for this reason it is, that the LORD sends that peremptory challenge unto
them, v. 12, 13, 14, 15. Stand now with Mem. 2. Branch 1.
thine Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have
labored from thy youth, if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou
may prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy Counsels: Let now the
Astrologers, the Starre-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save
thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as
stubble: the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the
power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit
before it. Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou have labored, even thy
Merchants from thy youth, they shall wander every one to his quarter: None
shall save thee.

28. Let me give you two instances or examples of things foretold by God, (by
his Prophet Isay) concerning the strange alteration of States or Kingdoms,
both which predictions were exactly and remarkeably fulfilled and accomplished;
the one about an hundred, the other about one hundred and seventy years
after, the Prophet from the mouth of the LORD had foretold them. The former is
related in the second Book of Kings, chap. 20. and in the 39. of Isay, verse.
6, 7, 8. The sum of both those Stories is this: After Hezekiah had showed his
House and all his Treasure unto the King of Babylons Ambassador, which came to
congratulate his late recovery from that dangerous sickness, of which the
Prophet Isayas had by Gods appointment cured him, having first secured him not
only of his instant recovery, but of the continuance of his former health, and
prolonging of his days by a sign from Heaven: the same Prophet came unto him,
and tells him that this his kindness or courtesy to the Ambassadors in
showing them his Treasury, was [factum male ominatum,] and did abode a future
misery to his posterity. Hear the Word of the LORD, says Isaiah to Hezekiah,
Behold the days to come, that all that is in thine House, and that which thy
Fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon:
nothing shall be left, says the Lord. And of thy sons that shall issue from
thee, which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs
in the Palace of the King of Babylon.

Now, if we consider the strength of Judah and of Egypt in those times, and
the small power which the Babylonian had in respect of his Neighbor the
mighty King of Assyria, who then laid claim to Judah; the accomplishment of
this Prediction or Prophecy was in all politic esteem or humane conjecture
more improbable and more incredible, than if a man in this Age should take upon
him to foretell that the Duke of Saxony, or some other Prince of Germany,
should conquer the Low Countries, France and Spain, and lead all the Royal
Race of both those Kingdoms Captives unto Dresden, or to some other Princely
Court of Germany within these hundred years next following. He that should
foretell thus much at this present, would be recou^ted a true Prophet or
Messenger from God in the ages following, by such as lived to see the event or
prediction fulfilled or verified. Now there was not one part or circumstance of
the former Prophecy, but was notoriously and remarkeably accomplished Mem. 2
Branch 1.
in Iehoiakim, Zedekiah, and their Children, both of them being sons to good
King Josiah, both of them being confederates with the King of Egypt, whose
joined strength could not resist the greatness whereto the Kingdom of Babylon
within three or four discents was grown: For Nabuchadnezzar had made himself
Lord of Iewry, of Egypt, and the Empire of Assyria, The same Prophet (which is
more remarkable and more admirable) about the same time foretells the sudden
desolation of the Babylonian Empire, before it was grown to half its height
or greatness, and names the Party which was to accomplish the work of the Lord,
more than an hundred years before he was borne. Isai. 45. verse. 6, 7.

29. The accomplishment of this Prophecy by Cyrus, the Lord would have as well
the Gentile as the Jew to take special notice of, as an impregnable argument,
or irrefragable testimony of his power, in raising up Cyrus to take vengeance
on the Babylonians in the height of their pride, for the wrongs which they had
done to Judah his Sanctuary: an impregnable argument likewise of his exceeding
mercy and loving kindness toward his people, whom Cyrus, after he had
conquered Babylon, did set at liberty, and gave them License to re-edifie the
City and the Temple. Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right
hand I have holden, to subdue Nations before him: and I will loose the loins
of Kings to open before him the twoleaued Gates, and the Gates shall not be
shut. etc. to verse.

17. The manner of Cyrus his sudden surprising Babylon in that night, wherein
they celebrated the Feast of their Idol Bell, is recorded at large by two
heathen Writers, Herodotus and Xenophon, as long after this Prophecy was
fulfilled, as the prediction was before it. Their Relations of it are so plain
and constant unto the predictions of Isay and Jeremy, and specially to the
Relation which the Prophet Daniel has made (who was in Babylon when Cyrus
took it) that the incrediblest Gentiles of that age were inexcusable. Now the
reason why the Lord seeks to win credit to his Prophet in these his strange
predictions of alterations in States and Kingdoms, was that neither Jew nor
Gentile should have any pretense to distrust the same Prophets more admirable
predictions concerning the Messiah which was to come; in which predictions this
Pophet above others, is so plain and so plentiful, that he was enstiled by
the Ancient Fathers, the Evangelical Prophet.

30. Of the literal and mystical sense of Prophesies.
Here I must request you to observe, what I must often inculcate or repeat
unto you hereafter, That the Spirit of God did from the beginning, use a
peculiar kind of fore-shewing all events which properly concerned the promised
Messiah, either in his birth, conception, baptism, or principal actions in
his death and passion, or in his resurrection and ascension. The alterations of
States or Kingdoms were for the most part fore-signified, or declared
beforehand, only by mere words, by mere Prophecy or prediction. But such
things or events as concerned our Savior Christ, were fore-signified as well
by deed and fact, as by word; as well by real representations, as by mere
Prophecy or predictions. From this twofold fore-signification of things to
come, which concern the Messiah, the Ancients have rightly observed Mem. 2.
Branch 1.
two senses of Scripture, the literal and the mystical. The literal sense is
that, which the words upon their first uttering or writing (whether in terms
proper or borrowed) directly and immediately import, without interposition of
real event, or representation of the mystery foretold, by matter of fact. So
that the branches of the literal sense, taken according to its full latitude,
(as it is oposed to the mystical or merely typical sense) may be as many as
there be tropes or figures of speech, whether Rhetorical or Poetical,
besides the proper plain Grammatical or Historical expression of things to
come. The mystical sense or meaning is that, which is portended by some deed
or fact, as by some Legal type instituted by Moses, or by some real event
which the sacred Historians or other faithful Writers according to their
predictions relate. For Heathen Historians ofttimes make historical Relations
of the events which the Prophets foretold. And the events so related and
foretold, become real Prophesies of other like events to come, as Isayes
predictions concerning Cyrus, and Zacharias predictions concerning Alexanders
victories (being both accomplished diverse hundred years before Christ was
incarnate) did mystically fore-shaddow such events as the Evangelists have
historically related concerning Christ and the success of his Gospel. Whether
the allegorical sense be a branch of the literal, or of the mystical; or
whether sometimes of the one, and sometimes of the other, and sometimes of
both, (according as the nature of the Allegory is) or whether sure Arguments
for confirming our faith may be drawn as well from the allegorical, as from
the plain literal and mystical sense, are points elsewhere discussed. It
shall suffice here to admonish you, that our belief (especially as it
concerns the mystical sense of Scriptures) must be always grounded on the
intention and meaning of the holy Ghost, or of God speaking in Scriptures, not
on the Prophets present apprehensions of what he speaks, unto whom perhaps
part of the holy Ghosts intention was revealed: the rest being wrapped up and
hidden, until the event or signs of time which it concerned, did more fully
unfold it. The mystical and literal sense oft-times concur; sometimes so,
as the same words may be univocally verefied of the type, and of the mystery
portended by it. As for example, in the 12. of Exodus, verse. 26. not a bone of
it shall be broken: This was literally meant of the Paschall Lamb, which these
words immediately and directly point at; for this was the Law of the Paschall
Lamb, that not a bone of it shall be broken. And all Laws are to be conceived
and interpreted according to the plain literal and Gra^maticall sense of the
words. But inasmuch as the Paschall Lamb it self was a real type or shadow
of the Lamb of God, which was to take away the sins of the world by his bloody
death upon the Cross, the selfsame words which were literally and
historically verefied of the Paschall Lamb, were as truly and more exactly
fulfilled of Christ, according to their mystical (and yet univocal) sense.
And the fulfilling of this mystery was the cause (as I doubt not but you all
know) why our Saviors bones were not broken upon the Cross, when the bones of
the other two which were crucified with him, were broken. Mem. 2. Branch. 1.
GOD in his wisdom had prevented all occasion of breaking his bones by
hastening his death, before the other dyed which were crucified with him.
Sometimes the same words may be verefied of the type and of the body, not
according to their univocal sense or importance, but aequiuocally, or
analogically; properly verefied of the body, and catachrestically of the type.
As for instance, these words; I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me
a son, are truly meant both of Solomon and of Christ, but not secundum
vniuocam rationem. The title of the Son of God, as it is communicated unto
Solomon with Christ, differs as much as [homo, and homo pictus,] as a man, and
a painted man. Some events there are concerning our Savior or his actions,
which were not at all foretold by express word of Prophecy, but only
foreshaddowed by deed or fact, or by some real type or representation; at the
least they are not literally foretold in the same places in which they are
really fore-shaddowed. Thus was his death upon the Cross really represented by
lifting up the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, yet not literally foretold
by Moses; so was his imprisonment or abode in the grave really foreshaddowed by
Jonas imprisoned in the Whales belly, but Jonas did not expres thus much by
word or Prophecy. But of these and the like types we shall have occasion to
speak hereafter. Of all the testimonies or fore-significations of Christ, or
him crucified, those testimonies wherein is a concurrence of
fore-significations as well by fact as by word, are the most pregnant, and most
concludent against the Jews; and therefore the furest grounds of our belief
in Christ. Of the particular manner how Arguments for confirming our faith are
to be drawn from this kind of testimony especially, God willing, hereafter.
Whether, of these or other Testimonies concerning Christ (but of these
especially) the belief or knowledge of the faithful has been or may be
either confused and indefinite, or explicit and distinct.

31. The first prediction which God revealed unto man, was concerning the
forbidden fruit; In that day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye. This
prediction our first Parents did not believe, until woeful experience had
sealed the truth of it unto their and our irrecouerable loss, for any thing
that they knew or could do. But the truth of the Divine prediction in
threatening evil, being fully experienced and ratified by their loss, was by
Gods Providence, wisdom, and mercy, an especial inducement unto them for
establishing their faith unto his prediction concerning the woman's seed, which
was to bruise the Serpents head. I will put The word enmity here used, is not a
term aequiuocall: and yet the thing signified by it, is not univocally the
same, as it respects the natural serpent and the natural man, and the woman's
seed and the old Serpent; but the same by Analogy only or proportion.
enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Genesis 3. ver. 15. In
this prediction, there is a concurrence of the literal and mystical sense. A
true enmity between the seed of the natural Serpent, and the natural seed of
the woman: Howbeit this enmity is but a type o^ Emblem of that supernatural
enmity which the spiritual Serpent bears unto the seed of the woman (...).

This was the original and fountain of all ensuing Prophesies or predictions
concerning Christ, and yet even this prediction it self, as most other
Prophesies, was in respect of the particular manner or circumstanstances, which
were to accompany the fulfilling of it, Mem. 2. Branch 1.
a kind of riddle, until the event or other declarations of Prophesies upon
it, and facts answerable unto them did unfold it. Our mother Eua (no doubt) did
in the general beeleue, that as by man death came into the world, so the
deliverance from death should come by man, which was to be borne of a woman;
but whether she did in particular believe, that this man or seed of the woman,
which was to deliver her and her Husband from the curse of death, should be
borne of a Virgin, or of a woman without the consort of man, is more then the
Analogy of faith or Christian Charity binds us to believe of her. Their
opinion is very probable, who think, she mistook Cain her first borne, to be
the promised seed, and that out of this too joyful apprehension, she uttered
these words, I have gotten or possessed a man of the Lord. So the most Genesis 4.
v. ^
translations read it: but as the authors of this opinion which I now recite,
translate, I have possessed a man, even the Lord; to wit, the Lord, which she
expected should redeem them. I know this Interpretation is rejected by Caluiu
and Mercer, two most judicious Interpreters of the true literal meaning of
Scripture, the latter especially, a most exquisit Hebrician. But to
counteruaile their authority, the same Interpretation is well approved by
Diuersae buic lectioni occasionem dedit vocula (...) quae aequiuoca est ad
omnia praememorata signifi cata. Et quia quisque suo abundat sensu, abundado
ego quoque et meo, simplicissime accipiendo dictiunculam (...), vt si^ nota
articuli simulatque demonstrationis, ip^^ssimam rei substantiam, cui iungitur,
denotans, boc sensu; Possedi siu^ acquisiui virum, n^mpe ipsum Adonai, q. d.
acquisiui illum ipsum virum, qui est Adonai, ^d est, Deus sieve Dominus, quem
sc^licet pollicitus est mihi Dominus, cum dixit, Semen tuu con^eret caput
Serpentis. Quia enim Eua credidit promissioni de semine mulieris, sine dubio
existimauit hunc illud esse semen, per quod caput Serpentis conculcandum. Paul.
Fag. in 4. cap. Genes.
Paulus Fagius, who, for ought I can perceive, was amongst Christian Writers,
the first Author of it; for whose authority and excellent skill in the Hebrew
tongue and Jewish antiquities, as I will not peremptorily avouch it, so I dare
not reject it. The Authors of this opinion concerning our Mother Euahs
mistaking her first borne son for the promised seed, have attributed the like
error, though not altogether so gross, unto Lamech the Father of Noah. Lamech
had as true a prenotion or steadfast belief in this general as Euah had, that
mankind should be comforted concerning their labors, that they should be
freed from the curse which the first man had brought upon the earth, upon
himself, and his posterity, and that this freedom or comfort should be
brought unto them by man, by one that was borne of a woman. And yet out of his
ouer-reioycing at the birth of the first son which God had sent him, he did
(as these Authors think) mis-apply his general prenotion or belief
concerning the promised seed, to his new and first borne son. Lamech (says
Moses, Genesis 5. v. 28.) lived 182. years: and begat a son. And he called his
name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work, and toil
of our hands, because of the ground, which the Lord had cursed. But to wave
this question: [Whether Lamech did imagine this his son to be him that was to
come, or whether besides him he looked for another,] it is questionless, that
he uttered this speech by the spirit of Prophecy, and as the speech it self
was verified or fulfilled of Noah, according to its plain Grammatical
literal sense, so it was exactly fulfilled or accomplished in Christ,
according to the full importance of its mystical sense, that is, Christ and
his office was as truly and really foreshadowed by Noah himself, or by his
office, qualification, Mem. 2. Branch 1.
or actions, as Noah's office or qualifications were literally foretold or
prophesied of in this speech of Lamech: Noah after the Flood offered a
Sacrifice unto the Lord, and the Lord smelled a sweet savor, or a savor of
rest, and upon this Sacrifice engaged himself by promise, not to curse the
ground again for man's sake. Genes. 8. verse. 21. Here you see Lamechs Prophecy
literally verified in Noah: howbeit the Sacrifice of Noah was but a smokie
shadow of that real and substantial Sacrifice which was offered by the Son
of GOD unto his Father Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has
given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to GOD for a sweet smelling
savor, Ephesians. 5. ver 2.
. The comfort which Noah afforded unto the World concerning the work and toil
of their hands, or the ground which the Lord had cursed, was but a slight
surface or liuelesse picture of that glorious blessing of life, which Christ,
having freed us from Adams curse, has by his death bequeathed unto us. I heard
a voice from hence, saying unto me, Blessed are the dead which dye in the
LORD, from henceforth yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them. Revel. 14. 13. Again, Noah was a
Preacher of righteousness, Christ was more, etc. Noah built an Arc, into
which whosoever entered not, did perish, into which likewise, whosoever did
enter, were saved from the Deluge; so did Christ build one holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, without which none can be saved; in which whosoever is
found, shall be undoubtedly saved from those everlasting flames wherewith the
World shall be destroyed.

32. So then our belief that Christ the Son of Mary was the promised Seed
which was to come, and that he was in part prefigured by Noah, may be rightly
grounded on the divine prediction or Prophecy uttered by Lamech; it cannot be
safely grounded on Lamechs apprehension or application of this prediction.
Herein perhaps he might err, and so might the best of Gods Prophets err in
the particular determination of time, wherein their Prophesies were to be
fulfilled, or in their applications of them to the persons in whom they might
conjecture they should be fulfilled. Nor is error in particulars of this
nature (so long as men steadfastly believe the general) altogether so dangerous
as some men think it, unless it be accompanied with wilfulness or obstinacy:
for that is it which turns errors into Heresies. Abraham himself, after his
belief in Gods promises concerning the promised Seed, was imputed unto him for
righteousness; did commit a greater error in misapplication of that very
promise, whose belief was imputed unto him for righteousness, then Euah or
Lamech did in misapplying Gods promise concerning the Woman's Seed unto their
Firstborn; if happily they did so misapply it. For Abraham by Sarahs
persuasion, thought Gods promise or prediction concerning his Seed, should be
fulfilled in the seed or offspring of Hagar, Sarahs handmaid; and continued
in this persuasion, until the Lord rectified it, and set his belief aright by
express promise of Isaacs strange and miraculous birth. And the event
answering to this promise or prediction, was a real fore-signification or
prefiguration of the more strange and more miraculous birth of our Savior. So
likewise was the strange birth and conception of Samson, of Samuel, and of John
Baptist: for God in his wisdom did dispense Mem. 2. Branch 1
these miraculous blessings of fruitfulness upon Woman, by natural
disposition of body or of age altogether barren, that they might serve as
inducements for establishing the belief of posterity, concerning the most
miraculous conception of the woman's Seed (...), which had been promised from
the beginning. And albeit an Angel from Heaven might in reason, (at least with
better reason than any mortal man can pretend) exact belief unto his solemn
message or predictions, without further proof or experiment; yet the Angel
Gabriel himself, the great Ambassador of the blessed Annunciation, would have
the blessed Virgin to ground her belief, not only upon his sole prediction,
but withal upon the fresh and real experiment of her Cousin Elizabeth's
strange conception of a son in her old age. For after the delivery of his
message, and his reioynder to her modest reply, How shall this be, seeing I
know not man? He finally concludes the Dialogue on his part, Behold, thy Cousin
Elizabeth, she has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the
sixth month with her, who was called barren; for with God nothing shall be
impossible. Luke 1. 36, 37. Nor did the blessed Virgin refuse to make trial of
the sign which he had given her: for immediately after the Angels departure
from her, she repaired unto her Cousin Elizabeth, (as the Text says) in
haste, where she found the Angels prediction fully ratified by the event or
fact. For, upon the first salutation of Elizabeth, the Child (whose conception
the Angel told her of) did spring for joy in Elizabeth's womb; and for a
pledge or token that she had conceived by power and virtue of the Holy Ghost,
her Cousin Elizabeth, upon her salutation, was filled with the Holy Ghost in
her heart, and out of the abundance of her heart thus filled, her mouth did
speak and utter that prophetical salutation which the Angel had used unto
her, with a loud voice; Blessed art thou amongst Women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy womb, verse. 42. And by this spirit of prophecy, Elizabeth did
then know that that blessed Virgin had conceived by the Holy Ghost, and that
then the Child conceived by her, should be her Lord and Redeemer: the blessed
Virgin again, upon fresh experiments of these facts fully answerable to the
Angels prediction, was filled with the Holy Ghost, and the spirit of prophecy,
by which she uttered that excellent saying, My soul does magnify the Lord,
etc.

Now the very Embassage of the Angel Gabricl was really fore-shaddowed or
prefigured by the sending of Esaiah the Prophet unto Ahas the King of Judah,
whereof we read Esaias the 7. verse. 3. The tenor of the Angels message unto the
blessed Virgin was literally and expressly foretold by the Prophet unto Ahas,
verse. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
name Emanuel. Howbeit even in this Prophecy or testimony of our Saviors birth
and conception, there was an (...), that is, a full concurrence of Prophecy
and Type, an express prediction or foretelling of what should afterward come
to pass, and a real ouershaddowing or representation of what afterward did
come to pass by matter of present fact or deed; that is, this Prophecy was
truly verified in the Prophets time, according Mem. 2. Branch. 1.
to its literal or historical sense; and yet again exactly and exquisitely
fulfilled, according to the literal and mystical sense, in our Saviors birth
and conception. The signs of both times, concerning the estate of Judah, were
in proportion the same. But the particular and full explication of this
Prophecy will come more fitly to be discussed hereafter.

33. For conclusion of the first general point proposed, I would request you
to note, that of such foresignifications concerning our Savior Christ's
conception, his birth, his baptism, his death, his passion, as consist in
matter of fact or type, some are direct, others are indirect, and signify by
contraries. As for example; The first Woman was made of Adam by Gods immediate
hand, not begotten by man, and being thus made, she was an inuerted type or
shadow, that the second Adam, who was to bruise the Serpents head, was to be
made of a Woman by the immediate hand of GOD, not begotten by man. Thus much
was expressly foretold by the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 31. v. 22. Behold, I
create a new thing in the Land, the female shall compass or enclose a man, or
the female shall enclose Geuer. But of this point you may be satisfied, if it
please you, elsewhere more at large. I only instance in this particular for
this time, to give you notice that some things may be really foreshaddowed, as
well by contraries or inuersion of the circumstances, as by direct types or
suitable representations. Whether it be this way or that way foreshaddowed, the
case is all one, as it was with that picture-maker, who being requested to
paint a man and an horse overthrown in battle, painted an horse in a full
careere with a man on his back; and being challenged for not making such a
picture, as he was requested to do, he willed the party to turn the vpside
of the Table downwards, and he had as fair and exact a picture of an horse
and a man overthrown, as he could make him. Of this kind of types was the
brazen Serpent; it could not be any direct type of CHRIST, albeit the lifting
up of a brazen Serpent, was a real type or representation of our Saviors
future exaltation upon the Cross. And so was Hezekiahs demolishing of the
brazen Serpent, a real prophecy or representation of our Saviors bruising
the old Serpents head, or rather of his utter destruction of his Kingdom,
which shall be accomplished at the last day. But the full explication of this
type, we must defer until we come to unfold the mysteries of Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. Let this suffice at this time for the first general point,
to wit, how our faith in Jesus Christ is to be grounded or confirmed: wherein
has been showed, first, That all belief must be grounded on the Word of GOD.
Secondly, That we believe these Books of the Old and New Testament to be the
Word of GOD, because they contain as well such predictions or Prophesies, as
real prefigurations or types of Christ and The Scripture is the only
infallible Rule, by which the ^^ue Church can be c^sce^ned.
his Kingdom, as none but the only wise immortal God could fore-shaddow.

34. The use of this Doctrine hitherto delivered, is the same which shall be
the end of all my meditations upon this portion of Scripture. The points which
I specially aimed at in the choice of it, were Mem. 2. Branch 1.
these: first, to breed or beget a full persuasion in you, that these Books of
the Old and New Testament are sufficient in themselves to make you wise unto
salvation; that the truth of mysteries contained in them, may be sufficiently
manifested by their own light, without the infallible proposal or authority
of any visible Church on earth to give them luster, or make them visible. Their
light is of it self sufficient to enable you to discern all truths expedient
for your salvation; and amongst other truths, to discern which of all the
visible Churches upon earth is the true Church of God. And this they
sufficiently teach, without any such notes or properties as the Romish Church
would obtrude upon you. If in the Writings of our own friends, I mean, the
Pastors or Teachers of reformed Churches, you light upon some notes of the true
Church, as preaching of the Word, and administration the of Sacraments, you
must conceive their meaning to be no more but this, That Verbi praedicatio and
Sacramentorum administratio non tam sunt notae quibus distingui potest Orthodox
a Ecclesia ab baeretica, quam formalis ratio se^ differ entia constitutiua
Ecclesiae visibil^s.
these two conspicuous and visible notes are essentially and necessarily
required to the constitution of a visible Church. They are not, they cannot be
any infallible notes for discerning which visible Church is true, which false,
which heretical, which orthodoxall: no more than to have public meetings, or
a form of government established by Law or Charter, can be a true note for
discerning which is the best or ancientest Corporation in this Kingdom. Now,
to have public meetings, or a form of government established by Law or
Charter, can be no note or difference for distinguishing one. Corporation from
another, because without these, no assembly of men, how great soever, can be
truly termed a Corporation. And that wherein all agree, can be no note whereby
to difference or distinguish one from another, or to determine which is the
best, which is the worst. Wherefore if the question were, Which is the best or
ancientest Corporation in this Kingdom? This question could not otherwise be
resolved, than by inspectio^ of their several Laws or Charters. Or, in case
their Charters were the same, that Corporation would be the best, which did
rightliest use, practice, or enjoy the benefits or privileges of the same, or
like Charter, or which did live as well in public as in private, in best
conformity to their Laws. Now, every visible Church is a Society or
Corporation Ecclesiastique: And no assembly or multitude of men, how great
soever, albeit they privately profess the same faith, can truly be said to
make one visible Society or Corporation Ecclesiastique, unless they have their
public meetings to hear the Word of GOD preached or read unto them, unless
at such meetings they join together in public prayer and administration of
the Sacraments. Whence if the question be, Of all such Assemblies,
Corporations, or Societies Ecclesiastic, as join together in hearing the Word
preached, in common Prayers, in administration of the Sacraments, that is, Of
all visible Churches which is the true Church of God: There can be no other
possible satisfactory answer than this, That is the true Church of God or
orthodoxall visible Church, whose Doctrine, Prayers, and manner of administering
Sacraments, is most conformable and agreeable to the fundamental Charter,
which Charter is contained in Mem. 2. Branch 1.
the Books of the Old and new Testament. So that all other points, all marks
and notes, how many soever our Adversaries make, must be examined and tried by
this Rule. Amongst other marks of the Church, they make the gift of miracles
to be one.

35. Concerning miracles I have not much to say, being loath to put my sickle
into another man's harvest, from whom I hope you shall reap full satisfaction.
Only this caveat I would commend unto you, which heretofore I have published,
That although it be granted, that the Devil by his own power can work no
true miracle, that is, nothing that shall be above the force or power of
nature, or contrary to it; or it being granted likewise, that God does never
lend the use of his omnipotent power unto Satan his angels or ministers, to
work any true miracle thereby to try the faith of Christians: yet all this
being granted in general, if we descend unto particular wonders, we must have
as great skill in the force and power of nature, how far it may extend, as
Satan has; We must be as cunning in discovering his slightes, iuglings, or
delusions, as he is in iugling or deluding, before we can be secure, that he
cannot put one of the two iuggling tricks upon us. As first, that he cannot
make us believe those wonders which we see effected to exceed the force or
power of natural causes, when as in truth and in deed they do not: or that
he cannot make us believe, that such wonders or miracles, as indeed exceed the
force of nature, to be wrought by him or his Instruments; when as they are
wrought by God himself, for some other special end or purpose, or for some
other use then he or his Instruments could refer them unto. The hailestones
mentioned Ioshuah 10. verse. 11. were, as well for their magnitude, as for the
manner of their falling upon the five Kings of the Amorites, truly miraculous,
and sure ratifications of Ioshuah's and his followers belief: Yet whether
Satan, permitted by God [applicare actiua passiuis,] to make choice of his own
Agents or Instruments, be not able so far to improve the strength of
natural causes, or so combine them, that they should produce as great
hailestones as those were, is more than any sober Philosopher will take upon
him to define. Howeuer, the production of the like or greater tempest then this
was, is not enough to persuade this or that point of controuersed doctrine. For
suppose some poor Amoritish Widow, pitifully oppressed by one or more of
these five Tyrants, had out of the bitterness of her soul, about this time,
presented her complaints to Nemesis at Rhamnus, a place wherein the power of
this reuengefull Lady was, in the conceit of the heathen, usually manifested,
in as remarkable and peculiar sort, as the virtue of our Lady (in the opinion
of the Romish Catholics) is at Hall or L^retto, in respect of other places.
Imagine again, those hailestones had fallen upon the five Kings upon the poor
Widows return into Canaan from Rhamnus, how easily might the supplyant have
bin persuaded by Satan, that this great miracle had bin effected for her sake,
and by the power of the imaginary Goddess Nemesis, whom she served? It was not
then this miraculous storm, but the consonancy of its miraculous effect, unto
Gods promise or prediction made to Ioshuah; (to wit, the manifest execution of
that GODS Mem. 2. Branch. 1
sentence whom Ioshuah worshipped, (maugre all the Gods, whose aid these Kings
of the Amorites had supplicated against Israel) which was to confirm the faith
of the Israelites unto Gods promises. For the Lord had said unto Ioshuah, (when
the Gibeonites supplicated his assistance against the Kings of the Amorites
that dwelt in the mountains) Fear them not: for I have delivered them into
thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee. Ioshuah, upon this
request of the Gibeonites, warranted by God, came unto them suddenly, and went
up to Gilgal all night. And as the Lord had promised, so it came to pass: for
the Lord discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter
at Gibeon, and chased them along the way, that goes up to Bethoron, and smote
them unto Azekah, and unto Makkedah. And it came to pass, as they fled from
before Israel, and were in the going down to Bethoron, that the Lord cast
down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they dyed: they were
more, which dyed with haile-stones, than they whom the children of Israel slew
with the sword. Josh. 10. v. 8, 9, 10, and 11.

36. For conclusion, the greatest wonderment or miracle, that in this age can
be wrought, must be tried by this only touchstone of faith, Gods written
Word, whether it proceed from God and his messengers, or from Satan and his
Instruments. Now seeing the Scriptures or Rule of faith, has manifested unto
us, wherein the Kingdom of Christ and the Kingdom of Satan or Antichrist do
consist, the point, whereon every miracle or wonderment must be examined is
this, Whether it tend to the establishment of the Kingdom of God or of Christ
in our souls, or to the erection or propogation of the Kingdom of Antichrist
through this world.

Suppose some man or woman amongst us were really possessed of a whole legion of
Devils, and that some Turkish, Jewish, Muscouitish, Greek, or Romish Priest
should take upon him by exorcisme to make all the Devils go out of the Parties
body possessed, one after another, in as visible and conspicuous manner, as he
could drive bees out of their hiue through a quill or pen, and cause every one
of them to tell you his name, or what place he holds in Hell; yet the true use
of such miracle or wonderment could be no other, than to resolve you, that
there may be a real possession of some bodies in this age, and a real
dispossession of these Devils, which had taken possession of it. But if the
party which had thus really dispossessed them, should upon this wonderment exhort
or require you to believe, that that visible Church whereof he is a Priest or
member, is the only true Church of God, whose proposals or doctrines you are
absolutely bound to believe, without further examination or trial of them by
the written Word of God, the rule of faith; this were a true and infallible
argument, that the wonder was wrought by the power and slight of Satan, not by
the virtue and power of God, or of Christ's true messengers. For if we duly
consider, what advantage or possession Satan might by this means gain over our
souls; if any Devil in hell would be so proud, so obstinate, or wilful, as
to refufe to obey any Priest, Jew, or Turk, that would adjure him to depart
upon these conditions out of any man's body Mem. 2. Branch 1.
which he did possess: reason and common sense might instruct us, that
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, and his assistants would use all the power they
could, to vex or torment such a wilful Devil, as an Apostata, a Rebel or
Traitor, that would not advance their kingdom when he might. Wherefore, if any
Priest or other, shall at any time tempt you to admit of the infallibility of
the Romish Church, or to believe in all points as that Church believes, only
upon fame or sight of such a wonder wrought by one of her children; ye stand
bound in conscience, and upon the allegiance which you owe to Christ, to crave
respite until you can inform your consciences, whether the acknowledgement of
such absolute infallibility, as the modern Priests and Jesuits ascribe unto
the modern Romish Church, or the submission of your belief unto all her
doctrines, (especially to this) be not a flat Apostasy from Christ unto Satan,
and a true acknowledgment of his Sovereignty made unto the Church of Rome, as
to his proxy or deputy for this purpose. Again, if any Priest should work
such a wonder as has been mentioned, by such exorcisme as they use, as by
applying the consecrated Host, (as they call it,) their crucifixes or
holy water unto the party affected, or by examining the Devils by oath upon
the Sacrament; you are bound in conscience likewise to crave respit to be
resolved, whether these or the like solemnities or ceremonies as they have used
of late in this Land, be not magical sacrifices, true and proper feats of
witcherie and sorcerie. These are points wherein no exorcist, no Romish Priest
or Jesuit this day living in this Land, can give any ingenious understanding
man any tolerable satisfaction. The former point, concerning the infallibility
of the Romish Church, is elsewhere handled at large, and I shall be willing to
acknowledge my self a thankful debtor unto any Priest or Jesuit, or other
wel-willer of the present Romish Church, that shall give me occasion or ground
of reason to think better of their Religion in this point, then hitherto I
have thought, or can persuade my self to think. And better then flat
Apostafie from Christ I never thought it, since I was able to read the Trent
Council, Bellarmine, Valentian, or other defendants of the Popes absolute and
plenarie power. My soul shall bless him, whether Protestant or Papist, that
shall convince my understanding, there can be any more pestiferous foundation
laid for the erection of Antichrists Kingdom, then the Jesuits and Canonists
have laid, by making the present Pope the virtuall Church; or the visible
Church of Rome, the sole Catholic Church, unto which God in his Word has
promised the infallible assistance of his Spirit. As for the latter point, that
their exorcismes are but enchantments or feats of sorcery, it has been laid
unto their charge by some of good place, and greater worth in the Church of
England, who are able enough to prove their Allegations, so their Aduersa^ies
would be willing to make their defense, or submit themselves to any lawful
trial.

The second Branch of the second Member, proposed Mem. 2. Branch 2.
in the former Treatise, Parag. 24. Containing an explication of the particular
Prophesies, on which John Baptists faith was grounded, as also of the signs of
the time, by which it was confirmed, before he sent his message unto our
Savior.
37. AMongst other things before delivered, this was one which I must request
you to call to mind, That there may be a true prenotion or steadfast belief of
some promise or prediction concerning Christ, and yet the parties which do no
ways distrust the indefinite truth or Of the prenotio^s which John or the
Pharisees had concerning the time or manner of Christ's coming or manifestation:
and of the Interrogatories propounded to John by the Priests and Jesuits.
fulfilling of such predictions or prefigurations, might oft-times err in the
application of them to some party, or in some other circumstance, until the
event it self did teach them rightly how to apply. Every error presupposes
some branch of Ignorance; but Ignorance does not always include error. Whence
it will follow, that if the best of Gods Saints might err in partculars
concerning themselves as Abraham did, there is no question but they and others
might be ignorant of many particulars which became manifest to posterity. Thus
the Pharisees or the Priests and Levites, which were sent from Jerusalem to
question John Baptist, had a true prenotion or belief in general, that God in
latter ages would raise up an extraordinary Prophet like unto Moses. But
whether this extraordinary Prophet should be the Christ or Messiah himself, or
rather his forerunner, his attendant or companion, they were ignorant. They
had again a true prenotion or belief in general, that God would send a
solemn Messenger to prepare the ways of the Lord or the Messiah whom they did
seek: but whether this Messenger should be Elias the Prophet, the same
individual person which was taken up in a fiery Chariot into heaven, or some
other in power and efficacy of spirit, in zeal to Gods true worship and
Religion like unto him, they were ignorant. And to have been merely ignorant
had been no fault, or at least no dangerous fault: but this their ignorance
declined to error and stiff presumption, that this Messenger foretold Malachy
3. verse. 1. should be Eliah the Tishbite himself. They had a true prenotion or
belief in general, that the Messiah his coming into the world, or
manifestation to it, should be solemnized with some extraordinary Rite or
Ceremony to be performed by water; as by washing or baptizing: but whether
this solemnity of baptizing or washing should be performed by the Messiah
himself, or by Elias, whom they looked should be his messenger, or by the
Prophet like to Moses, (who as they expected, should be a person distinct from
Christ;) In all these points they were ignorant, at least doubtful. Howbeit
their prenotion of this indefinite or general truth did most incline unto the
first point, to wit, that this solemnity of baptizing should be performed by
the Christ or Messiah himself. Thus much may probably be gathered from John's
emphaticall denial that he was the Christ Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
or Messiah. This is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? And he confessed and denied
not: but confessed, I am not the Christ. Ioh. 1. v. 19, 20. Thus much he
confessed voluntarily, as may be gathered from Saint Luke: And as the people
were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he
were the Christ or not: John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize
you with water, but one mightier than I comes, the latchet of whose Shoes I
am not worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with
fire. Luke 3. verse. 15, 16. This voluntary acknowledgement of his, was in
effect to deny that he was the Christ: but what he here intimates by way of
denial, or prevention of the people that doubted whether he were the Christ
or no, he plainly expresses, being solemnly and formally asked the same
Question by the Priests and Levites, which the people tacitly made; I am not
the Christ. Ioh. 1. 20.
Now, his answer to this first interrogatory, being so full and plain; they
frame a second, What then? Art thou Elias? And he says, I am not. And not
satisfied with this answer, they press him with a third, Art thou the Prophet?
And he answered, No. And he had good reason to answer negatiuely to this third
Interrogatory, because he had answered negatiuely to the first: for that
Prophet which Moses foretold the Lord would raise up like unto himself, was
to be the Christ, the promised Messiah, and no other.

38. Of the exact proportion and similitude betwixt Moses and Christ, you may
read In the 3. Book upon the Creed.. 3. cap. 11. parag. 7.
elsewhere, or hear more at large hereafter, as occasion shall require. His
answer to the second Interrogatory being negative, might well administer matter
of new quarrel or dispute unto the captious of those times, and some occasion
of scruple unto the curious amongst us: for he seems to deny that, which our
Savior in this very Matt. 11. 9, 10.
Chapter avouches of him; But what went ye out for to see? A Prophet? Yea, I
say unto you, and more than a Prophet. For this is he of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my Messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee. And again, verse. 13, 14. For all the Prophets, and the Law prophesied
until John. And if ye will receive it, this is Mal. 4. 5.
Elias which was for to come. And again, Mark 9. verse. 11, 12, 13. When the
Apostles asked him, saying, Why say the Scribes that Elias must first come; (to
wit, before the consummation of the hopes of Israel, or their redemption by the
Messiah) He answered, and told them, Elias verily comes first, and restores
all things, and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer
many things, and be set at naught. But, I say unto you, that Elias indeed is
come, and they have done unto him what soever they listed, as it is written of
him. This he spoke of John Baptist, after he was beheaded. And what reason
had John to deny he was Elias, when he was asked this Question, seeing our
Savior, after his denial, has twice affirmed it? [Non male respondit, male
enim prior ille rogauit.] The foreman or speaker of the Priests and Levites,
did propound this Question amiss, and in such a sense, as John could not
answer affirmatively to it. For the meaning of the Interrogatory was, Whether
he were that very Elias the Thisbite, which was taken up into Mem. 2 Branch 2.
Heaven in the fiery Chariot; and John knew himself not to be this Elias, nor
did our Savior ever affirm that he was this Elias.

39. But some men happily will reply, That albeit they were mistaken in this
particular, to which John did well to give a negative answer; yet John, having
so fair an occasion to rectify the error of the Priests and Levites, might
have done better, if he had more fully expressed himself, and answered with a
distinction, that he was not Elias the Thisbite, but yet that Elias which the
Prophet Malachy had foretold the Lord would send, chap. 4. For John could not,
in all probability, be ignorant of the Prophet Malachy his meaning, seeing the
Angel Gabriel had expressly expounded it to his Father Zachrias, Luke 1. verse.
17. He shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the
hearts of the Fathers unto the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just, to make ready a people prepared for the LORD. But this perhaps was
more than John had occasion to call to mind. He might be ignorant, without
offense, whether Elias himself was not to come after him. For even the best of
Gods Saints and Prophets (as was observed before,) knew no more of Gods will
concerning things to come, than it was his will and pleasure to impart unto
them. Each of them knew his Cue, the the signs of the time when he was to
begin, and when to end; each had the part, which God had appointed him to utter
or act, perfectly by heart; Each knew the tenor of his own Commission: but
none, or few of them, did so well understand another Commission, until they
had seen it sped, or the meaning of it unfolded by the event. Now, although
the words of Malachy were literally meant of John Baptist, yet were they a
kind of Riddle, until our Savior did unfold them. And it seems by the
phrase which our Savior uses, Matthew 11. verse. 14. that their true meaning
was a mystery, which he himself or John only knew, and was to be revealed
only to such as were already true Disciples. For the word receive is (...), a
term of art amongst the Hebrews, and imports some such mystery as the Jews
imagine to be contained in their Cabalisticall art. The like force has the
same word in that of the Apostle, 1. Timoth. 1. 15. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy 1 Timothy 1. 15.
of all reception or Cabalisme. Not that he approues that Art, at least, as
since that time it has been used, but rather, that this was a mystery of
greater worth and consequence, than all the mysteries which the Cabalists can
imagine to be in their Art contained. The manner of importance or the Apostles
speech, is much-what like to that answer of his in the Homer. Iliad. m.
Poet, who when they sought to terrify him from fight, by the ill-aboding or
sinister flying of Birds, made answer;

(...),

It was the best Augurium or south-saying, for a man to fight for his Country.
40. Finally, although Malachy did prophecy of John Baptists coming before
Christ in the power and spirit of Elias; yet John Baptist did not receive his
instructions from this Prophet, nor had he his Commission for being Christ's
forerunner, or his warrant for baptizing from Malachy, but from the Prophet
Mem. 2. Branch 2.
Isay. And therefore when the Priests and Levites pressed him further, saying,
Who art thou, that we may give an answer to them that sent us? What say
thou of thy self? He said, I am the voice of one crying in the Wilderness,
Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias. This was the
peremptory answer which he meant to stand unto. This, and other passages of the
same Prophet being joined with the internal testimony of the Spirit, which did
interpret their true meaning unto him, was his warrant for doing what he did;
for baptizing, or for preparing the way of the Lord which was to come. But
whether the Lord would send Elias or some other greater messenger than
himself, was more than he durst take upon him to resolve the Priests and
Levites in, (specially seeing they were of the sect of the Pharisees:) and more
perhaps than he in his religious modesty or sobriety did question or inquire
after. But when the same Priests and Levites did by way of demand or
Interrogation seem to vpbraid him with arrogance, in taking more upon him than
was befitting him, unless he were either the Christ, or Elias, or the Prophet
like to Moses; to some of which so great a work as the administration of
baptism did solely belong: he modestly answers [distinguende;] I baptize
with water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know not: He it is, who
coming after me, is preferred before me, whose Shoes latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. Ioh. 1. 26, 27. In which words the Evangelist Saint John
does intimate as much as is expressed by the Evangelist Saint Matthew, to wit,
That Christ should baptize them after another manner than John did, that is,
with the holy Ghost, and with fire. chap. 3. 11. I will not trouble you, but
rather request you not to trouble your selves with that needless Question (and
for the most part as ill stated by such as have most meddled with it, as it is
needless) how John's baptism did differ from Christ's baptism, or Whether they
were two baptismes altogether distinct.

41. Thus much you may evidently conceive out of what has been now delivered.
First, that the Priests and Levites (at least the Sect of the Pharisees, of
which Sect, the Priests and Levites which questioned John concerning his
Baptism, were) did not err in their prenotion or belief in general, that
the Messiah his coming or manifestation to the world, should be solemnized by
Baptism, nor did they fail in their conjecture, that the Christ or Messiah
himself was to baptize: but with what baptism he was to baptize, they were
ignorant. Secondly, you may perceive that John Baptist had not only a
prenotion, but a distinct belief or knowledge in particular; that as he
himself did baptize with water, so the Christ or Messiah, whose forerunner
he was, should baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire. The only useful or
pertinent questions which remain to be resolved or discussed, are but two. The
first,

[1.] Whether the Priests and Levites, or the Pharisees had their prenotions or
belief in general, [that the Messiah his first manifestation to the world,
should be solemnized by baptizme] from unwritten traditions of the Ancients
only, or whether it were grounded upon the express testimony of Scripture, or
the written Word of God. The second, Mem. 2. Branch 2.


[2.] Whether John Baptists firm belief of Christ's baptizing with the holy
Ghost, and his own baptizing with water, were grounded only upon the
internal revelations made to him in private, by him that sent him to baptize
with water; or whether they were grounded likewise upon express testimonies of
the written Word, interpreted and made known unto him by the same spirit by
which the Word was written.

To both these Questions the answer must be affirmative; as well the ones
prenotion, as the others distinct belief, were both grounded upon the express
testimonies of the written Word. The only search or inquiry then to be made,
is upon what express testimony the one or other was grounded, and how our
belief may be grounded upon the same testimonies.

42. I must request you to remember, that God in the Old Testament did
fore-shew things to come two ways: either by express testimony or prediction,
or by matter of fact or real representation. One and the same future event is
often times declared or fore-signified both ways. Now predictions merely
prophetical are of two sorts. Sometimes the Prophets foretell Two sorts or
branches of the literal sense.
things to come in proper and literal terms, so as every man at the first
hearing may understand their meaning. As the Prophet spoke to Ahab, 1. Kings
chap. 20. verse. 42. Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man, whom I
appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and
thy people for his people. Sometimes they foretell future events of greater
consequence, as truly and as certainly, but by way of parable, emblem, or
allegory. Now, this kind of prediction, and the types or figures of the Law, or
real events, have the same proportion as Poetry and painting. It was wittily
said, [Poema est pictura loquens, and pictura est Poema silens,] Every Poem is
a kind of speaking picture, and every artificial picture a kind of mute and
silent Poem. And so likewise every type or ceremony of the Law, Hence says our
Savior, Mat. ^. v. 13. That the Law as well as the Prophets prophesied until
John.
every historical event portending mysteries Evangelical, is a tacit and
silent prophecy; and every prophetical parable was a kind of speaking type or
picture of the like events. The events foretold or represented by Gods
Prophets, are always real and substantial, more than moral, more than
natural; mysteries truly celestial and supernatural. Howbeit, the
representation of such events or mysteries, is often times merely literal or
verbal, but conceived in such terms as suppose a feigned metamorp^osis in the
works of nature, to make the picture more fresh and lively. And this kind of
prophetical expression of things to come, we call the emblematicall sense or
literal Allegory: so that although every Poet be not a Prophet, yet every
Prophet of the Lord was a true Poet; not in faigning events which never were,
nor never should be, but in framing pictures of future events in themselves
contingent, as exact and fresh, as any Painter can make of the man whom he
sees with his eyes, or whose picture has been drawn to his hand. Now, if a
Painter could make exact pictures of Children which shall not be brought forth
till the next year following; we would say he wrought by inspiratio^ of his
spirit, in whose books all their members are written, or that Mem. 2 Branch 2.
his pencill was guided by his hand, who found out the birth of man.

43. The Prophesies in special concerning the manifestation Most of Jsaiabs
Prophesies concerning John's baptism or our Saviors manifestatio^ were
emblematicall.
of the Messiah, and John's office or attendance, are for the most part
conceived in terms not proper, but parabolical or Emblematical, that is,
consisting of literal or verbal Allegories. Howbeit some of these Prophesies,
perhaps some passages in all of them, point out future events in literal
proper and historical terms. And of events thus literally and punctually
fore-shewed, some came not to pass until the Messiah was revealed: Others
were historically verefied long before; yet so, as the events which then
happened, were by Gods institution true types or shadows of mysteries revealed
in the Gospel, or to be revealed during the time of grace. So that one and
the same Prophecy, is sometimes or in respect of some part of its total
object, fulfilled according to the plain literal sense: sometimes, or in
respect of other parts of its object, it is fulfilled according to the literal
Allegory: sometimes, or in some respect, it is fulfilled according to the
mystical sense or real Allegory. Amongst other sacred passages, which, by the
confession of the Ancient and modern malignant Jew, have special reference to
the days of their Messiah his revelation, these following are more remarkable,
Isay, cap. 35. and cap. 40. of which hereafter. And again; I will open rivers
in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the
wilderness a poole of water, and the dry land springs of water. I will plant
in the wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree, and the Myrtle, and the Oil
tree: I will set in the desert the Fur tree, and the Pine and Box tree
together: That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together,
that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the Holy one of Israel has
created it. Isaiah 41. verse. 18, 19, 20. Remember ye not the former things,
neither consider the things of old. Behold, I will do a new thing: now it
shall spring forth, shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert. The beast of the Field shall honor me,
the dragons and the owls, because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers
in the Desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen. This people (the seed
of Abraham according to promise) have I formed for my self, they shall show
forth my praise. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob: but thou have
been weary of me, O Israel. That is, the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh, or such as gloried in their carnal prerogatives of their birth or
progeny. Isaiah 43, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Go ye forth of Babylon: flee ye
from the Caldeans with a voice of singing: declare ye, tell this, utter it even
to the end of the earth: say ye; The Lord has redeemed his servant Jacob. The
Prophet emphatically implies that the miracle which God had wrought for his
people in the wilderness after their deliverance out of Egypt, should be
reiterated or emine^tly accomplished upon their return from Chaldea. He
foresaw, as Jeremy did, that this second deliverance should be more glorious
then the former. Vide Ier. 23. verse. 27.
And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts; he caused the
waters to flow out of the rock for them: he claue the Rock also, and the
waters gushed out. Isaiah 48. verse. 20, 21. For ye shall go out with joy, and
be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before
you into singing, and all the trees of the Field shall clap their hands.
Instead of the thorn shall come up the Fur tree, and instead of the bryer
shall come up the Myrtle tree, and it shall be to the Lord Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off. Isaiah 55.
ver. 12, 13.

44. From these and the like particulars in this Prophet, we may observe this
general; That in all or most places, wherein the manifestation of the Messiah,
or propagation of his Kingdom is mentioned, there is still foretold some
strange miracle or wonder to be wrought in the desert, and in particular the
bursting out of waters. The question is, in what sense these and like places
have been fulfilled, or whether the predictions were plainly literal, or
rather by way of Parable or Allegory. Whatsoever may be said or thought of
some of these predictions, certain it is, that others of them were never
verefied or fulfilled according to the literal, plain or natural sense of the
words, either before or about our Saviors manifestation in the wilderness.
That is as much as to say, The mysteries here truly foretold upon John's
baptism, were not fore-shaddowed or prefigured by matter of deed or fact, or
by any such real representation as these words properly imply; or by any
natural or visible alteration of the soil or trees in the wilderness. Only
the manner of the Prophecy or prediction is Emblematicall or Allegorical,
that is, the mysteries here foretold, were such in respect of men's souls,
bodies, or affections, as these alterations in the soil or trees of the
wilderness (if they had literally fallen out) might have been true shadows
or pictures of them. To begin with that place whence John's Commission took his
beginning. Isaiah 40. verse. 3, 4. The voice of him that cries in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a
high way for our God. Every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and
Hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
places plain. We are not hence to believe, as some later Jews foolishly
dream, that all the Hills in the wilderness or place where the Messiah was to
be ma^ifested, were to be leuelled with the Valleys or lower ground; or that
all the highways for men to come unto him, should be made as plain and
smooth as a bowling-Alley or Garden walk. The intent or purport of the Prophet
was, that this Crier in the wilderness was so to prepare the hearts, the
affections, and dispositions of men's minds, that they should not be offended
in Christ or the Messiah, when he should be revealed; that they should remove
all stumbling blocks of pride, arrogance, covetousness, perverseness,
hypocrisy, or the like, which did hinder them from coming unto him with all
their souls and all their hearts. So when it is said, The Lord would turn the
thorn into the Fur tree, or the bryer into the Myrtle tree in the
wilderness; we must not imagine such a real or corporeal transmutation upon
our Saviors approach. For if this Metamorphosis had bin made, John should not
have been a Crier in the wilderness, but in the garden. What then do the
words according to the Prophets natural meaning and intention import? As true,
as real, and strange an alteration in men's souls and affections, which thus
harkned to the Cryers voice, as the supposed change of the thorn into the
Fur tree, or the bryer into the Myrtle tree, or the change of the wilderness
it self Mem. 2. Branch 2.
into a garden (if that had been really and miraculously wrought) could have
fore-pictured or fore-shaddowed. The Metap^^^ or A^^gory is no other then that
of the same Prophet, Isaiah, 5. verse. 7. The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is
the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant Plant: and he looked
for The Prophet in the fist verse had allegorically pictured oppression by the
wild grape, and righteousness by the useful fruit of the true vine.
Judgment but behold oppression, for righteousness but beheld a cry. Tha^
this is the intent and meaning of Isaiahs poetical manner of prediction or
figurative kind of speech on the forecited places, may be gathered from John
Baptist himself, whose Interpretation of them in this place is li^erall,
though his speech be metaphorical and suitable to the former Allegory. For
the tenor of his proclamation or crying in the wilderness was, Repent, for
the Kingdom of God is at hand. Now Repentance, according to the strict and
proper sense of the original, imports a mutation of the mind. And John, in the
very next words expresses, wherein this change of mind whereto he exhorts them
does consist; Bring forth fruits worthy repentance. Math. 3. verse. 8. This he
spoke unto the Pharisees and Sadduces, when they came unto his baptism, whom he
terms a generation of vipers, more barren unto all good works or fruits of
the Spirit, then the thorns in the wilderness, or the Brambles in the desert;
and yet as proud that they were Abraham's sons, as the bramble in the parable
of Iotham (Judges 9. verse. 15.) which sought to be anointed King over the
trees of the Forest. All of them expected to be heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which they rightly believed should be established in the days of the
Messiah or Christ. Howbeit they thought the chief glory of this Kingdom
should consist in their tyrannizing or domineering over the Gentiles, like
Lords and Kings. For quelling this humor, and working that change of mind
wherein true repentance consists, John admonishes them, Think not to say
within your selves, We have Abraham for our Father: (This proud conceit was as
a Mountain which was to be removed, ere they could come to Christ:) For I say
unto you, that God is able out of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham. Matthew. 3. This last clause in its literal and proper sense, imports a
more miraculous change, than the turning of the bramble into the Myrtle, or the
thorn into the Fur tree, than the exalting of valleys into mountains. And
yet rather then Gods promise should not have been accomplished, this speech of
John must have been fulfilled in its strict and proper sense. Howeuer;
literally fulfilled it was, in the adoption of Publicans and sinners, (of whom
it was meant by John) to be Abraham's seed and heirs of promise. But the
Baptist continues his former Allegory or parabolicall speech, according to the
Prophet Esaiah's intent and meaning; Now also the Axe is laid to the root of
the trees: therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewne
down, and cast into the fire. verse. 10. None are excepted, no not the
Offspring of Abraham; for unless upon the baptism of water which John
administered, they become fruitful like the Vine or Olive, they must be
accounted amongst the thorns and brambles, and be sentenced unto the fire.

45. But what shall we say of the waters bursting forth in the Wilderness, so
often mentioned by the Mem. 2. Branch 2.
Prophet Isaias? Were these predictions as merely figurative as the former,
and not at all fulfilled according to the literal, plain, historical sense?
It is probable that they were thus fulfilled, and that God had shown some
wonders in the wilderness, in causing springs of water to burst forth in dry
and barren places, The literal Allegory or Emblematicall importance of waters
bursting out in the wilderness, so often ^e^tioned by the Prophets.
between Isaias and John Baptists days: perhaps before the 107. Psalm was
penned, which for the plain literal sense accords with the Prophet Isaias
words; He turns the wilderness into a standing water: and dry ground into
water springs. And there he makes the hungry to dwell; that he may prepare a
City for habitation. Psalm. 107. verse. 35, 36. Yet because this is but probable
or coniecturall, we will make it no ground of our intended inference.
Supposing then that these predictions were as merely figurative or
metaphorical as the former, they might not withstanding truly and
prophetically prefigure, or by way of Emblem fore-shaddow, as well the
internal comfort of the Spirit wherewith Christ baptizeth us, as the external
baptism of water which John administered. The water, you know, has two
natural properties, from which many metaphors (usual in sacred Writers) are
borrowed; by which the true intent and meaning of the Prophet Isaias figurative
or emblematicall expressions of the waters in the wilderness is to be valued.
The first natural property of water, (specially in hotter countries, where
thirst is more vehement, and waters more pleasant) is, to refresh or comfort
the weary soul: The second, to be the Nurse or Mother of fruitfulness,
as well in the trees or grass of the Field, as in plants, herbs, or flowers
of the garden. According to this latter property, the Prophets prediction of
springs bursting out in the wilderness, was a true Poetical Emblem or
shadow of John's baptizing with water, who was to be by his office, as the
Gardener, to water and cherish those fruitful trees and plants of
righteousness, with which God had promised to adorn the wilderness. For even
the Publicans and sinners, Aliens by nature from the Commonwealth of Israel,
being made partakers of the baptism of John, were ingrafted into Abraham's
stock, made fruitful branches of that Vine which GOD had planted in Iewrie,
and heirs of that heavenly Kingdom which John did preach: whilst Abraham's
seed according to the flesh were dis-inherited. All the people that heard him,
and the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But
the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves,
being not baptized of him. Luke 7. ver. 29, 30. vide Matthew. 8. ver. 11, 12.
According to the first natural property of water, which is, to refresh the
weary, or such as are ready to faint for thirst, the same predictions of
springs or waters bursting forth in the wilderness, did prefigure the
internal comfort of the spirit, wherewith Christ alone baptizeth us. For
though John did plant and water those plants of righteousness, yet was it
Christ alone that gave the increase. And this internal baptism was really
fore-shaddowed, not only by figurative or Prophetical manner of speech, but
by historical and real matter of fact. And so likewise was the external
baptism by water literally foretold by the Prophet Isaias, that it should be a
type or sign Mem. 2. Branch 2.
of Christ's baptism with the Spirit. This internal baptism, (to omit other
instances) was really fore-shaddowed by the waters which issued out of the
rock in the Wilderness, when the people murmured against Moses and Aaron, as
if they had brought the^ forth out of Egypt to have killed them with thirst in
the desert. Now this we take as granted, that every miracle which God wrought
in the Old Testament, was a true shadow or picture of some great mystery to
be fulfilled in the New Testament, or after the manifestation of Christ. In
this the Jews agree with us; only they expect, that the miracles which their
Messiah should work, should be more glorious to the eye of sense, than those
which Moses wrought. But we say they are not only greater, but of another
kind: otherwise they should not be true miraculous mysteries but mere miracles.
Now that the waters issuing out of the rock, were a type or shadow of this
mystical baptism of the Spirit, we have the testimonies of the Prophet Esaias,
Chap. 48. verse 28. before cited. and of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. verse. 1, 2,
3, 4. Brethren, I would not that you should be ignorant, how that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the Sea; and did all eat the same
spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: For they
drank of that spiritual rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.
How was it Christ? not literally, not identically. Christ, according to the
Godhead, was not so present in, or so united to the rock, as he is now to our
flesh; yet was it Christ, the second person in Trinity, the Son of God, which
made the water (wherewith the Israelites, his people, were comforted and
refreshed in the extremity of their bodily thirst) to issue out of the rock
when Moses smote it. The mystery portended or fore-shaddowed by this miracle
herein consists; That the same Son of God (who was truly God) which gave
them plenty of water out of the rock, should afterward become the Rock of our
salvation; the Fountain of life unto the thirsty and weary soul. This
internal baptism, which was thus really fore-shaddowed by the waters in the
rock, was literally foretold. Psalm. 36. verse. 8, 9. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou shall make them
drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures. For with thee is the Fountain of life:
in thy light shall we see light.

46. Amongst other senses, in which the Scriptures of the Old Testament are
said to be fulfilled in A peculiar sense in which Prophesies, the Psalms
especially, are more frequently fulfilled, than observed to be fulfilled by
most Interpreters.
the New, one, and that an especial one (as is elsewhere observed) is, when
such speeches as are by the Prophets (most of all by the Psalmist) indefinitely
uttered of God, but cannot be attributed to the Divine nature otherwise then
(...), (that is, by manner of speech borrowed from the customs or fashions of
men) do imprint their strict and proper character upon God made man, and fit
his actions as the Seal does the print in Wax. The Divine nature is life it
self, an Ocean of living waters, which we cannot approach; but the Divine
nature in Christ, is as a Fountain or Well of life, from which every thirsty
soul may draw the water of life without stint, without any danger of drowning
himself, or drawing it Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
dry. For it is more calm and placid than any Fountain or Spring, though more
inexhaustible than the Sea. According to this sense is that other place of the
Psalmist fulfilled in Christ, that is, in God made man; The Lord shall reign
for ever, even thy God, O Sion, unto all Generations. Psalm. 146. v. 10. That
the God of Sion, as God, should reign for ever, was no new thing, no matter of
wonder, or worth notice-taking to any Inhabitant of Jerusalem or man of Judah.
All of them, (from the least unto the greatest) knew well that He which had
made the World, had no beginning, no end of days or soueraignety. But that
this God of Sion, who was Lord likewise of Heaven and Earth, should be as
visibly enthronized in Sion as David had been; and that he should begin to
erect a Kingdom which was never to have an end; this was a wonder worthy to
be taken notice of by all the world. Now, that this God of Sion, by whose
protection Moses had led Israel out of Egypt, under whose conduct Iosuah
brought them into the Land of Promise, that he who had anointed David King,
should himself be anointed King over Sion, was the true and literal meaning
of the Psalmist in this and the like places; of which hereafter. Of this rank
is that Prophecy of Isaias, chap. 40. verse. 5. with which John Baptist was
well acquainted; for he had his Commission from it: The glory of the Lord
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it. Such an open, distinct, and full sight, as these words
literally import, supposes an object truly visible and within ken of ordinary
and common sight. God in his glory is altogether invisible to flesh and blood,
and though he had taken visible shape upon him in the Heavens, yet so he had
still remained invisible to men that have their habitation here on earth. That
unto them he might become visible, and that they might see his glory together;
so see it, as they were seen of it; that he might see them, and they see Him
with the eyes of flesh: He took up our flesh for his Tabernacle, and walked
and talked amongst us in more visible and audible manner than He did in the
Camp of Israel, than He did with Moses in the Tabernacle of the Congregation.
This which Isaias here speaks from the mouth of the Lord, the Lord himself
did after utter with his own mouth, and yet with the mouth of man, to wit,
that he which had seen him, had seen his Father, because the glory of God
was manifested in Him. And when the Prophet says, That the glory of the Lord
should be revealed, and that all flesh shall see it together, it is in this
speech included, that this glory of God should be revealed or manifested in
the flesh. The best interpretation of the Prophets words that I can commend
unto you, must be from Saint John. chap. 1. v. 1, 14. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. And the Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt amongst us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. This blessed Apostle
might perhaps say of himself and some few others in a peculiar sort, We saw
his glory, and the glory which we saw, was as the only begotten Son of God:
for he with Peter and James had seen him transfigured on the Mount. But all
that saw the man Christ Jesus at his Mem. 2. Branch 2
Baptism with their bodily eyes, did so see the glory of God revealed from
Heaven. And he was so seen of all flesh. Some of all sorts, though not all of
every sort, did see him baptized, and heard him declared from Heaven to be the
Son of God. Some then present were Pharisees, others Sadduces, some Jews,
others Gentiles, some Publicanes, some Priests and Levites, some Samaritanes,
others Galileans. Not at that time only (though the Prophets words be
especially meant of that time) but ever after, all flesh might have seen the
lively characters of those glorious attributes of Salvation, which the Prophets
and Psalmist had appropriated to the God of Sion, to make distinct and real
impression in the man Christ Jesus. These two attributes of glory and
salvation, are of so near alliance, of such equivalent use, that whereas the
Prophet had said, All flesh should see the glory of God; Saint Luke expressing
his meaning, says, All flesh shall see the salvation of God. chap. 3. verse. 6.
He supposes, as the Prophet meant, that the glory of GOD should be manifested
in the salvation of men. This glory or salvation of God was then revealed, and
became visible to flesh and blood, when God became man, and took his general
attribute of salvation, as his proper name, being called Jesus. Finally, that
salvation of God which Simeon saw with such delight at our Saviors
Circumcision, all flesh did or might have seen at his Baptism.

47. But to return unto the Testimony of the Psalmist, With thee is the
Fountain of life, which contains the mystical signification of the waters,
which miraculously issued out of the rock. The best Interpretation of both
places is delivered by Saint John, by way of Comment upon our Saviors words,
John 7. 38, 39. He that believes on me (as the Scripture has said) out of
his belly shall flow Rivers of living water. This intersertion or parenthesis
[as the Scripture has said] stands like the tongue in a balance, doubtful to
whether part of the Sentence wherein it is contained, it inclines. Some
Interpreters would draw it to the first part; He that believes in me, as
says the Scripture, that is, in such wise, such sort and measure as the
Scripture requires, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water. Others
would draw it to the later part, and render it thus; He that believes in me,
out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water, as the Scriptures has
foretold. Though both interpretations may be true, though both may stand with
the general Analogy of faith; yet the later (in my opinion) is more pertinent,
and more consonant to the true intention of this place. But then it will be
questioned, What Scripture has said that, which our Savior here does, to wit,
that rivers of living water should flow from such as believed in him? The very
express words are no where else to be found in Scripture: for they are, (as
most of our Saviors are, when he speaks of greatest mysteries) parabolicall.
Their importance, or real sense, is expressed by Saint John in the same place;
This he spoke of the Spirit, etc. Now, if by the rivers of living water, our
Savior meant (as Saint John tells us he did) this plentiful effusion of
his Spirit; the same Scriptures which foretell the plentiful effusion of the
Spirit, whether in terms plainly literal or emblematical, foretell likewise
Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
the rivers of Living water which were to flow from true believers. The manner
of our Saviors expression of the Spirits effusion by rivers flowing out,
implies, it should be powered out in such a plentiful measure, as would be not
only sufficient to satiate the souls of them that thirsted after it, but in a
measure ouer-flowing to the Salvation of others. And such were these admirable
gifts of the Holy Ghost, which after our Saviors Ascension were bestowed upon
his Apostles and Disciples. The Scriptures, which particularly foretell this
plentiful effusion of the Spirit, are many: these following are, if not the
principal, yet the most apposite to our present Argument, Joel 2. verse. 28,
29, and 32. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will power out my
Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, your
old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. And also upon
your servants, and upon the hand-maides in those days will I power out my
Spirit. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord, shall be delivered: for in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall
call. And again, Isaias 44. verse. 3, 4. I will power water upon him that is
thirsty, and Floods upon the The dry ground in this place, [supponit pro
homine] (as some Logicians speak) and is to be understood of men so affected,
as David was, when he uttered that Song in the Wilderness of Judah, My soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where
no water is. Psa. 63. v. 1. Compare this Testimony with the former Testimony,
Psalm. 36. parag. 45.
dry ground: I will power my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring: And they shall spring up as among the grass, as Willowes by the
Watercourse. The first words of this later Prophecy were literally and
historically fulfilled in the baptism of John; the later part of it, is, as it
were an Evangelical explication of the mystical sense of the former words.
And John Baptist might from this place alone easily collect, that although he
might power water upon men's bodies, though he did plunge or wash such as are
compared to dry Land, in the waters, and by this external Sacrament, ingraft
them in the stock of Abraham: yet he could not power out the Spirit of God, or
bestow the blessing of increase upon them. This he knew must be the work of
him that sent him, who had bestowed some portion or measure of the Spirit or
blessing here mentioned upon him, as a sure pledge or experiment of the like
blessing to be bestowed on others; specially on such as had been partakers of
his Baptism. From the same place likewise John might easily gather, that the
baptism of water wherewith he himself baptized, was in order of time to go
before the baptism of the Spirit, which was mystically prefigured by it, and
foretold by our Savior in the forecited place, John 7. verse. 38. though (as
we said before) in a figurative or allegorical sense, which Saint John in the
next words after, verse. 39. has expounded unto us: This spoke he of the
Spirit, which they that believe on him, should receive: For the Holy Ghost was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. John's meaning is, the
Spirit was not powered out in such plentiful measure, as this place of Isay and
that other of the Prophet Joel did import. For, after our Saviors
glorification, all such as were baptized with water, were likewise baptized
with the Holy Ghost: most of them filled with the Spirit of Prophecy, or gift
of tongues, enabled to convey the words and waters of life unto the souls of
others. All this was fore-signified by the holy Ghosts descending upon Mem. 2.
Branch 2.
our Savior at his coming out of the water. For his baptism was a
prefiguration of his death and resurrection: and by his resurrection he was
really declared to be the Son of God, and fulfilled the Psalmists prediction;
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Psalm. 2. Which prediction was
further ratified, and the meaning of it determined by the voice from heaven;
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. The same truth thus often
declared as well by predictions as by matters of fact or real event, was
finally testified by the descending of the holy Ghost upon his Apostles and
Disciples. So that another Branch of Saint John's meaning, or if you will,
another shoot of the former branch, is, That the holy Ghost, at the time when
our Savior uttered those words, He that believes in me, etc. did not appear
as an authentic witness to ratify his Doctrine. His testimony concerning
our Savior was reserved till our Saviors glorification, after which it was
public, frequent and visible. Jesus, (says Saint Peter) whom ye slew and
hanged on a tree: Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Act. 5. v.
30, 31, 32. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy
Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him. This giving of the holy Ghost
in visible manner, was that baptism of Christ which was opposed to the baptism
of John, and that the world might know and believe it came immediately from
Christ, and not from John, nor from the Apostles, or from the Sacrament which
they administered; it was given to some, and these by condition Gentiles, before
they had been partakers of John's baptism, or any Mosaicall rite or Sacrament.
Act. 10. 44, 47. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all
them which heard the word. Whence he concludes; Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost, as well as we?
Saint Peter took more special notice of our Saviors words from this
experiment in Cornelius and his family, than he did from the holy Ghost
descending in cloue^ tongues upon himself and his fellow Apostles, which had
been baptized: And as I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us
at the beginning. Then remembered 1 the Word of the Lord, how that he said,
John deed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.
Acts 11. 15, 16. Saint Peter's belief in this point, was grounded upon our
Saviors words, and confirmed by this experiment: John Baptists belief of the
same conclusion, was grounded upon the Prophet Isaias predictions. John did
foretell the same Matthew. 3. verse. 11.
truth which our Savior did, before he was acquainted with him or knew him by
face: and yet John's knowledge or belief of this mystery was confirmed by a
visible sign, by the descending of the holy Ghost. Concerning which, and the
manner how John came to know our Savior before he baptized him, with the signs
of the time that did accompany or ensue upon his baptism, we are in the next
place to make inquiry.

48. From the: former Dialogue between the Priests and Levites and John
Baptist, concerning his office and ministry of Baptism, you may observe, that
John was careful to prevent two inconveniences: Mem. 2. Branch 2.
First, the false opinion which the people had conceived of him, as if he had
bin the Messiah himself; and secondly, to prevent all suspicion of compact or
collusion between Jesus of Nazareth (whom he afterward proclaims to be the
Messiah) and himself. And unto this suspicion both parties had been more
liable, if they had been as well acquainted before our Saviors baptism, as
afterward they were. Not to speak of our Saviors knowledge, who knew all
things; for John the Baptist, he had a true prenotion or distinct belief of
these generals or indefinites. 1. That the time wherein the Messiah was to be
manifested unto Israel, was now approaching. 2. That the Messiah was to repair
unto the place where he baptized, there to be declared or manifested unto
Israel. 3. That the Messiah after his manifestation, was to baptize others with
the holy Ghost. These generals he believed and knew from the predictions of the
Prophet Isay, expounded to him by the internal revelation of the Spirit, and
the signs of the time immediately preceding. But of these particulars
following, he was ignorant until the event, and the signs immediately
following did unfold them. 1. The day and hour wherein the Messiah was first
to be manifested; when he first begun to baptize, he distinctly knew not. 2.
The day and hour of the Messiah coming unto him being known, yet he knew not
how to distinguish the Messiah from other men by face or sight. 3. After he had
known and seen him face to face, yet he knew not whether he should baptize
him with others or no: but rather presupposed it as a matter unfitting, that
the messenger, whose Commission only was to baptize with water, should baptize
his Lord and Master, whom he knew to be sent of purpose to baptize others with
the holy Ghost. This last point is evident from Saint Matthew, chap. 3. verse.
13, 14, 15. When Jesus came from Galilee to Iordane unto John, to be baptized
of him; John forbade him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? And Jesus answering, said unto him, Suffer it to be so now:
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him.

49. That John Baptist before this time did not know our Savior by face, is
evident from Saint John, chap. 1. verse. 29, 30, 31, 32. The next day, (not the
next day after our Saviors baptism, but the next day after the Priests and
Levites had questioned John, or the next day after our Saviors return from
the wilderness) John seeing Jesus coming unto him, says, Beh^ld the Lamb of
God, which takes away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, After
me comes a man, which is preferred before me: for he was before me. And I
knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I
come baptizing with water. And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit
descending from heaven like a Dove, and it abode upon him. And further to
prevent all suspicion of compact or collusion betwixt them, or rather to stir
up the people to admire with him the sweet d^sposition of the Divine providence
in all this business; He repeateth again what he said before; And I knew him
not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon
whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is
he, which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. And I saw and bear record, that this
is the Mem. 2. Branch 2.
Son of God. But whilst I am a twisting these two Evangelical narrations
together, you have perhaps already espied or may hereafter epsy a knot or
riuell, where with your belief one time or another may be entangled;
specially, if the Jew, Atheist, or Libertine should draw it faster, or a weak
Interpreter of Scriptures have the handling of it. That you may the better
know, whenever occasion shall be offered, how to loose or untwist the knot,
give me leave first to cast it. For as the great Philosopher tells us; No
man knows rightly how to assoile or resolve a question, unless he first know
how to frame it. The right making of any objection (as the same Philosopher
tells us) is more then half the solution of it. The doubt or knot which arises
out of the two narrations of the A seeming contradiction betwixt S. Matthew and
S. John fully clcered.
Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint John, is framed thus: First, it is
evident out of them both, as also out of the other two Evangelists, that the
Holy Ghost did not descend upon our Savior until John had baptized him. It is
evident again out of Saint John's words forecited, cap. 1. ver. 33. That the
descending of the Holy Ghost upon our Savior, and his resting upon him, was
given by God himself unto John Baptist for a sign, whereby to know or
distinguish the Messiah or him that was to baptize with the holy Ghost, from
all other men. Now if John knew him by face from all other men, before the
Spirit did descend and rest upon him, what needed this sign? And if he knew
him not by face before the descending of the holy Ghost, what construction can
we make of Saint Matthews words before recited, chap. 3. ver. 13, 14. where he
says, That when Jesus came to be baptized of him, John replied, I have need to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? For to whom could the Baptist
himself in good earnest say, I have need to be baptized of thee, save only
unto him whom he knew could baptize him with the holy Ghost and with fire? And
if John Baptist knew Jesus of Nazareth at his first coming to him, to be the
man, which was to baptize with the holy Ghost, before he had seen the holy
Ghost descending upon him (as out of Saint Matthew it plainly appears, that
he did so know him) How is it true which Saint John says in the person of John
the Baptist, I knew him not? that is, in ordinary construction, as if he had
said, I had not known him, but by the descending and resting of the holy Ghost
upon him.

50. The seeming contradiction betwixt these two Evangelists, has occasioned
some of the Ancients to conceit, that the Holy Ghost did twice descend upon
our Savior: once before his baptism; (of which descension, John only or some
few more were spectators, and by this sign in private John did know him,
before he came in public to be baptized of him,) and again immediately
after his baptism. But a man cannot more strengthen or confirm a weak,
crasie or unsound objection, than by giving it a lame, vnsolid or
vnsatisfactory answer. The one part of this distinction consisting merely in
imagination, would serve as a foil, to give some tincture or color of truth
unto the objected Contradiction, which if it be well examined and better looked
into, consists only in appearance. Iansenius seeks to salve this objected
contradiction in this manner: Quanqu^a se^^ndum proba^tho^^m Chrysostom^
s^n^etia^, vt prius dictu^ est, Ioannes a^te columbae des^^n^u^ inte^iori
spi^^tus reuelatione Christis vemeni^m ad baptisum s^u^ cognouerit, id tame^
non pugnat cum praesenti loco. Na^ non dic^t hic Ioannes sibi ignotu^ fuisse
donec Co^^^bae ind^t^o illum agn^^erit, sed tantum (...). cap. 16. ^ol. 38.
The Baptist in the words forecited, says no, that he Mem. 2. Branch 2.
did not know our Savior before the Holy Ghost did point him out by descending
upon him, but that he had received a revelation from God concerning the holy
Ghosts descending upon him. The solution is borrowed in part from Saint
Chrysostom, perhaps sufficient enough to blanke a forward disputant, that
would undertake to prove a plain contradiction between the Baptists Words,
as they are related by Saint Matthew, chap. 3. and by Saint John. But many
speeches which cannot legally be convinced of falsehood, are often apparently
delusory or impertinent, and imply some moral inconvenience, albeit they
cannot easily be drawn to a Logical impossibility or irreconcilable
repugnancie. If we take the Baptists words as Saint John relates them, chap.
1. ver. 33. And I knew him not, etc. according to the ordinary standerd of
Civil Dialect in matters of serious conference or commerce, they import thus
much at least, That all the knowledge which John Baptist had of our Savior
before he baptized him, was suggested from consideration of the sign which God
had given him, not from any new internal revelation of the Spirit, altogether
distinct from that revelation by which the sign was given, verse. 33. But he
that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shall
see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptiseth
with the holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the Son of God.
His record had not been authentic, unless he had seen the Spirit descend
upon him. And his coniecturall knowledge of him, as of the Son of God, before
the Spirit did descend upon him, had been altogether groundless, without some
just presumption that this was the man upon whom the Spirit was to descend.

51. Maldonat having framed the like answer in effect as Iansenius does, seeks
to illustrate it thus by example: Albeit John Baptist did no more know our
Savior by face from other men, than Samuel did the sons of Iesse, one of
which he was appointed to anoint King in Saul's stead over Israel; yet when our
Savior came to be baptized, he might know him to be the Messiah, by some such
Divine instinct or revelation, as Samuel knew David, whose face he had never
seen before, to be the man whom God had appointed him to anoint King over
Israel. But of this (otherwise judicious) Commentator in his expositions of
Prophesies, or of the manner how Scriptures are said to be fulfilled, that may
be truly said, which the French Mathematician did of Cardanus his writings; [
Monath. in Arist. Mechan.
Ingeniose semper, raro perfect,] His Expositions in this kind are always
acute and witty, seldom exact or fully satisfactory. And the very instance
which he brings for illustratio^ of this point is very unfitting, very
unlike. For it is evident out of the History mentioned, 1. Sam. cap. 16. ver.
3. That although Samuel knew none of Iesse's sons by face, yet he had
distinct revelations from God, some negative and express, Look not on his
countenance, nor on the height of his stature, because I have refused him.
verse. 7. Others again, as expressly assertory. For when David was brought
before him, The Lord said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he. verse. 12. Samuel
had no visible sign given from God, whereby to know the man, whom he was to
anoint, from his brethren; but was merely to rely upon such revelations or
instructions Mem. 2. Branch 2.
as God had promised to give unto him in the very act or business. Call Iesse
to the Sacrifice, and I will show thee what then shall do, and thou shall
anoint unto me him, whom I name unto thee. 1. Sam. 16. 3. But God, as you
heard before, had given to John Baptist an express visible sign, whereby to
distinguish the Messiah, or him that was to baptize with the Holy Ghost, from
all other men. God did not promise him any such new revelations or
instructions, whereby to know him before his Baptism, or in the act of
baptizing, as he expressly promised to Samuel. Nor does the Evangelist either
mention or intimate any such revelations, as the History says were given to
Samuel, to have been given or made unto John Baptist, before the Holy Ghost
did descend upon our Savior. So that, such revelations or instructions as
Maldonat supposes, were on Samuels part altogether necessary, because he had
no visible sign given him: but in this business of John Baptist altogether
superfluous. The exhibition or production of the visible sign which God had
promised him, was the only new revelation which he was to rely upon.

52. I will not trouble you with the variety of opinions or expositions of
several Commentators, from none of which I have received any full satisfaction
my self. All of them have omitted one point, which in every controversy ought
in the first place to be enquired after. And it is this; Whether there be not a
Mean between the opposite or controuerted opinions? The opposite opinions in
this argument are two: The one, That the holy Ghost did descend upon our
Savior in John's presence, before he was baptized by John: The other, That John
did know our Savior before his baptism, by some special immediate revelation
of the Spirit. Now, it is not necessary that John should know him by either of
these two ways. There is an apparent mean or middle way betwixt them, by
which John might come to such knowledge as he had of our Savior, before the
Holy Ghost did in the sight of the people descend upon him. And this mean, we
may suppose to be the opening or unfolding of some Prophetical passage, whose
meaning (before) John had neither occasion in particular to observe, nor
opportunity to discern. Howbeit, this knowledge of Scriptures may be called a
revelation, but ordinary and mediate, such as the Ministers of the Gospel may
at this day have by the help of Commentaries, by collation of Scripture with
Scripture, or of historical events with Prophesies precedent: the signs of
the time being in all ages the best Commentators, and as it were substitutes to
the spirit of Prophecy or Revelation. Now, although the Evangelist neither
mention any special revelation made unto John, after God had given him a
sign, whereby to know our Savior, nor intimate any probable ground for such
conjectures: yet they (Saint Mark especially) relate such circumstances of our
Saviors coming to John, as might well occasion him to call to mind, a
peculiar passage concerning Christ's Baptism mentioned by the Prophet Isay,
which otherwise perhaps had not been thought of, or whose meaning, although
he had thought of it, John could not for the present have understood, without
such Comments or Expositions as the manner of our Saviors Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
coming to Baptism did make upon it. Now, the testimonies of the Scripture
long before written, especially the Prophetical testimonies or predictions of
things to come, are no way superfluous, either where new revelations (though
made by God to following Prophets viua voce) or visible signs are given or
promised, but rather subordinate and concurrent: that is, (to speak more
plainly) as well all new revelations made by the Spirit (whether viua voce, or
otherwise,) as all visible signs or wonders, which God does promise or work,
are to be examined and authorized by his Word already written, specially by the
predictions of the Prophets. And all new revelations, or visible signs or
wonders, which have been, are, or shall be, if they proceed from God or the
spirit of Truth, are always true Commentaries or expositions of some part or
other of the written Word, and pledges withal of some greater Mystery to come;
afterward to be fulfilled for their good, to whom such revelations or signs
are given and made.

53. The historical relation of Saint Mark, Of the means or signs by which
John came to know our Savior in part before the Holy Ghost did descend upon
him.
whose circumstances might lead John, and now may lead us unto the right
meaning of the Prophet Isaias Testimony concerning the descending of the Holy
Ghost, is in the 1. of Mark, v. 9. And it came to pass in those days (to
wit, in those days wherein all the Land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem went
out, and were all baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins) that
Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Iordane. Now,
ye are to conceive, that as no Bishop or inferior Minister amongst us, does
or may at any time administer Baptism, save only to such as he knows to be
borne of Christian Parents, whose names and place of dwelling he knows: so,
neither did John, the first Minister of Baptism, admit any to the Baptism of
water, save only such as did profess their names, their condition of life, or
place of dwelling. And (our Savior only excepted) all that were baptized of
him, did confess their sins. All this is evident from the Evangelists,
especially from the Evangelist Saint Luke, chap. 3. For John bestowed a
distinct Sermon or exhortation upon every distinct sort or profession of men
that came to be baptized of him. Unto the Pharisees and Sadduces which came to
his Baptism amongst other multitudes of people, he said; O generation of
Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth
therefore fruits worthy of Repentance, and begin not to say within your
selves, We have Abraham to our Father. For, I say unto you, that GOD is able
of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. And now also the Axe is
laid to the root of the Trees. Every Tree therefore which brings not forth
good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the fire. Luke 3. verse. 7, 8, 9. The
people hearing their Teachers or Masters thus sharply checked by John, asked
him, saying, What shall we do then? He answers, and says unto them; He
that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none, and he that has
meat, let him do likewise. And as it follows in the same Evangelist, Then
came also Publicans to be baptized, and being taught, as it seems, by the
example of the people of Judea, which had been baptized before them, Mem. 2.
Branch 2.
They said unto him, Master, What shall we do? And he said unto them, Exact
no more than that which is appointed you. And after they had been baptized,
the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And he
said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages. verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Now, after all these were
baptized, (yet all these being still present with John, that all flesh, as the
Prophet foretold, might see the glory, or, as Saint Luke says, the Salvation
of God;) our Savior came to be baptized of John. And inasmuch as John before
this time did neither know him by face, or by name; there is no question, but
he would require both his name, his profession, and place of dwelling, before
he would admit him unto Baptism, unless our Savior happily did in both
prevent him. Howeuer, after John had once heard his name, and the name of the
place, (Town or City) from whence he came; he might easily prognosticate or
divine, without any special extraordinary revelation, that amongst all the
multitudes of men, which resorted unto his Baptism, this was the man, on whom
the holy Ghost was to descend, according to Gods promise, and the prediction of
the Prophet Isaias. And upon this prenotion or presumption, John might in
modesty say unto Him, as you heard before; I had need to be baptized of thee,
and come thou to be baptized of me?

54. But I know, you expect to know the place of the Prophet Isaias, wherein
the descending of the holy Ghost upon our Savior, is foretold; and how the
name of Jesus, and of the Town or City whence he came, might call this place
unto John's mind, or expound the distinct meaning of it, before unknown unto
him. The place is, Isay 11. verse. 1, 2. And there shall come forth a Rod out of
the stem of less, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots. And the Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, etc.
This prediction or Prophetical testimony is of the same rank or kind, that
all or most of this Prophets predictions which concern the mystery of John's
baptizing our Savior, were before observed to be; that is, a prediction not
given in literal, plain, Grammatical terms, but in terms allegorical or
emblematicall: such as was Iothams prediction of Abimelechs and the men of
Sechems ruin, by the Parable of the Trees of the Forest: or such as Isayes
fore-picturing the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, by the Parable of the
Vineyard, which was to be laid waste by its Lord and Owner; because in stead
of Grapes, it brought forth wild grapes. The Prophet Isay, in the later end of
the tenth Chapter, and in the words immediately preceding to the late-cited
Testimony had said, Behold, The Lord, the Lord of Hoasts shall lop the bough
with terror: and the high-ones of stature shall be hewne down, and the
haughty shall be humbled. And he shall cut down the thickets of the Forest
with Iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one. verse. 33, 34* By the fall
of Lebanon, a Forest famous amongst the Nations for tall and goodly Cedars,
he fore-pictures the extirpation of David's Royal Race by Solomon and his
Successors, or the pulling down the mighty from their seats: By cutting
down the thickets of the Forest with Iron, Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
he fore-shaddowes the destruction of this people by the enemies sword, and
the low estate whereto the House of Judah and of David should be brought,
before the coming of Shiloh, or of him whom they so long expected. In the
later part of the Prophecy, (which is the beginning of the eleventh Chapter)
the Prophet fully expounds himself, That the intent or purpose of the
Prophecy, was to instruct the people, that when the Offspring of David, and
hope of Judah should seem in a manner utterly cut off, (as it was to all men's
thinking in the days of Herod the Great,) yet then there should spring a Rod
out of the stem of Iesse, and a Branch out of his root, which should raise
the House of David (now ruined) unto greater height than ever it had. By this
Rod or Branch, the Prophet understands a man; for he terms him the Rod or
Branch of Iesse, (who was David's Father:) But a man, that should be better able
to rule and feed the people of Israel than David himself, the chief stem
of Iesse, or Solomon his son, or any other King of Judah had been. The
extraordinary gifts or qualifications, which the Prophet fore-telleth that the
Spirit of the Lord, which was to rest upon him, would bestow upon this Rod of
Iesse, are such as can appertain to none, save only to the Messiah himself,
that is, to the Lords Anointed, or him that was to be anointed with the holy
Ghost.

55. The greatest offense which the Jews took at our Savior, was that he
came not forth of Bethlem the City of David, but from Nazareth, a Town in
Galilee; that his education was so mean, and his parentage so poor. Now, this
offense, the Prophet Isaias (so they would have understood him) had fully
prevented, foretelling that he should grow up as a Rod out of the stem of
Iesse, and as a Branch out of his root. This did truly fore-picture, that he
should be of meaner parentage than David himself had been, as being to
spring out of the decayed stem or root of Iesse. Again, the very word in the
Original, [Netser] signifying a Rod, did picture out unto us, the very place
wherein he was to grow up as a Rod, until he came to be declared unto Israel
by the Spirit of God descending upon him. For the Town of Nazareth has its
very name from the word here used by the Prophet Isaias, [Netser] and is as
much in English, as the Town of Rods or Grafts. Now, albeit John did not know
this Rod or Branch of Iesse, before he came unto him to be baptized, yet his
very name, being JESUS, which is a Savior, and the name of the place whence
he came, Natzareth [a Town of Rods,] could not but suggest thus much to John;
That seeing the holy Ghost, or Spirit of God was to descend upon some one that
came unto his Baptism, and to rest upon him; there was none amongst all the
multitudes, that came unto him, in whom this prediction or sign which God had
given him, could be so fulfilled, as in this Jesus of Nazareth: and thus
certainly expecting, that the Spirit of God would descend upon him, he
refused, as Saint Matthew tells us, to baptize him, saying; I have need to be
baptized of thee, etc. Now, this very sign which God gave to John how to know
him, was given before by the Prophet Isay, in the place forecited. For, in
that he is termed a Rod or Branch, on which the Spirit of the Lord should rest,
it is imported, that the manner Mem. 2 Branch. 2.
of his resting should be as a Bird or Foul does upon a stem or branch. So
that all which God in the sign given to John does add unto the Prophecy, is
a distinct expression of the Bird or Foul, in whose shape or bodily likeness
the Spirit was to descend and rest upon him; and that was in the shape or
bodily likeness of a Dove. So then John before our Saviors baptism, had the
Testimony of the Prophet, that the Spirit of the Lord would descend and rest
upon the man whom he then first knew only by the name of Jesus of Nazareth,
that is, of Jesus the Rod or Branch of Iesse. After our Saviors baptism, he
had this testimony or assurance of the Prophet, and his own Interpretation of
it (when our Savior first came unto him) fully sealed and warranted by the
evidence of his bodily senses, by the visible experiment of the holy Ghost,
descending in the likeness of a Dove, by the voice which he heard from Heaven,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

56. That this Prophecy of Isaias has special reference to the time of our
Saviors baptism, and to the Kingdom of heaven, which John proclaimed, and
into which his baptism by water was as the door or entrance; the very
ceremony or solemnity of men's admission unto it do testify: and so do the
effects and fruits of the Spirits descending and resting upon the Rod or
Branch of Iesse, which fruits and effects are in the same Chapter at large
described, and are of two sorts. The first sort concerns the Rod or Branch of
Iesse himself, and these are set forth in the 11. Chapter of Isaias, verse. 3,
4, 5. The Spirit of the Lord (says the Prophet) shall make him of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord, and he shall not judge after the sight
of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears. But with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity, for the meek
of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with
the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be
the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. All these
are heroical endowments or qualifications for government of so great a
Kingdom, as the Prophet foretold this Rod of Iesse or Branch of David was to
erect. And of these qualifications here mentioned, the best gifts which the
Lord bestowed on David, on Saul, or Solomon, or upon other Kings of Judah at
their anoyntments or inaugurations, were but shadows or prefigurations. Now,
the descending of the Spirit of God here foretold by the Prophet, and resting
upon our Savior, was his anoyntment and solemn inauguration or designement to
his Kingdom. Not that he was instantly to enter into his Kingdom of glory, or
take possession of his heavenly Inheritance, but for a time to expect such
troubles and persecutions in the attainement of it, as his father David had
suffered between the time wherein Samuel had anointed him King in his Father
Iesses house at Bethlem, and the time wherein he was publicly anointed King,
after Saul's death, in Hebron. That our Saviors anoyntment or designement to be
King and Lord over Israel, does bear date from the time that he was baptized
by John in Iordane, Saint Peter testifies, Acts 10. verse. 37, 38. That word you
know, which was published throughout all Judea, and began Mem. 2. Branch 2.
from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached: how God anointed Jesus
of Nazareth with the holy Ghost and with power, who went about doing good and
healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him. The voice
which at his anointment was heard from heaven, did plainly and openly declare
him to be that son of David, of whom alone it was truly fulfilled, which
David by his spirit of Prophefie had foretold, That God should be unto him a
Father, and he should be unto him a Son. And upon this declaration made at
his baptism, the devil, unto whom some scattered sound of it happily came,
might collect that he was [Dei Filius.] The first memorable Act his Father
David (after Samuel had anointed him) did undertake, was his conflict with
Goliath: and the first Act this Rod of Iesse, after his anoyntment undertakes,
was his encounter with Satan in single combat. The other part of the fruits
or concomitances of this our Saviors anoyntment by the holy Ghost, is
described at large in the 11. Chapter of Isaias, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Wolf
also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard also shall lie down with the
Kid: and the Calfe and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little
Child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones
shall lie down together: and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. And the
sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned Child shall put
his hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
Mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea. The exact fulfilling of this Prophecy in its literal
sense, that is, according to the strict propriety of native or vnborrowed
signification of words, [credat Iudaeus,] let it be expected by the
unbelieving Jew, whose too much credulity to the letter has brought forth an
absolute infidelity concerning the mysteries of his salvation. But whilst he
expects such a league and amity betwixt the creatures here mentioned, as the
words literally import, he plainly declares himself to be more cruel, more
rancorous and untamed, than the most ravenous beast, or most venomous creature
here mentioned. For, neither the sweet inuitation of our Savior, nor all the
good deeds which he wrought amongst this people whilst he lived on earth, nor
the punishing hand of God, which has bin always heavy upon them since his
death, has to this day wrought such a placable or reconcilable disposition
toward us Gentiles, or toward their own brethren which trust in Christ, as
they expect in the days of their Messiah, should be wrought in the Wolf
toward the Lamb, or in the Aspe or Cockatrice toward the Child or sucking
Infant. We may take this amongst others, as a sure Argument of our Interest in
the Woman's Seed, in that this generation of Vipers or Serpents (as John
Baptist terms them) have exercised the venomous enmity of Serpents against
all that have professed the name of Christ since his death. But the greater
their enmity is unto the profession of Christianity, or the longer it has
continued, the more strange and admirable will that reconciliation or agreement
seem, which the Evangelist records to have fallen out at the time of our
Saviors baptism or anoyntment; not only between the Jew and the Gentile, but
between Mem. 2. Branch 2.
the Pharisee and Publicane, between the Sadduce and the Roman Soldier, all of
them communicating together in the solemnity or Sacrament of baptism. For many
of every sort here mentioned, were baptized (...) in Iordane, confessing their
sins. This sudden and unexpected obedience of all sorts unto the Summons of
John's calling to repentance, and the strange alteration which followed upon the
sacrament of baptism and the repentance which John preached, as well in the Jew
as in the Gentile; is the mystery of the new Testament, which the Prophet
fore-pictures in the Parable of the Wolf agreeing with the Lamb, of the
Leopards reconciliation with the Kid, and of the Lions near familaritie with
the Ox or Ass.

The Publicanes which before the preaching of baptism and repentance by John,
were as ravenous as the evening Wolves, became as innocent as the Lamb. The
soldiers likewise which had bin formerly as fierce and cruel as the Lion,
became as tame and gentle as the Ox or Cow, and submitted their necks unto the
yoke of the Gospel. Such of the Pha^ises likewise, as before their baptism
had been as venomous as the Aspe or Cockatrice, did by the worthy receiving of
this baptism, and the grace which God did give them, become as mild and
gentle, as the sucking Infant The parallel circumstances or signs of the time
in the days of Noah, and of John Baptist.
or weaned Child.

57. This I take to be the true interpretation and native meaning, though not
of these words which he uses, yet of the Prophet himself, and that which the
holy Ghost did purposely intend to express in the forecited place. But may
not the prediction, though merely, or for the most part (as was observed)
parabolical, have some special reference to the days of Noah, wherein the
like reconciliation of hostile and antipathizing natures, was literally and
historically verefied and experienced? Yes doubtless, the signs of that old
world, and the signs of the time wherein our Savior was baptized, do as
exactly resemble the one the other, as the shape or image of the face in the
glass does the picture that produces it, or the picture does the live body
which it represents. And besides the power of God, which is able to effect all
things without secondary causes or means subordinate, we cannot imagine any
other cause or reason that should move the Jew and Gentile, the Pharise and
Publican to communicate together in John's baptism, beside that which moved the
beasts of every kind herementioned by the Prophet, and others beside them, to
hold better consort in Noah's Arc, or at their entrance into it, than they had
done whilst they enjoyed their natural liberty in the Fields and open air.
The true reason of both these strange reconciliations and co^posals of these
inbred fohoods, was that, which the great Philosopher tells us will unite the
deadliest enemies, [(...)]. i. The sudden approach or joint apprehension of
dread or danger alike common, and alike imminent to both. Now the strange and
uncouth dread of this universal deluge, could not choose but compel all the
Land creatures to keep the peace of nature before they entered Noah's Arc; to
forbear the exercise of wonted hostility, whilst they were in it; and to
entertain a general truce whilst the deluge lasted. But what fear or dread
of danger alike imminent to all, could the Pharisee and Publican, the Sadduces
and Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
the Heathen Soldiers jointly apprehend, that might move them to like peace or
consort during the time of John's baptism, or before he was to baptize our
Savior? The Prophet Malachy, to my apprehension, in the conclusion of his
Prophecy, intimates some great plague or curse ready to fall either upon the
whole world, or at least upon the Land of Iewry; unless it were prevented by
such means as the flood might have been, or as the destruction of Nineveh in
the days of Jonas was prevented; that is, by humiliation and true repentance.
And this humiliation of the people, or turning to the Lord by true repentance,
was to be wrought, as Malachy speaks, by the Prophet Eliah, that is, as you
heard before, by John the Baptist. The Prophets words are these; Behold, I will
send you Eliah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day
of the Lord. And he shall turn the heart of the Fathers unto the children, and
the heart of the children unto the Fathers, lest I come and smite the earth
with a curse. Malac. 4. verse. 5, 6. The best interpretation of this place is
made by the Angel Gabriel, Luke 1. verse. 16, 17. And many of the children of
Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in
the Spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the Just, to make ready a
people prepared to the Lord. Unless some competent multitude had been thus
prepared to entertain the Kingdom of grace, or the Gospel, or Christ Jesus
the King in their hearts, his first coming had been as dreadful to the whole
Land, as the unworthy receiving of his body and blood was to the Corinthians,
1. Cor. 11. God in his wisdom (as some of the Fathers very well observe) had
so ordained, that the same Element by which the old world (besides Noah's
Family) were destroyed, should be consecrated as an especial means for
preservation of the new world. The baptism of water which John administered,
was as a renouation or ratification of the promise which God had made to Noah:
a visible sign, that GOD had freed the earth or Land of Iewry from that curse
which Malachy speaks of, and was withal a visible pledge or sacrament of a new
blessing. Whatsoever the curse or anger was, which hanged at this time over the
peoples head, the Dove which descended upon our Savior at his baptism, did
bring to this generation a more express release from it, and a more sovereign
pardon for all their sins, than Noah's Dove did bring of Noah's and his
families deliverance from the curse of waters, or from the danger of the Flood,
when she came with an Olive branch in her mouth. Now, inasmuch as John's
baptism by water, was as the [medius terminus,] or as the way and passage
between Noah's Arc, and that holy Catholic Church, which our Savior Christ
was now to erect, whereof Noah's Arc, as you heard before, was the expre type;
it is no marvel if that which was literally fulfilled or verefied in the days
of Noah, were fulfilled according to its emblematicall importance or mystical
sense, in the days of John or at his baptism. The congruity between Noah's
Arc, and the holy Catholic Church, or new Jerusalem which was now to descend
from heaven, does herein partly consist. First, not only Noah and his Family,
but the Beasts as well Mem. 2 Branch 2.
clean as unclean which entered into the Arc, were all preserved from bodily
destruction: So, not only the Offspring of Abraham, (which was pre-figured by
Noah's Family) nor such Prosely^es only of the Gentiles, as were made visible
members of the Jewish Church, which answered in proportion to the clean Beasts
in Noah's Arc:) but even the worst sort of the Gentiles, such as had most
oppugned the Children of Abraham in their Religion, so they will be admitted
into the Holy Catholic Church or mystical body of Christ, shall be as
undoubtedly preferued both in body and soul from the curse of Hellfire, as
the unclean Beasts which entered into Noah's Arc were from the curse of waters.

58. That the admission of the Heathens, which What was mystically prefigured
by the clean and unclean beasts in Noah's Ark.
had been no Proselytes of the Jewish Church before, into the Catholic Church
now erected by Christ, was prefigured by the unclean beasts, is more than
probable unto us from the Vision which Saint Peter saw, Acts 10. verse. 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Peter, after his prayer, became very hungry, and would have
eaten: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance, and saw Heaven
opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great
sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth: wherein were all
manner of foure-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping
things, and Fowls of the Air. And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter,
kill, and eat. But Peter said, Not so, Lord, for I have never eaten any thing
that is common or unclean. And the voice spoke unto him again the second
time, What GOD has cleansed, that call not thou common. This was done thrice:
and the vessel was received up again into Heaven. The opening of Heaven, and
the letting down of the vessel, wherein were all manner of beasts, as well
unclean as clean, did signify that the Kingdom of Heaven, or gates of the
new Jerusalem, were now set open to all believers, and the way to true belief
manifested to all, of what Nation soever they were: the one as open, and the
other as manifest to the Italians or Romans, which never had been Proselytes;
as to the seed of Abraham, or the Proselytes which they had made. That matters
of fact, or emblematicall representations by vision or apparences, are as
truly doctrinall, as words uttered and understood according to the literal
sense; we need no further proof, than Saint Peter's application of this
vision, verse. 28. And he said unto them, (unto Cornelius, and his Italian
friends and attendants) Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man
that is a Jew, to keep company or come unto one of another Nation: but God
has showed me (not in express words, but by vision or representation
emblematicall) that I should not call any man common or unclean. Nor did Peter
in express terms or conceit, deem any man unclean. Only he had said,
whether in express words or in thought only, I have never eaten any thing
that is unclean. Yet, when answer was made, What God had cleansed, that call
not thou common; he knew by the circumstances of the time, and by the tenor of
Cornelius his message unto him, that God in this answer did not mean beasts or
things edible, but men represented by unclean beasts, whose use the Lord at
this time had sanctified unto his people, in token Mem. 2. Branch 2.
that men or Nations before unclean, were now capable of sanctification. The
mystery included in this vision, was fulfilled in the baptism with the Holy
Ghost, and was prefigured by the admission as well of Publicans and Roman
Soldiers, as of Pharisees, Jews, or Proselytes, unto the Baptism of John.
Now, S. Peter's own interpretation of this vision, will warrant our former
Interpretation of the Prophet Isay, cap. 11. verse. 6. as also, of most other
places in this Prophet, which, as you heard before, were to be understood, not
according to the literal, plain, and Grammatical signification of the words,
but according One and the same portion of Isaias Prophecy, which had been only
emblematically or parabolically fulfilled in such as came to John's Baptism,
was historically and literally fulfilled in our Savior Christ, after his
Baptism, and in his Apostles after his glorification.
to their poetical or emblematicall importance. Howbeit, when we affirm that
the aforesaid Prophecy, Isay 11. verse. 6. was specially fulfilled, according
to its poetical, parabolicall, or emblematicall sense, we no way deny, that it
might in part be verified or exemplified, according to the plain, literal, or
historical signification of the words. Certainly it was so verified in our
Savior, whilst he remained, after his Baptism, in the Wilderness. And
immediately (after his Baptism) the Spirit drives him into the Wilderness.
And he was there in the Wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and was
with the wild beasts, and the Angels ministered unto him. Mark. 1. ver. 12, 13.
We do not read, that any wild beast or noisome creature (of which the
Wilderness had plenty) did either annoy our Savior, or attempt any violence
against him whilst he was with them: We do not read, that Satan did ever
tempt Him to encounter with a Lion or a Bear, as his Father David had done, or
to tread on Serpents or Scorpions, to see whether they would sting him or no;
because he saw by experience, that this Jesus of Nazareth had power over all
these, and whatsoever other creature else that was at Satan's command. He had
seen that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 91. verse. 13. fulfilled in him: Thou shall
tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon thou shall trample
under feet: yet he hoped, our Saviors confidence in the authority and power,
which he exercised over wild beasts and venomous creatures in the
Wilderness, might animate him to try another conclusion, which he thought had
as fair and plausible premises in the Scriptures to infer it: Then the
Devil takes him up into the Holy City, and sets him on a Pinnacle of the
Temple; and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down:
for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in
their hands they shall be are thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone Matthew. 4. verse 5, 6.
. Where was it written that the Angel should take charge of him, lest he
should dash his foot against a stone? In the very same place (and in the words
immediately going before) wherein it was said that he should tread upon the Lion
and the Adder, etc. The Lion, the Adder, and other noisome creatures would ever
and anon be in his way, whilst his way was in the Wilderness: and to tread
on them was no tempting of God. The Angels of God in this case were to protect
him: but to cast himself headlong from the Pinacles of the Temple, was no
part of his way. The Prophet had foretold no such miraculous protection of him
or his followers. For him to have tried this conclusion, had been a tempting
of God. This, and Mem. 2. Branch 2.
the like, were feats better beseeming Simon Magus, or others of Satan's
Scholars. For this reason, our Savior after his resurrection, bequeatheth no
such power or authority unto his Disciples: unto whom notwithstanding he
communicated the former power of treading upon Serpents, of conuersing with
wild beasts or venomous creatures in such manner, as the forecited place, Isay
the 11. verse. 6 etc. according to the plain, literal, and native
signification of the words, imports. I beheld Satan (says our Savior) as
lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on Serpents
and Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any
means hurt you. Luke 10. verse. 18, 19. This Commission being first drawn
about the time that this answer was returned unto John by our Savior, was
more fully ratified upon our Saviors resurrection, and (as I take it) before
that time not put in execution by his Apostles or Disciples. Thus much the
literal meaning of Saint Marks words, chap. 16. v. 16, 17, 18. to my
understanding does import He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,
but he that believes not, shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them
that believe, In my name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, they shall take up Serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
He says not, that they should leap down from the Pinacles of the Temple, or
from the tops of high Towers, and not hurt themselves.

59. Again, I would not deny but that the forementioned Prophecy, Isay 40.
14. which was exactly fulfilled according to the literal Allegory or
emblematicall sense, might be in part fulfilled according to the plain,
literal, and proper sense; Not at the time of John's Baptism, but some years
before, yet after John was of age and experience to observe the signs of the
time, and their prognostics. Amongst other symptoms of that terrible
Earthquake which overthrew twelve famous Cities in Asia, about the sixth or
seventh year of Tiberius, Tacit. lib. 2. Annal.
Tacitus relates this for one, [sedisse immensos montes, visa in ardu^ quae
plana fuerint.] The Grammatical sense of his words, so far as they reach, is
so exactly parallel to the plain literal sense of Isaias Prophecy, that I
cannot English them better, than by borrowing the English translation of the
Prophet: The Logical extent of whose words, is far more ample than the
others historical relation. Some valleys, according to Tacitus, were exalted,
and some mighty Hills were brought low. The Prophet says, Every Valley shall
be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be brought low. According to
this Logical extent or universality, this Prophecy neither has been, nor
can be fulfilled in its plain, literal, and historical sense. Howbeit, this
and the like visible wonders wrought by the hand of God, though answerable but
in part to the plain literal meaning of this Prophet, were true and exact
emblemes of that which the Prophet principally meant, and which the mouth of
the Lord since has spoken, Whosoever exalts himself, shall be brought low,
and every one that humbles him self, shall be exalted. Luke 14. verse. 11. The
exact accomplishment of this sentence, according to the utmost extent Mem. 2.
Branch 2.
of its universality, is not to be expected till the last Day. Howbeit, there
was a true Crisis of it exhibited at the Baptism of John, which was (as Saint
Luke Luke 3. 1.
tells us) in the fifteenth year of Tiberius. From that time the Publicans
and Sinners were advanced, and the Children of Abraham, which gloried in their
birthright, debased. Poor Fishermen became Heads of the Tribes of Israel,
greater men in the House of God, than Moses and Aaron had been, whilst Moses
successors, the chief Priests and Doctors of the Law, were infatuated, and
became like salt without taste or savor. Of this miraculous change, the
forementioned prodigies were (as we said before) the types or emblemes. As
Mineralists usually find some homogeneall earth or metal nearer That is, the
surface of the earth.
the Day, as they use to speak, which directs them unto the metal or treasure
which they seek: so, before the exact accomplishment of diverse Prophesies, God
usually gives his people a glimpse or hint by the signs of the time, by some
real event or matter of fact, answerable in some measure to the plain
literal sense of the Prophet, but true emblemes or more immediate prognostics
withal, of greater mysteries approaching. That Earthquake which happened in
Iewry, whilst Augustus Caesar and Anthony tried their fortunes in that great
and famous Sea Fight at Actium, was in part an accomplishment of the Prophet
Haggai his literal meaning. chap. 2. verse. 6, 7. Yet once, it is a little
while, and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth and the Sea, and the dry
Land. And I will shake all Nations, etc. This shaking of the Nations, and of
the Earth at that time, was a sure prognosticke of that mystery which the
Prophet in the Verses following fore-telleth, to wit, that the glory of the
latter Temple should be greater than the glory of the former, and that the
desire of all Nations, who was the glory of both Temples, the Prince of that
peace which God had promised to give in Jerusalem, was shortly to come. For
about some twelve years after, Herod erects the Temple anew, and made it even
for external pomp and ornament, more beautiful and glorious than Salomons
Temple had been; that the King of glory and Prince of peace, for whose
entertainment (though unwitting to Herod) it was erected, might come unto it,
and fill it with glory. And within eighteen years after Herod began this
work, He was presented in it, and acknowledged by Simeon to be the light of
the Gentiles (one desired of all the Nations) and the glory of his people
Israel.

60. The best Commentary upon the late-cited passage of the Prophet Haggai, is
a passage parallel unto it in the Prophet Malachy: I will shake all Nations,
says Haggai, chap. 2. verse. 7. and the desire of all Nations shall come. Who
or what this desire of all Nations should be, is not so expressly avouched by
this Prophet, but that some good Christians of later years have questioned,
whether this place were literally meant of Christ's coming to the second
Temple, or whether the glory with which Haggai fore-telleth, the House of God
should be filled, were the glory of the Son of God incarnate. To prevent this
captious Criticisme, or to satisfy the cavil which carnal minds might
pretend for it; the Prophet Malachy determines the quality of the Person, and
the place Mem. 2. Branch 2.
unto which he was to come. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come
to his Temple; even the messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in: behold,
he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 3. 1. But though his coming were
to be sudden, was it therefore to have no certain prognosticke? or was it
sudden only unto such as neglected the presages of peace, or other signs of
the time foretold by the Prophet Haggai, v. 7. I will shake all Nations, etc.
And in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts verse. 9? There is
no motion in this inferior world, but tends to rest, and the more vehement the
motion is, so it be not unnatural and destructive, the more pleasant is the
rest which terminates it. This experiment in the course of nature, is the
ground of the Prophetical Emblem. That unusual shaking of Sea and Land, that
extraordinary commotion of all Nations, mustred to that terrible sea fight
between Augustus Caesar and Anthony, and to the rest of the Roman Civil
wars a little before, was but a prognosticke preamble to that happy and
unspeakable peace which the Prophet foretold the Lord would give in his
Temple at Jerusalem. This was that peace of God which passes huma^
understanding, which was to be diffused throughout the Nations, when the Son of
righteousness did arise, whose beams are clothed with Salvation, as the
Sunbeams are with light. Some glimpse or flashes of this glorious peace,
which was to issue out of Jerusalem, (the vision and fountain of peace) Rome
had by reflex, as the moon at the full has its light from the Sun. But as no
man within that hemisphere wherein the Moon shines in her full strength,
looks after the Sun that gives the light: so few or none, much delighted
with the glory and splendor of Rome, being then at full, did much look after
the Sun of Righteousness, whose approach (though in an opposite Hemisphere)
the general peace proclaimed at Rome by the shutting of Ianus his Temple, did
as certainly prognosticate, as the day star does the Suns arising. Of this
universal peace, that general tax mentioned by Saint Luke, chap. 2. ver. 1.
was one special consequent. Now, this tax was first decreed by Augustus in
Spain, within three or four years after the battle of Actium. Ob eam Edicti
pronuntiatione^ nonnulli Popul^ in Gallia and Germ^nia rebellauerunt, (...)
Ed^c^o ^^ssi sunt ad illos doman^ies a Cae are I (...) and (...); qui (...),
Romanoque in p^rio subegissent, anno quadrag^simo s^cundo sui imperij, quo anno
(...) est, a Praside Syriae C^^ino caeteroque orb Edictum Tarraconae decretum
executioni (...), cu^^s computationem Hispa^ia omnis, non a generali executione
per vniuersum facta, (...) facti ret^nuit. Episcopus Geraldensis Paralipon.
Hispan. lib. 10.
And for this reason it is, that the Church of Spain did anciently begin their
computation of years, not from our Saviors birth, as we do, but from the
date of Augustus his Decree for the universal tax first enacted in Spain,
though not put in execution till our Saviors birth, about some 26. years
after. So that of his birth, as well the earthquake in Iudaea, as the general
wars and the universal peace which ensued, were infallible presages unto all
such as duly compared the Signs of the time with the Prophets prediction.
Thus much of those particular Prophesies on which John's faith, before he
received this answer from our Savior, was grounded. Unto which a little is to
be added, concerning the peculiar signs of the time, which did accompany our
Saviors baptism.

61. It was a perpetual Law unto the Israelites, that Mem. 2 Branch. 2. Of the
signs of the time which did accompany our Saviors baptism.
as every seventh day was a day of rest unto themselves, so every seventh year
should be a year of rest unto the ground. It was not in that year to be
tilled. Now, at the end of every seventh year of Sabbaths or rest, that is,
after 49. years ended, they were to have the year of Iubile. The year
wherein John began to baptize and perform his ministry, was the seventh
Sabbaticall year, a year most obseruable by the Law; but this Law concerning
the years of Sabbaths or of rest, as the modern Jews themselves confess,
was but slenderly or not at all observed by their forefathers after their
return from Babylon. And for this sin, amongst others, they have had for a
long time no Land of their own wherein to observe it. The time of the year
wherein John begun to enter upon his office or ministry, as some Functius
Reusnerns.
Chronologers rightly gather, was in the beginning of September. In the
beginning of which Month, as you may read, Leuitic. 23. they were to observe
the feasts of Trumpets, by which Ceremony the other solemn feasts in the same
month, as the feast of the Atonement, and the feast of Tabernacles were
proclaimed. Whether the Jews after their return from Captivity, did observe
this solemnity, or neglect it, as they had done the years of Sabbaths, I well
know not, and much it skilleth not. It suffices us to observe, that the
mystery fore-signified by the ceremony or solemnity which the Law commanded,
was duly observed and fulfilled by John: for he in the beginning of this
month, began to lift up his voice like a Trumpet in the wilderness, as the
Herald or Ambassador of that God whom in all their solemn Feasts, especially
in these of the seventh month, Vide Isai, 58. 1, 2. Mal. 3. v. 1.
the Jews did seek, and whom they now might both have seen and felt; unless
they had been worse than blind, unless they had winckt with their eyes, and
wilfully bereft themselves of their senses. Now, to awake them out of this
slumber, the same God whom they sought, being deprived of this his Herald or
Crier by Herod's cruelty, proclaimed himself, as you may read in the
forecited place, Ioh. 7. 37. to be that God or Fountain of Life, whereto John
by his baptism did direct them: In the last day, that great day of the Feast,
(to wit, the Feast of Tabernacles, in which feast John's baptism was most
famous) Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me
and drink. Our blessed Savior in this Proclamation, acts but that very
part, which he had penned for himself: He had dictated it to the Prophet
Isaiah as he was the Wisdom and Son of GOD; by whose spirit the whole body
of Scriptures was written, to whom all the Prophets and Evangelists were but
Scribes or Amanuenses. He now utters and acts it with the voice and gesture
of man. But what date does the penning and writing of it bear? God himself
had thus invited them, Isay 55. verse. 1, 2. Ho every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea come,
buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Wherefore do ye spend
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies
not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your
soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me:
hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make Mem. 2. Branch 2.
an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. But this
Proclamation of our Savior fell out after John's death, and was the last
solemn inuitation which he made unto the Jews at Jerusalem; of which by Gods
assistance, hereafter. Another special sign of the time, by which John's faith
was confirmed, is from the Circumstance of the time and place, wherein our
Savior was baptized by him.

62. I am not ignorant, that there has been an ancient tradition, At what
time of the year, or on what day our Savior was baptized.
especially in the Western Church, that our Savior was baptized upon the
sixth of January, which we call the Epiphany or the twelfth day. And the
Church of England, not willing to dissent from the Romish Church, save only in
matters of great consequence, or in points wherein that Church has no show of
antiquity, retains in part the Liturgy or Service which that Church had
appointed for that day. So you may find the second Lesson usually read in our
Churches upon that day, to be the third Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel,
wherein the History of our Saviors baptism is most expressly mentioned; and at
the end of the History concerning our Saviors baptism, the second Lesson
appointed by our Church for that day, does end. But in a part of the Liturgy
to this day used in the Romish Church, to wit, in the Antheme appointed for
that very day, it is in express terms avouched; [Hodie a Ioanne in Iordane
Christus baptizari voluit;] This day our Savior pleased to be baptized of John
in Iordane. Notwithstanding all this, Iansenius that reverend Bishop of Gant, a
most learned and ingenuous Interpreter of the sour Evangelists, albeit he
dyed a member of the then visible Romish Church wherein he lived, did not
think himself bound to believe either the practice or tradition of that
Church, because in his judgment it was not warantable by Scripture, specially
if they took the words before cited in the strict and literal sense. For
being so taken, it contradicts the words of Saint Luke, chap. 3. ver. 23. And
Jesus himself (when he was baptized of John) began to be about thirty years
of age: Or (as he reads) was almost thirty years of age, when he began to
enter upon his function: which bears date from the day of his baptism. Now if
he had bin baptized upon the sixth of January, or the Epiphany, he must needs
have been either 13. days above 30. years old, or but 13. days above 29.
Some Romanists, acknowledging our Savior to have bin baptized before he was
30. years of age complete, account his age from his conception, in respect
whereof, he was almost thirty, when he was but some few days above 29.
years old, if we account his age from his Nativity. Others would have him
baptized in the 31. year of his age, accounting his Naclantus in medulla
Scripturae.
age from his Nativity. For, suppose he had been baptized upon the sixth of
January, after thirty years complete, he might as truly be said to have been
then about thirty years, as if he had been baptized some few days or weeks
before he was thirty. But the Greek (...), when it signifies about this or
that time, does usually signify rather short then over. And for this reason
Iansenius, although he point the Original, as the followers of this last
opinion do, yet likes much better of Epiphanius his opinion, who was an
ancient Writer, and a professed Collector of ancient Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
traditions or opinions; and he refers the day of our Saviors baptism
unto the seventh of November. So does learned Chemnitius refer it to the feast
of the Encenia or purification of the Temple. But some other Chronologers of
reformed Churches, with more probability, refer the day of his baptism unto
the tenth of September, which was the feast of the Atonement. Upon this day the
Angel appeared unto Zacharias, whilst he was burning Incense in the holy
place, and foretold the birth and conception of John Baptist.

63. The consonancy of many types and signs of the time with this opinion, is
very great and very pleasant. But if I should relate them all, you would
happily say, they are but coniecturall, because not grounded upon testimony of
Scripture. Many of them I must confess, are neither expressly foretold by any
Prophet, nor really fore-shaddowed or prefigured, for ought I know, by any
real event or matter of fact, or by any solemnity commanded by the Law The
Cerenony concerning the Scapegoat and other solemnities used in the Feast of
the Atonement, mystically fulfilled in our Savior upon the day of his baptism.
of Moses. Yet one event there is which followed immediately upon our Saviors
baptism, so expressly related by three Evangelists, that it does necessarily
argue some prefiguration or fore-shadowing in the Law or books of Moses: for
so every remarkable event or action which concerns our Savior Christ was
fore-shaddowed. The event whereof now I speak, was his leading into the
Wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the Devil. So says Saint Mark
expressly (what the others intimate.) And immediately the Spirit drives him
into the Wilderness. Mark 1. 12. Now the end of his going or being led
thither (though few Interpreters have observed it) was, to fulfill the mystery
fore-signified by the Scape-goate, which upon the day of Atonement, as we
read, Leuit. 16. 21. was to be led by the hand of a fit man into the
Wilderness, after Aaron or his Successor the High Priest had laid his hands
upon his head, and confessed over him all the Iniquities of Israel, and all the
transgressions, and all their sins, putting them (as the Text says,) upon
the head of the Goat. Now, as it is evident out of Scripture, that our Savior
Christ was crucified at the time, that the Paschall Lamb was killed; to the
end the World might take notice, that he was the Lamb of GOD, whose sacrifice
the Paschall Lamb did prefigure; so by a certain Analogy of faith, we may
rightly gather that our Savior was led into the Wilderness by the Spirit,
upon the same day, that the Scapegoat was by the prescript of Moses Law to be
led thither; to the end that John, and such as were present, might believe and
acknowledge, that the mystery fore-shaddowed by the legal ceremony of the
scape-Goate, was fulfilled in this Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had seen and
known baptized of John. Wherefore, in as much as it is evident out of
Scripture, that the escape Goat was to be led into the Wilderness upon the
Feast Day of the Atonement, and inasmuch as our Savior was led into the
Wilderness, immediately after he was baptized; the conclusion will directly
follow, that our Savior was baptized upon the Feast of the Atonement, which
was the tenth of September. So that John, by this account, was a quarter of a
year above thirty, and declining toward the wane, and our Savior growing up
into his full age, being a quarter Mem. 2. Branch. 2.
under thirty, when he was baptized of John. The end of our Saviors going
into the Wilderness, was (as you heard before) to be tempted of the Devil;
and amongst other means, to be tempted especially by fasting. This temptation
doubtless did not befall him for his own sake, but that he might fully
expiate the sins committed by the Israelites in the Wilderness, from whose
curse their posterity was not acquitted, until he which was prefigured by the
Scape-Goate, had really and bodily undergone the burden of it, as the
Scape-Goate in shadow or ceremony only had done. One special end of his
going upon this day into the Wilderness, was, to carry thither the sins of
all that came unto John's baptism. For, as many as were baptized by John,
confessed their sins. And if John did not, no question but He, who was to
accomplish as well that which was fore-shaddowed by Aaron, as by the
Scape-Goate, did put all the sins, which had been confessed to John, or to
God in John's presence, upon himself, as Aaron did put all the iniquities of
the Children of Israel, and all their transgressions (being first confessed)
upon the head of the Goat, before he sent him into the Wilderness. Leuit.
16. verse. 21. Where we are by the way to note, that this people did always
with their own sins solemnly confess the sins of their forefathers. The
especial sins which the Israelites had committed in the Wilderness, were
their tempting of God, saying, Is the Lord amongst us or no? and their
rebellious murmuring against God, and his servant Moses, in their grieuance of
hunger and thirst, or in their intemperate longings after their Egyptian diet.
For this sin they were stung with fiery Serpents; the relics or Offsprings
of their first Parents curse, whom the old Serpent had feduced and made subject
to annoyance by the venomous Creatures. And this sin was remarkably and fully
expiated by our Saviors fasting forty days and forty nights in the
Wilderness, and by his vanquishing the Tempter himself the old Serpent in
this temptation (as we say) at his own weapon. For at this time he escaped
the malice of the Devil; the powers of darkness had no power over him. And
this was prefigured by the Scape-Goate, which being led into the Wilderness,
was to be let go by the man that led him.

64. Probable it is, that John Baptist from his observance, how exactly our
Savior had fulfilled the type of the Scape-Goate, did (upon his return from
the Wilderness) pre-collect or prognosticate, that he should as exactly
fulfill the type or mystery of the Paschall Lamb, and hence proclaims him to
be that Lamb of God which was to take away the sins of the World, more than
three years before our Saviors Apostles or Disciples did know the meaning of
this mystery, or the congruitie between the shadow and the body. It is
remarkeably said by our Apostle, That our Savior is the body whereof legal
ceremonies were the shadows. But you must understand a body so heterogeneall
and complete, that no one or few legal ceremonies could perfectly fore-shaddow
it. But as the Ceremonies were many and almost infinite; so every one did
fore-shaddow some part or piece of this complete body; no remarkable part of
it, that Mem. 2. Branch 2.
is, no special event or action which concerned our Savior Christ, but was
fore-shaddowed by some or other legal ceremony. As his leading into the
Wilderness upon the day of the Atonement, was foreshaddowed by the Ceremony of
the Scape-Goate; so his Baptism upon the same day, was as expressly
fore-shaddowed or prefigured, as any event concerning him, either was or could
be, by the Legal Ceremony, which Aaron, or his Successor the High Priest,
were to observe upon the same day, to wit, upon the Feast of the Atonement: And
Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and shall put off the
Linen garments which he put on, when he went into the holy place, and shall
leave them there. And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place,
and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt Offering, and the
burnt Offering of the people, and make an Atonement for himself, and for the
people. Leuit. 16. ver. 23, 24. Aaron was to wash his body in the holy place,
as standing in need of Legal sanctification from it: So unable was he to
sanctify himself or it. Our Saviors body was washed in Jordan, and by his
bodily presence sanctified both the water and the place, yea Heaven it self,
or that heavenly Mansion, whereof the Aaronical holy place was but a shadow,
was now purified by our Saviors Baptism, as it was afterward to be cleansed
and sanctified by his blood. Between the circumstance of the time when, and
the circumstance of the place wherein our Savior was baptized, the confort is
sweet.

65. Our Savior was baptized by John at Bethabera beyond Iordane, as is
evident from Saint John the Evangelist, Chap. 1. verse. 28. This was the place
(as the name imports) where the Israelites under the conduct of Joshua or Jesus
the son of Nun, first entered into the Land of Canaan, the Land of their
promised rest. And in token that this was the Land which God had promised unto
Abraham, and that this was the time and place wherein God did tender
performance of his promise unto Abraham and his seed, so far as it concerned
the blessing or Inheritance temporal; the River of Iordane in that very season
wherein it was accustomed to ouer-flow his bancks, did divide it self, and
retract the stream, to give the seed of Abraham as safe and dry a passage
into the Land of Canaan, as the Red sea had given them ou^ of Egypt. The
reason why Jesus the Son of God would be baptized at this place, rather then
at any other, and the reason why the heavens did open over him being in this
place baptized, was to show, that He was the Jesus which was to conduct them
into their rest indeed, into that Land, whereof the Land of Canaan was but the
Map; that he was the man in whom Gods promise unto Abraham performed in part
by Jesus the son of Nun, was to be finally accomplished. The opening of the
heavens, and the emission of that voice from Gods presence, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, was a full and satisfactory answer unto all
the prayers which the high-Prists did annually make, when they went into the
most holy place. But in what sort Jesus the son of Nun, or that other Jesus
the son of Iosedech did fore-shaddow the Son of God, will come into more
particular consideration in a fitter place. Thus far of the Prophesies on which
Mem. 2. Branch 3.
John Baptists belief or warrant for baptizing was grounded, and of the signs
of the time expounding the meaning of these Prophesies unto him, or his
attentive Auditors before his imprisonment.

The third Branch of the second Member. The consonancy between those
Scriptures whereunto our Savior in this answer refers John, and the former
Prophesies on which John's faith was grounded, with the congruity of time and
other circumstances or occurrences, which unfold their meaning.
IIsdem alimur ex quibus constituimur: As every thing's first breeding or
beginning. 66.
has been, such commonly is the manner of its nourishment or feeding. Bodies
or creatures merely vegetable, as Trees, Plants, Herbs, Corn, Grass, and
the like, seek after no other nutriment than the juice or moisture of the
fatned earth, with which kind of nutriment Creatures endued with sense cannot
thrive or prosper. The meanest food that can give satisfaction to the meanest
of them, is vegetable, as Grass, Corn, Herbs, or other fruits of the Fields
or Trees. Some kind of creatures endued with sense there be, which must be
nourished with others of the same, but of inferior kind. As the Lion will not
feed on straw with the Ox or Ass, but feeds on these and other like
Creatures consisting of flesh and blood, as these do on vegetables. So that
there be almost as many several sorts of nutriment or feeding, as there be
several or distinct kinds of creatures nourished and fed. And not so only,
but even creatures of the same kind have their variety of nutriment. Though
all receive their nutriment from the fatness of the earth, yet is not every
vegetable alike content with every soil.

Hic segetes, illic veniunt foelicius vuae.

Some soyles yield plentiful nutriment to Vines or Plants, but are not so
kind Nurses unto Corn or Herbs. Some kind of mould is good for Corn, not
altogether so good for Grass. And in the same mould wherein Rye or Oats grow
up and prosper, Wheat or Barley thrive not so well. Now, albeit God allowed
greater variety of food or nourishment to mankind, than to all other kinds of
Creatures besides; (for most creatures vegetable, or such as feed on
vegetables, are given by express Charter unto man for food:) yet we see by
experience, that some men either by peculiar constitution of body, or by long
accustoming themselves unto some special kind of food, are more delighted and
like better with that, than with any other. And albeit a man by ill diet,
whereunto he has been long accustomed, shall contract any disease or
distemperature; yet a skillful Physician will be as careful to give some
contentment unto custom, as to correct the present distemper. The use or end
of all nutriment, in what body soever, is to continue life and health, and to
augment strength. And our several refections should be as so many several
inuitations Mem. 2. Branch. 3.
or entertainements of the soul or spirit of life, that it would be pleased to
reside where now it does, until God provide it of a better residence. Now, as
every vegetable or sensitive body lives by its soul, so the reasonable soul
of man lives by faith. The first original or seed of faith, is the Word of
God. The only nutriment of faith, or of the soul which seeks to live by
faith, is experiment or observation of events, whether in our selves or without
us, answerable to the Word of God, from which faith had its first seeds or
beginning. Again, as every man is most bound to observe those rules of
Scripture, which most concern himself or his profession: so those experiences
or tastes of Gods blessings which suit best with his peculiar kind of life,
yield best nutriment unto faith once begotten. Every man's growth in faith is
then most firm and solid, when it proceeds from a perfect growth in those
Scriptures from which it took first root, and from whose experienced truth it
was formerly nourished and increased.

67. Seeing then John's faith in Jesus of Nazareth, as in the Messiah then
revealed, did spring from Gods Word uttered by Isaias the Prophet, as from its
first root, and had been nourished by sensible experiments and manifest signs
of the time, answerable to the Prophet Isaias predictions concerning John's
office: for this reason it is, that our Savior, who best knew what answer
would be most fitting and most satisfactory to John's demand, returns him no
other answer than you often have heard read unto you; The blind receive their
sight, the halt go, etc. The sum of the answer is a brief rehearsal of the
various miracles which our Savior had lately wrought and continued to work,
when John's Disciples came unto him. Now, all the miracles here recited, are but
so many sensible experiments of those predictions, wherein John's faith
concerning the discharge of his office was first grounded; experiments of the
very selfsame kind, by which his former faith had been nourished and
confirmed. Such experiments they are as could not but strengthen his faith,
although it had been weakened by doubt or distrust: experiments in themselves
able to revive his faith, although it had bin more than half stifeled by
despair.

68. The special places of the Prophet Isay, by which John was directed in the
execution of his office of preaching Repentance or baptizing, and whereon his
faith or belief of the Messiah which was to come was grounded, have been
alleged and expounded to you before. They were for the most part such as did
foretell strange wonders to be wrought in the desert, as the bursting out of
waters in dry places, turning of Valleys into Mountains, planting of the
Wilderness with pleasant Trees. All which predictions were only or especially
to be fulfilled in their allegorical or parabolicall sense, that is, in the
strange alterations of men's affections and dispositions, which did follow upon
John's Baptism, yet not wrought by John, but by him that came after him, which
was to baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire. John, before his
imprisonment, had seen good fruits of his Baptism and preaching of
Repentance, he had seen the holy Ghost likewise descend in miraculous manner
upon our Savior, whereby he knew him to be the Anointed Mem. 2. Branch. 3.
of the Lord, and that righteous Branch of David, which was to accomplish
whatsoever the Prophet Isay, or John out of him, had foretold. But as for
miracles, John himself wrought none before his imprisonment, nor had he seen
or heard our Savior work any. As indeed he did work no miracles, besides the
turning of water into wine at the marriage feast at Cana in Galilee, which (as
Saint John the Evangelist ^elleth us) was the beginning of miracles, or as a
proof or assay of his ability to work miracles when his hour was come; which
was not, till John was imprisoned. But immediately after Herod had imprisoned
John, our Savior left Judea and went into Galilee; where, by Gods appointment,
the Kingdom of heaven, whose approach John at his baptism had foretold, was
to be proclaimed and established. The matter of fact, to wit, his going into
Galilee upon John's imprisonment, is expressly related by Saint John, cap. 4.
verse. 1, 2, 3. When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard, that
Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John, (though Jesus himself
baptized not, but his Disciples) he left Iudaea, and departed again into
Galilee: not so much for fear of the Jews, as to accomplish that, for which
he was sent into the world. The end of his going into Galilee at this time,
after John had performed his office of baptizing, and was now to decrease, is
more expressly noted by Saint Matthew, chap. 4. verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Then the Devil leaves him, and behold, Angels came and ministered unto him.
Now when Jesus had heard, that John was cast into prison, he departed into
Galilee. And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon
the Seacoast, in the borders of Zabulon and Napthaly: That it might be
fulfilled, which was spoken by Isaias the Prophet, saying, The Land of Zabulon,
and the Land of Napthaly, by the way of the Sea beyond Iordane, Galilee of the
Gentiles: The people which sat in darkness, saw great light, and to them
which sat in the Region and shadow of death, light is sprung up. In
particular to show you the whole manner how this Prophecy was fulfilled by our
Saviors going out of Iudaea into Galilee, by his leaving Nazareth, and
repairing to Capernaum, would require a longer discourse than is fitting for
the Pulpit. Some touch of it, perhaps I shall give you in the conclusion of our
Saviors answer to John, as it concerns the first place of Isay, whereto he
refers him. That which I would now have you to observe out of the Evangelist
Saint Matthew, is this: First, that this Prophecy was fulfilled in our
Saviors promulgation of the Gospel in those places. Secondly, albeit our
Savior was anointed King of Judah, and inaugurated to the Kingdom of heaven
at his baptism; yet he did not take actual possession of his Kingdom, or
give Laws unto his subjects, he did not fully exercise his Regal authority
over Satan and the unclean spirits his angels, nor establish the Kingdom of
Grace by signs or wonders, until the time of John's imprisonment. Thus much is
evident from the words of Saint Matthew, Chap. 4. verse. 17. From that time (to
wit, from John's imprisonment) Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. From the same time he did choose his twelve
Apostles, and gave Authority to them and to the seventy Disciples Mem. 2.
Branch 3.
to preach the Kingdom, to heal all manner of diseases, and to deliver the
people from the tyranny of Satan. From the same time our Savior began to make
that excellent Sermon upon the Mount, whereof you may read, Matthew. 5, and 6.
which is the fundamental Charter, by which the Kingdom of Heaven here on
earth is established. Now, albeit John did work no miracles himself, nor had
seen our Sauiur work any before his imprisonment; yet he had engaged his
credit and reputation with the people, (who took him for no less than a
Prophet,) that Jesus of Nazareth, whom he baptized in Iordane, should work
such miracles as Isaias the Prophet had foretold the Rod or Branch of Iesse
should work; and accomplish all, which the said Prophet had foretold should
ensue upon the voice crying in the wilderness. That John had thus far engaged
himself for winning reputation to his Lord and Master, is evident from the
fruits or effects of this his engagement, manifested in the people. John 10.
v. 39, 40, 41, 42. After our Savior had escaped out of the hands of the Jews,
he went away again beyond Iordane, into the place where John at first
baptized, and there he abode. And many resorted unto him, and said; John did
no miracle, but all things that John spoke of this man, were true. And many
believed on him there. Now, albeit John, after he had seen the holy Ghost
descend upon our Savior, did never doubt whether he was the promised Messiah
or no: yet what greater comfort or satisfaction could John receive being now
imprisoned, than to have an acquittance from his former Engagement for our
Savior, sealed by such visible and sensible events as are here related, and
solemnly acknowledged and delivered by him for whom John stood engaged, who had
fully discharged whatsoever John had promised on his behalf? That this answer
of our Savior did really discharge John of his former engagement, and fully
acquit him from all suspicion of collusion or compact with Jesus of Nazareth,
whom he baptized, and proclaimed to be the Messiah; might easily have appeared
to the most malicious Jew then living, that would but have compared the
miracles here related, with the predictions of the Prophet Isay, laying both
of them to heart, and weighing them with the circumstances of the several
times. The testimonies are two. The first prediction of the Prophet Isay,
whereto our Savior in this answer refers John, and all such as should
seek satisfaction from him, is, Isay 35. but especially, verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that
are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come
with ve^igeance, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you. Then
the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the
dumb shall sing: for in the Wilderness shall waters break out, and streams
in the desert. And the parched ground shall become a poole, and the thirsty
Land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be
grass, with reeds and rushes.

69. The Testimonies before cited out of Isay, albeit they were abundantly
sufficient to beget faith in John himself, and others that did impartially
consider Mem. 2. Branch 3.
and compare them with the signs of the time and other circumstances, of which
you have heard: yet were they not so apt or effectual to convince the froward
and partial hearers, as this last cited Testimony was, and is. Against the
former places, and the expositions which John made of them to himself and to
his Disciples, pride and malice or fretting jealousy might have made these or
the like exceptions, plausible enough to discontented minds, or to men
possessed with a preiudicate opinion either of John, or of Jesus of Nazareth,
whom John proclaimed for the Messiah. Thus might such men as I now spoke of,
have objected. It is true which John alleges for his Commission out of Isay,
That there shall a voice be heard crying in the wilderness, to prepare the
ways of the Messiah whom we expect; that the Lord will work strange wonders
in the desert, upon the Messiah his declaration unto Israel. But, who shall
assure us, that this John is to be the Crier or Herald, which Isay foretold
should usher the Messiah into his Kingdom; or that this Jesus whom he
proclaims, should be the Branch of Iesse, the Son of David, and that
Christ or Anointed of the LORD, whom we expect? The Prophet does not so
plainly describe the voice of one crying in the wilderness, either by name,
by parentage, or by dwelling; but that it is possible for some other man to
come after John, which may have better right to that Office, which he takes
upon him, than, for ought that yet appears, he has. It is no miracle for a
man of better note than John is, to pretend or counterfeit such revelations or
expositions of the Prophets, as he makes show of: for as yet he has given
us no real proof of his extraordinary calling, by any evident miracle or
vndo^bred wonder; and without some apparent miracle, his testimony of himself
or of Jesus of Nazareth is not concludent. Nor do we in thus saying, any way
question the truth of Isaiahs predictions; but only whether this man which
takes upon him to be a Crier in the wilderness, be the very man whom Isay meant
in the Prophecy alleged by John, or no. What if many of such as repaired to
this John in the wilderness, have, upon his baptism and the doctrine of
repentance which he taught, become new men, nothing like to the men they had
been? What if some of them, being before more barren than the Bramble, have
since his baptism showed themselves more fruitful then the Fig Tree or the
Olive? What if others, of men more ravenous then Wolves, have become as
moderate in their desires, and as harmless in their actions as the silly
Lamb? What if others, heretofore as fierce and cruel as the Leopard and the
Lion, are now become (to most men's seeming) as tame and gentle as the Ox, the
Ass, or other like domesticke creature? What if th^rs, heretofore noted to
be as venomous as the Aspe or Cochatrice, have now gotten an opinion in (...)
(since they were disciplined by John) for (...) and placable, as the sucking
Infant or the new wearned child? Yet who knows whether this se^^^ing Sanctity
or change of mind may not be counterferted or pretended only? or whether
these men may not within short space return again unto their former temper,
and appear in their inbred native Mem. 2. Branch 3.
likeness?

70. These and the like exceptions might malice, pride, envious icalousie, or
preiud^ca^e opinions have made, with some color of probability, unto men
offended with John Baptists person; specially, if they had made them
immediately after he began to baptize. And it would have been an hard task
for John to have refused the objections, or convinced the Obiectors, out of the
testimonies of the Prophet Isay before cited. But now that pride and malice it
self might see the blind restored unto their perfect sight, the Lame unto
their right use of limbs; now, that men (happily) heretofore offended with
John Baptists person or our Saviors, might perfectly know, such as they had
formerly known to be altogether truly dea^e, to be as well able to hear as
to be heard: in that they might hear such as were perfectly dumb, to speak
distinctly; in that they might see lare nastie and ^othsome Leapers become as
clean and comely of body as themselves: nor pride, nor malice it self (so
they would suffer themselves to be thoroughly informed these matters of fact)
could mo^e any question whether these and the like were the very men or ^o,
whom Isay the Prophet meant in the Prophe^^^ last cited Chap. 35. And being
once truly informed in matters of fact, to wit, [that these miracles were
truly wrought, and wrought by that Jesus of Nazareth, whom John proclaimed to
be the Messiah,] they could not question whether the same God, which had sent
Isaias the Prophet to foretell these strange wonders, had not also seat this
Jesus of Nazareth to accomplish that in deed and truth, which Isaias had
foretold, and which was in part fore-shaddowed in the days of Ezechtah and
the Prophet Isay. For, albeit the malicious Pharisees or other Jews, whom God
had given over to a reprobate sense, might have calumniated our Savior, as if
he had wrought these miracles here mentioned, by the power of Satan, as they
said sometimes that he did cast out Devils by the power of Beelzebub Prince of
Devils; yet could not calumny, nor malice it self, entertain a suspicious
thought, that the Prophet Isay should foretell the working of these miracles by
the sprit of Iyes or of Satan. For Isaias plainly affirms, that their GOD
should bring this salvation which he promises. Of which salvation the
miracles wrought in my Text, are the undoubted pledges, or rather the first
beginnings. So it is said, Isa. 35. 5.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened. This word [Then] presupposes a
time when those miracles should be wrought: and this time was, when God should
come to save his people. God did often save his people: But it is one thing for
God to save his people, and another, that God should come to save his people.
It is one thing that God should come to save his people, another, that God the
Auenger, that God the Recompencer or Rewarder, [their God in special,] should
come to save them. Yet are all these branches emphatically contained in the
literal sense or Grammatical construction of the former words: Behold, your
God will come with vengeance, even God with a Recompense, he will come and save
you. Isay 35. verse. 4. This argues a special manner, and an extraordinary
measure of Salvation. In brief, the sum or extract of the whole Chapter is
this. The miraculous alterations Mem. 2. Branch 3.
in the Wilderness, as of waters breaking out, etc. mentioned in the beginning
of this Chapter, (elsewhere so often inculcated by the Prophet, and fulfilled
upon John's Baptism,) were sure prognostics or presages of Gods coming to
save his people: and the particular miracles foretold, verse. 4. and now
wrought by our Savior, were infallible signs or demonstrations from the
effect, that the Lord, whose ways the Crier in the Wilderness was sent to
prepare (that very God of whom Isaias here speaks) was come in person to save
his people. And it is probable, that John's Question, Art thou he that should
come, etc? had peculiar reference unto this place; at least, our Saviors
referring Him to this place, would give him full satisfaction that he was to
expect no other to come.

71. Besides the evident fulfilling of this Prophecy, beyond the utmost extent
of its plain Grammatical sense; the signs and circumstances of the time
would much avail John, or others then better acquainted with the Histories or
customs of the Jewish Nations, than now we are. Concerning the circumstances
of the times wherein Isaias uttered this Prophecy, thus much in general is
undoubtedly true. The Revelation or Prophecy was first conceived or vttred by
Isaias, at that very time, wherein Sennacherib King of Assyria had laid the
Land of Judah waste, and put Jerusalem unto that great distress, whereof you
may read 36. Chapter of this Prophecy, as also in the eighteenth and
nineteenth of the second Book of Kings: Which desolation and distress, as
also the deliverance from it, the same Prophet Isaias had foretold, as you may
read Isa. 8, 9, and 10. Chap^ers, and the latter part of the seventh chapter.
The History of Sennacheribs attempt against Jerusalem, with his mighty
ouer-throw, and of Ezechias sickness and recovery, ar^ inserted at large
between the 35. and 40. Chapters of this Prophet, not through negligence of the
Collectors or Compilers of these sacred Volumes, but by the special direction
of the holy Spirit, to the end, that the Reader might compare the historical
events with the Prophetical predictions, and their Euangelical accomplishments
with the historical events or portendments. That these Prophesies of Isaias in
particular, although literally Of the sign given to Hezekias for his
deliverance from the Assyrian; and what the signs or circumstances of those
times did fore-shaddow.
and historically verified in the days of Hezekiah, did in the opinion of the
ancient Jews portend or prefigure some greater mysteries to be accomplished in
latter ages, we need no further Testimony than that of the Son of Sirach.
chap. 48. verse. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. He smote the Host of the Assyrians, and
his Angel destroyed them. For Ezechias had done the thing that pleased the
LORD, and was strong in the ways of David his Father, as Isay the Prophet, who
was great and faithful in his vision, had commanded him. in his time the Sun
went backward, and he lengthned the Kings life. He saw by an excellent
spirit, what should come to pass at last, and he comforted them that mourned
in Sion. He showed what should come to pass for ever, and secret things or
ever they came.

71. That blasphemous message, which Sennacherib sent to Hezekiah by Rabshakeh
his General, happened in the beginning of the seventh Sabbaticall year: and
Hezekiah and his peoples delmerance (by Sennacheribs Mem. 2. Branch. 3.
ouer-throw) was accomplished in the year following, which was the year of
Iubile. Thus much ^he lirerall sense and meaning of the Sign which the Propher
Isay gave to Hezekiah, does (to my apprehension) directly import. Isay 37.
verse. 30. This shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such as
grows of it selse; (this was the express Law of the Sabbaticall or seventh
year, as you may read, Leuit. 25. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6) and the second year that
which springs of the same. This is the express Law of the year of Iabile,
which did always immediately follow the seventh Sabbaticall year, as you may
read, Leuit. 25. verse. 11, 12. A Iubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you:
ye shall not sow, neither reap: that which grows of it self in it, nor
gather the Grapes in it of thy Vineyard. For it is the Iubile, it shall be
holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field. How well
or ill, this people at other times did practice this precept, whilst they
lived under Kings which were of the Race of David, I now inquire not. The Lord
at this time had enforced them to make a virtue of necessity, and to rely
mecrely upon his extraordinary blessing upon their Fields and Vineyards
(specially such as were within their walled Cities) without their own labor
or husbandry, either in sowing, planting or reaping; in all which, although
they had bin disposed to break the Law of the Iubile, yet the enemy had
prevented them. Howbeit, at the end of two years, the Lord had promised
deliverance from the present siege and fear of their potent enemy, as it
follows in the Prophet, And in the third year sow ye and reap, and plant
Vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof. This sign Vide leremy 34. verse. 13, 14,
15.
was a sign of a Covenant between God and them: a pledge or earnest, that if
they performed the precept of the Law concerning the Iubile and Sabbaticall
year: he would perform the thing signified by the ceremony of the I^bile, that
is, joyful deliverance from the oppressor. This extraordinary blessing of God
upon their Plants and Vineyards, during the time of the siege, was a sign or
pledge of Gods extraordinary blessings upon the besieged, as well Prince as
people, after the siege was broken up, and the mighty army of the Assyrians
destroyed and scattered. For so it follows in the Prophet. verse. 31, 32. And
the remnant that is escaped of the House of Judah, shall again take root
downward, and bear fruit upward. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
remnant, and they that escape out of Mount Sion: the zeal of the Lord of
Hoasts shall do this.

73. What question soever some curious Chronologer may move concerning the
computation of time, as whether this deliverance did precisely fall out in the
year of Iubile by the Law appointed, or in some year substituted in lieu of
the Iubile before neglected: sure I am, that whatsoever this year of their
deliverance did want of the legal form, was abundantly supplied in the
reality or substance of the year of Iubile. No servant throughout all the Land
of Iewry did ever rejoice more at the approach of any year of Iubile, than all
the Freemen and Masters in Jerusalem, than all the Princes and Nobles of
Judah, than the King himself did rejoice at their deliverance from the yoke of
the Assyrian, whose overthrow the Prophet compares unto the overthrow of
Pharaoh, Mem. 2. Branch. 3.
Vide Isay 11. verse. 16, 17.
Isay 10. verse. 26, 27. And the Lord of Hoasts shall stir up a scourge for
him, according to the slaughter of Midian at the Rock of Oreb, and as his rod
was upon the Sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be taken away from off
thy shoulder, and his yoke from thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed,
because of the anointing. Of this strange deliverance from Sennacherib, the
strange birth of the Emanuel mentioned, Isay 7. 14. and of the Child likewise
mentioned, Isay 8. 1. (whether that were the same or some other) were pledges
or signs unto this people. So was the deliverance of Hezekiah and his people,
a type or shadow of a greater deliverance from a greater enemy in the days of
the Messiah, and all the joy which was conceived upon the destruction of
Sennacheribs Army, was but a picture of that joy which this people was to
expect upon the anoyntment of their Messiah, as may appear from the ninth of
Isay, verse. 3, 4, 5, 6. Thou have multiplied the Nation, and not increased the
joy, (or as the latter English has it, To him thou have increased the joy, or
perhaps it may be rendered, Have thou not increased the joy?) they joy before
thee, according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the
spoil. For thou have broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his
shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian. For every
battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood;
but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. For unto us a Child is
borne, unto us a Son is given, etc.

74. Nothing more usual with Gods Prophets, than to prefixe denunciations of
woe and misery to Prophesies of comfort: and to make the experienced
accomplishment of woes foretold, the infallible auouchers of ensuing joys. To
omit other instances or exemplifications of this observation, elsewhere
handled, the connection of the fortieth Chapter of Isay (whence John's Commission
for baptizing with water was derived) with that doleful prediction, Isay the
thirty ninth, verse. 7. is remarkable. So is the connection of the ninth Chapter
of the same Prophet with the eighth, especially if we set the full point in
the Hebrew where Saint Jeremy found it, and where Arias Montanus in the great
Bible has placed it. For so the first words of the ninth Chapter, according to
our present English, should be the latter end of the eighth Chapter, and
should be rendered thus: There shall be no flight, no hope of escape from the
straights or anguish that besets him. And according to this reading, the former
Prophecy of woe and misery should here end. After which the Prophecy of joy
and comfort does immediately ensue in the beginning of the ninth Chapter, to
this or like effect: The Land of Zabulon, and the Land of Nepthaly were the
first of all the Tribes of Israel, that were found light (and swept away by the
Oppressor) but in latter days the way of the Sea beyond Iordane, Galile of the
Nations shall be glorious. The people that walked in darkness, have seen a
great light: they that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them
has the light shined. I am the bolder to commend this sense to the judicious
and learned, because it sets the Prophetical prediction, and the Evangelical
Narration, Matthew. 4. verse. 15. in an even and parallel course. Whereas the Mem.
2. Branch 3.
ordinary reading and poynting of the beginning of that ninth Chapter of Isay,
is so perplexed, that many good Interpreters by following it, have made the
Evangelist (for ought that I can see) to fall foul upon the Prophet, and the
historical event, (if this prediction were historically verified in Hezekias
days) to cross the Evangelical mystery related by St. Matthew. Unto both
these inconveniences, but especially unto this latter, another ouer-sight or
non-obseruance, (not so much in point of Grammar, as of History or Geography)
have given great occasion. For it is commonly received, though without all
ground, yea contrary to the ground of sacred History, that Sennacheribs army
was destroyed by the Angel, near unto Jerusalem. But could we as clearly
gather where Sennacheribs army was destroyed, as we can clearly prove that it
was not destroyed about Jerusalem: the fulfilling of this Prophecy would be
as perspicuous for the manner or circumstance, as it is remarkable for
substance. But the search of the place where Sennacheribs army was destroyed,
we leave to the Schools. For the Prophecy it self [The Land of Zabulon, and
the Land of Nepthaly, etc.] whether it were not at all verified by any real
event, until it was accomplished by our Saviors transmigration from Judea
into Galile, or whether it were ratified by some historical event in Hezekias
his days, as by the manner of Sennacheribs overthrow, certainly the Prophets
special intent and purpose was to give posterity notice, that as the Land of
Zabulon, of Nepthaly, the way of the Sea, etc. were first captiuated by the
Assyrian, so they should be the first spectators of that great victory, which
the Angel of God, the great Angel of the Covenant, was to have over those
powers of darkness, which the Assyrian tyranny did but fore-shaddow. And this
was the reason why our Savior upon John's imprisonment, leaving Judea, went
into Galilee, because his Sovereignty over Satan was to be manifested, and the
Kingdom of Heaven first proclaimed and established there. And thus much of the
former testimony, Isay 35. whereto our Savior in this Answer refers John,
and of the signs and circumstances of the time, wherein the Prophecy was
first conceived, or of the times immediately ensuing.

75. The second testimony whereto this Answer refers John, and which does
well illustrate and ratify our observations upon the former, is Isay 61. verse.
1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me,
to preach good tidings unto the meek. I must here give you notice, that
whereas our English reads, To preach glad tidings unto the meek or poor, the
phrase in the Original is the selfsame with this here in my Text. Only the
Verb in the Original is the Active, because the Prophet fore-tels the Office
of CHRIST: but in the Evangelist, who shows the effects or fruits of Christ's
Office, it must needs be as you will easily conceive, a passive. Wherefore I
must dissent as well from our English as from our Latin Translations, in the
translation of the Hebrew in the Prophet, as I did before in the translation of
the Greek here in the Evangelist. The vulgar Latin having rightly translated
the Greek here in my Text, [pauperes euangelizantur,] does vary from it Mem.
2. Branch 3.
self and from the truth in the interpretation of the Prophet. For so he
renders it, as our English does, [Misit me euangelizare pauperibus,] He sent me
to preach unto the poor: whereas if this translation had been constant to it
self, it should have been, [misit me euangelizare, or euangelizatum
pauperes,] he has ^ent me to Euangelize the poor in spirit. And to
Euangelize them, is as much as to imprint the Gospel or Kingdom of Grace in
their hearts. And this interpretation of the Prophet may be necessarily
inferred from the circumstances of the Prophetical Text it self, by the same
Arguments which before were used for interpreting the Evangelists. To preach
the Gospel unto the poor, is only to make them a promise of the Kingdom of
Grace; which cannot be the true or full meaning of the Prophet in this place:
for this first clause, [misit me euangelizatum pauperes,] is the general root
wherein all the Clauses following are contained, as branches. Now this Anointed
of the Lord here spoken of, did not only promise to bind up the
brokenhearted, but did bind them up. He did not only promise liberty to the
Captives, or the opening of the prisons to such as were shut up; but did set
both at liberty. As we say, Christ's been dicere is been facere: so Christ's
Proclamation of liberty to the Captives in this place, was their actual
freedom or manumission. The enemies yoke was to dissolve and break, upon this
anoyntments pouring out, as the wax melts before the fire. So much the
Prophetical phrase in the Original, chap. 10. verse. 27. does import. In like
manner, when it is said, that he did [euangelizare pauperes,] euangelize the
poor; it is not only meant, that he did preach the Gospel or glad tidings
unto them, but made them actual partakers of that Spirit of joy and gladness,
wherewith God, even his God had anointed him above his fellows. This
often-mentioned Euangelization of the poor, and meek in spirit, is as much as
that which follows, verse. 3. To give beauty for Ashes, and the oil of joy
for mourning. Now, if you call to mind what was before delivered, That our
Savior was anointed to his Prophetical and Kingly Office at his baptism, by
the holy Ghost descending upon him in the shape of a Dove; and that John, upon
the first hearing of the Cities name where he dwelt, did know him to be that
Rod or Branch of Iesse, on whom the Prophet Isay, chap. 11. ver. 1, 2. had
foretold, the Spirit of the Lord should rest: Our Saviors answer to John is
as full and satisfactory, as the heart of John, or any man living could desire;
so apposite and fitting, as nothing but the wisdom of God could devise. The
sum of his answer is in effect this; Go show John again that the Spirit of
the Lord, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of might and
counsel, which Isay foretold should rest upon the Rod and Branch of Iesse,
and which John saw descend, and abide upon me in the shape or likeness of a
Dove at my baptism, is not departed from me, it is upon me still. The ointment
wherewith the Spirit anointed me, was not given me for mine own use; nor is it
spent or consumed, although it powerfully diffuseth it self to all about me,
that are not offended with me. By it the poor are made rich, even as rich as
Kings, instated in the Mem. 2. Branch 3.
Kingdom of grace and of the Gospel, and anointed heirs unto the Kingdom of
Glory. By it every broken and contrite heart is healed: such as were shut up,
are set at liberty; such as were bound, are loosed; by it the yoke of the
oppressor is dissolved. Now, the end of all this change or alteration is, as
the Prophet Isay concludes, That they might be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Isaiab
61. verse. 3. The Rod, the Branch of Iesse, the Righteous Branch of David; were
the known glorious titles of the Messiah or Son of David: and it was his
glory, whilst he lived on earth, to make others like himself, trees or
plants of righteousness. The Prophets continuation of this Allegory in
comparing men to trees, even in those places wherein the glory of Christ's
Kingdom is most plainly, though must elegantly foreshaddowed, argues the sum
of all the wonders which he foretold should be wrought in the wilderness, and
which he has represented in such variety of Poetical pictures to be this;
That the dry and barren places of Judea wherein John baptized and preached
repentance, as also the vast and barren places about the borders of Zabulon and
Napthaly, which heretofore had scarce yielded any food or nutriment for ^ame
beasts or cattle, much less any fit habitation or resort for men, should in
the days of the Messiah, become the most fertile and fruitful Nursery of such
plants and grafts, as God had prepared for the celestial Paradise. These trees
of righteousness whereof the Prophet speaks, were first planted in the
wilderness wherein our Savior preached the Gospel of the Kingdom, and
wrought miracles. They were instated in the Kingdom of Heaven, (as Feoffees in
trust for the founding of some new Society or Corporation,) and made supporters
or pillars of that Church militant, which hereafter shall become Triumphant.

76. That which seals this admirable consonancy between the Prophetical
predictions and these Evangelical events or experiments, is the circumstance
or signs of the time wherein these miracles mentioned in my Text were wrought,
and wherein this message was sent unto John. This is intimated, when it is
said, Isa. 61. 2.
He was sent to preach liberty to the Captives, and to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord. These are express Characters of the year of Iubile: and
the year of Iubile is by interpretation, as much as the year of joy or
rejoicing; declared by the sound of Trumpets. Now, John (as you heard before)
began to lift up his voice like a Trumpet in the wilderness in the beginning of
September, which was every year to the Jews the feast of trumpets. Now, this
seast of Trumpets, wherein John began to cry in the wilderness, was the later
end of the seventh Sabbaticall year. Our Savior, as you heard before was
baptized upon the Feast of the Atonement, which was the beginning of the year
of Iubile, wherein the Iubile was to be proclaimed with Trumpet. He was at the
time of his baptism, as you heard before out of S. Luke, about thirty years
of age: and an exquisite Reusnerus Naclantus.
Chronologer has well calculated, that the day wherein he was baptized, was
the beginning of the thirtieth year of Iubile, after this peoples entrance
into the Land of promise. So that every year of our Mem. 2. Branch 3.
Saviors private life before he was declared unto Israel, was equivalent to
the accomplishment of a Iubile, which is for fifty years; and the people
might expect of him now coming to thirty years of age, whatsoever had bin
fore-shaddowed in all the years of Iubile or Joy, for fifteen hundred years
from this peoples entrance into the Land of promise. Now in this thirtieth
year of the Legal Iubile, our Savior began to preach the Gospel, that is,
the joyful tidings of the Kingdom, and the liberty of the Sons of God: and in
truth and substance to accomplish that, which was prefigured by the Legal
Iubile. All the privileges or matters of rejoicing which the Legal Iubile did
afford, are set down at large, Leuiti^. 25. verse. 9, 10. On the tenth day of
the seventh month, in the day of Atonement, shall ye make the Trumpet sound
throughout all your Land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim
liberty throughout all the Land unto all the inhabitants thereof. It shall be a
Iubile unto you, and ye shall return every man to his possession, and ye
shall return every man to his Family. And verse. 39, 40, 41. If thy brother
that dwells by thee, be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee, thou shall not
compel him to serve as a bond servant, but as an hired servant, and as a
soiourner he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee to the year of Iubile.
And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, and
shall return unto his own Family, and unto the possession of his Fathers
shall he return.

77. If you desire to know the Evangelical mysteries prefigured by these
Legal privileges of the Iubile or fiftieth year; and the manner how all
these prefigurations were fulfilled by our Savior, at the time when he sent
this answer unto John: you must consider, that no servant throughout the Land
of Iewrie, whether an hired servant of the seed of Abraham, or a bondman of
the Nations, was ever in so great a bondage or hard servitude unto his master,
as all the sons of Abraham, yea of Adam, were unto Satan. This acceptable
year of the Lord, in number the thirtieth Legal Iubile, being first
proclaimed by John, afterward by a voice from heaven at our Saviors baptism,
and lastly by our Savior himself after John's imprisonment, was the time
appointed by God for the manumission or setting free of his people, and all
mankind from the bondage and servitude to Satan. Nor did our Savior only
proclaim this acceptable year of the Lord, but did by deed and fact declare
himself to be that Lord which had given the Law of Iubile unto the Jews, and
was now come in person to put the true intent and full meaning of it in
execution, which was to set free all such as did hearken unto his voice, and
sought to be eased from their slavery and thraldom. Of this present freedom
or manumission, even these bodily miraculous Cures here mentioned in my Text,
were undoubted effects, and so many ocular or sensible demonstrations. All
these defects or imperfections of body, as blindness, lamenesse, deafness,
dumbness, crookedness, and the like, were as the bonds and chains of Satan.
Thus much is evidently proved by our Saviors Argument against the Ruler of the
Synagogue, which was displeased because our Savior had healed a poor woman
upon the Sabbath day, whose body was bowed together. Mem. 2. Branch 3.
Thou hypocrite, (says our Savior) does not each one of you on the Sabbath
day loose his Ox or his Ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering?
Luke 13. verse. 15. And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom
Satan has bound, lo these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the
Sabbath day? verse. 16. Saint Peter's words are more general; for he says, He
healed all that were oppressed of the devil, Act. 10. v. 38. But the special
document and the fullest assurance of this present freedom or manumission by
our Savior, was the often-mentioned Euangelization of the poor in spirit,
that is, their participation of that Oil of gladness, wherewith he was
anointed above his Fellows or adherents. This includes as well [terminum ad
quem,] as [terminum a quo;] that is, it includes not only a manumission or
deliverance from the servitude of Satan, but withal an accomplishment or
fulfilling of that, which was prefigured in the second privilege of the Legal
Iubile: and this privilege was, that every man might return unto his
possession, or to the inheritance of his Fathers, although he had formerly
pawned or mortgaged it. Now, Paradise, you know, was the possession which all
of us lost in our first Parents, and from entering into it we were all
excluded, so long as we continued the servants of sin and Satan. And unto
this possession did the Woman's Seed or second Adam, the Anointed of the Lord,
whereof the Prophet Isay speaks, Chap. 61. actually restore the poor in
spirit, that lived and conuersed with him. This restoration or returning to
the possession or inheritance of their first parents, was first proclaimed, and
the possession it self in part first given or bequeathed to his Disciples, a
little before John sent unto our Savior this message, whereto my Text
contains the answer. The Proclamation was our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount.

78. It is a point worth your observation, that our Savior begins that
Sermon, (which as we said before, was the fundamental Charter of the Kingdom
of God, or Evangelical Law) from the beginning of the forecited 61. Chapter
of Isay. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, says the Prophet, therefore he
has anointed me to euangelize the poor, or meek in spirit. He opened his
mouth, says the Evangelist, Matthew. 5. verse. 3. that is, after long silence and
expectation, he began to proclaim the acceptable year, Blessed are the poor
in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus our Savior expressed the
meaning of this Phrase in my Text, [pa^peres euangelizantur:] for the poor in
spirit are therefore blessed, because instated in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
instated they were in the Kingdom of Heaven, by being euangelized. Another
part of his Embassage or effect of his anoyntment, was to comfort all that
mourn, to give to them that mourn in Sion, beauty for Ashes, and the oil of
joy for sorrow. Esaias 61. The second Branch of his Embassage or Proclamation
was, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Matthew. 5. verse.
4. Saint Luke, Chap. 6. adds, (which is not expressed in Saint Matthew) that
at the same time, he pronounced a woe unto the rich, a woe unto the full, a woe
unto such as laughed, (to wit, in an unseasonable time, when God had called to
fasting and mourning) and a woe unto the vainglorious or men-pleasers. v. 24,
25, 26. Mem. 2. Branch. 3.
As well the woes as the blessings here solemnly pronounced, were expressly
foretold by the Prophet Isay, chap. 61. verse. 2. So it is said, That the Lord
had sent him to proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD, and the day of
vengeance of our God. This powerful denunciation of woe and blessing was that
Fan, whereof John Baptist speaks, Matt. 3. verse. 12. His Fan is in his
hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his Wheat into his
Garner: but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. Both our Saviors
Sermon, and John Baptists description of his Fan, as also that of Malachy 3.
verse. 2, 3, 4. are but exegeticall expressions of that fundamental Prophecy,
Isay 35. verse. 4. wherein it is employed, that when GOD should come to save his
people, he should come as well [Deus vltor] as [Deus remunerator] as well God
the Revenger, as God the Rewarder. But did our Savior give any document of
this his power at the uttering of this Sermon? It came to pass, says the
Evangelist, when Jesus had ended these sayings (of woe and blessing, of
vengeance and recompense) the people were astonished at his doctrine. For he
taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes. Matthew. 7. verse.
^8, 29. Thus when our Savior expounded the for (...) Prophecy, Isay 61. verse.
1. in the Synagogue at Nazareth, All bare him witness, and wondered at the
gracious words, which proceeded out of his mouth.

79. The precise time of the year or month wherein our Savior made this
Sermon, or returned this answer here in my Text unto John, or whether it were
returned before he preached the acceptable year of the LORD in Nazareth,
cannot so easily be gathered from the circumstances of the Evangelist: but as
all Interpreters (I think) agree, this Answer was given within the compass of
that year wherein our Savior was baptized. Now, this was the last Legal
Iubile which this people were to enjoy, and the first beginning of the
Evangelical Iubile, which was to continue here on earth until the Worlds end,
to be fully accomplished in the World to come. So that this great mystery of
our eternal Rest and Joy in heaven, had first a shadow in the Law, to wit,
the Legal Iubile. Secondly, a Picture in the Prophet Isay, or in the History
of Hezekias, and his miraculous delivery from the Assynians. Thirdly, a live
body in the Gospel or days of the Messiah, euery-way answerable to the
picture drawn by the Prophet. The first conception of this live body, or
Evangelical Iubile, was from the day of our Saviors Baptism: and the birth
of it, from the delivery of our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount. Fourthly, the
accomplishment, full growth or perfection of this live body, is to be expected
only in the life to come, where our Joy, our Rest and Peace, shall be for
measure boundless, and for term endless. Now, according to these several
degrees of shadow, of picture, of life, and growth, one and the same
Scripture, even according to its native and literal sense, may be often
verified and fulfilled. All the former Prophesies likewise concerning the
planting of the Wilderness with pleasant Trees, though actually fulfilled,
according to the importance of the parabolicall or Emblematicall sense in that
year of Iubile, which Jesus of Nazareth did proclaim, shall not be finally
accomplished, until the beginning of Mem. 2. Branch 3.
that Iubile which shall have no end. Thus much is specified, Isay 60. verse.
20, 21, 22. Thy S^^ne shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon
withdraw it self: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the
days of thy mourning shall be ended; Thy people shall be all righteous: they
shall inherit the Land for^euer, the Branch of my planting, the works of my
hands, Netser.
that I may be glorified. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small
one a strong Nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time. This last verse,
though partly fulfilled in the conversion of whole Nations by our Saviors
Apostles and Disciples, made Citizens of the new Jerusalem descending from
Heaven at our Saviors Baptism, shall not be accomplished, until these Trees
of Righteousness be transplanted into the Heaven of Heavens, and set there by
the Tree of Life. Then shall the least sprig that has been truly ingraffed
into the stock of Jacob, the meanest ^^^ne of Abraham by faith, become more
fruitful in himself, than Abraham was in his posterity, and a greater King
and Lord of more than David or Solomon in their prime. Thus much is included in
that saying of our Savior, Mark 10. verse. 29, 30. There is no man that has
left house, or Brethren or Sisters, or Father or Mother, or Wife or Children,
or Lands for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now
in this time, houses, and brethren and sisters, and mothers and children, and
lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life. If the least
of them that forsake all for Christ's sake, grow in this life into an hundred,
how great or strong a Nation every small one that is not in this life offended
in him, shall, after this life ended, become, is inexpressible. But we believe
our Savior, that the least and smallest of such as forsake all for him and the
Gospel, shall have life eternal. And we believe Gods Word, that life
eternal is more than ten thousand lives temporal, though a thousand lives
of a man's own, be much more worth than a million of other men's lives, whereof
we might hope to be Lords and Disposers.

80. That other Prophecy likewise before mentioned, Isay 35. verse. 4. though
literally verified at Gods first coming into the World to be made man, and
then punctually fulfilled, when JESUS of Nazareth, GOD and MAN, came to John's
Baptism, is to be finally accomplished, when the same Jesus shall come to
judge the quick and the dead. Then shall he manifest himself to be God the
Auenger, and God the Recompencer, by pronouncing that Sentence from which there
shall be no appeal; Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The former part
of this Sentence shall proceed from him, as he is God the Rewarder of all such
as diligently seek him: The latter part of this Sentence, Go ye cursed, etc.
proceeds from him as he is God the Auenger. In that accomplishment of days,
(which shall utterly abolish all night) and not before, shall that other part of
the same Prophecy, Isay 35. verse. 5, 6. be likewise finally accomplished:
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped, etc. The eyes of many blind were opened at the time when this
Answer was given, yet not the Mem. 2. Branch. 3.
eyes of all the blind men then living, which were not offended in Him, but
only the eyes of all the blind throughout Judea and neighbour-Regions, that
came unto him without offense. At his second coming, the eyes of all, that
after perpetual darkness have been finally shut up by death, shall be
opened to see the glory of God; so opened to see it, without offense, as they
shall never be shut again, never be deprived of this beautiful vision. In
that day shall all the halt and lame, that have not bin offended in him, e^^n
such as never enjoyed the use of limbs from their coming out of the womb,
unto their going unto their gra^e, become more strong and agile than the Heart,
and m^re swift and nimble than the Roe. Then shall the ears and tongues of all
that have been borne deaf and dumb, be so unstopped and unloosed, as upon
the first opening they shall be enabled to hold consort with the Quire of
Angels, to descant upon those hidden mysteries and Prophetique Songs, about
whose literal sense or plain Grammatical meaning, there has been much
discord amongst greatest Critics, and amongst Schoolmen continual iarres.

This is all which I have at this time to say concerning the three particular
Branches proposed in the beginning of the second general Observation, which
was thus: What satisfaction this answer of our Savior [The blind receive their
sight, etc.] could give to John or his Disciples, or to any that doubted
whether Jesus of Nazareth was He that was to come. Somewhat more is to be said
concerning the Conclusion; Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in
me.

MATTHEW. 11. VERSE. 6. Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.
THe universality of the blessedness here promised, may partly be gathered by
this Induction, as you heard before: The blind are happy, the lame are happy,
the Lepers are happy, the deaf and dead are happy: therefore all are, or at
least, there is none but might be happy, so they would not be offended in me.
But the same conclusion, Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in
me, is more immediately contained in the last clause of the fifth verse,
[Pauperes euangelizantur,] and may be inferred by way of Syllogism, thus:
Every one that is euangelized, is blessed: but every one that is not offended
in me, is euangelized: Ergo, Every one that is not offended in me, is
blessed. To be euangelized, that is, to have the power and virtue of the Gospel
imprinted upon their souls, is the highest degree of happiness, that in this
life can be expected. [Beatum esse inest Euangelizato per se (...)] All are so
far happy in this life, as they are Euangelizati, and no further: so that of
the mayor proposition there is no question. The minor, [Euery one, that is not
offended in Christ, is Euangelizatus] is thus inferred: To be poor in spirit,
and not to be offended in Christ, are terms, as Logicians speak,
reciprocal: whosoever is poor in spirit, is not apt to The Conclusion.
be offended in Christ; and whosoever is not apt to be offended in Christ, is
poor in spirit. And again, none that are truly poor in spirit, are apt to
take offense at Christ; and, none that are apt to take offense at Christ, are
poor in spirit. So that, if the poor in spirit be euangelized, then all that
are not offended in Christ, are euangelized, and all are so far euangelized,
as they are not offended in him. Romans 1. verse. 16.
For [Euangelium Christi, est potentia Dei ad salute^,] The Gospel of Christ is
the power of God unto Salvation, unto all such as being invited, do come to
Christ, without putting stumbling blocks or matter of offense before their own
feet. Whether, to be poor in spirit, or not to be offended in Christ, is
first in order of time or nature, were not so profitable to dispute. It
suffices us to know, that Christ was sent to anoint the poor in spirit with
the oil of gladness, [ex officio] and that none are poor in spirit, but such
as are not offended in him. Whence, the points to be inquired after, are but
two. The first, What it is to be offended in Christ. The second, Which be the
special offenses that are to be avoided.

82. [Whosoeuer is not offended.] The word in the What it is to be offended in
Christ.
original signifies a stumbling-blocke, or some hard body against which
another may so strike or dash, as it may hurt it self, or be hindered in its
motion or progress. The Latin [offendo,] whence our English is derived
(according to its prime and natural signification) imports as much as the
Greek does. For, it is a compound of the old Verb [fendo,] now almost out of
use amongst the Latins, which signifies as much, as to touch or smite: whence
the Latin [defendere] is as much as to ward or bear off. This use of the
word [defend,] is common in our English. So we call him a Master of Defense,
that can teach others to ward off blows or strokes, or other annoyances, that
by darting or hurling may be intended against them. And amongst Mariners, to
send off, is as much as to prevent or hinder one ship from grating and falling
foul upon another. And if we would follow the Latins as strictly in the
proper use of the word [offendere,] as we do in the use of the single Verb
[fendo] or of its compound, [defendo,] we should say, one ship offends
another, when one ship falls foul upon another: For so a Latinist would
express the English [Nauis in nauim offendit:] for, offendere, is as much as
impingere, to hit or dash against. In this propriety, the Latin [offendere] is
used, Psalm. 91. 12. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash
thy foot against a stone. [Ne offendas in lapidem, etc.] Now, because to offend
or dash against hard bodies, is displeasant and grievous unto sense; Every
thing is hence said to offend us, that is displeasant and grievous unto us, or
that hinders us in the prosecution of our will, delights, or pleasures. Hence
they are said in this secondary sense to be offended in Christ, that were
displeased with his actions, person, or doctrine. The issue or consequence of
this mutual offense taken by men at CHRIST, or by GOD at men, which contemn
and spurn at his admonitions, is excellently expressed by the Prophet Esaias,
chap. 8. verse. 13, 14, 15. Sanctify the LORD of Hoasts himself, and let him
be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a Sanctuary to
those that sanctify his name, and dread his power; but for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offenses to both the houses of Israel, for a gin
and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall
stamble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken; namely, as many
of both the houses of Israel, as did not sanctify his name, or dread his
power. When he says, he shall be for a stone of stumbling, this imports the
issue and consequence, not the end why this stone was laid in Sion. For if the
reuolting Jews themselves, did not therefore stumble, that they might fall.
Romans 11. 11. The end or reason why this stone was laid in Sion, was not that
they might either stumble or fall; but many of them have stumbled and fallen,
many of them have bin broken and ensnared; but they are broken and ensnared,
because they stumbled and took offense, where none was given: and all this the
Prophet did foretell to prevent a scandal or offense, which the weak in faith,
or the Heathen, which had not heard of Christ, would have taken, unless the
lamentable event of the Jews, which spurned and kicked at this stone, had bin
distinctly foretold, and as it were painted out by the Prophet. The meaning is,
as if he had said; I see you will kick or spurn at this precious stone or
foundation, which God has promised to lay in Sion: and seeing you will not be
forewarned, take your pastime: yet know withal, that this your sporting with,
or spurning of this stone, which your master builders will reject, as being
too base and unsightly in their eyes; will prove but as the spurning of some
wanton creature at the spring, or ginne, which they easily may remove, but
being removed, it will The Conclusion.
bring the snare or trappe upon them, which they shall not be able to remove or
escape. Our Savior Christ in his humiliation was as the spring or ginne, at
which the Jews spurned: but is since grown into the corner stone, and shall
become as the trappe, and fall to crush and bruise all such, as spurned at or
contemned him in the days of his humility, or at this day make a scorn at
such humility as he taught. The Prophets speeches in this and like places,
wherein he foretells what shall after happen in such a manner, as he may
seem to inuit them unto that which afterward they bring upon themselves, is
but like that in the Poet;

Rode caper vitem; sed dum tu stabis adaras, In tua quod spargi cornua possit,
erit.

But the best Comment that is or can be made upon the Prophets words, is made
by our Savior, Matthew. 21. verse. 42, 43, 44. Did you never read in the
Scriptures, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head
of the corner? This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.
Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the fruit thereof. And whosoever shall fall
upon this stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will
grind him to powder. These chief Priests and Pharisees, to whom our Savior
propounds this question, were the master builders in Jerusalem; but were so
far from sanctifying the Lord of Hosts, and so far from making him their
fear, their dread, and Sanctuary, as the Prophet advised them; that they kick
and spurn at him in the days of his humiliation, as unfit to have any place
in The Conclusion.
their visible Temple. But shortly after he uttered this Parable, he grew into
so high and great a place in the true Temple of God, that he has groun'd the
material Temple, and the whole City of Hierufalem it self to dust and powder
by falling upon them: although he did no otherwise fall upon them, than by
suffering his Fathers wrath and displeasure (which he had still kept off) to
fall upon them that did spurn or were thus deeply offended at him. The
several fates or final issues of every ones ways, that have heard of Christ
or bin baptized in him, is fore-pictured in the state or issue of these Jews,
to whom he was first revealed.

83. Every one is so much more happy, as he is less apt to be offended in
him; they most unhappy, that are most offended in him. To be offended in
Christ all they are said, and here intended, which being invited to come unto
him, or being on their way, are, upon whatsoever occasions or temptations, led
another way; or so stumble and fall in the way undertaken by them, that they
have no heart to go forward: but either directly retire, or stay at the place
where they stumbled or fell. Whatsoever hinders any man from coming to
Christ, or from embracing the Gospel, is an offense, not given, but taken.
Though all be offended in him that have been invited Three originalls of
dislike or offense taken against Christ by the jews.
and come not to him; yet the Jews are more properly said to be offended in
him, than the heathen, which had not sought after him. The offenses which the
Jews took, were for the most part, either against his Country, or against
his parentage, or against his doctrine. This last offense, in respect of these
days, is the most dangerous, and that wherein we modern Christians may
trespass so much more hainously, than the Jews did; as they did more
grievously offend than the Heathens, in being so deeply offended at their
Messiah, of whom they had heard, and after whom they had sought.

84. The most, and even the best sort of the Jews, were apt to take offense at
our Saviors supposed Country. Thus when Philip came and told Nathaniel, John
1. v. 45, 46.
We have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did write, Jesus
of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph: Nathaniel said unto him, Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth? Nathaniel in speaking this, spoke as for the present he
thought. This speech (it seems) was Vox populi, in those days. But our
Savior had a more charitable opinion of Nathaniel, than Nathaniel had of his
Country or place of dwelling. For not withstanding this his hard conceit of
Nazareth, our Savior commends him for a true Israelite, and one, in whom
there was no guile. The common offense was quickly removed out of so harmless
and humble a heart. Upon a little conference with our Savior, he acknowledges
him for that stone elect and precious, which God had promised to lay in Sion.
Rabbi, says he, thou art the Son of God, the King of Israel. Nathaniel,
though in part offended with the place of our Saviors present habitation, was
yet truly happy, in that he was not so far offended with it, as to refuse at
Philips inuitation to come and see whether any good thing could come out of it
or no. His preiudicate opinion of Nazareth was less than Naaman's was of
Iordane: his success in hearkening to The Conclusion.
Philip and repayring to Jesus of Nazareth, much happier than Naaman's was in
hearkening to the Prophet Elisha, and his washing in Iordane. So useful is
that rule, which since has bin commended unto us by our Apostle Saint Paul;
Try all things, and retain that which is best. But what is best we cannot know
without trial or comparison of particulars.

85. The same prejudice which Nathanael had of Nazareth, the people, mentioned
Ioh. 7. verse. 40. had of Galile, the Country or Province, whereof Nazareth was
a poor City or Town: But their prejudice was much more deeply rooted, than
Nathanaels was; their offense at our Savior, and the prejudice they had of
Galile, was greater, and they by it more unhappy. After our Savior had made
that Proclamation in the Feast of Tabernacles, whereof you heard before; If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me, (as the
Scripture has said) out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water. Ioh.
7. 37. Many of the people when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is
the Prophet: others said, This is the Christ: but some said, Shall Christ come
out of Galile? has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the seed of
David, and out of the Town of Bethleem, where David was? So there was a
division among the people because of him, and some of them would have taken
him. Thus you see how apt preiudicate opinion is to pick quarrels with the
truth, and to pretend insoluble contradictions between Scripture and
Scripture, or between it and the Prophets opinions or Interpretations of it:
betwixt which there is an admirable and apparent consonancy, to such as will
with patience and impartially The Conclusion.
confer them. It is most true which this people alleged, that the Christ
and Messiah was to come out of Bethleem, the City of David, but might he not
therefore come out of Galile? out of Nazareth? [Distinguant tempora, and
concordant Scripturae:] one Prophet foretells that the Ruler of Gods people
should go out of Bethleem, a place of plenty, a fruitful soil, and by
interpretation, the house of bread. This was meant of his birth and first
coming into the world; and that Jesus of Nazareth (which now came out of
Galile) did first come into the world out of Bethleem, the City of David, this
people had too good proof, so they would have but looked back to the time of
their own births or infancy, or have examined the records or history of
thirty years fore-passed. For what was it that moved Herod to slay all the
Infants about Bethleem, but that he hoped among them to have slain the
expected Son of David, the hope of Israel? Another Prophet fore-telleth as
distinctly and plainly, that this same Son of David should grow up, as a tender
plant out of a dry ground, and that many should be offended in him (as this
people now was) for no other reason, than that he was not so beautiful or
glorious, as they expected their Messiah should be. Isay 53. v. 3. The same
Prophet elsewhere specifieth the Towns name, wherein this Branch of David was
to grow, as you heard before out of the eleventh of Isay.

86. But these Scriptures were aenigmaticall or obscure; and how should the
people know their meaning, without the interpretation of the present visible
Church, that is, of the Highpriests, the Scribes, and Pharisees? This was the
plea of the visible Church in The Conclusion.
those days, and this peoples reliance upon their visible Church or chief
Rulers of Jerusalem (after such a manner in part, as the Romanists now do upon
the Church of Rome, that is, upon the Pope and his Cardinals) was the beginning
or root of the Jews Apostasy from Christ. That which the Romanist would
persuade us to be the Rock of our salvation, and rule of our faith in Christ,
was to those Jews the only rock of offense; the line of desolation, as the
Prophets call it, to Jerusalem. That very objection which the people in the
seventh of John did make, was taught them by the Scribes and Pharisees, the then
visible or representative Church. The prejudice which these great Rabbis had
of Galile, and the offense which they took at our Savior, was so deeply
rooted in their hearts, that they took it as a proof sufficient to condemn
him for a false and counterfeit Prophet, because he avouched himself to be a
true Prophet, being, as they imagined, a Galilaean. For when Nicodemus had
severely taxed their partiality, and unwarrantable proceeding against him; Does
our Law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does? They
answered, and said unto him, Art thou also of Galile? Search and look: for out
of Galile arises no Prophet. Ioh. 7. v. 51, 52. The truth, and because the
truth, the true Church of God, was visible and conspicuous in Nicodemus, or at
least in such as the high priest, the Scribes and Pharisees, the then visible
Church, did excommunicate and persecute as seducers, or men seduced by our
Savior. The Scribes and Pharisees were the visible Church in the selfsame
sense, as the Romanists now take it; yet limbs of Antichrist, true types and
The Conclusion.
shadows of these sons of Belial, with whom we have to deal, who after
many warnings and evident conuictions of blasphemous intemperancy, are not yet
ashamed to bring those arguments for the establishing the Authority of their
present Church, which, if they had any truth in them, would justify the
Scribes and Pharisees, in condemning our Savior for a false Prophet, a seducer,
or blasphemer; yea, would prove Judas to be a better Martyr than any their
Church can brag of, for betraying him.

87. Certainly, the men of Nazareth were not offended with our Savior, either
for his Country in general or particular, and yet most unhappy men, in that
they were upon other occasions deeply offended with him, when he came in love
to visit them, and proffered the glorious light of the Gospel unto them. He
came to Nazareth where he had bin brought up, and as his custom was, he went
into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. And there was
delivered unto him the Book of the Prophet Isaias; and when he had opened the
book, he found the place where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has
sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives,
and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,
to preach the aceptable year of the Lord. Luke 4. verse. 16, 17, 18, 19. Never
did any Preacher in the World choose a fitter Text, or better suting with time
and place, than this, which by divine providence offered it self unto our
Savior at the first opening of the Book; and the application was as pithy, as
the Text was plain and The conclusion.
pregnant: And he began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled
in your ears. Luke 4. 21. Against this Doctrine or exposition, no exception
was taken at the first, but on the contrary, (as the Evangelist says) All bare
him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his
mouth. ver. 22. What was it then that did finally offend them? Nothing besides
their own squeamish, nice, and womannish fancy. They were taken with a spice
of the selfsame disease, whereof our Romish-Catholique Dames are sick even
unto death; to whom any stinking weed or loathsome drugge, raked out of the
sink or puddle of tradition, so it be brought by a Quack-saluer or
Mountebanke from beyond the Seas, relisheth much better than the sweetest
flowers that grow either in the Prophetical or Evangelical Herbary; better
than the bread and water of Life it self, daily proffered unto them by the
native and allowed Physicians of their souls; Men as able to instruct their
foreign instructers in any good learning, especially in the glad tidings of
the Gospel, as they are to instruct the rude and ignorant, in matters of
treason and villainy. Out of this enchanted humor, or bewitched fancy, the
Inhabitants of Nazareth, after they had heard our Savior for a while with
admiraration, began to say, Is not this Joseph's Son? Or, as Saint Matthew
relates it, Whence has this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not
this the Carpenters son? Is not his Mother called Mary? and his Brethren
James, and Ioses, and Simon, and Judas? and his Sisters, are not they all with
us? Whence then has this man all these things? and they were offended in him.
The Conclusion.
Matthew 13. verse. 54, 55, 56, 57. This offense they bewray in words, but Saint
Luke intimates another Original of their offense, deeplier rooted in their
hearts, and which upon no provocation, but rather upon our Saviors intended
prevention, did draw them unto most desperate practices. The original of this
offense, was our Saviors refusal to work such miracles amongst them, as they
expected, albeit for this refusal he brought them a ruled case, which should
have taught them patience and humility; but as they were affected, it filled
their hearts with rage and cruelty. Luke 4. verse. 23, 24, 25, 26. 27.
And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this Proverb, Physician,
heal thy self: Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in
thy Country. But I tell you of a truth, many Widows were in Israel in the
days of Elias, when the Heaven was shut up three years and six months; when
great famine was thorow-out all the Land: but unto none of them was Elias sent,
save unto Sarepta, a City of Sidon, unto a woman that was a Widow. And many
Lepers were in Israel, in the time of Elizeus the Prophet; and none of them was
cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. The implication was, that even the
honestly-minded or well-disposed Heathen were nearer to the Kingdom of God,
than the stubborn and selfe-willed Jew, that boasted in being Abraham's seed,
and the expected Messiah Countryman. Their apprehension of this his meaning,
and application of his words unto themselves, did work a general distaste of
his person and doctrine. All they in the Synagogue, when they heard these
things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the City,
and The Conclusion.
led him unto the brow of the Hill, (whereon their City was built) that they
might cast him down headlong.

88. They are principally offended with him, because he would not do such
miracles as they expected: and he is therefore unwilling to do any miracles
amongst them, because they were already offended in him. It is a remarkable
censure which Saint Mark gives of this their untoward disposition: He could
do no mighty work there, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick
folk, and healed them. Mark 6. verse. 5, 6. Certainly those sick folks were
not offended in him, otherwise he had not healed them. He did not many
miracles there, says Saint Matthew, chap. 13. verse. 58. The reason given by
St. Matthew, why he did not, and by Saint Mark, why he could not do many
mighty works there, was one and the same, avouched in the same terms by both
these Evangelists, and it was his Auditors unbelief, or that deep offense
which they had causelessly taken at him. But happily ye will say, The greater
their unbelief was, the more need they had of his mighty works to make them
believe: and what work can we imagine so mighty, that Christ, who was truly
God, could not really effect, so he were willing? And willing, it seems he
was, to have made his Contrymen, and Neighbors of Nazareth, true believers:
he read his Commission and Charter of foundation, for establishing the
Kingdom of Heaven here on earth, in their audience. And it is a truth
unquestionable, that CHRIST as now, so then was truly GOD, and continued the
same, blessed for ever: and unto The conclusion.
God nothing is, nothing can be impossible. All this is most true in respect of
his power; but ye must again consider, that many things which are very
possible, and very easy in respect of his power, are altogether impossible to
be done, because they imply a contradiction or contrariety to the eternal
Rule or Law of his Goodness, Justice, or Majesty. Now, it is an express
branch of his eternal law or equity, not to cast Pearls before Swine, not to
save such men by miracles or mighty hand, as contemn and spurn at the
ordinary means of Salvation, or despise the riches of his bounty. The portion
of Scripture before mentioned (so they had suffered him to have gone forward
with the exposition of it, or would have attended to him with that respect and
reverence which was due unto the Words of GOD,) was more effectual to beget
faith in their hearts, than all the miracles that could have been wrought; for
faith comes by hearing, not by sight; and seeing this churlish people had
swinish ears, and brutish appetites, our Savior as man, could not (without
manifest violation of his Fathers eternal Law, and of his own eternal Law, as
he was God) feed their eyes or other senses with such miraculous spectacles,
as were ordained to convert men. Every unruly or exorbitant desire is a rock
of offense; every affection, how natural or how civil soever, vnrectified,
vnmastered, or unsubdued, is as a crooked, rugged path, which must be made
plain and straight e're we come to Christ. This rectifying, this smoothing or
leueling of our desires and affections, is that way of the Lord which John was
sent to prepare To this purpose the Apostle, Hebr. 12. interprets the Prophet
Isay, chap. 40. verse. 3. by himself, chap. 35. ver. 3.
. Desire of knowledge in Arts or Sciences of wisdom, The Conclusion.
or experience in affairs civil and politic, is a desire in it self
commendable: yet, if the desire of the one, or the other be immoderate, it is
as a hill or mountain that must be brought low, ere the way of the Lord
(whether from him to us, or from us to him) can become passable. The desire of
a sign for confirmation of faith, is not unlawful. Abraham desired one, and
had it; and so did Hezekiah: and both herein commended. Ahaz had a sign
offered, but would not take it, and is by the Prophet sharply reproved. Yet
the immoderate or unseasonable desire of a sign, is a dangerous root of
offense. Both parts of this observation are from Saint Paul, 1. Corinthians. 1.
verse. 22, 23. The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom,
but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling-blocke, and unto
the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. verse. 24. Whom does
he mean by such as are called? All that are in any sort, or howsoever called?
No, but such as are not merely Grammatical, but real passiues; or, as others
speak, such as are effectually called. In what terms soever we express our
selves, we mean the same persons, and the same thing that our Savior here
does, that is, all they, and The more special offenses, which this age is as
ap^ to take against Christ as the Jews were.
only such, as are not offended in him: for they all, and they only obey
their calling.

89. The more special roots of more dangerous offenses, or more grievous
stumbling-blockes in the way to Christ, are Covetousness, Vainglory,
Ambition, Jealousy of reputation, or fear of disgrace. All these things
(says the Evangelist) heard the Pharisees which The Conclusion.
were covetous, and they mocked him. Luke 16. 14. How can you believe, (says
our Savior) which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only? John 5. 44. vid. verse. 39, 40. Among the chief Rulers
(says the same Evangelist) many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees,
they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue: for
they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God. John 12. verse. 42,
43. These roots of offense are alike common to the Jews, and unto us: We
must take heed, that we examine not our selves, by comparing our affections
toward Christ's person or office, with the affections of these Jews toward
his office or person. This were the readiest way to cast us into a Pharisaicall
slumber or dream of our own righteousness. The only means for us to know,
whether we be more or less offended in Christ, than the forementioned Jews
or Pharisees were, is to compare our lives, conuersations, and practice, with
our Saviors doctrinall precepts, especially with those fundamental ones,
solemnly uttered by him in the Sermon upon the Mount. Matthew. 5. Amongst which,
this is a principal and peremptory one; I say unto you, that except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. verse. 20. Now, from
entering into the Kingdom of heaven, which is the Kingdom of happiness,
nothing can bar us, unless we be offended in Christ, who is the way and
door unto it. Is there any amongst us, that seeks as earnestly after the
praise of men, or after any honor that comes not from GOD alone, as the
Jews The Conclusion.
mentioned, Ioh. 12. and Ioh. 5? Is there any amongst us as covetous, as the
Pharisees were, mentioned Luke 16? If any such there be either in this, or any
other Christian Congregation, be they many or few, all and every of them are as
far from the Kingdom of Heaven, altogether as much offended in Christ, as
the forementioned Rulers, Jews, and Pharisees were. Is there any amongst us of
disposition toward his Brother or Neighbor, or toward any professing the
name of Christ, as implacable or irreconcilable as the Scribes and Pharisees
were toward Publicans and sinners? Let such a man, if any such there be, know
and remember, that whilst he continues in this mood, he is as much offended
in Christ as they were: and if he so continue, our Savior Christ will be as
much offended at him in the last Day, as at those that crucified him. Is any
man as careful for the things of this life as these Jews were? He is as
far from the Kingdom of Heaven, and the happiness here promised, as the
Jews; yea, as the Heathen were. It is our Saviors inference, not mine; Take
no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or,
Wherewith shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do the Gentiles
seek) For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things.
Matthew. 6. 31, 32. His Precept for our direction follows; But seek ye first
the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of it self. verse. 33, 34. This is the perpetual
Law of the Euangelical Iubile, whose observance was prefigured in the legal
observation of The Conclusion.
the seventh year of rest, or the year of Iubile: In both which years, as
you heard before, the Jews were forbidden to sow or reap, commanded to rely
upon Gods extraordinary blessing in the sixth year, and to rest contented with
such things, as should grow of their own accord in the seventh year of rest
or year of Iubile. Not to sow at all, or not to reap in these two years, was
a temporary Law, merely legal or ceremonial. The moral Law hereby
prefigured, and perpetually to be observed by us Christians, is, That we buy
so, as if we possessed not, that in sowing or reaping, or in whatsoever other
business concerning this life, we use the world, as if we used it not: That
our prime and chief care be in seeking the Kingdom of God, or matters of the
life to come: That every present day, we take more pain and care in imploring
Gods blessings upon our present and future labors, than in contriuing means,
or disposing of labors, in worldly conjecture, most available for procuring
our ends, or that good which we seek. This practice and method our Savior
had enjoined us in that prayer which he has taught us. First, we pray that
Gods name may be sanctified; and that his Kingdom may come; that his will may
be done in earth as in heaven: and in the next place, that he would give us
bread this day, for to morrow, and the days following; that is, as the Apostle
says, to cast all our care on him, who cares for us all. But what auayles it
us to know by how many ways and means we may be offended in Christ, unless
we know withal by what means possible these or the like offenses may be
auoydable? It is true, and therefore The Conclusion.
our Savior teaches a compendious way or means for avoiding offenses. As
first in this very Chapter, Matthew. 11. verse. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek,
and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. To the same end
or purpose are all those places of Scripture addressed, which exhort us to
humility, to deny our selves, to take up our Cross and follow Christ. Of these
and other good rules to this purpose, you may read at large, Luke 14.

90. But others happily will say, What avails it to propose these good rules
unto us, unless it be in our power to practice them? We believe it as a
dictate, or maxim of faith, that God gives grace unto the humble, or unto such
as for sake all, and deny themselves; but what is this to us, unless we may
likewise be assured, that God will either give us grace, or some free will, or
natural power to deny or humble our selves? Here indeed were the true and
fruitful issue of all these intricate controversies, which in later years have
much troubled the peace of the Church, as well the Romish, as the Reformed. The
controversies I mean of Election and Reprobation, between the Lutherans and
the Caluinists, between the Arminians and the Gomarists: as also, the
controversy concerning concurrence of Grace and Free Will, prosecuted with
eager and bitter contention for these many years, between the Jesuits and
the Dominican Friars. But of this radical controversy, about Free Will, a
point necessary to be known, and yet inwrapped with as many unnecessary
intricate disputes, and on all parts as ill^stated and handled (for the most
part) as any other question whatsoever; I shall have fitter The Conclusion.
occasion to speak at large, when I come to handle that argument concerning
our servitude to sin, which must be the entrance unto our knowledge concerning
Jesus Christ and him crucified: unto both which, these discussions upon this
Text have been premised.

91. At this time I will only acquaint you with that, which I have elsewhere
delivered, as the true mean between the contrary opinions of the Lutherans
and the Caluinists, between the Jesuits and Dominicans, betwixt the Stoickes
and the Pelagians, in the point of free will, or power of man to work or not
to work his own salvation. The mean is, that albeit man has no freedom of
will or ability to do that, which is good, or to dispose his heart for the
better receiving of Grace: yet he has a true possibility or freedom of will
to do, or not to do something required by God; which thing being done by man,
God will dispose his heart, and make it fit for his grace. The same thing not
being done or neglected, the neglecters heart shall every day than other be
more indisposed, and more incapable of grace than heretofore. For illustration
of this point, I have instanced in two particulars, to wit, in Naaman the
Syrian, and the Widow of Sarepta, both Heathens and unregenerate. Naaman had
no power or Free Will to cleanse himself of his Leprosy, either in whole or
in part; yet a true freedom of will to wash or not to wash in Jordan. Now, if
he had sinally departed in such a sullen fit, as he begun to take at the
Prophets advice, and not at all have washed himself in Jordan, he might have
returned home a fouler Leper than he came. So then the cure was altogether
Gods work, Naaman The Conclusion.
had no finger in it; but to wash in Iordane was in part Naamans own work,
and an exercise of that free will, which God upon Adams fall, does take from no
man. In like manner, it was in the poor widows choice, to give or not to give
Elias a cake of her small store of oil and meal: but if she had refused to do
as the Prophet advised her, God had not multiplied the oil and meal in her
cruse extraordinarily. So then in working this miracle God had no partner, it
was merely his doing: but in bestowing these alms upon the Prophet, the poor
widow in part did work. This was an act or exercise of her free will and
loving kindness, no fruit of sanctifying grace. In like manner, to humble or cast
down our selves before God, that we may be partakers of sanctifying grace, is
in part our work, and strictly requited at every man's hand, that hopes to be
partaker of this grace: but the lifting of us up, or our conversion to God, is
merely, solely and totally Gods work. In this work we are as merely
passive, as Naaman was in the cure of his leprosy, or the poor widows oil
and meal in the miracle which God wrought in it: but so merely passive we are
not in the former work in humbling or casting our selves down. Humble your
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time. 1 Pet. cap. 5. v. 6. For if it were as impossible for us to cast our
selves down without Gods special grace, as it is to lift our selves up
without it; the Apostles Precept, Iam. 4. 10. had been to no better purpose,
than if a man should say to a lame child, fallen into a deep ditch, Come
hither, my child, and I will help thee up. This were rather to mock a The
Conclusion.
child in his misery, than to promise him any help or comfort. I hope there be
none here present, men or women, but think it very possible for them, so
far at least to cast themselves down before God, as to receive the pledges
of Christ's body and blood, as our Church commands, meekely kneeling upon
their knees.

92. But some, perhaps, though I hope not many, That kneeling at the sacred
Communion, is a gesture most decent, and most consonant to the analogy of
faith.
are of opinion, that in this case they are not bound to do what they can do,
but rather tied not to kneel, though the Church command kneeling; because they
have no express warrant or rule of Scripture so to do: howeuer, they and all
that profess themselves to be Christ's servants, have an express command to
receive the pledges of his body and blood: and if any be so scrupulous, as not
to receive them in any other manner then is expressly commanded or warranted by
the Scripture; the parties thus affected (for ought I see or know) must not
receive them at all, and so they shall evidently transgress the express
general rule of Scripture, which commands all to receive them. For in all
cases of this nature, that is, in all cases wherein the thing it self or
action is expressly commanded to be done, and the manner or circumstances of
doing it not so expressly commanded; the authority of Superiors must rule our
affections or opinions, for the manner or circumstance of doing what is
commanded. Whosoever in this case hears not his lawful Pastor or Governor,
hears not Christ: Whosoever in this case despises the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church wherein he lives, despises Christ: Whosoever in
this case wilfully offends against the Canons The Conclusion.
of the Church, is offended in Christ, and puts a stumbling-blocke in his own
way; yea, he bars himself out of the Kingdom of Grace, expressly promised
here in my Text, to all that are not offended in Christ, and in more special
sort really exhibited to all that worthily receive this blessed Sacrament of
his body and blood. But happily it will be farther replied, that albeit our
Savior did not expressly forbid us to receive the Sacrament kneeling, yet he
has taught us by his example to receive it after another manner and gesture;
and it is more convenient to follow his example, than the ordinance of the
Church. To this I answer, that our Savior did not at all receive the
Sacrament, because he had no sins to be remitted by it. His Apostles had,
and did receive it; but whether standing, sitting, or kneeling, it is not
expressed. All that can be gathered out of the Evangelist, is this, that as
they were eating, our Savior took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to his Disciples: so he did the cup likewise. But whether they received
the bread or the cup still sitting, after the same manner as they did at their
meat, is not expressed, nor can hence be gathered: for so a man may truly
say, that whilst we are at Service and prayers, we receive the Communion; yet
it will not follow, that because all or most of us sit in time of Service, we
therefore sit at the receiving of the Communion. But be it granted, that the
Apostles ate the bread, and drank the wine, after the self same manner that
they ate the Passover, yet it would be very hard to express the particular
manner of their eating the Passover. I am persuaded, that there is never a
Ioyner in this Kingdom, The Conclusion.
that could make us seats and Tables of the same fashion, that the Tables and
seats were of, at which our Savior and his Apostles did eat the Passover:
or in case we had such seats or Tables made to our hands, for ought I can
imagine, we must have some famous Antiquary or Master of Ceremonies, to
instruct us how to sit or lie, or to dispose of our bodies at them.

93. This only is certain, that our Savior himself did eat the Passover
after the ordinary and accustomed manner of those times, and according to the
Rites and Ceremonies of the then visible Church. For which Rites and
Ceremonies, in all particulars, the then visible Church had no express Rule or
pattern, which they were perpetually bound to observe, either given by Moses
or the Prophets; they had added many circumstances, which are not expressed in
Moses. Now, if our Lord and Master, who had power to institute new Rites and
Ceremonies, did notwithstanding conform himself to those Rites and Ceremonies
of the visible Church of the Jews: shall we not herein truly follow the
true example of Christ, if we do the like? On the contrary, shall we not show
our selves to be none of his Disciples, if we use or affect that liberty or
singularity, which he neither did nor would use, although there were no
authority in the earth to command him to conformity? Lastly, it may be
objected, that many in the Primitive Church, who knew the Apostles practice
better than the visible Church now does, did not receive the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, after the same manner as now we do. I am not ignorant
of a scruple, The Conclusion.
which many of the busie-brained Masters labor to instill into their Auditors
heads; though in other cases they can slight Antiquity at their pleasure, yet
in this case they have been curiously Critical, to observe out of the Fathers
of the Greek Church, that they received the Sacrament [(...), not (...),] that
is, bowing indeed, but not bowing their knees. All this we grant; for the
Greek Church at this day receive the Sacrament standing on their feet, yet
bowing their bodies, not their knees. What is the reason? To make a leg, (as
we say) or to bow the knee, is a ceremony even in expressions of civil
courtesy, ridiculous amongst them. Howbeit they express their several
respect to their friends and to their betters of what rank soever, as
distinctly and curiously by several manners of bowing their heads and bodies,
as we can do by making legs, bowing the knee, or kneeling upon our knees.
And herein they are highly to be commended, for reserving a distinct kind of
bending their bodies, in expressing their submission toward God or Christ in
their Liturgy or receiving the Sacrament. So then, [distingue loca, and
concordant consuetudines.] Though the Greeks receive the Communion standing,
and bowing their bodies, whereas we receive it with bended knees, without
bowing of our bodies: yet herein we fully agree, that both we and they receive
it in the most decent and submisse manner, for gesture or deportment of our
bodies, that we otherwise know or use. They receive it standing, and bowing the
upper part of their bodies, because that is the best and most significant sign
of subjection or submissiue obedience, that is in use amongst them: we receive
it The Conclusion.
kneeling, because this is the best and most significant sign of submissiue
obedience, that is in use or practice in these Western parts of Europe. Did
not some amongst us poison their natural and civil affections, with
presumptuous conceits of extraordinary sanctity, nature it self (to whom our
Apostle in like case a^pealeth) would thoroughly inform us all, that we stand
bound to receive so great a blessing, as in this Sacrament we expect at the
hands of our gracious. God, after the best and most submissiue manner of outward
gesture and deportment, that we know, or can frame our bodies unto.

94. But if a man should ask, Whether the rite or custom observed in the
Greek Church, or in our Church, be in it self the more decent or significant,
or better befitting the use or end of this Sacrament? I dare confidently
affirm, that the ceremony or gesture observed and commanded by our Church,
does much better befit the use and end of the Sacrament, than the rite or
ceremony observed by the Greek Church does; better than any other rite or
manner can do, though otherwise as decent and sitting, or more decent and
fitting, in all other parts of Gods service. And my reason which I commend unto
your impartial consideration, is this; that this Sacrament was not instituted
in remembrance of the first institution of it, or to represent the Apostles
manner of receiving of it, but in remembrance of our Saviors death and passion.
Whence I would request such as urge our Saviors example for a pattern of
their behavior or deportment at the Sacrament, to look upon our Saviors
bodily gesture or deportment in the heat The Conclusion.
and extremity of his passion, wherein he presented himself before his
Father, in his agony and bloody sweat in the Garden. Being in this agony, as
St. Luke says, he presented these supplications unto his Father; Father, if
thou be willing, remove this cup from me, nevertheless, not my will, but thy
will be done. But after what manner or gesture of body did his perplexed soul
utter these earnest supplications, [(...),] kneeling, or fixing his knees upon
the ground.

95. If I should have spent the whole time allotted, only in exhorting or
preparing you to the fit and worthy receiving of this Sacrament, I could not
have said more, or more to the purpose, than the contemplation of our Savior
in this agony does at first view present unto all of us, that will lay it to
heart. And it is in a word this, that you would make his prayer, commutatis
commutandis, a pattern for your prayers; his gesture in presenting his prayers
to his Father, a pattern of your gesture or deportment, whilst you celebrate
the memory of his passion, specially whilst you make application of the
benefit of his passion to your selves, by receiving the visible pledges of his
body and blood; which I hope you do not mean to receive, without fervent
prayer that God will pass over your sins, and not enter into judgment with
you. You need not, you may not interpose that condition in your prayer, which
our Savior did in his, Father, if it be possible, let this cuppasse from me.
So great was his good-nesse toward us, his loving kindness so tender, that he
purchased unto us better certainty, and better assurance that our prayers may
be heard, than he had that his own prayers should be heard in this
particular. The Conclusion.
Therefore it was not possible that this cup should pass from him, that it
might be possible for it to pass from all, and every one of us. Pray we then,
but let us pray with bended knees, every man for himself, and every man for
his fellow-Communicant: Heavenly FATHER, seeing thou art willing so to have it,
let thy cup of thy wrath and displeasure pass from us, and let thy cup of thy
blessing be ever amongst us: O cause not any of us to drink of that bitter cup,
which thy only Son, our only Savior, has swallowed for us. Expose us not
(good FATHER) to those bloody and grievous conflicts with the powers of Hell
and darkness, which thy Son sustained for us. Oh lay no more upon us, than
thou shall give us strength and patience, through him, and for him, ^^ undergo
and vanquish. Make us to triumph as Conquerours in this victory over Hell and
Satan, over all the power of the enemy. Thus praying whilst we celebrate the
memory of his agony and bloody sweat with knees bended, as his in that agony
were on the ground, and with hearts lifted up to heaven, where he now sits at
the right hand of God; My life for yours, my soul for your souls, if herein
ye offend either God the Father, or Christ his Son, the holy Spirit, or your
own consciences. To receive this blessed Sacrament without some mental
prayer, were to receive it unworthily. To pray whilst you receive it, and not
to pray kneeling on your knees, as your custom is at other prayers, and as the
Church your Mother, upon this particular occasion of praying in special
inioyneth you, were to be offended in Christ, more offended in him for the
Church your The Conclusion.
Mothers sake, than the Jews were for Galile or Nazareth his Country sake. Nor
are you only offended in him, by refusing to bow your knees when you come unto
him; but you give just offense to the common Adversary, to whom Saint Paul
advises you, to give no offense, much less to give any advantage against the
truth: for so you offend the pillar of truth, the Church of God. Now, God of
his infinite mercy remove all needless scruples out of the phansies of the
weak, and all real obstacles of offense out of the hearts of such as have
power to command their knees in this service.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in some Copies, thus to be corrected. Page 7. Lin. 1^. for
prinpall read principal. Page 25. lin. 1. virtues read vertuo^^. Page 73. l.
8. at any tempt you read at any time tempt you. Page 74. li. 3. and 4. Church,
elsewhere read Church is elsewhere. Page 75. in Marg. Jesuits read Leuit^.
Page 80. li. ^^. the manner of importance or the Apostles speech read the
manner or importance of the Apostles speech. Page 107. l. 1. says no, read
says not.


