SEVEN QVESTIONS OF THE SABBATH BRIEFLY DISPVTED, after the manner of the
SCHOOLS.

Wherein such cases, and scruples, as are incident to this subject, are
cleared, and resolved,

By GILBERT IRONSIDE B. D.

HEB. 4.9.10.11. There remains therefore a Rest to the people of God. For he
that is entered into his rest, has also ceased from his own works, as God did
from his. Let us study therefore to enter into that Rest. etc.

(...).

Just. Mart. dial. cum Try. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the
Famous University, and are to be sold by EDWARD FOREST.

Anno Salutis M.DC.XXXVII.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD WILLIAM by Divine providence LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY His Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan,
CHANCELLOR of the University of OXFORD, and one of his MAJESTY'S Most
Honorable Privy Council.
HIM that is weak in the Faith receive you, Romans 14.1.
but not unto doubtful disputations; says the Apostle.

It may please your GRACE to remember, that the Church of Rome, was at this
time like the Moon when she is orient, illustrious for her faith, spoken of
through the whole world, Romans 1.8.
shining in all Christian piety, and made gloriously red with the blood of her
Martyrs. Yet was there a duskie mist raised about her, which did much obscure
her glory. For though she erred not in fundamentalls, as did the Church of
Corinth in the article of the resurrection; nor with the Church of Galatia,
mixed the Law with the Gospel, as if Christian religion were an extract of
both, as the Socinians at this day; yet in things of less consequence God
permitted the envious man to sow the seeds of contention in this goodly field,
Genesis 16.12.
till, as so many Ishmaels, every man's hand was against every man.

The things in question were (if any can be such in the time of the Gospel, of
which no sober man doubts) of an indifferent nature, as meats and days; the
parties contending were the strong, and the weak in faith, the manner of the
contention amounted unto a Schism, whilst the strong rejected the weak with
scorn, and contempt; and the weak fell to their common ward of judging and
condemning the strong. It was therefore high time for the Apostle to put to his
hand; he is a master builder, and knows that a house divided cannot stand; of
all things therefore he labored to procure amongst them a settled peace;
since, as Inveniat vos diabolus munitos, and concordia armatos, quia pax vestra
bellum est illi. Tert: ad Martyrs.
Tertullian says, the Churches peace is to Satan, the old enemy thereof, a
continual war. Now the way which the Apostle takes in the work, is such, as
never fails of its effect, the way of knowledge, and the way of love; a
mutual receiving of one another into a good opinion, and a moderate discussing
of the points in controversy. This latter will do little good without the
former, for till we can be content to receive one another as brethren; we
shall never satisfy one another as Divines. Till this, Victory will be sought,
not Truth; and as Se nec res^^dere nec tacere potuisse. Aug. Retract. 1. cap 49.
St Augustine notes of Gaudentius the Donatist in his time, though he knew not
how to answer, yet he knew not how to hold his peace. It is well observed,
that there is Discordia personarum, as well as opinionum, Schism is commonly
more in the man then in his tenants; in the heart of the Schismatique, then in
the discord of his judgment. That men should not dissent in opinions, is not
to be expected; the Angels do thus differ, Discordia fieri potest, u^ vel
^^llum sit peccatum vel saltem veniale, quando quis probabiliter existimet non
esse bonum quod alter (...). Greg. Valen.
as the Schoolmen teach. This therefore is no sin, unless we become
undecently pertinacious; nay, when the heart it self is grown Schismatic,
the sin is the less, while we proceed not to definitive sentences against
our opposites. But how difficult, and almost unpossible a thing it is, to be
thus temperate, the continually interrupted peace of the Church in all ages
has made too-too apparent; especially in the weaklings here spoken of, whose
religion has much more of zeal, then of knowledge. For that the Church should
consist of none, but of strong, is an Vtopian fancy of the perfectists, whose
Church is a Moon without spots; a family, in which are no children; a
firmament, in which are no stars, but of the first magnitude. The true Church
of Christ ever was, and will be a mixed congregation; in this, like
Nebuchadnezars Image, which had mixed feet of clay and Iron. There remains
therefore the Apostles other remedy, which is not only to receive them into our
hearts, but to support them also with our hands, whilst with the one eye we
look upon their persons, with the other upon their opinions, bringing these
into public light, (for commonly they lurk in corners) and the touchstone of
disputations. Tertullian.
Suspecta esse debuit, quae vult occludi: that doctrine justly deserves to be
suspected, which desires to be concealed. But herein also the Apostle directs
us by a distinction; for some disputations are perplexed, and perplexing; others
not so, but serve to clear the Understanding, and settle the Conscience. The
former sort have ever been the bane of the Church, a worm bred in religion,
and eating out the very bowels thereof. To repress these kinds of disputes,
and to confine turbulent searching wits, has ever been the wisdom of the
Church. Such wranglings the Apostle does even abhor, as fitter for the
Schools of Heathens, 2 Timothy, 2.23.
then of Christians; being (how profound soever they seem) foolish and
unlearned, good only to beget new janglings, filling the Church with disputing,
not edifying. Such therefore were ever dangerous, ending always in greater
hazard, says (...). I sid. Pel. ad Theo. Scholasticum Ep. 93.
Isidore the Pelusiote: neither are they more dangerous, then endless; for
difficulties assoyle not doubts, as the same (...). Ad Alipium. Epist. 97.
Father gives the reason,

Questions of this kind are raised, either about fundamentals, wherein our
faith stands, as the Temple upon her pillars; and miserable is that Church,
whose foundations are shaken; things of this kind ought to be bebeleeved, not
disputed; and herein we should gladly give the hand to them of Rome, were the
decisions of the Tridentine Fathers, the decisions of the Catholic Church, or
consonant thereunto: Or about the secret things of Gods counsel, the Quod sit
whereof is indeed revealed, the Quomodo sit not so, in which viam quietativam
intellectus, as Pennottus calls it, like the North-west passage long since
promised, no man as yet has ever found. The latter kind of disputes concern
either the public peace of the Church, or the outward practice of
Christianity; in both which is seen Satan's malice, casting scruples into men's
consciences: and the vanity of some spirits, who applaud themselves, saying,
with the Fly upon the Chariot, what a dust do we raise? The disputing of
points of this nature against such as these is most necessary; especially if
God be pleased to give men tractable hearts, not to withold the truth in
unrighteousness. Scrupulus conscientiae est, quand^ men's dubia vacillat,
nesciens quid melius, semper parata facere quod sciret Deo gratum; and contra
ist^ scrupulum seuti^^^rem facere, non semper est peccatum: licet talis
scrupulus sit val^e periculosus and quantum fieri potest, extinguendue. Gers.
compend. Theol.
For though they be things in themselves of less importance; yet from such
trifles (as they seem) flourishing Churches and States have been much impaired.

No better work therefore can be undertaken, then is the dis-entangling of the
conscience; every scruple therein being like a thorn in the foot, much
hindering our progress* or a mote in the very eye of the soul, of all parts
the most tender, not fuffering, without anguish the least molestation. Perhaps
it is not always a sin (says Gerson) to go against the fears, and
scruples of our minds, provided we be ever ready to embrace Truth made known
unto us; yet such scruples certainly are very dangerous, and by all means to
be extinguished. And good reason; for as a careless conscience begets
presumption; so a scrupulous, desperation. A too large conscience calls evil
good, and a too straightened calls good evil. The former sort sticks at
nothing; and herein have a kind of advantage, Conscientia tum nimis larga, tum
nimis stricta cavenda; nimis larga generat praesumptionem, nimis stricta
desperationem; nimis larga frequenter dicit malum bonum; nimis stricto bonum
malum; nimis larga de nullo remor sum habet, and ideo in rebus (...) rarius
peccat etc. Gers. ib,
for by this means they err not in things indifferent; but the latter start
at every thing, and are therefore more often wounded, if ever whole.

The peace also of the Church is to be valued at the highest rate; for it is
with her as with the civil State, all the contentments of a Kingdom are
nothing, if peace be wanting.

That these questions of the Sabbath are things of this nature many have long
since complained, and Your GRACE does easily discern. For notwithstanding the
Sabbatharian tenants, for the most part thereof, be mere novelties, unknown
even unto our Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary, and were but timorously set
afoot by their first masters; yet how deeply they are now rooted, who sees
not? and how the hearts of men are thereby alien'd one from another? how such,
as dare contradict them, are made even Anathema; all religion being reduced to
this one head, the observation of the Sabbath: How a manifest schism is raised
thereby (so far at least, as for fear of Authority men dare adventure) a
weak eye may discern. So dangerous has been the long connivence of the
Church, and silence of her sons; whilst some have undervalued these
questions, as too mean speculations for men of great abilities to be engaged
in* others have been contented to see well-affected people to be drawn on in
Religion by this holy fraud. But what the issue of both have been, experience
has now discovered; for Miloes suckeling is become an Ox; and the twig, that
might have been snapt in sunder, is grown a sturdy Oak. For my own part, I
well hoped to have stood upon the Hill, and beheld this skirmish in the Valley,
being indeed every way unfurnished for such a service. But it has pleased God
to dispose otherwise; that which I did, partly for my exercise, but chiefly
satisfaction, being found as 1. Sam. 10.22.
Saul hid amongst the stuff: or (to compare the least thing with the greatest)
as they say St Gregory was discovered in the Merchants warehouse. I have
notwithstanding at length with my best alacrity committed it unto public view,
most humbly beseeching Your GRACE to receive both the Work, and the Author
into your Patronage and protection. The great Bishop and Shepherd of our
souls multiply his choicest Favors upon Your GRACE: and by and through Your
GRACE upon his poor Church, until that precious ointment, composed not of
sweet spices, but of Gods holy spirit, flow from the head of our Aaron even
unto the skirts of his clothing; which shall be the daily prayer of

Your Graces most humbly devoted G. IRONSIDE.

To the READER.
GOOD Christian Reader expect not to be courted with fruitless Apologies; I
desire only to inform thee concerning this present Treatise, which is now
thine. That which I intended, when my thoughts first looked this way, was my
own satisfaction. For though I were not a stranger to these Questions, nor
took up these tenants by occasion of the Kings Declaration (an aspersion
fastened upon many an honest man) but had declared my self therein for many
years before, as some who are contrary-minded can bear me witness: Yet when
of late they fell into agitation, I confess the strange confidence of most,
the resolute sufferings of some began to stagger me. For I conceived, that I
not sufficiently searched, and that something surely had escaped me; else it
was (I thought) not possible, that men of good apprehensions, honest
dispositions, and well qualified with sundry parts of learning should not only
stick at them, but oppose them also even with hazard. This was the cause why I
not only weighed such arguments, as Treatises of this nature afforded: but such
also as either my self could frame, or my poor slender reading help me unto.
This I held fit to acquaint thee with, least thou should perhaps think that I
affected a Sciomachy or Umbratilous skirmish, making a great show of arguments
only to make a greater show of answers. But God knows I intended herein
satisfaction, not ostentation; to see what might be as well, as what was
already said. To which purpose I have also faithfully related the reasons of
our Adversaries, and added such weight unto them by pressing them home, as my
weak understanding enabled me without partiality, desiring only light, which I
always professed to follow, if they afforded any. But here if I have at any
time for pities sake left untouched certain places of Scripture, miserably
tortured, I fear wilfully wrested, (a common and great fault in them with whom
we deal) let me be pardoned this injury. Shows and flourishes, which an Artist
may convey into a well penned discourse, may go for convincing evidences
amongst the vulgar. He deserves not the name of a Scholar or Orator that cannot
by this means make any Paradox extremely probable; for it is not easy for a
common eye to distinguish shadows from substances, especially when they are
wrapped up together under the specious titles of piety. And this was the only
reason of my method, which being that of the Schools is of all others (if used
with sobriety) most satisfying. It is not then the pleasing of thy fancy with
quaint language, and apt cadences of words: nor the drawing of thy affections
with patheticall exclamations of holiness, religion etc. nor appeals to men's
consciences, by which they are artificilly caught before encountered, which I
intended; to such strains I profess my self a stranger; but the unmasking of
all apparences, and discovery of naked truth. And here let no man be offended,
if I speak freely, that I have not found any convincing proof in any point of
their doctrine, wherein we differ, either out of the word of God, or well
governed reason. It is therefore to be feared, that men seek themselves, not
truth herein. And sure selfe-seeking is more ways then one; not only the
desire of profit, preferment, favor, greatness: but those poorer phantasmes
of popularity, opinion of being the un-erring Rabbis in the Church, or making
good a side hunted after makes us guilty thereof. And amongst the rest there is
no such selfe-seeking as singularity, Signa singularitatis non continere se
intra suos fines; fastidire dostrinas resolutas; indebita doctorum and
doctrinarum appropriatio; gaudere potius de aliena impugnatione, qu^^ eo^^ ad
concordiam ducere. Gers.
if the Schoolmen have given us its true characters; amongst others these. To
loath common resolutions already given; to appropriate to our selves the
infallibility of our Doctors and Doctrines; to take more delight in oppugning
our adversaries, then reconciling of controversies. If this be singularity, and
singularity selfe-seeking it is easily seen who seek themselves. For not to
speak of the two latter Characters, which are as the proper passions of our
Sabbatharians, I will only relate what you may read in Mr Sprint concerning the
first. In this controversy (says he) those reverend and goodly writers, living
in the times next above us were of more remiss and weak judgments: but those
of latter days more sincere and strict; God as it were rewarding the pains
and diligence of every age with revealing some part of truth. The which thing
as he did to them of other times before, revealing unto them sundry truths,
wherewith their predecessors never were acquainted: so dealt he with the
Primitve Fathers in their several times, and so perhaps he will do with them
that follow us. So he has done to this age of ours; and as he has done it in
sundry other truths, so also in this of the Christian Sabbath. Mavult
curiositas quaerere invenienda, quam inventa intelligere. ib.
Singularity it seems is a curious fancy, which chooses rather to invent new,
then to understand those Tenants which are already received. Such (I confess)
was my ignorance as to believe that all necessary truths had been sufficiently
revealed; as for unnecessary revelations we bequeath them to such Phanatique
spirits as affect them. My opinion also was, that those Pillars of our Church,
that lived in the former age next above us in whom might be discerned the very
spirit of Elias, had beeen no weak, remiss, unsincere (or to speak plain)
profane Gospellers. Sit studium solius veritatis absque fermento vanitatis,
Let truth alone be studied, and all leaven of vanity avoided. But it has been
an ill lesson instilled into the heads of young Students by those that were
heretofore the great leaders of the Disciplinarians, that howsoever the
Ceremonies of the Church were in themselves tolerable, yet no way to be used
by such as had preached against them. And the reason was as good, as the
Doctrine, least the people seeing them in an error in this, should believe
them in nothing else, therefore needs must we magnify all our dictats
whatsoever. But first, the supposition of the peoples scandalized infidelity is
a mere fiction; was St Peter's doctrine the worse thought of, because his error
was reproved by St Paul? Are the errors of Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Retractati^ Augustini non inhonoravit eum, nec authoritatis dictorum suorum
robu^ evertit. Gers.
or any other of the ancient Fathers prejudicial to their other truths? But
suppose the people should thus stumble, must we therefore pertinaciously adhere
to our mis-opinions though but in Ceremonies? Surely then they were not wise,
whosoever wrote Retractations. The best that is, may possibly be mistaken, and
if so let God have the honor of our humility. To have erred may be the shame
of our natural frailty: but to acknowledge our errors is the praise of our
Christian ingenuity, and to reform them our glory. I speak not this out of any
hope conceived that this poor piece of mine should prevail with any in this
kind. It is storied that when Philo the Jew was sent to Cajus the Emperor in
behalf of his nation against the Greeks, that Appian who was sent by the
Greeks against the Jews spoke first, and the Emperor was so enraged by
Appian, that Philo was commanded out of his sight unheard. (...). Eusebius. lib.
z. c. 5.
It will be here not much unlike save that Philo the Jew has first spoken; our
Sabbatharians have filled the ears of our people these many years, and hearts
fore-stalled with prejudice are unteachable says S. Augustine. I shall
therefore think I am well dealt with, if this be not avoided as a prohibited
book (for this Iesuited trick is also taken up) but most happy, if I may escape
that which the Psalm. 57.4.
Psalmist styles, and I have already felt to be sharper then swords. If any
list to be contentious (a book in Print is at every man's mercy) if his
arguments be gotten in his spleen, be prosecuted by his passions, till they
conclude in evil speakings, in some corner-creeping or scurrilo^s invectives
fitter for a Player then Divine, let him know his answer shall be contempt. But
if any will be pleased in the spirit of meekness to show me a better way, I
trust I shall neither be so wayward, as to take it amiss: nor so weak as not
to profit by him. My only suit unto thee (Christian Reader) is, that thou
peruse it with as single an eye, as the heart was sincere from whence it
proceeded. Upon this condition I bid thee heartily Farewell.

Thine in the truth of the Gospel of Christ Jesus GILBERT IRONSIDE.

The several Chapters with their Contents.
The PROEME. The Proeme containing the partition of the whole work. CAP. I.
Wherein the first question is proposed, with the arguments seeming to prove the
Sabbath to be as ancient as Adam in Paradise. CAP. II. The Arguments for the
negative opinion are set down. CAP. III. Wherein it briefly declared, what is
to be thought of the present question. CAP. IV. The Arguments proposed Chap. 2.
are fully answered; and the exposition of sanctification by destination is at
large handled. CAP. V. The second Question is proposed, whether the letter of
the fourth Commandment be a Moral precept. CAP. VI. The Arguments for the
affirmative are propounded, and enforced. CAP. VII. In which are set down the
Arguments for the negative. CAP. VIII. The question is stated, and explained.
CAP. IX. The Arguments for the affirmative examined. CAP. X. Containing two
digressions: the first showing who are the best interpreters of holy things:
The second, wherein the two opposite tenants in this question of the Sabbath
are compared one with another. CAP. XI. Wherein the name of the Christian man's
Feast Day is proposed, with those Arguments which seem to conclude for the name
Sabbath. CAP. XII. The reasons against the name of Sabbath are briefly
alleged. CAP. XIII. Wherein is briefly showed what is to be thought of this
Question. CAP. XIV. Wherein the Question concerning the duration of the day is
proposed, and the Arguments for the day natural are set down. CAP. XV. The
Arguments against the day natural are proposed. CAP. XVI. Wherein something
concerning the day natural, and artificial being premised, the former
Arguments are briefly answered. CAP. XVII. The Question concerning the
institution of the Lords day proposed, with arguments for the divine authority.
CAP. XVIII. The Arguments for the negative are briefly set down. CAP. XIX. The
Question is briefly stated, and resolved. CAP. XX. The affirmative Arguments
are briefly answered. CAP. XXI. A preparative discourse to the two maine
questions which follow, concerning the observation of the Lords day. CAP. XXII.
The question concerning the corporal rest is proposed, with the arguments for
the affirmative. CAP. XXIII. The Arguments for the Negative are also related.
CAP. XXIV. The Question is unfolded in nine propositions. CAP. XXV. The
Arguments brought for the affirmative, are answered, and in particular that,
which is drawn from the Judgments of God, is handled more at large. CAP. XXVI.
Wherein is inquired after those duties of holiness, unto which the conscience
is bound on the Lords day. CAP. XXVII. The Arguments, which seem to conclude
for all duties of holiness in general, are set down. CAP. XXVIII. The
Arguments for the Negative are briefly expressed. CAP. XXIX. Wherein is
declared, what is to be conceived in this question. CAP. XXX. Wherein
satisfaction is given to the reasons formerly alleged. CAP. XXXI. Wherein is
contained the conclusion of the whole, setting down a short delineation of both
the opinions and tenants in these several questions.
THE PROEME containing the partition of the whole Work.
OF the questions of the Sabbath some are fundamental, serving as pillars to
support the rest; others are less principal, and subordinate, and are the
Corollaries of the former. Those of the first kind are two; the one,
concerning the original, and institution of the Sabbath, whether it were given
to Adam in Paradise, or to Moses, when Israel came into the Wilderness: the
other, of the morality of the letter it self, as it is expressed in the
decalogue; for by this it will appear, whom the Lawgiver intended to bind
thereby, and how long; as also, what be the several shadows, and ceremonies
contained therein. Those disputes of the latter kind are such, as are raised
about the Christian man's Feast, or Holy Day; for this our late Sabbatharians
have of themselves (the Scripture being in a manner silent) squared in all
proportions to the Jewish Sabbath, both for doctrine, and practice, and in a
sort confounded them. Here therefore we must enquire, first, quid nominis, what
name is proper, or at least most suitable thereunto: Secondly, quidrei, what
this Sabbath is in it self, and its own nature. And because it may undergo a
two fold consideration; the one, as it is a day, and portion of our time: the
other, as it is the Lords day, dedicated to his use, and service; it is
necessary in the next place, to enquire of the dimensions of this day; of what
duration, and continuance of time it must be; and then considered quatenus the
Lords, two things offer themselves to be considered, first, by what authority
it came to be instituted, and imposed upon the Church of Christ; and secondly,
how it ought to be celebrated, and observed by us. The latter does also divide
it self; for there being two things, which concur to the nature and being of
a Sabbath, first, the outward rest of the Body, or cessation from works, which
we may call the material part; secondly, the duties of holiness, wherein
consists the life, and spirit of the observation; we must examine both what
that rest is, which is enjoined; and what are those holy duties, which are
commanded.

CAP. I. Wherein the first question is proposed, with the arguments seeming to
prove the Sabbath to be as ancient, as Adam in paradise.
AS in the maladies of the body, the symptoms are removed, when the root of
the disease is purged out: so our errors (the only sickness of our minds) are
reformed, when the foundations, on which they are built, are overthrown. Our
first question therefore is, when the Sabbath had its original; whether it
were commanded Adam, and the Patriarchs immediately from God himself in the
beginning; or only to the Israelites in the wilderness, by the ministry of
Moses. The former tenent seems to have many evidences, both from Scripture,
from reason, and from the authority of many of the Learned.

First, from the words of Moses, So Gold blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it, because in it he rested from all his works, an argument may be
framed thus. The resting of God from all his works, and the blessing and
sanctifying of the Sabbath, were coetaneous; for when Moses says, So God
blessed, he referrs us both to the reason why, and the time when, and the
manner how the Sabbath was first instituted: but God rested from all his works
immediately from the Creation, while Adam was yet in Paradise; therefore,
immediately mediatly from the Creation God blessed, and sanctified the Sabbath
day.

Secondly, Genesis 1.14.
in the same Scripture, God said, let there be lights in the firmament for
signs, and for seasons, for days, and for years; in which place the word in
the Original signifies holy convocations. From whence thus. As soon as there
was Sun, and Moon, there were times appointed for holy convocations; for
this was one maine end of their Creation. But the Sun and Moon were from the
beginning, therefore from the beginning there were times appointed for holy
Convocations, therefore the Sabbath --

Thirdly, Heb. 4.3.4.
from the words of the Apostle, who seems to Comment upon the words of Moses,
As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest, although the
works were finished from the foundation; When the works were finished, a rest
was appointed for Gods people: but the works of God creating the world were
finished from the foundation, therefore from the foundation was a rest, or
Sabbath appointed Gods people.

Fourthly, Nondum lata erat lex, sed Sabhathum ^am servabatur. Bar. Itin.
Moses could not have spoken of the Sabbath unto the Israelites in the
Wilderness, as of a thing well known and practiced, unless the Sabbath had
been observed by them, and their fore fathers, before their comeing thither;
but Moses does thus speak unto them of the Sabbath in the wilderness, before
the law was given in Sinai; To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord, Exodus 16.23.
and the seventh day, which is the Sabbath. Where note, that first he calls it
the holy Sabbath. Secondly, he says, it is the Sabbath; but unles it had been
already instituted, it could neither he holy, nor be at all; therefore etc.

Fifthly, that which was observed by Noah, at the time of the flood, was
doubtless observed of him before the Flood, and so from the beginning; but the
Sabbath was religiously observed by Noah, Genesis 8.10.12.
in the time of the flood. For having sent out the dove, and she returning,
finding no rest for the sole of her foot, he abode other seven days, and
afterward other seven days: therefore etc.

Sixthly, that which Job, and his children observed, was long in use before
Israel came into the Wilderness; for all agree, that Job was descended either
from Shem or from Nahor, or from Ishmaell; and Moses magnus homo non ita
scripsir quemadmod^ Diabolus locutus est, sed dece^tius, utpote devotus Dei
famulus. Orig. in v. 11. c. 1.
Origin affirms, that Moses wrote that story: but Job and his children kept
holy the Sabbath day, for there was a day, Job. 1.6.
(says the Text) wherein came the sons of God to present themselves before the
Lord; these sons of God, are Job and his children; and this day, the Sabbath
(says In cap. 1.
Pineda the Jesuit) therefore etc.

Seventhly, that which has ever been the boundary of the week, was ever from
the beginning: but the Sabbath has ever been the boundary of the week, for
time has ever been divided by weeks, therefore the Sabbath has ever been from
the beginning.

Eighthly, God left not Adam, and the Patriarchs without any necessary
instructions, (for God never fails in necessaries) but the Sabbath contained
matter of necessary instructions for Adam, and the Patriarchs; both in regard
of their faith, in the article of the creation of the World in six days; and
in respect of their hope, that there remained a rest for them in Gods Kingdom:
Therefore God left them not without the ordinance of the Sabbath.

Ninthly, to whom God appointed public worship, to them he appointed the time
of worship, which is the Sabbath: but God appointed to Adam, and the
Patriarchs public worship, for men called on the name of the Lord, neither
was this any will worship of their own. Therefore etc.

Lastly, the testimony of many of the Learned. Est enim festus dies non untus
populi regioni so^, sed in universum omnium, quae sola digna est ut dicatur
popularis festivitas, and natalis mundi, Philo Iud. de oper. Mund.
Philo the Jew says, that this feast did appertain to all nations from the
beginning. Mr Broughton affirms, that the Fathers observed it before Moses.
Benedictio ista nihil aliud est, quam solennis consecratio, qui sibi Deus
studia, and occupationes hominum asserit die septimo. Calvin. in c. 2. Genes.
v. 3.
Calvin says, that the blessing of the Seventh day was a solemn consecration,
whereby God laid claim to the studies and employments of men for himself upon
the seventh day. And again, God (says Primum ergo quievit Deus, deinde
benedixit hanc quietem, ut faeculis omnibus inter homines sancta foret, vel
septimum quemque diem quiet^ dicavit, ut suum exemplum perpetua ^sset regula.
Calv. ib. Cathar, in Genes. Alcuin. quaestionib. in Genes.
he) did two things at the beginning, first he rested, then he blessed that
rest, that it might be holy amongst all men throughout their generations. Unto
this Catharinus, Alcuinus and many of the Popish school subscribe. Zanchius
affirms, as probable, that Adam kept the first seventh day in Paradise, and
that the second person in the Trinity took upon him the shape of a man, and
instructed him, and his wife upon that day in the works of the creation.

CAP. II. Wherein the arguments for the negative part are set down.
FOr the negative are also produced many reasons: as,

First, the Sabbath was not given to Adam, either before his fall or after his
fall, therefore not at all given him. Not before his fall, for God does nothing
that is needless, or superfluous; but to Adam, yet in Paradise, a Sabbath was
needless. First in regard of his body, which needed not any rest, or
refreshing, (being not only immortal, but Communis est sententia Patrum and
Theologorum hominem in statu innocentie fuisse impassibilem. Greg. Val. Tom. 5.
disp. 7. q. 4. p. ^.
impassible) not so much as of sleep it self. Alex. Hal. part. 2. q. 86.
memb. 30.
Alexander of Hales brings many probable arguments to this purpose. Secondly,
it was needless in regard of his soul, which wanted neither the practice, nor
instructions of the Sabbath: not the practice, for every day was to Adam,
before his fall, a practical Sabbath; his whole life being nothing else, but a
perpetual contemplation of holy things; the dressing of the garden was no
impeachment at all to his heavenly thoughts: not the instructions of the
Sabbath, for Primus homo sic institutus est a Deo ut haberet omnium scientiam,
in quibus homo natus est instrui, Th. ^. 1. q. 94. art. 3. in corpore.
his knowledge of the Creator, and all things created, was of it self perfect,
and needed not the helps of teaching, preaching, catechizing. No man will say
(I presume) that he needed to be instructed in the mystery of the Sabbath, as
our spiritual rest from under the burden of sin, in the kingdom of grace,
and our eternal rest in heaven in the kingdom of glory. Divines generally
affirm, that he knew not, that he should fall, or need a Redeemer, though
perhaps the fall of Angels was revealed unto him.

And Aquin. 2^. 2 oe q. 2. art. 7.
those, that affirm him to have known the Incarnation of Christ, say, he knew
it, not as appointed for man's redemption from sin, but as ordained for man's
translation to farther happiness. The Sabbath could not mind him of the
eternal rest in Heaven; for suppose, that if Adam had stood, he should have
been translated with his posterity to fill up the room of the Angels, which
is as groundlesly as commonly affirmed; yet that very estate of glory could not
have been to them, as it shall be to us, a rest, for this rest is opposed to
misery, from which the state of innocence was privileged.



Praise, Honor, Glory, and Power be to him, that sits on the throne. We
may well conceive, that if Adam had not fallen, our estate should have been
much like, though much inferior to the Saints in glory. I know, that Aquin.
pare, 1. q. 44. art. 31.
Schoolmen commonly teach, that Adam, in the state of innocence, should have
been a priest, a Prophet, and a King, having to this purpose a personal kind
of knowledge imparted unto him, enabling him to be the head, and teacher of all
mankind. But this being grounded upon a false principle viz, That his original
righteousness, of which his knowledge was a part, was a supernatural
endowment, superadded to the estate of pure naturalls; must needs be a
consequent like the antecedent, out of which it is deduced. Order then should
have been in that estate, for so there is amongst the Angels; but no division
of men into pastoral charges, and congregations, which neither are amongst the
Angels, nor shall be hereafter amongst the glorified Saints. The precept
therefore of the Sabbath, to be observed by Adam in Paradise, was in all
respects superfluous, Ergo.

Secondly, it is generally affirmed by In principle mundi ipsi Adae, and Evae
legem dedit ne defructu arboris plantatae in medio paradisi ederent, quae lex
i^ sufficeret, se esset custodita. Tert. ad Iud.
Divines ancient and modern, that Adam, in the estate of innocence, had but
one positive law imposed upon him, even that of the forbidden fruit; neither
do we read of more in Scripture. And this, we commonly say, with Hoc tam leve
preceptum ad observandum, tam breve ad memoria retinendu^, tanto (...) inju,
titia violatum est, quanto saciliori possit obser vantia custodiri. Aug. ^e
C^v^t. l. 14. c. 15.
S. Augustine, made his disobedience the greater, God requiring no more at his
hands: but if Adam had a commandment to observe the Sabbath, God gave him more
positive Laws, then one, Ergo.

If any man say, he needed no positive law for the Sabbath, being bound
thereunto by the light of nature, for nature teaches men to keep holy unto
God those days, upon which they have received greatest mercies; for this
guided even the Heathens to their holydaies.

Adam should have kept the sixth day, for in it he received from the hands of
God an helper meet for him; in it, he and his wife received a blessing upon
their Creation, and full power, and dominion over all creatures, being thereby
enstalled the happy Princes of the whole world.



In hoc discordat nostra translatio ab alia, quam augustinus exponit, nostra
enim translatione consummatio operum oscribitur diei septimo, in alia diei
sexto, ut^^; autem veritatem^^here potest, distinguenda est rei duplex
perfectio, etc. super sent, l. 2. c. ^. 15. 9 3.
Aquinas, both in his sums, and upon the sentences, affirms as much: There
is (says he) a twofold perfection; the one, wherein things receive their
perfect being, this all things had upon the sixth day; the other, which
regards not the being, but only the operation of things in being; this was
bestowed on creatures the seventh day, for then God resting from giving being
unto things, began to set nature to the work of propagation; but any man may
see. First, that this is only said without any ground. Secondly, that he was
forced thereunto, by laboring to reconcile the vulgar translation with that of
Saint Austin; the one reading, in the seventh day, the other in the sixth day
God ended his work. Genesis 2.2.
But what a small fly this is, to choke so great a Camel, will soon appear;
for the text means not, that God did any thing upon the seventh day, as
Aquinas conceived; but that, Inde ab hoc die destitit ab omni opificio. Trem.
in i^cum.
when the seventh day was come, all things were finished; nothing being
defective, either in regard of the first, or second perfections, of which the
distinction speaks. Adam therefore had all things perfected, and so delivered
into his hands on the sixth day. And Hoc loco non dicit Deus rebus ipsis
benedixisse, sed diei. Est. 2. Did 15. art. 9.
one observes rightly, that the text says, God blessed the day, not the
creatures; so that if it were true, that nature binds us to keep those very
days, on which we have received mercies; Adam was obliged to the Friday,
which, I think, no man will presume to affirm.

Thirdly, whatsoever was commanded Adam in paradise was universally commanded
unto all mankind in all their generations, for we were all in Adam, neither had
our first parents any personal or temporary precept: but the Law of the
seventh-day Sabbath is of no such universal extent, neither is it still in
force. The first appears, because the So Moses, The Lord has given you the
Sabbath. Exodus 16.29. So Nehemiah, thou made known unto them thy holy
Sabbath, by the hand of Moses thy servant. Neb. 9.14. So Ezekiel. 20.12. reckoning
up Gods favors to that nation, says, moreover I gave them also my Sabbaths.
Scriptures do ever appropriate the Sabbath as a peculiar rite prescribed the
Jews: The second is also manifest; for we observe not at this day that
Sabbath, which is said to have been given Adam, which we must have done had it
been commanded in paradise, unless we could show express precepts given to
Adam to the contrary; but such a countermaine, certain it is, Adam never
received.

Fourthly, that which is either natural, or commanded in Paradise before the
fall, was not to be abrogated by Christ in the fullness of time: the reason
hereof is, because that fullness of time, wherein Christ came, and did all
things appertaining to the Messiah, is to be reckoned from the promise of the
seed, which was not made till after the fall; that therefore, which preceeded
this promise, appertained not to the Messiah, either to establish, or abolish:
but the observation of that Sabbath, which is pretended to have been commanded
Adam in paradise, is abrogated by Christ, as he is the Messiah; even that day,
on which God rested, and which he sanctified, which the Church of Christ
neither does, nor ought to keep: Ergo.

Fifthly, if the Sabbath had been observed by the Patriarchs before Moses; it
is no way likely, but that some footsteps of such their observation would have
appeared in the Story, wherein many things, of less weight, and less tending
to edification, are punctually recited. In the first sacrifice Moses observes
the names of the men, the quality of their oblations, the success of both. All
men know, that the fittest time for such observances was the Sabbath: would
Moses (think you) have omitted this circumstance, who is so exact in all other?
For 'its most congruous to think, if they had then a Sabbath, they would have
offered their Sacrifices chiefly upon that Sabbath. In the days of Seth men
began to call upon the name of the Lord, replanting and reforming religion;
every man will acknowledge, that the observation of the Sabbath is a maine
point of reformation; and therefore sure if their forefathers had ever
observed a Sabbath day, that especially (defaced, no question, among other
things) would have been reformed, and this had been a material point in the
story, which yet speaks nothing thereof. It is afterward said, that Noah
offered a sacrifice of rest, what fitter time for a sacrifice of rest, then the
day of rest? But had this sacrifice of rest been offered upon the day of rest,
it had been as remarkable a thing in the story, as that he builded an altar,
and offered of every beast, and every foul, yet not a word hereof. Come to
Abraham, we read of many Altars, which he made to call upon the name of the
Lord: a world of small things are recorded of him, yet no mention of any
Sabbath, which he ever observed. If he had been bound to any set Sabbath,
doubtless he would have sealed the promises of God unto himself and his
family upon that day especially; but the Texttels us, He circumcised himself,
and his household the self same day, in which the Lord talked with him. It is
hard to prove, that this was the seventh-day Sabbath, and suppose it, every man
will confess it to be an important circumstance, which yet we read not. The
story of Jacob is full, and exact, but neither in his flight to Padan-Aram, nor
in his return to Canaan, nor going up to Bethel upon special command, and
reforming his household, nor going down into Egypt. nor in his abode there, the
least mention is made of a Sabbath observed by him. I confess, that a negative
argument from authority does not conclude de rebus agendis, to show what is, or
is not to be done; but de rebus actis, to prove what was, or was not done, with
such a concurrence of circumstances of times, places, persons, occasions; in
this case I say, a negative argument is more then probable. L^gant, and
proserant aliquem ducem norbarum praecepisse, ut arrup to oppido na^us
serire^ur, qui in illo, out in illo te^plo suisset inventus. de civ. lib. 1. c.
6.
Saint Austin thinks it strong enough even against Heathens: for being to
prove that Christian religion is indeed the true religion, and came from God;
he uses this medium: because the barbarous Goths in all their bloody
conquests in Italy, Spain, and Africa spared the temple of Christians, and all
such, as fled unto them for sanctuary, which was never vouchsafed in any
conquests to the Idolatrous worshippers of Heathen Gods. But how does this
appear? His proof is only negative from authority, let men (says An illi
saciebant, et scriptores earunden rerum gestarum isla rettechant^ It inc vero
qui ea, qu^ laudarent maxim requir ebant, ill a praeclarissima pietatis
indicia praete^nent. lb. c. 6.
he) read and allege any such example; was any such thing done, and did their
historians hold their peace? what would they, who diligently sought for matter,
and occasion to commend the states, and persons of whom they write, pass over
in silence such excellent monuments of piety? Sure if this argument of Saint
Austin be strong enough, ours much more, for the Holy Ghost omits not any thing
in the story of the Saints, which might apparently make for the pious
instructions of after ages.

Sixthly had the Sabbath been so anciently observed by the Patriarchs, in all
likely hood either Moses, or some of the Prophets would have reproved the
profanation, and pressed the observation thereof upon the Israelites from their
practice, and examples: I am sure Nehemiah does so, after the Law was given:
Nehem. 13.17.
Then reproved I the rulers of Judah, and said unto them what evil thing is
this, that you do, and break the Sabbath day? did not your fathers thus, and
our God brought all this plague upon us? Certain also it is, that the
Israelites were superstitious observers of their fathers, especially of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: They eat not of the sinew that shranke in the
hollow of his thigh unto this day (says Moses): But neither Moses, nor any of
the Prophets, though in other things they make frequent mention of their
forefathers examples, speak a syllable of this upon any occasion, ergo.

Lastly this opinion is supported by men of far greater authority, then the
former. Instituta legalia quae in typo data sunt populo Jsrael. Orig. Hom. 5.
in Number. Genesis 32.32.
Origin reckons it amongst those legalls instituted by Moses, and given unto
Israel as types. Tertullians treatise against the Jews is nothing, but the
relation of a conference, which passed between him, and a Jew; in which he
proves, that the legal ceremonies of Moses are no way necessary unto
salvation; and amongst the rest Qui contendunt Sabbathum adhuc observandum
quasi salutis medelam, doceant in praeteritum iustos Sabbatizasse. Et paulo
post. Doceant, sicut iam pr^locuti sumus, Adam Sabbatizasse, ant Abel etc.
Tert: adv: Iu^ daeos. Sed dicturi sunt Iudaei. ex quo hoc praeceptum datum est
Per Mosen, exin de observan. dum suisse.
he speaks of the Sabbath, saying, let them show us, that Adam, or Abel, or
Enoch, or Noah, or Abraham, or Melchisedech received the precept of the
Sabbath. Having made this challenge, he brings in the Jew replying, that
because it was given to Moses, therefore it was to be observed of all nations;
in Tertullians time therefore this truth was acknowledged even by the Jews
themselves. To this purpose also is Dicit Rabbi magister, observatio Sabbathi
in lege fuit instituta, ut in fide po puli firmiter permaneret novit is mundi.
Tho. in l. 2. Sent. did. 15. art. 3.
Rabbi Moses cited by Aquinas, that the observation of the Sabbath was
instituted in the Law. S. Cessanti a servilibus operibus populo iubetur, ut
dies Sabbathi sanctificet. Cypr. de spirit. Sancto.
Cyprian, following the footsteps of his master, says, that it was commanded
the Jews, resting from their servile work, to sanctify the seventh day. S.
Illud unum de Sabbato usque adeo figurata diei septimi observatione apud
Israelitas velatum fuit, and in mysterio, praeceptum fuit, and quodam
Sacramento figurabatur, ut hodie a nobis non observetur, dug. quest sup. Exodus
l. 2. q. 172.
Austin affirms, the Sabbath to be a part of the veil of Moses Pro die sexto
in Hebraeo diem septimum habet, arctabimus igitur Iudaeos qui de otio Sabbathi
gloriantur, quod iam tunc in principio Sabbathum dissolutum sit. Hieron.
tradit: Heb: in Genesis
S. Hierome, observing the Hebrew text to be, in the seventh day God ended his
work; inferres, that therefore the Jews had little reason to glory in their
Sabbath rest, because God himself did not rest that day. I commend neither his
antecedent, nor his consequent, but by this it appears, that in his opinion,
there was no Sabbath commanded, or observed in Paradise. And more expressly in
c. 20. Haec praecepta, and iustificationes, and observantiam Sabbathi dedit
dominus in deserto. Hieron, in cap. 20. Ezekiel.
Ezekiel. Add to these Neque cerre ulla corporis circumcisio illis fuit, quia
neque nob is est, neque Sabbathorum observation, quia neque ne^is est. Eusebius.
lib. 1. c. 4.
Eusebius in his ecclesiastical history, and Proinde videtur non temere
interpretibus scripturae diligentioribus, praedicendo forte dominum
sanctificasse Sabbathum, cum ab exordio rerum sanctificasse legitur. Bulling.
Praefat. de Sab. and Feri^^.
Bullinger, affirming it to be the opinion of the most diligent, and accurate
expositours of holy scriptures, of what sort soever. And lastly, whereas it is
said, that Zanchius thinks, that Adam kept holy the first seventh day in
Paradise, and had Christ in shape of a man to be his preacher; I will oppose
none other then Mr Perkins, that Adam sinned, and was cast out of Paradise the
sixth day. Add hereunto those Nehem. 13.8. Exodus 20.31. Ezekiel: 20.12.
places of scripture, which speak of the Sabbath, as given to the Jews by
Moses, as a part of his Leviticall covenant; with which how this other opinion
can agree, I understand not. Quod Moses diem septimum nominet, and quomodo Deuteronomy
orhem is sex diebus creavit, hic est temporarius ornatus, quo hoc praeceptum
populo suo ornat, nam ante Mosen hoc non invenitur, neque de Abraham etc. Luth.
To. 7. epist: ad amic: vid. Epiph haeres. 8.
Luther (I am sure) affirms, that when Moses, naming the seventh day, adds,
that God rested the seventh day, having made the world in six, did it to set
it out to the people, to whom it was then commanded: for before Moses, no such
observation is to be found either in Abhaham, or any of the Patriarchs.

Chap 3. Wherein is briefly declared, what is to be thought of the present
Question.
IN this question, so hotly debated on both sides, I never conceived it of any
great consequence, which way soever the balance fell. For though they, that
affirm the question, think it to make much for the morality of one in seven;
yet all me know, that Evane scant nugae Pseudo prophetarum, abroragatum esse
quod ceremoniale erat in hoc mandato; remanere vero quod morale est; nempe
unius diei observationem in hebaomade Calvin. Insti^, lib. 20. c. 8.33.34.
Calvin, who is their greatest enemy in this, joins with them in the other, as
well (...) he may, without co^tradicting himself, especially if we speak of
Adam, and the Patriarchs after the fall. Indeed had it been given our first
Parents in Paradise, and state of innocence; as it must universally have bound
all men, so neither could it have been in any thing ceremonial, relating unto
Christ, to be abolished by him; as is alleged in the third, and fourth
arguments; and we must still have kept that day, on which God rested But if it
were in practice only after the fall, so were many other ceremonies, Altars,
Sacrifices, washings, circumcision; which yet are not therefore moral, but
only positive precepts, and forerunners of the ceremonial Law, to be
established in the hands of Moses. Ob. If any man say, there is not the same
reason; because the Law of the Sabbath was afterward made one of the ten
words, written in the tables of stone; which since it cannot be affirmed of
Sacrifices, Circumcision etc. seems to make a great difference:

Summum genus, and short epitome of the whole ceremonial Law, as Ex hisduebus
iocis (Levit. 19. and Levit. 26) manisestum est Sabbatho annexum fuisse aultum
taber naculi, nec modo res fuisse coniunctas insolubili vinculo, sedotium a
laboribus debuisse reserri ad sacrificia. Calvin. in Exodus
Calvin has well observed, and long before him S. Postaqua^ descendit Moses de
monte, opera ^ommendantur rabernaculi co^struendi, and vestis sacerdotalis, de
qui^^^^ faciendis antequam aliud praeciperet locutus est adpopulum de Sabbahi
observatione Aug. q. Exodus ^^ 2. q. 72.
Austin. To the question therefore, the whole seems to move upon two hinges,
matter of fact, and matter of faith. The matter of fact is what Adam did, or
should have done in the state of innocence; but this, and all such of like
nature, since Adam stood not, are mere speculations, known only to the
Almighty, by that part of his infinite wisdom, whereby he beholds all
possibilities of things. The matter of faith may be thought to be the text of
Scripture, alleged out of Genesis. Which is not so; for not the text, but the
interpretation is here only questioned, how it is to be understood for
circumstance of time only; in which case though sundry interpretations be
brought, none can be said to be de fide, as long as all accord with the analogy
of faith. Upon those words, in the beginning God made Heaven and Earth, S.
Austin says, they may have a two fold interpretation. Video vere potuisse dict
quicquid horum diceretur, sed quid horum in his verbis (...) cogitaverit, non
ita video. Nemo mihiiam molestus sit, dicendo mihi. non hoc senti^ Moses, quod
t^ dicis, sed hoc sentit quod ego dico Aug. 1.12. Con. c. 24. and. 25.
The first, that God made all things visible and invisible, in that perfect,
and glorious frame, in which now they are. The second, that he made the
rudiments of all things, out of which they were in their several orders
extracted. I see, (says the Father) both may be true; but which only was in
Moses mind, when he wrote the Story, I see not; nay who is able so perfectly to
know, as to affirm this was it, and no other. Let no man therefore contend
with me, saying, Moses meant not, as thou say, but as I say; it were
foolish, and rash thus to affirm. If the doubt be, whether the place in the
second of Genesis, which lies at stake in this question, may admit both
interpretations, without any prejudice to the Analogy of faith: that, Quam
stultum fit in tanta copia verissunarum sententiarum, quae erui possunt, temere
affirmare, quam earum Moses potissmum senserit, and pernitiosis contentionibus
ipsam offendere charitatem.
which is given by our Adversaries may justly be suspected; ours, I am sure,
cannot.

CAP. IV. The arguments proposed Chap. 2. are fully answered, and the
exposition of sanctification by destination is at large handled.
Unto the first, supposing that the words of the text, blessed, and Sanctified,
are expository; this I say supposed, (because Aquin. p. 1. q. 7 3. art. 3.
some have distinguished between them) the meaning of the place is, that God
bestowed a special prerogative, and preferment upon the seventh day, setting
it apart from the rest of the week; for so the word signifies.

That this was done, we all agree; when it was done, is the question; for this
circumstance we have not expressly in the Text. Now because it may be doubted,
whether Moses wrote the story before the deliverance of Israel, as Lib. 7. de
preparation: Evangeli^. c. 2.
Eusebius Caesariensis thinks: or after the Law was given, as Hexamer.
Beda, Abulensis in Genes.
Abulensis, and most others are of opinion; let our Adversaries make their
election, and this Text nothing favors them. For if Moses writ after the Law
was given, as is most probable; then the proposition, that Gods resting from
his works, and the Sabbaths sanctification were coetaneous, is denied; and
these words stand not in reference to the beginning of the world, but to the Law
given.

Moses speak of this sanctification in the history of the Creation, whereas
the proper place for this had been Exodus, the History of Israel in the
Wilderness?

Moses in that place, because there he had occasion, to speak of the several
days of the week, and of the reason of the seventh days Sanctification, Gods
resting from all his works. As if Moses should have said, you know, how God
has lately separated the seventh day from others to his service: here is the
reason, when he made the World, he himself rested upon that day, as is also
expressed in the Law it self. But s^^ing, Moses wrote that history before the
Law, we must distinguish, for things are said in Scripture to be sanctified, or
set a part, two manner of ways. First, by way of purpose, and destination
only, as God sanctified Jeremy to be a Prophet unto him, before he was born.
Secondly, by way of actualluse, and employment; as when the Levites were
admitted to the actual service of the Tabernacle. True it is, that Gods
resting from his works, and sanctifying the Sabbath, were coetaneous in the
first sense, by way of purpose and intention, which Moses relates: but not in
the latter, by way of actual execution. As soon as he had ended his works,
he ordained, and appointed, that the seventh day, the day of his own rest,
should be that, on which his Church should rest, and follow his example; and
this was that great blessing and prerogative bestowed on that day. Therefore
Mus^m. ^ee. com.
Musculus does well express sanctificatus by destinat us, a day sanctified,
because a day destinated, and fore-appointed. And Bysield against Brerewood.
M. Byfield himself has observed, and that rightly, that the word in the
Original does signify to prepare; to prepare is one thing, and actually to
appoint is another. So then the Sabbath had not an actual existence in the
world from the beginning, it had only a Metaphysicall being, as all natural
things are said to be in their causes. For the cause, or reason of the Sabbaths
sanctification (Gods rest) was from the beginning, though the sanctification it
self was long time after.



Moses also wrote by inspiration; but here we read, what God has done, as well
as what man should do; and so'tis an history of what was past, if we rightly
understand the Text; this therefore is but a cavil.



Esai. 45.1.
whether Cyrus was not thus sanctified, to be the destroyer of Babylon, and
restorer of Gods Church? or whether this service were the first, that ever
Cyrus did, when he was every way fitted thereunto? Nay was not Christ thus
sanctified to be the Messiah? yet was he near thirty years old, before he
actually manifested himself to be the Messiah, and showed froth his glory. I
presume, that no man will say, that all the time before, he wanted abilities
thereunto.



his hour was not yet come: And thus all things else are done by him, as Nihil
incomptum ^tque intempestivum apud verbum. Praecognita sunt enim huic omnia a
patre: perfici^^^tur autem a filio, apto tempore, expectante eamhoram, qua est
a patrc praecognita. Irenae. lib. 3. Cont. haeres. c. 18.
Ireneus well observes; So here, indeed the seventh day was from the beginning
the day of Gods rest, and might have been employed as the Lords Sabbath; and
some days doubtless were thus bestowed, and perhaps this. But the time unto
which God had destined, or ordained it, wherein solemnly to make it his holy
Sabbath, was not yet come, viz. the redeeming of his Church, out of the bondage
of Egypt; for of it was the Sabbath a special memorial. For my part I cannot
understand, why any man should mislike this interpretation, since the word
sanctified, when it is attributed to such things, as are not capable of
holiness, is mostly used in this sense; especially since nothing has hitherto
been objected of any moment, but what may be reduced unto these heads.



But who sees not, that this is mere sophisme, supposing that, which is in
controversy, viz. whether the word sanctified in that place, does signify
destinated? For if so, then this interpretation is warranted from the letter it
self. If not, this must be proved by some other medium; for to say the text
does not warrant your exposition, is only to deny, that the world sanctified,
is in that place so to be understood, which is the question.

desination, and restrains the act of God, spoken of in the third verse, unto
that period of time, spoken of in the second verse, else how can (And) the
copulative tie all together? Now plain it is, that the words of the second
verse are to be under stood of the time present, immediately after the creation:
for then God ended his works, then he rested from his works; therefore he then
sanctified the seventh day to be forthwith observed by Adam, and his posterity.

sanctified the day: but that therefore he then commanded Adam to observe the
day, does no way follow. For that God did then sanctify, that is destinate the
day to be the Churches Sabbath in due time, is one thing; and to command Adam
to observe it, is another. A man may determine with himself, that one of his
sons (having many shall be his heir, may we therefore conclude that he did
presently put him into the inheritance, the antecedent is true, the consequent
false.

sanctified by destinated for times to come, is not warranted by any other
place of Scripture, therefore it may justly be suspected in this.

sanctified, is put for destinated very frequently in Scripture. Es. 13.3.
The Medes were Gods sanctified ones, that is destinated to be in time to come
the destroyers of Babylon, and the restorers of his Church. Ioh. 10.36.
The father sanctified his son, and sent him into the World, ordaining, or
destinating him to be the redeemer of the World. And the same word, which is
here translated sanctified, is used in the Ier. 12.3.
12. of Jeremy and third verse to signify to prepare, or preordaine. And that
it is so to be understood here also, it shall (I hope) appear by other places
of Scripture, in answer to that which follows.

destinate a day for its memorial, to be kept holy so many years after.

Sinai to be kept, when they came into the land of Canaan forty years after:
neither were any of them observed before in the Wilderness, no not the Numb.
9.2.
Passover, save once, that we read of, which was by an especial command from
God himself. Concerning this, the words of Exodus 13.5.11.12.
Moses are plain, when the Lord has brought thee into the land of the
Canaanites, etc. then shall thou keep this service in this month. So that I
affirm two things.

First, that although the great works of God are so done, as to be had in
remembrance; yet many of them had never any set times appointed for their
memorials by God himself, unless perhaps by such a destination, of which we
speak. Was not the drying of the earth from the flood, much the same with
creating the sea, and dry land? Yet Noah, who was then as it were another Adam,
is not commanded to keep that day holy. Was not the birth of our blessed Lord
(not to speak of his conception, passion, ascension etc.) as glorious, as the
first days works; and was it not then also in a manner said, let there be
light, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Jsrael? Yet
the Angels, which rejoiced to see that day, had no commission to proclaim it
holy: neither did God himself appoint it for holy, unless by destinating it
to be hereafter observed, by the precept, and practice of the Church, as we see
at this day. Secondly, when God actually commands his Church the memorialls of
his mercies, there is many times a great distance set between the institution,
and the observation; as appears in the instances given in the Jewish festivals.



Deuteronomy. 5.15.
Remember, says Moses, that thou were a servant in the land of Egypt, and that
the Lord brought thee out thence with a mighty hand, therefore the Lord thy God
commanded thee to observe the Sabbath day. Plain therefore it is, that the law
of the Sabbath was grounded upon their deliverance out of Egypt; for the one is
rendered as a reason of the other. So that howsoever it please some to tell us,
that the word (Remember) called the people back to consider the practice of
this law in former ages; and that this precept has morality in it, because of
the word Remember; yet they must give us leave, to think Moses the best
Expositor thereof, saying remember thou were a servant in the land of Egypt.

God rested the seventh day, (says the commandment) and therefore he blessed,
and sanctified it. The Sabbath therefore was grounded upon the creation, as
well as upon their redemption: nay this last seems to be but accidental, and
accessory to the former.

Est duplex Sabbathi sanctificatio: una qua sanctificatum est a Deo, altera qua
praecipie^atur Israeli. Sanctificatio Deiest, qua dics septimus statim initio
est quieti deputatus, and consecratus: sanctificatio Israelis est, diem
septimum ^ Deo quieti sanctificatum pro sancto habere. Mus. praecept. 4.
Musculus, that there is a twofold sanctification of the Sabbath. For both God
sanctified it; and Israel sanctified it; God sanctified the Sabbath, when
presently from the beginning he deputed, and consecrated the seventh day unto
rest; Isreal's sanctifying was the keeping holy that day, which God had long
before deputed to be kept. According to this twofold sanctification, there is a
twofold respect of the word Remember. For in the commandment they are bid to
remember the ground of the seventh-daies destination to this holy use from the
beginning. In that of Deuteronomy, they are bid remember the immediate ground, or
reason of the actual institution, and observation of the day. The word
therefore Remember, in the commandment, has not (as is supposed) primarily
any reference, either to the works of God, or to the finishing of those works:
but secondarily, and inclusively only, as being the occasion of Gods
destinating the day to be in time to come the Churches Sabbath, which they are
primarily, and immediately commanded to remember. And in that other place,
Remember has respect unto their deliverance out of Egypt; as being the
primary, and immediate reason of the Sabbaths institution, and actual
observation. And indeed, if we will speak of things as they are, we shall
find, that the Sabbath could not congruously have been instituted, and
observed, until this time of their deliverance. For now God makes to himself
a glorious Church, which before lay hid in private families, in the midst of
Idolaters, without Ceremony, without sanctuary, and therefore without Sabbath;
for Sabbath and Sanctuary are relatives in Moses. Levit. 19.30.
Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. No Sanctuary, no
Sabbath. Now, and not till now, God has a separated people unto himself; and
the Sabbath, we know, was given them, as a pledge and seal of this separation.
Therefore the Prophet, Speaking of the great favors of God to this people, as
distinguished from others, says, Ezekiel. 20.12.
moreover I gave them my Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that I
am the Lord, that sanctify them. Where first the prophet speaks of them
Emphatically, he gave his Sabbaths to them, and none but them, to be a sign
between him, and them; and none but them; that he does sanctify them and none
but them; and all this, when he lifted up his hand unto them to deliver them.
Secondly, he speaks of Sabbaths in the plural number; meaning all their three
sorts of Sabbaths, of days, months, and years, all which are made the signs,
and pledges of their separation. That this is the common exposition of that
place, by all, but himself, is confessed by Aliqui consent dici hic Sabbatha
in plurali, ut significet triplex Sabbathum, primum dierum, quod proprie
dicebatur Sabbathum, secundum mesium, tertium annorum, nam Sabbata haec o ania
dedit Deus Iudaeis in signum salutis, and quietis dan^^ per Christum. Cor. Lap.
Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit, as great an enemy to this destination, as any
other. But if any list to be contentious herein, declining this place, as they
do that of the Colossians; as if the prophet spoke not of their weekly
Sabbath, but only of their other feasts: the words of Neh. 9.13.14.
Nehemiah seem to me as clear as the noonday, saying, thou made known
unto them thy holy sabbath (the weekly sabbath) and command them precepts,
and ordinances, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant. God, we see, made
known now unto them, not unto their fathers, this weekly Sabbath, by the hand
of Moses his servant. Ob. If any say, it was now made known unto them only by
way of remembrance, reviving that old ordinance of his, which had now been a
long time intermitted, by reason of their bondage in Egypt.



Nehemiah, that the whole moral law was given unto Israel by the hand of Moses
in the wilderness; may we from hence conclude, that therefore they never were
in the world till then in precept or practice?

(thou madst known unto them thy holy Sabbath, and commandedst them precepts,
and ordinances, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant) cannot, in any
congruity, be understood of the morals, which are immediately engraven upon the
conscience; and (I think) are no where said to be made known by the hand of
Moses. But let this be granted; yet let it be considered, what he says in the
words immediately going before, (Thou came down also upon mount Sinai, and
spakest unto them from heaven, and gave them right judgments, and true
laws, good statutes and commandments,) and then I conceive we may well
conclude, that when he adds (and thou made known unto them thy holy
Sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, and ordinances, and laws, by the hand
of Moses thy servant) either he means the same laws, spoken of immediately
before, which were such a tautology, as I think cannot be paraleld in
Scripture: or that the text apparently distinguishes between the morals in the
thirteenth, and the ceremonials, and Iudicialls (of which the Sabbath was head)
in the fourteenth verse.

to the words of the story, Genesis the second; and that therefore the word
Remember bids them look back to what God had appointed from the beginning. Now
the words of the commandment speak not of any destination, but of an
institution, therefore that also in Genesis must so be understood.

Remember, which is more frequently, then solidly insisted upon, look to the
practice of former ages, and Gods institution from the beginning: but is a
plain caveat (if men list to see it) for the time to come. And I appeal to
common sense, how the words (remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day) can be
construed, remember how your fathers kept it, or how God did institute it from
the beginning? It is far more rationally said by some of our adversaries in this
point, that Remember is added to this, and to no other commandment of the
decalogue, as for other reasons, so because of the ceremoniality thereof. For
they indeed were formerly practiced by all man kind, and were naturally (though
imperfectly) known, so that they could not be forgotten; but this of the
Sabbath was a new ordinance of another nature, and made known by the hand of
Moses. It was withal the chief of all the ceremonies, containing in the
mystery thereof the Epitome of Gods mercies in Christ, in whom the father
blesses us with all spiritual blessings: therefore is this Remember thus
prefixed.

Adam even in the state of inocency: and therefore, as soon as he was created,
he was set to dress the garden, and to work therein in imitation of Gods
working. There is the like reason of Gods resting, as of his working, that the
one should be exemplary as well as the other; no doubt therefore, but that this
was enjoined him, as well as that.

Adam in the state of innocence, as binding him to follow Gods example herein,
I understand not. Sure I am it has no footing in Scriptures, and is spoken
gratis, and the whole argument a pari is a mere fancy. Especially,
considering, that (as Calvin has well observed) Gods example recorded in the
commandment binds not us at this day, though in the estate of corruption. For
the words of the commandment (six days shall thou labor) are not
preceptive, but only permissive. And Pro sua ^bertate permittit. Neque enim, ut
inscite quidam putarunt, exigit sex dierum laborem, sedipsa facilitate ^o^ ad
parendum allicit. Calv. in Exodus
Calvin bitterly, but justly derides, those, that expound them otherwise:
saying, God does not, as some have ignorantly thought, exact of his people the
labor of six days, but allures them, by the facility of that, which he
requires, to obey the command. If those words therefore set not a binding
precedent before us, but permit us only to follow our occasions on the six
days, as shall seem good unto us; much less was Gods example preceptive unto
Adam in that condition. Until therefore something else shall be more
substantially alleged, I shall ever read, with Musculus, sanctified, that is
destinated for time to come. To conclude, whereas the argument might seem to
be enforced from the particle (So) in the Original, it is only a copulative:
our last translation therefore reads it, And God blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it.

To the second; be it granted that the word in the original be the same, which
is elsewhere used for holy convocations; and that God, when he made those great
lights, had an eye to this their use, to which also he afterward appointed
them, in the new moons and other festivals of the Jews; yet from hence to
infer, that from the beginning there were such times thus observed by the
course of those great lights, draws blood from the text. For this was neither a
principal, nor natural end of their creation; Though therefore God did
appoint the Jews in their solemn feasts to be guided by the Moon, yet we see
the Christians follow no such directions. If this had been either a principal,
or a natural end of the moon from the beginning; surely that which was
natural is become mutable, and we that look not to this use of the Moon in
our times of holy convocations, save only in a few moveable feasts, are most
unnatural. The whole argument thus grounded upon the signification of the word
is in all the parts thereof unsound.

To the testimony of the Apostle Heb. 4. the Jesuit Hinc satis clare elicitur,
and evincitus Sabbathi cultum, and requiem in usu fuisse apud homines ab
origin mundi, ali^s vim non haberet discursus and argumentum Pauli. Corn. a
Lap. in loc.
Cornelius a Lapide says, it is by this place clearly evinced, that the
Sabbath was in use amongst men from the beginning, or else the whole discourse
of the Apostle in that place is overthrown. For trial whereof, and clearing
of this Scripture, we must first set down the Jesuits deduction, and then
compare it with the text, out of which it is deduced. The words of the Apostle
are. We which have believed, do enter into rest, as it is said. As I have
sworn in my wrath, if they enter into my rest: although the works were
finished from the foundation of the world. These words, Est occupatio, per quam
ascendit Apostolus ad explicandam anagogen Sabbathi, etc.
says he, are brought in by way of preoccupation, wherein the Apostle
ascends in his discourse to explain the anagogicall meaning of the Sabbath,
and from the rest thereof, and that of Canaan, to prove, that there remains
to the true believers a third rest in heaven: As if the Apostle should have
said, Quod duplex requies promissa fuit patribus nostris, primarequies fuit
Sabbathi.
God did heretofore promise a twofold rest unto our fathers; the first of the
Sabbath, in which he commanded them to rest from their daily labors: the
second of Canaan, where he gave them rest from all their enemies. But David
speaks Psalm. 9^. neither of the test of the Sabbath, because all men were
already brought into that rest from the beginning of the world, when God, having
perfected the creation, commanded men to rest therein in imitation of his rest:
neither does the Apostle speak of therest of Canaan as appears v. 7.8.
therefore a third rest is there meant by the Prophet, even the rest of heaven.
If this be compared with the Text, it will be found out of square in three
things.

First, in that he makes the Sabbath to be a promise to the Patriarchs, but
where do we find any such promise? Nay how could it be a promise, if
instituted in paradise? For a promise is of a thing to come, not already in
being.

Secondly, the Apostle speaks of those rests, which were given the Jews, as
types and figures of our spiritual rest: but the Jesuit affirms the Sabbath,
not to have been given to the Jews, but man kind from the beginning; which
indeed overthrows the whole scope of the Apostle.

Lastly, the maine intention of the Apostle is mistaken, which is not to
explain the Anagogicall, or heavenly Sabbath, but only the spiritual rest,
which the faithful under the Gospel receive in Christ. The words are plain,
we which do believe do enter into rest: nor is the present tense put for the
future, as the Jesuit suggests without any ground; For it is the sin of
apostasy falling from the faith of Christ, against which the Apostle so much
labors in that place, and throughout the whole Epistle; and apostasy is a
falling away from some estate, in which we already are. Indeed our spiritual
rest, which we find in Christ, Rev. 21.4.
ends in that heavenly rest described Revel. 21.4. but this was not first,
and immediately typified by the Sabbath, and the land of Canaan; and therefore
in a secondary, and subordinate construction, only to be found in that place of
the Apostle. Leaving therefore this lesuiticall interpretation to those that
like to follow it; the text is plain enough, (as Praecipua huius loci
difficultas hinc provenit, quod violenter a multis torquetur. Mar^o. in Loc.
one has well observed) to all those, that desire not to wrest it: For the
Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, to whom he writes, to take heed, least by their
Apostasy they deprive themselves of that rest of God, which he ever proposed,
and promised to their Fathers, and so preventeth two objections. For they might
say, we can be in no such danger, having already entered into Gods rest two
manner of ways.

First into that rest of his, which was from the beginning, when he finished his
works; into this the Sabbath, which he gave our Fathers, as a special pledge
and badge of his people, has admitted us. Our imitation of him is our
communication with him.

To this the Apostle answers, that indeed the Sabbath was given as a
memorial of Gods rest, but that this is not the rest of God, of which the
Prophet David speaks.

Secondly, we are entered into Gods rest, being brought by Joshua into the land
of Canaan, the land of rest.

But this plea is also rejected by the Apostle, because David, whose text is
quoted, lived long after Joshua. The sum therefore of that Scripture is only,
that neither the rest of the Sabbath, nor the rest of Canaan was that rest,
into which God promised to bring his people, but only types, and shadows
thereof. To conclude, this argument hangs together like a rope of sands,
because the text says, the works were finished from the foundation, when God
rested; it infers, that therefore also Adam, and the Patriarchs kept a Sabbath
from the beginning; in which is no coherence at all, as any man may see.

To the fourth it is confessed, that there was a Sabbath before the Law was
given in Sinai; but the question is not of Sinai, but the wilderness after
Isreal's departure out of Egypt, till when we say, there was no Sabbath. And
whereas it is said, that Moses speaks thereof in that place, as of a thing well
known; he that looks better into the text, shall easily perceive the contrary.
To this purpose observe these circumstances.

First, the occasion of those words of Moses; to morrow is the rest of the holy
Sabbath unto the Lord; they are his reply to a relation of a new accident, in
the gathering of Mannah, viz. that whereas all the weekbefore, whether they
gathered more or less, every man had an Omer full, now on the sixth day every
man gathered two.

Secondly, this new accident is expounded by a new oracle, or revelation, this
is that, which the Lord has said, for so the words are used v. 16.

Thirdly, what is this new Oracle, but the reason of this new accident, God
teaching them thereby a new observation, viz. that of the Sabbath. For surely
if the Sabbath had been so well known, as is pretended; neither the rulers of
the congregation would have wondered so much at the double portion of Mannah,
which fell on the sixth day; they might easily have concluded to morrow is Gods
resting day; neither needed Moses have given them a new oracle for their
satisfaction.

Fourthly, we may observe the peoples disobedience; for notwithstanding all
this, some went out upon the seventh day. By this it probably appears, that
they knew not yet what belonged to the keeping of a Sabbath. This was, it
seems, the first, that they ever heard of; therefore they neither believed,
nor observed it; whereas afterward being acquainted therewith, they kept it
even to superstition.

Fifthly, mark the Lords expostulation with them; how long refuse you to keep
my commandments, and my laws? Had he spoken in the singular number, then
indeed, how long, might have seemed to intimate, that the law of the Sabbath
had been of greater antiquity; but when the Israelites are reproved for
breaking the Lords commandments, and laws; it is still meant of those, which
God gave them by Moses; neither can any place be showed to the contrary.

Sixthly, we may note, that God does only reprove, not punish this violation;
whereas afterward, when the Sabbath was known, and established, the gatherer
of sticks must be stoned; Now what difference, I pray you, between
stick-gathering and Mannah-gathering; but that the one sinned of presumption
against an ordinance newly settled, and by consent established; The other,
against a law only newly proposed, and made known, but not fully assented unto;
And this I am sure is the reason rendered by Quare qui (...) colligebut
punichatur; certe quoniam si statim d^principio, quando feruntur leges, ac jere
in promulgatione ips^ contemnerentur, nullo mode possunt postea cus^odiri.
Chain Mat. c. 12. hom. ^^.
Saint Chrysostom, for stoning the stick gatherer; because if laws should be
contemned, as soon as they be made, and almost in their very promulgation,
they would never afterward be observed.

Seventhly, the words of Moses are remarkable; see how the Lord has given you
the Sabbath: see, betokens the novelty of the thing: how, shows the
occasion of the Sabbath; to you, says the text, not to your Fathers, or to all
man kind; To which point the words of Nehemiah are so plain, as it is a wonder
to me, how any man can imagine a Sabbath commanded before Moses. Nehem 9.14
Thou made known unto them thine holy Sabbath by the hand of Moses thy
servant.

Lastly, mark the conclusion of the story, so the people rested on the seventh
day. By reason of this new accident, new revelation, gentle reproof, and
admonition were they brought to keep a Sabbath. Unto all which add the gloss
of Trem. in locum.
Iunius, and Tremelius, affirming, that there were three causes of the Sabbaths
institution; the remembrance of the creation, the deliverance out of Egypt, and
the fall of Mannah. No effect can precede its cause in nature, and time, which
the Sabbath needs must do, if it preceded Mannah in observation, and yet the
fall of Mannah be a cause of its institution. It does not therefore appear by
this Scripture, that the Sabbath was a thing well known, and practiced at that
time. When Moses says it is the holy Sabbath, the present tense is put for the
future, as is most usual, when we speak of days or solemnities, though
novell, and occasional.

To the fifth we say, that Noah, in sending, or forbearing to send forth his
Dove, was not guided by any rule of Religion. For I would ask any sober man,
whether, if Noah had sent out the Dove upon the Sabbath, (supposing a Sabbath
to have been in the days of Noah) he had thereby sinned, in breaking the
Sabbath? For if the Sabbath were broken thereby, it must be either by the Dove
flying on that day, which were too ridiculous: or by Noah's letting her out of
the Arc; and by this rule, he that should open a casement of his house to let
a bird abroad upon the Sabbath, (for Noah did no more) should profane it;
which to affirm, is more then Jewish superstition.

But you will say, Noah regarded not the flying of the Dove, only he durst not
do it on the Sabbath, because it was his own work; and his thoughts should
have been employed about his worldly estate, and condition, which the Esai. 52.
Prophet forbids.

This place of the Prophet we shall have fitter occasion hereafter to examine.
For the present it shall suffice to remember, that Noah, at this time, though
he were saved from drowning, yet he suffered also under the common distress of
the flood. Was it sin, think you, for Noah to think upon this calamity on the
seventh day; or to labor to know, how near God had set a period to that
misery? If a man were at sea, where, or in what part of the world he knew not,
would you hold him guilty of profaneness, if he should go about to discry the
land upon the Sabbath day? But what other reason can be given of this seventh
days expectation, which is thus noted in the text.

Some perhaps will say, because seven is the number of perfection, that Noah
might have conceived, that God would complete his Judgment, and make dry the
earth upon some seventh day: or, that knowing, that God made the world in seven
days of nothings, he might hope that he would new make it again, as it were,
out of the flood in some such time.

But for mine own part, I do not conceive, that the observation of numbers
was yet extant; but rather, that Noah was directed hereunto, by the change of
the Moon in every seven days; well He resolved to open the windows, or
floodgates of heaven, giving extraordinary strength of influence to the
stars. Bolton.
knowing that the element of water is most subject to this Planet, as
experience shows. And there is no doubt to be made, but that, as God did
miraculously both power down the flood, and withdraw it: so in both works he
used the help of second causes, and strengthened the natural influences of
those heavenly bodies. This reason therefore does no way conclude.

To the sixth, which is the place of Job. understanding, by the sons of God,
Job, and his children, and their standing before the Lord, their keeping of the
Sabbath; If it be the interpretation of Pineda the Jesuit, I think it is a
singular phantasy of his own. But to give Pineda his due, although he seem to
say, that this sense may be gathered out of the septuagint; yet he himself
affirms, that by the sons of God, in that place, are meant the holy Angels;
and proves, by many reasons borrowed from Ex quibus omnibus efficitur, vt qui
fil^^ Dei venerunt, ut assisterent coram Domino, Sancti Angeli nocessario sint.
Pined. ex Aquin. part. 3. q. 13.
Aquinas, that the title of the sons of God does more often agree to the
Angels, then to men, in holy Scripture. This argument therefore, as it is
forsaken of reason, so also of authority; only we may note by the way, that Job
offered sacrifice for his children every day, not upon any one set day more
religiously observed, then another.

To the seventh, be it granted, that time has ever been divided by weeks,
notwithstanding some say, that, before Isreal's coming out of Egypt, we find no
mention of them at all in Scripture. But that there should be no such division
of time without the seventh-day Sabbath, has no ground of reason. For look how
time came to be measured by quarters, and months, which was by the Sun and Moon
set for that purpose in the heavens: so likewise by weeks. And therefore I make
no question, but that the heathen, who never heard of a seventh-day Sabbath,
have weeks, as well as months, and years. For men do naturally observe the
course of those great lights, and by the revolution of the Sun reckon their
years, and by the Moon their Months: Now the subdivision of the month into
weeks is chalked out unto them, by the four changes of the Moon. This
argument therefore seems to suppose that, which is against the light of
nature, viz. that men first began to divide time by weeks, and so adding week
unto week, made up the year; whereas they are naturally taught first to
account months, and years, and afterward to subdivide these into weeks,
Lastly, this argument supposes, that Adam observed the next day after his
creation for a Sabbath, which I suppose few will affirm, sure I am, none can
prove.

To the eight, be it granted, that God never fails in necessaries, that the
points of faith, and hope mentioned in the argument, were behoovefull
instructions for Adam, and the Patriarchs: that they are also included in the
ordinance of the Sabbath; but that they are only shut up in this ordinance, or
that Adam, and the Fathers before the law, learned them not else where; is no
way to be yeclded. For they might have them (as questionles they had) both by
the light of nature, and of revelation. By natural light; for we must not
think, that Adam utterly lost the knowledge of his Creator, or works of
creation; he knew after his fall Genesis 3.12.
the voice of God, he knew also that God had given him the woman. It was also
known by the light of revelation, in the promise of the blessed seed, in which
is comprised both our creation, redemption, and translation to a better life,
as Mihi, ne quid dissimutem, non subinnui tantum boc loto, sed ^lta voce
proclamari videtur relegatae gentis restitu^io. Park. l. 1. de delcen.
one has well observed. Our creation in these words, out of the earth wast
thou taken, and thou art but dust; our redemption in those, he shall break
thine head; our translation in the last clause, till thou return; in which he
proclaims the restitution of Adam, and his posterity, that are his seed, to
the happiness of Paradise, not earthly, but heavenly.

To the ninth we say, the Patriarchs no doubt did publicly worship God; their
altars and sacrifices make it manifest; neither was it any will worship in
them, but appointed by revelation. From hence to clude, that therefore God
appointed them the Sabbath, is no good consequent; for God appoints men many
duties, but prescribes no certain time of performance. For time is no part of
the worship, but an accident, and adjunct thereof, left for the most part to
discretion, and opportunity. I hope, that no man will deny, but that God is
publicly worshipped amongst us upon Holy Days, Wednesdaies, and Frydaies; and
yet God never sets us thosetimes. From the worship thereof to infer the time,
is no good deduction. But let all be granted, that God both prescribed worship,
and time; the Sabbath at most is but a positive precept, as the sacrifices also
were, no moral duty, which is the thing aimed at in this question, and shall
be handled in that which follows.

Lastly, the testimonies of the learned are not, and, as I conceive, cannot be
very many; and those that are, may easily be reconciled. To begin with Philo,
the very addition which is given him, that he is a Jew, is sufficient exception
against his testimony. And so for M. Broughton; it may be reputed a part of his
Rabbinicall learning, to which he was so much addicted. M. Calvin is not
constant to himself in this point; for in his book of Perpetuam islam
cessationem Iudaeis repraesentahat unius diei ex septem observatio Call. inst.
l. 2. c. 8.
Institutions, he plainly speaks thereof, as given to the Jews by Moses,
Videtur Deus per diem septimum populo suo delineasse, futuru^ sui Sabbathi in
ultimo die perfectionem. Ibid.
not by God to Adam. Catharinus, and Alcuinus are held but Innovators amongst
the Schoolmen in this point, and are generally forsaken of all their follows.
Lastly that of Zanchius is but a fancy of his own, and that also far fetched;
and thus much of the first question.

CAP. V. The second question is proposed, whether the letter of the fourth
Commandment be a moral precept?
A Law being once enacted, we take into consideration the binding power
thereof; for all laws do naturally bind all such, upon whom they are imposed,
until it does appear, that they be repealed. Hence though Critickes say, lex
a legendo, yet Divines take up another Etymology, lex a liga^do, its therefore
a law, because it does oblige. But all Laws being not of the same kind, do
not bind after the same manner, neither as they are laws, nor as they are
intended by the lawgivers. This is most true not only of humane laws, whose
authors are men, but of such also as proceed immediately from God himself. For
there be some laws of his, which oblige all people, nations, and languages
upon the face of the whole earth, even every son of Adam. Others of them are
prescribed either to particular persons, or some one people, and nation only:
some of them also are of perpetual, and everlasting continuance, never to be
revoked; others were ordained only for a certain period of time. Laws of the
first kind are properly styled moral, which are in both the forenamed respects
universal, the dictates of nature, and included in the divine essence, which
is not subject to any shadow of change; Laws of the latter kind are all the
ceremonial, and judicial ordinances. The second question therefore is,
whether the fourth commandment of the Decalogue be a moral law, binding all
men throughout all ages to the end of the world: or whether it were given only
to the Israelites, till the fullness of time, and exhibiting of the Messiah?
The affirmative seems to some men as clear as the day it self, and to be a
point of that high consequence in religion, as that we ought rather to suffer
as Martyrs, then to quit this truth. We will therefore muster up all such
arguments, as make to this purpose.

CHAP. VI. The arguments for the affirmative are propounded, and enforced.
ANd first, it is alleged, that all the commandments of the Decalogue are
moral, being parts, and branches of the law of nature. But the fourth
commandment is one of these, placed in the very heart of the rest, spoken by
Gods own mouth, written by Gods own finger, and that in tables of stone, to
teach us their perpetuity, laid up with the rest in the Arc; therefore the
fourth commandment must needs be moral.

Secondly, if this be not moral, as well as any of the rest, not only Moses,
but God himself, who placed it so, might seem purposely to confound things of
different natures, intending as it were to breed distractions in the Church, as
we see at this day. But this is no way to be imagined, for God is the author of
peace, and not confusion; therefore doubtless the fourth commandment is
equally moral with all the rest.

Thirdly, that which is naturally written upon the hearts of the very heathen
themselves, must needs be moral; but the whole fourth commandment is thus
naturally written. Ergo.

First the Sabbath must be the seventh day; for this number was ever reputed
the number of perfection, and the holy number, not only Cyprian, de Spiritu S.
S. Cyprian so calls it, but Homer also, Hesiod and Callimachus.

Secondly, the whole day was spent even by heathens after an holy manner, in
public worship, and private contemplation.

Thirdly, they also observed their Sabbaths with severe strictness from all
manner of works. Their Idolatrous Priests affirmed, that the holy days were
polluted, if any work were done in them; By all which it is plain, that the
very Heathen observed the Sabbath not by revelation, for this they never had,
but by the very light of nature; therefore, etc.

Fourthly, that commandment is moral, which has all the characters of
morality, As first, that it appertains to all nations in all ages. Secondly,
that the more understanding amongst the Heathen approved, and taught it.
Thirdly, that it may be discerned by reason rightly informed. Fourthly, that it
contains something which is necessary to humane nature to attain its end, and
final happiness. Fifthly, that it is such, as if it were observed with the
rest, would make the conversation of man complete, without the addition of any
other law; but all these marks of morality are to be seen in the fourth
commandment. The two first are apparent by the precedent argument; for it was
ever observed, approved, and taught by Heathens in all ages. The third is a
necessary consequent of the former, for if the Heathens observed it, this their
observation must needs proceed from reason rightly informed. The fourth no man
can be so wicked as to deny; for if any thing be necessary to bring men unto
everlasting happiness, it is the observation of the Sabbath. The last also is
evident, for if all the rest of the Decalogue together with this were observed,
what need we any other laws either of God, or man? Ergo.

Fifthly, that commandment is moral, whose reasons are moral; but such are
the reasons in the fourth commandment. As the first, which is taken from the
equity of the law, giving men six for one; for God ever was, and ever will be
alike liberal to all men in all ages in this kind. The second, drawn from Gods
interest in the seventh day. The Seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord, and what
sons of Adam are exempted from giving God his own? The third, is Gods example
proposed for our imitation; for all men are bound by the very light of nature,
to be followers of God, as dear children. The fourth, is the promise, which is
made therein; For it will be as blessed a day, or a day as full of blessing
unto us, if we sanctify it, as ever it was to the Jews; God being not less
good, nor his grace less powerful, nor his promise less sure; The fifth, is
the ease and refreshing of our servants, and beasts, to whom Christians must
not be less merciful, then the Jews. Lastly the Sabbath taught them, that
they were the Lords people: and no man will say, but that we also are so, by as
many and by more strong ties, and relations, then were ever any. Ergo etc.

Sixthly, the law Ceremonial, and Judicial were given only to the Jews, and
such as were circumcised; but the fourth commandment was directed, not only to
those within the covenant, but also to strangers, and aliens. The strangers
within thy gates. And upon this ground Neh. 13.16.
Nehemiah reproved the Tyrian Merchants, which were strangers; therefore etc.

Seventhly, from the words of Christ in the Gospel, Mat. 24.20.
pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath day; Those words were spoken to
the disciples, foreshewing, that if their flight should happen to befall them
on the Sabbath; their affliction would thereby be increased. But if the fourth
commandment be not Moral, what addition of sorrow had it been, if their
flight had befallen them that day? Christians (and such were the disciples)
need not trouble themselves about a law Ceremonial. Thus then. That
commandment, the breaking whereof might justly grieve a Christian forced
thereunto by flight, is doubtless moral, but the fourth commandment is such,
therefore etc.

Eighthly, that commandment, against which humane corruptions do especially
arise, and band themselves both in the Godly, and the wicked, must needs be
moral: but our corruptions do chiefly fight against the Sabbath, as the Godly
feel by experience in themselves: and experience does also make evident in the
wicked of the world; therefore etc.

Ninthly, that cannot be a truth of God, which overthrowes all religion, lets
in Atheism, Epicureisme, and all profaneness; no good tree can bring forth
such evil fruit. But that doctrine, which denies the morality of the Sabbath,
overthrows all religion, lets in Epicureisme, and Profaneness; as appears in
those Churches, wherein it is taught in foreign parts. Ergo.

Tenthly, that which the Church of England teaches in her Homilies, ought to be
held for truth by all the obedient children of that Church; but the morality of
the Sabbath is that, which the Church of England teaches in her Homily of the
time, and place of prayer; as will appear to every one, that will read the
same: Therefore all the obedient children of the Church of England ought to
acknowledge it to be true.

Eleventhly, if you make the fourth commandment Ceremonial, you make the
Church of England guilty of Iudaisme. For that Church, which reads to her
children a Ceremonial Law, and commands them to kneel, whilst it is read, in
acknowledgment of their subjection thereunto; and at the end to pray, Lord have
mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law, cannot but be a Jewish
Church: But the Church of England thus teaches her children. Ergo.

Twelfthly, unless the fourth commandment be moral, there will be but nine
commandments in the Decalogue, which is contrary not only to the received
opinion of all men, but to the calculation of the whole Catholic Church in
all ages, and is no mean Sacrilege to affirm. Ergo.

Thirteenthly, that which is taught by men, which are most spiritual, and
alone discern the things of God, must needs be true, and so on the contrary.
But the Morality of the Sabbath is taught by men that are most spiritual, the
contrary by men that are carnal, therefore etc.

Lastly, we have the authority of all our English writers almost ever since the
reformation unto this time; neither was it hitherto ever contradicted for at
least these threescore, and ten years, unless by Papists, Anabaptists, or
Familists. Ergo.

CHAP. VII. In which are set down the arguments for the negative.
THe negative tenent has also its arguments, which in the next place must be
produced, and

First, it is alleged; That commandment, over which Christ was absolute
Lord, as he was the son of man, is not moral; for a moral precept is part
of Gods eternal law, over which the son of man can have no power, being made
under the law: But Christ, as the son of man, was Lord of the Sabbath, as
himself upon two sundry occasions has twice told us Math. 12. Mark. 2.

To these Texts these exceptions have been made.

1 Excep. 1.
That this phrase does no more import the Sabbath to be a ceremony, then the
same used by the Apostle does conclude the dead, and the living to be a
ceremony, for he rose again, that he might be the Lord of the dead, and of the
living.

But this is to play with the ambiguity of the word; it is one thing to be Lord
of the Church, to guide, govern, perfect, quicken, raise, glorify her: for
this is the meaning of the Apostle, upon which that in the Ephesians may seem
as a comment. Ephesians. 1.20.21.22. And another thing to be Lord of the Law or
constitution, to moderate, dispense, order, alter, abolish; for in what other
construction can any one be said to be Lord of a law?

2 Except. 2.
It is said, that Christ did not intend by these words of his any such
Lordship, because he did not then abrogate the Sabbath.

Nor is this to the purpose, for never any man yet dreamed, that Christ did in
those words abolish the Sabbath; for both it, and the rest of the legal
ordinances were in force, till they were nailed with him to the Cross.

3 Except. 3.
It is excepted, that our Savior in those words does only dispense with his
Disciples in that particular case, and challenge to himself the power, and
prerogative of expounding the Law against the Pharisees, who pretended only to
the Chair, and to give interpretations of the Law.

But to satisfy this also, and to clear the Text, we affirm,

1 That Christ does not there, or in any other place, ever dispense with the
law in himself, or any other, for he took upon him the form of a servant, and
came not to break the Law, but to fulfill it.

2 That in those words Christ does not intend to expound the law only; for this
he had done before, by the example of David, and by the place in Hosea.

3 That he does therefore begin a new argument against the Pharisees,
consisting of two things; the first of the end, and intention of the Law, which
was the good of man; the other from his own office, which was to be head both
of men, and Angels, and therefore being to dispose of all things, which tended
unto man's good.

4 That he intended by those words to rectify their superstitious conceits of
the Sabbath. As if he had said, you magnify the Sabbath, as if it were one of
the greatest of all the commandments, a maine end of man's creation; but you
must know, that it was made for man, and not man for it, as were all the legal
rites, and ceremonies. And if this be so, I, that am the Messiah, am by my
office Lord of the Sabbath, and can, and will abrogate the same in due time.
And that this abrogation of the law of the Sabbath was that, which our Savior
did there at least insinuate unto them, is plain; if we compare the text with
that other of S. Matthew, where he tells them, that he is greater then the
Temple, having absolute jurisdiction, Templum Sabbatho serviebat, ipse autem
dominus erat Sabbathi. Mald. in locum.
and Lordship over all Legal, and Mosaicall rites.

Secondly, that, for which, no man is to be censured, and condemned, is not a
Moral Law; for the Law of nature teaches us to condemn the transgressors of
all Moral precepts; but no man is to be judged or condemned for the Sabbath.
Col. 2.16.
Col. 2.16.

If any man say, that the Apostle speaks of the other feasts of the Jews,
which also are called Sabbaths, not of the seventh-day Sabbath in the
commandment.

I answer. First, that he contradicts all Ancient, and Modern expositions.

Secondly, that in all other places of Scripture, where mention is made of
their Sabbaths, the weekly Sabbath is also included. Nehem. 20.33. Esai. 1.13.
Hose. 2.11. why not here?

Thirdly, the Apostle had reason to have excepted this especially, considering
that his doctrine in that place is a doctrine of liberty; for in cases of this
nature unless men have their bounds set them, they easily turn their lawful,
and warrantable liberty into unwarrantable licentiousness.

Fourthly, it is not likely, nor agreeable to any rule, that, when all, which
are denominated, are expressed, (as Sabbaths) that which does denominate, (
viz. the weekly Sabbath) should be excepted; but on the contrary.

Fifthly, the enumeration of the text is sufficient. New-moones, Holydaies. What
Ceremonial feasts had the Jews distinct from their weekly Sabbath? which
stands not under one of these heads. Either therefore the Apostle uses
tautologies, which is not likely, his discourse being in that place Polemicall:
Multa festa habebant Iudaei quaedam quotanuis celebrari oportebat, quaedam
ineunte quolibet mense, quaedam fingulis septimanis, ut Sabbathoru^, haecomnia
tanguntur ab Apostolo, hoc in loco. Salisbut, in locum.
Or that Tripartite enumeration of new-moones, holy days, Sabbath days
includes also the weekly Sabbath.

Lastly, the weekly Sabbath, which the Jews observed, and circumcision, were
the two maine heads of Iudaisme, for which in those times the Seducers so much
contended: therefore this weekly Sabbath is there especially to be understood.

Thirdly, that, which is a shadow of good things to come, whose body was
Christ, cannot be a moral law; for moral duties are eternal verities, no
fleeting and vanishing shadows. But the Sabbath in the fourth Commandment was
such a shadow of good things to come; As has in part appeared by that place of
the Apostle Heb. 4. and shall be farther evidenced in that which follows, and
has generally been taught by all Ep^ph.l. ^ hae. 8.
Antiquity. Ergo.

Fourthly, that, which cannot be deduced out of the principles of natural
reason rightly informed, without revelation, cannot be Moral: But the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, as it is set down in the letter of the fourth
commandment, cannot be so deduced. For first natural reason cannot teach us,
that one of seven must be observed, much less, that it must be the seventh
from the creation, or that it must be one of seven in imitation of Gods rest.
For though men by the light of nature may know the creation, and that God was
the Creator, I will add, (though it be impossible) the order how things were
made; yet that all this was done in six days, which is the ground of the
Sabbath, natural light cannot reveal. Neither can nature teach, that a whole
day from evening to evening is to be kept holy: For this is the rule of the
Sabbath in the fourth commandment, which is rather against nature. For nature
teaches to calculate from morning to evening as Aquinas. 1 ^. 2. ae. q. 74.
Art. 3. ad Sextum.
Aquinas shows; nor does nature show us that straight and exact resting from
all manner of works, as the Commandment, and the exposition thereof given by
Moses does require. If any man say, that some shreads of all these were found
amongst the Heathen in practice, and that they were doubtless guided thereunto
by the light of nature. He speaks nothing to the purpose; The question being
not of their practice, but the principles of natural reason, which must be
produced, and the deduction made according to those principles. Now let any
Philosopher. or Divine, laying aside his Bible, make the demonstration out of
mere natural principles, and erit mihi magnus Apollo.

Fifthly (which is also Manifestum est itaq, non aeternum, nec spirituale, sed
temporale fuisse praeceptu^, quod aliquando cessaret. Tert. advers. Iud.
Tertullians reason) whatsoever is de facto abrogated, and abolished for
practice; whether by Christ, or his Apostles, cannot be moral for precept. For
whatsoever is moral must be perpetual; but the letter of the fourth
Commandment is thus abolished for practice. For first, not the seventh from
the creation, but the eight is observed. Secondly, this eight was never
observed by the Christians, as the Jews observed their seventh; neither for
time from evening to evening, nor for manner in any respect. Lastly, we keep
not our day upon the same reason, and ground with theirs, as in memory of the
creation, of the deliverance out of Egypt, of the fall of Mannah; but of
Christ's resurrection: Nor to the same end, to represent unto us our spiritual
rest in Christ. For the faithful have already obtained that, for parts, though
not degrees, neither was the Lord's Day ever appointed to Shadow out unto us the
eternal consummation thereof in Heaven. The letter therefore of the fourth
Commandment is in all the branches thereof vanished, and abolished, Ergo.

Sixthly, that which is moral, admits no dispensation upon any ground of
necessity, Charity, Piety, or what else soever. And this Chrysostom. Hom. 40. in
cap. 12. Math.
St Chrysostom makes good; saying, in those things, which are altogether
unlawful, (as whatsoever is forbidden by a moral Law) (...) excuse whatsoever
can be pleaded to make it lawful. A man must not lie, no though it be a holy
fraud: Commit Idolatry, Rebellion, Murder, Theft to save his life, nay his
soul, or a thousand souls: But the fourth Commandment admits of many
excuses, and dispensations; and that, when neither Charity, Piety nor necessity
require. I never heard a Physician blamed for tending his Patient on the
Sabbath, though not in extreme danger; nor a Shepherd condemned for
following, or folding his flock upon that day; yet the folding of Sheep is
neither a work of Piety toward God, nor mercy to the cattle, which would be
better unfolded: only it is a matter of profit to the owner. The Laurent. in
Tert. advers. Iudaeos ex Rabbin^s in Ios. c. 6.
Jewish Rabbis tell us, that the children of Israel never kept but the first
Sabbath, during their whole pilgrimage in the wilderness. No man will say,
they were forced by necessity to this long intermission. Chrysostom. ib.
St Chrysostom is of opinion, Abraham cu^m consensi^ occidere filiu^, non
consensic in homicidium, quia debitum erat eum occidi per mandatum Die, qui est
dominus vitae and mortis. Aquin, 12. q. 100. art. 8, ad 3.
(how justly I say not) that our Savior in his own person brake the Sabbath,
when no occasion compelled him thereunto: As when he made clay with his spittle
for the blind man's eyes.

If any object, that even moral laws admit of dispensations, as in the case
of Abraham, who was commanded to sacrifice his own son; and of the
Israelites, who were also commanded to rob and spoil the Egyptians.

The Communiter dicitur, quod Deus mutare potest materiam praeceptorum, sed
manente materia non potest dispensare. Vig. c. 15. v. 7.
Schoolmen have long since untied this knot, distinguishing between the
dispensation of the law, and the mutation, or change of the thing concerning
which the commandment is given: And this change of the thing may be made, in
regard of some of the commandments, by the omnipotent sovereignty of the Lord,
but not in others. God by prerogative royal over all create beings may call
for any man's life by the hands of whom he pleases, as in Abraham's case. He may
likewise deprive any man of his propriety in any of his goods, and so give them
as a prey to another, as in Isreal's case; But God cannot change the matter of
other Commandments, as make himself more Gods then one, or worthy to be
dishonored. So then in the forenamed particulars there was no dispensation in
the commandment, but an alteration in the things. And the reason of this
distinction is plain; for had the Egyptians continued the lawful owners of
their Jewels, and ray meant, the Israelites must have been thieves, keeping them
from them without their consents. God can no more make theft to be no theft,
then deny himself.



matter of the fourth commandment is the seventh day; the sanctifying thereof
the form; but how the seventh day can be changed, and not be the seventh day,
to the Physician, or shepherd, or any other, is not imagineable. Omne quod
est, dum est, necessario est. Whatsoever has being, whilst it has being,
must necessarily be that which it is.

Seventhly, whatsoever is contained under the name of legal sacrifice in the
old Testament, is not moral: for not only the Leviticall sacrifices, but even
those, which were offered by Adam, and the Patriarchs, were Ceremonial. But
the Sabbath is referred unto this head by Mat. 9.13. vide Mald. in locum. In
voce (Misericordia) Synecdoche est notando; nam sub hoc nomine Christus omnia
humanitatis officia comprehendit. ut nomine sacrisic^^ omnes caeremonias, and
quiequid est externum. Marlor.
Christ himself disputing with the Pharisees, and citeing against them the
Prophet Hosea. For as under mercy are comprehended all works of love to our
neighbors: so under the title of sacrifice are contained all the rites of the
Mosaicall Law.

Eighthly, that Commandment, for the observing whereof man was not made, is not
Moral; Ordinatur homo ad Deum non per interiores actus mentis, sid et^am per
exteriora opera, quibus div^^am servitutem prositetur, ista opera. and cultus
Caeremonia vocatur, Aquin. 1. 2^. q. 99. art. 3. in corp.
for therefore God made man, that by the observation of the Moral Law, he
should bear his own image in the world, serving him in righteousness, and
holiness to the glory of his Creator. But man was not made to keep the Sabbath
in regard of any circumstances of the commandment; but on the contrary the
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: Therefore etc.

Ninthly, that Law, which determines. Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies,
prescribing set times of holy worship, and the outward solemnities there of, is
not Moral, but Ceremonial. This I take to be a Theological Maxim among all
sorts Lex Caeremontalis est, quae praescribit ri^us Ecclesiasticos, and
externas Caereinonias, sacrificia, vasa, loca, tempera. But. loc. com.
of Divines, and the reason is, because the law Moral being the same with that
of Nature, does not descend to any particular circumstances. But the fourth
commandment prescribes, and determines set, and particular times of holy
worship, and the outward solemnities of the same, saying, the seventh is the
sabbath, in it thon shall do no manner of work, Therefore etc.

Lastly, may be produced many witnesses of all kinds. Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes.
Ignatius says, that old things are passed away, applies it to the Sabbath in
the fourth Commandment. In quibus fingulis lex non dicam impossibilis, and
infirma, sed plane iam mort^ae. Orig, lib. 6. in Romans cap. 8.
Origin upon these words of the Apostle the law was weak through the flesh,
expounds it of the Ceremonial law, which (says he) understood according to
the letter, and so observed, was weak, and not able to do us good. His first
instance is in the law of the Sabbath. Tertul. adversus Iudoeos.
Tertullian calls it a Temporal Sabbath. Iam temporegratic revelat^
observatio illa Sabbathi, quae unius dici vacatione figurabatur, ablata est ab
observatione fidelium. Aug. in Genesis ad lit. lib. 4. c. 11.
S. Augustine does every where distinguish the fourth from the other, as being
Ceremonial, and not belonging to the new Testament. Hier. lib. 28. in Galatas.
S. Jerome makes it a Jewish observation. Literalis illa observatie Sabbathi
sonantis requiem, non dantis, indictus saerisifciorum ritus, interdictus
porcinae carnis esus, pluvia est ex illa nube (Mosi) descendens, sed nolo in
hortum meum descendat. Bern. sermon. 50. in Cant.
S. Bernard sticks not to say, that the literal observation of the Sabbath,
was one of the precepts, which Ezechiel calls not good, and numbers it with the
Law against Swineflesh. Damascen, de fide orthod. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Damascen is large, and particular in this point, showing where, and how it was
Ceremonial. Quies ab operibus, licet non amplius sit in Christianismo
praecepta, ficut scribit Apostolus Col. 2. necessaria tamen est, and instituta
ab Ecclesia propter imperfectos. Luth de bonis operibus.
Luther says plainly, that the outward Rest of the Sabbath is not commanded us
Christians under the Gospel, and alleges for proof the Prophet Isaiah,
cap. 66. and the Apostle S. Paul Colos. 2. Evanescant nugae pseudo-prophetarum,
qui Iudaica opinione populum superioribus saeculis imbuerunt, nibil aliud
asserentes, nisi abrogatum, esse quod ceremoniale erat; id vocant diei septimae
taxarationem, remanere autem quod morale est; nempe untus diei objervationem in
hebdomade; atqui id nihil aliudest quam in Iudaeorum contumeliam diem mutare,
diei sanctitatem eandem animo re^inere. Calv. inst. lib. 2. c. 8.
Calvin sharply confuteth the maintainers of a seventh day Sabbath for false
Prophets, and Jews. All the Protestants, by what names soever distinguished,
follow these their leaders, except a few in comparison in the Church of
England, which have all started up since the days of Queen Mary.

And therefore Bellarm. de cultu. Sanctum lib. 3. c. 10.
Bellarmine, setting down the Doctrine both of the Lutherans, and Calvinists,
reduces all to these heads. First, they affirm, that the Law of God requires
us to keep some days holy. Secondly, that those days are not determined by
the Law of God, but that this determination is left wholly to the Church.
Thirdly, that those days which the Church shall determine, are not in
themselves more holy, then other days. Fourthly, that this determination of
the Church does not bind the conscience, but in case either of contempt, or
scandal.

Now if this be the Doctrine both of the Lutherans, and Calvinists, they cannot
affirm the fourth Commandment to be moral; For if so, then God had
determined a set day, and time, wherein to be worshipped; then one day had been
more holy, then another, being set thus a part by God himself for his holy
use; and then also all men's consciences had been bound to the observation
thereof, even out of the case of contempt, and scandal.

If any man suspect Bellarmines honesty in this his report of Lutherans, and
Calvinists, let him show wherein he has unfaithfully collected. I am sure,
Amesius, who has taken upon him to weake^, and enervate his whole Doctrine,
touches not upon this: It were an endless piece of work, to set down the
particular writers of the reformed Church. I will only name Bullinger, and
Pelican, and that in those places, where they purposely treat of this subject.
Because the common evasion is, that heretofore the Protestants of all kinds
were so taken up with the common adversary of the reformation, that they never
sufficiently studied this point. Seimus Sabb^thum esse Ceremoniale, quatenus
coniunctumest cum sacrifici^s, and reliquis Iuda^cis Caeremoniis, and quatenus
alligatum est tempori Caeterum quatenus Sabbatho reli gio and pietas ^opagatur,
and ius^us oracretinetur in Ecclesia ipsa, charitas proximo servatur,
perpetuum, and non temporale est. Bull. dec. 2. ser. 4.
Bullinger therefore, writing purposely of this subject, says, we know, that
the Sabbath was Ceremonial, as joined, and annexed to the Sacrifices, and
other Jewish rites, and as confined to a set time. Die septimo vacandum,
catenus morale est, quod s^ato tempore domino vacandum sit, quod ne deferatur
ob occupationes temporarias. Caeremoniale decretum est, ut septimum diem non
praetereat, quocun^ tandem die supputare incipias Pell. in Exodus 18.
Pelican likewise thus expresses himself. A seventh-daies rest is so far
Moral, as that God must have a certain time appointed for his worship; but
that we must not let slip the seventh day, wheresoever we begin to reckon, is
Ceremonial. I know arguments from humane Authority are unartificiall; and that
some men are so wise in their own conceits, as that they stick not to cry down
all others, when they oppose their fancies; The immediate symptom of
singularity. This therefore shall suffice.

CHAP. VIII. In which the question is stated, and explained.
THe Morality of the letter of the fourth Commandment is thus eagerly
maintained even with way wardnesse, to make way only to that which concerns
the Lords day; of which we will also speak (God willing) in its place. For
there being neither precept, nor practice in the Scripture, nor any other good
record for that, which has of late years been imperiously thrust upon the
consciences of men in that point: the broachers of those doctrines were of
necessity to shelter themselves under the letter of the fourth Commandment;
And indeed this hiding place being once granted them, we could never be Jewish
enough in Sabbatizing. But if it be made appear, that this is but a pretense
only, and a covering of Fig Leaves; the nakedness of their doctrine will soon
be seen: and that they have (though unawares) laid snares, and ginnes for men's
consciences therein. For the opening now of this point, we must first enquire,
what a Moral law is? And then, how the fourth Commandment is Moral, and how
not? Lastly, what be the particular Ceremonies therein contained.

Moral is derived Moralus sunt de illis, quae secundum se ad honos mores
pertinent; cum autem humani mores dicuntur in ordin^ ad rationem, quae est
proprium principium humanorum actuum illimores dicuntur boni qui co^gruunt
rationi Aq. 1. 2. ae q. 100. art. 1. in corpore.
from Mores, which signifies manners: That therefore in a large and general
construction of the word may be said to be a Moral law, which does any way
prescribe concerning the manners of men. Now the manners of men being good, or
evil, as they either agree, or disagree with right reason, a Moral Law is
that, which prescribes a man to govern himself, as right reason neither
blinded nor corrupted does require. Hence it is, that the Law Moral, is the
Law Natural; for that only is right reason not corrupted, which God imprinted
in the heart of manin the creation with an indeleble character never to be
blotted out. And therefore the relics thereof remain ever since the fall of
Adam in the worst of the heathen. This kind of law is always in force, though
it never be proclaimed; because it commands those things, that are of
themselves simply good, and forbids those things, which are of themselves
simply evil. Yet because it was much obscured in man's heart, the fall of Adam
making us the children of darkness; God was pleased to give a copy thereof in
writing to his people, and in them to his whole Church for ever; The Moral law
therefore, of which we speak in this place, in its proper and restrained sense,
is not every rule of right reason; but only that, which is naturally engraven
upon the conscience. So that the Schools have well distinguished the rules of
right reason into three kinds.

First, there be some so common and obvious, as that man, retaining humane
reason, cannot err in them: as that God is to be loved; good to be embraced;
evil to be avoided; and such like practical principles ex terminis evidentia;
and all conclusions necessarily, and immediately flowing from the same And so
Moral (says Non omnia decalogi praecepta sunt de lege naturae stricte
accepta. lib. 3. sent. did. 37. q. 1. art. 2. con. 1. Duo praecepta negativa
primae tabulae sunt de lege naturae proprie ^b. con. 2.
Gab. Biel) extends it self but only to two Commandments of the decalogue,
Thou shall have no other Gods but me, and Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. For it being a natural principle, nay Quod Deus fit,
est primum principium complexorum. Bradvv. de causa Dei lib. 1. cap. 12.
the first and ground of all the rest, that there is a God; those practical
conclusions are known of themselves without farther teaching. Laws thus Moral
are utterly undispensable even by God himself, who cannot deny himself.

Secondly, some of these rules and directions of manners are not so obvious,
and manifest of themselves; yet such, as every vulgar and mean capacity may
easily find out even by the light of nature: as that parents are to be
honored: that God is publicly to be worshipped, with Secundae tabulae
praecepta sunt de lege naturae non stricte, sed large accepta. Biel ib. con 3.
the precepts of the second table. These are not so plain, and evident, as the
two former; and therefore men do the more easily err in them, as we see by
the practice both of heathens, and of the ignorant Christians. These may in
particular cases be dispensed with, Non rapiebant alienum, quia Deus erat
superior, and verus Dominus omnium bonorum Aegypti, and totius univer sitatis,
and ita poterit transfer Dominium infilios Israel. Biel. ib. Dub. 4.
by changing the nature of the things, about which they are conversant, as has
already been showed.

Thirdly, some of the rules of right reason, directing men's actions, are yet
more dark, and obscure then the former; and therefore are known only to wise
men, or by revelation; Such are all good positive laws superadded to those of
the decalogue, either by God, or man; and may be styled Responsa prudentum, the
answers of the wise. In this last and largest construction of Moral, all the
Holy rites prescribed by Moses, being appendices to the fourth commandment;
and all the Judicials appendices to the several precepts of the first, and
second table may be termed Moral. The question therefore is not of this kind
of Morality, but of the two former only, viz. Whether the law of the Sabbath be
either a principle in nature known, and evident of it self: or at least such,
as every man, that has the use of pure natural reason, may without revelation
easily find out? For that it is under positive precept in the fourth
Commandment was never doubted.

We must in the next place understand, how we speak of the fourth commandment
in this question; whether of the whole, and every part thereof, or of one, or
more parts, and clauses?

And first, there are, that say, that according to the law of God, and rules of
right reason, there ought not to be in the time of the Gospel any distinction
of days, as being directly contrary to Christian liberty. So our Anabaptists,
Perfestists, Libertines.

On the other side there are, that affirm every letter and Syllable therein to
be Moral: as the lews; and such Christians, as in this particular do Iudaize
expressly, as the Familists, and others, together with our rigid Sabbatharians,
who although they stand not for that very day, of which the commandment
speaks, the seventh from the creation, as the others; yet keep the Lords day,
as being a seventh intended also in the commandment, and to be observed in all
things according to the sound of the letter by all men in all ages; which is no
better then implicit Iudaisme. And herein they stand (for ought I know) alone,
unless they will claim kindred of the ancient Heretics, the Ebionites.

There are others in the third place, that affirm, the fourth commandment to
be partly Moral, partly Ceremonial. And this is the most general voice of
Divines, ancient, and modern, Protestants, Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists;
except those before named.

But this their agreement is not without great disagreement; some affirming in
one sense, and some in another, some of more, some of fewer branches of the
commandment.

Many in the Popish School, with some Protestants, especially Lutherans, put
morality in two clauses; the first is, Remember thou keep holy the resting day,
where a day is commanded (say Morale est sanctificare unum e septem. Baldvv. c.
de Sab. casu 2. Manet hoc morale, esse nimirum aliquod tempus, vel diem aliquem
singulis septimanis ad exercitia divina peragenda tribuendum. Conradus
Dietericus dom. 17. post Trin. Morale est, quod sacra requies die septimo non
determinate hoc vel illo, sed uno e septem pie observanda est. Thum. in expl.
Dee.
they) in general. They second is, the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, wherein (say they) the former generality is restrained, and determined to
be one of seven.

But Evanescant nugae pseudoprophetarum, qui Iudaic a opinione populum
superioribus saeculis imbuerunt, nihil aliud asserentes, nisi abrogatum esse
quod caeremoniale erat in hoc mandato, id vocant su a lingua septimae diei
taxationem, remanere vero quod morale est, nempe unius diei observationem in
hebdomade, Calv. instit. lib. 2. c. 8.
Calvin, and all those that insist in his steps fly from this as from false
doctrine, and Iudaisme, I mean this latter assertion; for they join with them
in the former, and acknowledge a morality for a set day; but say they, the
determination to one in seven, or five, or ten, etc. is wholly arbitrary, and in
the power of the Church to prescribe. And herein Calvin has the voices of many
both Papists, and Lutherans. One thing more must be added, that when Divines
put morality in the first clause (Remember thou keep holy the resting day)
those words may undergo a twofold consideration; for they may be taken

Either formally, as they lie in the commandment, and thus considered they are
not Moral; because they speak of that particular Sabbath given unto the Jews,
even the day of Gods rest. It is not a Sabbath, but the Sabbath, even that
which God sanctified, and is pretended to have been as ancient as Adam. The
Sabbath must be the same with the seventh, or else there is no tolerable sense,
or congruity in that Law.

Or Materially, as challenging a tribute of our time; As if it said, put a part
some certain, and set time from thine own employments for Gods public
worship; and in this sense Hocest quod usitate and recte dicitur, novum
testamentum non genus, quod morale est, sed speciem, quae caeremonialis est,
abrogasse. Chem. part. 4. exam. Morale est quant um ad hoc, quo l homo leputet
aliquod tempus vitae suae ad vacandu^ divinis. Aq. 2.2. ae q. 122. art. 4. in
corpore. Festa quoad genus instituta sunt, quoad speciem manent in liber a
potestate Ecclesiae. Bald. c. de Sab. Casu 2.
they affirm it to be Moral, and not otherwise. That God therefore must have
some of our time allotted out for his public service, is the substance of that
commandment, to continue for ever unto the worlds end. The whole letter, as it
is expressed in the decalogue, is the shadow vanished away, being either
Ceremonial, Judicial, or mystical. Therefore says An vero propter unum
praeceptum, quod ibi de Sabbatho positum est, dictus est Decalogus littera
occidens: quoniam quisquis illum diem huc usque observat, ficut litera sonat,
carnaliter sapit. Aug. de spirit. and lit. c. 14.
S. Augustine, he that keeps the Sabbath, as the letter sounds, is carnally
wise, not spiritual. To which purpose Quod in lege, quae duabus tabulis lapide
is conscripta est, solum inter caetero in umbr a figurae positum est, in qu a
Iudaei Sabbathum observant. ib.
he speaks continually. And Bedae Hexa.
Bid affirms, that the Apostles of Christ took clean away the letter of the
Sabbath; But we will, as was promised, descend to particulars, declaring, and
following herein the footsteps of the holy Ghost, and reverend Antiquity.

First, that in regard of the rest and preciseness thereof, it was Ceremonial.

Secondly, that in regard of the persons, it was Judicial.

Thirdly, that in regard of the determination of the time, and imitation of
Gods rest, it was mystically to be understood.

That is properly a leviticall ceremony, which God commanded Moses in the
Leviticall Law to shadow out Christ, or his offices, or his benefits, and
doctrine of the Gospel. And therefore the Apostle defines the Ceremonial Law,
to be Heb. 10.1. Co. 2.17.
a shadow of good things to come, whose body is Christ. These Ceremonials are
farther marked unto us by Vsus Caeremoniarum erat; primo, ut essent imagines
cultus interioris; secundo, ut demonstrarent immunditiem hominis inhaerentem,
tertio ut palpabiles essent conciones de passione Christi; quarto ut essent
maceries, quibus Jsraelis Ecclesia ^ reliquis gentibus discerneretut. Buc. de
leg.
Divines by diverse characters.

First, the Ceremonies were notes, and badges of distinction between Jew, and
Gentile, parts of the wall of separation set between them.

Secondly, they were helps to discover unto them their natural filthiness in
Gods sight.

Thirdly, they did shadow out unto them that inward, and invisible worship,
which God requires of all such, as worship him in spirit, and truth.

Fourthly, they were unto the people so many visible sermons of the death of
Christ, and glad tidings of the Gospel; not that the ceremonials did always
look only to things to come; for many of them had (as it were) two faces, and
pointed historically to things past, as well as mysteriously to things to come.
The Passover did remember them of their deliverance out of Egypt; the
Pentecost, of the law given in mount Sinai; the feast of the Tabernacles, of
Gods protection of them the wilderness; the Sabbath, of the Creation of the
world in six days. Yet (as Quamvis instituta erant obrecordationem
beneficiorum praeteritorum, (ut Sabbathum in memoriam creationis) tamen
habebant coniunctam adumbrationem, and promissionem spiritualium beneficiorum
in Christo exhibendornm, scilicet Sabbathum gaudi^m spirituale, et requie
confeientiae datam in Christo. Ioh. Sarisb. Episcop. in Col. 2. v. 17.
a learned Prelate of the Church has observed) all these had thereunto annexed
the shadows of things spiritual; As their passover was a type of our
redemption by the blood of Christ; their Pentecost, of the pouring out of the
spirit, writing Gods laws in the tables of our hearts; their feasts of
Tabernacles, of our present pilgrimage to Jerusalem which is above; their
Sabbath, of the peace of conscience and joy of heart, which we receive by a
lively faith; their new Moons, of the Churches illumination; So that their
looking back to some remarkable Histories of things past, did nothing hinder
them from being shadows of good things to come.

These therefore being the undoubted, and generally received cognisances of
Ceremonial observances, we must examine, whether they do agree unto the law
of the Sabbath.

And first, that the Sabbath was a part of the wall of partition, given to
distinguish Jews from Gentiles, appears both by the law, and the Prophets;
keep you my Sabbath (says god by Exodus 31.12.
Moses) for it is a sign between me, and you in your generations, that ye may
know that I the Lord do sanctisy you, therefore shall ye keep my Sabbath; And
by Ezekiel. 20.21^
Ezechiel the Lord says, I gave them also my Sabbaths, to be a sign between
me, and them. By comparing of which places plain it is, that God spoke this
not of their other feasts, and solemnities, (the common evasion) but also
chiefly of the weekly Sabbath; for though in the Prophet it be in the plural
number (Sabbaths) yet in Moses it is the Sabbath. The Sabbath was a sign
between God and his people, viz. Of his covenant made with them, having
discarded all other nations, making them only a holy and a peculiar people to
himself, leaving others in their pollutions, and to their manifold
abominations. The Law of the Sabbath was of the same nature with that of the
circumcision, as Ergo Sabbathum and circumcisio in signum data sunt very
Sabbathi, and verae circumcisionis. Hier. in Eze. 20.
S. Hierom has well observed upon that place of Ezechiel. Hoc quidem illustre
esse voluit Deus discriminis symbolum inter Iudaeos, and profanas gentes, unde
and diabolus, quo infamiam aspergeret purae sanctaeque religioni, per protervas
linguas Iudaica Sabbatha saepe traduxit, Call. in Exodus praece^. 4.
M. Calvin calls it an illustrious sign of greater note and use to separate the
Jew from the Gentile, then circumcision could be. And this was the reason, why
the Devil raised up so many blasphemous tongues against it amongst the
heathen. Neque circumcisio ita ipsos ab aliu distinguebat, ut Sabbathum. Theod.
in Ez. 20. Ioh. 7.22.
Theodoret also says, that many other nations communicated with the Jews in
circumcision; and we know it to be true at this day in Turks, and Mahumetanes.
But the Jews alone even unto this day observed a Sabbath, as the only proper
seal of Gods covenant. Lastly, our Savior is observed to have joined the
Sabbath with circumcision, as being both of like nature, and use.

The second Character of ceremonies is, that they served to mind the people of
their natural uncleanness; This we see in all their washings, cleansings,
purisyings; sacrifices, therefore called also expiations. The same like wise
did their feasts, and new Moons represent unto them, some more, some less.
And this also did the rest of the Sabbath; For as circumcision remembered them
of the superfluity of malitiousnesse to be done away by the circumcision of the
spirit: so did the rest of the Sabbath mind them of their pronenesse to follow
their sinful lusts, walking in their own ways, and of their averseness from
suffering God to dwell, and reign amongst them. This also appears out of that,
which has already been said; for being a sign and representation of their
covenant with the Lord, it not only remembered them of Vt scilicet ludaei
seirent, non aliter vitam suam posse Deo prohari, nisi rationem, consilia,
sensus omnes carnis exuerent. Calv. in Exodus
what he required of them, but also of their own crooked dispositions
thereunto. It appears also by the Prophets expostulation with his people to
this purpose, for seeking their own wills, doing their own works, and speaking
their own words; for by these things cannot be understood ordinary works,
thoughts, words at other times lawful; as is commonly expounded, to the
entangling of weak consciences.

For first, though the commandment forbad them ordinary works, and their very
sitting still was a Sabbaths duty, as we shall show hereafter; yet to speak
common words in ordinary communication, or to think of any ordinary things, as
occasion required, was never forbidden.

If any man say, that the other negative precepts take in also the heart, and
the tongue, and therefore that this also in the Sabbath must be so extended.

I answer, that all other negative precepts are of things simply, and in their
own natures evil; To kill with the tongue by slandering, and railing; so to
murder in the heart by malice, envy, hatred, evil wishes, are things in their
own nature simply evil; and therefore no marvel if in this case negative
commandments thus enlarge themselves; it is not so here.

Secondly, this interpretation crosses the maine scope of the Prophet, which
is, to discover the deep hypocrisy of their hearts, not any outward visible
profanation of the Sabbath; As if the Prophet should have said, the Lord has
sent me to cry aloud against your deep dissembling with him in two principal
points, the one of fasting, the other Esaias hypocritas objurgat, quod in
externo tantum cessandi ritu insist^rent. Call. ibid. and Instis. lib. 20.
of resting before him. In both these you are so outwardly formal, (for they
did outwardly fast, and Sabbathize most precisely) as that you think God does
you much wrong, not to accept both your persons and Arguunt dominum quod bona
opera non respiciat. Hier in locum.
performances. Sinon prophanes Sabbathum sequendo volantatem, id est libitum
passionum tuarum, a vitij suti ab opere otium agas, Cornel. a Lapid. in locum.
You seek me daily, and will know my ways, even as a nation that did right,
and had not forsaken the statutes of their God, and ask of methe ordinances of
justice; they will draw near unto God, saying wherefore have we fasted, and
thou see it not? But says the Prophet, I am sent to tell you, you neither
fast, nor rest aright; you should fast unto sin, and rest unto holiness;
fast unto mortification, rest unto sanctification, not following in either
regard your own corrupt immoderate desires. Fast and rest in this manner, and
then see whether your light, (all manner of felicity) break not forth as the
morning, and thou mount not up on the high places of the earth. Thus it is
generally understood by all ancient, and modern Expositors; and therefore is
quitted by Amesius, as being nothing to that purpose, for which it is commonly
avouched; and by Greenham. Catech.
Mr Greenham not to belong to the Christians at this day, but in proportion.

The third character of Ceremonies is, that they represented unto them that
inward, and spiritual worship, which God requires of them that fear him. So
unleavened bread signified sincerity, truth and the like. This also is plain
in the Sabbath, representing unto them the inward repose, which we ought to
have in the Lord, denying of our selves, crucisying our carnal wills, and
affections, suffering the Lord wholly to govern our hearts by his holy spirit.

Lastly, the Sabbath was a visible Sermon of the glad tidings of the Gospel;
of that rest, which Christ should bring us; of reconciliation with God; of
peace of conscience through the powerful operation of a true and lively faith.
For this last the Heb. 4.
Apostles testimony is so evident, as whosoever gainesaieth it, fights
against the light it self: we, which have believed, do enter into rest. What
rest^ even Interpretatur Apostolus Sabbathum, cum dicit remanet igitur
Sabbatisinus pobulo Dei. Aug. contra Adam. c. 16.
that, which is shadowed in the Sabbath, instituted and grounded upon Gods
resting from his works from the foundation; and what rest was thus shadowed,
but that, which Christ and his Gospel brings them. By all which (I think) it
is manifest, that the Sabbath was not only a Type, or figure, as the brazen
Serpent: as many of their Judges, Priests, Kings, Prophets also were, (for this
is that, which is replied) but properly and truly a Leviticall shadow, and
ceremony abolished in Christ the true Sabbath indeed, as Epiph: contra heresi
lib. 1. Tom. 2. cap. 30.
Epiphanius styles him.

To proceed therefore, if the rest commanded in the Sabbath were thus a figure
of our spiritual rest in Christ; then doubtless also that proportion of rest,
which is the strictness of Sabbathizing according to the sound of the letter,
shadowed unto them that proportion of holy and spiritual rest, which God
requires of his redeemed ones, and unto which Christ will at last bring them by
degrees. The Jews, we know, were forbidden all kinds of servile works, even
the kindling of fires, and that upon pain of death: I confess, some are of
opinion, that this was but a temporary injunction, during Isreal's abode in the
wilderness: Their reason is, because our Savior dined (says the Text) with a
chief Pharisee upon the Sabbath; and it is probable, so great a man
entertained so great a personage with a great feast, which could not be without
kindling of fires. But I cannot conceive, that any Mosaicall ceremony once
instituted could be abolished, till they were altogether nailed to the cross;
especially having reference to any benefit, which the faithful receive from
Christ; as has this of the Sabbath. Now though the Jews rest were so strict,
and exact, yet we may justly wonder at the penalty inflicted on the
transgressors, death; since God passed over greater things with less censures,
as fornication, and theft, which are contrary to the Law, and light of nature
it self. Nisi eximium aliquid, and singular fuisset in Sabbatho, videri
posset aequa atrocius iubere hominem interfici, tantum quoniam ligna deciderat.
Calv. in Exodus
Calvin therefore says rightly, that unless there were some excellent, and
singular thing in the Sabbath, more then is expressed in the letter, it might
seem to savor of cruelty to put a man to death for gathering a few sticks,
and kindling a fire with sticks already gathered. But says he, what was this
great and excellent thing in the Sabbath? Doubtless not the litterall rest;
for then the punishment should continue still the same, and the precise
observation of this rest ought to remain. It is therefore the mystery, that is
so excellent and highly esteemed of the Lord, viz. that the faithful should
sanctify unto him an Sabbathum commendatum est priori populo in otio corporali
temporaliter, ut sigura esset sanctificationis in requiem spiritus sancti Aug.
ad Ian. ep. 119.
entire rest from all, even the least servile works of sin and Satan,
leaving no one lust unmortified to reign in them, into which absolute liberty
Christ will also at last bring us. This is the mere reason, why God does by
his Prophets so punctually stand upon the observation of the Sabbath; because
in the violation of the litterall rest they did in effect spurn at this
spiritual rest, which was the substance of that shadow.

If any man ask, whether then under the Gospel no bodily rest be at all
commanded; we shall I trust in due time give him satisfaction herein, when we
come to those questions, which concern the Lords day.

The next thing in the letter of the commandment, are the persons there named,
thy son, thy daughter, thy man servant, thy maid servant, cattle, and
stranger: although Damasc. lib. 4. sidei vnbodox. cap. 24.
Damascen avoucheth it for Ceremonial; making children, Servants, Strangers a
Type of our sinful and natural affections: and the Ox, and the Ass figures
of the flesh, or sensuality. Yet I rather consent with those, (amongst whom
also are some of our adversaries in this question) who affirm this passage to
be partly Memorative, looking back to their servitude in Egypt, partly
Judicial, teaching that merciless people, that God expected that their
servants, nay their beasts should then at that time have rest, and refreshing.

We have in the next place the prescribed time, the seventh day, even that day,
which God himself rested on; which how and in what respects it was mystical,
and figurative, let others speak. Magdeb. Cent. 12.
Petrus Alphonsus a Jew baptized in the Christian faith 1106, being then 40
years of age, and having for witness of his baptism Alphonsus that pious
King of Aragon from whom he received the name of Alphonsus, in honor of his
worth and learning. This Alphonsus (I say) presently upon his baptism, and
being a Christian, had many and great contestations with the Jews, from whom
he revolted. Amongst other things was questioned the law of the Sabbath, which
he affirmed to be Ceremonial even in this very part thereof, which concerned
the time. For (said he) as God the Father ended all his works in six days, and
rested the seventh at the worlds Creation: so the son finished his course
also upon the same day, and rested with it is finished, on the seventh at the
worlds redemption. His conclusion therefore is, that since that is
accomplished, of which the observation of the Sabbath was a sign, it is
altogether needless that any such observation should be longer continued. And
indeed it may well be thought to be more then casual, that Christ should
pronounce his Consummatum est upon the Cross much about the same time, as we
may probably conjecture, in which God the Father made the woman last of all his
creatures. Ipso die Sabbathi requievit in sepuichro, postquam sexto are
consummavit omnia opera sua. Aug in Genesis ad lit. lib. 4. c. 11.
St Augustine teaches the same almost in the same words; and Omnes
solennitates veteris legis fuerunt institutae in co^memorationem alicujus
beneficij divini, vel iam exhibiti, vel figurati, ideo observantia Sabbathi, in
qua commemoratur beneficium creationis, and figurabatur quies corporis Christi
in sepulchro, fuit potissima, Durand. lib. 3. did. 37. q. 10. ad quartum.
Durand also upon the third of the sentences; and many others.

Lastly, Gods example is proposed; but upon this the Apostle has a plain
comment, when he says, he, that entered into rest, has ceased from his own
works, as God did from his; which being a reason of that, which immediately
goes before, (there remains a rest unto Gods people) must needs make Gods
resting from his works a Proto-type of our resting in Christ, which is indeed
the rest of God, as St Chrysostom expounds it. This day therefore, of which
the Commandment speaks as of the day of rest, is observed to have no evening
annexed unto it, (as the others had, when it is said, the evening and the
morning were the first day) because Gods rest, which we have in Christ's, is
permanent, to last for ever. This Ego vero non dubito quin Deus sex diebus
condiderit mundum, ac septimo quieverit, ut documentum ederet summae operum
suorum perfection is, it a ut dum se typum proponit ad imitationem, significat
se ad veram f^licitatis metam suo^ vocare. Calv. in Exodus
Mr Calvin puts to be out of question the meaning of the letter. God (says he)
made all the world in six days, and rested the seventh, to show us the
perfection of his works. And therefore he proposed himself in the Commandment
to be imitated by the Jews in the Mosaicall law, to teach them that he calls
all them, that believe in him to complete, perfect, and everlasting happiness,
even that spoken of Esai 66.23.

CHAP. IX. The Arguments for the affirmative examined.
THe first, which is commonly famed for invincible and unanswerable, is as weak
as any of the rest. All the Commandments of the Decalogue are Moral, but
still with that distinction, and difference of Morality spoken of in the former
Chap. All are Moral, but every one in his proportion, and degree, and so is
that of the Sabbath; Moral it is for substance, not circumstance; Moral in
regard of the purpose, and intention of the Lawgiver, that some time should be
set apart: not Moral in regard of the letter, in which it is expressed.

If therefore the proposition be of the sounds and syllables of the Decalogue,
so that whatsoever is written in the letter thereof is affirmed to be Moral,
it is utterly untrue. For what think you Jllud in primo praecepto, quieduxit te
etc. and illua in quinto, ut diu viva^ etc.
of those words in the very front of the Decalogue, I brought thee ont of the
land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, are they Moral? If any say
these words are a preface, no law, he speaks nothing to the purpose; for the
proposition in question is universal, of whatsoever is written in the tables
of stone with Gods own finger; Besides give us liberty to exclude from being
moral, whatsoever is not a law: and thereby the reasons of the fourth
Commandment will be denied Morality; for the reasons of any Law are no more
the law it self, then the preface thereof: Indeed there is an implicit
Morality in that preface, Egypt being a type of the Kingdom of Satan, the
house of Bondage, the dominion of sin; and under the deliverance of these are
contained the rest of Gods mercies to his Church; If such a morality as this be
all they seek for in the law of the Sabbath, no man (I presume) will gainsay
them herein. But to give an other instance, what shall we think of that clause
in the fifth commandment, That thy days may be long in the land which thy
Lord thy God gives thee? I am sure it is no principle in Nature, nor
conclusion flowing from any natural principle: nature can only say, God will
bless all dutiful and obedient Children; but that it shall be with this, or
that particular blessing (as this is) nature cannot teach us. Besides this is
only a positive and conditional promise, not universally and perpetually
performed, therefore not Moral. And farther let us consider not only what is
promised, but to whom, and it will appear, that those words concerned Nullo
modo ad nos possumus accommodare. Luther. tom. 7. Epist. ad Amicum,
the Jews only, and the land of Canaan, and are applyable to us, only by way
of proportion. I am not Ignorant how some labor to patch up a Morality in
these words, perhaps because they find them written in the tables of stone. But
their distinction of old in years, and old in grace, though otherwise of good
use, is in this place of no validity; For the promise is without equivocation,
of long life in the earth, as the Apostle expounds it Ephe. 6.3. But what speak
we of things circumstantiall? Our adversaries confess the taxation of the
seventh day to be Ceremonial, though the very heart of the Commandment, and
written with Gods own finger. Although therefore it be written in tables of
stone, and that by Gods own finger, and that in the very heart of the whole
Decalogue; (which also is pressed) that therefore it must be Moral, must needs
be acknowledged no good consequent, unless men have a mind to play fast and
loose with this argument.



Philo deleg.
Philo the Jew tells us, that the first Commandment is the heart of the whole,
being written part in the first, part in the second table. But if by the heart
we understand that which gives life to all the rest, so the first commandment
(Thou shall have no other Gods but me) is the very vital spirit of the whole
Law of God.



Deuteronomy. 5. 22. thus he spoke, and added no more. Quod refere Moses Deum nihil
adjecisse, eo perfectam vitae regulam december praeceptis comprehendi significat.
Calv. in Deuteronomy. 5. v. 23.
Calvin's gloss, which was the common marginall note, viz. that these ten words
are perfect directions, needing no additions; is indeed true, but comes short
of the meaning of the holy Ghost in that place; for the true reason of that
clause is expressly set down in the words following, when you heard the voice
out of the midst of the darkness, you came unto me and said, if we hear the
voice of the Lord our God any more, we shall dye; As if Moses should have said,
you heard but these ten words, he added no more, and you were thus afraid. What
if he had held on as he began? So that it is their fear at that time, of which
Moses puts them in mind, to beget in them an awful reverence of God, and
heedfull observation of his Law; and is nothing to our purpose.

To the second, by placing the fourth commandment, being Ceremonial, amidst
the Morals in the Decalogue, there is neither confusion of things, nor
distraction of the Church; unless by accident, as the law begets sin through
our own corruptions. For will any man say, that in Leviticus and Deuteronomy
Moses did purposely confound things, to distract the Church; this were
blasphemy, and yet Morals and Ceremonials are commonly mixed in those
Scriptures. Nay we may with more reason affirm, that had not this law of the
Sabbath been thus place, we might justly have complained of confusions, and
distractions. For it being a Commandment mixtly Ceremonial, it could not
without distraction have been ranged amongst the merely Ceremonials; and on the
other side it being mixtly Moral, reason requires it should be Si quaeratur,
quare aliae Iud^^orum festivitates praecipiebantur in decalogo, di^ quod
fuerunt tantum Caremoniales, Sabbathum autem magismorale est, quum
Caeremoniale. Greg. de 10. praeceptis. Caeremoniale islud determinabat
natural. Greg. de Val. tom. 2. disp. 7. q. 7. p. 4.
set amongst the merely Morals in honor to the Moral parts thereof. For the
Moral and Ceremonial parts thereof cannot well be severed one from the other;
the general, which is Moral, from the particulars which are Ceremonial.

Lastly, though it were in no respect moral, yet the Law of the Sabbath being
that, wherein is The Lord prescribes the feasts of the old Test^mentin these
words. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Doct. Hollands Apology
for the Queens day.
folded up the whole Ceremonial worship (for so Sabbath is sometimes taken) it
might well challenge its place amongst the Moralis both in the Tables and in
the Arc; that so the whole Law Moral and Ceremonial might at once be
preserved together, unto which Gods covenant did equally oblige the people of
the Jews.

To the third, that this Commandment is naturally engraven upon the hearts of
the Heathen, is utterly untrue. And whereas it is said in confirmation thereof,
that the Heathens generally admired the number of seven, we nothing doubt
thereof; but to infer, that therefore they acknowledged the Sabbath for a
natural law, were too loose a consequence. The number of three was (I think)
in as great esteem amongst them, as the number of seven; it were a pitiful
inference, therefore they naturally discerned the blessed Trinity. The like may
be said of the number of ten, may we therefore say, they knew there were ten
commandments? It is true, that Clemens Alexand. Strom. lib. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus brings many authorities out of Homer, Hesiod,
Callimachus, to prove, that the very Heathen knew the seventh day was to be
kept holy; But how? As Natural, and Moral? Nothing less; but to show, that
the wisest of the Heathens were thieves of holy things, having stolen them out
of Moses writings, for these they had translated: Or Isreal's practice, and this
is the maine scope of that place alleged out of the fifth book of his Stromata;
and therefore he does not only instance in the seventh-day Sabbath, but in the
article of the Trinity; the resurrection of the body, the fire of the last day;
and the judgment following. Besides, that the Heathen in all ages gave great
heed unto numbers, is confessed; But whence? Not from any light of nature,
which directed them; but partly from the delusions of Satan in Sorcery,
Geomancy, and curious arts: partly from Pythagorean superstition: and partly
from their own experiments and observations. To insist a little upon the
latter, whence did they admire the number of three? but that they observed,
there were three principles of every natural body, matter, form, privation;
three kinds of souls that informed those bodies, vegetative, sensitive, and
rational; three sorts of good things, which completed the happiness both of
soul and body; three regions of the soul like the three regions of the air;
and thus they collected, tria sunt omnia, all things consist of three. The
number of ten was also in esteem; and because ten is the greatest amongst the
unites, they conceited this to be the number of greatness, even to the tenth
egg of an hen, and the tenth wave of the Sea. But the Poet sets down their
observations; men have Hic numerus magno tunc in honor fuit; Seu quia tot
ligiti, per quos numerate solemus. Ovid. Fast. 3.
ten fingers; women go with child ten months; when we have told unto ten, we
must begin again with the unites; As for the number of seven they held it
sacred, and the number of perfection; but Gellius Noct. Attic. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Gellius shows out of Varro, whence they made that collection: as seven
Planets, seven stars; the Moon varieth her course by sevens; man's conception
in the womb is absolved in seven days; all his proportions, are perfectly
formed in seven weeks; he is safely borne in seven months; but he that is
borne in the eight month never lives; every seventh year is their
climacterical; the arteries of man's body keep a kind of musical motion to the
number of seven; and a world of such stuff. Not only the Heathens, but the
Fathers themselves have exercised their wits, but wantonly this way. Ego ad
Deum potius argumentabor hune modum temporis, ut december menses decalogo magis
inaugurent hominem, ut tanto temporis numero nascamur, quanto disciplinae
numero renascimur. Sed and cum septimo mense nativitas plena est facilius quam
octavo, honorem Sabbathi agnoscam. Tertul. lib. de Anima.^ cap. 37.
Tertullian speaking of man's nativity in the seventh, and tenth month, though
he will not superstitiously attribute any thing to the force of numbers, yet he
dares say, that God, by the tenth, would acquaint man with the ten
Commandments; and by the seventh, honor the institution of the Sabbath.
Septenarius iste numerus ex quaternario and ternario constans habet ex partibus
suis excellentiam maximam; ternarius Creatorem propter Trinitatem enunciat;
quaternarius Creaturam propter quatur Elementa. Cyp. de Spiritu Sancto.
S. Cyprian also speaking of the giving the Law upon the day of Pentecost
says, there is a great mystery contained in that number; for seven times seven
with the addition of one unity makes the Pentecost, in which the nine and forty
are an emblem of this life, and the unity of the life which is to come. And
that you may think he had great reason to call it the holy number, he proves it
to be so from the parts of which it does consist, four and three; for three is
the number of the holy Trinity, by whom all things were created: and four the
number of the Elements of which they were made, with much more to this purpose.
But what poor speculations are these, to sway any man's reason in a point of
Religion, I leave to the judgment of any sober minded man. It borders upon
superstition, and Cabalisticall Iudaisme to be observant of numbers, which the
holy Ghost has not commended unto us for mystical: as the weeks of Daniell,
and the number of the beast.

To the fourth, the letter of the Sabbath has not one, much less all those
characters of Morality, which are set down; not to question the things
themselves. That God should have tribute of our time, for public worship was
never by any man denied to be natural, and moral; but for the determination
of one in seven, of this one, more then of another, that it must be a whole
natural day of twenty four hours, that it must be thus and thus observed,
and all these grounded upon Gods rest at the Creation, has no character of
Morality at all. That the wiser of the Heathen taught, and practiced most of
them, is confessed, but as stolen amongst other holy things, as has been
showed. The Law of the Sabbath appertained not to all nations; neither did God
give it unto mankind in Adam, nor was it ever intended to any but to the Jews,
as an especial pledge to distinguish them from other nations. That those
things, which are laid down in the letter of the law, are necessary directions
unto perfect happiness, has less ground then the former; for let any man
show, how the number of seven does guide to happiness more then three, five,
ten: or to begin the day rather at night, then in the morning: or to do no
manner of work; till this appear, this argument concludes not.

To the fifth, briefly both propositions are faulty. The first, that whatsoever
is backed with a Moral reason, is a Moral Law; for what think you of the Law
of the first f^uits? No man I think but will say, it was Ceremonial, yet the
reason given of it is moral; Prove. 3.6.
Honor the Lord with thy substance: So the reason of the fifth commandment, is
it Moral or Ceremonial? If Ceremonial, then how stands it written in the
tables of stone? If Moral, then that, which is Moral, may be the reason of a
law Ceremonial; and so the proposition is not true, (ex. gr.) Deuteronomy. 26.^.
Thou shall not kill the damme with the young, that thy days may belong in the
land, etc.

The second proposition is also faulty; for let the reasons of the Commandemen
be well scand, and they will come far short of that Morality, which is
pretended. Ask natural reason at best refined, what proportions were fit to
be observed between God and man; would it answer, we must have six for one?
and not rather on the contrary, or any other? what principle of natural reason
can guide us to the number of six herein; God you say has interest in the
seventh; but this is the question, let this interest be discovered by natural
light, we will grant the Morality. All men are as much bound to follow Gods
example in resting, as the Jews, but

First, we deny, that this example of God is, or may be known by the light of
Nature.

Secondly, that it is there proposed to all men in their generations, being
given particularly to the Jews only. For the commandment speaks not of the
seventh, but of that seventh from the creation; wherein the Church follows not
Gods example, keeping the first of these seven. For unless we rest that very
seventh, in which God rested, we no more resemble his rest, then a man that
has a ladder resembles Jacob, that had a vision of a ladder. But God has
promised a blessing unto our rest, as well as unto theirs, for the Lord even
blessed the seventh day to the right observers thereof. But the text is
strained, for though God has promised always to bless his own ordinances, in
the public worship; yet for any blessedness to be communicated to the day,
or affixed to one more then to another, we read not.

That servants and beasts should now rest, and be refreshed, is confessed to be
Moral; but that they should have rest upon such, and such a day, just so many
hours from all manner of employment, was partly Ceremonial, partly judicial,
as has bin said. Which also farther appears, because it is added Levit. 26.5
as a reason of the seven years rest, which I think no man will say was
Moral; neither do I see, why the one should not hold as well as the other.

Lastly, true it is, that the Sabbath was a token unto them, that they were the
Lords people; and that we under the Gospel are also the Lords people is most
true. But was not Circumcision also a badge unto them, that they were the Lords
people: must Circumcision therefore be Moral, and perpetuali? God forbid. We
see therefore the vanity of this argument likewise.

To the sixth, first, if by strangers we understand all, that are aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel; plain it is, that the Sabbath was no more given
unto them, then Circumcision; for it was a sign of Gods covenant, and God
never covenanted with the Heathen. Moses was the Lawgiver of the Jews;
neither does any law bind the Gentiles, because Moses gave it, but because only
it is written on their hearts; If by stranger we understand bondslave, or
sojourner, not yet made Proselyte; the commandment indeed speaks of him, but
not to him; of him, for his ease and restraint; not to him, for his
observation; such were not obliged, unless first adopted; as appears in the
law of the Passover.

If any say, why then did Nehemiah threaten the Merchants of Tire for breaking
the Sabbath day?

I answer, he did it not, because he thought them bound to keep the Sabbath;
but because Ne quid occ^rreret Israelitis ante oculos contrarium etc. Call. in
Deuteronomy. 5.15.
they occasioned the breaking of it amongst the Jews, and offended against the
present government of the state. For if Nehemiah conceived those Tyrians to be
under the Sabbath, why did he shut the gates to keep them out? he should rather
have compelled them to come in, and constrained them to keep the Sabbath, being
now under his power, and jurisdiction.

To the seventh, how superstitious the people of the Jews were in their
observation of the Sabbath, even in case of life and death, notwithstanding
they had the example of diverse of Gods Saints, their predecessors, to the
contrary, as of Elias fugit a facie Iezabel die Sabbathi. Anton. tit. 9.
Elias, and Judas Machabeus; and how their superstition continued, not only
when the City was destroyed by Titus and Vespasian, but long after, as appears
by the history of the Jew in Rome, that would not be taken up out of a Iakes,
because it was his Sabbath; what advantages the enemies of that nation took
from their superstition in this kind, is evident of it self. Our Savior
therefore in the Scripture glanceth at their superstitious, and Quod malum
luxuriae hoc nomine significatum est, quia haec erat, and nunc est pessima
Iudaeorum consuetudo. Aug. de Cons. Evangelist. c. 75. lib. 2.
luxurious observation of the Sabbath, foreshewing, that it should be no small
promoter of their lamentable destruction; Orate ut fuga vestra fit expedita,
nullis impedita remoris vel tempestatis, vel religionis. Marl. in locum.
so the best and ancientest Expositors. Sabbatha sancta c^lo, de stercore
surgere nolo. Laziard. in hist. universali.


But you will say, what was this to the Disciples, that they should pray
against it?

I answer, that the Christians also observed the Sabbath among the Jews,
Dicet ali^uis, Iudaei sciebant licere in Sabbatho fugere, ut vitam morti
^riperent. Respondeo Iudaeos plerosque hoc ignorasse, vel putasse fugere quidem
fas esse hostibus insequentibus aliter esse ^efas. Bar. in locum.
till the Gospel was sufficiently preached, and the Synagogue was honorably
buried. Some therefore, that were weak amongst the^, might be entangled in that
superstition: Others, that were stronger, might be hindered, and prejudiced in
their safety by those that were contrary minded; and all were bid to pray
against the judgment of God, which hanged over the head of the bloody City,
and whatsoever might in any degree further, and increase the same, though
themselves were not engaged therein.

To the eight, the riseing of man's corruption against any law gives no true
estimate of the Morality thereof. It is generally the effect of laws of
restraint, to beget an appetite in men to the thing forbidden; the motions of
sin are set on work by the law. Besides, if the rule given were a certain
Maxim, then on the contrary, that law, against which humane corruptions do
least rise (which without question are the Commandments of the first table)
should be least Moral; which I think no man will affirm. But to pass by
this, I would gladly know, against what in the Sabbath man's corruptions be so
rebellious? I doubt not, but you will say, against the strict and holy
observation thereof; but the manner how the law bids, is one thing; and the
manner how the day is to be observed, is another; of which we shall also speak,
in due place.

To the ninth, taken from experience in foreign parts; in the first place I
answer, that the reformed Churches of God beyond the seas are much beholding
unto you for branding them with laying religion on the back, setting up
Atheism, and Epicureisme. And I believe many of this judgment are as free
from those evils, as any Sabbatharian in the world. But strange it is, that
some men cannot vent their novell fancies, unless, like new wine, they break
the old bottles of love.

Perhaps you will say, men will take liberty to be profane, when all tie of
conscience is taken off; as when the Morality of this law is denied.

But we must know, that the conscience is not let loose, as is supposed; but
only bound in another way, as we shall see hereafter. It has ever been the
custom of all sorts of people, thus to palliate their errors under the titles
of holiness.

To the tenth, the Homily is very brief in this point; the Summa totalis is
this. First, that although God be at all times to be glorified for his mercies,
yet his pleasure is, there should be set time for this purpose.

Secondly, that this Commandment given in the Decalogue does not bind us
Christians, as it did the Jews.

Thirdly, that whatsoever is found in the Commandment appertaining to the Law
of Nature, as a thing needful to the setting forth of Gods glory, ought to be
received of all men.

Lastly, that the set time of Gods public worship ought to be on one day of
seven. This indeed, which is last, seems to be something; but seems only, for
it must receive construction according to the foundation, on which the Homily
builds, viz. that nothing herein is Moral, but what appertains to the law
of nature. Seeing therefore that this particular cannot be deduced out of the
Law of nature, the Homily never intended it for Moral.



and ad populum; and in treatises of this nature every passage is not
rigorously to be pressed for advantage in disputation. This favor must be
yielded to all the popular tractates of the ancient Fathers, else many things
may well be quarelled at in them. Secondly, let the passage it self be well
construed, and the Homily clears it self; for it says indeed, that Gods
commandment was so to the Jews; but the Christians have followed this example
voluntarily and of their own choice; and if of their own choice, then
doubtless not by any necessity of Moral precept.

To the eleventh, what if the Church retain, and read this amongst the
Moralls? Does she not also appoint by her Liturgy Leviticus and Deuteronomy to
be read amongst other parts of Scripture? Or do we think with the Maniches,
that the old Testament is not the word of God: or with the Anabaptists, that it
appertains not unto us. We retain and read the Ceremonial law in our
congregations, not so much for the Ceremon^es themselves, which are vanished
away; as for those eternal truths, of which they were shadows. And as we
retain, and read them: so we also pray unto God for his mercy and grace, that
we may fulfill and practice them, so far forth as they do concern us.
There be therefore two things, which we ask in that short petition following
the commandment.

First, that our hearts may be graciously inclined, to sanctify all such times,
as are set apart for Gods public worship.

Secondly, that as long as we live here in the vale of misery, and sin, we
may be enabled by his grace to keep a perpetual spiritual Sabbath in
righteousness, and holiness, and peace of conscience all our days.

To the twelfth, this takes deep impression amongst the vulgar, who have been
taught their ten Commandemens perhaps for their prayers from their cradles, and
therefore stand for this tanquam pro aris, and focis. But in one word to give
them satisfaction; the argument is denied; for there are and ever will be ten
Morals, though the letter of the fourth be Ceremonial. That God must have his
set, and appointed Sabbaths, which is the essence, life, spirit of that
Commandment, is for ever Moral, though the circumstances, expressed in the
text, be Ceremonial. And this is no novell assertion, but the common doctrine
of all antiquity. And therefore S. Chrysostom. Hom. 40. in Math.
S. Chrysostom, speaking of this commandment, instead of Remember to keep
holy the seventh day, reads, remember to keep a spiritual Sabbath. And Aug. in
Exodus lib. 20. cap. 172.
S. Augustine expressly says, that the nine rest, as they are literally set
down, are doubtless to be observed in the new Testament; but that one of the
Sabbath, was given under the veil of Moses, and mystically commanded. His
reason is out of the text, when Moses (says he) returned from God out of the
mount, and had received from him the pattern of the Tabernacle, and all holy
things, he speaks to the people only of the Sabbaths observation; by which it
appears, that this was given only as the head of the Ceremonials. Alia quipp^
nona, sicut praecepta sunt, in novo testamento observanda minime dubitamus;
illud autem unum de Sabbatho adeo i^ Mysterio praeceptum fuit, ut hodie a nobis
non observetur, sed solum quod significabat intuemur. Inter omnia illa december
praecepta, solum id quod de Sabbatho positum est, figurate observandum
praecipitur. Aug. ad Ian: ep. 119. In istis december praeceptis, excepta Sabbathi
observatione, d^catur mihi, quid non sit observandum a Christiano. Aug. de
spirit. and lit. c. 14.
The same Father disputing in another place, how the Commandments of the
Decalogue were a killing letter, as well as the Ceremonies, makes frequent
distinction between this one of the Sabbath, and the rest; affirming, that not
only this, but those nine also were a killing letter. So that St Chrysostom,
and St Augustine acknowledged ten commandments Moral; but with our
distinction, that there be but nine literally moral.

Oh! but this is to curtoll the Decalogue, cutting it short by a distinction.

But what ingenuity there is in this exception, let any man judge. When our
adversaries themselves say, that the taxation of the particular seventh day,
and the rest required therein, was, at least in some respect, Ceremonial, may
we cry out you curtoll the Decalogue? let us have ten wholly and entirely
Moral? There may therefore be ten Moralls, though the letter of the fourth be
more or less Ceremonial, by their own confession.

To the thirteenth, this stands in terms of comparison between the Patrons of
the two opposite opinions; but all comparisons (as they say) are odious, and
such as these more then any other. My charity shall cover the want of charity
in this objection. But because it is a very disputable point, whether the more
spiritual, taking Spiritual for strict, zealous, well affected, desirous to
walk before God, as the Apostle speaks unto all well pleasing: (for this I take
to be meant, by spiritual in this place) whether I say the more spiritual the
man be, the more sound and Orthodox are his positions; it will not be amiss,
by way of digression, to speak a word or two hereof; especially, it being
amongst the Vulgar in these days a point of no small importance.

CHAP. X. Containing two digressions, the first showing who are the best,
Interpreters of holy things. The second, wherein the two opposite tenants in
this question of the Sabbath are compared one with another.
AS light, and truth multiply themselves by reflection, so does darkness and
error. One error therefore admitted, many others are entertained, either by
way of consequence, or imitation. It was heretofore an opinion, which at this
day is ingrafted in the hearts of many of our people; that an unconverted
Minister could not convert his hearers; being unregenerate himself, he could
not be used as an instrument of an others regeneration. This position, the very
pillar of Puritanisme, being rejected, at least in show, by those that wished
well to the cause; an other point of doctrine began to be broached in the room
thereof, but in effect, much the same, viz. that an unsanctified man cannot
acquaint the people with the truth of God, at least so well as others; that God
hides himself from men of corrupt minds, revealing himself only to some
peculiar and selected ones. If therefore we would at any time have our
understandings informed in things we know not, our consciences satisfied in
things doubtful, or be directed in any of our ways, either with God or men,
we must repair to those that are of strictest lives, of precisest carriages,
and sanctified conversations; for the more holy the man, the more sound, and
orthodox are all his resolutions. Hence it has come to pass, that by
pretending to holiness, so many Oracles have been of late years erected in
sundry corners of this land, unto which our well minded people have repaired,
as the Heathens did to the stool of Apollo; the Jews to the breast of the
high Priest; and the Papists this day to the Sea of Rome. And to speak truth,
this point is nothing but Popery taken in at the back door: for why do the
Romanists think the Pope to be infallible? but that they hold him to be, (as
they style him) His holiness; being that spiritual man (of whom the Apostle
speaks) that judges all things, himself judged of none, as Soto in 4. sent.
did. 25. art. 1. concl. 1.
Soto has interpreted. The difference only is, the Pope challenges unto
himself absolute infallibility; these men only likelihood, and probability,
and eminency above others.

This last error is worse then the former; for that was not only odious, being
raked out of the graves of some ancient Heretics, but destitute also of
tolerable probability. This latter is somewhat more refined, and perfumed, and
seems to be supported by Scripture, reason, and authority. The ancient
Prophets, (say they) which only were the Lords Seers, enabled to discover truth
from falsehood, to separate the precious from the vile, and foretell the
judgments of God upon the Church and State, were, as Mich. 3.
Micha speaks of himself, full of the spirit of the Lord; men sanctified
throughout. 1. Cor. 7.
St Paul, when he would have his doctrine believed, and embraced, sets it on
with this: I think, that I also have the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2.
The natural man, (as the same Apostle witnesses) perceives not the things
of God, they are spiritually discerned: For it is the anointing, that teaches,
says 1. John, 2.27.
S. John. Romans 12.2.
Whosoever fashioneth himself according to the world, can never prove, try,
search, or find out what the will of God is. Men therefore Math. 18 3.
must be converted, and become as Children newborn, or else they cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, the doctrine of the Kingdom, which is the
Gospel. This Instituianimum meum intendere in sacras scrip^uras, ut videren
quales. essent, and ecce video rem non compertan superbis; non eram talis ut
intrare in ea^ possem, and acies meanon penetrabat interiora (...) Aug. Cons.
3. c. 40.
S. Augustine found verified; when before his regeneration he addressed
himself to the reading of the Scriptures, he confesses, that he was not as
yet such a one, as could enter into the^. He that will know Christ's voice, must
be one of Christ's sheep; and if any man do his will, he shall know the
doctrine, whether it be of God. And there is great reason it should be so,
because God, and wicked men are mere strangers, nay enemies; and we know, that
amongst strangers and enemies there is no communication of counsels, and
secrets. On the contrary, those, that are spiritual, are not only his
servants, but John 10.
friends; nor friends alone, but sons, and daughters, from whom their father
concealeth nothing; but Psalm. 25.
the very secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him.

This the very Schoolmen themselves faw, and acknowledged. Johannes Damascenas
videtur non parum ^rr^sse in vita cur ergo non potuit errare similiter in
dectrin^? Brad lib. 2. de caus^ Dei. cap. 3^.
Bradwardine setting down how many of the Ancients either did indeed, or might
be thought to comply with Pelagius, reckons up Damascene amongst the rest; but
slighting his authority, says, Damascene erred greatly in his life (he means
his dissembling at the Tomb of Mahomet) and being thus erroneous in his life,
why might he not also err in his doctrine? The learned Contingit s^pe, quod
Simplex aliqua bona persona melius intelligit aliquod Dei mysterium, quam
magnus aliquis Doctor, cum malus sit and iniqu^^. Ideo dicebat Christus,
Gratias tibi ago etc. Gers. par. 4. sermon. de nativit.
Chancellor of Paris acknowledges, that one good, pious, holy man, though
otherwise simple, does understand oftentimes more in the mysteries of
Godliness, then the great profound studied Doctors of the world. This he
confirms by the words of our Savior, I thank thee o Father, etc. and by the
example of the sheepheards, to whom the Angels appeared and preached Christ;
when the wise men of the East, Herod the King, the high Priests and Elders knew
not where to find him. Besides, it is the nature of the word to be plain, and
facill to such as are of a semblable disposition thereunto: but hard and
difficult to those, that are Rebellious. It gives light to the simple says
Psalm. 19.
the Prophet; where there is humility of spirit, simplicity of mind, syncerity
of heart, a conscionable walking with God, the light of the word shines even
to the perfect day. For as in natural things there must be a proportion
between the eye and the object: so in things spiritual, he must have a strong
vigorous eye, that must look upon the Sun. The eye of a child, because it is
tender, and weak, is dazeled as soon as it feels the air; a blear eye smarts
at every looking up. The natural unregenerate man has the eyes of the
Nycticorax or night crow, compared with divine truths, as Aristotle himself
acknowledges. Lastly, there be many impediments in the unregenerate, which
serve as strong bars to keep out the light of truth; as pride, vanity,
deceit, hypocrisy, sensuality. A vessel so full of filth and rottenness
cannot be capable of the sincere milk of the word: or if any thereof happen to
enter, it receives a taint from the vessel that receives it; the liquor smells
of the Cask; and the spider converts all things into poison. Nay certain it is,
that every carnal affection, once grown habitual, does harbor at least in
the spawn and seed some heresy or other; so that men of vicious, and lewd lives
do believe nothing, which may prejudice their corrupt affections. Unless
therefore (says Nisi mactaverimus cupiditates carnis nostrae, non possumus
esse idonei, ut in actionibus nostris intelligamus, quae sit voluntas Dei, sed
quod nostro sensui vehementer arridet, interpretamur esse voluntatem Dei, Sa^b.
in Romans 12.
Sasbot) we sacrifice, subdue, and mortify the lusts of the flesh, we can be no
way fit to understand the will of God; but will ever interpret that to be Gods
will, which is most agreeable to our own humors. Therefore Non haec dixit
Dominus, ut os^endat omnes viros honos per se intelligere posse omnia loca
scripturarum, sed ut doceat viros probos carere quibusdam impedimentis, propter
quae alij nec perse, nec per alios fidei veritatem intelligere possunt. Bell.
de interp. verb.
Bellarmine himself does confess, that pious and good men have not so many
lets and hindrances to keep them from truth, as others have, in whom their
judgments, being corrupted by their affections, neither do, nor can, by
themselves, or others, understand the doctrine of faith preached unto them.

This being that, which is thus speciously said in the defense of this.
Paradox, we will briefly discover the falsehood and vanity thereof for the
satisfaction of the judicious, and indifferent reader, by distinguishing those
things, which are thus confusedly heaped, together. For he that has truth to
himself in gross, may well vent to others error by retaile. We must
therefore distinguish.

First, of the persons of men unregenerate.

Secondly, of the spiritual estate, or being spiritual.

Thirdly, of the things of God.

Fourthly, of the knowledge of those things.

Unregenerate men are of diverse kinds; either such as are apparently known, and
may be averred for such, both by the judgment of faith, and the judgment of
charity: as Heathens, Infidels, Apostates, Heretics; Or they are such as are
in the bosom of the visible Church, known unto us only in general by the
judgment of faith, which says there are such, but unknown unto us by the
judgment of charity, when we come to look upon particulars. Besides, the
unregenerate within the Pale of the Church are either private, and ordinary
people; or public persons, guifted, and qualified to the service of the
Church.

To be spiritual, is also of doubtful signification; for as the spirit of God
dwells, and works in men diversely, so are they in different kinds
spiritual. Now the spirit works by his graces; and these are either such, as
well call saving graces, as faith, hope, love, fear, obedience, given to men
for their own profit, by the help whereof they work out their own salvation: or
such, as we call common graces, as miracles, tongues, healings etc. which God
bestows upon men for the good of the Church, and the promoting the salvation of
other men.

The things of God are also of two sorts; some are only in fide,
Circumstantiall; things in, and concerning faith, and religion, without the
knowledge of which we may well be saved: Others are de fide, substantial
truths; such, as Athanasius has in his Creed, of which he says, he that
believes them not, cannot possibly be saved.

Lastly, the knowledge of holy things is two fold: speculative, and
experimental: by the one, we know what the things are in themselves; by the
other, we have a lively sense, and feeling of them in our own souls.

These distinctions being applied to our present purpose, the truth opens it
self in these propositions.

First, the unregenerate, and unsanctified without the Church, discern no kind
of heavenly truths of what sort soever; unless they be also natural, to be
found out by discourse of reason; or moral, written upon their hearts. Of such
as these the words of the Apostle are to be understood; The natural man
perceives not the things of God; and that of our Savior, my sheep hear my
voice. And in this condition S. Augustine speaks of himself in that passage of
his confessions. There is indeed no proportion between the light of their
darkened minds, and the light of supernatural saving truths.

Secondly, the unregenerate within the Church, if public persons, if
sufficiently qualified by nature, education, and common graces, being diligent
in their places, with the ordinary concurrence and assistance of the spirit,
may as infallibly deliver the doctrine of religion, as any other, not superior
unto them in the fore named indowments; especially if they be accompanied in
them with common modesty and civility. Qui expo^unt scripturas, sint ingenio
praediti, studio exercitati, in judicio humiles, a^ affectato vitio immunes
Ger. de Com.
Gerson therefore, expressing how the Expositors of Scripture should be
qualified, requires; first, that they have natural parts; secondly, that they
be well grounded, and studied; thirdly that they be of humble judgments;
fourthly, that they be free all from gross and affected vices. And Sub utraque
comparandi sunt igitur doctores doctoribus, and illi, quos constat habere
conditiones positas in regul^ praetedenti, praeserendi sunt non habenti^us, and
dona gratis data. habentes non possidenti^us.
the same man affirms, that those, that have those common gifts, are to be
preferred before those, that have them not. It is as evident as the
sun-shining, says an eminent Bish. White against Fisher.
Prelate of our Church, disputing against Romish infallibility, that the
Pastors of the Church, if they use means, and have sufficient knowledge, and
the assistance of ordinary grace, may be as infallible in their doctrines, as
the Roman Prelates: his meaning is of any, which challenge most unto themselves
the spirit of infallibility.

Thirdly, the title of spiritual agrees not only, or in a more proper and
peculiar sense to those, that are regenerate and truly sanctified; then it does
to those, who are only enlightened; but rather on the contrary. When the
Prophets claim unto themselves the spirit, and to be spiritual, they
understand the spirit of illumination only. Hosea 9.7.
The spiritual mean is mad. And when went the spirit of the Lord from me to
speak unto thee? 1. King, 22.24.
Rev. 4.2.
I was in the spirit says S. John, that is, ravished in a prophetical vision,
or ecstasy. So the Apostle calls the gift of tongues, interpretation of tongues,
prophesies, spiritual gifts; 1. Cor. 7.40.
and so he speaks of himself in the place alleged, I think that I also have
the spirit of God.

Fourthly, the regenerate, and truly sanctified children of God are not
privileged above others in those things, which are only in fide, or
circumstantiall points of religion; howsoever it be otherwise with them in
those things, which are de fide, wherein the substance, and essence of saving
faith does consist. Things of this kind 1. Ioh. 2.2^.
the anointing shall teach them; Ioh, 7.17.
and they shall know the doctrine whether it be of God. Hence it oftentimes
comes to pass, that in these things a simple illiterate person understands
more then learned Clearks: they being sometimes hid from the wise, as when the
indignation of the Lord, upon their pride, and obstinacy, spreads a veil
over their hearts. And in this notion our Savior speaks comparatively of the
Pharisees, and his Disciples, saving, Mat. 11.25.
I thank thee O Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise, and have
revealed them unto Babes. Although then other points of religion are not
presently known unto men; for these the spirit reserveth unto itself, and by
ordinary means reveals to one in one kind, to another in another: yet in
those things, which are necessary unto salvation, the regenerate, having the
spirit dwelling in them, shall be kept by the mighty power thereof. But not so,
as that either the regenerate shall not at any time, or the unregenerate shall
at all, or at most times ordinarily err in them; especially, if public
persons, and qualified as aforesaid, in the second proposition.

Fifthly, the inward, and experimental knowledge, or sense rather of heavenly
mysteries is not in the unregenerate, unless it be in some light superficial
taste, as the Apostle calls it. For even the bad ground received the seed with
some kind of sudden, and flashing joy; but only the elect of God, holy, and
beloved of him, having the spirit bearing witness with their spirits, have the
true lasting joy of Salvation, which shall not be taken from them. And so the
Prophet is to be understood; Psalm. 19.
the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; not his known; and revealed
will, which is preached upon the house top. It is only the Spouse, the true
faithful soul, that has her beloved between her breasts, whom he brings into
his wine cellar; that is stayed with flaggons, comforted with apples; that is
caused to drink the spiced wine, the new wine of the Pomegranate. Often times
(says Plus aliquando credendum est sim^licibus Idiotis de consolatione, and
beatitudine interna, tanquam plus in his vere sapientibus, and per experientiam
intimam philosophantibus, and puros sensus habentibus, quam alijs, licer
eruditis, cum suis foedis de^ideriis ob nubilantibus. Gers. in solen. sanctorum.
Gerson) there is more credit to be given to simple Idiots concerning inward
joy, and happiness, as being more truly wise, and understanding in points of
this nature, speaking by their inward sense, and experience; then unto others
though very learned, having their minds clouded with filthy lusts, and desires.
Not that we are to credit every Enthusiast, fantastically boasting of his
familiarity with Gods spirit, of which he is not over prodigal to any: but
only when the true cup of consolation overflowing in our brethren we observe a
real sympathy between theirs, and our own experiments. But who sees not, that
experimental consolation is one thing, spiritual illumination an other? and
that this therefore can make nothing for the pretended prerogative of
infallibility.

Lastly, this estimate of truth, taken from the sanctity of the teacher, is
most uncertain, and therefore most vain. For if by sanctity we understand
that which is inward, the new moulding, and making of the heart; this is far
removed from any man's search, and seen only of God, who tries the reins; it is
hid in the soul, as leaven in the three pecks of meal, the understanding,
will, affections, says S. Hier in Math. 19.
S. Hierome. The spirit of discovering was one of those Charismata, with which
the Primitive times were furnished, as being necessary indeed for those times.
But now no man can say, as S. Peter did to Simon Magus, I see that thou art in
the gall of bitterness; or as S. Paul did to Elymas, Thou child of the Devil.
If by holiness we mean that, which is outward, seen in men's actions, how
deceitful, and leaden a rule will this prove to be? It is here, as in wealth
and learning; many men show more then they have, and many others have much more
then either they do, or can show. Let this be our trial, and you shall many
times find the grossest Heretics to get the start of the soundest
Catholics. I will not only say, that S. John the Baptist was more strict,
austere, precise in his life then our Savior: but the Pharisees also
themselves, though inwardly like graves full of rottenness, were outwardly so
whited, that they gained the opinion of the world, and durst defame our blessed
Lord for a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans, and sinners.

Perhaps (you will say) these were only shows. Propter hoc novae prophetiae
recusantur, non quo^ altum Deum praedicent Montanus and Priscilla and
Maximilla, nec quod Iesum Christum solvant, nec quod aliquam ^idei aut spei
regulam everrant, sed quod pla^e doceant saepius iei^ na^^, quam nubere. Tert*
in Psych. cap. 1. Quinam isti sunt semel nom^nabo, exteriores and interiores
Botulae Psychicorum. ibid.
Tertullian (I am sure) was in earnest, when he condemned the Orthodoxe of
those times for Carnalists; and that guided thereunto by the very heresy that
he had sucked from Montanus, as appears by a treatise of his written to this
purpose. Our new prophesies (says he) are refused; not that Montanus, and his
two Prophetesses, Priscilla and Maximilla preached any new Deity, or denied
Christ, or overthrew any rule of faith and hope; but that they plainly teach,
that men should fast more, and marry less. And in the words immediately going
before, he describes his adversaries by stuffed puddings, or sausages. Ptlagii
nomen non sine land altqua posui, quia vita eius a multis praedicatur. Aug.
retract. 11. c. 33. Mark. 13.22.
Pelagius also, the professed enemy of Gods grace, whose heresy overthrows
the very Basis of Christ's kingdom, was not only in outward show, and
formality, but indeed a man of a well governed life, and blameless carriage.
S. Augustine, that damned his doctrine, extolled his conversation; nay, it is
the general mark of false Prophets, to come in the rough garments of
austerity, sheeps clothing, innocent outsides; else it were impossible they
should deceive so many, nay almost the very elect. This therefore must needs be
a most deceitful balance to weigh any man's doctrine in. To draw therefore to
a conclusion August. ad Hier ep. 11.
S. Augustine unto S. Hierome says, I confess unto your brotherhood, that I
have learned to give such reverence, and honor to the books of Canonical
Scripture only, that I most firmly believe, none of the pen men thereof to
have erred in the least things; so that when I meet with ought in their
writings, which seems contrary unto truth, I presently think, that either the
book was false printed: or that the Translators were mistaken: or that I my
self understood it not aright. But all other authors I so read, as that though
they excel in learning, and holiness, yet I think nothing true, because they
so thought it; but because they make it appear to be true by those Canonical
Authors, or probable reasons at the least. Doct. Twist. praef. con. Armi^.
A learned man also of these times has spoken so home in this point, that
nothing more need be added thereunto. If at any time (says he) the Lights of
the Church think not the same things, but dissent one from another in diverse
points, and those of moment in religion; what is to be done? But to try all
things, and to hold that, which is good. But how may we do this? shall our
labor be to search which Side was more docible and desirous to learn, had
more humble minds, did more tremble at Gods word, were more obsequious to the
guidance of his spirit, were more ready to renounce themselves, and their own
wisdoms, worshipped God with greater fear, and reverence, were more frequent
and earnest in their daily prayers, fasted oftener to keep the body in
subjection, were more exercised in the reading of the word, and meditating
therein. Who sees not this kind of touchstone of Ecclesiastical doctrine to be
neither commanded of God, nor approved of men, nor to be attempted with any
hope of good success? God forbid, that as often as we dissent one from
another, we should presently object to the adverse part, that they neither fear
God, nor serve him, nor do his will. For neither are we able to dive into men's
hearts, and the better we our selves are, the more conscious of our sins, more
ready to amplify our own misdeeds, more mild and merciful in censuring of
others. Leaving therefore this kind of search, which after many obscure, and
slippery Meanders gives but a doubtful issue, and scarce ever brings us to the
truth; what remains, but to bring the dictates of the greatest Divines to the
Law, and to the Testimony? If they endure not this trial, those other are but
popular, and gaudy shows, wherewith simple people are deluded. Let this be the
trial. It were easy to answer the weightiest arguments, against which nothing
can be said, with an answer ad hominem as they call it, against whom,
whatsoever he be, some exception or other may be taken.

But though the persons of the Teachers may not be weighed in this balance,
yet their doctrines may. Because therefore the adverse part does so highly
advance theirs of the Morality of the Sabbath for pious, and religious: as if
without it holiness it self could not subsist in the world; and so far
depresse the contrary, as if it were the only floodgate to let in Atheism. It
will not be amiss briefly comparing each with other, to see which does most
advance Gods glory, most edify his Church, give most life to religion, and
bring most comfort to a Christian man's conscience. Suppose therefore one should
tell us in effect this: The fourth commandment is wholely, and merely Moral;
only indeed there be some Appendices thereof, which concerned the Jews, viz.
the day spoken of in the commandment, the seventh from the creation (whereas
not that Seventh, but a Seventh, which the Lord should choose, is Natural, and
Moral) and the strictness of the Rest, which was enjoined them in kindling of
a fire. This indeed is in a sort permitted Christians under the Gospel. Yet
men may do well to forbear even this, and to dress their meat over night;
all the rest of the Law binds us strictly, nay more then ever it did the Jews.
We must therefore remember not to do, either by our selves, or those that
belong unto us, the least servile work from Saturday sunset till Sabbath Day
sunset: or, as others, from Saturday midnight, till next day midnight: or, as
others, from Sabbath Day sunrising till Monday sunrising; for a natural day
of twenty-foure hours must precisely be observed. In all this time, all works,
words, and thoughts are to be abandoned, which may at any time else be done,
spoken, or had; so that both in public and private we be employed only in the
holy things of God. Therefore the public exercise being ended; for a Sermon
must of necessity be heard, neither may men satisfy themselves with the common
Liturgy of the Church, if they purpose to sanctify to the Lord an holy Sabbath.
The public exercise (I say) being ended, a short meal may be made, for this
is no day to feed the body in, and to make a feast on this day is utterly
unlawful. After dinner, see that you fetch not your wonted walks, or any way
recreate your selves, or have any communication but of holy things, and what
was delivered in the Congregation. If any man, not acquainted with the
mysteries of Godliness, deliver you a message, or letter upon that day, you
may receive it of civility; but see you neither dispatch the business, nor
think thereon until next morning, upon pain of sin. Be sure also to take
your notes, and repeat to all such, as shall assemble themselves, what you have
written, and so repair unto the evening Sermon, which also must be heard either
at home, or abroad. This done, give not your selves a breathing while; suffer
neither Child, nor Servant to have any recreation; for this were to profane
the day. Assemble therefore your selves together, recount what the Afternoon
has brought forth; do also likewise after supper. Nor yet are you by all this
discharged of the duties of the holy Sabbath, unless the former practices have
made such deep impression in your phansies, as to season the nights sleep with
holy dreams, which is the last duty of the Sabbath. These things thus done,
you may not only well expect a blessing upon what you have heard, but upon all
that is yours the whole week after. For so highly is the seventh day in Gods
favor, that he does not only sanctify it, but also bless it.

Now let another come, and say, the commandments of the Decalogue be not all
of the same rank, but amongst these the fourth is partly Moral, partly
Ceremonial. The Moral part is, that God must have set, and standing times for
his outward, and solemn worship; all which times are religiously to be
observed. But the letter concerns only the Jews, written indeed, as other
holy things of Moses, for our edification, and consolation, of which every part
if full. For first, we must consider, that the Sabbath, as it is there
literally expressed, was a sign of the separation of the Jews to be Gods
people from all other nations of the world; which is now by the coming of
Christ abolished, as all other pieces of the wall of partition are taken down,
that the Gentiles may glorify God, as it is written Deuteronomy. 32.43.
Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. It did also show them the pronenesse of
our corrupt nature to do our own wills* and to fulfill our own lusts, not
suffering the Lord to rule in us by his Spirit; whereas he requires perfect
conformity of the whole man, with an utter cessation from all his servile works
of sin, and Satan. It did in the third place lead them unto Christ, who alone
gives us test from these cruel Taskmasters; who has crucified the body of
sin in us, and triumphed over Satan in his cross. And therefore as God the
Father, having made the World in six days, rested the seventh: so God the
Son finished all things, which were written of him for our redemption on the
sixth day, and began his rest on the seventh, obtaining for us the rest both of
grace, and glory. The rest therefore of the Sabbath given in such severe
precepts unto the Jews does lead us Christians under the Gospel unto the rest
of sanctification, which we must endeavor to keep inviolable with all
watchfulness, not suffering the least fire to be kindled in any of our lusts.
And as it does thus edify: so it ministers no small comfort, assuring us, that
as God rested from all his works, and Christ from his: so we also by degrees
shall enter into rest in the Church militant, till it be perfectly consummated
in the Church Triumphant; as the Apostle says, Heb. 4.9.
there remains a rest for Gods people.

Now let the indifferent Reader judge, whether the former of these do not
burden, and indeed ensnare the consciences of men with many outward,
unprofitable, impossible performances, even to superstition, and without end;
whereas this latter doctrine contains the very pith, and marrow of Religion;
promotes the care, and study of true sanctification, and is most quickening,
and cordial to weak, and tender consciences. But not to stray in this by-path
any farther, it were much to be wished as one of the greatest blessings of God
upon his Church, that Sacra Theolegia pium, and prudentem Lectorem requirit.
Brad. L. 2. c. 31.
Bradwardines rule were once well observed on all hands; the study of Theology
(says he) requires both a pious, and a prudent Reader; pious in himself,
prudent in his doctrine: a dove for the one, a serpent for the other. When
these are divided in the Ministers, divisions must needs be amongst the people;
and a house divided cannot long continue. One looks at the holiness of his
Minister, another to the learning of his; neither, as they ought; and therefore
the one strains at Gnats, the other swallows Camels; both pester the Church,
the one with looseness, the other with singularity. He that is licentious,
like the Camels of the Ishmaelites carrying many a sweet burden, but never
tasting them (Against whom Erasm. Dial.
Erasmus has a bitter Satyr in his Cyclops Evangeliophorus) is in show a
friend of the Churches peace, a zealous promoter of the government thereof; but
indeed an enemy, occasionally increasing that faction, which he verbally cries
down. For men think of him, and all his disciplinarian invectives, as Non nisi
magnum bonum a Nerone damnatum Tert. Ap. c. 5.
Tertullian speaks of Nero, and his persecuting the Gospel; it must needs be
some good thing, which so wicked a man, as he, condemned. In vain do these
Vipers go about to devour with their mouths that faction, which themselves
either breed, or cherish at least by their lives. On the other side, he that is
singular, whom with Aelians Tiger either the sound of a Bell, or music of a
Timbrell causes to run mad, cares not whether he runs, and draws others after
him, so long as he runs, as the phrase is, on the right hand. By this means
his duties in Religion daily grow, and multiply, as either his own, or some
other man's head, and fancy runs: this is Idolatry, that superstition; this is
profane, that is abomination, and Antichristian; and what not? And he that
dares think otherwise, is tantum non Anathema. But did these men rightly
consider of errors, they should find little difference in regard of their
malignity. He that falls from a bridge, has as little safety, as comfort,
though it be on the right hand. Nay, it would be no paradoxe to affirm, that
errors of this kind are most dangerous, being less discerneable in
themselves, less burdensome to the conscience, less hopeful to be reformed,
and being indeed the illusions of Satan transforming himself into an Angel of
light, in which shape he becomes the fowler Devil.

CHAP. XI. Wherein the name of the Christian man's Feast day is proposed, with
those arguments, which seem to conclude for the name Sabbath.
THe names of things, if rightly given, serve much to disover their natures. On
the other side Omnia peri^litan^ur aliter accipi quam sunt, and amittere quod
sunt, dum aliter accipiuntur, si aliter quam sunt, cognominantur. Tert. de car.
Chr.
Tertullian says well, all things are in danger to be mistaken, if they
retain not their true, and proper names. Being therefore to treat of the
Christian festival, and the Questions moved concerning the same; the first
thing, which offers it self, is, whether it must, or fitly may be styled the
Sabbath day.

The affirmative tenent is supported by these reasons.

First, those names, which God himself has imposed, are without all question
most proper, and most fit to be retained: But God himself has imposed the
Name Sabbath upon all days of his solemn and public worship; and such is
the Christian man's feast day. The Assumption appears. For not only the seventh
day in the fourth Commandment, but all the new Moons, and other festivals of
the Jews, are commonly called Sabbaths: Therefore etc.

Secondly those names are commonly best, which are most ancient. Inquire (says
Job. 8.8.
Job) of the former ages, and prepare thy self to the search of their Fathers:
But the name Sabbath is more ancient then any other, being the name, that was
first given to days of this nature: Therefore etc.

Thirdly that name is always best, which does most acquaint us with the nature
of the thing. In this the excellent Wisdom, which God gave unto Adam,
appeared, that he gave names to all the creatures answerable to their natures:
But the name Sabbath, given to the days of public worship, is such: for they
are days of rest unto us, and they were instituted in remembrance of Gods rest
at the Creation, and of Christ's rest in the Resurrection, and are pledges of
our future rest in glory. What name therefore can better agree unto them then
Sabbath, which is as much as Rest.

Fourthly, that name is doubtless best, which best directs us to the duties of
the day: For if 1. Cor. 1^.26.
all things must be done for edifying, such names are best to be imposed and
used, as are most accommodated unto edifying: But the name Sabbath best leads
us unto the duties of this day both outward and inward: Outward: Resting from
all Corporal, and worldly employments: Inward, resting from the spiritual
slavery of sin, and Satan. Add thereunto, that it does not only best direct us
unto the duties of the day, but it does also help to confirm our faith, and
hope in the promises of God concerning the life to come, and our Math. 8.11.
sitting down to rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in Gods kingdom:
Therefore etc.

Fifthly, we must not affect to be singular in anything not so much as in words
and Phrases: Loquendum cum vulgo; says the proverb. But not only the vulgar,
but all men wha^soever speak religiously, and reverently of the Sabbath day:
Therefore etc.

CHAP. XII. The reasons against the name of Sabbath are briefly alleged.
FOr the Negative opinion stand these reasons.

First, he speaks best of things, whose language is most conformable to the
holy Ghost in the Scripture: But the holy Ghost does every where in the new
Testament (which alone speaks of the Christian man's Holy Day, as having being,
and existency) call it the Lords day, no where the Sabbath day; The name of the
Lords day is therefore best, and fittest to be used.

Secondly, we should retain those names, which the Primitive Church in the
purest times the first three hundred years chiefly used, unless through any
corruption, or abuse they are scandalous: But the name of the Lords day has
been chiefly used in the Primitive Church, and in the purest times; neither is
it since through any abuse become scandalous; Ergo etc.

Thirdly, we of the reformed Churches should not forsake the Roman Church, but
where necessity does enforce us; For then we are guilty of that Schism, which
is made in the Christian world; Neither should we vary from our selves so much,
as (were it possible) in sounds, and Syllables; for then we may be justly noted
for singularity and affectation: But both the Roman Church, and all reformed
Churches use to style it the Lords day, not the Sabbath, Ergo etc.

Fourthly, we that are Christians should beware how we gratify the Jews in
their superstitious obstinacy against Christ, and his Gospel in the least
things; least we partake with them in their hardness of heart; the ancient
Christians fasted Saturday, especially for this reason, because the Jews
fasted on Satt^rday. But in using the name Sabbath we gratify the Jews in
their obstinacy against Christ, and his Gospel. For they abhor the name of
the Lords day, as the greatest Blasphemy: Therefore etc.

Fifthly, it is one of the chiefest points of a Christian man's wisdom so to
speak, as not to put a stumbling block before his weaker Brethren: He that does
otherwise Romans 14.15.
walks not charitably, says the Apostle: But the name Sabbath may be, and is
become a snare to many weak ones, especially in reading of the Scriptures. For
where ever they find the name Sabbath, they presently conceive it to be spoken
of, and to agree to the Lords day; and many times by this means fall into flat
Iudaisme: as appears by their quoting of the old Testament in the Questions in
hand: Therefore etc.

Sixthly, that name, which does less edify, is less proper. This, I think,
will easily be agreed on by all parties: But the name Sabbath does less edify.
For it leads us only to an outward cessation from bodily labor; which of it
self, and precisely considered was indeed a duty of the Jewish Sabbath; but is
not so of the Christian Festival; as hereafter shall appear. On the contrary,
the name Lords day does best open and explain the whole nature, and duty of the
day; as the remembrance of Christ's resurrection, the acknowledgment of his
Lordship over the Church, and all other Creatures in the world: Ergo etc.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein is briefly showed what is to be thought of this Question.
IT is a frequent rule in Cum de re constat propter quam ver ba dicuntur, de
verbis non debere contendi: si quis id facit imperitia, docendum esse,
simalitia, deserendum. Aug. cont. Acad. lib. 3. cap. 13. and lib. 2. cap. 11.
S. Austine, that wise men should not strive about words, unless when there is
some real difference in the things. But I doubt whether this question be only
a fight about words. For as the Non illos viros ^os fuisse arbitror, qui rebus
nescirent nomina imponere; se^ mihi videntur haec vocabula elegisse, and ad
occultandum tardioribus, and ad significandum vigilantioribus scientiam suam.
Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 10.
same father speaks of the Academicks; so may we, without breach of charity,
suspect of our Sabbatharians at this day. They are not (says he) such simple
men, as know not to give things their proper names; but they purposely make
choice of such words, as may best serve both to hide from the simple, and to
intimate to the wiser sort of their disciples their opinions. Else I see no
reason at all, why the name Sabbath should be so common, and that of Lords day
so seldom used. I deny not, but the name Sabbath is lawful, and may also be
used by such, as have their wits well exercised in Scriptures, if without
superstition, fraud, or scandal: But yet notwithstanding the name Lords day is
both more fit in it self, serving more for edification; and the Arguments to
the contrary do not conclude.

To the first, true it is indeed, that God himself in Scripture imposes the
name Sabbath upon all days of public worship in the Jewish Synagogue; and
the reason was, because the very corporal rest was a chief thing aimed at in
them; being both memorative of some things passed, and figurative of things
also to come: But that therefore the days also of Christian Assemblies should
be so called, does not follow: because the reason is not the same, as shall
appear in it is proper place. The name Sabbath therefore is no more Moral, and
to be retained in the times of the Gospel, then the name Priest, Altar,
Sacrifice; which perhaps our adversaries themselves will allow of in a common,
large and Analogicall construction. If therefore we look to the Si vocis
primaevam significationem spectemus, Sabbathum erit omnis dies festus. At
Scripturae consuetudine Sabbathi nom^ fere appropriatum est diei septimo Estius
3. Sent. d. 37.
first and original signification of the word, every Holy Day, wherein men
rest from their labors, and attend the public worship, may be called a
Sabbath; but if we look at the application of it in Scripture, we shall find it
appropriated in the first, and chiefest sense to the Sabbath day, or Satturday
in the fourth commandments; in the next and subordinate construction, to all
the Jewish festivals, never to the Lords day.

To the second; No man will deny, but that antiquity is a good guide in the
search of the truth: for all errors are upstarts, even those that are
gray headed. The Ier. 6.16.
Prophet therefore advises to ask for the the old way, which is the good way;
but his meaning is, that which is simply old, not comparatively only. The
corrupt Glosses of the Pharisees were very ancient. Math. 5.38.
Ye have heard, that it was said to them of old time, an eye for an eye. The
superstitions of the Romanists are like so many old aches in the body of the
Church; yet as the one, so also the other, mere novelties in religion. Should
I grant the name Sabbath, as applied to the Christian Feast, to be of some good
standing; yet without all Controversy it was not known to the true Primitive
times. Indeed antiquity ever used one of these four, either Sunday; not from
'Dum sol^s l^tt^iae indulgemus, long alia ratione quam religione solis. Tert.
Ap. cap. 16.
the Sun in the firmament, but Mal. 4.2
the Son of Righteousness with healing in his wings: or the Day of light,
from the Sacrament of Baptism, called by the Fathers our Illumination: or the
Day of Bread, not from holy bread, as Papists now use it; but from the other
Sacrament of the Supper administered every Lords day; or the Lords day, which
does, and will continue to the worlds end.

To the third: The name Sabbath does not best acquaint us with the Nature of
the Lords day, as is pretended. For the nature thereof consists not, either
in our corporal, or Spiritual Rest, or in Remembering the Rest of God in the
Creation, or in being a pledge unto us of our eternal rest: All these are
accidental considerations of the Lords day. Indeed the memory of Christ's
resurrection is essential thereunto; but not so much in regard of his rest, as
of his conquest over death, and the grave, and being made the Lord of the
Quick, and the Dead. It being therefore the Lordship of Christ, made evident to
all creatures both in heaven and in earth, by the Glory of his Resurrection,
which is then celebrated, it ought to be styled the Lords day, not a Sabbath.

To the fourth: What the duties of the day be, we shall see hereafter. Let it
be granted therefore for the present, whatsoever the Argument does suggest, the
consequent is denied. For whatsoever duties are then performed, are, or at the
least ought to be directed in a special manner unto the Lord Christ, as our
service of him. The day therefore, is to be named, not from the nature of the
things done; but from the quality of the person, to whom they are intended; and
therefore not Sabbath, but Lords day. And whereas it is said, that the name
Sabbath may serve to confirm our faith and hope of our eternal Rest; I
answer, that indeed it may be so used by us, but was never so intended in the
first institution thereof: and being a consideration so remote, it cannot
claim to denominate.

To the fifth: It is indeed most rue. that we ought not, especially in matters
of Religion, to innovate though but words, and Phrases, although perhaps
insignificant, and improper; much less ought we to swarve from such language,
as is most savory and religious; but which name has most salt, the Sabbath, or
Lords day, I hope it does appear by this, which has been said. And who speaks
most Religiously, the Apostles, and the whole Church; or some few private
persons of late years, is easy to determine.

CHAP. 14. Wherein the Question concerning the duration of the day is proposed,
and the arguments for the day natural are set down.
AMongst those things, which disquiet and perplexe the consciences of the weak
concerning the Lords day, this is not the least, where it is to begin, and how
long it lasts. For God requiring of us perfect and entire obedience without
diminution, or defalcation: and James 2.10.
S. James saying, that he that fails in one point is guilty of all; unless
every minute of time, which the Lord requires of us, as his tribute and
homage, be duly tendered to him, our whole labor bestowed upon the parts, and
pieces of the day, is not regarded. It is also that, which concerns the most
sort of our inferior people to be satisfied in, le^st the Commandment
requiring one thing, their employments another, they many times wound their
Consciences, and rob themselves of that peace, which otherwise they might
enjoy. We must therefore, before we proceed any farther, inquire, whether the
Lords day be to consist of any certain determinate number of hours, as being a
Natural day, or Artificial. And here our Adversaries are very positive, that
the Christian man's Sabbath, as well as that of the Jews, is to consist of full
twenty four hours; and they have these reasons.

First, all the time, that the Commandment requires, is to be observed. But
that the Commandment of the Sabbath requires a whole natural day from evening
to evening is undeniable: Therefore etc. If any man say the Commandment was
Ceremonial, and so proves nothing for the Christian observation; it may be
replied, that this being granted of all the other branches; yet it is not so in
this. For no man can show, how the time of twenty four hours can be in any
respect mystical. Though therefore the rest of the latter should vanish as a
shadow, yet in this particular it must needs continue Moral.

Secondly no one day of the week is longer or shorter then other: but if the
Lords day, as the rest, has not twenty four hours, it must needs be shorter,
and that, which is next there unto, either going before, or comeing after must
be longer then any other day. Therefore etc.

Thirdly, it is a good Rule, which the Rabbis give; that we should not take
from that which is holy, to add to that which is profane, but on the
contrary: But if the day of Gods public worship amongst us have not allowed
it so many hours, as other days, we take from that which is holy, and add to
that which is profane, even our own secular employments; which were impious,
and sacrilegious: Therefore etc.

Fourthly if the Jews Sabbath were to consist of twenty four hours, then
much more the Christians. For we have both received more, and greater benefits,
and we also have more and greater mysteries of Godliness to contemplate; But
the Jewish Sabbath was a whole natural day: Therefore etc.

Fifthly, the Scripture seems to be plain to this purpose. For the 92. Psalm
was the Psalm of the Sabbath; as appears by the title thereof, and in the very
beginning thereof the Prophet sets down the very time of its observation,
saying, Psalm. 92.1.2.
it is a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing unto thy name O most High;
to declare thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy truth in the night
season, meaning a whole natural day: Therefore etc.

Sixthly, we must rest, as God Rested, beginning to rest from the works of our
callings, when God began to rest from the work of Creation. For Gods rest is
propounded in the Commandment to be our pattern: but God began his rest at
evening the sixth day, immediately after the making of the woman; and so
continued the day of his rest which was the seventh. If therefore our Rest must
be answerable to Gods Rest, it must begin at evening, and continue till
evening: Therefore etc.

Seventhly, as Christ rested, so must the Christian rest; his actions were our
instructions; and we call the day of our Rest the Lords, because it was
dedicated unto him; but Christ finished his course, and began his Rest over
night, resting in the grave four and twenty hours at the least: Our Rest
therefore, being grounded upon Christ's Rest, cannot be less then a whole
Natural day.

Eighthly, as the Apostles, to whom the observation of the day was immediately
prescribed by Christ himself, kept the day in their own persons: so doubtless
must we their successors in all after ages: But the Apostles Sabbath was a
whole natural day. This appears by S. Paul's practice at Troas, when he
preached, and administered the Sacrament, and communed with the Disciples of
holy things (all duties of the Lords day) Acts 2^.11.
until the morning: Ergo etc.

Ninthly, as our Savior, who instituted the day, observed it in his own
person: so doubtless must the Church for ever. But our Savior appeared (and
his very apparition was the institution) not only early in the morning, but
also John 20.19.
late at night to his Disciples; and even then preached unto them, and gave
them the holy Ghost, with the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore etc.
If any object, that by night in that place is understood the evening or
shutting in of the light only, making it thereby a day artificial; the very
circumstances of the Text are against him. For first the doors of the house
were shut (says the Text) which is not usually done in the evening; Secondly,
they feared a search would be made for them, which is commonly done in the
dead, and depth of the night; Thirdly Profunda jam nocte. Aret. in locum.
Aretius a good Protestant Expositor says expressly, it was very late in the
night.

Tenthly, as the Primitive Church observed the day, so must we: But the
Primitive Church kept a night, as well as a day; as plainly appears by their
vigills and overnight assemblies, not only in time of persecution, but when
the Emperors themselves were Christians. Every man knows, and we read unto
this day the Sermons of the ancient Fathers in their vigils, which doubtless
had never been, but that they held themselves obliged to a twenty-foure-houres
Sabbath at the least: Therefore etc.

Lastly, diverse good authorities may be brought to this purpose, not only of
some private men, as Sicut Antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbatho, dicente
legislatore, a vespere usque ad ve^eram. Aug. de tempore.
St Augustine, and Irenaeus contra Valent. l. 4. cap. 31.
Irenaeus; but whole Observemus igitur Diem Dominicum, and sanctificemus eum a
vespere diei Sabbathi usque ad vesperam Dominici diei sequestrati ab omni
negotio. Con. Agath. cap. 47. Noctem ipsam, quae nos insseratae lucd
in^^cessibili redidis, spiritualibus excubijs exigamus. Con. Matis. c. 1.
Counsels have so determined this point, nay the very Canon law the sink and
dunghill of Popery.

CHAP. XV. The Arguments against the day natural are proposed.
THe negative Tenent has also its Reasons.

First; our Resting day must be proportionable to our working day; for they are
relatives, and all relatives have their mutual Respects in all things, in
which they are Relatives. Certain therefore it is, that God requires for
himself such a day of Rest, as he does proportion unto us for our own
employments: But our working days are Artificial, not natural. Man goes
forth unto his labor till the evening; ( Psalm. 104.3.
says the Prophet) and Ioh. 11.9.
there are twelve hours of the day (says our Savior) Ioh. 9.4.
night comes, wherein no man works. Therefore etc.









Secondly, if the Christian Holyday were to consist of a certain determinate
number of hours; either the new Testament, which alone speaks of this day: or
the Church of Christ, who alone observes it, would have directed us, where to
begin those hours, and where to end them. For the Jews were expressly so
directed: but neither the new Testament, nor the Church of Christ has given
any such directions.

If any say, we need no such new information in this point, having already the
same, which the Jews had in the fourth Commandment; we shall I hope give him
satisfaction in the answer to the first Argument of the precedent chapter,
which it does concern.

Thirdly, if a Lords night be to be sanctified, as well as the day, this night,
and all the parts thereof must differ from other nights, by some special
appropriation to the Lord, as the day differs from other days; But how can
this be, unless we rest not at all that night in our beds, or serve God by
dreams and visions? Which to affirm were notoriously absurd.





Fourthly, there is no moral law in nature, nor positive law in Scripture, but
is in it self possible to all men in all parts of the world in regard of the
thing commanded. But a natural day-Sabbath, as it is made to consist of a day
and a night, is absolutely impossible for some men in some parts of the world,
in regard of the thing commanded: in some parts there being nothing but day,
and in other places nothing but night for a long space together. This is so
apparent as needs no proof: Therefore etc.



Unto which I answer,

the Lords Land. Commerce indeed they had with other nations, which proved
their ruin; but for any voyages they made, or Colonies they deduced, we read
none. Solomon, it is true, sent a navy unto Ophyr, which is Peru, as most
conceive; or as Josephus, some place in the East Indies: Iehosaphat attempted
the like, but his ships were broken at Ezion, Geber. 1. Kings 22, 48.
For though Solomon's navy found prosperous success, intending therein the
glory of Gods house: yet Iehosaphat having no such warrantable grounds failed
in his expectation. Some think that the Jews traveled, and t^^ded into that
part of the Indies, which at this day we call New England; for there they find
a harbor, which the natives call Nahum-Keik, the harbor of him that comforts,
or of him that repents. It Is usual in this language to have contrary
significations: But let it be granted, that they meet with some Hebrew words in
that tongue; what nation is there, in whose language you may not make the like
observation. Say also that the Jews travailed into the East, and west Indies
for Gold and Spices. I think it easy to show, that those parts of the world, in
which are either continual day or night, were not known until after Christ,
and the destruction of Jerusalem. In a word, had the Jews at any time
travailed into such places, where they could not have kept their Sabbath from
evening to evening, it had been sin unto them; For when a man shall, by any
voluntary action of his own, cast himself into an utter impossibility of
fulfilling any positive precept of the law of God, it becomes evil unto him,
though otherwise it be both lawful, and commendable. The case therefore is not
the same with the Jews, and us in this point, they being precisely bound both
to places, and houses, from both which Christ has set us free. The objection
is of no weight.

Fifthly to make the night part of the Lords day to be observed by the Church of
Christ, is contrary to the ground of the institution thereof, which is the
Resurrection of Christ. For Christ rose not in the night, but early in the
morning, and being risen, his Resurrection has no night. But how can the night
remember us of that, which has no night? If we keep the night before, we
solemnize not Christ's resurrection, for he was not as yet risen; if the night
after, we seem to be enemies of his resurrection, as if the Sun of
righteousness were set the second time, whereas Romans 6 9.
Christ being risen, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him.

If any man say, he keeps not the night, as a part of the Lords day, the
memorial of Christ Resurrection; but as a part of his Sabbath in the fourth
Commandment; He seems expressly to forsake Christ, and to cleave to Moses,
and being weary of being a Christian, defires to turn Jew.

Sixthly, A night Sabbath is contrary to the end of the Institution under the
Gospel, which was Gods public worship in the congregation, for other use
thereof we find not in holy Scripture. If any man object, collections to be
made for the poor, private prayers, and christian exercises etc. we shall, God
willing, speak thereof also in its place. But night assemblies for the public
worship (except in time of persecution) are contrary to the Apostles Rule, 1.
Cor. 14.40.
let all things be done decently and in order. Experience in former ages has
made it manifest, what abuses were practiced under such pretenses.





Secondly the Church has no such custom.

Thirdly, private night-conventicles are as little, nay far less to be
trusted, then public meetings in the night.

Lastly the practice of the primitive Church was utterly without any set number
of hours; and there was much variety in their observation; sometime they began
their public worship on Saturday after supper, as in Syria, and Egypt.
Some-time they began their Lords day about the Tempus publici conventus fuit
Antelu^anum. Con. Antis. cap. 11.
dawning, the time; as they conceived, of Christ's Resurrection: others also
began upon satturday noon, and held on until Sunday morning. At this day our
Sabbatharians are divided in this point; some affirming from evening to
evening; others from morning to morning; others from midnight to midnight; so
that their position of a twenty-foure hours Sabbath can be no better, then a
snare to weak Consciences, there being no certainty, wherein to fasten.

CHAP. XVI. Wherein something concerning the day natural, and artificial
being premised, the former arguments are briefly answered.
TO give better satisfaction to weak, and unstable minds, we must know what a
Natural day is, and where it is to begin, where to end. Some have of late
fondly denied this distinction, because it is not found, as they think, in
Scripture; And indeed the terms Natural, and Artificial are not there read;
but what matter is it for sounds and syllables, if we have the sense, and
substance. Math. 28.2^
St Matthew is plain, that it was the end of the Sabbath, when the first day of
the week began to dawn: so that all that night, until the dawning of the first
day, was part of the Sabbath, which were not possible without the distinction
of Natural, and Artificial.

Sabbath from evening to evening, and therefore that the night following could
be no part of the Sabbath.

Matthew in that place speaks not according as the Jews accounted from evening
to evening: but as the Romans from morning; which was a natural day of
twenty-foure hours. But not to spend time in so needless a point, we must
proceed to enquire where the natural is to begin, and end. In this there is no
small variety of opinions. Astronomers begin at noon; Mane diem Gens Graecorum
incipit; astra sequentes in medio lucis; Iudaei vespere; sancta inchoat
ecclesia medio sub tempore noctis.
Jews at Sunset; the Grecians at morning; the Dies naturalis secundum
ecclesiam Romanam incipit a media nocte. Aqui part 3. q. 8. ad 5.
Church of Rome with the Vmbrians at Midnight. But this is to find knots (as
they say) in Bulrushes. For if the natural day be measured by the revolution
of the Sun, as all confess, sure it is, that until the Sun begin his
course, the day cannot begin. At what time now did the Sun set forth upon the
fourth day at the creation? Common reason will say, when he first appeared in
the Horizon; the rising therefore of the Sun in the Horizon must needs be the
first period of the natural day. And so the words of Genesis 1.5.
Moses are to be understood, saying, the evening and the morning were the first
day; that is the shutting up of the day, which is there called the evening; and
the beginning of the next, there called the morning, Permittitur autem vespere,
quia cum a luce dies inciperet, prius terminus occurrit lucis, quod est
vespere, quam terminus noctis, quod est mane: vel secundum Chrysostom, ut
designetur, quod dies naturalis non terminatur in verspere sed in ma^e. Aquin.
part 1. q. 74. art. 3. ad 6.
was the first day. The words also of S. Matthew before cited make it apparent;
in which not only midnight, but to the very dawning belonged not to the first,
but last day of the week. It was not of it, but toward it: as the end of one
contiguum is the beginning of another. By all which it is apparent, that when
God commanded the Jews their Sabbaths from evening to evening, the order of
the natural day was inverted by him, not so much looking to the number of
four and twenty hours, as to the time of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt,
which began, when the Passover was eaten at even; of which their deliverance
the Sabbath is a memorial, as has been said.

Some thing also must be said of the day Artificial which we may define to be
a certain proportion of hours, appointed by men, and employed by Artificers
about their crafts, and trades. This is not the whole time between Sun, and
Sun, but generally (I think) conceived by all nations to be measured by
twelve hours, according to that of our Savior: John 11.9.
Are there not twelve hours of the day? And, as the Math. 27.
Evangelist describes the passion of Christ by the third, sixth, and ninth
hours.

Having thus briefly set down the day Natural, and Artificial; whereas it is
generally supposed by all men almost, that the Lords day must be measured by
one of these two proportions of hours; the truth is, there is no such portion
of time set us in the New Testament, which alone can direct us in the Lords
day; neither expressly, nor implicitly. Unless therefore we will have recourse
unto the Jewish Sabbath, and begin the observation thereof over night, and that
Analogically, because Christ himself our Passover was sacrificed at Evening,
and our Redemption from the spiritual Egypt set on foot; the Conscience has
no ground to settle upon. But what warrant Christians have to follow the Jews,
in observing the Lords day, in regard of any circumstantialls, I see not. And
that Analogicall respect (before spoken of) between the sacrificing of ours,
and their Passover, cannot bind the conscience. The whole therefore is left to
the Church, and Magistrates under the Gospel; the time being such by their
appointment, as may be convenient for the public worship of God: neither do
the Arguments to the contrary conclude.

To the first: the Jews indeed were prescribed a natural day, not properly,
but equivocally so called, consisting of twenty four hours; but that the
time, which limited them, does also limit us, is utterly untrue. And whereas it
is said, that the twenty-foure hovres were no way Mystical, or Ceremonial; It
will be replied, that though the number of hours spoken of (which are not so
much as mentioned in Scripture) was in no respect mystical; yet the time named
from evening to evening was partly memorative, looking to the time of their
deliverance out of Egypt: partly positive, looking to the public worship, the
morning and the evening sacrifice, which concerns not us, but only in a
proportion. For as the Jews worshipped the Lord upon the day of their Sabbath,
and had set times of assembling themselves on that day both morning and
evening: so it is fit, and convenient, that the Christians also worship the
Lord in their public assemblies, both in the beginning, and toward the
evening of their Lords day.

To the second: A day may have a twofold consideration; the one Absolute, as it
is a day; the other Relative, as appointed for any use, or service. The fifth
of November may be considered either as such a day of such a month; and so
it is neither longer, or shorter then any other natural day: or as a day set
apart by the Church for public thanksgiving, and so it consists only of a
morning, as appears by the Statute, from whence it has authority. The case is
the same in the Lords day, which continues no longer, then the duties of the
day require.

To the third: the saying of the Rabbines is a good admonition to all men, not
to abbreviat or lessen the time appointed by the Church for holy duties; but
this makes no more for twenty four hours, then it does for forty or fifty, or
any other. It is (all men will confess) sacrilege to rob God of his time; but
it must be made to appear, that God has claimed unto himself this time in
question; till when nothing can be concluded.

The fourth indeed were unanswerable, if the case were, as is pretended between
us, and the Jews; But

First the ground, upon which this argument is builded, is sandy; for it
supposes, that God appointed them from Evening to Evening to contemplate the
mysteries of Godliness, and mercies vouchsafed unto them; whereas it was both
memorative, and mystical, as has been proved; neither did they spend the
night of their Sabbath in contemplation, but in bodily Rest.

Secondly, it is utterly untrue, that we under the Gospel have more work for
the Lords day, then the Jews had for their Sabbath: For as Lib. 4. c. 4.
Eusebius observes, their religion was the same with Christian Religion, which
at this day we profess; 1. Cor. 10.2.
For they all were baptized unto Moses, and did all eat of the same spiritual
meat, and drink of the same spiritual Rock, which was Christ: his meaning is,
that the body and substance was the same, only it was clothed with many
shadows, and as the Apostle calls them Gal. 4.9.
Beggarly rudiments; so that their Sabbath days work was in this respect, as
much as our Lords can be.

Thirdly, I say, it was much greater; for how cumbersome was Gods worship to
them by Sacrificings, Purifyings, Washings? How did God seem to hide himself,
and his mercies from them in Types and figures, whereas he reveals himself to
us even in the face of Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 3.
And not only Moses had a veil put upon him, 3.15.
but also their hearts, which remains unto this day; There was also a
restraint of Gods spirit unto them: as of the rain in the days of Elias;
whereas now the fountain is opened, and the spirit powered out. All men know,
that when any thing is enquired after, it is sooner found when it lies open,
then when it is hid; by a man of understanding, then by a child; one that has
eyes to see, then by one that is hoodwinked; by one that has many helps, then
by one that has none; So is it between the Jews, and us in holy things: This
argument therefore is a mere (...), neither can any more prevaricating reason
be produced.

To the fifth, it were to be wished, that Scripture might be handled, if not
with more reverence, yet with greater gentleness, not thus to be racked. The
92. Psalm was the Psalm of the Sabbath, and it makes mention of night and day
to be spent in the Lords praises; But what then, will any reasonable man
imagine, that they then had night meetings in the Temple, or sat up late in
their families that night? Those times of morning and evening, if we restrain
them, as spoken of the Sabbath day, are metonymically to be understood, for the
whole worship of God, whenever performed upon that day; and are as much, as
when we say, Morning-prayer, and Evening-prayer. But farther, notwithstanding
the Psalm was the Sabbath-Psalme; yet whatsoever is therein contained may not
respectively be spoken of the Sabbath only. And this is Tantum vult docere,
nisi nos nostra socordia impediat, nunquam deesie argumentum laudandi Deum; nec
vere defungi officio gratitudinis, nisi in eo si^^us assidui, sicut ipse
bonitatem and fidem erga nos perpetuat. Calvin. in locum.
Mr Calvin's observation upon the very words alleged; affirming, that day and
night are there put in indefinitely for all times whatsoever; as appears (says
he) by that, which follows: For his loving kindness, and his truth are
always toward us. But as those, that have yellow eyes, think every thing to
be of that color: so these men cannot meet with the Lord to be praised night
and day, especially in the Sabbath-Psalme; but it must presently conclude a
four and twenty houres-Sabbath.

To the sixth; as Gods rest began, so must ours; is a proposition Atheologicall;
For the Jews themselves, who observed the Sabbath in imitation of Gods Rest,
looked not at their pattern in this particular, but only at their deliverance
out of Egypt; into which deliverance they entered, when they sacrificed the
Passover. The example of God is not proposed without limitation in the
Commandment; he so rested, as that he never since returned to his labors,
from which he rested; he so rested, as that he blessed it; in neither of which
ought we to presume to imitate his Rest. Lastly, I wonder how the example of
Gods rest, proposed in the Commandment, can concern our Lords day, which was
not the day of the Lords Rest, but the beginning of his labors.

The seventh is not much unlike.

First, therefore we observe not the Lords day in memory of Christ's resting in
the grave. For though in some respects he may then be said to have entered into
Rest; yet was the grave part of his humiliation also, and our Redemption, and
no complete and perfect Rest.

Secondly, let it be supposed, that the grave to Christ was only a place of
Rest, and that he entered thereinto overnight; what is this to a twenty four
houres-Sabbath? unless perhaps Christ rested but just so many hours in the
Grave; but how then was he three days and three nights in the Bowels of the
earth? This therefore is a mere pretense, no proof.

The eight, drawn from Apostolical practice, is in all parts thereof unsound.
Plain it is, that Apostolical practice binds not the conscience, but where
there is a precept annexed: Nay where there is a precept annexed, both precept
and practice may be (as they say) ambulatorium in lege, of no lasting
continuance. But in this point we have neither precept, nor practice, either
for the present, or for after ages. I presume, that no man, well considering
the place alleged, can deny, what Curavit scriptor libri causam producendi
sermonem produ cere. Aug. epist. 86. ad Cus.
S. Austine long since observed, that S. Paul at that time took the advantage
of the present occasion, and necessity, and not otherwise. Sure I am, that if
the Apostles practice, there recorded, were a president for us to follow;
neither the whole Church of God can be excused, who never since has observed
such a Sabbath: nor the Apostle himself can be acquitted, who, for ought we
read, never did the like before, or after in any part of the world. Besides all
this Calv. in locum.
Mr Calvin thinks, that the day there spoken of was the Jews Sabbath, not the
Lords day; reading, in stead of uno Sabbathorum, quodam Sabbatho; upon a
certain Sabbath day, not Lords day. But if any list to be contentions herein,
sure we are out of the Text, that S. Paul and the congregation met not, till
they came together to break bread, which in those times was commonly after
supper, and so it Acts 20.7.
came to pass, that he continued his preaching till after midnight. This
therefore can be no president for a natural daies-Sabbath, but may be
alleged for a night-Sabbath only; and such Sabbaths were never yet heard of.

To the ninth: the practice of our Savior is (I confess) of great force, and
the argument drawn from thence of more probability, though it conclude not; For

First, the ground thereof is but loose, that our Saviors apparition was the
Institution of the Lords day. For if ever our Savior instituted the day, it
must be by his Resurrection, which is a thing distinct from his Apparition. Our
Savior instituted the observation of this day by his Resurrection: as God the
Father instituted the Jewish Sabbath day by his ceasing to work; which was only
the ground, and Reason of the Institution, as has already been said.

Besides, if the appearing of Christ after his Resurrection were the
institution of the day; it must needs follow, that to whom he first appeared,
to them the day was first instituted, and commanded: now these must needs be
the Soldiers, or Mary Magdalene; and if so, what inconveniences follow? For
by this means a public, and everlasting ordinance for the whole Church of
Christ must be delivered either to those, that are not of the Church, as the
Soldiers: or to a woman, whom nature it self inhibits to teach in the Church.
And whereas it is commonly affirmed, that Christ kept the first Lord's Day with
his Disciples, leaving an example to us therein. I cannot sufficiently wonder
at the boldness and rashness of this Assertion: For let the Text be looked
into, and we find therein these particulars. First, he having appeared to Mary
early in the morning, he appears to the whole College of the Disciples ( Thomas
only excepted) late at night. Then having given them his ordinary benediction,
Peace be unto you, he shows them his hands, and his feet. Lastly he imparts
unto them their Apostolical mission, and indowes them with power, the keys of
the holy Ghost.

But what are all these to the observation of a Sabbath, or Pastoral charge?
What Preaching, Catechizing? What Sacraments administered? Unless Orders shall
be thought a Sacrament. It Is a strange keeping of a Sabbath, and such as our
adversaries will not avow, to begin early in the morning with one, or two, and
let all the rest of the day slip, doing nothing amongst their people till late
at night; and then neither Preach, Pray, nor administer the Sacrament. But what
then was the reason, why our Savior appeared so late in the night, and the
Apostles in all likelihood sat up so late expecting his coming? The Text does
satisfy both scruples; first on the Disciples parts, that were assembled
together, not thinking of Christ, but for fear of the Jews; then on our
Saviors part, this seeming unto his wisdom the fittest opportunity to show
himself unto them, to comfort them in their present fear; and to furnish them
with the holy Ghost, against future temptations; to which tend both his words,
and gestures. And this Clavieni^^ manus fixeru^t, lancea latus ejus aperuerant,
ubi ad dubitantium corda sananda sunt servata vulnerum vestigia Aug. tract. ^^
Ioh. 12^
Saint Austine saw upon the passage of the Text, where he showed his hands, and
side; for the print (says he) of his wounds were reserved to heal the doubt
of their fearful hearts; and the effect followed, for they were glad (says
the Text) when they had seen the Lord.

To the tenth: Certain it is, that the first original of Vigils, or
night-assemblies, was persecution, as appears, Acts 12.12. but persecution
ceasing, they were continued of devotion; and the Fathers constantly preached
in these vigils, or Eve of any Festivals. In process of time they began to be
corrupted, and by little and little degenerated into superstition, as being a
work of merit, and supererrogation. They were therefore (because otherwise also
abused) not only despised, but forbidden; and by name Placuit prohibere, ne
foeminae in Coemiterio pervigilen, ^o quod saepi sub obtentu orationis scelera
latenter commi^tantur. ^on. Elib^^a^.
to women: By which it appears, that it was not an essential duty, or
observation. Lastly these vigils, being always the night before, cannot
advantage our Sunne-rising-Sabbatharians, which observe the night following;
which are the best, and greatest part.

Lastly, the authorities alleged, as Saint Austine, Irenaeus, the Synods of
Agatho, and Matiscon (not to question the validity of them) speak according to
the custom of the times, wherein vigils were not yet so grossly abused; not
enforcing any thing upon men's consciences herein. The Canon Law also shows the
Practice of the Church of Rome beginning at midnight, as was before observed out
of Aquinas. But me thinks, they, that are so suspicious of Rome, fearing every
thing to be a relic thereof, and to smell of Popery, should not have been so
hardy, as to avouch the Canon Law, which they think no small horn of the beast.

CHAP. XVII. The Question concerning the institution of the Lords day proposed,
with arguments for the divine authority of it.
HAving thus entreated of the Lords day, as it is a portion of our time, to be
set apart for holy uses; we must now consider it in regard of the institution,
and observation thereof; and first, whether it be enjoined by the Church by
Divine, or Ecclesiastical authority. To prove a divine institution, either
immediately from Christ: or mediatly from the Apostles, are brought such, and so
many arguments, as are able, in the opinion of their owners, to convince any
man's judgment, not corrupted with profaneness of heart, or darkened with pride,
and prejudice. We must therefore faithfully muster them up in their full
strength, that all men of sober minds may take their dimensions.

First it is said, that God by his precept requires one of seven to be for ever
observed; his words are, Exodus 20.10.
The seventh is the Sabbath; but the Lords day is one of the seven, and no
other of the seven is to be kept Sabbath; therefore this.

Secondly, all holy resting days are in the fourth commandment, as every
species is contained in the genus, and every Individuum in the species. It must
needs be in this, as in all other things. For example, Honor the King is a
general precept, under which the honor of all particular Kings is
comprehended: honor King Richard, King Henry, King Charles: But the Lords day
is an holy resting-day, as appears by the practice of the whole Church, and was
never yet denied by any enemy thereof, unless he were some malicious person.
Therefore etc.

Thirdly, one and the same Scripture has many times two literal senses, or at
least is twice fulfilled in one, and the same literal sense; for example Not
abone of him shall be broken, fulfilled both in the paschall Numb. 9.12.
Lamb, and Ioh. 19.36.
Christ our passover; Out of Egypt have I called my Son, first verified of
Hos. 11.1.
Israel his adopted Son, then of Math. 2.15.
Christ his natural Son: A voice was heard in Ramah, understood first of the
captivity of the Jews foretold by the Jer. 31.15.
Prophet, then Math. 2.18.
of the number of the Innocents by the cruelty of Herod. As it is in these and
diverse other places of this kind: so it is in the letter of the fourth
Commandment; where either we have two literal senses, one for the Jews
Sabbath, an other for the Christians; or at least one literal sense twice
fulfilled, once under Moses, and once under Christ. Now whatsoever is commanded
the Church in the Scripture under any literal Sense, is of divine institution:
But the Lords day is commanded in the fourth precept, though not in the first,
yet in the second literal sense, Therefore etc.

Fourthly, that which was foretold and typified in the old Testament, is of
divine institution in the new; for where the ceremony is commanded the Jew, the
substance is commanded the Christian; for example: where unleavened bread is
commanded them, there sincerity, and truth is commanded us: But the Lords day
was thus typified, and foretold in the Testament. This the Rabbis themselves
have observed in sundry passages; First, in the words of God, saying let there
be light, therefore the Messiah should rise the first day of the week.
Secondly, from the fall of Adam on the sixth day, therefore the Messiah should
suffer that day, rest in the grave the seventh, and rise the next. Thirdly,
from the words of Boaz to Ruth, Ruth. 3.13
sleep until the morning, therefore the Messiah should sleep in the grave all
night, and rise in the morning. Fourthly, from the cloud covering the people
first on this day: from Aaron, and his sons executing their Priesthood first
on this day: from the Princes of the congregation, who made their offerings
toward the erecting of the Tabernacle on this day. From the fire also, which
first came down from heaven, and consumed the Sacrifices upon this day: And if
any man be so profane hearted as not to be convinced by these grave
collections of the Jewish Rabbis, he shall find the same averred by the
Fathers, and Synods in the Church of Christ. Both Hic dies octavus (i. e.)
Sabbathu^ primus praecessit in imagine quae imago cessavit superventente
post-mod^^ veritate, Cyp. ad Fid. Ep 59.
Saint Cyprian, and Sanctos patrer plenos spirita octavae die^ sacramentum non
latebat, quo figura^atur resurrectio. nam and pro octav^ Psalmus inscribitur,
and octava lic circumci^e. bantur ^^^^nte^. Aug. ad Lan. Fo. 119.
Saint Austin make the Administration of the Circumcision on this day a Type,
and Figure of its future observation. The Synod called Foro-Iuliensis affirms,
that Isaiah prophesied of this day; An other Synod held at Matiscon said
expressly, that this day, which was intimated unto us by the shadow of the Jews
seventh-day, is made known unto us both by the Law and Prophets; what can be
more evident?

Fifthly, that day, which the Lord himself has made, must needs be a day of
the Lords own instituting; for to make, and to ordain, and appoint, are in
this case terms equivalent: But the Lords day is a day of the Lords own
making, and appointing; ^pse est d^e^ (...) perpet^^^, ipse nobis per septimae
dici umbram insinuatus noscitur in lege, and Prophetis. C^n^. ^^^atis. c. ^.
Syn For. c. 13.
so says the Prophet David: Psalm. 118.
This is the day, which the Lord has made. And therefore Exultemus and
Laetemur in eo, qui a lumine vero nostras tenebras fugaturus illuxit; nos ergo
constituamus di^m dominicam in frequentationibus usque ad cornua altaris.
Arnob. in locum.
Arnobius upon this place says, let us also make our Lords day a great day,
since God himself has so made it. A learned Prelate also of our Church has a
Sermon extant upon that text, much to the same purpose. Therefore etc.

Sixthly, that day, which the Lord ever does, and will bless unto his Church,
and people, which religiously observe it, is doubtless a day of his own
ordaining, and appointing; therefore sanctified, and blessed are put together
in the Commandment. But God has, and continually does, and ever will bless
this day with groth of grace, and all spiritual blessings in Christ to all
such as Religiously observe it. Therefore etc.

Seventhly, that which the example of God the Creator, resting from all his
works, was to the Jews in regard of their Sabbath; that also the example of
God the Redeemer is, and must be to us, that are Christians in regard of ours:
But the example of God the Father resting from his works was a sufficient
institution of the Jews Sabbath; for therefore they rested, because God
rested; it should therefore be a sufficient Institution unto us under the
Gospel, to rest on the Lords day, because in it Christ rested.

Eighthly, If a day of holy rest were instituted by God the Father in memory of
the worlds Creation, which was the less; much more was there a day of holy
rest instituted by God the Son in remembrance of the worlds redemption, which
was the greater. The consequent is authorized by Athan Hom. de ^^^en.
Athanasius in his Homily of the Sower: But a day of holy rest was ordained by
God the Father, in memory of the Worlds creation, as is undeniable. Therefore
etc.

Ninthly, Certain it is, that nothing, but divine authority, can bind, and
overcome the Conscience in regard of any outward observations, in their own
natures indifferent; for the Conscience is a Throne, in which God only sits,
and commands. But the conscience is bound, and overawed to the observation of
the Lords day; as all men confess, and feel by experience, unless they belly
their consciences. Therefore etc.

Tenthly, That day, which the Church observes in regard of some mystical
signification therein contained, is a part of Gods worship; and must therefore
be under precept, unless we will worship God after our own fancies; But the
Church observes the Lords day in regard of some mystical doctrine therein
contained, the Lords resurrection, our own future glorification; therefore it
must be under precept.

Eleventhly, Whatsoever is not under divine precept is mutable, and may utterly
be abolished in the Church of God by the authority of the Governors thereof;
but the Lords day cannot by any humane authority whatsoever be changed, and
abolished. Therefore etc.

Twelfthly, If the observation of the Lords day be not of divine, but only
Ecclesiastical constitution, then are all festivalls, or holy days of the
year of equal dignity, and honor with it: But it were little less then
blasphemy to affirm the latter; and clean contrary to that of Ignatius Ep. ad
Magne sianos circa medium epistolae.
Ignatius, who lived, and wrote in the purest times, styling it the Queen of
days Therefore etc.

Thirteenthly, It Is only the divine prerogative of God himself, to put
holiness into times, and days; for he only is the fountain of holiness. But
the Lords day is an Holy Day, and has holiness in it, more then other days;
whence it is, that the Fathers frequently call it Sacred, Mystical,
Religiously to be observed: Therefore doubtless made holy by God himself.

Fourteenthly, None can appoint any thing to be a part of Gods worship in the
Church, but Christ, who is the head of the Church, to rule and govern her; who
can command the spouse, but the husband? But the observation of the Lords day
is a special branch of Gods worship in the Church; therefore none can, none
ought to institute it, but Christ himself.

Fifteenthly, There being a change of the Priesthood, there was also a change
of the Law, says the Heb. 7.12.
Apostle; (...),
the word there used in the Original signifies the transposing of things, one
being put in the room and steed of another; But the Jews Sabbath was one of
those things thus to be exchanged, being Ceremonial; therefore our high Priest
put an other in the room thereof; but no other, therefore the Lords day.

Sixteenthly, Only Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, to appoint, and dispose
thereof as he thinks good; the Church can claim no such Lordship; but the
Sabbath is changed, and another appointed in the place thereof, which the whole
Church observes; this change therefore was made by Christ, not the Church.

Seventeenthly, Old things are passed away, all things are become new, so the
2. Cor. 5.17.
Apostle. The meaning is, that Christ has made all things new in his Church,
as new Creatures, new Man, new Covenant, new Commandment, new Way, new Names,
new Song, new Garments, new Jerusalem, new Heaven, new Earth. But unless
Christ has also made a new Sabbath, he has not made all things new. Ergo etc.

Eighteenthly, It is no way to be believed, that Christ would leave his Church
under the Gospel in worse condition, then he found the Synagogue under Moses;
But if Christ left not his Church under the Gospel a Sabbath of Divine
Institution; he left it in a far worse condition, then he found the
Synagogue, which received a Sabbath from God himself, as a special token of
his love; Ergo etc.

Ninteenthly, If Christ has left us no day of his own appointment, and
Institution, it were our safest way to turn Jews (as some have done upon this
very motive, at least in this point) for the Jews day we are well assured was
from God; but we may say of the Lords day, as they did of the Lord himself, we
know not whence it is; But no man will say it is best for us to turn Jews in
this point; Ergo etc.

Twentiethly, The very Name is a sufficient demonstration of a Divine
Institution; for all things belonging to Gods worship, which have the Lords own
name stamped upon them, were ordained by the Lord himself; as the Lords
Prayer, the Lords Supper etc. But the observation of the Christian Sabbath is a
thing appertaining to Gods worship, and has the Lords own name engraven upon
it by the Rev. 1.10.
holy Ghost himself. Ergo etc.

The one and Twentieth, That which Christ did immediately institute in his own
person, and with his own mouth ordain, must needs be of divine institution;
But that Christ did immediately in his own person institute the Lords day, the
Ioh. 20.19.22.
Evangelist makes apparent; for he came into the midst of his Disciples (the
holy assembly) the two first days of the two first weeks; then he blessed
them, breathed on them; gave them the keys of the Kingdom: It Is very likely
he did this every first day of the week from his Resurrection to his Assension,
Act. 1.2.3.
speaking unto them the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God. Ergo etc.

The two and twentieth. Christ, whiles he was upon the earth after his
Resurrection, gave the Apostles instruction, and commands Acts 1.2. what these
commands were may be known (say Divines) partly by their Doctrine, and partly
by their practice; But if Christ gave them such commands, as is most apparent,
without question he would not omit to command them a day to remember him, and
his Resurrection in, and to perform unto him holy worship: nay that this he
did, appears also by their practice; Ergo.

The three and twentieth makes it more evident, thus: Whatsoever is an
Apostolical tradition, is of Divine Institution; for they delivered nothing,
but what they first received; But the Lords-daies observation is certainly an
Apostolical tradition, 1. Cor. 10.^.
for they appointed collections to be made for the poor that day; the
ordaining of the one does necessarily infer the other; the duty of the day
supposes the day; And withal this day has been constantly observed by the
whole Church in all ages, and that without the authority of any general
Council; the very definition of an Apostolical tradition delivered by Illa,
quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae quide toto terrarum orb
observantur. Aug. ad Ian. ep. 118.
S. Augustine. Ergo.

The four and twentieth: If the Lords day were not of Christ's institution to
his Apostles, then surely they by their practice have drawn the Church of
Christ into an horrible presumption; as great, as that of Jeroboam, Antiochus,
and Antichrist himself, changing times and seasons; But God forbid any man
should think so uncharitably of the Apostles; therefore certainly they
received warrant for what they did from Christ himself.

The five and twentieth. If we keep the Lords day, warranted thereunto only by
the Apostles practice, for which they themselves received no precept; then by
the same reason we have only the Apostles practice for abolishing the Jews
Saturday-Sabbath; But we forbear not Saturday-Sabbath, only upon the Apostles
practice, and example, for which doubtless they received a precept. And indeed
the examples of holy men, not seconded by precepts, show what we may do, the
case being the same; not what we must do; Now the Church not only may, but
must forbear Satterday-Sabbath, and observe the Lords day. Ergo etc.

The six and twentieth: That day, on which the holy Ghost was given with all
his graces, with such efficacy, that Acts 2.41.
S. Peter immediately with one short Sermon converted three thousand souls,
must needs be a day of Christ's own Instituting; But this day was the Lords
day, the day of Pentecost. Ergo etc.

The seven and twentieth. That day, on which Christ revealed himself unto S.
John, acquainting him with his whole counsel concerning his Church, to the
worlds end, was doubtless a day, which he himself had especially selected out
of all other days, for himself, and his service; But the Rev. 1.10.
Lords day was the day of Revelation to S. John; Therefore etc.

The eight and twentieth. That day, whose Profanation is revenged with
miraculous judgments, even revealed from Heaven, must needs be of Divine
institution; for why else should the Lord so severely require it? But the
Profanation of the Lords day has been in all ages miraculously revenged; as
an Tom. 3. Conc. ^dem fere council. Paris. tomo 3.
ancient Synod held in Scotland, and sundry other good Records make it
apparent. Therefore. etc.

The nine and twentieth. A cloud of many Arguments, all of which are at the
least probable, are equivalent to a demonstration; But here is such a cloud.
Therefore. etc.

Lastly there wants not the authority of the learned. Ignatius styles it the
Queen of days: Justin Martyr says, the Lord himself changed it: Athanasius
affirms the same, as we see Argument the eight. The latin Fathers call it
sacred, as Argument the thirteenth: Augustine, Leo, and the Council of
Palestina enlarge themselves in the praises and prerogatives of the day.
Amongst the Schoolmen some are found, which maintain it to be of divine
Authority. Nay some Antisabatharians themselves have acknowledged the same; So
mighty is truth, and prevailing.

CHAP. 18. The Arguments for the Negative are briefly set down.
FOR the Negative it is said.

First, that whatsoever is of Divine institution is to be found either in the
natural, or positive law of God; for all laws are written constitutions, say
Civilians. And the Schooleman gives the reason, for otherwise they were Leges
constituuntur, cum promulgantur, alioqui constitationes positivae non essent
nisi in laqueum and offensiones, and scandalum nedu^ insipientum, sed and
sapientum. Gers.
no laws, but snares for men's consciences, and stumbling blocks, not only * to
the simple, but to wise men themselves. But that the first day of the week
should be the Christian man's Sabbath, is not found to be written, either
naturally upon the heart; or positiuely in the Scripture, either expressly in
the letter: or implicitly to be deduced by necessary, and undeniable
consequence: Not naturally upon the heart; for then it were a principal of
nature, which no man affirms; Nor positiuely in Scripture, for then the text
might be produced; not by undeniable consequence, for we shall see the
weakness of all these deductions, which hitherto are, or, as I conceive, may
be made; and in this point we must wholly be guided by probabilities, says Mr
Perkins.

If any man except against the sufficiency of this enumeration, and conceive it
to be a divine ordination, because it has authority from the practice of the
Apostles, and their example recorded in Scripture.

I answer, that in deed the Papists make much use of this Maxim. Ab Apostolis
per doctrinam spiritus sancti instituta, and omnibus saeculis post Apostolica
tempora succedentibus celebra^a est. Bell. de bonis oper. lib. 2. cap. 34.
Bellarmin maintains the fast of Lent to be a necessary observation, by no
other way. But me thinks, when a man speaks of holy things, to which the
consciences of men are bound under the obligation of sin; it is too much
loosenes to say, we are bound to follow the examples of Gods Saints, when no
precept can be produced. For only the examples of Christ in such things, which
are mo^rall virtues: or wherein he discharges the office of a Mediator, and
wherein he is proposed unto us to be immitated by us, are to be admitted for
necessary instructions, and obligations. And surely were it otherwise, so that
a man should distinguish between a divine precept, and a divine ordination (as
the Jesuit Lainez did in the Council of Trent) what a wide gappe were opened
to usurp upon men's consciences? St Augustines rule is safe, I believe not,
what I read not. If any man say, that this days observation was an
Apostolical tradition; we shall I hope give him satisfaction, when we come to
those arguments, which formerly were made to this purpose.

Secondly, if Christ had given any command to forbear the Jewish Sabbath, and
in its room to observe the Lords day; the Apostles, holding their first
Synod, would doubtless have expressed as much in their letters to the
Gentiles; for they profess by that their decree, to lay upon them all
necessary burdens in regard of outward observations. But the keeping of the
Lords day in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, is an outward observation, and
the Apostles burden them not therewith; therefore etc. The Argument gathers
strength from the circumstance of the text; because the question was at that
time, which also occasioned the Synod, between the Jews, and Gentiles, how
far forth they were bound to the law of Moses, of which the Sabbath was one
special branch.



second, that indeed their directions were only negative; and from hence we may
well infer, that the first Christians were tied to no affirmatiues, but such
only, as were express duties commanded by precept of the Gospel; But the
observation of the Lords day is affirmative, and no where so precepted.
Therefore etc.

Thirdly, whatsoever is of divine institution, and (as they say) by necessity
of precept laid upon the whole Church of Christ, is to be observed, as a
necessary means unto salvation by the particular members thereof, unless we
be debarred therefrom by some inevitable impossibility; for he that is guilty
of one, is guilty of all. But that the observation of the Lords day, ever since
Christ's resurrection, or ascension, has been a necessary duty, without which,
if it might possibly have been observed, no salvation were to be had, were
desperate rashness to affirm. For many doubtless there were, which never
kept the Lords day in the Apostles time: as most believing Jews, and many
believing Gentiles. Many also in these times very seldom, or never keep a
Sabbath, by reason of their callings: as workers in Mines, Colepits,
Shepherds, Cooks, Physicians; whose salvation notwithstanding we may not
doubt; Ergo. etc.

Fourthly no outward observation is under precept in the Ecclesiastical Law,
which concerns not the kingdom of God, Romans 14.17.
defined, to be Righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost; and therefore is
the Gospel called Evangelium Regni, the Gospel af the kingdom, and the Law
of the Spirit: This proposition is laid down by the Schoolmen for a Maxim in
Divinity, and is thus proved by way of induction; for the Lex nova in
exterioribus illa solum praecipere debuit, vel prohibere, per quae in gratiam
intr^ducimur, vel quae pertinen^ ad rectum usum gratiae ex necessitate. Aquin.
1.2. q. 108. art. 2.
Gospel commands only such observations, which are either means of Grace, as
the word, and Sacraments: or wherein the use, and exercise of grace does
consist: as the duties of love toward God, and man; But that the first day of
the week should be observed Sabbath, nothing concerns the kingdom of God
within us, because its neither a means of grace, nor exercise of grace.





Fifthly, that day, which cannot be kept universally through the whole world,
was never commanded the whole Church of Christ by an Evangelicall Law; for the
law of the Gospel is given to all nations. But the first day of the week,
which is the Lords day, observed in memory of the Lords resurrection, cannot be
thus universally kept, considering the diversity of Meridians, and the unequal
rising, and setting of the Sun in diverse Climates in the world. Some of our
adversaries foresaw this objection, but could never avoid it; only they tell
us, that it was so with the Jews in regard of their Sabbath; and therefore
Practice of piety.
affirm, that they were not bound to keep their Sabbath upon that precise,
and just distinction of time, called the seventh day from the Creation. For the
Sun stood still in Iosuah's time; it went back ten degrees (five hours) in
Hezekia's time; besides the variation of the Climates throughout the world.
Upon this they infer two things. 1. that God by his prerogative might
dispense with men in these cases: 2. that the Commandment means not the
determinate seventh from the Creation, but indefinitely a seventh. But what
absurdities do hence follow?

First, they seem to affirm, that the standing still, and the going back of
the Sun, made an alteration in the day, as it was the seventh from the
creation. Indeed they made it longer, and to consist of a greater number of
hours for the present; but what is this to the number of seven? One and the
self same day may be longer in Summer, shorter in Winter, yet keeps its rank
amongst the other days of the week for place, and number.

Secondly, they affirm that the Jews were not bound to any determinate day,
not to this seventh, but a seventh. Expressly contrary to the words of Moses,
Exodus 20.10.
the seventh is the Sabbath.

Thirdly, there is the same reason in all the forenamed particulars between the
Jews Sabbath, and the Christians. If therefore their day were indefinitely a
seventh, ours must also be indefinitely a first; and by this means they say,
and unsay with one, and the same breath; the first day is our Sabbath by divine
institution, and yet not the first, but a first; which is to yield the question.

Sixthly, there is the same reason of keeping a determinate set Sabbath under
the Gospel, that there is of preaching, praying, and administering the
Sacraments, Ordaining of Ministers, doing works of mercy at set-times. For I
think no man is so far infatuated with this paradox, as either to prefer
the Sabbath before these: or to sever the day from the duties, which are the
main end of the days observation. But all these are commanded in general, not
prescribed in particular when, or where, or how; so all things be done
decently, and in order; We no where read how often in a year we must receive
the Sacrament of the Lords supper; how often we should hear a Sermon: or when
to give, or how much either publicly, or privately. If therefore there be no
set times appointed for the maine duties of religion under the Gospel, there
is no set time appointed to be kept Sabbath. Therefore etc.

Seventhly, That, which is expressly against Christian liberty, was never
commanded by Christ, or his Apostles; but to have the conscience burdened with
any outward observations, putting Religion in them, as being parts, and
branches of Gods worship, is directly against Christian liberty; for how is he
free, that is thus bound to times, and days? We have then only exchanged, not
shaken off the Jewish bondage. If any man say, that this was both the argument,
and error of the Patrobrusians of old, and Anabaptists of late; he is much
mistaken, for they pretend not to Christian liberty, when the conscience is not
burdened immediately from God; but to unchristian license, and confusion, to be
exempted from the laws of men, and decent order of the Church.

Eighthly, There is no duty, I think, essential in religion, ordained by
Christ, or his Apostles, of which we find not either exhortations in respect of
performance: or reprehensions in regard of their neglect, either in the
Gospel, the Acts, or the Epistles; But the keeping of the first day of the
week Sabbath, is no where pressed, or exhorted unto; the neglect thereof no
where reproved, or forbidden in all the new Testament. Ergo.



Christ; as extreme unction, the Presbytery, women's vayles, widows; these are
mentioned with honor: but so is not the manner of observing the Lords day,
which is now cried up; nor any divine institution thereof. Whereupon these
things will necessarily follow. That either the Apostles never held this
observation to be a divine precept: or that having given it for such to the
primitive Christians in the Churches planted by them, they never failed in the
observation thereof; which is not imaginable, considering what gross abuses,
and prophanations were found amongst them: or lastly, that the Apostles knowing
the Lords day, which they had enjoined the^ as a divine precept, to have been
neglected, winked and connived thereat; though so ready (even with the rod) to
reform all other disorders; which also cannot be well conceived.

Ninthly, Had the observation of the Lords day-Sabbath been of divine
institution, it is very probable, that the 1. Cor. 6.^.
Apostle, reproving the Corinthians for going to Law one with another under the
heathen Judges, would not have omitted the advantage of this circumstance. For
plain it is, that their pleadings were ordinarily upon the Lords day. By their
going to Law therefore they not only scandalized the Gospel, and devoured one
another; but were also prophaners of that day, which Christ himself had
Commanded to be kept holy; it being impossible at once to keep a Sabbath, and
attend a Court of Judicature under an Heathen Judge. But the Apostle makes not
the least mention of this circumstance, though so pregnant and advantageous to
his purpose; it is therefore very likely, there was not as yet any divine
precept for the Lords Day.

Tenthly, if Christ had appointed this day, because it was the day of the
Resurrection; then the Eastern Churches, which followed St John, did ill, and
transgressed this ordinance of Christ, when they kept their Easter (which only,
and properly is the day of Christ's resurrection) upon any other day: as it
happened in the Leviticall account. And so Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24. 'O (...).
Soc. lib. 5. c. 21.
Pope Victor may well be justified, who did excommunicate them for this
offense; but the Disciples of S. John, though perhaps they did not so well, yet
cannot be simply condemned for evil doers, and to have been justly
excommunicated by Pope Victor: as Iraeneus in his Epistle to Victor makes it
appear. Ergo etc.

Eleventhly, Had it been a divine institution, doubtless those Fathers, and
Synods, that have spoken so much in praise of the day, displaying the glorious
prerogatives thereof, to commend it thereby to Christian men's observation,
would never have omitted this, which is the greatest of all the rest. But
neither the Council of Palestina, setting down the several Benedictions of
this above other days: nor the Council of Matiscon in France attributing the
irruption, and prevailing of the Goths, and Vandalls, to the neglect of this
day: nor Cyprian. ep. 66.
S. Cyprian, nor Leo, which have written large panegyricks hereof, ever affirmed
a divine institution.

Twelfthly, That, which the Orthodox condemn to be indeed Popery, should not
be consented unto by us; especially by such of us, as would be held the great
Reformers of the Church, and therefore startle at the very sight of harmless
ceremonies, because they have been polluted by Papists; as the Cross after
Baptism, Surplice etc. But that the Lords day is not only a part of the
Churches order, and policy, but of Gods worship also, and is more holy, then
other days (as it must needs be, if from divine authority) is condemned by
Paraeus in cap. 14. ad Romans Ames. Bell. enervat.
Reformists in the Papists; far therefore be it from our adversaries to
Symbolize with them.

Lastly. Authorities also are not wanting. (...). Soc. ib.
Socrates affirms, that the Apostles never intended to establish Laws
concerning Holy Days to be observed by Christians, but to be unto them the
Masters of true piety, and holiness. And because (says the Historian) no man
is able to produce any precept to this purpose, upon authentical record;
plain it is, that the Apostles left these things to the liberty, and
appointment of men. The historian speaks indeed of Easter in that place, but
first he delivers for Maxims, and Principles that which has been said.
Secondly, that question of Easter (as I conceive) differs not any thing from
this of the Lords day: viz. whether the day celebrated by the Church in memory
of Christ's resurrection ought necessarily, and by virtue of Divine precept to
be the first day of the week only. Hoc in iis culpat Apostolus, and in omnibus,
qui serviunt creaturae potius, quam creatori; nam nos quoque and dominicam diem
and Pascha solenniter celebramus, sed quia intelligimu^ quo pertineant, non
tempora observamus, sed quae illis significantur temporibus. Aug. cont. Adam.
Man. c. 16.
S. Augustine also made it not only will worship, but the service of the
creature, which is Idolatry, to observe any day, as commanded of God; and
answering what the Manichee (against whom he wrote) might object, viz. that
Christians themselves diligently observe the Lords day, and Easter; true (says
the Father) we solemnly keep all these, but the time is not that, which we
observe, as if it were commanded; but we look wholly to those thins, to which
the times lead. Dicat aliquis, nos quoque simile crimen incurrimus, observantes
diem dominicam; ad quod qui simpliciter respondet, di^et, non eosdem Iudaicae
observationis dies esse, quos nostros, ne inordinata congregatio populi fidem
minueret, in Christo, quod non celebrior sit dies illa; qui vero acutius
respondere conatur, illud affirmat, omnes dies aequales esse. Hier. in Gal. c.
4. Tyndall in his answer to Sir Thom. Moors first book. Fr^ths Declaration
of Baptism. Barnes supplication to the King.
S. Hierom likewise makes the Quaere, whether our Christian Lord's Day incur
not the Apostles prohibition in his Epistle to the Galathians, and resolves
negatively upon these grounds. They differ, (says he) from those there
condemned; first, materially, for they are not the same days; Secondly
formally, for our days have not in them any holiness, and necessity from
divine institution, as theirs had; but are at liberty to be kept upon any day
whatsoever; Thirdly, in regard of their end, which in ours is only to preserve
order, and to avoid confusion in our Ecclesiastical Assemblies. The book of
Homilies affirms plainly, that Christian men did of themselves without any
divine precept follow the example of God commanding the Jews a Sabbath, and so
took upon them the observation of the Lords day; we have also the unanimous
consent of all the reformed Churches of God at this day in Christendom. Add
hereunto the suffrages (not to say the sufferings) of our own Martyrs in those
Marian days. How the tenent came to be changed Mr Rogers, in his preface to
his Comment upon the Articles of Religion established in the Church of England,
has at large set down. Lastly, M. Perkins (who, I think, was one of the first,
that took up this tenent) speaks waveringly, and doubtfully herein. And surely
his modesty is to be commended, if you compare it with the violence of his
followers, with whom any man of contrary judgment is tantum non a reprobate.
But Mat. 11.19.
wisdom is justified of her children.

CHAP. 19. The Question is briefly stated, and resolved.
BEfore we come to answer the arguments made to the contrary, some few things
are to be premised for the better opening of the truth in this point. And
first, though our adversaries agree in general upon a divine institution of
the Lords day; yet they vary in nothing more, then when they come to
specificate their tenent, and show how it is divine. Sure it is, that
whatsoever is of divine ordination, must be so, either from God the Father in
the law of nature, or some positive precept of the old Testament: Or from God
the Son, in some precept of the Gospel: or from God the holy Ghost inspiring
the Apostles, John 16.13.
leading them, according to the promise of Christ, into all truth. Some
therefore affirm a divine institution of the Lords day from God the Father,
grounding themselves upon the morality of the letter of the fourth
commandment. But this, savouring too much of Iudaisme, and the commandment
speaking precisely of another day, is generally exploded. Others therefore
pretend an institution from God the Son by Evangelicall law; but being
required to show some word of Christ's establishing this observation, fail in
their proof, and are taken upon a Nihil dicit. The third opinion therefore is
now become most universal, viz. That it is an institution from God the holy
Ghost, in, and by the Apostles. And this tenent is wisely taken up, it being
such a hiding place, out of which men cannot so easily be drawn, as out of the
former; especially considering, that they extend to this purpose Apostolical
inspirations to the uttermost latitude; for they were inspired (say they) what,
and how to teach the Church in all things. And these inspirations, whenever
they became notified to the Church, were, and are to be esteemed divine
institution; whether written, or not written in Scriptures; wherein they seem
to imitate young Respondents in Philosophy, who use to shelter themselves under
the secret qualities of natural things, which they know their Opponents cannot
easily discover: Or rather they are glad to plow with a Popish Heifar,
(Tradition) of which Sacra nostrorum anchora est, ubi nulla suppetat nostrarum
falsitatum probatio. Spal. 2. de repub. c. 11 ^. 51.
Spalatensis says, It is the very sacred anchor, on which our men rely, when
they know not how otherwise to defend their falsehoods, and against which
themselves also have made ample invectives.

For the better clearing therefore of this point, it is necessary something be
said; First of Apostolical inspirations; Secondly of Apostolical traditions.
Concerning the first, the Apostles, we all know, sustained a threefold person.
For we may consider them either as Apostles, by extraordinary mission sent to
plant the Gospel: or as ordinary Pastors to govern the Churches already
planted: or thirdly as private persons. As Apostles, they were infallibly
inspired with all truths upon all occasions, which might plant the kingdom of
Christ, and bring men unto the obedience of the faith; the end of their mission
being to bear abroad Christ's name. Acts 9.15. To this purpose they were also
furnished with the gifts of Tongues, Miracles, Healings, Discerning of Spirits,
being immediately directed by the holy Ghost. As Pastors, they had a twofold
work; First, to perform the duties of the man of God, exhorting, reproving,
correcting, instructing in righteousness; Secondly, as Elders, to rule well,
erecting such government in their planted Churches, as might best sort with the
times, and states, in which they lived. Thus considered, no doubt but they were
also inspired; but not in like manner, nor measure as before. For their
inspirations, as pastors, were only such irradiations, influences, and
concurrences of the Spirit, as are afforded at this day to the Pastors of the
Church; unless by some personal miscarriages they procure unto themselves
spiritual derelictions. Thus the spirit is at this day present in all
Ecclesiastical Synods, nay even with private ministers, using the right means
in their places, even in their private labors. For the promise of Christ
reaches also unto them, and he is present with them unto the end of the world;
Where notwithstanding we must remember, that as all dictates of Ecclesiastical
Synods, or dictates of private Pastors, are not to be esteemed divine precepts,
because they are subject to error: as daily experience makes it manifest, even
in such persons, and assemblies, as are most regular; nay when their
resolutions are most conformable to the word of God, yet they are not divine
ordinances: So it must be conceived of the Apostles, considered as the Churches
Pastors, without any impeachment at all to their Apostolical dignity. We
know, that even the Apostles, considered as Pastors, were subject to mistake;
as appears by Gal. 3.11.
St Peter, who, living at Antioch, as a Pastor, was justly reproved by S. Paul
(how ever Hoc excedit modum fraternae correptionis, quae Praelatis a subditis
debetur. Aquin. in 4. sent. did. 19. art. 2. Stap. de Doct. princip. c. 14.
Stapleton, and Aquinas gloze it) for not walking as behoved a Pastor, or
Minister of the Gospel. And in another place, Paul, and Barnabas consulting
the Churches Pastors, in what manner, and with what company they should set
about the work of the Ministry, dissented from one another; and Acts 15.39.
that in such heat, as it makes it apparent, they were not both, if either,
directed by the Spirit; but as God by his providence overruleth affections,
bringing by them his own purposes to pass. Nay plain also it is, that,
although as they were Apostles they delivered nothing, but what they had
received; yet, as Pastors, and governors of particular Churches, they
delivered some things of themselves, not as dictates of Gods spirit; So 1. Cor.
7.6. V. 12. V. 25. V. 40.
S. Paul, I speak this by permission, not of commandment; to the rest speak
I, and not the Lord; and I have no commandment of the Lord; and I give my
judgment, and again, after my judgment. Neither is Non est consilium
divini-spiritus, sed pro eius may state praeceptum. Tert. Exhor. ad Castit.
Tertullians gloss to be regarded; for he was now infected with Montanisme,
when, out of that Scripture to condemn all second Marriages as unlawful, he
says, it is no advise, but a binding precept; for the Apostle speaks of
himself, and his own judgment, as contradistinct unto the Lord, and the
spirits revelation:

V. 25.
he has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful; and again, V. 40.
I think also that I have the spirit of God.

Haec non absque Ironia dicta, qua Pseudo-Apostolos taxat, qui Paulum
traducebant, quasi alienus a spiritu Christi esset, and indignus, qui coeteris
Apostolis annumeretur. Martyr in locu^.
Peter Martyr will give him satisfaction, saying, it was to add the more
weight, and authority to his words, in opposition to the false Apostles, who
were crept into the Church of Corinth, and undervalved S. Paul's judgment. But
observe, whether S. Paul to vindicate his reputation against them, says more,
or as much, as some of our adversaries say of themselves, upon all occasions,
when their dictates come to be questioned. Are not we (say they) the faithful
Ministers of God, men more spiritual, then others, who use not to mislead our
people? And are not our opposites, men, that seek themselves, that please the
times, having all the marks and characters of false Prophets? Whereas the words
of the Apostle exceed not the bounds of a modest, and just defense.

But it will be farther objected, that by this means we bring in the Papists
Evangelicall counsels, if any things were delivered by the Apostles in
Scripture, which are not precepts.

I answer, that this is a mere calumniation. For these Evangelicall counsels,
upon which the Romanists build their works of merit, and supererrogation, are
(they say) Counsels of perfection; by embracing of which they become higher in
Gods favor, and have done more, then is required at their hands; for which
they shall be more extraordinarily rewarded in Gods kingdom, and by which they
daily augment the Churches treasury. Such counsels we utterly disclaim,
notwithstanding the Apostles have advised many things of themselves in
Scripture. Inspired then the Apostles were as Pastors; but these were not
divine constitutions. And hence it comes to pass, the government, which they
erected (for this appertained not to their Apostolical, but Pastoral charge)
was no settled, or binding constitution. Lastly, directed also they were as
private persons, which belongs not to this place to enquire into. Ex
traditionum vinculo, quas a Christo acceptas Apostoli servandas reliquere,
Ecclesia eximere fideles non potest; in aliis vero, quae Apostoli constituerunt
tanquam Ecclesiae pastores, poterit summus Pontifex dispensare ibid.
We must in the next place, enquire of Apostolical traditions. These the
Papists themselves, the great admirers and advancers of them, distinguish into
two ranks. For some ( Alia divisio est Apostolicae traditionis; nam alteras
Apostoli a Christo domino acceperunt; alteras spiritu sancto suggerente in
Ecclesiae utilitatem tradiderunt. Canus lib. 3. loc. cap. 5.
they say) the Apostles immediately received from Christ, to be delivered to the
Church forever to be kept; As, that Matrimony, Confirmation, Extreme Unction
are Sacraments of the Gospel. These they delivered, as Apostles from Christ,
and cannot be changed by any law, or custom to the contrary, no not by Papal
authority it self. Other Apostolical traditions there are, (say they) which
they received not from Christ, but were suggested unto them by the spirit, for
the profit of the Church; and they instance in the fast of Lent, and threefold
immersion in Baptism. These they delivered as Pastors, not Apostles; and may
be dispensed with, as occasion shall require. More plainly, those Traditions,
which they received of Christ, were (says Canus) fidei dogmata, articles of
faith; against which whosoever pertinaciously erreth, is an Heretic; but those
other, which they delivered by the motion of the spirit, as Pastors only, are
not fixed, but moveable in the Church. According to this sense also I find the
Fathers to speak of Traditions. S. Cyprian relating what Pope Stephen had
written unto him against Rebaptization, that nothing should be innovated in the
Church, but what was anciently a Tradition in this thing, should be observed.
True (says Vnde ista traditio, uti une de dominica and Evangelica authoritate
descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis, and Epistolis veniens? Ea enim facienda
esse, quae scripta sunt Deu^ testatur. Cyp. Ep. ad Pomp. 74.
S. Cyprian) but whence comes this Tradition, from Christ in the Gospel: or
from the Apostles in their Epistles? If so, then God himself (says the
Father) has commanded by his servant Joshua 1.
Joshua, to keep all such Traditions; there we have the first kind. But in
another place, Diligenter de traditione divina and Apostolica traditione
observandum est, and tenendum, ut ad ordinationes rite celebrandas Episcopus
eligatur plebe praesente. Cyp. ep. 68.
S. Cyprian writing to the Clergy, and people of Spain, commending them for
deposeing Basilides, and Martialis from their Sees, and placing in their rooms
Sabinus, and Felix; says, that the choice of Bishops, and Ministers in the
presence, and with the approbation of the people, was of divine and
Apostolical Tradition, and observation. Now who sees not, that here S.
Cyprian speaks of those other Traditions, delivered and practiced by the
Apostles, as the Churches Pastors; which are no longer in force, then the
Church shall like? For this choice of Bishops, and Ministers, we are sure, is
neither delivered in the Gospel, the Acts, or the Epistles. If I mistake not,
this also is that, which the Professors at Leyden in their body of the Purer
sort of Divinity, (as they call it) hammer upon, when they thus distinguish of
Traditions. Some (say they) there are, whose chief heads are contained in the
Scriptures: as the Apostles Creed, Baptism of Infants, that Women should
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and here they add, that the Lords
day be kept holy. These they receive for divine, but all other whatsoever they
reject. It were to be wished, that they had expressed themselves in purer and
clearer terms; their summa capita are so obscure, as if purposely devised not
to be understood. For if they understand, by the chief heads of things, the
substance, and matter of the thing delivered, though in other words in
Scripture, (as it should seem to be their meaning, by their instances in the
Apostles Creed, childrens Baptism, and Women's communicating) they speak of
things under precept, and concur with us in our distinction. But if they
understand by chief heads, whatsoever is named, and mentioned in the writings
of the Apostles, (as it seems they also do, by instancing the Lords-daies
observation) then must they also receive Extreme Unction, the selling of
possessions, having all things common, the Presbytery for Apostolical
traditions necessarily to be received; for all these have general ground, and
footing in Scripture. But to draw toward a conclusion in this point, according
to the doctrine of the Traditionaries themselves, we affirm these things.

First, that the observation of the Lords day is no divine Traditions,
delivered by Christ immediately to his Apostles, to be laid as a necessary duty
upon his Church; and the reason is, because its no where so delivered by them
in the Acts, or in the Epistles; and because it is no Article of faith, or
practice necessary to salvation. Neither have they, which have gainesaid, ever
been reputed for Heretics by the Church, or any sober minded man.

Secondly, we say notwithstanding, that it is very probable (for probability is
our surest ground) that the Apostles commended this day unto the Christians of
those times in honor of Christ's resurection, and give it the title of Lords
day.

Thirdly, that they never imposed it upon the Church, as a necessary
observation; nay that themselves observed it not in those places, where the
Jews had Synagogues, and observed their Sabbath, unless it were for breaking
of bread in the Lords supper, with reservation of Christian liberty.

Lastly, the Ex institutione Apostolica servata tamen liberta te Christiana.
Great: Whether the Church can now alter it to any other day, I submit my
judgment to the Church herein. Doct. Holland. Apol.
Apostles commended this observation unto the first Christians, as their
Pastors, and part of their Ecclesiastical Order, and Discipline; and therefore
it binds only the children of the Church, and that by Ecclesiastical
authority; and the Church may (if occasion so require) change, and alter the
same, as seems good unto her; neither do the arguments to the contrary
conclude.

CHAP. XX. The Affirmative Arguments are briefly answered.
LOoking upon this multitude of allegations, and considering the strange
confidence of their Authors, I remember the words of Melchior Canus, that
having collected the arguments, which the Protestants bring against the
Apocrypha, many of his friends advised him, neither to set down all: neither
to press those, that he did set down, home to the point, le^st he should not
be able to make a clear, and a full answer, and so not only endanger his
credit, but also corrupt his judgment. I know, that very many men conceive,
through custom, and prejudice, that Catalogue of reasons (...) irrefragable;
but Consilium amicorum quidem, sed timentium ubi non est timor, Existim^runt
enim imperiti argumenta esse maiora, quam u^ a nobis refelli possunt, Can. lib.
20. cap. ^^. loc.
as my Author unjustly in his cause faith, his friends feared where there is no
cause of fear: so I do truly find it to be in this dispute, and shall soon
be able to blunt the edge of that sword, which we have thus whetted.

To the first, plain it is that the fourth commandment is misalleadged; for
neither a seventh, nor one of seven, but that particular seventh, which was
given unto the Jews is there spoken of. And how the Lords day can in any
propriety of language be called the seventh, I confess, such is my dullness,
that I cannot apprehend; for if we speak thereof according to the order of
nature as they succeeded one another from the Creation, it is the first day of
the week, and so the 1. Cor. 16.2
Scripture calls it. If we relinquish the order of nature, its not the seventh,
but the eight in number of days, and so Tertul. de Idolol. Cyril. in Io. lib.
12. c. 58.
many of the ancients style it. If we still confine our selves to the compass
of a week, and withal dissolve the reference, which one day has to another
in regard of the Creation, we may make it any other number, what we please.
Lastly this argument supposes the question. viz. That God has commanded the
Church of Christ, under the Gospel, one of seven, and this in particular, to be
kept Sabbath; whereas all outward observations, which were commanded in
general, are left to the wisdom of the Church, when we once descend to
particulars.

To the second, It is most true, that all particulars are included under their
generals; but this does not infer, that he, who commands a general duty,
does thereby also prescribe the manner, and circumstances of particular
actions, contained, and commanded under that general. For example, it is a
general precept (at least to such as it appertains, for the unlettered (I
think) it binds not) to read, and search the Scriptures. But I hope, the
Acts. 8.32.
Eunuch, when he did this in his chariot, was not bound at that time to read
that particular passage in the Prophet concerning the person of Christ. The
Apostles were commanded in general to ordain Pastors, and Ministers; were
they therefore commanded to choose Timothy in particular? We are bid to give
alms of that which we do possess; but our particular distribution to his, or
that man, at this, or that time, is in our own discretion. Honor the King, is
a general precept; but this binds us not to receive such, or such a particular
man for our King: but he being by the grace of God our anointed Sovereign, the
precept, which before was general, becomes now a particular tie, and binds us
to honor him. So here, the fourth precept commands to sanctify some set time
for public worship; does it therefore command the first day of the week to
be that time? To keep some time is one things, this general is under divine
precept: to keep this, or that time, is another thing, this particular is left
unto the wisdom of the Church. And thus Exemplum sit in geniculatione, quae
sit dum solennes habentur precationes; qu^ritur sitne humana traditio, quam
repudiare, vel negligere cuivis liceat. Dic, fic esse humanam, ut simul sit
divina; Dei est, quatenus pars est decoris illius, cuius cura, and observatio
nobis per Apostolum commendatur: hominum autem, quatenus specialiter designat,
quod in genere fuit indicatum magis, quam expositum. Call. Inst. lib. 4. c. to
par. 30.
M. Calvin does affirm, that one, and the same thing may both be a divine
precept, and a humane constitution in different respects. He gives instance, in
kneeling at the Communion, and at public prayers in the congregation. The
question is, whether they are humane Traditions; thou must answer (says he)
that it is both humane, and divine; it is a divine ordinance, being comprehended
under that decency commanded by the Apostle in general: and it is a humane
constitution, in regard of the particular designation of this, or that gesture.
Indeed when the particular is once appointed either for days, or gesture, or
any other outward observation, the general precepts binds us to those
particulars. If therefore this argument can hold for the manner of observing
the Lords day-Sabbath, which is prescribed by our Sabbatharians, well; sure I
am it concluds nothing for the institution thereof.

To the third, it is true, that one, and the same Scripture is many times twice
fulfilled; but this proposition holds only, when that Scripture speaks either
of Christ, and his Church: or of things, which were transient Types of things
to come. And lastly, they are such Scriptures, as the holy Ghost has already
discovered unto us; for we have no warrant to follow our Pha^^es herein. If
therefore the letter of the fourth commandment be a prophecy of Christ, and
his Church: or the Jews Sabbaths were Types of the Lords day: or the holy
Ghost has in any place revealed unto us, that what was spoken of the one, was
intended by him of the other, we subscribe to this argument; but till this be
made appear, it serves to no purpose.

To the fourth, this therefore comes timely in to second his predecessor, but
has not that strength, which might be wished. For we utterly deny, that ever
the Lords day was prefigured, much less precepted in the old Testament. Those
Rabinicall collections shall pass for dreams. The authority of the Synod, and
Fathers produced in the argument, are nothing to the purpose. For in the first
place, S. Cyprian is wilfully mistaken; he treats in the place cited of
Baptism for Infants at two, or three days old; this Fidus a Bishop, to whom
he wrote, held very unfit, if not unlawful, for diverse reasons; amongst the
rest, because circumcision was not administered unto any, until the eight day;
To this Quod in Iadatica circumcisione carnali octavus dies observabatur,
sacramentum est in umbra and in imagine; nam quia octavus dies (i^est) post
Sabbathu^ primus futurus erat, and nos vi^i^icaret, quo dominus resargeret, and
circumcis^nem spiritualem daret, hic dies praecessit in imagine. Cyp. ad Fidum.
S. Cyprian replies, that to the Jews the eight day was to be that, where on
Christ should rise, and spiritually circumcise us; the legal circumcision was
given upon that day, as a Type, and figure thereof. In which words of S.
Cyprian, we have two Types, and two things Typified; first the carnal
Circumcision is made a Type of the spiritual; secondly the day, wherein one was
administered, is made a Type of that day, wherein the other should be performed;
but what is either of these to the keeping of the Sabbath? S. Augustine ad
Ianuarium is no better handled, for he says indeed, that the Type of the eight
day, was not unknown to the Fathers, filled with the spirit of prophecy; for
David has a Psalm. 118.
Psalm entitled for the eight day: Infants also were circumcised on that day.
A figure it was then, and well known unto the Fathers, but of what? This
follows expressly in S. Augustine, of Christ's resurrection, and of our
quickening and circumcision by him. The Inchoante noctis initio (idest) vespere
Sabbathi c. 13. Omnibus mandamus Christi anis abstinere ab omni peccato, and ab
omni opere carnali, etiam a propriis coniugibus. Ibid.
Synod called Foro-Iuliensis commands diverse things concerning the Lords day,
viz. to begin with Saturday Evening prayer; to abstain from all works, sins,
companing of Men with their Wives etc. Their reason is, because the choysest of
Gods mercies were vouchsafed unto the Church on this day; they add also, that
this is the Sabbath of the Lords delight, spoken of by the Prophet Isai 58.13.
Isaiah: for Diceret ta^tum Sabbathum, and non delicatum. Jbid.
says the Synod, had he spoken in that place of the Jews Sabbath, he would
have called it barely a Sabbath, without any such attributes of delightful, or
mine. When this interpretation of the Prophet shall be averred by the
Opponents, we will think of an answer to this authority. The Synod of Matiscon
is more ancient then the former, and purposely held concerning the Lords day;
here, amongst other things, we have this passage; This is the perpetual day of
rest, which is known by the law and the Prophets: and insinuated unto us by
the shadow of the seventh day. But that Synod intends no more, then the former
( viz. That upon the day of Christ's resurrection we were admitted into
everlasting rest) appears evidently by that which follows, it is Iustum est,
ut hanc diem celebremus, per quam facti sumus, quod non fuimus. Con. Matis, ubi
supra.
but equal therefore, that we should celebrate this day, by which we are made
that, which we were not. Not therefore the keeping of the day it self, but the
mercies of the day, peace, and liberty in Christ, is that, which the Synod
affirms to be intimated unto us in the Type, and to be known by the law, and
the Prophets.

To the fifth, the day, of which the Psalmist speaks, is literally the day,
wherein David was settled in his Kingdom, and the unction of Samuel took
effect. As if the prophet should have said; God long since anointed me to be
King over his people: but this was a day, on which he decreed to settle me
actually in my Kingdom. There is no question, but that Psalm is mystically,
and spiritually to be understood, as well as literally, of Christ, and his
Throne, as of David and his Scepter; one was a figure of the other. I deny not
also, but that David's day was a figure of Christ's day, though it did not
appear, that David was settled in his Kingdom the same day of the week, that
Christ rose out of his grave; But understand the place how we please, all that
can be gathered thence are but these three things.

First, that God had in his counsel determined a set day to perform his
promise unto David, making him King of Israel.

Secondly, that God had also decreed a set period of time, wherein Christ
should be exalted, and set upon the Throne of his glory in the Kingdom of the
Church.

Thirdly, that as the Jews had cause to rejoice in the days of David, God
having given them a man after his own heart: so the Christians have much more
reason to rejoice in Christ their King, and to embrace the mercies of his
glorious resurrection. If any man now say, that either the ancient, or modern
Arnobius, mentioned in the argument, collect from hence the institution of the
Lords day; I answer, they find it there instituted no otherwise, then the
whole Church has ever found it, viz. Logically, because they ground the
observation of the day upon the mercy of the day; not morally, as being
formally, and positively instituted either in that, or any other Scripture.

To the sixth, we have here a well known fallacy, the effect being attributed to
that, which is no way the true cause thereof. As when the wolf in the fable
quarrelled with the Lamb for troubling the water, when the Lamb stood all the
while below the Woolfe in the river: And when the heathen in the days of Mala,
quae civitas pertulit Christo imputant; bon^ vero non imputant Christo nostro,
sed fato suo. Aug. de civit. lib. 10. c. 1.
S. Austine charged the Christian religion to be the cause of the scourge of
the Goths, and Vandalls, and all other evils, which then afflicted the world.
But to return to our Opponents. I will only demand, whether God does not
bless his ordinance unto his people upon Lecture days, as well as upon Lords
days. If not, why are they in vain so much frequented; if so, then evident it
is, that Gods ordinance may bless the day, and make it happy unto his people.
But the day does not bless the ordinance unto us; the words in the
Commandment (has blessed and sanctified) are Exegetically put, the one
expounding the other.

To the seventh, the example of God the Father, resting from his works of
creation, was that indeed, upon which the institution of the Jews Sabbath was
grounded, but not the institution it self. For to this there was required a
law to be given, which was not until the days of Moses, and the fall of Manna
in the wilderness. The like we also affirm of the example of God the Son,
at the worlds redemption resting from all his labors; for though it be not a
Law instituting, yet it is sufficient ground, and warrant, why it was at first
instituted, and has ever since been observed.

To the eight, all arguments of this kind from the less to the greater are but
probable, and must be understood of great, and less in the same kind. For
that, which is less in one respect, may be greater in another; it is so in this
particular. For the creation of the world is a greater work of power, (...)
then the redemption; and the redemption is a greater work of goodness then the
creation. Besides in reasons of this kind we must always add si caeterasint
paria; for any disparity in any circumstance of time, place, person
overthrows all conclusions built upon comparisons. Now suppose, that the
argument speak of the same kind of great, and less, which yet it does not;
nothing can be concluded, because the circumstances of time, and persons are
not equal. For the Jewish Sabbath was given in the childhood, and nonage of
the Church, to a people of dull ears, stiff necks, heavy hearts; to such the
appointing of a determinate time was necessary; but the children of the light,
men of ripe ears, that have their ears bored, their hearts illuminated, need
no such childish rudiments, as the observation of days. And this Sicut
praeceptum de sacrificiis habuit aliquam causam moralem, non simpliciter,
sedsecundu^ congruentiam llorum, quibus ilex dabatur, qui ad Idololatriam proni
erant: sic praeceptum de observatione Sabbathi habuit aliquam causam moralem,
ex condition eorum, quibus lex dabatur, qui propter avaritiam iis inditam etc.
Aqu. in 3. sent. did. 37. art. 5. in corp.
Aquinas long since observed. The words of Athanasius, alleged in the Homily
of the Sower etc. are a mere allusion, or illustration, showing only the
conveniencie, which was never doubted; not the necessity of this observation,
which is the point in question.

To the ninth I briefly answer, that he, whose conscience is not overawed by
the laws of the Church, and states, in outward observations, in things
lawful, and in different, established upon good grounds, and Christian
considerations, is neither good subject, nor good Christian. It is true indeed,
that the conscience is the Throne of God; yet I think no man will so restrain
him to that Throne, as to say, he cannot put another thereinto. That Lex aliqua
potest cond^ cui sit necessario etiam (...) mortali parendum, quaeque vi sua,
quamvis non nisi dependenter a lege divina and aeterna obliget sub mortali.
Greg. Val. de lege hum. Vbi pater iubet quod centra dominum non sit, sic
audiendus est quomodo Deus Aug. in Ps. 70.
our superiors, especially those that derive their power immediately from God
himself, may, if cause so require, lay their authority immediately upon the
conscience, binding it to sin, in cause either of neglect, disobedience, or
contempt, is to all sober minds a Maxim in Divinity.

To the tenth, the mystical signification of any ceremony, or observation
whatsoever is either of divine imposing; as in the sacraments, and all such
ceremonies, as are parts and branches of Gods worship: or of humane invention:
as building of Churches East and west, bowing toward the Altar, usingthe
surplice, the Cross after baptism upon infants, or otherwise, as the
Primitive Christians used. Such as those are no parts of Gods worship, neither
is the conscience bound thereunto, but in obedience only to authority.

To the eleventh, the observation of the Lords day is not only metaphysically,
and speculatively mutable, but also Morally and practically, as well in our
times, as in the Primitive Church. For amongst the first Christians, for some
hundred years, we cannot find any regular, and constant practice thereof.
Supposing therefore the decrees of Counsels, the practice of the Christian
world, the edicts of Emperors, the statutes of the Land, it is unchangeable in
sensu composito, all things standing as they do: but supposing Neque Christus,
neque Apostolus celebrationem primi diei lege aliqua praeccperunt, sed propter
praesentem commtaitatem ita sanxe^^n^; a qua quidem sanctione recedere
possumus, si evidens Ecclesiae utilitas pos^ulaverit. Bald. de Sabbath. cap. 20.
that the Church, and state should find sufficient cause to repeal all such
constitutions; it may, and ought to be changed in sensu diviso, as well as any
other observation, whose ground is only decency, and order, when it comes to be
abused to superstition.

To the twelfth, if we consider all days, which the Church has set apart for
public worship, absolutely, as being so set apart; I hope it will not be
thought blasphemy, to affirm, that the Lords day, and all other holy days are
equal; So I am sure Omnes di^s aeaquales esse. Hier. in Gal. 4
S. Hierome affirmed of old, and our learned Bishop Down, tables.
Downham of late: but in some respecttive, and accidental considerations, one
day may be said to be greater, and better then another. And this may be either
from the ground, or reason of its observation; so it is said by the Ioh. 19.31.
Evangelist, that the Sabbath was a high day, because the feast of the passover
fell upon that day by translation (which was the manner of the Jews, when any
of their feasts fell out to be the day before the Sabbath) and in this respect,
we may call the Lords day the Queen of days; because it is kept in memory of
Christ's resurrection, which is far to be preferred, before any festival
celebration, in memory, and for imitation of any Saint whatsoever: Or, from the
solemnity of the public worship, according to the custom of the Church: Or
lastly, from the intention of the Church appointing, as when she intends only
half, or some part of the day to be kept holy, forbiding all manner of works
upon some days, but allowing them upon others, as Markets, and Faires. In this
latter respect also, no Holy Day is equal with the Lords day, especially in
the Church of England, however it be in foreign parts; notwithstanding if we
look to the outward solemnity of Gods worship, some holy days may be greater
then it.

To the thirteenth, that one day should have more holiness in it then another,
as it is this day, or that day, by divine institution under the Gospel, is a
proposition Atheologicall, and part of the Egyptian, and Judicial
superstition, which the Apostle condemns in the Epistle to the Galathians;
and against which, S. Hierom reasons irrefragably. For then this holiness,
faith Aut haberent sanctitatem ex lapsu syderum, aut Dei beneficio, aut hominum
inssituto.
he, must be derived either from the motion, and influence of the heavens: or
from the impression of Gods holiness made upon it. The former no man will
affirm; and for the latter if ever any such impression of Gods holiness were
communicated to any day, doubtless it was to the seventh from the Creation.
But this in the time of the Gospel, is accounted, but as other common days.
If any man say, it may receive its holiness from man; sure we are that all the
men in the world cannot make any creature in the world to be formally holy.
Days are well styled holy by accident, and in regard of their end, and
appointment, because set a part for holy things; and no otherwise. And this
agrees not only to the Lord's Day, but to all Holy Days whatsoever; and that
equally, being all set apart by the same authority of the Church.

To the foureteenth, the public worship is an especial part of our serving
of God; and in this the Church is to hearken only un^^ Christ her Sovereign
Lord, in regard of the (...) thereof; but for ritualls, and accidentals, (...)
liberty, so all things be done decently, and in order. Who knows not, that the
day, wherein the worship is performed, is merely circumstantiall? Only for
orders sake, least (as Hieron. in Gal. 4.
S. Hierom speaks) the confused, and unprescribed Assemblies should by degrees
lessen the faith of men in Christ himself.

To the fifteenth, it goes hard, when to resolve a case of conscience, men are
forced to fly to Criticismes: But if here a man should deny, that (...) does
signify an exchange, or putting of one thing in the room of another, store of
work would be cut out for Grammarians. But this needs not, for that (...)
signifies to retract, alter, reverse, as well as to exchange, every man
knows. We therefore grant, that Christ has brought in a (...), having
recalled and utterly abolished the Jewish Sabbath, established in the letter of
the fourth Commandment. Furthermore I answer, that if the exchange of the
Priesthood had made only an exchange of the Law, putting one thing in the room
of another; Christian religion should now be as burdensome, as the Jewish was
heretofore; in regard of the number, though not for the quality of their
observations; which how absurd it is, appears at first sight.

To the sixteenth, we all acknowledge Christ to be the Lord of the Sabbath, and
of all things else in his Church. The Jewish Sabbath also is abolished; yet it
follows not, but this might be done by the authority of the Church. For what?
does he, that is Lord in a house, do all things with his own hands? In the
house is nothing left to the power of wife, and servants? Christ indeed is Lord
of the Church, gives orders with his own mouth concerning things necessary, and
substantial; but he leaves ritualls, and ceremonialls (such as are time,
place, manners of his worship) to his wife, and servants, the Church, and
Magistrates.

To the seventeenth: no man denies, that * all things are become new, so we
take the rest of the text with us, 2. Cor. 5.17.
old things are passed away; for it was the passing of old things away, which
makes all things to become new. In the Gospel all things are become new, no
otherwise, then the reformed religion is said to be new; because it has
receded from the corruptions of Popery, which had a long while stuck to the
Church: as an old ach lies in the body. The Ceremonies of Moses are vanished,
things themselves are exhibited, and this is the novelty there spoken of. But
granting what the argument requires, that all things are become, not only
negatively, but positively new: as a new Testament, a new and living way. May
not his spirit make other things new, as new hearts, new creatures? May not the
Church also make some thing new: as new form of government, new exercise of
public worship, with new circumstances thereof? But as all things else are
become new, so I wish these men would leave their old abusing of Scripture, and
think of a new, and better kind of reasoning.

To the eighteenth, that Christ has left his Church, in worse estate, then he
found the Synagogue, because he has not burdened it with observations of
days, is a mystery in Divinity. It is, as if a man should say, the Heir is in
worst case, when he is Lord of all, then when being a Child he differed not
from a servant, because now he is no longer under Tutors, and governors; this
is such a Paradox, as few Wards will believe. To be freed from putting
holiness in days, is part of the liberties of the Sons of God, in which the
Apostle wishes Gal. 5.1.
us to stand.

To the nineteenth, To turn Jews therefore in this point, and upon this
ground, because they had a Sabbath of Gods own appointing, and we have not;
were as great madness, as for a Slave, that is once manumitted to return unto
bondage. What if they had a day of Gods immediate appointment? Had they not
also Priests, Vestments, Sacrifices, a set day of humiliation yearly, etc? If
it be best to turn Jew in one, why were it not so in all? But this needs
not; for God has hitherto, and ever will give us our appointed Feasts, though
from men, and by men, as he gives us Priests, Altars, Temples, Sacrifices, and
all things belonging to his worship, and service.

To the twentieth, many things have the Lords name stamped upon them, which
never were of Gods immediate, and particular appointment. Our Churches are
called the houses of God; our Communion Table, the Lords table; our Ministers,
the Lords Ministers; yet are none of these of immediate institution from the
Lord himself, though all are such as appertain to the Lords worship. It is an
old rule, a nomine ad rem non valet argumentum, from the name to the thing the
argument does conclude.

To the one and twentieth, concerning our Saviors keeping of the Lords day
with his Disciples, as their Pastor, after his resurrection, enough has
already been spoken; and the Scriptures alleged have been also cleared, in
which there is not any one footstep of an institution.

To the two and twentieth, its most true, that Christ, after he was risen, was
forty days on the earth, and conversed diverse times with his Disciples,
which times are particularly set down in the history. He gave them also
instructions, and commands, but these are also upon record. They were of two
sorts, either such, as belong to their Apostolical function, as Math. 28.19.
to go to all nations, teaching, and Baptizing, having neither staff, nor
scrip, etc. or some local mandates, as Luk 24.49.
to stay at Jerusalem till they received the promise. These are all the
commands, of which I find Protestant Per haec ma^data quidam nihil aliud
intelligunt, quam illud ipsum mandatum quod post clarius exponit ne
Hierosolymis discedant; sed rectius alij de praedicando Evangelio etc. Marl. in
locum.
Interpreters to understand the text; Papists indeed gladly extend it farther,
but cannot.

To the three and twentieth, that it descended from the Apostles by tradition,
may with more ease be denied, then ever the contrary can be proved. But we must
remember to distinguish of Apostolical inspirations, and traditions, according
to the doctrine of the Traditionaries themselves, before delivered; that it
descended from them as Pastors, not Apostles; as a thing of their own
instituting, not of the Lords commanding. S. Augustines definition we
acknowledge, and desire no other Judge. For first, it is clear, that Quo
tempore Christiani se a Iudaeis seiunxerunt, and diem dominicam fe^iari
caeperunt, non est memoriae proditum. Magd. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 6.
no man can show, when the Jews, and Christians severed their assemblies.
Secondly, many particular Churches varied one from another, in this point, as
it has been said, Thirdly, the Lords day was never observed as a Sabbath, with
cessation from works, till Constantines edicts commanded it; which were
afterward enlarged, or restrained by Ecclesiastical constitutions. That the
Primitive Church, in the time of persecution, observed the Lords day as a
Sabbath, has no ground at all in Scripture; and is not consonant unto reason;
because certain it is, that they kept the Jewish Sabbath, till the Synagogue
was buried. Neither is it likely, that they kept two days together: or if they
did, is it probable, that neither the Jews should quarrel at this
observation: nor the Heathens, who derided the Jews for mispending the seventh
part of their lives in idleness, note it in the Christians, over whom they
held watchful eyes? Or is it likely, that the Primitive Fathers, who wrote
Apologies for the Church, either to the Emperor, or against the Gentiles, in
which they expressed the whole carriage of the Church, should never so much as
mention this days observation, as taken up, and kept, as the Jewish Sabbath,
by divine institution? If we consider Sabbath duties named in the argument,
certain it is, that they preached no more, nor so much on that day, as they
did upon others; for this they always did on the Jews Sabbath, because of the
concourse of people. S. Peter's sermon upon the day of Pentecost, which was the
Lords day, was accidental; occasioned by those that mocked at them, and their
gifts of tongues. S. Paul's sermon at Troas has been already examined; and as
for their collections on the Lords day I wonder from whence it should be so
generally conceived, that they were then either commanded, or made. S. Paul
bids the^ indeed provide a benevolence for the poor Saints at Jerusalem
against his coming; and that they might be in readiness, he wills every man,
the 1, Cor. 16.2.
first day of the week, to lay apart by himself; not, to collect in the
assembly. So that this being a particular occasion, was particularly ordered by
the Apostle, as their wise Pastor; not, as a ruled case to bind the Church for
ever. Nay farther, we may affirm, that collections are no essential duties of
the Lords day; neither are they so esteemed, and used in most congregations,
living as we do in a settled estate, wherein the law has provided for the
poor in another kind. The Sacrament of the supper was indeed constantly
administered every Lords day; but the reason was no way Sabbatharian; for the
Sacrament, being the badg of Christianity, could not be received in the Jewish
Synagogue, wherein they performed other duties. Besides, they much mistake,
which judge of their Communions, by ours; as if they only received upon resting
days, with sermons before, and collections after; they only met together in
some private Chamber to break bread, without any more ado. And this they did
upon the Lords day, as most suitable to that service, wherein Christ was to be
remembered. Lastly, admit all the argument requires; we have only the ancient
practice of the Church; but this makes no divine institution; by the confession
of them, that most advance the Churches power, Non ideo aliquid est iuris
divini, qui^ olim illud Eccles^a usurpaverit. Greg. Val. de Euch. q. 7
the Papists themselves.

To the four and twentieth, That the Apostles should be guilty themselves, and
make the Church guilty of so damnable a presumption, as this argument speaks
of, were indeed a blasphemous consequence; but the best is, this terrible
inference has no acquaintance at all with the antecedent, the reputed Father
thereof. For what was the presumption of Jeroboam, and Antiochus, figures of
that, which shall be practiced by Antichrist? But the changing of those times,
which God appointed to be observed by his Church, commanding others to be kept
in their places, and that out of impious, and blasphemous intentions, to
subvert true Religion, and to set up Idolatry in the room thereof? Did the
Apostles so? God forbid. But the Jewish Sabbath being expired, and having
breathed out its last gasp, that the public worship of God might be upheld
with decency, and order, they commanded the observation of the Lords day unto
the Primitive Christians; which has no likeness at all, with those things
here spoken of.

To the five and twentieth, It is true, that the practice of holy men in
Scripture, not seconded by precept, binds not the conscience; only their
example shows us the lawfulness, and expediency of the things practiced upon
like occasions, with like circumstances; and this is our warrant for observing
the Lords day. But for despising the Saturday-sabbath, we have more then the
naked practice of the Apostles. For in all their Epistles they proclaim all
Leviticall ordinances, (and such was that Sabbath) to be ceased under the
Gospel; Christ, who was the substance, being come.

To the six and twentieth, Whether Pentecost fell on the Lords day, is
questioned by some, and denied by many; their reason is, because the fifty
days were to begin the morrow after the Passover. Levi. 23.16. But plain it
is, that our Savior did eat the Passover upon Thursday-night; and so
Saturday, the Jews Sabbath, must be the first, and last from the fifty days.
To avoyde this objection, In Ex. c. 39.
Rupertus reads the text; Thou shall account from the next day after the
Sabbath, understanding it of the Sabbath properly so called, or weekly
Saturday-sabbath; and so our Lords day, being the next following, is made the
first, and the last of the fifty. But this is a plain mistake of the text. For
the first day of unleavened bread, being commanded to be a Sabbath, is that
Sabbath there spoken of, from whence they were to begin their account.
Secondly, therefore others interpret those words; (Thou shall number fifty
days) from the first day of unleavened bread, (for not only the first, but the
last also of those days was a Sabbath) exclusively, shutting out the first day
after from the beginning of the number of the fifty; and by this means they
bring it also to be the Lords day. But whether does this hold; for the text
says expressly from the day after the first Sabbath: or as our old
translation has it, thou shall number unto that day. And Verba includuut diem,
non excludunt. Joseph. Ant. lib. 3. c. 13.
Josephus himself (a Jew) says, the words are inclusive, not exclusive.
Others Bell. de cultu Sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 13.
therefore say, that the first day of unleavened bread, which was to be a
Sabbath, happening to be Friday; and the morrow after being their weekly
Sabbath, the Jews transferred the former into the latter, and kept two Sabbaths
in one (as their custom was) propter olera, and mortuos, making it by this
means, a greater, or higher day, as the Ioh. 12.31.
Evangelist calls it. This being done, they begin to account from that great, or
high day, and so the Lords day was the first, and last of those fifty. But when
all this stir is made about the day of Pentecost, on which the holy Ghost was
given; first this fell out by mere accident, and from the superstitious
conceit of this people concerning their Sabbaths, that it was not lawful for
them in them to bury the dead. Secondly, what looseness is in the conclusion
gathering any thing from any thing? The holy Ghost was given on that day,
therefore it was a Sabbath of Divine institution.

To the seven and twentieth, This also savours of the like looseness. Indeed
if God did never reveal himself unto his Prophets, but on Sabbath days, the
inference were tolerable; but this I think no man will affirm. I presume, God
revealed as much to Daniel in his kind, as S. John in his; must therefore the
days of Daniels revelations be Sabbaths? Besides, who can tell, whether the
Lords day, of which S. John speaks, were the Lords day, which we keep: or
Easter day, the solemnity of Christ's resurrection, which S. John, and his
Disciples observed, as it fell out according to the Jewish supputation?

To the eight and twentieth; This being drawn from the Judgments of God, is
full of rash presumption. For Esa. 55.8.
Gods ways are not as man's, but secret, and unsearchable, and his judgments
past finding out. But in this place it is as fallacious, as presumptuous;
affirming Non causam pro causa, assigning that to be the cause of the
judgments, which is not. For the day is one thing, the profanation,
irreligious contempt of Gods ordinances appointed upon that day by the
Constitutions of the Church, and the law of the Land, is another. These indeed
be sins highly provoking Gods wrath; but no respects, which God has to this
day more then to another, does pull down his judgments. And therefore I doubt
not, but if the day were changed into any other, there would be as exemplary
judgments of God revealed from heaven, against this kind of ungodliness of
men, as ever were in any ages upon the Lords day. I deny not, but that a Synod
held at Paris reports diverse strange accide^ts, which befell the Prophaners of
this day; Some killed with Lightnings, whilst they were at Plough; others
taken with a sudden shrinking of the Sinews; others consumed in a moment, as
Jobs Job. 1.16.
Cattle, and Servants, by fire from heaven. Et multa alia terribilia iudicia,
and many more dreadful Judgments, as that Synod speaks. But let any man cast
his eyes upon the beginning of that Nullo modo divinae authoritati concordat,
quod religio Christiana sicut a sanctis patribus traditu^ accepit et Ecclesiae
authoritas se habet diem Dominicu^ reverenter, venerabiliterque non colit. Con.
Par. cap. 50.
Chapter, and he shall find, that they esteemed, and taught, the Lords day to
be observed only by Ecclesiastical authority. And though they enlarge
themselves in the praises of the day, yet they speak not a syllable of any
divine institution, either from Christ, or his Apostles.

To the nine and twentieth. Indeed here is a Cloud of witnesses, as dark, as
thick, and I hope sufficiently dispelled by the light of truth. That these
arguments are all probable, I cannot find; but on the contrary. they cannot
therefore be Demonstratiue, that are not Topicall. But grant them to be
probable, let them be pressed for such, and no more; let not the conscience of
our hearers be fettered with probabilities. Lastly the authorities alleged are
for the most part also satisfied in their several places.

CAP. XXI. A preparatiue discourse to the two maine questions which follow,
concerning the observation of the Lords day.
HAving examined the original, and institution of the Lords day; it remains
only, that in the last place we enquire after what manner it ought to be
observed in the Church; and what be those duties of the day, unto which in
particular the conscience is bound under the penalty of sin. For how soever
this be the last conclusion in our adversaries positions, yet it is the first
in their intentions; and I doubt not, but they would willingly shake hands with
us in all the rest, might this be yielded. Necessary therefore it is, that this
be known; not only for the satisfying of many weak consciences, who are
wavering herein, and therefore daily wounded: but also for the better according
of these Questions formerly disputed. But should we be exact in the discussing
hereof, it would prove to be a Hydra of many doubts. For it being agreed
between us, that the whole observation of the Lords day does consist in a
Dichotomy, being divided between rest, and holiness; there arise out of both
sundry scruples, which may be ranged under these two heads.

First, whether they be jointly, and equally commanded, as essential duties:
or whether the duty of holiness be essential, and that, wherein the
sanctification of the day consists. The duty of rest being on the other side
only accidentally commanded, as it stands in relation to the duties of
holiness. Now supposing (as it is commonly taught) that corporal rest, and
cessation from works is enjoined, as an essential duty; it is necessary to
know, in what measure, and degree it is required of us Christians in the time
of the Gospel; whether in that rigor, and strictness, as was exacted of the
Jews under the Law. And under this head come five particulars by name, about
which many disputes have been raised amongst the weak.

First, whether all works of profit, which are not of absolute necessity, be
forbidden as sins upon that day, how lawful and commendable soever they be
upon other days: as journyes, Harvest works, ordinary trades.

Secondly, works of pleasure, and honest recreations, in themselves lawful,
and not prohibited by the Church, and State.

Thirdly, works of the mind: as the studying of Arts, and Sciences, which are
not parts of Divinity, but only usual handmaids thereof: as the tongues,
Philosophy.

Fourthly, all conferences, discoursings, consultations about things of common
life, and merely civil.

Lastly, Whether a more liberal use of Gods creatures in feasts, and
entertainments of friends, and neighbors, either Anniversary, as the feasts of
dedication of Churches; or occasional, as marriages, and Christning-dinners be
forbidden Christian people, as prophanations of the Lords day.

The second general head, and Lerna of perplexities is, whether the duties of
holiness, by which the day is sanctified, be only acts of the public worship
of God in the Congregation: or whether the private exercises also of Religion
appertain unto the day, as necessary, and immediate duties thereof; and that,
during the whole time? And under this head a world of particular cases are
raised also; and many times such, as neither wise men, nor learned men would
imagine: as daily appears by experience to men of Pastoral employment in the
Church. But these, and the forenamed particulars being delivered as
Magisteriall dictates, and conclusions out of the former Positions; my purpose
is, only to make inquiry into the two general heads, under which they are
contained. For these being weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and true
judgment, the rest will evidence themselves, as Corollaries.

CHAP. XXII. The Question concerning the Corporal rest is proposed, with the
Arguments for the affirmative.
THat the outward bodily cessation from all secular employments whatsoever, is
of it self a duty of the Christians man's Feast Day, may seem to be proved by
many undeniable arguments.

First, that, which is an essential duty of all Sabbaths in general, is an
essential duty of every Sabbath in particular. But the Lords day is the
Christian man's Sabbath, and may so be called, though improperly, as has been
formerly confessed; and bodily rest is an essential duty of all Sabbaths in
general: as appears both by the very name of Sabbath, which signifies as much
as cessation: and more expressly by the letter of the fourth Commandment (In it
thou shall do no manner of work) confirmed by the Exodus, ^^.15.
commination of death from the Lords own mouth upon all those, that shall
transgress this Law. Ergo, etc.

Secondly, the Prophets are the best Commentators of the Law, and are therefore
usually put together, Math. ^^.40.
The Law, and the Prophets. But the Prophet Isaiah says, that those, who will
honor the Lord in his Sabbath, must not do their own works, nor follow their
own pleasures, nor speak their own words. In which three whatsoever may be any
business of our own is expressly forbidden us on the Lords Sabbath, by which we
honor him. Therefore. etc.

Thirdly, in all Laws whatsoever, that is essential, and for its own sake
commanded, for whose sake other things in the Law are enjoined, according to
the common Maxim, Illud est perse, propter quod est aliud. But many things in
the fourth precept are commanded, that this duty of utter cessation from all
secular employments may be performed. For wherefore would God have not only our
Children, and servants rest, but our beasts also to rest? unless only, that
all means, and occasions of not resting might be taken from the Parents,
Masters, and owners themselves. Therefore. etc.

Fourthly. All theft is directly, immediately, and for its own sake forbidden;
and of thefts, the chief and capital is Sacrilege. But to work upon the Lords
day is theft, nay sacrilege; for we steal so much from God (this day being
his) as we bestow upon our selves, and our own employments; whereas, on the
contrary, by resting on that day, we abstain from holy things, and give the
Lord his own. Therefore. etc.

Fifthly, whatsoever does immediately hinder any thing, which God commands, is
immediately forbidden in the Negative of every Affirmative. This is a Maxim
generally received in expounding the Decalogue. But all kinds of works upon the
Lords day, whether serious, or lusorie, do immediately hinder that, which God
commands, viz. To attend his worship, and service, suffering him to work
effectually in us by his word, and Spirit. This Moses does plainly teach us,
in saying, Lev. 23.3.
There shall no work be done therein, in is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your
dwellings etc. Where first he repeats his Commandment, There shall no work be
done therein. Secondly, he gives the reason, for it is the Sabbath of the Lord
in all your dwellings. It is not possible for you to perform the duties of the
Lords Sabbath; or that God should work on you therein; unless there be an
utter cessatio^ from all kinds of works. It stands also with reason, for
worldly employments steal away the heart from holy things; and according to
our Saviors rule, Mat, 6.24.
We cannot serve God, and Mammon.

Sixthly, that, which immediately resists, and overthrows the Kingdom of God
in us, Romans 14.17.
Which is righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, must needs be
immediately and for its own sake forbidden by the Law of God. But all secular
employments of what nature soever upon the Lords day immediately resist, and
subvert the kingdom of God in us. Righteousness, take it how we will, either
for the righteousness of justification, which is imputed: or righteousness of
sanctification, which is inherent, comes by hearing, grows by prayer, is
strengthened by meditating, and conferring; not by journying, working, and
sporting on the Lords day; and the more these are practiced by us on that day,
the less righteousness must needs be in us. The conscience also is deeply
wounded by such gross prophanations, if it be not senseless and seared: as
appears by the confessions of Converts, and Penitents, and the Godly feel in
themselves by daily experience. And it cannot but diminish the joy of the holy
Ghost; for this is chiefly fed, and nourished by holy meetings, and godly
exercises of religion. Nay if it be true, which many learned men affirm at
least for probable, that Christ shall come to judgment on the Lords day. What
little joy can any man find in things earthly, and sensual on the day, when,
for ought he knows, he may suddenly hear the voice of the Archangell
summoning him before the Tribunal of the Lord, whose Sabbath he is then
profaning.

Seventhly, if there were no law prohibiting works on this day, the very law of
expediency were enough. For it is no way expedient on that day, to make such a
medly of things heavenly with things earthly, to mix the holy things of God
with things profane; base, and vile things with things honorable, and
glorious; this were to make the Lord's Day a garment of linsywoolsy. But the
Lords day, and the duties thereof are things holy, heavenly, and glorious. All
secular employments profane, vile, contemptible. The 1. Cor. 6.2.
Apostle calls the things of this life the smallest things. Therefore, etc.

Eighthly, that, which was ever blasted in all ages with some extraordinary
curse, and remarkable judgment, is doubtless not only unlawful, but in an
high manner abominable in Gods sight. For the Lord Exodus 34.6.
being gracious, long-suffering, and slow to anger, does not usually reveal
his wrath from heaven, but against some unsufferable ungodliness of men. But
the profanation of the Lords day by servile works has been ever thus
blasted; whether done about sunrising that day, and being a matter of no great
importance: or after evening prayer in the afternoon, to take away all
evasions from the circumstance of time. Of this there has been much, and
lamentable experience ever since the Kings Declaration, he being confuted as it
were herein by the King of Kings.

Ninthly. The consent of the whole Church ever since Constantines time: as
appears by the Edicts of that Emperor, with sundry Synodicall constitutions
in all ages; many wholesome statutes made to this purpose in all parts of the
Christian world. The Fathers also have been large in the same argument, utterly
condemning even those speeches, and conferences, which withdraw our minds from
the serious meditation of what we have heard in the congregation. Chrysostom. Ho^.
5. c. 1. Math.
S. Chrysostom has much to this purpose, which he does also illustrate by two
familiar similitudes. The one, of men that go into the hot Bathes for their
health, as soon as they come out, they retire themselves to rest, and sweat in
their beds, least by going abroad about their business, they deprive
themselves of the benefit of their bathing. The Lords day is as it were the day
of the souls spiritual bathing in the living, and wholesome waters of the word
of God, and the blood of Christ. This day therefore should be a most retired
day, wherein we should be secluded from all earthly things, least we deprive
our selves of the wholesome profit thereof. The second is of Scholars at
School, when they have their tasks set them, they labor, and beat upon it
the whole day, and all is little enough. Upon the Lords day we sit at Christ
feet in his School, to be taught from his mouth. What we have heard from him
in the Congregation, must be our work the whole day after; unless we affect
to be like broken vessels, which receive much, but retain little. S. Aug. in
Ps. 32.
Augustine also bitterly inveighs against sports, and pastimes upon this day;
and by name against Dancing, saying, a man were better upon the Lords day go
to plough. By which, it seems, he condemns all kind of works, and
recreations; concuring with that Oportet Christianos in laud Dei and gratiarum
action usque ad vesperam perseverare. Syn. Tur. c. 4.
Synod, held at Tours in France, which faith, that Christians ought upon the
same day to persevere in the praises of God, and in giving of thanks until the
night. To which purpose runs the unanimous consent of all those worthies in
the Church of England, which have treated on this subject, almost since the
Reformation.

CAP. XXIII. The Arguments for the Negative are also related?
THE Negative also is supported by sundry reasons. First, that, which is not
under any Law Natural or Positive, can be no essential duty, unto which the
conscience is bound under the penalty of sin; for where there is no Law,
there can be no Transgression. But cessation from work upon the Lords day is
under no Law Natural, or Positive; not natural, for it is neither a principle
in nature known unto all men: nor any conclusion to be derived from any
natural principle; I mean such a total cessation, as is here questioned. For
that men should have times of rest, and refreshing is natural; that God should
have part of our time sequestered for his worship, is also natural; but neither
the question, nor arguments produced intend this natural rest, but an
artisiciall kind of cessation, which our Sabbatharians have fancied unto
themselves, and cannot be known unto us, unless by Revelation. Neither is it
under any positive precept; for then it might be showed in some Evangelicall
writer, and we need not fly to the Law, and the Prophets of the old Testament;
to which satisfaction will soon be given.

Secondly: Nothing commanded the Jew, as a Ceremony, under Moses, is, or can
be an essential duty of Religion unto the Christians in the time of the
Gospel. And the reason is plain; for the ceremonial law was the application
of things, in their own natures indifferent, to mystical, and holy uses; and
otherwise there could be no distinction between Moral, and Ceremonial. But
that utter, and total cessation from works here spoken of was a ceremony
commanded the Jew under Moses, has already been manifested. Therefore, etc.

Thirdly. That, which is not in it is self, and in its own nature an act of
Religion, cannot be in its self, and its own nature a universal Christian
duty, binding all men under the penalty of sin. But an utter cessation from
bodily labor upon the Lords day, is not in its self, and its own nature, an
act of Religion; for then it must be some part of Gods worship, inward, or
outward; wherewith, if rightly performed, God is well pleased. But God (says
M. Calvin) is not taken with any bodily rest, and cessation of his creatures
precisely, and of it self considered, upon what day soever; which I think all
men of sober minds will acknowledge; it cannot therefore be of it self a
Christian duty upon the Lords day. If any man say, it is a part of Gods
worship, being an ordinance commanded by him. Let him show us any such command
for the Christian festival, and I will subscribe.

Fourthly, that, which of it self does no way further our spiritual
edification in Christ, is not a Christian duty, binding the conscience upon any
day. But corporal rest from the works of our lawful callings, does no way
further our spiritual edification. For if 2. Tim. 4.8.
Bodily exercise profits nothing, bodily cessation profits less. If any
man say, it helps much to Edification; for by this means we may wholly attend
the things of God. I answer, that is not the thing in question; for then it
edifieth not by and of it self, but by and through the holy exercises. If it
be further said, that it does edify, remembering us of our spiritual rest
required of us, and the eternal rest promised unto us. I answer, that this
Edification proceeds not from the Significatio alia est divina, seu a Deo
rebus addita, a^ ob signationem, and cultum, ut significatio Sacramentorum:
alia humana, and ecclesiastica, hominu^ instituto rebus addita, utsit occasio
memorandi rem gestam; illa est necessaria, haec libera: significatio dominicae
est humanitu^s. Parae, in To. 14.
thing it self, but as affix't thereunto by our own inventions, and
institutions. And so the Surplice, the Cross, standing at the Creed, and all
Church Ceremonies do edify, which yet of themselves are not Christian duties.

Fifthly, if Christian liberty extend it self to things of greater consequence,
carrying with them far greater show of divine command; then doubtless we are
much more free in things of less importance. But we are left free under the
Gospel to many things of greater weight, as Vowing, Fasting, Preaching,
Catechizing, receiving the Sacraments, Confession. For all these are commended
to Christian Liberty, in regard of determinating circumstances: as where, when,
in what manner, how long, how often; And some of the^, whether at all; yet are
things of greater importance, and have more probability of Divine precept, then
bodily cessation on the Lords day. Ergo, etc.

Sixthly, that, which is not so much as mentioned in the new Testament for a
Christian duty, is not commanded Christian people under the penalty of sin.
This must needs be true of all such duties, which Christ, and the Gospel has
brought in, imposed upon the Church, as distinguished from the Jewish
Synagogue. But corporal rest, such as our Sabbatharians require upon the Lords
day, is not so much as mentioned in the new Testament; and yet the Lords day,
and the observation thereof was brought in, and imposed upon the Church, as
contra-distinguished from the Jewish Synagogue. Ergo, etc.

Seventhly. Had this been an immediate Christian duty, so essential as it is
now made; doubtless the first Christians, living under persecuting Emperors,
would have made as great a conscience of this, as of any thing else whatsoever.
Especially, because it concerned the Lord himself, to whom the day is devoted;
and persecution maks men stick closest unto Christ, and all Christian duties
commanded by him. But the Primitive Christians did all manner of works upon the
Lords day under the persecuting Emperors, unless whilst they assembled
themselves by stealth to break bread. This appears by Constantines edict
against working upon this day, wherein notwithstanding are excepted all labors
of Husbandry whatsoever. It is a true rule, that the manners, and customs of
men, are the Mothers of the Laws of Kings, and States. A law prohibiting the
doing of any thing, is a strong presumption, that the thing was done;
especially, when the Law is exceptiue. Plain therefore it is by the Law of
Constantine, who was the first Christian Emperor, that the Primitive
Christians made not cessation from works upon the Lords day a matter of
conscience.

Constantine did only reviue the duty, which Persecution had almost defaced.

Constantine was not the reviuer, but the first enactor of this observation, in
regard of bodily cessation; if not, why can it not be showed who preceded him
herein? But let it be, that Constantine renewed the Discipline, which was
decayed; it seems then, that the labors of Husbandry, (then what more
toylesome?) were in use amongst Primitive Christians upon this day, because
they are excepted by Constantine, which renewed the Discipline of the Church in
this behalf: or else Constantine instead of a reviuer, must needs be made a
depraver, and corrupter.



David did eat the Shewbread; which cannot be averred of those times of
Constantine.

Lastly, authorities also are not wanting. Cont. Manich. lib. 2.
Epiphanius against the Manichees says, that God regards not outward
cessation from works more upon this, then any other day: because by his
providence the Sun rises, and sets; the Moon waxes, and waneth; the
Winds blow; and Women bring forth as well on this, as any other days. And
against Ebion the same Idem cont. Ebion.
Epiphanius says, that the Disciples plucking the Ears of Corn upon the
Sabbath day showed, that the outward rest of the Sabbath was ended, when
Christ, who is our great Sabbath, was once come. Cogitans requiem in Deo tuo
and propter ipsam requiem omnia faciens, abstine ab opere ^ervili; omnis enim,
qui facit peccatum, servus est pecca^i. Aug. Ps. 32.
S. Augustine also upon the 32. Psalm, which is mistaken by our Adversaries,
as speaking against all sorts of works, serious, and lusory, faith: We must
seek rest in the Lord our God, abstaining from all servile works; for he that
commits sin, is the servant of sin. Our servile works are our sinful
works, from which to abstain, is all the rest required of us under the
Gospel. Luther: de bonis operibus.
Luther expressly faith, that the outward rest, spoken of in the Commandment,
is no longer under precept in the profession of Christianity. Calvin thinks it
strange, that man should imagine, that God is delighted with bodily cessation.
And to confess my ignorance, I know none, either Protestant, or Papist, new,
or old, (our English Sabbatharians set aside) which teach corporal rest, to be
of it self a duty of the day, under positive precept.

CHAP. XXIV. The Question is briefly unfolded in nine Propositions.
THE whole question may be easily cleared in these following propositions.

First, I conceive, it is out of all controversy, that the outward rest from
all manner of works, as it is expressed in the letter of the fourth
Commandment, was of it self, precisely considered, and without relation to
any thing else, to the Jews an especial duty of religion, and part of Gods
worship. For though it be true, which Calvin in Levit. 19. v. 13.
M. Calvin has observed upon these words of Moses (You shall keep my Sabbaths,
and reverence my Sanctuary) that God commanded them cessation from works, with
reference to the duties of the Sanctuary, yet were it also of it self a
Sabbath-dayes duty. For that, which is of its self, and for its own sake
commanded, may also be made a subordinate duty to help, and further another
duty. So Prayer, which is of it self a maine part of Gods worship, is made a
subordinate help to increase our dependence upon God, and to beget in our
hearts an awful reverence of his Majesty. It Is so here; for also if it had
stood commanded only in relation to the worship of the Sanctuary, why were they
to begin it over night? where as nothing was done in the Sanctuary, till the
next Morning. If any man say, that, which was done over night, was only by way
of preparation. He much deceived himself; For the preparation is one thing,
the Sabbath another. They had their preparation, and their prepreparation,
which took up almost the whole day precedent; both of their own invention.
But they began not their Sabbath-rest till after Sunset in the evening. And
howsoever they imposed many things upon themselves of their own Traditions by
way of Preparation; yet the first use, and true end thereof was, to provide for
themselves what to eat upon the Sabbath; in which it was unlawful for them to
dress any thing, or so much as to kindle a fire. Their over-nights rest had no
relation at all to the Sanctuary, but to their coming out of Egypt, the memory
whereof they were commanded to solemnize thereby. As therefore unleavened
bread, the not Ploughing of their Land in the year of Iubile, were necessary
duties of the ceremonial worship; so was the outward rest in the fourth
Commandment. This I take to be Sabbathum commendatur primo populo in otio
temporaliter ut figura, Aug. ad Ian, ep. 119. Colebatur Deus Sabbatho in ipsa
exteriori quiet ab operibus servilibus, quia quiescebant ad repraesentandam
divinam quietem a creatioone mundi. Cajet in Aquin. 22. q. 122. art. 4.
generally agreed upon.

Secondly. It is also out of question, that this utter cessation, which was
unto the Jews a duty of Religion, permitted them notwithstanding; first, works
of piety; for the Priests, says our Savior, They oblerved their rest, as
being properly, and simply, and in its self a Sabbath days duty. But we etc.
Wille^. Syn. 9. Genesis Cont. q. 7.
breakethe Sabbath, and were blameless. Secondly, works of mercy both to men,
and beasts. It was lawful on that day to heal the diseased, as appears both
by our Saviors practice; and those defenses, which he makes for himself,
justifying his practice against the calumniations of the Pharisees. It was
lawful also to Math. 12.3.
help a beast out of the ditch, to Math. 12.11.
give him meat, Luke 13.15. Elias fugie^at die Sabbathi. Anto^^n, tit. 9.
to lead him to the water, which be our Saviors own instances, upon the
former occasions. Thirdly, works also of necessity were allowed them; whether
they were the necessities of nature: or casual, or accidental necessities, as
defending themselves from unexpected incursions of their enemies. The
lawfulness of works of this kind they learned from dear bought experience; as
appears by Josephus, and the history of the Macchabees.

Thirdly, I conceive it also to be evident, that whereas works of mercy, and of
necessity be of two sorts; some, which are of extreme necessity, which cannot
be deferred, if we hope to preserve the being of our selves, and others: some,
which are only of moderate, and convenient necessity, which may be put off,
though with some loss, and detriment. The Jews were allowed not only the
former, but those also of the latter kind; unless such as were by name
expressly forbidden them. Those were three. First, Iournying. They were not to
go out of their places this day, Exodus 16.29. This they afterward interpreted
of themselves to be 2000. paces, or two Italian miles, which they called a
Sabbath-daies Iourny; concerning which God never delivered any thing unto them
in his word. As therefore in other things they superstitiously contracted the
Law, and made it straighter, then ever God intended: so in this they extended
it, and made it larger, then the Letter of the Law could bear.



Mat. 12.1.
S. Matthew, and Mark. 2.23.
S. Mark call the Sabbath, Luke 6.1.
S. Luke calls the second Sabbath after the first. By which it appears, (for
the latter Evangelists do ever expound the former) that this Sabbath was some
anniversary Festival, not the weekly Sabbath. secondly. They were not to
kindle a fire upon this day, in all their habitations. Exodus 35.3. This also
was an absolute precept, admitting of no exception, unless in cases of Piety,
Charity, and extteame necessity.



place all manner of work upon pain of death; and gives instance in the
kindling of fire, without reference to the dressing of their meat, or any other
addition whatsoever.

Secondly, they had an express prohibition for matters of Cookery upon the
Lords day. Exodus 16.23. and therefore the day before was the Preparation to the
Sabbath.

Thirdly, they were forbidden to carry Burdens on the day of their Sabbath too
and fro: as appears by Nehem. 13.19.
Nehemiah, and the Prophet Ierem. 17.21.
Jeremiah. These therefore excepted, the Jews were permitted any works
whatsoever, which were of convenient, though not of extreme, and eminent
necessity. This conclusion appears, both by our Saviors doctrine, and
practice. By his doctrine, in those Maxims delivered to this purpose. Math.
9.13.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Mark. 2.27.
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. By his practice,
Math. 12.3.
when he justified his Disciples for plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath
day, though mistaken by the Pharisees. For I believe no man will say, that they
were in extreme necessity, that they must either have starved, or fainted, or
incurred any incurable disease. The Text tells us, they were hungry; and the
place was not far from the City. When our Savior usually healed men diseased
upon that day, and most of them carried their grief many years, I think, no
man will say the diseases would have killed them, or grown mortal, had they
not been taken upon the very instant. But to give instance in a thing beyond
exception; when he commanded those, whom he healed, to take up their beds, and
to carry them to their own houses; was this any work of extreme, or pressing
necessity? Or might it not have been deferred, with little, or no inconveniency
at all?



Iraeneus adversus Valent. cap. 16.
Irenaeus, that our Savior never did any thing, which was contrary to the Law
of the Sabbath, which God commanded his people by the Ministry of Moses. And
the reason hereof is evident; for he was made under the Law, and performed
perfect, and entire obedience thereunto. Neither can any man show any
particular in the Law Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, which he always
observed not; and therefore doubtless he was as far from dispensing with
others, as he was in dispensing with himself. Supposing therefore, that this
had been a means to make his Miracles more illustrious; yet had the thing in
its self been repugnant to the Law, he neither would have permitted it in any,
much less have commanded it so often; though to have gained both credit to his
doctrine, and glory to his Miracles. He well knew, that evil is not to be
done, that good may come thereof. But that, which is thus supposed, has no
ground, or show of truth. For I conceive it to be more rational to affirm,
that the differring of the taking up of their beds, and carrying of them to
their own houses the next day, upon notice given thereof, a greater concourse
of people would have been gathered together, to have seen the sight, and to
have gloryfied God for the same. But I do not observe, that our Savior
affected either ostentation, or publication of his Miracles, but pro renata
showed his glory in them, as occasions offered themselves.

By this therefore, which has been said, our third Conclusion does appear:
viz. That the Jews might lawful have done, whatsoever was, not only of
absolute necessity, but also of convenience; unless in such things, as were
expressly forbidden them.

Fourthly: Its also, as I conceive, out of question, that Christian liberty
has freed us by the Gospel, from some part at least of the burden of the
Sabbath, in regard of the strictnes of that rest, which was commanded the
Jews. This proposition is found in express terms in our Sabbatharians
Treatises; unless in some one, or two, who would persuade Christian people to
Super-Iudaize, Keeping the Lords day in a stricter, and more precise manner,
then ever the Jews kept the Saturday Sabbath. But this being a strange fancy,
and almost singular; I trust, this fourth conclusion also will pass without
contradiction. And there is good reason it should; for not only the rest of the
Sabbath, but the strictness of that rest was Typical: as has been already
showed, prefiguring that accurate holiness, which God requires of his people,
and that fullness of joy, and perfection of happiness, unto which Christ
admits us, that believe his Gospel. Besides the whole Christian Church in all
ages has delivered this for an undoubted truth, and Vacent tanquam Christiani.
Qui inventi fuerint Iudatizare, anathema sint. Con. Load. c. 29.
abhorred a Jewish resting on the Lords day, and ever accursed it, where they
found it. By this then it is plain, that in the time of the Gospel we are not
only allowed the same things on our day of rest, which were permitted the Jews
upon their Sabbath: but even those things also, which they were expressly
inhibited. And if this be so, it must needs follow, that since no particular
works are forbidden us, as were forbidden them; and in general, works either
of absolute, and extreme, or of moderate, and convenient necessity are allowed
us, as well as them, no restraint at all lies upon us in things appertaining to
common life.

Fifthly, there is notwithstanding a cessation from works required of Christian
people under the Gospel upon all days of their public worship, and
Assemblies. For nature her self teaches all men (says Natura d^ctat
aliquan^o vacandum quieti, and orationi Dei. Gers. de december praecept.
Gerson) sometimes to rest from their own employments, and to spend that time
in the praises of God, and prayer to him. This is evident of it self, and
therefore there is scarce any Nation so barbarous and void of reason, which
observes not this Law written in their hearts, by sequestring sometime, or
other to such rest. The Turks, nay the Indians have their Sabbaths. And indeed
these two, viz: to attend Gods public worship, and at the same time to follow
our own employments, are incompatible, and imply a contradiction: as on the
other side, to be taken up with our own affairs, and neglect Gods public
worship, is open irreligion, and profaneness. This conclusion therefore will
pass for current upon both sides also.

Sixthly. Although the Law of nature, in the General, and Moral part of the
fourth Commandment requires us to rest upon the day of Gods public worship;
yet how long we are bound to abandon the labors of our callings either before,
or between, or after the public worship; is neither set down in Scripture,
nor can be determined by the Law of Nature. General directions the light of
every man's conscience will suggest unto him, and may be deduced out of the
written word; concluding, that whatsoever may hinder either the worship it
self, or our profiting thereby, should be forborne, and avoided. But when we
descend to practice, no general rule is, or may be given. For as they say,
Practica est multiplex, and no Law can justly be framed of Particulars in this
kind. For all men are not alike of themselves; that, which may be an
impediment to one, may not hinder another; more time is allowed some men,
though to dispatch but a little business, then others need have for weighty
matters. How therefore to govern our selves therein, we must have some other
direction, besides the general rule, and dictate of nature.

Moses in the Commandment, which requires a whole days rest of twenty four
hours of all men whatsoever.

Moses, as being her children under the Gospel: the letter of the Law of Moses
being wholly ceremonial: as has formerly been showed.

Seventhly. Therefore it must needs be, that the determinate time of cessation
from works, together with the manner, in regard of the strictnes thereof, is
wholly left to the power, and wisdom of the Church, and Magistrate. It is
therefore the common direction of the Casuists, Quilibet e^ die abstine at ab
omni labor, aut mercatione, aut alio quovis laborioso opere secundum ritum and
consuetudinem patriae, quam consuetudinem Praelatus spiritualis illius loci
cognoscens non prohibet: quod si aliqua super talico^^uetudine ^^bietas
occurrat, consulat superiores. Gers. de Decal. praecep^.
that men abstain from the works of their several callings, according to the
custom of the place in which they live; and if any scruple happen to arise
herein, they should consult with their Superiors in the Church, and Commun^^y,
who only may dictate unto them their pleasures herein. And thus has it been in
all ages of the Church with great variety and contrariety of Laws, and
constitutions; as the state of the times, wherein they lived, required. How it
was before Constantines time, who was the first Christian Emperor, the History
of the Church does not show, but very imperfectly. This we may be assured of,
that had their cessation from works been such, as at this day is pressed on
men's consciences by our Sabbatharians, Constantine might have saved his labor
in ordering this point. Constantine having begun, diverse Synods in particular
national Churches followed, together with sundry Laws of Kings, and Princes
in their Territories, and dominions; some restraining; others enlarging the
peoples liberty. For when some had brought the people even to a Jewish
superstition, equaling, if not exceeding that, which is now required by the
Adversaries. Others taught the people to stand fast in this part of their
Christian liberty. For proof whereof, I will only trouble the Reader with two
instances. Synodus Quia ersu^sum est populo die dominica cum caballis, and
bobus, and vehiculi^itinerari non debere, neque ullam rem ad victum comparare
etc. Syn. Aurel. 32. c. 10.
Aurelianensis Can. 6^ says, that because the people are persuaded, that none
ought to travail with horses, and wagons upon the Lords day; and that nothing
might be done in dressing of meat, or making clean of houses (which thing
appears plainly to belong rather to the Jewish, then to the Christian
observation of the day) we appoint therefore, that what was heretofore lawful,
shall still be lawful; only we think fit, that men abstain from works of
husbandry, that so they may the better attend the exercises of the public
worship. A Haec sunt festa, in quibus prohibitis aliis operibus conreduntur
opera agriculturae and carucarum viz: omnes di^s dominicae etc. Syn. Oxon.
Synod also held in our own land at OXFORD does allow both husbandmen and
Carmen to follow their employments even upon this day. We need not go beyond
our own memory; for who knows not, that Markets, and Fayres were usually kept
upon the Lords day some good space in the reign of Queen Elizabeth; and how
afterward Parliamentary Laws provided to have the Lords day kept, as it is
now in use; and that to rectify men's judgments, and to settle their
consciences, his Majesty's Declaration has since been published.

Pharisees, Math. 19.8.
Non fuit sic a principio. It was long so, and the longer the worser; but it
was not so from the beginning.

Ignatius, who, for ought I know, is the the most ancient and authentic
witness, that can in this case be produced. Let us keep the Lords day (says
he) no longer after the Jewish manner with cessation from works: for he that
does not labor, let him not eat; and God has commanded us in the sweat of our
faces to eat our bread. First, he condemns all Jewish Sabbathizing in
general. Secondly, he makes cessation from works to be a part of Iudaisme.
Thirdly, he proves by two places of Scripture, that Christian men may lawfully,
and with a good conscience work upon the Lords day. The one taken out of Genesis
3.19.
Moses, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread: and the other out of the
Apostle, grounded on that of Moses: Ep. ad Magnes.
He that will not labor, let him not eat. 2. These. 3.10.
It was then lawful to work on the Lords day: why is it not now? Unless the
Laws of the Church, and State have since inhibited them.

Eighthly, Though it be a thing in it self lawful to labor upon the Lords
day, unless in prohibited cases by the public Magistrate; yet it is not
unlawful for any to observe it with as great strictness, as ever the Jews
did; so that his observation be accompanied with these conditions.

First, that we have no opinion, that such a rest is of necessity to be
observed under pain of sin, putting Religion therein; for then the
conscience is ensnared; and our rest is not religious, but superstitious. For
though the Dictates of an erroneous conscience be to be obeyed, and therein a
man does well; yet his conscience therein subjects it self to an Idol,
fancy, or Chym^ra of its own making, and so a man does ill.

Secondly, that when we thus practice it in our own particulars, we neither
labor to draw others into the like; nor presume to condemn those, that are
contrary minded. For by the former we shall betray an unquiet spirit in our
selves, and may become authors of evil unto our brethren; and by the latter we
break the common peace, and uniformity of the Church, wherein we live: and,
being guilty of schism, become evil members both of the Church, and State.
With these cautions Vnusquisque abundet sensu suo. Every man may do, as he
lists. For the Law of the Magistrate allowing works of any kind, serious, or
lusorious, does not forbid any man to forbear them.

Lastly, any work of what kind soever, which may be beneficial unto any in a
special, and extraordinary manner, the benefit whereof would be utterly lost,
were the present opportunity neglected, may lawfully be done upon the Lords
day; unless some circumstance adhere thereunto, which may make it unexpedient;
as in case of scandal, or the like. For example, the husbandman may lawful
save his corn in the time of long, dangerous, and unseasonable weather.
Fishermen may do well to take Fish offering themselves upon the Coast upon
the Lords day, which would be carried away the next tide: to which add drawing
of Cole-pits, and Mines, travailing of public Posts; the sittings, and
consultations of the Councels of State, etc. This also is consented unto in
regard of some of the particulars, even by our adversaries themselves: as in
cases of Mines, and public Posts. But upon what grounds they should dissent
from us in the latter, I understand not; unless they will condemn themselves
in those things, which they do allow.





Esau, that will not deny himself all advantages, where the Lords honor is
so highly interested, as it is in this particular; Nay it argues not only a
carnal mind, but an heart full of unbelief. For may not the Lord, and will
he not (think we) make a recompense of all such losses, sustained in
Contemplation merely of his holy Sabbath.



CAP. XXV. The Arguments brought for the affirmative are answered; and in
particular that, which is drawn from the Judgments of God, is handled more at
large.
THese Conclusions being thus premised, it will not be difficult to dissolve
the arguments formerly alleged.

To the first therefore I say, it is utterly untrue, that outward rest, and
cessation from secular employments is an essential duty of Sabbaths in
general, but of Sabbaths properly so called, which were only the Jewish weekly
Sabbaths. And this those very Scriptures used for confirmation do make
appear, being all of them branches of the law Ceremonial. The Lords day is a
Sabbath, but not properly so called, and as the word does signify, but
Analogically, and in its proportion. And therefore the Christian Holyday is no
where styled by this name, either in Scripture, or Antiquity: as has already
been declared. Lastly we deny not, but there is a Rest, which is Moral, and
eternal to all days of public, and solemn worship: as it is laid down in
our fist Conclusion; but not as any essential duty, as essential is here
taken, that is of it self, and its own nature, without reference to the
public worship. For so it was to the Jews in the fourth Commandment; and so
our Sabatharians now make it, pressing the Letter of that precept in the same,
nay in a greater rigor, then ever it did bind the Jews. This argument
therefore is weak in all the parts thereof.

The second carries with it much weight with poor ignorant, well-minded
people, as seeming to be the very words of the holy Ghost. But how both they,
and the Text it self have been abused, has already been showed, and need not
here to be repeated. We will only add what the argument it self suggesteth,
that the Prophet Commenteth upon the Law; and the Letter of the Law is wholly
Ceremonial: as has also been declared.

To the third. That the Rest of the fourth Commandment was imposed upon
Servants, and Beasts, to take away all occasions of travail from their Masters
and owners: or that this was intended by the Lawgiver herein, is a groundless
fancy, and comes near to wresting, and perverting of Scripture. For when the
Lawgiver shall with his own mouth render a reason of his own Law, expressing
what he aimed at in the several clauses thereof; it is not only vanity, but
presumption in any other to show the depth of his reach, to tell us of other
reasons, and those directly contrary to his; and all this in his name, as being
sent from him with He says. It is so in this particular. For God has
expressly expounded this clause in the Commandment, and showed his aim
therein; as first, that it was to remember them of their labors in Egypt,
where they were servants, and entreated more like beasts, then men. Secondly,
it was the Lords goodness extending it self even to the meanest of his
Creatures, that their Servants, and Cattle might be refreshed as well as
themselves; not therefore for the Masters sakes, as a restraint (as is
pretended) but for the poor Servants, and Beasts sakes to be refreshed
thereby, was this added in the Commandment. God having thus rendered an account
of this passage, it is more subtle, then solid, and savors more of acuteness,
then of religion, to affix to this exposition any glosses, and conceits of our
own.

The fourth has already been satisfied in the Question concerning the duration
of the Lords day.

To the fifth it is indeed true, that all impediments of holy duties are
forbidden by the same Commandment, wherein the duty is required, though not
immediately as the duty it self, but inclusiuely by way of reduction only, as
Privations are reduced to the same Predicaments with their habits: But that all
secular, and civil works, words, thoughts are such impediments to the duties
of the Lords day, as are imagined, unless they hinder us in the public
worship, is utterly untrue. The text of Leviticus speaks of the carnal
Sabbathizing of the Jews, which being of it self a duty, was broken by any
thing done by them. But we are Christians, not Jews. And whereas it is
suggested, that secular diversions steal away the mind from holy things,
choking the good seed of the word in us, it being impossible to serve God, and
Mammon; this is true indeed, where the world is made an Idol, and a man's
affections are immoderately set upon outward things; and so the text alleged
does expound it self; Now every man's reason will tell him, that there is a
great difference between carking and careing for outward things, which at all
times is unlawful, as being the service of Mammon: and the dispatching of some
accidental occurrent, or secular discourses, or ordinary affairs, which are
always lawful, but when we ought to attend Gods public worship.

To the sixth. Were the Minor proposition true, it would well near follow,
that the active life should be most miserable, and little better then
profaneness; being, by reason of infinite secular employments, made uncapeable
of Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the holy ghost. Magni maris fluctth^s quatior,
atque in navi wentis tempestatis validae procellis illidor, Greg. dial.
S. Gregory indeed complains, that when he was taken out of his Monastery, and
made Bishop of Rome, and by the greatness of his See forced to engage himself
in the matters of the world, it seemed a new tempest to his soul. But what is
this to some trivial employments of particular men, which may suddenly be
trans-acted without tumult, or distraction? But to descend to the particulars.
It Is most true, that faith, which purifieth the heart, is obtained by hearing
the world, strengthened by meditation, and conference; does it therefore follow,
that by whatsoever else we do we destroy, or overthrow it? It is as if in
natural things we should say, natural life does consist in natural heart,
and moisture, both these be upheld by natural food. whatsoever therefore is
not our natural food, overthrows our natural heat, and moisture,
destroys natural life in us; and so war me clothes in winner may kill.
Saving faith, and our honest employments of this life are so far from being
incompatible, as that the one is preserved, and cherished by the other; when
they are undertaken, and performed, as they ought to be, in the Lords presence
with reverence, and fear, and obedience, not intermitting the habitual bent
of the soul toward heaven. With these conditions the circumstance of time,
whether on this day, or on that day, is not material, so the public worship
be not prejudiced thereby. The same is also most true of Peractis sa^r is,
an^mi gratia equiect quis, piscetur, aut simile quid jaciat, non magis
prophanat sabbathum, quan Christus per sata. ^ll^. de Sab. c. 5. Peractis
sacris recreationes licitaesunt, sed non carnales, and s^urri^es-quales in
obs^^nis ^udis, ^osu charta^^^^, and tesse^acum, compo^ationibus etc. sed lusus
priae, nochi pales^rica ex^^citia, jacu^atus, and simi^ia ad liberagem
recreatione ^^mo^o non ^^ant cum neglectu caltus jacri, qui ante om^i^pt
aece^ere d^^er. (...) c. ^.
Recreations, if they be honest in themselves, and lawful by the State, and
used as they ought to be with moderation in regard of the things, and good
intention in regard of the person; they are so far from hindering, as that
they serve to advance the kingdom of God in us; first enabling the body;
secondly putting life and cheerfulness into the mind; thirdly, increasing our
thankfulness unto God, for being so indulgent a Father unto us in Jesus
Christ, allowing us all things, whereof our frailties stand in need. Nay the
Ludorum es^ triplex differentia; quida^ ex se turpitudinem habent, and tales ab
omnibus sunt vitandi: alij, qui ex gaudi^ devotionis procedunt ^^cut David
dixit, Ludam ut violior fiam. quidam ludi sunt ^^hi^ turpitudinis habentes, and
sunt materi^ Eutrapeliae* and servatis debit is circum^ stantijs possunt
laudabiliter fieri a poeaitentibus ad quietem propriam, and alijs
delectabiliter convivendum. Aq. 4. sent. did. 16. q. 4. art. ^*
Schoolmen have long since determined, that if men were to be professed
Penitents, no recreations of this kind, thus qualified, would hinder them.

Yea, but the Conscience is wounded, and the Joy of the holy Ghost is ecclipsed
by such prophanations.

I answer, that these be indeed the effects of profanation, and that worthily:
but it does not as yet appear, that works, and recreations on the Lords day
do profane the same. And Whereas it is said, that many have felt, and
confessed their wounded Consciences from hence.

First, it must be known, whether their cases were such, as the question is
stated to be.

Secondly, we must remember, that there be many needless, and causeless
wounds of Conscience. For not only a Conscience rightly informed, which is not
hearkened unto; but also an erring, and doubting Conscience may, and do wound,
and that deeply; especially, when they meet with Emperickes, that undertake to
cure them. The Conscience is one thing, the fear, and Scruple of Conscience is
an other, (says Gerson) And I verily believe, if these converts were well
looked into, the wounds were from the fears, and scruples, and not from the
Conscience it self. And lastly, whereas it is said, that probably Christ will
come to judgment on the Lords day. The very words of our Savior reclaim,
saying, Math. 34.36.
that day and hour knows no man: but suppose that Christ should then come,
doubtless whatsoever is just, honest, and lawful, not forbidden eitherby God,
or man, may confidently be averred at his coming.

To the seventh. These secular employments, of which we speak, are not so
unexpedient to be mixed upon the same day with holy things, as is supposed. For.

First, who is there that does not intermix them in the whole course of his
life? and why they should be expedient upon one day, and not upon another, I
cannot understand.

Secondly, true it is, that in all outward things, taken in a divided sense, by
themselves considered, there is this vileness and baseness, as is said: but
considered as they are, or at least should be used by a Christian man in
obedience unto God, who has imposed them upon us: and with faith in his
promises to sanctify them unto us, accompanied with an unfeigned desire to
glorify God in them, and for them, they begin to change their natures, and are
no more base and vile, but honorable and glorious. To conclude therefore Omnia
munda mundis ^ Ti^. 3.^3.
To the pure all things are pure, but to them that are defiled, and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds, and consciences are
defibed.

To the Eight, drawn from the judgments of God, which have been exemplary upon
works, and recreations used on the Lords day. I say, that this, and most of
like nature, are first, rash, and vain: Secondly, weak and concluding nothing.
It is rash, for who has known the mind of the Lord at any time, his ways
are past finding out; and of all others, the ways of his judgments are
unsearchable. This our Savior has sufficiently taught; as in the John 9.
case of the man borne blind;* the fall of the Tower of Siloam; and Luke 13.2.
massacre committed on the Galileans. The whole book of Job serves to show the
folly of vain men, presuming to particularize the footsteps of the Lord; as
if he proceeded in his justice according to our fancies: yet with Job. 38.2.
Elihu, we will not leave off to darken his Counsels by words without
knowledge. It is as weak, as rash; for if it be denied, that either the evil
inflicted is a judgment, or that it was for this inflicted, we are forth with
put both to shame and silence.





First, when the spirit of God shall be pleased to reveal so much, we may
warrantably publish unto others, what the Lord has revealed unto us. So it was
lawful for any man in David's time to say, that when Ammon was murdered,
Thamar deflowred, his wives, and Concubines dishonored in the sight of the
Sun, all this befell him for his murder, and Adultery: for for the Prophet 2.
Sam. 1^.11.^2.
Nathan had foretold it by his Prophetical spirit. So Nehemiah, after their
return from the captivity, might warrantably say, that God brought that evil
upon their Fathers, for such and such sins, because the Prophets had formerly
foretold the same. Whenever therefore the spirit does reveal it unto us by
immediate, and extraordinary inspirations, or mediatly by the word, threatening
those particular sins with those particular judgments, which we see to be
executed upon them, we may, nay we ought both to observe it in others, and to
lay it to heart in our selves.

Secondly, we must be well assured, that the thing, which we will suppose to be
punished by the Lords immediate hand, be, not only in our opinions, but truly,
and indeed, a sin. This has ground upon the former: for if it be threatened
by God in Scripture, we may be well assured, it is indeed an evil, and
hateful in his sight. If therefore it be a disputable point in the Church of
God, suppose the balance be equally carried on both sides; who are we, that we
should take upon us to pronounce a definitive sentence, condemning our
Brethren, which Romans 14.4.
stand or fall to their own master.

Thirdly, when we find by observation, that it ever has been, and continually
is so, at least for the most part; we may, though not infallibly, yet more
safely particularize in this kind. So if the Barbarians had not mistaken St
Paul for a murderer, their judgment had been rightly pronounced out of that
general maxim, which holds at least for the most part, Vengeance suffers
not a murderer to live.

Fourthly, when the sinner is taken in the very manner, and the sin does
either naturally, or morally cooperate to his judgment, we may do well to
observe the Lords hand therein. So many times surfeiting and drunkenness kill
immediately of themselves, and lasciviousness begets mortal diseases.

Fifthly, when the Lord proceeds against men by the rule of Retaliation, dealing
with them, as they have dealt with others, meting to them their own measure.
This indeed is remarkable, and a man may say with Judges 1.7*
Adonibezek. As he has done, so the Lord has done. Thus oppression is many
times punished with extortion; disobedience to Parents with rebellion of
children; adultery with uncleanesse. In such cases therefore we may probably
conjecture, though not peremptorily define, because the justice of God does
mostly render unto men according to this rule, though not always.

Sixthly, the conscience of the sinner himself is many times a good directer to
point out unto us the accursed thing. For as in other respects, so in this
also, the Etymology of the Canonists does well agree, when they define
Conscience by Consonancy with God. Conscientia est consonant ia animi cum Dee.
The conscience is as it were Gods Concordance in a man's own bosom, especially
when we are under the hand of his justice.

Lastly, men must beware how they draw the Lord to their parties, forcing him
to be of their faction even against his will. We foolishly go about many times
to advance our cause by observing of some accidents, which befall those, who
either in judgment, or practice dissent from us. But besides that these be
vain observations, and next allied to superstition, if we happen to mistake in
our judgments, we make the Lord, as much as in us lies, to bear false
witness with us, who is truth it self.

Now whether the observations, which our Sabbatharians have made in this
particular, be not of this rash, presuming, and profane kind, let any wise
man judge, and (I wish) that they themselves would well consider. For

First, it was never yet revealed by Prophet, or Apostle, that God would thus,
or thus punish honest, lawful, and harmless recreations upon the Lords day
with such, particular judgments, as are observed, to have fallen upon some
particular persons in diverse quarters of this land. Let such threatenings be
produced, and something is said.

Secondly, as wise, learned, holy men, as any of contrary judgment, affirm,
not nakedly by way of dictate, but with sundry reasons in writing, that such
recreations upon the Lords day, especially in such manner as is expressed in
his Majesty's Declaration, are no sins, as has already been showed. What
insufferable arrogance therefore is it in these men, to cry out. Lo
judgments, judgments from the Lord out of heaven? What is this, but foolishly
to triumph before the victory, and vainly to think of our selves more highly,
then we ought to think?

Thirdly, is it so always or for the most part, and do not such accidents
fall out as frequently upon other days, and upon other occasions? If the first
be not affirmed, as I am sure it cannot, for there be thousands (the more is
the pity) that profane the Lords day in greater measure, then any of those, in
whom instances have been made, which yet never felt any exemplary evils; It Is
therefore a wicked and unchristian conclusion to say, Vengeance suffered them
not to live. If the latter be most true, surely we father not the judgments of
God aright. When Mr Trask was confuted in the pulpit for his error concerning
his new imagined kingdom of Christ, and through the turbulency of his spirit
not enduring his reproof came to be silenced, it happened that D. Sutton, who
opposed him herein, had his next child still-borne: Lo said M. Trash to some
of his friends, the Lord has declared himself to be on my side: the author of
my silencing has a child still borne. Had this been a strange accident, and
not befalling other women, his collection had been probable; whereas now it
was, I will not say, ridiculous, but most vainglorious, if not blasphemous. The
case here is much the same.

These Sabbath breakers were taken in the very manner, ad their prophanations
did cooperate to their destruction.

This indeed is our fourth rule, but still supposing the thing in doing to be a
sin well known, and not questioned to the contrary; such as are those of
gluttony, drunkenness, uncleanesse, which are the instances of that rule. For
otherwise there is scarce any good thing, of which it may not be said, that
some or other have been stricken either with sickness, or death in the very
doing: even preaching, and praying it self: The true estimation of things
depends not upon the events, or accidents accompanying them. Besides it is not
considered by these Exclaymers, whether those, that have thus miscarried,
swarued not from those directions, and limitations prescribed unto them; for if
so, the blame rests upon their own licentiousness. But it is taken hand over
head; it happened upon the Lords day, and this we think to be enough.



Declaration is so far from opening a gap to licentiousness, that would men
keep themselves thereunto, as they ought, the Lords day was never so well
observed in this kingdom in any age, as now it would be. Besides, it is most
unreasonable to abridge all men of their true Christian liberty in this, or any
other kind, because a few abuse it to their own destruction.

Fifthly, what rule of Retaliation can be picked from hence? what proportion is
there between this pretended sin, and those conceived judgments?

Sixthly, did ever the consciences of those, that miscarried, make this
application?

And lastly, to what purpose is this Catalogue of judgments so studiously
collected, but to advance our cause, and to draw God to our party; which ought
not to be done, but to confirm certain and revealed truths, of which no man
doubts? It is therefore a good rule, which St Iudecet ille qui ad prenunciandum
nullo odin, nulla offen sione, nulla levit ate ducitur. A^ab. in 10. 8.
Ambrose gives; let him judge, who is not in danger to be carried either by
hatred, or distaste, or lightness of mind in his sentence. And by this I am
sure, our adversaries have no right to the Chair; their minds being so
disaffected to this truth; their spleenes so full of gall against all that
gainsay them, and by consequence their hearts so full of levity, and vanity
in censuring their brethren. IF they regard not St Romans 14.4.
Paul's Quis es tu, who art thou that judge, let them hearken to S. Pierumque
nes cum rectitudinem justitiae exequimur, mansuetudinem relinquimus and cum
mansuetudine (...) servare etc. Greg. Mor. l. 1. c. 10.
Gregory, setting before their eyes our Saviors mildness; we men (says he)
for for the most part laboring to preserve judgment and justice, utterly
abandon mildness, and mercy: and on the contrary, when we would be mild, we
cease to be just. But our Savior clothed with our flesh was never so mild,
but that withal he was just; neither was he so severely just, as to forget to
be merciful; and he gives instance in the woman taken in adultery, in which he
excellently observed both. For when he said. Cast the first stone at her, he
satisfied the rule of justice even in the rigor of the letter of the Law: but
when he added. Let him that is without sin amongst you cast this first stone;
he so qualified it with equity and moderation, that the woman escaped. Let us
be zealous in Gods name against all prophaners of the Lords day: but let us not
be so intemperate in our zeal, as to usurp Gods throne, pronounce our
pleasures upon our brethren, take them out of their graves, and brand them to
posterity, as men plagued, and smitten of God for profanation. I will conclude
with the words of the same Postulatus ^udicare dominus de peccatrice non
station dedit judicium, sed prius inc^inans se deorsum, digito scribebat in
^erra nos typice instituens, ut, cum proximorum pe^^ata conspicimus, non haec
ante reprehendenda iudicemus quam digito discretionis so^erter exculp amus.
Greg.
S. Gregory upon the same story in another place. Our Lord (says he) being
required to judge the Adulteress, did not presently pronounce her doom, but
first stooped down, and wrote with his finger upon the ground; he intended
hereby to instruct us (says the Father) that when we seethe apparent errors of
our brethren, before we proceed to our peremptory sentences, we first wisely
consider of the thing, and with the finger of discretion note what was
pleasing, or displeasing unto God therein. What our Saviors intention was in
this action of his, I cannot say. I am sure, S. Gregory's observation is grave,
and substantial, according unto which if we reflect upon the clamorous
determinations of our Sabbatharians, the point being yet in controversy, and
defined against them by the most, and the learned in the Church; it will
appear, that they neither weigh things in the balance of moderation; nor
distinguish of things with the finger of discretion.

To the ninth, the authorities alleged speak for the most part as forced
witnesses quite contrary to that, for which they are produced; as the Edicts of
Constantine, the Synodicall decrees. The rest shall receive answer in the next
Question to which they more properly belong. Those, who have written to this
purpose in the Church of England of late years are parties; and therefore
cannot be competent judges in this controversy.

CAP. XXVI. Wherein is inquired after those duties of holiness, unto which the
Conscience is bound on the Lords day.
THere remains only the last scruple, which is, or can be incident to this
subject, viz. What duties of holiness are proper and essential to the Lords
day; whether only the acts of public worship with the congregation: or the
private exercises also of those head-graces, faith, hope, love; unto which,
whatsoever is in Christian Religion, may be reduced? And this is indeed a point
of chiefest consideration, because it is practical; and practice being the
life, and spirit of knowledge, the conscience can never be thoroughly settled,
until this be discovered. Our literal Sabbatharians affirm in this question;
and so affirm, that they make the observation of the Lords day the very
abridgment of Godliness, in respect of the first Table: and of righteousness;
in respect of the second Table. And from hence proceed these wide outcries
against any, that shall contradict them; that Religion is laid upon the back,
and profaneness set up in the room thereof. Nay they so affirm in this
point, as that their doctrine is made an open, and professed snare; such a
manner of holiness being exacted, as that it is impossible for any man living
in the state of corruption, to sanctify a Sabbath in that manner, as is
required of him, either in thought, word, or deed. I confess were it true,
that upon the Lords day a man, forsaking the natural rest of his bed sooner
then upon other days, must begin early in the morning with the acts of
repentance, then proceed to the acts of faith, and after the duties of love
conclude with repentance: and this with that manner of solemnity, and
formality, which some require; it must needs be even to the best an utter
impossibility, whether we look at parts, or degrees. But that the observation
of the Lords day, in that manner as the Lord himself expects, whatsoever men
please to impose, is not such a Chimaera as they fancy, will appear, I hope,
in its due place. In the mean while we will set down these arguments, which
seem to support this opinion.

CHAP. XXVII. The Arguments, which seem to conclude for all duties of
holiness in general, are set down.
FIrst, from the letter of the Commandment, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath
day, we many reason thus: where no one kind of holy-da^^s are spoken of, there
all duties of holiness are to be understood; it is generally so in other
places of Scripture, as in that of the Apostle, Peter 1.16.
be ye holy, for I am holy: and elsewhere, Heb. 12.14.
follow holiness, without which no man shall see God. But in the words of the
Commandment holiness in general is required of us. Therefore etc.

Secondly, that, which is, and ought to be a common duty of all days, is much
more a particular duty on the Lords day. The reason hereof is, both because the
Lords day is in many respects to be preferred before all other days: and
because it is set apart from all others unto holiness. But the private
exercises of all gracious habits with our selves, and our families are, and
ought to be common performances upon all days. For as they bind always, so
are they indefinitely commanded, without restraint to any set days; they are
therefore much more required upon the Lords day, being the common duties of all
days.

Thirdly, any duty is more required upon that time, on which, if rightly
performed, it is more acceptable to God, then at any other time. For by this
appears, that God has regard as well to the time, as to the duty. But all the
duties of holiness, even the private, and personal, and oeconomicall, are
more acceptable unto God, if performed on the day of his Sabbath. this
appears; first, by the words of the Isay 58.13.
Prophet saying, if thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure upon my Holy Day, and call my Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, etc. In which
words plain it is, that the Lord as much presses the time, as the duties.
Secondly, by the Law of contraries. For if any sin, as drunkenness,
uncleanenesse, blasphemy, and profaneness be more abominable in the sight
of God upon the Lords day, then upon any other day; it must needs be, that the
contrary virtues are more acceptable unto him also from the circumstance of the
day. But the former is generally affirmed, especially of the Scotists, and is
grounded upon that common Maxim in Moral Philosophy, Bonitas and malitia
actionum pendet a circumst antijs, the good and evil of our ways are to be
measured by the circumstances thereof; and amongst these the circumstance of
time is not to be slighted. Ergo etc.

Fourthly, the day of Christ's corporal resurrection from the grave requires of
us above other days a spiritual resurrection from sin in all the duties of
holiness of what kind soever; for this being the general use to be made of
our Saviors resurrection as appears by the Apostle. Romans 6.4. it should be
chiefly practiced on that day, on which the memory thereof is solemnized. All
men will acknowledge, that when we do the duty of the day upon the day it
self, it is most seasonable; and duties seasonable does the Prove. 25.11.
wise man compare to apples of gold in pictures of silver. But the Lords day is
the day of Christ's resurrection. Ergo, etc.

Fifthly, that Law, which does enjoyne public worship, does also require of us
all such duties, as are furtherances of the public. For where the end is
commanded, all such means, as directly tend unto that end, are also under
precept. But the Lords day requires public worship, as all acknowledge; and
the private, personal, and oeconomicall duties of holiness are maine helps,
and furtherances thereof; both preparing us thereunto, and putting life into
our performances, and causing us to profit thereby. Therefore, etc.

Sixthly, that, which was shadowed as a Type in the old Sabbath, is required as
an Evangelicall duty in the new Sabbath, which is the Lords day; for all the
Mosaicall ceremonies were shadows of good things to come, to be performed
partly by Christ, partly by his spirit in us. But this quiet rest of the soul,
and repose of the spirit in the Lord by all the duties of holiness, was
shadowed as a Type of the old Sabbath; therefore are they Evangelicall duties
on the Lords day.

Seventhly, though the letter of the fourth precept be Ceremonial, yet is the
equity thereof moral, and of this there is no question. But the letter of the
Jewish Sabbath required not only public sacrificing, but commanded also
private rest. For no man was to go out of his place, says the Exodus 16.29.
text. The Christians therefore on their Lords day are in allequitie and
proportion bound not only to the public but private duties of holiness; it
is Iuxta illud legis Mosaicae maneat unusquisque apud seipsum: nullus
egrediatur ostium domus suae die Sabbathi. Bern.
S. Bernards argument in his Octo puncta.

Eighthly, it is moral in the commandment, that every man learn upon the
Sabbath those things, which belong to his salvation. This proposition is set
down in terminis by a Quicquid sit de ecclesiae praecepto, cer te lege naturae
and fidei tenentur Christiani ea discere, quae suae Saluti sunt necessa^ia:
Est. 3. sent. did. 37. par. 14. Festivis, and maxim in praecipuis
solennitatibus magis circa ^a quae solennitat is sunt immorandum videtur, ut
pa^^ter and eru^iatur animus, and exci^etur affectus. Bern. Ser. 3. in Epip^.
Popish Schooleman: far be it from any good Protestant to speak less
honorably of the Lords day then such. But it is not possible for us to learn
from the public those things, that belong unto our salvation, unless we add
thereunto private exercises of holiness; as praying, meditating, conferring
together with actual motions of all habitual graces in us; for by the one we
fasten them in our memories; by the other we incorporate them into our hearts.
Therefore, etc.

Ninthly, the Lord's Day is a holy day, not in it self, and in its own nature,
as the Anti-Sabbatharians themselves confess, but as it makes us holy by
performing holy duties. But the exercise of Gods public worship alone makes
us not holy without the private; Therefore. etc.

Tenthly, the proper duties of this Jewish Sabbath, besides public worship,
were contemplative of the Creation (as appears by the reason of the rest
prescribed in the Commandment; for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth) etc. recognition of their deliverance out of Egypt, remembrance of the
fall of Mannah, and their settling in the land of Canaan. The equity therefore,
and the proportion of the Commandment requires, that we not only worship God
in public, but also privately study, and be good proficients in the School
of nature, in regard of the great works of Gods majesty, and power: and in the
School of Christ, in regard of the great mercyes of our redemption. Ergo etc.

Lastly, Authorities are infinite. The Syn. Arelat. c. 19. Syn. Turon. c. 40.
Syn. Mogun. c. 37: Syn. Matiscon. c. 7. Syn. Agath. c. 47.
Synods generally say, we should continue in holy duties until night, having
our eyes, and our hands stretched out unto him all the day long; sequestered
from all other employments let us only attend the service of God until night.
Hugo de Sancto Victore says, that all the Festivals were appointed, as for
other ends; so that we might be vacant unto prayers, and contemplation. To
which purpose also many passages out of the Fathers might be brought,
especially in their popular Sermons, as every man knows. Ergo, etc.

CAP. XXVIII. The arguments for the Negative are briefly expressed.
FOR the Negative tenent it is also said.

First, that, which is every days duty, is no duty of the Lords day, as it is
the Lords day; for then there should be no difference at all between the Lords
day, and other days, in regard of the duty therein required; which were to
confound the Lords day, to the great disparagement thereof, with other days.
But the private exercises of those fundamental graces of faith, hope, love are
the duties of every day.

If any say, that the difference consists in this, that to common days
appertain only private duties, to the Lords day both private, and public.

The scruple still remains in regard of those days, wherein the public
worship of God is also in use, as Lecture-dayes, Holy Days, etc. unless we
account those days also to be Sabbaths, which our adversaries in this question
will not agree unto.

If it be farther said, that the difference stands in this, that in other days
they are only habitually, but on the Lords day actually required.

I answer, that, in their other Tractates, an habitual serving of God is so
far rejected, as that they think it impossible to walk with any comfort with
the Lord, unless we also add thereunto sundry actual performances; the time,
and manners whereof they also show us. If therefore any difference be, it is,
that we must be wholly taken up with such performances during the whole Sabbath
for 24. hours: and turn mere Euchites upon the day, which is not required in
other days. But that the Sabbath is of no such length, has been already
declared; and that God gives no such continuate taskes of holy performances,
shall, I hope, before we part be made evident.

Secondly, Finis non seper est de substantia praecepti, neque secundum; veros
Theologos cadit sub praecepto. Med. Inst. Non idem est finis praecepti, and id,
de quo praeceptum datur. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 100. art. 9. ad 2.
the end is not commanded by that Law, in which the means are prescribed; for
though the precept of the end include also the precept of the means, yet not
on the contrary. This proposition is laid down by the Moralists as an
undoubted maxim, and does evidently appear. For example, when we are
commanded to hear the word, we are not by the force there of commanded to
believe in Christ Jesus; yet Romans 10.17.
Faith, (as says the Apostle) comes by hearing. That rule, which commands
to beat down the body, and to keep it in subjection, does not require of us
the virtues of humility, chastity, etc. but on the contrary, these, being the
end, require the other as the means. But the law of sanctifying a holy Sabbath
is a law of the means, whereby we are taught, and enabled to serve the Lord in
the private duties of holiness, and to exercise in our selves the graces of
faith, hope, love, etc. This also is plain of it self, and requires no
farther proof. For why do we resort to the congregation on the Lords day? But
partly to be instructed by the word: partly to be inflamed with the love of
God, and zeal unto his service the whole week after: as well, as to tender
him our public homage in acknowledgement of his sovereign dominion.

Thirdly, no affirmative precepts are to be extended beyond that, which the
letter does contain, though it be otherwise in precepts, which be negative.
For example, honor thy father, and mother, when we know what it is to honor
our Superiors, we have the whole latitude of this Law. It is not so (I say) in
negatiues: as appears by our Saviors confutation of the Pharisees glosses
upon the seventh Commandment. But the law of the Sabbath is an affirmative
precept, and prescribes the public worship of God in the congregation;
therefore is not farther to be extended.

Fourthly, if all duties of piety, and mercy whatsoever were commanded by the
law of the Sabbath, then were there no difference at all between this, and the
other precepts of the Decalogue, at least for that day: so that upon one day of
every week the other Commandments were needless, and superfluous. But this
is not to be affirmed.



ten words, ten for their number, words for their distinction. I deny not,
that one and the same duty may be under diverse precepts; but then they are
diversely considered, as referred to diverse ends. The object of different
commandments may be materially the same, but formally distinct: So temperance
and sobriety may be both under the sixth, and under the seventh precept; under
the sixth as means of preservation of breath; under the seventh, as the helps
unto chastity, and mortification. But what formality can distinguish the duties
of holiness on the Lords day from the same duties on other days, I know not;
if you say, to sanctify the Sabbath, the question is begged, and so nothing
said.

Fifthly, were the whole practice of Religion both public, and private the
duty of the Lords day, then it would follow, which is also affirmed, that to
observe the Lords day, were impossible to any man in the state of corruption.
For I think, no man, unless he be some braine-sick Perfectist, will challenge
to himself such a measure of holiness, though but for a day. But that the law
of the Lords day is thus impossible, being not a Legal but Evangelicall
observation of positive command, (for all such are light yokes and easy
burdens) is utterly untrue; Therefore, etc.

Sixthly, nothing, but what is natural, and eternal, is commanded in the
fourth precept of the Decalogue, binding us under the Gospel: but that
private, and personal acts of religion should be performed by us precisely
upon this, or that day of public worship, in that manner as is required, is
not natural, and eternal, binding us under the Gospel. For the Law of nature
prescribes only in general, not any thing for any time, or day, or manner in
particular.

Seventhly, that, which is no where spoken of, much less commanded in the new
Testament, binds not the conscience of any under the Gospel: but the private
exercises of religion upon the Lords day are not spoken of, much less
commanded in the new Testament. For then such commands were easily showed, and
all men would readily submit themselves thereunto.

Eighthly, this manner of observation seems to change the nature of the Lords
day from being the Christian Feast, and transformeth it rather into a day of
Fast, and humiliation. For let their doctrine of Sabbathizing be compared to
the doctrine of fasting, and we shall find them the same, save only that a
total abstinence from all things, wherein nature delights, is required in
the one, but not so in the other. But we must not metamorphize the Lords day,
which is, and ought to be the Christian man's Festival, wherein he should not
only inwardly, but out wardly also rejoice in the Lord his God.



Heb. 12.11.
Apostle speaks of affliction in general (That afterward it yields the
peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby) is true
also of the day of humiliation, of the bruising of the soul in particular; the
affliction is one thing, the fruit thereof another; this joyful, that for the
present grievous, and does not so well sort with the nature of the Lords day.
Upon which ground it was expressly forbidden the Hoc ab omni ecclesia Orientali
and Occidentali observatum contra haereticos. Can. Apost. 61.
Christians by Antiquity to fast upon the Lords day.



unto the great Bishop and Shepherd of his soul: but the question is not of
any sinners conversion. But of the Sabbaths observation by men supposed to be
in the the state of grace; of whom the habitual practice of holiness, with
the actual duties of the public worship, is alone required.

CHAP. XXIX. Wherein is declared what is to be conceived in this Question.
HAving thus laid down that may probably be said upon either part; for the
better settling of the conscience herein, these conclusions are to be observed.

First, that holiness, which is required of a Christian, is of a large extent,
taking in all the duties, which we owe to God, our brethren, and our selves.
For Pet. 1.16.
We must be holy, as God is holy, being created after his image; and this image
does consist in holiness and righteousness, as in the two integrall parts
thereof; holiness relating, in a restrained sense, unto piety and godliness:
righteousness unto justice and judgment; unto both which we stand always
obliged, and must practice them, when we are required thereunto.

Secondly, the duties of holiness, as contradistinct unto righteousness, are
perfectly contained in the four Commandments of the first Table, which are so
many distinct Predicaments of all true piety. For although the duties of
righteousness in the second Table put on the attributes of holiness, as
directed unto the Lord, performed in obedience to his Majesty; yet are they
not formally so in themselves considered. And although the same duties of piety
may be comprehended within diverse several precepts* yet there is still to be
observed some peculiar, and distinct consideration, which puts them formally
under such, or such a precept.

Thirdly, that therefore the law of the Sabbath in the fourth Commandment is
no transcendent, comprehending all the duties of all the rest, either of the
first or second Table: for then it must needs be the Summum genus to the rest,
out of which they all may be deduced, and into which they may be resolved. This
is verified alone of those two great Commandments, as our Math, 22.38.
Savior calls them: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, with
all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy strength: and thy neighbor as
thy self: but cannot be affirmed of the fourth precept. For how can we either
extract the rest, or almost any of them out of this, or fold them up all
therein? It would be a strange inference, to say, Remember thou keep holy the
Sabbath day: therefore thou shall have no other Gods; therefore thou shall make
no graven images; therefore thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc. and as strangely would all these being put together make up that
one; Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Fourthly, that therefore there is something appertaining to piety, which is
only to be found in this, and in no other precept of the Decalogue. Now what
this is, will easily appear, if we take a short view of Gods worship, as it is
prescribed in the several Commandments. The worship of God is the immediate
act of religion, which inclines the heart and the whole man to the service of
God. And because God must be served not after our fancies, but as he himself
has appointed; therefore it is a good Etymology of Religion, a relegendo sese
intra suos fines, contracting her self within the bounds, and limits, which
are prescribed her. For this indeed is the difference between true and false
religion: that the one uses a wandering, and extravagant licentiousness,
whereas Major part mundi quicquid obvium est temere a^cipit; pietas autem, ut
in firmo gradu consistat, sese intra suos fines relegit. Call Inst. lib. 10. c.
12.
the other is fixed and keeps to those limits, which God has set her. This
our Savior teaches us in that answer of his unto the Pharisees, Math. 22.1.
give unto God the things which are Gods. For we must not tender him any thing
whereby to worship him, which is not his own; so that what justice is amongst
men one toward another, the same is religion on man's part toward God.
Religion is written naturally upon the heart of man, and rooted in his very
conscience, though the print thereof by much defaced by original, and is more
and more daily blotted out by actual transgressions. For not only Qua^^^^ sui
numinis intelligenti a^^ universis 'Deu^ ipse indidit. Call. ibid. c.
these that are within the pale of the Church, but the Heathens themselves, and
the worst of wicked men have a natural sense, and a feeling of religion. There
is a kind of natural piety in the soul, says Anima nihil de Deo discens
'Deu^ nominat, nihil de iudicio eius admittens Deo commendare se dicit. etc.
Ter^. de car^, ne Christi.
Tertullian, having for it is object both God himself as the chiefest good, and
supreme Lord of the whole world: and the holy things of God whatsoever. The
practice of this duty of religion belongs both to the outward, and the in^^^d
man: from the inward man are required religious Adoration, Invocation,
Dependence, and Thanksgiving. Thus to give God his own is, John 4.24.
as our Savior James 1.27.
styles it, to worship him in spirit and in truth, and is properly that, which
we call the fear of God, from whence, as from a fountain, all good duties
whatsoever are derived. For it does not only produce it is own operations, but
does command, as a Sovereign Lady, all other virtues; according to that of S.
James, true religion, and undefiled is to visit the father less, and the
widows, ad to keep himself unspotted of the world. This is religion not
formally, but effectually religion, being the cause which does produce them.
But God having not only made us spirits, but bodies, in which our spirits
dwell, as in houses of clay; the duty of religion extends it self unto the
outside of man also, which must likewise give God his own. And religion, in
this notion, is under the second precept of the Decalogue; in which, as we are
forbidden all Idolatrous services whatsoever: so are we commanded such bodily
testifications of our spiritual worship, as may best stand with the nature and
will of that God, which is worshipped by us. This though it be distinct from
the former, yet is not exclusiuely to be understood, as if it only exacted
formal postures and corporal prostrations; for the Isai 29.13.
Prophet assures us, that those, that think to worship God with these only, are
abominable in his sight. Outward reverence must ever be accompanied with
inward worship, and so performed it is commanded in this second precept. Now it
being a necessary consequence, that persons, so inwardly affected, and
outwardly regulated, will not at any time, and likely cannot, cast any vile
aspersions upon the Lord, or any thing that belongs unto him: but, on the
contrary, readily speak all good of his name, whatsoever it be, that makes him
known unto us; therefore the third precept of religion gives us the holy man's
Character, not to take the name of the Lord our God in vain. Lastly,
considering that every reasonable creature in his particular must in this
manner give his Creator his own; for the Lord having universal dominion over
all flesh, should publicly be worshipped by societies of men: therefore what
the former precepts require of every one in particular, that the fourth precept
injoines publicly to be performed by all assemblies throughout the whole
earth. And herein, because it is a thing of most dangerous consequence to leave
men unto themselves (for then there would be as many fancies as faces) God has
ever prescribed public rites, by which he would be publicly worshipped,
leaving the circumstances thereof to the wisdom, and discretion of the Church.

Fifthly, if therefore we will speak distinctly of the things of God, as is most
fit we should (for only a distinct knowledge is the foundation of true piety:
as confused and indigested notions are the mothers of hypocrisy, and nurses of
superstition) e must consider what are those public duties, whereby God is
publicly worshipped; for only these are immediately under the fourth
Commandment. Now the acts of divine worship, whether public or private, are
(as has been said) Adoration, Invocation, Dependence, or Adhaesion, and
Thanksgiving. Adoration is the advancing the Lord in our own thoughts, setting
him in the highest room of our hearts, and subjecting unto him the whole man,
even the conscience it self. Invocation is the lifting up the heart to the
throne of his grace, acknowledging him alone to be the father, of whom is named
the whole family both of heaven and earth, expecting all our wants to be
supplied by him, and from him. Dependence or Adhaesion is a fast cleaving to
the Lord with full purpose of heart, wholly casting our selves upon his wisdom,
power, goodness, justice, mercy, with all confidence, quiet, and assurance.
Thanksgiving is the tribute which we return him, even the praise and glory of
his grace. When therefore considering our selves to be the members of the
mystical body of the Church? we join unto the Lords people in acknowledgement
of his supreme dominion in these performances of divine worship, we are
discharged from the maine, principal and essential duties of the Lords day.
And on the contrary, he, that either absents himself from the public meeting
of the place, where he is, (not being constrained thereunto by inevitable
necessity) or being present in body, joins not in spirit with his brethren in
the forenamed acts of public worship, is an open, and direct prophaner of the
day.

Sixthly, we must also consider, what be the general helps, and furtherances of
public worship. These are four.

First, Pastors and Ministers are requisite to go before the people, as their
leaders in holy things, and to be in a manner Mediators, between God and them;
hence are they said to stand upon the mountains, as the middle way, which
makes their feet beautiful,

Secondly, there must also set, and appointed places of public assemblies;
and such have ever been even in the time of the Apostles immediately upon
Christ's asse^bly. Such was the house, wherein they were gathered together on
the day of Pentecost. And this some are of opinion (how justly I say not) to be
the meaning of that passage of the Apostle, where, speaking of Priscilla and
Aquila, he says, Romans 19.5.
likewise greet the Church, which is in their house. Sure we are, that the
Sabbath, and the sanctuary, are usual joined together. There must also be
laws, and constitutions for the regulating of the public assemblies, least
the disorders of them bring both confusion into, and contempt upon the Gospel
it self, as S. Hierome speaks. Till order was settled in the Church of
Corinth, what manifold abuses crept in amongst them; pride in some, faction in
others, sensuality and profaneness in many, like so many Vultures eating up
the uery heart of all Christian duties?

Fourthly, the people likewise must be instructed in those things, which belong
unto the worship of God, before whom they publicly present themselves: and in
all necessary points of faith, and life, that they may know how to walk before
him unto all well pleasing, and full assurance of understanding. But here we
must remember, that these are not in the commandment directly and immediately,
as things of absolute necessity, without which the Lords day could not be a
holy Sabbath: but indirectly, and by way of convenience, for the well or better
being thereof. For suppose, there be no Minister in a Parish, a supposition not
impossible by sudden death, unexpected imprisonment, particular persecution;
suppose also the usual place of meeting to be taken away by any accident, or
calamity; suppose there were no laws for to order such assemblies, or
Magistrates to execute those laws, as in the ruins of a State; I would not
doubt but in such cases the Lords people might assemble themselves upon the
Lords day, adore the sacred majesty of God, invocate his holy name, protest
their dependence upon him, and give him for a sweet smelling sacrifice the
fruits of their lips. Else, how is Math. 18.20.
our Saviors promise appliable unto all men, where two or three be gathered
together in my name, I will be in the midst of them? Else, how did many of the
Primitive Christians (think we) keep the Lords day in the absence of the
Apostles, having not as yet a settled Ministry? Else, how do those, that
travail by Sea, (I think not, that every ship carries a Minister,) else how
do many of our Merchants in some factories in foreign parts, where the
public practice of their Religion is not tolerated, and a Minister of their
own is not to be had: I say, how do these observe the Lords day? Surely if
any or all of these employments did inevitably cast men upon the rock of
profaneness, they were utterly unlawful for any Christians to undertake. It
cannot therefore be sufficiently admired, whence that opinion was at first
taken up, which is now mistaken even for a Maxim in Religion; that unless
there be Preaching in a Parish, the Lords day cannot be sanctified by the
Parishioners. Nay many of our common people are at that height in this fancy,
as to think it an obligation lying upon their consciences to hear an
Afternoones-Sermon also, if possibly it may be had. If therefore their own
Pastor, either through sickness, or absence, or other reasons, cannot satisfy
their desires herein; they forsake their own Assemblies, and wander as their
humors lead them. By this misprision, that which is but a help unto the
worship, is esteemed by the vulgar above the worship it self, and all the
branches thereof; and as it was said it another case, the Daughter has eaten
up the Mother. Far be it from me to speak, or so much as think in secret any
thing in the prejudice of that great and glorious work of Preaching. Sooner
shall my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; for I know it to be Gods
ordinance, Romans ^.^6.
even his mighty power unto salvation; it ^owes the seed, whereby we are
begotten; it is meat, whereby we are nourished; Medicine, whereby we are
healed; both Oil, and wine being powered thereby into our wounds. By it the
understanding is informed; the memory refreshed; the will inclined; the
affections made pliable; the heart comforted; truth preserved; errors and
heresies beaten down. But yet far be it from any man to make an Idol of it;
which is done, when either we advance it above, or equal it with the public
worship. By this preposterous conceit of many well-mined people, a grand
inconvenience has befallen the Church of England, from which most of her other
mischiefs are hatched; First, in opinion, that he is no lawful Minister,
which is not a Preacher; Secondly, in practice, for all men; to avoid this
exception, or brand rather, as suddenly turn Preachers, as they do
Ministers. So that if any man conceive a good opinion of himself, that he may
do good in Gods Church by some ways or other, he shuffles into holy orders,
and immediately from them into the Pulpit; And every Youth, whose maintenance
extends not it self beyond three or four years in the University, as soon as
he is old enough, will be a Minister; and then it is a foul disparagement to
him not to be a Preacher. Hence especially, partly through ignorance, partly
through impudence, faction is fomented; the people humoured, and mislead;
Religion is made a Maze, and quite changed from that, which originally it was.

Seventhly, it is not to be doubted, that there may be also many personal
furtherances of the public worship, whereby particular men may be made more
apt thereunto, more devoute therein, receiving great comfort, and profit
thereby. But that such preparations, or previous dispositions, or what else we
please to call them, are under the precept of the Lords day, as it is our
Christian Sabbath, does not follow. For

First, they are not of absolute necessity, without which the public worship
must needs fall to the ground. I think no man will say, it is unpossible that a
man should worship God in public, which has not done it in private,
otherwise then habitually. It is not here, as in acting a part upon the Stage,
to which a man comes as a new thing never heard of before; for we are bred in a
Christian state, nursed in a solicitous Church, acquainted with God his word,
his worship, as it were from the Cradle. Few men (I think) there are in our
congregations, which cannot suddenly recollect themselves from other
distractions, to join with our brethren in public, unless transported with
unexpected, and violent temptations.

Secondly, no particular rules can be prescribed, which shall universally
direct all men of all ranks, and endowments; which not observed, they cannot
worship God in public. Must we read the word of God in private? What shall
become of them, whose education has not extended to the Primmer? Must they
pray in private, and secret, otherwise then the Church has taught them? What
shall such do as have not the help of books, and are not arrived to their
imagined perfection of extemporary effusions? Must they repeat a Sermon, or
Catechize their families etc? what if they cannot? Where are those duties
commanded pro hic and nunc (as they speak) upon the Lords day, but in public
Assemblies?

Thirdly, supposing therefore a general precept of preparation to the
public, which no man will deny, for the Eccles. 5.1^.
holy Ghost commands it expressly, keep thy foot when thou go into the
house of God: The Schools teach us, that the manner of performing the duty
falls not under the precept, in which the duties is commanded. If thy foot be
kept, it matters not by what means thou keep it. In a word therefore,
personal and private helps of the public worship, not as it is public, and
regarding the whole congregation, but looking to our own profiting thereby,
are only generally commanded us; the particulars being left to every man's
discretion, and no man's conscience is further burdened.

Eighthly, with reservation therefore of Christian liberty, those, that can and
will spend the vacant times of the Lords day in the private exercises of piety,
are by no law prohibited, by no authority discountenanced, ought not by others
to be disheartened, but encouraged rather; with these Provisoes, First, that
they put no Religion therein, as if God required it at their hands, as a part
of the days sanctification; for then are they guilty of will worship.
Secondly, that being personal devotions, they be performed in secret, for so
Math. 6.6.
our Savior has directed.

Thirdly, that when they are extended unto the whole family, the Master of that
oeconomicall discipline be well fitted, and qualified thereunto, and presume
not beyond his measure.

Fourthly, that he keep himself within the compass of his own charge, not
admitting any of other places; for then he becomes offensive to the State, who
has, and that justly, a iealousy over all such Assemblies.

Fifthly, that, what is done herein, proceed from the sincerity of his heart,
without any respect unto sinister ends; else they are mere pretenses.

Lastly, that they be not burdensome to their servants herein, so as to make
them weary of good things, of which our natures are impatient; but so, as that
the day be unto them both a spiritual, and a corporal refreshing.

Ninthly, all such things whatsoever as keep us from, or hinder us in the
public worship, are altogether unlawful upon the Lords day. This conclusion
is evident of it self from the premises, and conclusions of the former
questions, and is generally assented unto; only the scruple is,



Mark. 15.1.
believe the Gospel; James 1.22.
be doers not hearers, Cor. 6.1.
receive not the grace of God in vain, Col. 3.16.
let the word dwell plentiful in you, etc. and are in some sort the end of the
precept of the public worship; in some sort I say, because not the first and
chiefest end. For this is to acknowledge Gods supreme dominion, preservation of
the Catholic doctrine, and the unity of the whole Church; but a more remote
and subordinate end, and last of all intended by the Lawgiver. But her we must
remember, that finis praecepti no^ est sub praecepto; that is, if we come short
of the end, for which any thing is commanded, so we fail not in the thing it
self, we sin not against the precept, wherein the thing it self is
commanded. This faith Neta has regulas, quibus toties uti oportet. Scilicet non
esse idem sinem praecepti, and id de quo praeceptum datur; quia finis praecepti
non cadit sub praecepto, ut id, quod praecipitur, sed ut intentu^ a
Legislatore. Quoniam ex hinc habes solutionem multarum quaestionum pro omnibus
erudit is, and bonis mentibus metuentibus culpara, ubi non est, Cajet. in
Aquin. 1.2. q. 100. art. 9.
Caietan, Lopez part 1. c. 34. de circumst.
Lopez and others, is a good rule to be observed, for the quieting of weak
consciences, which fear many times, where no fear is; conceiving, that they
transgress more Commadements, then they do indeed. He that is not bettered by
the public Assemblies, sins indeed, but not against the Commandment of the
Sabbath, which injoynes those Assemblies. Although therefore men must not think
it enough to stand in the congregation, as Images in the glasse-windowes; yet
if we join with our brethren in the acts of Gods service, suppose we receive
not improuement of grace therefrom, we must not presently be arraigned for
prophaners of the Lords day.

You will say, our edification in religion being required (say by other
precepts) we are always bound to forbear such things, as are destructive
thereof: as sports, plays, and all other ways, which have no affinity there
with.

I would gladly know, what difference there is between the public worship
upon the Lords day, and the same upon other days. The same word is preached,
the same prayers used, the same hymns are sung, the same Minister employed,
the same people present; yet neither honest recreations, nor lawful vocations,
nor manual operations, are then thought to be hindrances to our profiting by
the public Asseblies. Then they steal not away the seed sown, they choke
not the good word of God, they drive not out of our hearts either the
exhortations of the Minister: or secret motions of the spirit; why then must
they do this upon the Lords day: have the ordinances of God less virtue? has
the day less promise of grace? Are our hears then more unreachable? Are they
not destructive of good things at other times? and are they so at this time? By
this it plainly appears, that we place some holiness in the day it self.
Besides, there is a gross ignominy, and foul aspersion cast upon those, whom
they oppose in this point; as if they countenanced such licentious ways, as
must needs destroy the work of grace in the Lords people; not honest
recreations, which serve to refresh them, are intended; but luxurious delights,
in which the Jews did Sabbathize, are insinuated; serving only as
provocations to lust, and incentiues of sensual pleasures. Charity thinks
not evil, faith the 1. Cor. 13.5.
Apostle; and evil be to him that thinks evil, faith the Proverb. It is the
easiest point of Rhetoric to be eloquent in speaking evil; he that has a
galled mind, a discontented fortune, an unquiet spirit, and has been
accustomed to a rash censuring humor, may soon become a bitter Satyrist.

but carnal and brutish delights, and why may we not call a spade a spade?









long, as empty discourses? Are not, think you, many poor servants wearied
with private exercises, and wish they were at an end?











usque ad ruborem, nay sudorem, to reviue them? For these being wasted by
nothing more, then by the continual bent of the mind (as the strength of a
bow, that stands always bended, relents always by degrees, until it come to
be of no strength) our several recreations cause several diversions, by which
the mind being let loose, and the body in agitation, the spirits receive a
kind of new life.



of the Gospel, with the Apostles limitations; that it neither be 1. Pet. 2.16.
a cloak on the one side nor evil spoken of on the other side, as an occasion
of falling to our brethren; with these cautions I never knew that truth did
harm in Gods Church.



unity and uniformity; howsoever our private judgments incline us, we should
rather comply with Authority, then be scandalized, especially, in points that
are so disputable. These things thus premised we shall easily satisfy the
adverse arguments.

CHAP. XXX. Wherein satisfaction is given to the reasons formerly alleged.
TO the first, the words of the Commandment are mistaken; for not all holy
duties in gross, but only that kind of holiness, which is proper to the
Lords day, is there spoken of; the words are plain, Keep holy the Sabbath day:
and the fourth precept is no transcendent, as is said in the second, and third
conclusions.



being utterly silent in this particular, if we speak of the Lords day, as
being our Christian Sabbath.

To the second, the Lords day may be considered,

First, in it is absolute nature, as a part of our time; and in this respect it
is most true, that, what is the common duty of all days, should be also that
days duty; the rather, because all other employments are abandoned, and
therefore more leisure is afforded.

Secondly, in his relative nature, as separated from the rest of the week to
the service of the congregation; and so there are especial duties appointed,
which are not common to other days by virtue of the fourth Commandment. The
reason, from the less to the greater, is of no force, because it speaks not
adidem; for the Lords day, as it is a day, and part of our time, is no better
then other days; but as it is the Lords day devoted by the Church to the Lords
service, it is indeed the Queen of days, and therefore therein the highest
and noblest Christian duties are performed in the public worship, even by the
precept of sanctifying the Sabbath day.

To the third, Familie-duties are not acceptable unto God performed upon one
day more then upon another, if there be no other considerations concurring
thereunto. He that is no accepter of persons, is likewise no accepter of times,
otherwise then the Apostle expresses it out of the Psalmist, ^ Heb. 3.7.
To day; if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; by which is meant
the whole time of the Gospel. Nor are the sins of men more hateful, because
committed upon that day, unless they carry with them an open or secret
malignity, hindering either the duties of the day themselves: or our holy and
religious performing of them, as the Aquin. Sylv. Cajet. Nav. Sot. Canus, Med.
Schoolmen teach. And so the words of the Prophet Isaiah are to be understood;
for their covetous desires, voluptuous living, and cruel practices made them
come before the Lord in his sanctuary only in outward appearance; formally
personating what God really required, nay abounding and persevering in their
wicked ways: as An circumstantia divini sesti sit necessario consitenda? Duae
sunt opiniones; prima Modernorum; qui tenent partem affirmantem; 2d sancti
Thom. Ios. Ang.
Justin Martyr expounds that place. More to this argument, in that which
follows.

To the fourth, the day of Christ's resurrection from the grave, requires no
more our resurrection from sin, then other days; unless only by way of
motive, or remembrance. Thus indeed this day, Vide Iustinum Martyr^ in Dial.
cum Triphone.
as all other consecrated things, does receive from its consecration an
especial quality to beget in the hearts of men the sparks of devotion,
unless they be hindered in them by want of reverence. What therefore Quanquam
vallis haec miseriae universaliter sit locus poenitentiae, nihilominus
Templorum locus sua quidem religione and qualitate est adpoenitentiam
provocativus and. Gersen. de vita Clerico.
Gerson affirms of Churches and consecrated places in regard of repentance, we
doubt not to affirm of the Lords day in regard of all holy duties. The Church
or consecrated place (says he) is, by reason of its venerable condition, ad
poenitentiam provocativus, a place provoking unto repentance; and from hence he
has these conclusions. First, that ordinarily it is a work more holy in it
self, more pleasing unto God, more profitable unto us, to pray in consecrated
places, then elsewhere; because the Majesty of the consecrated place does more
incite us unto devotion. Secondly, that all blasphemy, either in words, deeds,
or signs is so much the more execrable, by how much the place is more holy.
Thirdly, that one cause, why wicked Priests are worse then wicked Laymen
(which S. Augustine faith, he often found by experience) is, that they abuse
those things which should win them unto repentance. Fourthly, that those
affections, which separate from God, are every where damnable, but much more in
the Temple: as appears by our John 2, 16.
Saviors overthrowing the Tables of the mony-changers there. So say we, that
the Lords day, by reason of the glorious dedication of it to the Lord Christ,
as the memorial of his resurrection, is in it is self provoking unto newness
of life; that holy duties are on this day ordinarily performed with greater
fervency of spirit, benefit to our selves, and therefore acceptance with God;
because the Glory of the day is apt to put life unto our performances; that all
irreligious conversation is therefore the more execrable upon that day; that
the reason, why wicked ecrable upon that day; that the reason, why wicked
Christians are worse then Godless Heathens, manytimes is, because they abuse
all such things, whereby the Lord would draw them unto himself, and amongst
others the Lords day; that all thoughts, words, and ways, which separate from
God, are always damnable, but much more upon the Lords day from this ground
and no other. But hence as it does not follow on the one side, that it is not
lawful elsewhere to repent of our sins, or to make our prayers unto God,
save in consecrated places; or that whenever we come there, we sin, if we
perform not these duties: so neither here, on the other side, must we
conceive, that no holy duties are to be done but on the Lords day: or that we
break the Law of the Sabbath, if, during the whole day, we do not perform
them.

And by this, which has been has said, not only the present argument receives
full satisfaction: but (if I mistake not) that great stumbling block of these
times, of bowing toward the Communion Table is removed out of the way of all
well-affected people. For the Table being amongst consecrated things, either it
acquires something by virtue of its consecration: or Consecrationes Ecclesiae
nan sunt rantum opera, sed sunt efficaces. Cajet. in Tho part. t. qu. 83 Art.
3. Res Consecratae habibes dicuntur ad exc^tandam in nobis reverentiam, and
devotionem. ibidem.
else the action of the Church is not only void, but also vain, and idle;
which no man will (I think) affirm. That, which the consecration conferres,
cannot be any real quality of holiness, for of this it is not capeable; it
must needs be therefore only a fitness or aptness in the thing consecrated to
work upon the minds and understandings of men, considering it as consecrated.
And is nothing else, but an Deus est prese^s Altari, Ecclesiae, and aliis
hujusmodi speciali modo, sicut novo instrumento ad excitandam reverentiam and
devotionem circa divinum cultum. etc. Cajet. ibidem.
aptitude to stir them up to holy thoughts upon those things represented, and
acted upon that holy place; which, multiplying themselves, do at last break
forth into the act of holy worship, in general of the whole Trinity: but
particularly of the glorious person of the Son of God, who humbling himself
unto the death of the Cross, tendered unto his Father an universal, and holy
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. Not the Table therefore is
worshipped; for this is so palpable Idolatry, as cannot be incident to any
Heathen: nor any thing set upon the Table, (the reserving of the consecrated
Elements we leave to the Church of Rome, and therefore there is no thought here
of Transubstantiation) but Christ, as the Messiah slain, the propitiation for
our sins, by whole stripes we are healed. The Table is only a memoratiue
instrument, unto which the assistance of grace is never wanting, either to
beget in our minds such thoughts of the death of Christ: or to extract from our
persons such a worship of him, if we Ecclesia Alrare and alia huiusmodi ex
consecratione adipiscuntur quandam spiritualem virtutem, per quam apta
redduntur divino cultui; ut scilicet homines devotionem quandam exinde
percipiant, and sint paratiores ad divina, nisihoc propter irreverentiam
impediatur. Aquin. part 3. qu. 83. art. 3. ad tertium.
be not otherwise wanting to our selves. And for my part (if this be all, which
is practiced; I am sure, it is all, which is taught by the Learned, even in the
Popish School it self) I see no reason, why, if a day quatenus a separated
day may be thus memoratiue, a Table or ALTAR (call it what you please) thus
separated, may not be so likewise: or why we should not readily embrace all
occasions, opportunities, helps, and furtherances of worshipping the person of
our Lord Christ; whose honor is generally impaired by sundry Heretics, and
most maliciously fought against by Satan, Antichrist, and all his accomplices.
Which is some had well understood, it had not been possible for them to have
stumbled thereat; at least they would have forborne many uncharitable
invectiues against their brethren, who, upon those grounds, exercise this
worship.

To the fifth, all means, directly tending to any good end, are included in
the precept of the end; but private duties, as they are here required, are no
where commanded as means unto the public, but rather on the contrary; for we
do not therefore accustom our selves to private duties, that so we may be
able to serve God in public: but we therefore attend the public, that
thereby we may be the better enabled to worship him the whole week after. So
that if the Lords day be indeed sanctified by the sincere performance of
public duties; the conscience is not farther obliged under the penalty of
sin, by any precept yet revealed concerning the Lords day.

To the sixth, it is most true, that the spiritual repose of the soul was
shaddowed out unto us by the corporal rest of the body in the Jewish Sabbath;
so that our whole life should be a holy rest unto the Lord from the servile
works of sin and Satan; and how men sin against the Lords day in
particular, if the Consecrated day be not a motive unto them of holiness, has
already been said. But that the day it self and the sanctification thereof,
such as is here prescribed us, was prefigured by the old Sabbath, we utterly
deny; that which was shaddowed thereby, being the duty of the whole time of the
Gospel, not of any particular day.

To the seventh, there is no proportion at all between these pretended
observances, and the Jews private rest; for certain it is, that when amongst
them no man went out of his place upon the Sabbath day, they performed a
public duty, celebrating thereby that common rest, which they had now
obtained from the slavery of Egypt, wherein every family, and person amongst
them shared.





First, they had an express precept in that kind, and the whole time was
chalked out unto them; it is not so with us.

Secondly, that only was required of them, which was most easy for every one to
perform; whereas those holy performances, which are here required, come not
within the reach of every man's measure.

To the eight, supposing that, which many of the Schoolmen teach concerning
our edifying in holy things on the Lords day, the argument is faulty in its
other proposition. For that we cannot learn of the Lord in public without
private exercises so varied and spunne along throughout the whole day is not
true: neither can any thing be universally affirmed herein, considering the
different states, graces, and abilities of men.

To the ninth, the Lords day is said to be holy, no otherwise then other
things, which are consecrated to Gods public, and holy worship: and how far
things of this nature are apt of themselves, and therefore do often cooperate
unto holiness in us, has already been declared.

To the tenth, it is most true, that God intended by the Law of the Sabbath to
mind his people of the worlds creation in six days, but that he did bind them
thereby to contemplate the particulars thereof, which few but Philosophers are
able to do, I think no man will affirm. So the Lords day was set apart for
the memory of Christ's resurrection. But what those private duties are unto
this, I see not, unles you say that article is to be studied. And to speak
truth, if men would upon this day preach Christ in public. and spend their
private meetings only upon this subject (for Christ is a Theme seldom
insisted upon) true Christianity would be better known, men's consciences would
be better settled, those meetings more charitable, and innocent, and none could
oppose them therein. But as the Proverb is Quid haec ad Icphali boves, to the
continuate, and un-interrupted exercises, of which we speak?

Lastly, those Authorities, which are and may be brought to this purpose, (to
which may be added, that Canon of the Church of England in the days of King
Edward, for spending the Lords day in private prayer, and thanksgiving;
acknowledging our offenses, reconciling our selves unto our brethren, visiting
the sick, comforting the afflicted, releiving the necessities of the poor,
instructing children, and servants in the nurture and fear of the Lord) are
not delivered by the Church, or ancient Fathers, as expositions upon the fourth
Commandment: as if they were the duties of the Lords day, as it is a Sabbath
but only as pious and Godly admonitions, where by to train up men in religion,
and allure them unto holiness. Number. 11.29.
Moses would had been glad, if all the Lords people had been Prophets; but no
man will say, that Moses therefore commanded them to prophecy. The Acts 26.29.
Apostle wishes, all men were such as himself was; shall we therefore
condemn, as transgressors, those that were not such? It is so here, for
although the Church do not account for evil doers those, that either cannot,
or do not spend the Lords day as aforesaid; yet I assure my self, that both
the Magistrates, and every good man will be glad to see men make a good
progress in true piety and religion. But what may commendably be done by some,
and what must necessarily be done by all, are distinct things; and herein
stands the present Question.

Sabbatharian tenent must needs be better, and safer then the contrary.



First, it is false in it self;

Secondly, unnecessary burdens are laid upon the conscience.

Thirdly, many doubtful perplexities are occasioned thereby.

Lastly, an apparent schism is made, and fomented in the Church.

CAP. XXXI. Wherein is contained the conclusion of the whole, setting down a
short delineation of both the opinions, and tenants, in these several
Questions.
FOR conclusion of the whole, it will not be amiss, to present the Reader with
a summary of the doctrine on both sides; that so with one cast of his eye, he
may be able to see both wherein they dissent, and which is more rational in it
self, and more suitable to the word of God. And here let the Reader take
notice; first, of that, which The observation of the Christian Sabbath. Page 15.
Mr Sprint has well observed, that in the most material points we
consentingly agree, though in certain circumstances we differ, each one
abounding in his several fence; which makes it strange to me, that our
Adversaries should so stick in these points, even against Authority it self;
since we so consentingly agree in points material. This I say being premised,
not to take notice of every thing, which might be collected out of the several
treatises hitherto extant; I conceive, that the finest thread, in which these
Sabbatharian positions can be spun, may be thus drawn. First, that God, having
created Adam in Paradise, revealed unto him the creation, with the order, and
manner, and time thereof, within the compass of six days. That the seventh
therefore was the day of his rest, which he would have observed as a Sabbath by
him and his posterity. That this day was most fit to be appointed; not only in
regard of God, who then rested; but in regard of man also, who was on the
seventh day to enter upon the domion of the world, as the Master thereof; and
what better entrance, then with the service of his Creator, in sanctifying the
Sabbath day. That hence came all his time to be divided by weeks, the boundary
whereof was, and that by divine institution, the Sabbath, God having blessed
the seventh day and hallowed it. That this hallowing the day, was the
declaration of Gods will; not what himself meant to do long after, but what
he would have men to do from that time forth in all their generations. That
thus it continued in the practice of the Patriarchs, before, and after the
flood; for else it had been impossible for the Israelites to have known (as it
is plain they did by their gathering of Manna) which were the six days of the
creation, and which the seventh of Gods resting. For sure we are, the time was
first divided into weeks; months, and years, being not known, till by long
observation found out by the course of the Sun, and Moon. That though in
this manner the Sabbath was given Adam by positive Law, yet easy it is to
follow the footsteps of nature guiding us thereunto. For all men acknowledge,
even by natural light, that some time is to be set apart for the public
worship; but being to seek of the proportion in special, and portion in
particular, nature kindly reaches forth her hand, guiding us to these also,
assuming as follows. That not only some time, but a sufficient proportion
there of is necessarily required, as to all other works, so to this of the
public service. That reason teaches, it is fit the Creature should wait the
leisure of his Creator in the designation of this sufficient proportion: the
Creature being under his absolute power, and being no equal carver to it self
in things of this kind, and reaping also greater comfort in any observance, for
which it has the warrant of its Creator. That seeing the week was the
original partition of time, it must needs be more convenient to set one day
of the week apart for the service of God, then one in a fortnight, or one in a
month. That herein an uniformity ought to be observed by all mankind
throughout all generations; without which, there must needs follow a manifest
Schism in the Church, rent in the State, and also in the world, if some in
some places observe one day Sabbath, others in other places another day. That
there is no such ground of uniformity, as the word of God, to whom all men owe
and profess there ready subjection; as for men's constitutions, though upon
never so good grounds, there are others as wise, and good as they, at least in
their own opinions, which will take liberty to vary from them. That therefore
it is fit, God himself should show us, not only the specificate proportion,
but the particularity of that specification. That in such designations as
these, the will of God is made manifest unto us, sometimes by his words,
sometimes by his works; so that if the Scripture were silent, as it is not, yet
this is a general direction, that the work of God done upon any day, is, and
ought to be the ground of its hallowing: If therefore we discern one day to be
preferred before another in some great and notable work, natural reason
teaches, that day of all others to be chosen for our public Sabbath. That
thus stands the case both in regard of the Jewish, and Christian Sabbath; God
having marked out unto them their Sabbath by the work of creation, ours by the
work of resurrection. That there needs no such recourse notwithstanding to the
works of God, having so express a Text, as that of the second of Genesis; for
the making good whereof against the fond Dream of Anticipation, may be brought
whole Iuries of Fathers and modern Divines. And reason it self averreth it by
an unanswerable Dilemma; for that passage must be written either before the
Law; and then God must reveal to Moses before hand what he meant to do in the
Mount, which is not probable: or after the law, and then what reason had Moses
to speak there of in the story, since it was so fully declared in the Tables?
That of those three things before spoken of, the time in general, the
proportion in special, and taxation in particular, the first only is generally
received for Moral; the other two are Positive rather then Ceremonial; for
what need of Ceremonies in Paradise? That the specification of one in seven was
ceremonial only respectively to the rest of the seventh day, not of the
seventh it self; for what ceremony can be found in the time indefinitely
considered, which is one of seven? That the Jews resting upon their seventh,
did prefigure Christ's rest in the grave, (in which fence also it is abolished)
but not our rest from sin here, and from misery hereafter; for these were
common to the Jews together with the Christians. The rest therefore of the
day, was partly Moral, partly Ceremonial; but not that one in seven should be
sanctified, for that this is simply Moral, we have the full cry of the
Schoolmen themselves. That the particular taxation of this one in seven more
then of another was also Positive, not Ceremonial; for there is the same
taxation of one in seven under the Gospel, and yet no Ceremony is put therein;
nay God having as it were chalked it out unto us by his works, it may well be
reputed Moral. As therefore God commanded the Jews their day: so has he also
appointed us ours, even the first day of the week for our Christian Sabbath;
That herein the wisdom of God is most remarkable in his Law, saying not,
Remember the Seventh day, but Remember the Sabbath day the day of Rest to
sanctify it. For by this means we also keep the fourth Commandment, in
sanctifying the Lords day; For as the Jews were tied to the observation of the
Sabbath, and had one of he seven preferred unto them: So we have also our
Sabbath, and one also of seven prescribed us. That though we take not the Lords
day as it is such a day of seven, from the Commandment; yet the rest, and
sanctification thereof, we justly derive from thence. That undoubtedly the
Gospel does not allow a worse proportion of time for the worship of God, nor a
worse manner of observing it, then the law did: and a greater does not well
stand with our ordinary callings. That seeing the day of the Creatours rest is
abolished, none of the seven can be more proper for a Christian man's
observation, then the day, on which his Redeemer rested; whom the Mark. 2.23.
Scripture styles Lord of the Sabbath; For God marked it out unto the Apostles,
to whom the translation of the day appertained by the resurrection of Christ, a
work no way inferior to the Creation. This therefore is the day, which the
Lord himself has made, faith the Prophet, Psalm 118. ver. 4. That although
there be no express proof in Scripture, yet sufficient it is to prove an
institution, from the continuate, un-inrerrupted practice of the Church, which
cannot be casual; and indeed nothing else can satisfy any, whose judgment,
and conscience cannot be overawed by the ordinance of the Church. That
therefore we must remember this to be our Christian Sabbath, (for so we may
justly call it, though neither Scripture, nor Antiquity so style it, because
all acts of Parliament, and Proclamations of the State so entitle it) being I
say our Sabbath, we are to sanctify it in all points, as the Jews did theirs,
both for the time, which must be 24. hours: and for the rest, doing nothing,
which may be an avocation from holy things. As for sports and pastimes,
howsoever the gilded titles of Christian liberty, honest recreations, and the
like be put upon them, yet it may justly be feared, least profaneness and
luxury be thereby intended, and a wide gapp set open to all licentiousness.
That all men know, how sincere soever the mind of the Magistrate be, how
greedily the vulgar are set upon these sports, how incroaching upon liberty,
how undiscreet in enjoying it, how impatient of any restraint therein. On the
other side, that the Saints delight in consecrating a Sabbath gloriously unto
the Lord; so that when others, instead of refreshing, toil themselves in May
games, or Morricedaunces, or worse, finding perhaps their own pleasure therein;
the Saints find nothing so sweet, as the Lords statutes, nothing so ravishing
as the refreshings of the holy Ghost, nothing so amiable as the Assemblies of
their Brethren, being made thereby more painful and conscionable in their
several callings the whole week after.

How these things, which seem thus handsomely contrived, do hang together
like a rope of sand, consisting of some truths, more falsehoods, most
uncertainties; let the indifferent Reader judge. It is true, that God created
Adam in Paradise; but not true, that the creation of the world was made known
unto him by revelation; for then, to what pupose was his excellent knowledge,
in which he was created, (and which many prefer beyond that of Solomon's)
imparted unto him? That God commanded the first seventh day to be his Sabbath
is very improbable; for what needed Adam a Sabbath in Paradise? And if he
sinned the sixth day (as most conceive) this was a bad preparation to the next
days Sabbath, and such, as was likely to disturb the whole work. If he stood
the sixth day and sinned the seventh (long he stood not all agree) was the day
of his fall, think you, the day of his Sabbath? That he entered upon the
dominion of the creatures upon the seventh day, contradicts the very Text it
self, which says, they were delivered up unto him upon the sixth day; unless
we like to interpret Moses by the figure Anticipation in that Chapter, which is
so much condemned in the next. That time was first divided by weeks, afterward
by months, which is the very pillar of all the rest; is as weakly, as
confidently affirmed: For not to speak of the circle here used, the division of
time into weeks being brought to prove the Sabbath to have been from the
beginning: and the Sabbath being blessed and sanctified from the beginning to
prove this division of time by weeks; no such thing can be concluded from that
Text; unless we grant, that all separated and sanctified days (and such were
all the Jewish Festivalls) are presently to be the divisions of time. On the
other side, sure we are, that man in the beginning was put to School unto the
creature, and that the Sun and Moon were purposely set in the Firmament to
show him times and seasons. Is it now probable, or can it stand with the
intention of the Creator, that man should come by the divisions of times,
otherwise, then by observing the Sun, and Moon, especially since the Changes
of the Moon do so punctually lead us unto weeks? In the next place, it was
wisely foreseen, that a positive precept serves not our turn; and therefore
we fetch about for a morality also therein, which cannot be without sundry
suppositions. That nature tells us of time to be set apart for Gods worship, is
most true; but that she directs us to this in special, or that in particular,
is fallaciously collected. For what if the creature be under the absolute power
of the Creator, are therefore no Circumstantials left to the discretion of the
Church in holy things? What though some particular persons would unequally
carue therein, as Prometheus did between himself and Jupiter; would the
Church always assisted by Gods spirit, think we, do the like? So for the
comfortable performance, which is pretended, I would ask, which is more
comfortable, when we have some things voluntary, which may be a free gift* or
when we are fettered in our performances, like flaues, more then sons?
Lastly, that uniformity in public actions cannot be observed, unless God
interpose his immediate authority, savours of something else, then Sabbatharian
tenants. If those days are always holy, which are honored with some notable
work of God, I see no reason, why the day of our Saviors incarnation and
hypostaticall union the most unsearchable Nunquam 'Deus adeo grande fecit
miraculum in caelo, aut terra, sive resuscitando mertuos, sive illuminando
caecos, and sic de aliis; sicut est miraculum hoc' unionis humanitatis
addivinitatem. Gers. part 4 a ser. de Nativitate
and glorious work ad extra: or Friday, wherein was finished the work of our
redemption, should not be a Sabbath, as Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 18.
Constantine made it. Surely, although all Sabbaths have been kept upon days
chalked out by Gods famous works, yet all days thus chalked out have not been
forthwith Sabbaths by divine institution. That the proportion of one in seven
to be kept Sabbath cannot be ceremonial; and that never any found any Ceremony
therein, is utterly untrue. For, to omit others; Videri ergo possit Dominus per
diem septimum populo suo delineasse suturam sui Sabbathi perfectionem. Call. de
4. prae. Sic eliam Clemens Alexandrinus ex Elatone. lib. 5. Stloma^.
Calvin has long since observed, that it did not only historically teach the
Jews the perfection of the works of nature, but mystically also the perfection
of the works of grace; and that nothing should be wanting unto us in the person
of the promised Messiah, the number of seven being the number of perfection.
Alike solid is that, which follows, that the Rest of the seventh day had
relation unto Christ's rest only in the Grave; but was not mystically referred
unto the grace of the Gospel; which is contrary both to the Scripture, and to
the stream of all Divines, Ancient and Modern. And what if the Jews were
partakers of the grace of Christ? yet were they led thereunto by the hand as
children, in these and the like figures; and how does this hang together, There
is a taxation of one in seven under the Gospel, therefore that, which the
Jews had under Moses, could not be ceremonial? That we under the Gospel keep
the fourth Commandment is most true, understood in general of the substance
of the Commandment, for times of public worship, but in nothing else. For
thought it say, Remember the Sabbath day, not the seventh; yet immediately it
adds, by way of exposition, the seventh is the Sabbath; and which it means
of the seventh, even the next after the creation. We must not then make God
wise according to our fancies, by making his word a Lesbian rule, broken
asunder, and patched together at our own pleasures. But say, it speaks of a
Sabbath in general, how does it speak of a seventh day-Sabbath in special
under the Gospel, or of the Lords day in particular? This therefore must be
helped with another heap of superst^^ons. Christians, you say, must not give a
worse time unto the Lords service, then did the Jews; must it therefore be
just the same; that a better would prove a public grievance, is a plausible
put off; why might we not give him every sixth day, if the whole Church should
think it fit? would it not be all one upon the matter to Tradesmen and
Laborers? But the Lord has marked out unto us his own day by his own
resurrection. This is most true, and therefore the Church always has, and I
doubt not but ever will observe it to the worlds end, though only by the
Churches authority. But supposing it to be our Sabbath, must it not be kept for
time and manner, as that of the Jews was? If it be not the Jewish, why should
we keep the Jewish time of just so many hours, with the Jewish manner of rest
for such or such cessations? As for the rest, he that is a Teacher of
profaneness, and an Abettour of licentiousness, an untempered morter-dauber,
let him be accursed.

The other pattern of doctrine therefore in this point, is. That God created
man in that high measure of knowledge, as made him little lower then the
Angels. Psalm. 8.5.
That man continued in this estate but a very short time, perhaps not many
hours. That notwithstanding his fall, a great part of his wisdom remained
with him, especially his natural knowledge of the creature, and the worlds
creation. That God admitting fallen man into the state of grace through
repentance, was pleased to converse with him (though not so familiarly, as
otherwise he would have done), by apparitions, and revelations. That the light
of nature remaining, taught him, that this God must be publicly worshipped.
That he being not unmindefull of his fall, and the curse, which thereby was
brought upon him, death: and being instructed in the faith of the Messiah to be
slain, hence God came to be publicly worshipped by the sacrifices of slain
beasts. That the set time of this public sacrificing is not mentioned in
Scripture. That the place in the second of Genesis was written by Moses after
the Law was given, and had relation thereunto. That nothing can be averred of
the Patriarchs practice till Isreal's coming into the wilderness, and the fall
of Manna. That the Law delivered in the fourth precept is moral for substance,
as that God must have times for public worship; Ceremonial for circumstance
in the rest, binding the Jews only, and leading them partly backward, to their
state in Egypt, the fall of Manna: partly forward, to good things to come in
Christ. That Christ therefore and the Gospel being exhibited, this
circumstantiall Sabbath must cease; but expired not quite until the
destruction of the Temple. That during this while, the Apostles kept the Jewish
Sabbath, as they did other Ceremonies. That withal they kept in a manner the
Lords day also for breaking of bread, though this was not always done upon
that day only. That whatsoever the Apostles did in the Churches by them
planted, was not by Apostolical authority, they being the Churches Pastors, as
well as Christ's Apostles. That the discipline of the Church (of which the time
and manner of public Assemblies is not the least part) was established by
them, as Pastors, not Apostles: and might afterward receive such changes, as
the state of succeeding times should require. That therefore the institution of
the Lords day is by Ecclesiastical authority; and that this is a sufficient
tie of conscience to all such, as list not to be obstinately wilful. That the
Lords day thus established must be observed, and set apart for Gods public
worship; and all means used for the supporting thereof. That those, that join
not with the Congregation therein, are guilty of profanation. That whatsoever
does hinder this in any man (of which no general rule can be given) ought to
be avoided by him; and that herein every man's experience can best inform him.
That such things, as are used only as diversions of the mind, and recreations
of the body, are lawful on this day, so they offend not in any other
circumstance. That those, that are inclined, and enabled to private holy
exercises performed without fraud, or sinister respect, do that, which is most
profitable and commendable, though not bound thereto by the Law of the Lords
day. That all men should be watchful over themselves to keep a spiritual
Sabbath from the servile works of sin throughout the whole course of this
life having always an eye to that Sabbath of Sabbaths, promised us in the
kingdom of GOD our Father, and of his dear Son JESUS CHRIST, to whom be
honor, and glory now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

