THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE, Defended by a Sermon preached at a Synod in the
Metropoliticall Church of York;

By THOMAS IRELAND, Bachelour in Divinity.

2. KING. 11.17. And Iehoiada made a covenant between the Lord, and the King,
and the people, that they should be the Lords people; likewise between the
King and the people.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Edward Aggas, and are to be sold at his
shop upon Snore hill near Holborne Conduit. 1610.

To the most reverend Father in God, Tobie, Lord Archbishop of York, Primate
and Metropolitan of England My most honorable good Lord.
WHereas every one is made, not only for himself, but for the Commonwealth;
which in a Monarchy (such as ours) consists in the welfare of the KING: the
welfare of the KING consists in the loyal and loving hearts of his subjects:
their love and loyalty may most appear in taking or approving of the Oath of
Allegiance: I thought it also my duty (most reverend in Christ, and my very
good Lord) being a public Minister, by a public authority commanded, to
gather and declare the proofs thereof out of the word of God. The cause is
public both for this, and for all kingdoms, the place where it was uttered
was public, being a Synod of the Clergy. The fruit may be public in
satisfying the doubtful, which here may see; that this concerns not so much
the Popes, as Gods authority bestowed upon our King: our adversaries are grown
public in their libels and contradictions; and therefore this without ambition
or vainglory may be published to the world. Thus determining to come in public,
the favors I have received of your Grace, who both commanded me to preach on
this theme, and then encouraged me to print this my Sermon, makes me the more
presume to dedicate it unto your gracious patronage and protection: for
although the matter does not answer your judicious expectation (as a mean
artificer often mars good stuff with rude ha^dling) but that the truth will
well enough defend it self with a bad weapon: yet the matter cannot be but
acceptable unto your most religious loyal Care, which with dear and deep
affection (I know) desires and endeavors by doctrine, discipline and example,
the confusion of Antichrist, the peace of Sion, the safeguard and honor of our
blessed Sovereign. Whatsoever it is, it is the profession of a clear
conscience; which if I have not well expressed, there are far stronger, which
uphold the state of this question; and many may succeed in this defense. There
is no true Christian-subiect, but would adueture credit and life in so great and
good a cause: And therefore humbly beseeching your Grace favorably to censure
the first adventures of a young scholar. I most humbly beseech the God of
Grace, to multiply his graces on your head and heart, unto your honor in this,
and happiness in a better world. And so rest.

Your Graces most humble and devoted Chapleine, Thomas Ireland.

Iuramentum Fidelitatis authoritate publica nuper stabilitum, iure diuino
licitum est. This oath of allegiance is lawful by the word of God, whereof
here follows the true copy.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare
in my conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's dominions and
countries.

And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church or
Sea of Rome, or by any other, with any other, has any power or authority to
depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Maisties dominions or Kingdoms,
or to authorize any foraigne Prince to invade or annoy him or his countries: or
to discharge any of his subjects of their obedience and alleagance to his
Majesty: or to give license or leave to bear arms, raise tumults, or to
offer any violence or hurt unto his Majesty's royal person, state or
government, or to any of his Majesty's subjects, within his Majesty's
dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or
sentence of excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the Pope or his successors, or by any authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea, against the said King, his heirs
or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their obedience, I
will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his heirs and
successors, and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all
conspiracies, and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
persons, their crowns and dignities, by reason or color of any such sentence,
declaration, or otherwise: And I will do my best endeavor to disclose or make
known unto his Majesty, his heirs and successors, all treasons and
traitorous conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against him, or
any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure
as impious and heretical this damnable doctrine and position; that Princes
which be excommunicate or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by
their subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and am in conscience
resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, has power to
absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and
lawful authority to be ministered unto me, and do renounce all pardons and
dispensations to the contrary.

And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of these same words, without any equivocation,
or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever; and I make this
recognition and acknowledgement, heartily, willingly, and truly upon the faith
of a true Christian. So help me God.

ECCLES. 8.2. I advertise thee to take heed to the mouth of the King, and the
word of the oath of God.


THE Writer of these words was Solomon, the wisest, and most peaceable
governor that ever was in Israel. The time was in his ancient years, when
after long experience of both good and evil, he saw and said, what was
befitting every state and place. The occasion, it seems, was the flight and
revolt of Jeroboam, and his accomplices. The coherence is apparent, how from the
commendation of true wisdom in the first verse, he deriues this wise
advertisement in the second; which he proves in the six following: and in the
ninth verse concludes his own and his equals miseries; when a ruler whose love
and care deserves love, reapes naught but hate and hurt of his own people.
His purpose was, he supposes himself a lawful King, as being ordained of
God, appointed of David, and admitted of Israel; and thereupon requires a
reverend estimation of his worth and words, and that upon their oaths then
sworn to God on his behalf.

The text is diversely read of diverse interpreters: the vulgar Latin which the
foremost English follows, reads Ego os Regis obseruo: but this is unlikely; for
being a king, he would not observe the king. The later English in the Church
Bibles reads absolutely: Keep the kings commandment, without mention of the
first person, mentioned in the original. The latest English inferres it with a
verb, which Iunius and Tremellius express with a possessiue: Praestitutum
meum, praestitutum Regis obserua: all sounding in one sense, as if he should
have said: Obey not me only as I am a man (for he was the wisest man) but as a
king: nor only while I am a king, but my successors whosoever shall be king
after me: nor only so, but as a public Preacher (says Solomon, for so the
book is entitled.) I would persuade every subject of every kingdom, to take
heed unto, that is, obey their kings. Men must not only be (...) lovers of
their persons, but (...) lovers of their places, nor only so, but with
Isocrates, (...) lovers of their successors; (...); for children should
inherit, as the fortune, so the friendship of their parents. Unto this
allegiance were that people double bound by the mouth of the king, and by the
oath of God: that is, by the authority of both God and king: for his mouth
here may signify (...) the favor of his countenance, or (...) the fruit of
his lips, or (...) the sense of his writings, which are improperly called the
sayings of his mouth: or if they would not look on these, yet should they
look (...) which Pagnin expounds either a cause, this being the ground of
that, or a custom which had been long, and was often used in Israel, or as our
translation has, the particulars, i. the words of the oath of God, i. that
godly oath whereby they were bound to their Sovereign.

This holy Scripture concerns us as much as them, we have a Solomon which
without comparison is wise, peaceable, and sanctified: his experience as great,
having reigned as long a while, over as great a people as Israel: his occasions
urgent, by reason of those English fugitives, which have whet their wits,
tongues, pens, and swords against his throne: his love and care as much, as
appears in his proceedings: his purpose but the promise of our love, trust,
and loyalty: the means an oath, approved of God, and accustomed in all
countries: and therefore our miserable vanity should be worse, if we despise
him, or his oath of Allegiance. This is the Thesis at this time to be
determined, wherein although the greatness of the cause, and the smalnesse of
mine experience, the multitude of adversaries, and the general satisfaction
has been given already by the Solomon and Zadockes: the King and Bishops of
this land, might either dis-burden or dis-hearten mine attempt, yet the
conscience of the truth, the liberty of our Church, the peace of our
Commonwealth, the safeguard of our sovereign, the command of authority, the
joint profession of Civil and Canonical obedience, it being the first and
chiefest Canon we should maintain, our Princes right against all traitors, and
heretics, would add spirits unto the most unworthy men or minds, to speak
in that, which for these thousand years has been the quarrel of all
Christendom. Give me leave therefore I beseech you, being a young Divine to
deal in statutes and state-affaires, as far as I can prove them consonant
unto Scripture, to follow those illustrious lights of the Gospel, which have
writ before in this argument, as a candle sometime serves in absence of the Sun,
and to speak as well for our euery-way-worthy king, out of the word, as the
Canonists and Jesuits do for their both creature and creator, their Popes
holiness, besides the word of God; and then as plainly, briefly, and pithily
as I can, I will deliver the divine lawfulness of the late statute-oath of
Allegiance.

This holy Scripture enioynes an observation, and yeeldes reason. In this
observation we may consider, whom and how we should observe, in this our
duties; and in that, the kingly power is declared. The kingly power (to ground
that first, which is the ground and scope of all the rest) is ordained of God,
as appears by nature and Scripture. Nature shows an heaven to rule this
earth, the Sun to rule the day, the Moon the night, our souls to rule our
bodies, and our heads by sense and motion, to rule all the rest of our members:
even the Cranes, Bees, and Storkes acknowledge their superiors in their order
and obedience. There is nothing so necessary, profitable, and beautiful in the
sight of God, Angels, and honest men, in our selves, in an house, in the world
or heaven, as this good order is. It is necessary, for with it every state is
quiet, and without it every thing is confounded: it is profitable by the peace,
honor, and safety, which it brings to them which rule, and them which can obey:
it is beautiful, for beauty is but a proportion and agreement of one part with
another. Thus it is excellent in our selves, for as in our bodies, our members
are directed by the senses, sense by reason, and reason by the Lord; so in the
politic bodies of our common wealth, the meaner sort must be ruled by the
magistrate; the magistrate must be ruled and ordained of the Prince, as the
Prince is of God. It is excellent in an house, when man and wife, children and
servants, know their places, and perform their duties: for then thy servants
are like subjects, thy children like nobles, thy wife a privy counsailour, and
thy self as king to determine all controversies. It is likewise excellent in
the world, where the baser creature serves the better, the better serves man,
and all indifferently serve one God. It is more excellent in heaven, whereas
the Sun rules amongst the rest of the planets, which are direct, stationall,
and retrograde; as he comes nearer, or goes further from them: as the planets
rule amongst the rest of the stars, as having stronger influence, fairer
lights, more spheres and motions. As the stars by signification of times,
and disposition of weather rule all Elements under heaven: so may we say, the
king is over the Judges both Civil and Ecclesiastical; the Judges over
inferior officers; and those officers are to compose the Commons in good
order. Yet is it more excellent in the heaven of heavens, wherein there are
Angels, Archangels, and several sorts of immaculate and immortal spirits,
every one in their kind beholding the face, and doing the will of God our
common Father which is in heaven, like so many Courtiers and honorable
attendants about a Prince. But it is most excellent in God himself, in whom
there is no difference of nature, yet a distinction of order; there is no
division of parts, yet a relation of number; there is no inequality of persons,
yet the first is as one fountain, from which the second and third proceed to
show, that though the nature of mankind be like and equal in many common
gifts, yet there may be many respects, why some be before others, and one
before all the rest. If then we will rule our selves, or be rulers in our own
families; if we would enjoy the creatures of this world, as we hope to be like
Angels, or to renew the likeness of God himself in us: we must imitate these
examples. (...) (says Aristotle) (...): that which is divine, better and more
ancient, is also more honorable: now the Monarchy was the first policy, for
when our first parent had begotten many children, he became a king: his
experience was their arbiter, his blessing their honor, his curse their cross
and heavy punishment: as long as he lived, which was very near the flood, it
was unnatural for his offspring to strive with him for any preeminence. Thus
Noah was unto the second world, and his children in their several trauailes' to
their several posterities, till the rulers authority grew tyranny, and the
peoples liberty turned into licenciousnesse, till the crafty mighty got the
weaker and ruder to their service, and all things were confused, as among
Pharoes Kine, the worse eat up the better without care and conscience, as
among the fish, the less were devoured of the greater without any respect of
humanity. How detestable was the sin before the flood, when they were
careless eating and drinking, every one did what they list, and took them
wives where they lusted? How miserable was the confusion in the building of
Babel, when every one commanded, but none followed? How abominable was it when
there was no ruler in Israel, but every one did that which was good in his own
eyes, even such (and so much worse, as our estate is weaker in these later
days) would be the manners of mankind, were there not some could rule, whom
others would obey. Thus the want of kingly power showed it good: and a good the
more general it is, it is the better, whereas many taking parts, it grows
particular, and so weakens as a river cut in many streams. Quot capita, tot
sensus, many heads have many thoughts, and many faults, and therefore Homer
said, (...), etc. one bearing rule, the rest will better meet, and live and
love as one, otherwise as in a body when the soul is gone, there are diverse
humors, every one striving who should soonest be severed, and thereby bring the
body to confusion. Such is a country without one ruler, every one seeks his
proper good, and leaves the public either impaired or dishonored, as a flock
without a sheapheard, as a ship without a Pilot, as other creatures without
man, so man would grow wild and vnwieldie without such an ouer-seer. For this
cause the Gentiles called them Gods which gathered and governed civil
societies together. Whereas Aristocracie seems the device of Pythagoras which
imagined many principles, and Democracie to be the proportion of Epicurus,
which would have infinite and irregular beginnings; the Monarch is divine, as
only representing Gods own power. As the Moon offers the sunbeams with
pleasure to men's eyes, which hardly can be looked upon in his own beauty, so
the Monarchy presents the wisdom, power and justice of the highest, which
otherwise cannot be looked upon in his own glories, for none has seen God and
lived. As then the children of Israel when they durst not hear the Lord, but
would have Moses to speak to them, took this condition also, that they should
obey Moses as God himself. So since men are so weak and timorous, they dare
not have Angels, much less the Lord himself immediately to govern them; yet it
is ea lege, that they must obey the Lords Liuetenant, as if he spoke himself,
for it is not his, but Gods authority by which he rules.

This the Scripture often teaches us, where wisdom says: by me kings reign,
and tyrants also do possess the world. Good Kings are Gods images, and evil
Princes, are his executioners: Ashur was his rod, Nabuchodonosor his servant,
Cyrus his anointed: Attila called himself his scourge, and Tamberlan his
wrath. And therefore although God uses them as a father does his rod; first
correct his children by them, and then throw them into the fire prepared for
them; yet the sons and Saints of God should submit themselves under his
instruments of correction, not so much like a dog running at the stone that
is thrown at him, biting the chain that holds him. i. repining at the tyrant
whereby God restrains him; but looking higher unto the chiefest cause of his
trouble, Gods anger, which punishes: and then lower, unto the greatest motive
of Gods anger, their own sin, which deserves it. If we thus think of evil
Princes, what must we think of good? Doubtless it is Gods only majesty which
appoints, his justice which directs, his power which enables them in this high
calling: God has given diverse gifts unto diverse men, in some wisdom to rule,
in some willingness to be ruled: God in his word has set forth every man's
office and duty: God has blessed it with success in every state and degree. God
in his own people Israel has set forth an example how men should behave
themselves in this business. It was the Lord which appointed Moses, Joshua,
David and his posterity to rule over Israel. It was the Lord which moved the
peoples hearts to receive, honor and obey them: for as every beam from the
Sun, and every branch from the root; in like sort every power does proceed from
God.

Thus by nature and Scripture, kings have rule over subjects, and therefore
subjects by the condition of relatiues must be ruled by them. Thus Saint Peter
bad us fear God, and honor the king: all therefore that hold of S. Peter
should be thus counseled. Thus God, Christ, and Christians have honored them:
God calls them Gods, Christ names them (...) either in re, as having done, or in
spe, as being able to do much good unto their people Justin says unto the
governors; Deum adoramus, vobis in alijys rebus laeti seruimus, We worship God
alone in spirit, but in outward things we gladly do you service, Policarpus
answered the Proconsull: Docemur potestatibus quae sunt a Deo defer honorem,
qui religioni non sit contrarius: all such honor as is not contrary to
religion, we may, nay, we must yield our Emperors: the Christians of the first
five hundredth years did some reverence (as is manifest by the cunning
imposture of Julian) to their images; and since bear themselves lowly to the
chair of State. A simple officer is heeded if he bring but the kings name, a
Judge because he takes his person, a messenger because he bears his arms, to
show, the honor that we owe unto themselves: Ester trembled at the
countenance of Assuerus, Israel heard the judgment of Solomon, as if it were
the wisdom of the Lord, people shouted out at Herod's oration, it was the
voice of God not man; this it may be was exceeding flattery, yet perfalsi
regulam, it may show the mean, which is with all awfulnesse to take heed unto
the looks or words of our Sovereign; that by practicing our duties toward
them, we may better learn to do them unto God himself, their place affoords
more experience, their office more occasions, their means more ability to be
doing good; God has given special gifts unto those he sets in government, as
Homer calls them (...) like to God, more excellent unto those he does advance
over his chosen, as unto Saul, David, and Zorobabel, he gives his judgments
unto the king, and his righteousness unto the kings son, that he may help
the wronged unto right, and defend the poor, a divine sentence is in the mouth
of the king, and his mouth transgresses not in judgment, and therefore we
should rather heed his laws or words then our private humors, or
selfe-conceited affections: since they are placed over us, not for their ease,
as what more careful then a crown, it being (...), a science of all sciences
to rule a man the most variable of all creatures, but for the common good, it
behoues us to serve them, says S. Peter, as we would serve the Lord.

Thus in general have we seen that observation which is due to kings, let us
now take heed unto the ground of this (The words of the Oath of God) wherein
we may consider the form it was an oath of God, the matter was the words
wherein it was conceived: for a formal difference it is called the oath of
God, because every oath is not of God. Our Savior and Saint James has forbid
all swearing, that is, all swearing by the creatures, whether heaven or earth,
gifts or Altars, Temples or Jerusalem, because this kind of swearing is against
God, our selves, and the condition of an oath. Against God, for therein we
should attribute his attributes, omni-science, almightinesse, and the just
revenge of periuries to the creatures; which glories God will give to none
other. Against our selves, for men commonly swear by greater then themselves,
so that hereby we make the creatures which are inferior, to be better then
mankind. It is against the nature of an oath, for every formal oath is an
invocation, and an imprecation. An invocation of witness, and an imprecation
of punishment, if it be false, which neither can be granted of the creature,
nor expected of the swearer. Our Savior and Saint James forbade all false,
vaineglorious, and offensive swearing in our customarie communication, these
be not oaths of God, nor of good, but of evil. An oath of God is made
according to his word, and Jeremy says, it must have three conditions: truth,
judgment, and righteousness, it must be solemn undertaken with due
judgment, it must be certain, the better to assure the hearers of an unknown
truth, it must be righteous to determine right from wrong: and being thus it
is commanded in the Law: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, thou shall serve
him, and swear by his name, it is prophesied in Esaias, that those of the new
Covenant of the Gospel, should swear by the name of GOD, it is promised a
reward, if they will learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, they
shall be built up in the midst of my people, those which with reverence
perform this duty, shall be edified in faith, and advanced in Gods kingdom.
An oath is a law of Nations, which GOD never abolished, a part of the divine
worship, for therein we confess him iudicem, indicem and vindicem, as GOD
hears our oaths, he knows our hearts, as he discernes in his wisdom, he
will discover in his justice, and in his judgment punish our double dealing.
Such an oath is a means of help in all humane uncertainties, for general
doctrines (as the Schoolmen say) may be confirmed by general conclusions,
but particular occurrences must have particular confirmation; such confirmation
cannot come from any sensible creature, which knows not what is truth, nor from
any man, for omnis homo mendax, every man is easy to be deceived, and so
ready to deceive: it cannot come from Angels, for Satan may transform
himself into an Angel of light: it must therefore only come from God alone,
who being called upon as a witness, will either certify the matter, or punish
the forswearer: let us therefore take with us the conditions of Jeremy. We may
well undertake an oath; God often swore unto the Patriarchs, the Patriarchs
often swore, as appears in Genesis, an Angel swears in the Revelation, an
oath was often used of the faithful, as in equal covenants between Abraham
and Abimeleck, in legal vows as the Nazarites, in judicial pleadings, as in
the case of borrowed goods being endamaged: this was used of brethren in their
bargaining, as between Jacob and Esau; of captains in their confederacies, as
of Judas and Nicanor; of servants to their masters, as Moses made an oath to
Iethro to stay with him: Thus Princes often swore unto their subjects, as the
Princes of the congregation did unto the Gibeonites that they should live;
Solomon swore to Adoniah, that he should not be slain for his rebellion: every
king when he takes his Crown, undertakes an oath, why should not subjects
also swear unto their Prince? Such was this oath here mentioned of Salomo^,
for otherwise it agrees neither to the former clause, where he bids us observe
the king, nor to the later, where he forbids all resisting him; the words are
not particularly recited, but the sense is plain, it required obedience, and
forbad resistance; thus princes often exacted an oath of their inferiors for
performance of their duties: as Joshua did of Achan, that he should confess
his fault: Ezra swore the Priests and Levites and all Israel to do according
to his word: Caiphas adjured Christ, he should confess, whether he were the
Son of God, or no: our Kingly Prophet and preacher took an oath of Shimei,
that he should not take a journey beyond Jorden, and (it may be well) commanded
all his people upon their oaths to keep their faith to him, against his enemy
Jeroboam; thus magistrates may well demand, and subjects render oaths.

Now whether this of Allegiance be such an one or no, shall be manifest in
discussing it. This oath of Allegiance is in some parts affirmative, in some
negative: the affirmative is either assertorie for the present, or promissorie
for the time to come. The first proposition is assertory, professing that our
sovereign JAMES, is lawful king; and promissorie be those parts wherein the
swearer tenders faith, defense, and the disclosing all conspiracies. The
negative parts concerns the Pope or the swearer; in the Pope he denies the
superintendence of his authorities, and the violence of his excommunications:
in himself he renounces the benefit of absolution, and the purpose of
equivocation.

This we may call the mouth of the king, because our blessed Sovereign endited
it, and yet the oath of God as it proceeded from his wisdom, and is consonant
with his most holy word, which will appear in proof of the particulars. If
the Pope, the Cardinal, his Chaplein, or the foule-mouthd exile, would have
named any thing that had been vnallowable, they might have saved us a labor;
but since they do not, because they cannot, we must maintain it all in every
part.

For the first assertory proposition of our Sovereigns lawful right, I could
never have imagined, that it would ever have been questioned, but that vir
dolorum Doleman would have advanced their titles, Clemens Octauus with his
briefes would have bard every protestant, tametsi sanguinis propinquitate
niteretur: Tortus (I shame to speak it) counts him for no Catholic, and so
no Christian, and so not of the Church, much less over it in jurisdiction: But
our most gracious King, has so soundly convinced all such imputations, and
has proved his and our faith to be so conformeable to the Scriptures, that
the gates of hell, shall never prevail over it: God has so blessed his
rightful claim with good success, and just applause of his own and other
countries, that the briefes came far too short, and perished by their own
deliverance to the fire, whither otherwise, they would have delivered us:
Doleman I remit unto the report of his own brother, and the seculars of his
Religion, which better know, as justly hate, and set him out for worse, then
this place or present is to be made acquainted with. For our Sovereign without
ambition or flattery, let me say thus much: If succession can make lawful,
This godly branch is lineally derived from the blessed loins of English Kings,
which for eight hundredth years have swayed the Scepter of this Commonwealth.
If institution from God can make a king, what greater proof hereof can be,
then his many deliverances before, his easy and happy passage then, and his
hopeful issue to continue this for ever, besides the special gifts which are
only fit for such a majesty, that are bestowed on him; in his religion, the
confirmation of our Gospel; in his experience (which ever since his cradle has
already reigned in a more trouble some estate) the maintenance of our peace is
most infallibly promised: But his learning is most admirable in a Prince of
such employments: By his meditations on the Psalms, his detestation of
witches, and the kingly blessing that he gave his princely son, wherein he
discourses so divinely for the Scripture, so religiouslly for the Church, so
prudently for the Commonwealth, so carefully for his Court, and so iudiciously
for other exercises, we may well know, that he knows how to govern a kingdom.
Those, although some railing Rabshakeh, would attribute unto some others; yet
his grave, sound, and sufficient composition of the scandalous factions and
opinions of our Clergy; his euery-where skillful moderating in our university
disputations, his most excellent orations often made unto the Parliament, may
satisfy the most envious, and testify to the most incredulous, the greatness
of his worth. Beyond all these is the neuer-inough praised Apology, wherein
with such plainness he delivers his deep knowledge, with such mildness he
meets with his adversaries, and yet with such acuteness and abundance of
reading, he confutes and retorts all their assertions or arguments. Especially
the premonition which none but a Prince of equal spirit and power durst
undertake, wherein he so royally defends the common cause of Kings, so severely
censures the censurers, so plainly does he declare his right, profess his
faith, discover Antichrist, and expound the Revelation, and with such love
persuades to Christian courage, and unity, that it effectually demonstrates
him a Prince, not only philosophical, which Plato thought a blessedness, but
prophetical, which the Scripture counts divine, his quick insight beyond the
reach of his privy Council, as appears in discovering the powder-blow; his
justice mingled with mercies, which those that sought his life, yet living, can
testify; his deep wisdom in devising this just oath, well witness him not only
wiser the^ Etha^ and Heman, Chalcol, and Darda the cunning and most learned of
our adversaries, but one for his graces and perfections worthy to rule the
world, what man or mind therefore can be so base, wicked, or perverse, which
either cannot find, or finding will not confess, or confessing will not
rejoice in this our happiness in enjoying him?

What subject should not promise and perform all civil faith? Our adversaries
very wrongfully rack this oath to spiritual obedience, for albeit in their
own sayings they can make mountains of mole-hils by their mental
reseruations, yet according to Saint Austin, tuxta mentem eius qui ministrat,
iurandum est, an adiuration is to be taken as the Judge requiring it, expounds
himself; and this is no more then iure divine should be yielded unto princes.

Thus Saint Paul admonishes Titus, he should admonish all, they should be
subject and obedient unto powers and principalities; Saint Peter wills us to
be subject unto all manner of humane ordinance, whether unto the king as to the
superior, or to the governors that are sent of him: where I cannot but wonder
at the corrupt exposition of the Jesuits; which would have (...), to be an
ordinance from man, as if it were from his devise, notwithstanding Saint Paul
has said, all power proceeds from God; whereas it is indeed an ordinance for
man, or Gods ordering man, as he did his other creatures in their places and
duties. Like to this is that, where they say that (...) signifies, we must not
obey the king, unless he shall excel in virtues, or otherwise, when as the
same Apostle immediately after bids us to submit with fear, not only to the
courteous, but also to the froward; to which Irenaus also consenting, says,
some Princes are appointed for profit, and some for punishment, al fit for
those over who^ they rule, and to be taken as appointed of the Lord. Thus the
martyrs did submit themselves unto their persecutors, as Ignatius being in
prison counseled his Antiechians. Thus the Christian Soldiers did unto
Julian. Thus the Councels did unto their Emperors, by whose help and authority
they came together, and confirmed their decrees. Thus the Church the more
primitive it was, it was the purer from disloyalty, not because, (as our
adversaries have imagined) it wanted power, for a little faith would have
removed mountains, if it had been expedient for Christianity: because it
wanted pride, and herein would imitate her master Christ, which might have
had many legions of Angels, yet had rather yield unto the civil sword of the
Magistrate. It is a novel doctrine therefore arisen up among the Jesuits to
say, Reges are proprie serui, very slaves unto their subjects, contrarying even
common reason by confounding the difference of those relatiues, and perverting
the truth of God. It was not thus in Persia, when the second Squire of Darius
body said, the king ruled all, all thing were done at his command, warfare,
tillage, tribute, killing, sparing, planting, wasting, all depended on his
pleasure. It was not so with Joshua, to whom the Reubenites, Gadites, and half
the tribe of Manasse said, whosoever shall resist thy will, or will not obey
whatsoever thou command, let him be done to death. It was not thus at any
time in Israel, for whether the kings were faithful or ungodly, the people
ever yielded civil faith. Samuel when he should first annoint a king, he told
the manners of a tyrant, that he would make his people and their children
slaves, not because a king should be so, but because if he were so, we should
rather suffer then resist; If the Centurion bid the soldiers come, they came;
or go, they went; do this or that, and they did it: and shall our General in
all causes be less honored then a Centurion? The Jews were bidden pray for
the peace of Babylon, with the life of Nabuchadnetzar, and of Balthazar his
son; and shall we cease to pray for kings, and those that are in authority,
that we way lead a quiet life under them? Without all question, we must be
faithful, in thought, word and work: Curs not the King, no not in thy
thought, speak not evil of the ruler of thy people, but rather pray for him,
as Daniel for Darius, though he put him in the Lions den. By this obedience
likewise must we be ready, says Saint Paul, to every good work: Obedientia
perfecta, sua imperfecta relinquere; and sometimes thou must leave thine own
undone, to do the business of thy Sovereign. Such is the faith we should
perform; unto which we must also join defense; this is as manifest in
Scripture: the wisest, holiest, and mightiest kings of Israel, had a special
guard of Cherethites and Pelethites; which would never have been granted of
Gods own people, unto men after Gods own heart, unless the like might have
the like. It was an honor unto Judah, that notwithstanding the treacheries of
Sheba, yet they stood fast unto their King from Jorden to Jerusalem. The
Worthies of David are also counted by their threes and their thirties, as they
stood more or less for him; in like manner they are not unworthily most
honored of our Sovereign, which have stood most in his defense: Like to David
is he worth many thousands, and therefore if any danger should happen, he should
be kept farthest from the reach of it. This is religion, to defend the defender
of the Faith: why should not all defend him, who defends all? His sword cuts
off thieves and murderers, that we may keep our goods and bodies in safety;
his laws curb adulterers, that we may keep our wives and daughters in
chastity; his nauies on seas, and forces on land, mainetaine our quiet and
security; in him as in the Palladium or purple hair of Nisus, consists the
safeguard of our common weal.

As the King of Syria said, fight neither against small nor great, but only
against the King of Israel: so the Pope, which has persecuted us ever since
Wickliffe with fire and sword, now fights not against small nor great, but has
cast all his quarrel upon our Sovereign, and therefore both small and great
must fight for him.

Far be it then from English hearts for to be like the men of Belial, who
despised Saul, as if he could not save them; but we must be like those, whose
hearts the Lord had touched for to stand with and follow him; not like
accursed Meroz which would not help, which would not help the Lord against
the mighty: but like to Zabulon or Nepthalim, who ieoparded their lives to
death, with Barak and Debora; not like to Ioab, who for his private quarrel,
would make David naked of his friends; but rather like Abishai, which exposing
his own body to peril, preserved the life of his dear Prince. For as a
Serpent will defend his head, and a man his heart, because therein lies the
lifeblood of their bodies: so should every subject, their Sovereign, being
(as Josiah was) the breath of their nostrils, and the blessing of their state:
as Codrus did for Athens, or Curtius for the Romans; or, if I may compare, as
Christ our Savior for his truth, so should every man even with his own life
redeem the life of his king, on whom so many lives depend. Dulce and decorum
est pro patria mori, even death were pleasant and honorable in such a cause;
let us then be valiant for our Prince, our Cities, and the service of our
God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his own eyes, so should we
promise and perform defense.

And thereon follows the disclosing all conspiracies, which is a part of true
defense, for otherwise qui tacet consentire videtur, he that conceales seems
to consent: who can hide fire in his bosom and not be burnt? who can conceal
a mischief and be guiltless? Qui non vetat peccare, quum posiit, iubet, he
that forbids not such a sin, favors, if not furthers it, and it is not only
those that sin, but those that favor sin, that shall be punished in Gods
judgment. When Iezabel shall be cast into the bed of pain, her lovers also
shall suffer great afflictions: if Bigthan and Teresh then intend evil against
Assuerus, it is for Mardochaeus, an honorable seruitor to disclose it; if the
King of Aram even in his privy chamber work mischief against the King of
Israel, it is for Elizaeus to reveal it; if Absalon or Adoniah stir up
rebellion against David or Solomon, it is for Zadock and Abiathar the Priests,
and Nathan the Prophet, with all speed possible to prevent it. It is the
trick of a Dalilah, not to disclose a danger, till the Philistines be upon us;
but Michol will discover it, even against her own father, while there is time
to fly. Beware then of Jacobs curse, who said of his own children, when they
became brethren in evil: Into their secret let not my soul enter, let not my
honor be joined unto their assembly; so grievous was their crime, he thought
it a sin to know them, and a shame to come amongst them; Praeferre patriam
liberis Regem decet: It is a Princes glory to prefer his country before his
children, much more is it in private men to say with Aristotle, Amicus Plato,
magis tamen veritas est amica; Our friends or kindred may be dear, but our
king and commonwealth must be dearer. As a good Pilot then discry the tempest,
and give warning, discover treason before thou be discovered, as a party; for
otherwise either the bird of the air, (says Solomon) may utter the voice, or
the stones in the street, says Christ, will cry out the truth; or thine own
mouth may condemn thee like Judas, who could not hold from saying, master is
it I.

This may persuade the lay parties, but the Priests in their auricular
confession; usurp greater authority, in this they will (their will is all the
reason they can yield) be like to God himself, to see, suffer, and couerall;
but let them know; their power is not alike to permit sinners for a season, and
then punish them on a sudden; their wisdom is not like to turn, and use the
worst unto the best purposes; their justice is not like, the longer they suffer
sin, they cannot send the sorer punishment at last; their providence is not
alike, the more the Christian shall endure to recompense their patience with
more pleasure, and therefore their proceeding in poenitentiali foro, in giving
penance must not be like; their presumption is rather like to Lucifers when he
said, Ego similis, I will be like the Highest: and therefore their punishment
will not be much unlike: I, but the seal of that holy Sacrament should not be
cancelled on so slight an occasion? Is that a Sacrament, which has neither
instrument nor institution in holy Scripture? Is that a seal which has no
sealing of Gods holy spirit? Can that be counted holy which has been polluted
with such and so many monstrous abominations, as ancient and modern histories
are stuffed with? Is the ruin of a kingdom but a slight occasion to break
the promise of such a Priest? Is that religion either conscionable or
charitable, which gives covert unto such Traitors? Is not their Christian
liberty, nay their Pontifical authority, made here the cloak of
maliciousness and rank villainy? Were not their profession the mystery of
iniquity, they would never keep iniquity so sacred in secrecy, that it should
never be disclosed. Ezekiel is commanded to dig through the wall, Jeremy to
discover the skirts, Esaias to walk naked, the Prophets to lift up their voices
like trumpets, to tell Jacob her sins, and Israel her transgressions; but now
silence and sufferance not only tollerates, but promotes the most barbarous
proiects and practices: Christ commands us, what we hear in the ear, we
should preach on the house top, to tell our brethren their faults in private;
if they mend not, we must call witnesses, if that serve not, we must accuse
them before the congregation; and shall the shameless life and credit of a
Traitor be preferred before the word of (...), before a Princes life, and the
lives of many thousand that are innocent? A Physician if he find an infection,
is to publish it, lest it spread abroad. The Leuitical Priest was to denounce a
Leprous man unclean, the Poet could mark a perilous person with a black
coal: Hic niger est, hunc tu Roman caueto: and shall the Minister of the Lord
behold a fire in his neighbors, his masters, his own house (for the
commonwealth is a common household of us all;) and further it with his
concealment, that it may burn the sorer with a sudden flame? The absurdities
hence ensuing moved the Friar to discover the traiterous purpose of the noble
man of Normandy: the Iacobin to manifest the treasonable resolution of
Barierius; and Garnet, to confess that the laws were just, were made against
co^cealements, and that he was guilty in breaking them: and this I hope
sufficient to dissuade all true Catholics from the concealing of all
conspiracies.

Having thus laid the affirmative part for a groundworke, the negative ensues
as a corollary: the first that is denied is the Popes usurped authority, that
neither of himself, nor from the Sea of Rome, or other men or means, he can
depose Kings, dispose kingdoms, discharge subjects, authorize aliens, or
license any to bear arms. That he cannot of himself, is manifest: no man
can come to such honor but he that is called of God; and God calls none, except
his only son to sit so near his throne; much less the Pope, of whom it is
experimentally noted of wise travelers: that, the worst Christians are in
Italy, the worst Italians be the Romans, the worst of the Romans be made
Priests, the worst Priests are made Cardinals, and the worst Cardinals are
chosen to be Popes. Among the later Popes, Pius Quintus was a good Prince, but
no good Prelate, as appears when he strained this to that by excommunicating
her late Majesty: Sixtus Quintus was a good Prelate, but no good Prince, much
less good man; for Bellarmine told a Popish Doctor of our nation: Quantum
capio, quantum sapio, descendit ad infernum; as far as I can learn, he went
to hell. Gregory the thirteenth was a good Prince and Prelat but no good man;
for it is a position received amongst the Jesuits: that Homo non Christianus,
potest esse pon tifex Romanus, or man that is no Christian may be Pope of Rome;
Clemens Octauus was a good man for a Pope, a good Prince, and a Prelate for his
own hierarchy, though not for ours; but Paulus Quintus that now reigns is
none of those, as is manifest in his proceedings against our King and Church;
in so much as Blackwell which would have died for the Prelacie, yet is ashamed
of his tyrannies, and says, he wants a good counselor.

Thus non a se, much less a seeds, the seat of Rome has no such privilege;
for though their faith was famous over all the word, the faith of Ephesus was
known to God, yet it is now fallen to Mahumetisme; though the Council of
Chalcedon decreed: (...) etc. because that city ruled then, it should have
some prerogative, yet the Council of Carthage has determined (...), etc. that
the Bishop of the primate sea, should not be called the ruler of the Priests.
The truth is, Rome has always been ambitious; even while the walls were
building, Romulus killed his brother, that he might reign alone; and till this
time antiquum obtinet, it continues like it self: so truly do they verify the
rule of their graund master Machiauell, that in the same places, as there have
been, there will be peculiar like affections; Rome as in her beginning it was
the pattern of all moral virtues, so in the beginning of Christianity, she
was the prime-example of true patience: there the tyrants dwelt, which
persecuted the Church, and those most, which were nearest them; of the Roman
Bishops therefore we may rather learn to suffer then to rule the world; now as
the first, even so the second Rome is degenerate into worse manners; the first
Bishops were persecuted, then acquainted, then equalled, then advanced over
earthly Kings; first they would be called Bishops, then Primi, then Primats,
then Princes, then Gods deputies, then Gods themselves. It is not then their
power, but their policy, that has brought them to this pass. As before their
garrisons and soldiers wan them Empire, so now their Colleges are their
fortresses, the Cardinals their Generals, the Friars their soldiers, the pens
their weapons; the seculars, and Jesuits, their Agents and instruments which
overcome the world. Quamuis Roma multis aucta victoriis fines imperii
protulerit, minus est quod bellicus labor subdidit, quam quod pax Christiana
subiecit. Although they got much by their warfare, yet their Christian cunning
peace, has got more to their dominion, as a Prophet of their own foretold and
taught. Tu regere Imperio populos Roman memento, Hae tibi erunt arts, pacique
imponere nomen. Like the snake, Rome has been warmed in the bosom of our
greatest kingdoms, till it stung them unto death; like iuie so long it has
embraced, that it has eaten up whole Monarchies; like the Crocodile, by
weeping and creeping, it has got into the best estates; like old Rome it uses
all Religion only for a vantage: he sets Kings at ods, and then becoms an
arbiter: he brings kingdoms to the balance, and makes that weightier, where
he does propend. As the Roman Emperors would be counted Monarkes of the
world, although their Empire in Scipioes judgment was but a point, and under
Traian, when it flourisht most, it was not the thirtieth part; so the Popes
will be taken for Governors of the world, though that there be but a little
cantle of Europe, which will hold of them. Thus you see that it is the cities
custom, not the Churches right which makes them thus usurping.

For there is no other, no, not Saint Peter that can yield it them: Saint Peter
(they say) was called a Rock, therefore on Saint Peter's chair must the Church
be built: to which we say, that as Simon was called Peter, i. a rock, so
Peter was called Simon, i. obedient, to show, that they should build so, that
they might still obey: nay being both Simon and Peter he was after called
Satan, to show, the succession of that name would after prove Satannicall. But
Peter had the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which might loose or bind: the
kingdom of heaven (we confess) was opened by S. Peter's key, the preaching of
the word; but the kingdoms of this earth, are yet reserved in the power of
God, promotion comes not either from East or West, from North or South, but it
is God, that sets up one, and pulls down another: But Peter was bidden feed
the lambs and sheep: why? feeding is not fleecing chiefest of the flock;
Peter was bidden kill and eat; such killing was the conversion, not the
confusion, the mortifying, not the murdering of the Gentiles, it was not the
killing sword, but pricking word, which wan Cornelius and 3000. at one sermon:
I but Peter by walking on the sea, did get a dominion from sea to sea, and from
the flood unto the worlds end: no more (say we) then Christ, that fled thither,
and walk there, because he would not be made a king. But Christ came into S.
Peter's ship to show that he would come into S. Peter's sea; yet as he came in,
he came out again; as he desired Christ for to depart from him, for he was a
sinful man; to show that he would part from them, when as they parted from
his truth: yet Peter was foretold his death, and bidden follow, to show, that
as he followed in suffering, he should follow in reigning: but all this was no
more, then he said unto James and John of the cup and baptism, they should be
baptized with; no more then he told his other Disciples, when he bad them take
up his cross and follow, promising: they that left all for him, should sit
upon twelve seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel: who notwithstanding
have no judgment in this world. If they say, S. Peter paid for Christ, we may
say, the fish paid it him; if, how Christ was first seen of Cephas, then of
the twelve, Mary Magdalen saw him before Cephas; if, how S. Peter spoke the
first and most unto the Jews of Christ, we must answer, it was because he
spoke last and worst, when he blasphemed him. These are the prerogatives of S.
Peter, whereon Bellarmine would build the Popes patrimony; but how absurdly you
may see, by that untempered mortar with which he daubes the Church-gouernment;
A monarchy (says Bellarmine) is the best, and to this we grant the best
Monarke, even Christ alone; as the father established him, I have set my king
upon mine holy hill of Zion. All things according to S. Paul happened unto the
Jews in a figure (says Bellarmine) and therefore our high Priesthood must
resemble theirs; to which we must answer, Saint Paul means al things that are
there mentioned, for otherwise al their ceremonies are to become Christian: the
Church indeed, as Bellarmine says, is a kingdom, but Christ is the king, to
whom all power is given in heaven and earth: a flock, but Christ is that good
shepherd: a body, but Christ is the head; a ship, which the blessed Apostles
could not guide in the tempest, until our Savior came and stilled the waves.
God forbid I should here condemn all Metropolitans and Diocaesans; for I know
there be certain Ecclesiastical reserved cases in which they may determine:
but an universal, infinite, and incontrollable jurisdiction, over men, Angels,
devils and purgatory souls, cannot be but Luciferian (unto which our
adversary compares it) and Antichristian. How can the Pope take on him to
direct all truth, and salve all mischiefs in this world, unless he pull
Christ's office from his hands? Can any man effectually call, and send orders
of Ministers, but Christ which enables us unto this calling? Can any determine
all controversies, but the Spirit, that leads into all truth? any make one
faith, but one Christ, in whom we trust? Can any govern well all the world,
but he must be more then a man; for a man can hardly govern his own family;
more then an Angel; for Angels are proportioned unto several provinces in
Daniels prophecy: He must be equal in justice, power and wisdom to God
himself, who takes no more in charge, then the Pope challenges. Saint Paul
had a care indeed of all Churches, but it was of all that were converted then,
far fewer then are now to be directed; it was in writing, praying, preaching,
traveling; which the Popes have little leisure to meddle with; it was for
edifiyng, not destruction, as they now intend. Being destitute of Scripture,
they fly to their own decretals, whereof some are so plainly forged, some
full of so plain falsehood; the residue so much partial, that we may say with
Christ, He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: and, If I bear
witness of my self, my witness is not true. Saint Peter did refer the
choice of an Apostle to the disciples, the Council of Jerusalem preferred him
before the rest, he calls himself but (...), a fellow Elder: Saint Paul
withstood him to his face, as being in place and deed such as might, and should
be blamed; Cyprian says, all the Apostles had the fame fellowship of honor
and office; unto which also Hierome consents. Pelagius the second, and
Gregory the first, would not be called universal; and thus it was til Phocas the
murderer of his Master made Boniface the third Pope of Priests: it is not then
from Saint Peter.

Much less from Christ: Christ would have no difference among the blessed
Apostles, nor have them reign as Kings of the nations; he bad the Priests give
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and as good give them nothing as not
obedience; Christ was obedient before his birth when he traveled for the tax:
all his life had many lessons of obedience, he paid tribut unto Caesar's
customers, was conue^ted before his deputy; confessed, his power was from above,
and over him. What greater humility could there be, then that the Son of God,
should submit himself unto the son of man, the Lord of heaven unto a lump of
earth, and the King of Kings, unto the subject of a King? His death was the
sum of all obedience, he was obedient unto the death, even the death of the
cross, and learnt obedience in that he suffered: the more he suffered, he was
willing to suffer more: this he neither needed nor deserved, but that with his
humility he would humble his followers under temporal authority. Now look upon
the Pope, how fair he follows him far of: Christ would not become a deuider
betwixt brethren, but the Pope diuides between Princes, as Alexander did the
East and West Indies between Portingale and Spain. Christ would not ask his
right, albeit he were very near unto the crown: the Pope would have many
crowns, albeit he has no right in them. Christ was a king, yet would seem
none: the Pope is none, yet would seem higher: like the Roman Dictators, they
detest the title, yet arrogate greater power to make their Senate of Cardinals
as good as kings. The Pope therefore is not the successor of Saint Peter, but
of Caesar, which was never great, Prinsquam pontificiam potestatemcum Caesarea
coniunxisset, before he joined the Priesthood and Empire in one person; not the
sole Vicar of Christ but of Satan, which promised all kingdoms unto those that
would fall down and worship him; not the God of men, as their Gloss pretends,
but the man of sin, who sets himself above all that is called God on earth,
i. all civil powers.

There has been great contention betwixt the spiritual and the civil state,
and it has fared with us, as Gedeons fleece; when it rained on the fleece, it
rained not on the ground; when on the ground, not on the fleece; when the
Spiritualty was rich, the Temporality was poor; now the laity is rich, the
Spiritualty is poor; I would to God as we might meet in faith, we might in
love, and both be content one with another advancement and prosperity: the
civil state should be like a father to provide for us, while the the
spiritual as a Tutor does instruct us; the civil as a good husband should
care for such things as are abroad, the spiritual as a good huswife, tend that
which is within our doors in our conscience: the civil as our head to guide
our outward motions, and the spiritual as our hearts for to direct our
affections: Both of them should be like Atrides (...) the two Sheepheards of
the people, like Amarias and Zebadiah; they should meet in one to consult upon
negotia Iehouae, Regit, and Reipub. the business of God, the King, and
Commonwealth: like both our hands, they should work together, for the whole
body of the kingdom; so that both be subject unto the king, which in this is
not mere laicus, a mere Layman, much less a Clerk; but like the soul,
which does all in all, yet is not any part; like a center, in whom the lines of
all inferior powers do meet, yet is no line; like the Sun, which works
contraries by the same force, yet feels not the mixture of any such qualities.

Thus the Kings of Israel had potestatem directiuam, and correctiuam over
Priests and people; David as he ruled these prudently with all his power, he
set them likewise in their orders: Solomon as he judged betwixt harlots, he
deposed Abiathar, and put Zadocke in his room: Iehosaphat as he sent the
Judges, he sent the Priests and Levites into the provinces. Let every soul
then says Saint Paul, the soul of the Priest, says Chrysostom, as well as
of the people, even the soul of Saint Peter (which was one of the Roman
Church) be subject unto these higher powers. To determine all in a word, we may
conclude; the Pope (as Blackwell says) has ability to rule Princes when they
be willing, but the king has authority to rule men, whether they will or no:
the Pope may be Christ's Vicar like other Priests, when he preaches and
ministers the Sacraments in steed of him; but the king is Gods Vicegerent (as
Anastasius the Pope, called Anastasius the Emperor, and Eleutherius the Pope
entitled Lucius king of Britain) to judge and execute his judgments upon
earth: the Pope may bar the king from his Masses, indulgences, and his own
orisons; and the king may bar the Pope from intermedling with his kingdoms.
Let them like Jacob and Laban not pass this pillar toward one another, for
evil: and all things else will quietly be composed.

But if by violence of his excommunications the Pope license any to take arms,
he goes beyond his teddar, and knows not of what spirit he is: for as Saint
Bernard says of Eugenius, in criminibus, non possessionibus potestas vestra,
praeuaricatores exclusura, non possessores: Your power consists not in
expelling any from possession, but in expelling sin from them; the keys of
heaven were not given unto such purposes; the rod of Moses may be turned into
a Serpent, but the rod of Aaron buddeth and bodeth peace. David could not build
the Temple being stained with blood. Paul protested, he was pure from the blood
of all. Gregory though he might have killed the Goths, he would not meddle in
such bloody matters; and shall the pillars of the Sanctuary, the successors of
S. Paul and Gregory, fill their hearts and hands with such practizes? Ever
blessed be the Right worthy Earl of Sarisbury: Qui baculum fixit: which has
set his rest on this, that never any Protestant regular, or vnconformitant, did
ever mingle their differences with bloody massacres? but it was excellently
noted of the most noble and learned Earl of Northampton: that there was never
any disturbance of the state without a Priest. By their fruits then you shall
know them: Envy, strife, and sedition is from a wisdom which is earthly,
sensual and devilish; but the wisdom from above is pure, and peaceable,
easy to be entreated; and the fruits of righteousness are sown in peace, of
them which make peace.

Excommunication is not now worse then in the days of Samuel, when Saul had
been accursed of God, so far, that he might not be prayed, or mourned for; yet
he could not be killed or deprived of David the next anointed: not worse, then
in the days of Christ, which would have us count excommunicates for heathens
and publicans; yet himself would eat, and ciuilly converse with them: not
worse, then in the days of Saint Paul, who delivered over an incestuous person
unto satan, that his spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord. Now their
spirit cannot be saved, if they be slain excommunicate. The company that he
forbids, is not that we should utterly forsake their society, for then we must
forsake the world; but that we should abstain from their communion; we should
not eat with them of the same unleavened passover Christ Jesus; we should
seek to restore them in the spirit of meekness: we should strive to do
good unto all, though they be not of the household of faith. Saint Paul thought
it sufficient, that the excommunicate was rebuked of many; but our Adversaries
are not satisfied unless they take life and al. God banished Adam out of
Paradise, and yet he gave him certain means to live. Gods holy Spirit parted
from the former world, yet he left them one hundred and twenty years leisure
to repent themselves. God severed Mirian from the camp, yet he would have the
people to stay for her, that she should not utterly be desolate: and shall we
censure more severely then the Lord of hoasts? Hereupon their own decrees
affirm, that excommunication is not mortalis, but medicinalis gladius; not a
killing but healing sword. Saint Austin says, it is not Corporalis, but
Spiritualis poena; a penalty for the soul, not for the body. Cyprian shows
the very case: suppose an evil doer cannot be severed without sedition: Tolera
Zizanium, eslo frumentum. be wheat, and bear with tares. Thus did Saint
Ambrose excommunicate Theodosius: his threatening was, Rogamus, non pugnamus,
we cannot fight, but pray: Lachrimae sunt arma: it is the tears of our eyes,
not weapons in our hands, which must overcome you; our warfare is not carnal
but spiritual, and mighty through God: we must fight with knowledge against
ignorance, with humility against pride, with examples of obedience, against
wilfulness in wickedness. How many Jews, Turks, Atheists, Epicures and
murderers does God now suffer in this world, and sets a mark on them as on
Cain, that none shall kill, until he please to take them hence? can any thing
then be so shameless under the pretense of religion to murder whom they list, as
that Friar did, who slew six score with his own hands in a French massacre?
Their doctrine therefore cannot be but impious against God in deposing or
abusing his officers, for he will take it, as if it were himself, as he said
of Samuel, they have not cast away thee, but me. It is heretical against the
Scripture, which commands the contrary, truth, love, and peace; it is
abominable, and so damnable in their own conscience, the censure of the
world, and the sight of God: Although the Popes propose it as meritorius, yet
their guilty conscience foretells heavy things, and in their hearts
proditionem amant, nov proditorem: they love the deed as far as it profits
them, but the doer they will have in bitter detestation; much more the world
hates this, and for it own safety, will not suffer such a sin unpunished.
Nature abhors murder, as appears by the bleeding of the murdered in the
presence of the murderer: much more the murders of a Prince, whose life has
been accounted sacred in all ages, countries and religions; much more under the
color of religion, when Gods Holiness is made a patron of such devilish
treacheries: and therefore in his judgment he will punish the less offenders
with less torments, and these with worst and most, as being most mischievous
men. Thus their opinion must needs be absurd, which pulls all kings and
kingdoms from Gods power, and leaves them in the disposition of a weak old
sinful man. As then this oath may betaken with a good conscience: being
undertaken it must be kept notwithstanding al absolution, it may be wisdom, as
times alter to change an opinion, but it is impiety to break a resolution
grounded on Gods word. Zachariah beheld a flying book, the length was 20, the
breadth was 10 cubits, which entered into the swearers house, and eat up the
timber and stones thereof; but now we may behold a flying bull of mighty voice,
but little force, which coms from Rome to license and command many to forswear
themselves, Violare Deorum non licet acta Deum; if one Magistrate infringe what
an other has determined, there follows nothing but confusion. God although
that he promised, whatsoever we bound or loosed on earth, should be so bound or
loosed in heaven, yet he never promised, we might loose on earth, what was
already bound in heaven. Woe to them therefore which call evil good, and good
evil, which de iustitia would make iniustitiam, and break the seauen-fold
binding of an oath, as the Hebrew name imports; as Samson did the new made
cords, with little force or care: who can this be but Antichrist? who sitting
in the Temple of God, would exalt himself above God so far, as to dissolve the
bonds made sacred by his holyname? and bring that blemish upon Christianity,
which even Jews and Turks abhor; who say the causes of our Christian
troubles are our daily blasphemies and periuries. This doctrine of absolution
is so contrary to inward peace and outward honesty, so odious in it self,
perilous for example, scandalous to the Church, preiudicious in the
confederacies of Princes, and suspicious in all contracts; for if our covenants
be never so surely writ on earth, and registered in heaven; yet they say, they
may be cancelled of his Holiness, that it cannot be suffered in a Christian
common wealth; look then into the word of God, whether it be better obeying
the king in keeping of a lawful oath, then a stranger in breaking it; look
into thy conscience whether it can be discharged of perjury by the bull of such
a Bishop: look unto the judgment of all flesh, whether the Popes pardons, can
prove a supersedeas against hell. Thus we must not look for absolution.
Equivocation and mental reservation is as dangerous, they be solaecismes in
reason, much more absurd in conscience and Christianity. This was Lysanders
noted crime to deceive children with triffles, and men with oaths. This was
that heinous fault of Ananias* he told not all he should have told: but kept
half back for his own profit, and so lied against the holy Ghost This was
the custom of heretics, to protest one faith, and have another in their
bosom. This is the shame of Christendom: since this doctrine was defended, men
make a common trade of lying and deceiving. This is the heart, and the heart,
whereof David so complains; the dissembling to satisfy for the present, which
Eleazar much abhorred: the trick of a false brother, which had the voice of
Jacob and the hands of Esau; he spoke like a friend, and dealt like an enemy.
The Satyr could not abide him could blow both hot and could. Solon condemned
(...) ambidexters in their words and deeds. God will not suffer men to halt
between two opinions, and therefore Christians should hate such amphibologies,
as they love God, reason, and religion.

To conclude, the scope and duties of this oath are honest, being faith, love
and peace. The example has been sorted in many Councels, Fathers and histories:
the promise is a conscionable protestation of a loyal heart. This oath is like
shibboleth: if you pronounce it right, you shall be received: if not, rejected:
like Ioshuaes question, art thou on ourside, or on our adversaries? like Ichues
demand of Ionadab: if thine heart be right toward me, as mine toward thee,
then ascend into my chariot: if you love the safeguard of your Prince, as he
tenders your safety, you shall purchase his favor: take it then as given by
good authority. Prayer is a duty most necessary to be made for Kings; we must
not pray without faith, for without faith it is impossible to please God: what
we believe we may well swear, and therefore we may swear for our Princes
honor and safety: an oath is (...) an end of all controversy. Now there is a
controversy, whether he which takes the Pope for his God, can take the King
for his master; and this oath will determine it. An oath is to be taken says
Isocrates, (...) either to clear thy self of some filthy crime; and what
fowler then high treason? or to free thy friend from a danger: and what greater
then such a suspicion? It is reason they that receive protection, should
promise love and duty to him which is the cause of: it is honest to profess
with our mouths, what we mean in our hearts, observance where it is
deserved. It is a duty which the Pope in far stricter terms exacts of al
Emperors, Jesuits, Priests and Auertites, from our profession why: should not
Christian kings require all faithfulness of their subjects? Kings may command
a public fast; as the King of Niniue did unto man and beast: or public
feasts as Mardochaeus and Maccabaeus did unto the Jews: or public oblations,
as Moses to the making of the Tabernacle; and Josiah to the repairing of the
Temple; or public prayers, as David indicted holy Psalms to be sung in the
Sanctuary, and therefore may compose, and impose an oath, which is not so
praecise a part of religion: an oath is used in covenants of reconcilement, as
between Abraham and Abimelech; and should not we rather be reconciled with our
King then a stranger? it is a motive of diligence, as when Saul swore the
Soldiers they should not eat, they were more earnest upon their enemies: it
is as a vow before God and man, of that which law, conscience, and humanity
requires at our hands: and vows in lawful matters are never to be reproved.
This was used of heathens amongst themselves, as the Roman citizens were
sworn unto their laws and commonwealth; of Christians to heathens, as the
Christian Soldiers did praestare Sacramentum; take a sacred oath of their
Captains to rest at their command; of heathens to the faithful, as Jacob
took an oath of Laban swearing by his Gods: Iusiur andum (says one) quia ius
omne, nihil nisi ius iurandum est; we should so much observe the laws that we
might swear the performance; Kings being keepers of each table, may swear
their subjects to the keeping of both laws; most chiefly that which concerns
God or themselves: for they be first and chiefly meant and mentioned in the
commandments: let me then say with Solomon, I advertise thee to take heed unto
the mouth of the king, and the words of the oath of God: for the Kings sake
observe the oath, for the oaths sake observe the King, for Gods sake observe
both God, oath, and King.

Oh blessed God by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, preserve thy
Servant our Sovereign in thy truth, peace and love: set him as a signet on
thine heart: with inward grace and favor still embrace and increase him: set
him as a signet on thy hand, with outward force and power still protect and
defend him: give him a long life, a safe estate, a wise heart, a loving care,
honor amongst his own, and victories against his eninemies. Grant this most
merciful Father for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, to whom with thee and thy
most holy Spirit, be given honor and dominion now and ever: Amen.

FINIS.

