By the Lord Depu(...) and Council.
HENRY FALKLAND.
WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, has by his (...)ers directed unto
Us the Lord Deputy, signified his Princely pleasure, that calling to Our
assistance, such of the Nobility and Counsels We should think fit, a speedy
redress and reformation should be made of diverse abuses and disorders
concerning Arms and Armory in this his Majesty's Realm of Ireland, occasioned
partly through the boldness of some Mechanical persons, who presume to meddle in
Irmory without direction from the King of Arms of the same, being the proper
Officer appointed to attend that service, And partly t(...)rough the Nobility
and Gentry themselves, who have of late (of which his Majest. takes notice)
wholly in a manner laid aside all Fu(...)all rites and ceremonies, by means
whereof (as his Majest. in his Princely and deep judgment most wisely
fore-seeth) the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry cannot but in a short time
grow into many perplexities and confused disorders in their Arms and
Petegrees, for want of the use of Arms at Obsequies and Funerals, and for want
of the entry of the day of the Decease, Matches, and Issues of the deceased
parties. And whereas his most Excellent Majesty has likewise bin pleased to
command that for direction in the premises, use shoul(...) be made of an Order
or Decree set forth in Print by the (...)ight Hon. the Lords Commiss. of the
Earl Marshals Office of England for the reforming of the like abuses there,
Dated the 10. day of Nov. in the 16. ye(...) of the Reign of King JAMES of
blessed memory, authorizing us thereby to lay down some such course and order
for the redress of the former e(...)ormities, and for the support of the
Officers of Arms here as shall be thought fit and reasonable to stand with the
state and condition of this Kingdom, with provision, that the said King of
Arms have satisfaction for such Funerals of the Lords, Knights, and other of
eminent place and quality, as of late have not made use of his Office, as by
his Majesty's said Letters dated at Westminster the 7. day of April, in the
third year of his reign, and enrol'd in the Roles of (...)s Majesty's high
Court of Chancery here, more at large appears We therefore in obedience to
his Majesty's said commandment, having taken a due and co^siderat view of the
forenamed Printed Order, and maturely pondered the other circumstances
enjoined by his Majesty, do order, decree and ordain, th(...) as well for the
good of the said Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, as for the honor of
the Kingdom it self, lest the most ancient and laudable use of Arms should
wholly be laid aside, and so no outward token or Emblem be left to make a
difference between Family, and Family, or to distinguish betw(...)n the most
honorable Nobleman and the poorest Artificer: That all Noblemen and
Noble-women, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen Being in number twenty
four.
contained in a schedule hereunto annexed: And all other that from henceforth
shall be either silently buried in the nightime by torch-light, or otherwise by
day or night time without either Scuchions or other achievements, or without
attendance of an Officer of Arms, shall nevertheless immediately after the
death and burial of every such Defunct, return a true Certificate of the
Matches, Issues, and times of decease, with their Arms which of right in their
life they bore; for the which they shall pay unto the said King of Arms
(though by a Clause of his Letters Patent he claim the same Fees that are
paid in Being double the Fees here reserved in every state and degree.
England) such Fees as we have and do hereby set down and appoint, Viz. Every
GENTLEMAN twenty shillings English. Every ESQVIER three pounds six shillings
and (...)ight pence English. Every KNIGHT five pounds Engl. Every BARONET and
BANNERET six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence English. Every BARON or
BARONESS twelve pounds ten shillings English. Every BISHOP twelve pounds ten
shillings English. Every VICOVNT or VICOVNTESSE fifteen pounds English Every
EARL or COUNTESS seauenteene pounds ten shillings English. Every MARQVES or
MARCHIONESS twenty pounds English. Every DVKE or DVTCHES twenty two pounds ten
shill. Engl. And every ARCHBISHOP twenty two pounds ten shillings English. All
which said several sums of money are to be paid to the said King of Arms,
or his Assigns, being orderly demanded, after the burial of every such
Defunct by the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of all and every Persons of
the degrees aforesaid. The which Certificates and Fees, if they shall refuse to
return and pay (the Fees being reduced so low under that which is paid in
England, and so by us according to his Majesty's Caveat, thought fit and
reasonable to stand with the state of the Kingdom). W(...) upon complaint made
by the King of Arms, or his Assigns to Us, take such further order therein,
as shall be meet and expedient for the accomplishment of his Majesty's
commandment. And (...) do straightly charge the said King of Arms, who now
is, or hereafter shall be, to make true and fair entries of the Certificates
abovenamed so returned into his Office (they paying such Fees as are before
set down by these presents. Persons of everall degrees whose Certificates must
be entered without Fees.
And likewise to enter the like Certificates of all Gentlemen, whose estates in
Land and goods exceed not five hundred Marks English. And of all Ladies and
Gentlewomen under the degree of a Lady Baroness as exactly as the rest, paying
no Fees at all. (Provided that it be first duly proved before two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace or more, that the party is no more worth.)
Which Certificates so entered, may in future time determine and end many
questions that hereafter may arise, as by many examples of late time have bin
seen in England. Provision for some Knights, and Esquiers.
Provided alvvayes that if the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of any
Knight or Esquire shall pretend poverty or disabilitie, and shall make the
same appear by Petition unto the Lord Deputy, or other Governor or Governors
f(...) the time being, order shall be taken upon due proof made, that the
Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall be eased of paying the said Fees (if so
i(...) shall be thought fit) and the Certificate notvvithstanding entered as
above. Nevertheless if any of the degrees aforesaid their Wives and Children
shall (...)quire to have their Funerals honorably solemnized with the
attendance of one or both the Officers of Arms, according to their degrees,
and with such other ceremonies as have in former times bin used, The Officers
of Arms in England by the decree above specified, are left at liberty in this
case to make their composition as in former time.
That then they shall pay the abovenamed Fees respectively with the addition
of It was two shillings the mile out, and two shillings the mile homeward, to
the K. of Arms, and twelve pence the mile out and twelve pence homeward to the
other Officer before, according to the custom of England.
Twelve pe(...)ce English the mile outvvard, and Twelve pence English the mile
homevvard, It was before xx. Nobles for blackes, and Liveries for 4. Servants
to the king of Arms and a quarter as much beside to the other Officer
according to the custom of England, beside Fees in money for every degree,
above double the fees within named.
and forty shillings English for Blacks, with entertainment of the Of(...)cer
of Officers of Arms and their servants in the Funeral house, and meat for
their Horses, as has bin accustomed, and with the accustomed and ancient
(...)quisite of Hearses with all their furniture when any shall be used, and
the above named Fees to stand for satisfaction to both for all demands. And for
remedy of the former abuses which are daily committed by Painters, Masons,
Glasiers, Goldsmiths, Cutters, Carvers, and the like, We do straightly charge
(...)d command them throught this Realm, that they presume not to meddle
with any matters of Armorie or Arms, except those Arms that are so commonly
known as there is no likelihood of error. And that no Painters, or other
person set forth any Funerals, or make any Scuchions, or other Funeral
(...)orke, without special leave and approbation of the King of Arms, or his
sufficient Deputy or Deputyes, as they will answer the contrary at their
pe(...) Provided that such as the said King of Arms shall appoint to make
Scuchions and other Funeral work, shall not exceed the ordinary Price
no(...)sed in and about London, as the same shall be certified under the hands
of two or more of the Kings of Arms there within a year after the Date of
the presents. Which Certificate is to be entered upon Record in his Majesty's
high Court of Chauncery ^ere. Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 4.
o(...) (...)ugust, in the third year of his Majesty's Reign. Anno Dom. 1627.

Adam Loftus Canc. Ia. Armachanus. Lanc. Dublin. R. Cork. Hen. Valentia. Thom.
Cromwell. Dom. Kilmallocke. Thom. Baltinglasse. R. Ranelagh R. Dillon. Will
Caulfield. Henr. Docwra. Fr. Aungier. Will. Parsons. Rich. Bolton. Dud. Norton.
Char. Coote. Adam Loftus.
The Kings of Arms of England have within the time prescribed in this Decree,
certified the prices of Funeral work, as follows, The prices (...)eing all
English.
Prices for Funeral work.
A Great Banner. xl. shillings. A Standart. xl. shillings. A Penoune. xxvj. s.
viij. d. A Banneroll. xxvj. s. viij. d. A Coat of Arms. xxvj. s. viij. d. A
Sword. x. shil. A Target. x. shil. A Crest carved. xiij. s. iiij. d. A Wreath.
iij. s. iiij. Mantles furnished. xx. shi(...) A Buckram Scuchion. ij. shi A
Buckram Scuchion with Coronet. ij. s. vj. (...) A Paper Scuchion. xi(...) A
Paper Scuchion with a Coronet. xiii(...). A Badge. x(...) A Scuchion on
Taffata. (...)
Furniture for a Hearse.
PEncilles a dozen. x. shill. A Water Table. vj. shil. viij. d. A water Table
with supporters and Coronet. x. s. A Crest on Pastebord. xij. d. A Scrole. iij.
shil. iiij. d. A Compartment. v. shil. A Coronet to compass the Hearse. xxx.
shil. A Scuchion for the seeling. xiij. s. iiij. d. A Staff for Banner or
Standart, xij. d. A Conductors Staff. vj. d.
Will. Seager Garter. Rich. S. George Clarenceux.

Printed at Dublin by the Society of Stationers, Printer to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1634.


