THE CHRISTIAN SACRIFICE By James Barker of Whethampstead P:

Pro: 23: 26: My son give me thine heart, Sacrificium dei cor contritum ct
concussum. engraved title page featuring two bearded men or prophets gazing
upward toward a sun with the Hebrew tetragrammaton or 'Yahweh' at its center,
and another man with a crown and royal robes gazing upward toward a flaming
heart



LONDON printed for Humphry Blunden near ye Rroyall Exchange in Corn hill 1630

To the Right Worshipful, Sir John Garrard, Baronet; The blessings of this
life, and that which is to come.
SIR,
THe end of man's creation was the service and worship of his maker; this (after
the fall) began first in Sacrifice, whether by man's election or Gods ordination
is not revealed: certain it is, not without Gods approbation and gracious
acceptance; for in the universal deluge, when an end of all flesh was come
before him: he made provision for his service by Sacrifice, in giving order to
Noah to take into the Arc of every clean beast by sevens. Genesis 7. 2.

This manner of service the light of natural reason did teach the Gentiles, and
Gods own blessed ordinance continued amongst the Jews, which did serve them as
it did others, not only as a testimony of their obedience to God, and
dependence on him but (God so appointing) as a Type of that most perfect
Sacrifice to be offered by Christ on the Cross: this once offered, at the last
put an end to all that went before, and in this one they all expired, all
Levitical Sacrifices, but other sacrifices there are, and these the Gospel
still retains, there in the law, and here in the Gospel, oblations in
Oblationes enim illic, oblationes autem and hic Iraen. advers. haeres. Vali. l.
4. c. 34. p. 429.
both: amongst the people of the Jews, and in the Church of Christ, sacrifices
in both: they and we, the Jew and the Christian agree in this, that God will
have Sacrifice; those holy offices of piety to God and charity to man, are
termed Sacrifices, so that I shall not fear to say there is a Christian
Sacrifice; and yet of this of Christians (as of that of Jews) how quickly God
grows weary, if the Heart be wanting. The heart is the salt that seasoneth,
and the incense that perfumeth the sacrifice; and makes it an odor of a sweet
smell, acceptable and pleasant unto God: and that our Religious service may be
a Christian Sacrifice: there must concur with an holy action, a devout
affection; for admit a strict and precise observation of all circumstances in
the action, if there be a fail in this, the labor is but lost in that: this
is chiefly accepted of God, that serving to make a way of discovery for man:
and for man's sake, God takes no notice of this without that; dissembling his
knowledge of the inmost intentions of the heart, and seeming not to know what
it is impossible he should be ignorant of: until by some outward expressions,
it be made known unto man. It is not then the inward affection only that (in
the Heart) God calls for; as if he excluded the outward action, but the
affectionate action, to do what is to be done heartily: what is to be done, I
say! for it is not left arbitrarie to the heart, to choose what shall be done,
or left undone, admitted or omitted: but the action determined, in the
well-managing thereof, is required the sincere intention, and dearest affectio
of the heart: respecting also the ground as well as the end: either of which
neglected in a duty of Religion: makes it an effect of heady zeal, not heedie
obedience, for obedie is a Relative: and ever referres to some precept, Canon,
Rule, decree, constitution or injunction: conformity, or at least submission
whereunto; is that we term obedience, and obedience is better then sacrifice,
or it is the best sacrifice; for he that obeys, makes a sacrifice of his own
heart, and a man's heart is himself Per obedientiam voluntas propria mactatur.
Greg. in ult. mor. Aq. 2. 2. Q. 104. ar. 3. resp.
this is the Christian Sacrifice, the project of the ensuing discourse: which I
have adventred to expose to the view of this censorious age: where I must not
think to speed better; then better then my self have done before me: from the
learned I cannot expect that any work of mine should merit praise: yet doubt
not, but at their hands I shall find or pity or pardon: of others, I shall be
censured as every man stands affected; but I pass not of their censures: so
long as in conscience of obedience to God, I strive in my calling to edefie his
holy Church: this is my prime aim: And next to this is to tender unto you some
token of thankfulness for your many favors, qui beneficia invenit compedes
invenit, benefits are of a binding nature, and a kindness received obliges an
ingenious nature to requital; but where it exceeds requital, the obliged must
not come short of acknowledgment, and a verbal acknowledgement is a poor
return for a real kindness: it is all we scholars can, our wealth is in
words., and words are swift, no sooner loosed from the tongue, but lost by the
ear; they may touch on the fancy by the way, but vanish before they recover
the understanding: here then the pen must assist the tongue, and words once
spoken, after written, and published to the more deliberate view of the eye:
remain as monuments in the mind; where they admit a review, until the
judictous be fully informed. And herein the disadvantage is mine, in stepping
from the pulpit, to the press; for faults which in transitu, are not espied:
at gase are easily discerned; yet here again is my hope, to meet, as with
indulgent ears, so with favorable aspects: and then patience and connivence
will salve all defects, and so mine infirmities will be either not seen, or
not censured: Besides I may say with the Orator, causa ago deorum, I speak in
Gods cause, not mine own: and so in his name (whose cause I undertake) may
challenge acceptance.

And thus much I dare boldly say, I have not by wilful neglect betrayed the
cause in hand; but have studied omnem movere lapidem; and to follow Solomon so
far as my wits would serve, in his plea for God: which howsoever some do take
(which do usually mistake what they do not understand) I am confident of your
favorable acceptance, whom I know so far a friend to Learning, and lover of
Religion, that what so relishes of either, finds kind entertainment with you.

Go on, Noble Sir, and season the flower of your years with the timely fruits
of grace and virtue.

You want not encouragements in the way of goodness, nor need you to look
further then your own house: even to him, that immediately went before you
(your deceased * Sir John Garrard, Knight and Baronet bequeathed by his last
will to the poor of the parish of Whethamstead 20. l. per annum for ever.
Father) who made you the executor of a large legacy to the poor. And left you
the heir of a fair estate in Lands and Houses: and that which is the chiefest
ornament of your mansion house, a most beautiful Chapel, a continual and
visible memento, to put you in mind of your daily duty to the God of heaven.

And let it not be thought presumption in me, that to these I have added this
as a help to your Devotion, and to this mine uncessant prayers for the
prospering of your good beginnings: And for the welfare and everlasting
happiness of your self, your virtuous good Lady and whole family; shall
never be wanting, the hearty desires of

Your Worships in the service of CHRIST sincerely devoted, JAMES BARKER.

THE CHRISTIAN SACRIFICE.
PROVERBS 23. 26. My Son give me thine heart.
THe text is brief, the words few, but full, Stilo brevis doctrina uberior,
etc Sal. in Ep. Euch. episscopo.
for many words need not amongst friends: friends in that near Relation, as
Father and Son: the title of Father imports Pauca sunt quae mandat sed
salutaria etc. Tim. ad ecclesiam cath.
Authority, the name of Son Obedience: and where there is Authority and
Veleitie, Power to command, and will to Obey, it is but command and it is done:
but this is an entreaty, no command: and it cannot be, that a father (who has
power to command) should entreat a Son, and be said nay: this is the easiest
request that can be made [My Son give me thine heart] and yet the hardest
suite, that can be granted, for he that gives his Heart, gives himself, and
all he Aq. prima secundae. q. 17. art. 9. arg. 1. Idem prima secundae q. 38.
art. 5. resp. 3.
has.

And now whilst God calls for the heart, let me entreat the ear (your patience
and attention) that what I shall speak, passing from the ear to the heart, may
set it in a right temper to Godward, may fit and dispose it for such a
sacrifice as God accepts: all other Sacrifices without Non bove mactato
Caelestia numin a gaudent. Ovid. Ep. 19.
this are in vain, there is none Gods delight, but the heart, that he craves;
My son give me thine Heart.

The words are Salomons, and Solomon here speaks, not in his own name, but in
Gods: God by him calls us sons: and he for God requires our Hearts: It is
God, that confers the Dignity, and God that requires the Duty: and he does it
in the sweetest terms of Relation, he comes in love, and speaks in the
language of a Father.

My son give me thine heart. My Son, says God, and in saying so, he
teaches us what we should say: for God in suing to us, calling us, his Sons,
teaches us, in praying to him, to call him Our Father: and this should serve
as a common Rule to all: that none, in any case, dare to approach into Gods
presence, or mention him, without the Addition of his just Titles. Reverence,
and Humility, best pleases him, and becomes us: In some cases he admittes
Boldness, in any case detestes Rudeness: at the least aford him what he
vouchsafes us, titles of Respect; seeing we are taught to call him, Our
Father, because he calls us, his sons.

My son, says God, here is his Interest, Give me thy heart, there is his
Request: And hard it were, that a father should not speed, when he entreats his
Son, whatsoever his suit be: the Request is reasonable, and unreasonable, yea
more, unnatural were that Son, to deny that Father any thing, to whom he
owes all: Indeed he were too facile, that would entrust his Heart with every
one: It uses not to be communicated; appropriated for the most part, to some
one, or two, and those dearest friends: for careful a man is, to whom he
imparts his heart: but from a Father (such a one as God) nothing should be
withheld that he would have, thou must render up when he requests: My Son
give me thine heart.

This is Gods suite to Man, and he preferres his suite by way of Petition, and
to the Petition he adds a Preface.

The Preface is a gentle compellation, My son: the Tenor of the Petition,
Give me thine heart. And yet, to call this a Petition is not so kindly a Term:
a Father to petition his Son: Is it not a Precept rather: jubet non orat pater,
the style of a father, is Imperative, not optative, and the Father that speaks
here is in the same mood Biddes, but Beseeches too. The law, that was
imperative only, presented God unto us, as a Lord, the Gospel is more mild and
gentle, and reveals him as a father; and when our Lord became our Father, then
was the rigor turned into Love, and in love there is a majesty, as well as
sweetness, which not only allures, but awes us: If still therefore we call
this a Petition, it derogates nothing from Gods Authority; his Petition has
the force of a precept, and acquaints us with our duty as well as his desire;
call it then still a Petition, or what else you will please to call it, you
shall find it has a double aspect, to God, and to Man.

As it Relates to God, it points out his love, and Authority.

His Love, in owning us, for his Sons.

His Authority, in vouchsafing to become Our Father.

As it Relates to man, it points out his Dignity, his Duty.

His Dignity, to be the Son of God.

His Duty, to do what becomes Gods Son.

His Love has exalted us to the dignity of Sons.

His Authority calls for the Duty of Sons.

And no share shall we have in the Dignity, except we perform the Duty; our
Duty it is, to give God our hearts: and then he will give us the Dignity to
become his Sons.

First, My Son, It had not been much to be called Son, had not God
vouchsafed to become the Father: Son is but an usual and ordinary complement
of a superior to his inferior, Son says Abraham to Dives in Hell: But My
Son! comes from the bowels of a Father, and a title of great Dignity it is,
when God speaks it.

My Son, says God, and in saying so, he expresses his love, and commends our
Dignity: Saint John would have all to note this, and therefore marks it out
with an Ecce. 1. John 3. 1. Behold what manner of love the father has bestowed
on us, that we should be called the sons of God. It is his love, his free and
unmerited love, that has thus exalted us; It is the Lords doing, and it is
marveilous in our eyes, marveilous indeed, for a wretched man to become Gods
son: had it been My servant, it had been honor enough for man; the greatest
Saints were ambitious of no greater title, there is Abraham his Servant, and
Moses his Servant; Psalm. 105. and David in the 116. Psalm ingeminates the
title, as if he were delighted with it, and took pleasure to repeat it; O Lord
(says he) truly I am thy servant, thy servant, and the Son of thine
handmaid: nay the blessed Virgin, who had the honor to be (...) the Mother of
God: yet her humility looks no higher then a servant, ecce Luke 1. 38.
ancilla domini, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, nay more yet, he that was
Lord of all became a servant, So by Gods own compellation, Esaias. 53. 11. So by
his own profession. 4. Matthew. 20. 28. and no more in the worlds estimation,
Philip. 2. 7. enough it is for any man, to be reckoned amongst these worthies,
to be of Gods family, in any Relation: but God thinks it not enough for his
Love: It is not therefore, My servant, but My Son.

We, that were unworthy to be accounted servants, he has advanced to the
honor of Sons.

Not My Servant therefore, but My Son.

Nay, not my friend! this privilege had Abraham, the father of the faithful.
Ja. 2. 23. for his faith: And the same is promised to Christ's disciples, upon
condition of their obedience. Jo. 15. 14.

And a great prerogative (...). Laere. Diog. do vita, etc. Ego sensi animam
meam and animam amici mei unam fuisse animam in duobus corporibus. Ang. lib.
conf. (...). Ar. lib. 8. 1 th.
it is, to be Gods friend, for a friend is alter ego, a second self, and
amicorum omnia communia, all things are common amongst friends, no comfort
withheld, no secret hid from a friend Genesis 18. 17. Pet. 1. 4.
: yet it is not my friend, but My Son: for Gods love which is infinite, knows
no bounds, but extends to the highest degree of kindness, and calls man now,
not my Servant, not my Friend only, but my Son. To be of Gods Court, his
servant, is much: to be of his counsel, his Friend, is much more: but to be
partakers of the Divine nature, the Son of God, is most of all: of this I may
say, as Elizabeth, in a case not much unlike, unde hoc mihi: Luke 1. 43.
whence is this to me, that I should be called the Son of God.

But how the Son of God? Or what Son does God here mean?

Not his natural Son! so is none, but Christ as God; he is both Primogenitus,
and unigenitus; his first-begotten, and only-begotten; of the same essence;
consubstantiall, coaeternal, and coaequal with the father; begotten by an
unspeakable Generation, which we may adore, cannot search out; for who shall
declare his Generation. Esaias 53. 8.

Yea Christ as man, by grace of hypostatical, or personal union, is after a
special manner, the Son of God, so foretold to be, before he was so; Luke
1. 32. That holy thing that shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son
of God. And so declared to be, when he was so; Matthew. 3. 17. This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well-plea-sed.

And thus, is none the Son of God, but only he, who both by nature, and the
union of his person, is indeed, the very Son of God.

Others there are, whom holy Scripture has honored with this title.

Adam he was so, by Creation, the immediate Son of God, for God was Father,
Mother, Godfather; made him, produced him, named him. Luke 3. The Angels they
are so, made in Gods image, and styled his Sons. Psalm. 89. 6.

And so are Kings, by Gods own ordination, and special appointment, the Sons
of God. Psalm. 82. 6. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of
the most high.

This title thus taken, is a singular prerogative, peculiar to some special
persons.

But here, we will take it more generally, as it is a common title, given by
God to all the faithful. My Son.

Not by natural Generation, for so is none, but Christ as God.

Not by grace of personal union, for so is none, but Christ as man. Not by
immediate creation, for so was Adam, and the Angels only.

Nor by Divine Ordination, for so are Kings and Princes only.

But by grace, and adoption, every true believer, is truly the Son of God.

The faithful by adoption, are filij designati, appointed by the Father for
the Sons of God.

Through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, they are filii facti, made the
Sons of God.

And by the laver of regeneration, they are filii signati, sealed by the
Spirit, for the Sons of God.

They are first designed by the Father for heirs.

Then really made and accepted by Christ for Coheyres.

And finally assured by the holy Ghost of an Inheritance undefiled, that fades
not away, reserved for them in the heavens.

Gods Sons the faithful are, before they are: so in the purpose of the
Vosque and si nondum natos jam tamen designatos filios jam credit. Chrysostom. Ser.
71. in orat. dominum page 306.
father, but not so in his Delight: they must declare their predestination, by
their conversation, before they can be admitted into Gods family: there must
concur with the Fathers purpose, the purchase of the Son, and the purging
of the holy Ghost: when in the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, they are made
such, as the father purposed they should be: then he takes delight in them, and
ownes them for his Sons, and not before: for it is not the fathers Adoption,
nor the Sons Redemption, that can privilege the faithful from being by nature
the children of wrath, even as others. Ephesians. 2. 3. without righteousness,
holiness, Innocence, and all right to glory; mere carnal men, and so by nature
must still continue, for that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: there John
3. 6.
must be a new birth, they must be borne again, and so made new Creatures,
before they can become the Sons of God: and here must not be left out the
office of the holy Ghost; for as the Son of God could not become the Son of
man, so neither can Luke. 1. 35.
the Sons of men, become the Sons of God, without the special office and
operation of the holy Ghost. Jo. 3. this cannot be the work of flesh and
blood, which naturally produces it is like, carnal, and sinful; nor the work
of man, for parents peremptores, our parents are our murderers, we derive
from them the contagion of sin *: and Non imitatione sed propagatione.
with sin an Obligation to eternal death: and so (says Saint Austin) we are
damnati antequam nati, dead in sin, before alive in the world.

Man's freedom from this wretched condition, and translation into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God, is a work of Grace, Gods entire work, so Saint
James, Of his own will Tit. 3. 6. Verbum adveniens aqua dat ei virtutem
abluendi. Aq. in locum Austin.
begat he us with the word of Truth. cap. 1. 18. with the washing of water by
the Word: so Saint Paul. Ephesians. 5. 26. Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit
Sacramentum, by the power of the word the Element is made a Sacrament.

And that water whose common use was to wash the body from filth, now serves
for a holy use to cleanse the soul from sin: to this use, God has ordained it,
and his Spirit accompanies his own Ordinance: which (whilst the eye is fixed
upon the sign) the water) carries the mind to the consideration, and so on in
a sweet meditation of the thing signified (the blood of Christ) by that the
Baptist washes the body, with this the holy Ghost cleanses the soul: and this
cleansing is a changing also, persona tingitur, and natura mutatur: Eusebius.
Emissen. de Ep. Hom. 3.
and this purgation by the blood of Christ, is a preparation for the grace of
Christ, which upon is infused into the soul, so St. Cyprian in expiatum pectus
and purum desuper se lumen infundit, and being then Cyp. lib. 2. ep. secunda.
Donato page 69. circa sinem.
infused, it gives to the powers of the soul, their first disposition unto
newness of life; which by frequent acts of virtue, is wrought into a habit,
and so is Christ formed in us: tantae molis erat, such a do there was, this
blood and sweat it cost, to Redeem man from slavery and bondage, to repair
the decays of nature, to recover the lost heritage, and to restore to the
Father his lost Son.

And now, brethren, you see your calling, how the sons of Adam are made the
sons of God, here is an Alteration which the spiritual eye may easily
discover.

First here is a change of our estate and condition: when we were enemies we
were reconciled unto God by the blood of his son, who by his death overcame
death, which we had deserved; suffered for sin, which we had committed:
fulfilled Gods law, which we had violated: satisfied his justice, which we had
offended; appeased his wrath, which we had kindled: recovered his favor, and
made our peace, and by this means we that were by nature children of wrath, by
that Grace and favor which Christ has obtained for us at Gods hands are taken
in to be the sons of God: for so well pleased was he with the obedience of
the natural son, that for his sake, and at his intercession, he is pleased
to accept us for his sons; thus Christ became our bail, and surety,
undertook for us, and humbled himself to the meanness of a servant, that we
might be advanced to the estate of sons.

And that our nature may be fit for that estate there is a change of that too;
the change of our estate is ascribed to the Credulitas quae deum spiritum
proclamavit de carnis substantia mortali in vitalem spiritus sustantium vos
mutavit. Chrysol. ser. 71. 2 Pet. 14. Est in locu^.
riches of Christ's merit: but this of our nature to the grace of his holy
spirit; this change is not in substance, but in quality, and so in quality;
though not in substance, the spirit of God alters our nature, conformes us to
the Image of Christ and makes us partakers of the divine nature, but mistake
not St. Peter for by nature he understands not the essence of God which is
appropriated only to the Trinity of persons and communicated to no man, but
the divine Attributes of wisdom, justice, holiness, truth, glory and
immortallity: and in these we have fellowship with the Father and with his
son Jesus Christ, and so are made wise, righteous, holy, merciful, immortal,
and glorious like God, in respect of the qualities not equality; our virtues
being but a ray of his Son, a spark of his eternal Aq. in 2 Pet. 13.
fire, a participation of his fullness, he being an inexhaustible fountain of
grace and goodness, fills our frail vessels, secundum modulum nostrum,
according to their capacity; see that what soever grace, the holy Ghost
effectually works in us, it is first originally in God, and is made ours
either by imputation or infusion, our nature is corrupt; I know that in me
(says St. Paul) To. 7. 18.
dwells no good thing: man's goodness is not inherent but either impured, or
imparted, and so when God is pleased to participate unto us, his own goodness,
there is a change wrought in our nature, new light is put into our minds, new
desires into our affections, new obedience into our wills, and a sweet
conformity into all our actions, and in this renovation there is no
destruction, but a conversion; no subversion of the old substance, but a
generation of new qualityes; there still remains the same subject, and this
alteration of our nature, is a transformatio^ not a transubstantiaton.

To this new man, there is not wanting a new name; and names are given to
express the nature of things: now no name can so fully, and so fitly notify
him, who is made partaker of the divine nature, adopted to the inheritance of
glory, and immortality, in the kingdom of heaven, as this of Gods son: here
then is a change of our names too, there are no more terms of hostility
between God and man, the enmity is now abolished, and all such names as carry
in them sorrow, shame, and misery are done away; and a new name that imports
comfort, glory, and felicity is imposed; and now we are no more enemies but
sons; now surely this is good news to hear the father has found his lost
son: an Angel is not an able and sufficient messenger, God himhimselfe bows
the heavens and comes down: ecce novum behold a new thing upon earth Esaias 43.
19. This is novum and inauditum, a thing never heard of before: God in the
flesh revealed it; heaven and earth, God and man reconciled, good tidings!
Blessed be the peace maker; God and man made friends, good news welcome be he
whosoever brings it, his lips are gracious, and his feet beautiful: whose
heart does not leap for joy, to hear himself (by the everlasting Father)
called my Son.

And this new name must be attended with a Chrysostom. ser. 68. in ora. Domi.
new life, qui Dei filium credit actu, vita, moribus honestate tanto generi
respondeat they that profess themselves the Sons of God, must be answerable to
such honorable compellations: this is a high and a heavenly calling, and our
conversation must be suitable to our calling: nec degeneret Cyp. ser. 5. de
ora. Domi.
actus noster a spiritu, ut qui coelestes and spirituales esse caepimus, non
nisi spiritualia and coelestia cogitemus, and agamus: we must look unto the
Rock from whence we are hewne, and beware we degenerate not from that Royal
family where into we are admitted, but we who call God, our Father, should be
blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, Phil. 2. 15. a
godly name and a wicked life agree not: sinners are hardened, and God
dishonored, when he that is called a son of God, behaves himself as a
servant of sin: it is very fit that every son of God should imitate his
Matthew. 11.
heavenly father: or if he desire a pattern nearer hand; let him learn of his
elder brother, discite a me (says Christ) learn of me! Frame your lives to
his rule, and they will acquit you, convince men, and please God; whilst he
sees his name honored, in your conversation, and their conviction.

Old things are past, behold all things are become new: new estate, new nature,
new name, new life.

Estate happy, the merit of Christ has purchased that: nature holy, the spirit
of Christ has sanctified that: name heavenly, the love of God has bestowed
that: life godly, the grace of God has wrought that: happy estate, holy
nature, heavenly name, godly life, man is now a son by grace not unworthy to
be owned of so great a Prolis tanto non in ficienda parenti.
Father.

At length, I have brought you to the height of Gods love, and Man's Dignity.

Gods Love never so Et quidem deitatis erga nos dignatio tanta est ut scire
nequeat quid potissimum imitari debeat creatura utrum quod Deus ad nostram
deposuit servit utem: an quod nos ad suae divinitatis rapuit dignit at em. Pet.
Chrysostom. ser. 72.
manifest, as in making us his sons, the utmost we could hope for, was
pardon, not for preferment: but to debase the natural son, in making him
like us: that he might honor us, in making us like him: is love without
measure! which we are as unable to conceive as we are unworthy to receive: the
expression is too mean, and low, to say it was paternall; a it Et sicut omnem
ut scriptum est paternitatem in Coelo and in terris a scipso volvit nominari:
fic a nobis patris in se affectum voluit cognosci and quid dicam patris imo
potius plus quam patris. a Sal. di guber. dei lib. 4. page 121
was more then mothers love, and was, what himself is, infinite.

Man never so dignified! who am I? and what is my fathers house (says David)
that I should be Son in law to a King? what is frail man, that he should be
exalted to the dignity of Gods son, called to the hope, and invested with some
possession of eternal life: what a happiness is this, above the rest of
mankind, who through ignorance and unbelief abide still in misery: and I would
to God, he would persuade the hearts of all men, to account this their chiefest
honor, to be Gods sons, religion is and ever has been, the honor and safety
too, of kingdoms, familyes, and particular persons: and this of Gods son,
preferred before the most glorious titles: It was the Religious boast of the
Emperor Theodosius, malo esse membrum Aug. de civi dei l. 5. c. 26.
eccelesiae quam caput imperij: and in the most magnificent, it is an addition
to their honor, to be Gods sons: the greatest in the world is nothing, if he
be less, the meanest is enough, if he be so much; and so much is every true
believer: for to as many as received him to them gave he power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his name Jo. 1. 12.

How is it then, this privilege is so slighted and undervalued of many, and
carnal alliance and kindred so much stood upon by all: men account their
carnal pedegrees, and if they can reckon a great man of their house how they
glory in it, whereas there is greater cause of boasting, to be of Gods family,
then to be descended from the loins of Princes: for carnal affinity is but
transitory, it abides not; Kingdoms and families have their periods; and in
death there is a dissolution of al kindred after the flesh, the mightiest man
alive, must one day say to corruption, thou art my Father, Job. 17. 14
to the worm, thou art my Mother, and my Sister, but our alliance here by
faith; death nor the grave has no power over; 1 Cor. 15. 55
and as it is begun on earth by grace in our adoption: so shall it not be ended
but perfected in heaven, by glory in full fruition: when all the adopted sons
shall be like the natural son, and their bodies made conformable to his
glorious body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to Phil. 3.
21.
subdue all things unto himself.

Many excellent things are spoken of you ye sons of God! but what man lives,
that dares challenge to himself this privilege? seeing every man is a sinner,
and if a sinner, no son, for he that is borne of To. 3. 23.
God sins not. 1. Jo. 5. 18. how sins not? sins not at all? God never
gave any such privilege to the regenerate (says Oecumenius) for the
Oecumcinus in locu^.
best of Gods Saints speaks in his own name and others. If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. We sin daily and
hourly, the best of us, but the best of us, sin no otherwise 1 Jo. 1.
then Gods children may sin.

Not totally, with a fullness of consent, quasi ad peccatum vacantes, but over
come through infirmity, with strength of tentation. Nor finally, ad mortem,
they sin not that is, sin not untodeath that sin, for which the holy Ghost has
said thou shall not pray, In all their sins there is still place left for
their humiliation and Christ's Intercession, so still they are innocent from the
great offense, for although many lesser sins do pass them without their
knowledge: and many greater sins be committed with their knowledge: yet in
the escape of those less, and the committing of these greater, they are
patients, not Agents, not obedient to the rule of sin, but overmastered by
the rage of sin; here is St. Paul's case just To. 7. malum quod nolo facio,
they sin unwillingly, and their unwillingnesse to sin will appear in their
heaviness for sin when the remembrance is grievous unto them, the burden
intolerable, then is the weight not charged on them but laid upon him who has
satisfied Gods justice, for it, by bearing it on his own body on the tree, for
whose sake, lesser and unknown sins charitate absconduntur are in charity
covered and our greater and well known sins poenitentia abluuntur are by
actual and unfeigned Bernard.
repentance purged who then shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It
is God that justifies! who is he that condemns? thus the sons of God they
are sinners and no sinners. No sinners! for being justified by faith they have
not only a plenary remission of all sins that are passed actually purchased
by the blood of Jesus; but also a preservation from sins to come, effectually
promised by the spirit of grace. But sinners! in regard of that inherent
corruption, which against their wills, does lead them captive into actual
transgressions.

For as there is semen gratiae, a seed of grace, in the regenerate, which will
not suffer them totally to sin.

So also there is semen peccatia seed of sin which will not suffer them wholly to
be sanctified.

Christ by his death indeed, has wholly taken away both reatum and suppliciun,
the guilt and eternal punishment of sin: but he has not absolutely taken away,
but noly weakened Concupiscience the root and seed of sin: which though it be
not as grace is, an immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. yet it is as graceis, a
remaining seed. 1. Jo. 3. 9. rooted and growing in our nature. It is not a
condemning, not a reigning, but a remaining sin, abiding in our flesh and
substance; must have no place in our liking, and affections and so it may
sometimes somewhat lessen and abate our comfort, but can never destroy our
happiness, whilst this body of sin, is kept from reigning in our sinful body
and brought into subjection by the wholesome discipline of spiritual
mortification, and then this stimueles carnis this throne the flesh like a
Serpent without a sting has motum and morsum, non venenum. It may stir, and
bite us; cannot hurt nor kill us: It may bruise our heel, but we shall bruise
it is head.

And thus though we be set in the midst of evil yet God withholdeth not his
tender mercyes from us but his loving kindness, and his truth continually
preserves us Psalm. 40. 11. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil
work (says St. Paul and will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom. 2 Timothy 4.
18. Sin it makes no change in God; it must in man, Gods grace in man, makes
man to repent of his sin against God.

Man's sin against God, makes not God Repent of his grace toward man.

1 Man Repents for sin, and his repentance sendes him to the throne of grace,
to beg pardon for his sin: where we have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

2 God repents not of his grace if man repent of his sin, wherefore that we
may continue in his favor, we must come before him like the publican into the
Temple with contrition in our hearts; and like the lost son to his Father
with confession in our mouths the Pharisie stood upon his justification, the
Christian must not, confession is the way to absolution, and thus although we
offend God daily by our sins, yet is he pleased again by our repentance, he
repents not of his grace but is faithful and just, if we confess he forgives.
True it is God will not connive at the errors of his children, he will be angry
with them for their offenses, as a father with his sons; and in his anger
visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with scourges:
but can a Father forget? can a Mother forget? they may, I will not, (says God)
Esaias 49. 15. he will not take away his loving kindness, nor suffer his
faithfulness to fail: he has sworn by his holiness he will not; the
foundation of God stands firm he changes not, but works a change in man
for sin that his purpose according to election might stand * this is his
purpose To. 9. 11.
he has declared by his promise, he has confirmed his promise by his word, he
has strengthened his word by his Oath he has sealed all these with the blood
of his son, he acknowledges this his seal by the witness of his spirit, and
his spirit assures our spirit, that notwithstanding our many fraylties we are
still sons: And this he does not, by immediate revelation, but by an
undeniable conclusion drawn from the revealed word: For if when we were
enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of his son: much more being
reconciled we shall be saved by his life To. 5. 9. for he living to make
intercession for us is able to preserve his own mercies in us.

Thus God against all opposition of sin and Satan has exalted us to the
dignity of sons: and if after this advancement through infirmity, we fall
into sin: shall we account our selves no sons because sinners? If we be
truly humbled for our sins, heartily loath them, desire to leave them,
constantly purpose to forsake them, and to sin no more, If we bewail sins past,
beware of sins to come strive against present Corruptions and by humble
confession seek for absolution, it argues we are truly penitent, and where God
sees true repentance, he sees no sin: By sin we go from God, and then he
disclames us: but by repentance we come again unto him, and whenever we
return he receives us. When the prodigal said I will go unto my Father and
say father I have sinned: the father upbraides not his former Riot, but
entertains him as his son, this my son was dead but is now alive; though he
had lost the duty of a son, yet had not God lost the bowels of a Father: he
retained still his fatherly affection, and delict a Ego perdidi quod erat
filii, ille quoth. patris est amisit. Chry. s. 2. 7 de filio prodigo idem ser. 3.
de filio prodigo. 1 Pet. 4. 8.
non videt vis amoris love does cover a multitude of sins * it may stand
therefore with the honor of a father, (such an one as God) to own sinners for
his sons, provided they have sorrowed heartily for their sins, and then, with
God they that have sorrowed are as if they had not sinned; But may it stand
with the piety of a father to leave his children in distress, and to expose
them to want and misery, If God be their father where is his care over them?
his provision for them? or can it be that the sons of the highest should not
be so well provided for as the fowls of the air and foxes of the field?
sometimes it so falls out that God has a strict hand over his own family,
concealing from them the good he intends to them, and withholding from them
these present blessings which in a plentiful measure he powers into the
lappes of the men of this world; not that he neglects his own whilst he
thus regards others, as if he had forgotten to be gracious, and shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure, but by some troubles in this life, to make
their joys more full, with the assured hope of glory and happiness in the
life to come: nor is he wanting to them in the things of this life, whereof
they have the promise, and shall have the possession too, when Psalm. 31.
God sees it may be for their good; so still as a loving father he sorts their
condition, as may be most for their welfare; sometimes straightning, and
sometimes enlarging his hand, either in poverty or riches, want or plenty,
sickness or health, adversity or prosperity, they have their share both in
the evil and good things of this life, to let them know that those present
evils are not the greatest, nor the goods of this life the chiefest, but that
there are evils to come more to be feared, and future good things more to be
desired, in the patient expectation whereof they must be content to endure the
want of some present good, and the sense of some present evils.

It should suffice them to know that not here, but in heaven, where their
Father is, their inheritance is, there must their hope be fixed, on that their
care placed, and for these temporal blessings they must cast their care upon
God, and depend upon his fatherly providence, who knows their wants and will
supply them, your heavenly Father knows whereof you have need (says Christ)
and Matthew. 6.
you know it is enough for a father (that is of ability, such an one as is our
heavenly Father) to know the wants of his Children, his own goodness will
supply whatsoever is needful or convenient.

It is not then against the honesty, and it may well agree with the piety of
a Father (such an one as God) to own a wretched, if a contrite sinner, for his
beloved Son.

But all this while, this Title seems to determine the Relation to one Sex;
seems, but does not: for God, who of the woman requires the duty, will his
Justice permit her to be excluded from the Dignity? certainly no! the word is
not to be restrained to the sex, but extended to so many of the whole kind, as
truly believe, whether they be male or female; for God is not (...) he maks no
difference of sexes, ages, nations, professions, degrees, estates or conditions
of men, but he that is Lord of all, is rich unto all that call upon him, male
and female, Jew and Gentile, young and old, rich and poor, prince and people,
bond and free, if true believers, he ownes them all without difference for his
Children.

And yet there is a difference amongst them, both in respect of Gods grace
toward them, and his grace in them; they are all beloved, but not equally: and
that Gods grace and favor is more to this, then that man, is not from Gods
final intention, which is equal and alike to all his chosen [Salvation and
Happinesse] but as men are said to love more, where they confer more; and to
favor most, where they receive most: so God in regard of some outward
expressions of love and favor, is said to love one more then another; and in
regard of men's apprehension to some, having a greater sense and feeling of his
love and favor then others.

And for his grace that is in them, whether for the qualification of their
persons, or salvation of their souls.

If we speak of the former, some are better fitted and enabled for the
execution of such offices and duties wherewith by their callings they stand
charged, wherein he that is most faithful, is most highly favored.

If we speak of the latter, the more grace God works in them, the more
gracious he is said to be toward them: and so the stronger their faith, the
ferventer their love, the more unfeigned their repentance, the more universal
their obedience, the more sincere their conscience, the greater his love unto
them, the more he is delighted in them, and such as in his love he has gifted
above their fellows, he usually honoreth above their fellows; and according to
the excellency of their graces, is the eminency of their places.

And therefore, though all the faithful be Gods sons, and in relation to him
brethren, and he the common Father of all, yet for all this it will not become
an inferior to affront his superior with a jam sumus ergo pares, hail fellow,
well met, for his community overthrows not that difference, which nature,
civilitie, and Gods own ordinance has made betwixt man and woman, and one man
and another: nor will either state, or Church, or private families, admit so
absurd a paritie. To lay all level; no principality in the state, no Prelacie
in the Church, no command in families, were to ruin all: an inconvenience,
which the seasonable foresight of Almighty God has (by his own blessed
Ordinance) prevented: nor did Christ at his coming (unto whom God committed
all rule, and all Authority and Power) divest the Princes of the world of that
Regal and Sovereign power wherewith God Per fidem Christi non tollitur or do
justitiae sed magis firmatur. Aq. prima secundae. qu. 104. Art. 6 conc.
has invested them, he abolished it not, established it rather.

And thus though all men be alike in the first Adam, made of the same mould.

And all the faithful alike in the second Adam the Sons of God.

Yet the Lord for the singular benefit of mankind has distinguished How son
ser. hab. Oxon. 1602.
them in great knowledge, and made their ways and reputations diverse: some of
them he has blessed and exalted, as Kings and Princes.

Some he has sanctified and appropriated to himself, as Priests and Prophets.

Some he advances above their brethren, and makes their fathers children bow
down before them; and others he leaves in the common rank: some he has
laden with honors, wealth, promotions, and dignities: and others he has
bestowed in meaner callings: thus wisely has God ordered the estate of this
present world, with the connection of such variety of parts, begetting a
harmony, and bringing a perfect soundness and sweetness to the whole body.

Where all the strings are of one sound, there is no music, where all the
members are alike, there is no body but a bulk: and even so, there is nothing
but discord and deformity, where there are not differences of degrees, estates
and callings of men: and where God has put a difference, let man do so too,
that man's estimation concurring with Gods ordination, every man may be honored
and respected according to his place and dignity.

The stones in a building are not all of one syze.

The vessels in an house not proportioned all for one use.

The members of the body are not all of one fashion, or for one office.

There are many stones in a building, many vessels in one house, many members
in one body, and in these many, there is variety, not Identitie, not many of
the same, but of diverse syzes, for diverse uses, of several fashions, for
several offices; and this variety of parts does beget an unity in the whole,
so we being many (concludes St. Paul) are one body: and in a body composed of
multiplicitie and variety of parts, there is more beauty greater safety, and
this, not only in the natural Connexio totius corporis unam sanitatem unam
pulchri tudinem. Tacit. Leo. Ep. 8. cap. 11.
body which is man, but in the politic body, the state; and in the mystical
body, the Church; beautified and strengthened with the several offices,
orders, degrees and callings of men, diversely qualified, making a distinction
amongst men of the same Christian profession, for a community of Religion
induces not a confusion into Christian common wealths: but confirms them
rather in peace and good order: enjoining every one (by an Apostolical Canon)
1. Cor. 7. 20. to abide in that calling wherein he is called, propounding no
new, but persuading a more conscionable use of the old * and if there See Luke
cap. 3. verse 10, 11, 12, 13.
be any that has no calling, to get him one, for he that has no vocation, is
of no Religion.

There are in the world viri absque jugo, Anabaptists.
unruly men, who stand upon their lawless liberty, which they mis-name
Christian; untamed heyfers, whom no pales or walls of law or discipline can
keep within the bounds of the Church or Commonwealth, who abhor that
lawful Authority or Christian Charity should regulate their illgoverned
liberty. But surely this is no privilege of Gods Sons, a character it is
rather of the sons of Belial, Judge. 19. 22. 1. Cor. 7. 21 1. Pet. 2.
for Saint Paul in one Epistle, and Saint Peter in another, teach another
lesson: thus much in effect; that honor, reverence, obedience, and service
unto men: may well consist with the liberty of the Sons of God.

The freedom Christ purchased for them is not civil; from the obedience of the
magistrate sovereign or subordinate, nor natural from those respects and
duties which children owe to their parents, wives to their husbands, etc. But
spiritual from sin and Satan, death and hell, this and not that is the
freedom Christ purchased, and Saint Paul fitly called, the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God; from which happy liberty, no believer is excluded: and
unto which, the meanest has as good right, as the greatest; and be men's
qualities and degrees, in the world, never so different God comprehends all
under one common motion of Sons, nor is it any worldly respect that makes a
man ever the more favored with God; for a man to plead his birth, breeding,
wealth, wit, learning, beauty, valor, is more fit for a Coridon to his
Alexes, or a Phoebus to his Daphne, then a Christian to his God; It is not the
proper man, nor the rich man, nor the witty man, nor the valiant man, nor the
learned man, nor the noble man; It is not any of these, (though all these
deserve a civil respect) that God is taken with, his affection pitches on the
godly man, Psalm, 4. 3.

The Lord has chosen to himself the man that is godly: and now let no man
disdain Gods choice, how mean soever in outward appearance, for whom his
mercy chooses, his love advances to the dignity of his Son, and whom his
love has advanced to the Dignity, from him his authority requires the duty
of his Son, and the duty here expressed is, to give God his Heart, which is
the second part of my text, My Son, give me thine heart.

If we be his Sons, God is our Father, there is his authority over us.

And if God be our Father, where is his honor, there is our duty to him.

Nobilitas ad virtutem obligat, the greater honor God has done us, the greater
are our engagements to him, and therefore as we have looked up with comfort to
the dignity, so now let us look down with care to the duty of Gods sons,
which is briefly sum'd up in two words Love and Obedience.

Where Obedience is, there is nothing so difficult commanded, that will not
with diligence be attempted.

And where Love is, there is nothing so precious demanded, that will not with
cheerfulness be tendered, here God tries our Love, by our Obedience, that he
may see how much we love him, by that which we will do for him.

And again, he tries the sincerity of our Obedience by our Love, that he may
see how much we will do for him by that which we will cheerfully give him, and
as a pledge both of Love and Obedience, he requires the heart. My Son, give
me thine heart.

Cor tuum, thy heart to God, there is the thing required to testify our Love.

Da mihi, Give me, there is the duty to be performed to express our
Obedience.

The testimony of thy Love to God, is thy Heart to God. A Heart, there is the
quid, the thing what it is that God requires, Thine, there is the cujus, the
propriety, whose it is.

First, the Heart is the thing God calls for; and what is that? This small
piece of flesh that beats in our mortal body? No; that were to require our
lives: God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice: and craves not our life, but our
Love; the Heart is the seat of Love; that our heavenly Father requires of us
his unworthy Children, that we love him.

And not only our Love, but in calling for the heart, he calls for our fear
and service too: for whatsoever the curiosity of some Philosophers have
determined to the contrary, the heart is the seat of all the affections and
passions: the Gall, Liver and Spleen, give the occasion to stir them up, but
in the heart they are seated: the Heart is the Metropolis of the soul: and
often taken for the soul with all her faculties.

Besides the Heart is Omnis hona dispositio corporis reduci dat quodam modo ad
cor ficut ad principium corporaliu^ motionum Aq. 1, 2. q. 38. art. 5 resp. ad
3. arg. Vide Aq. 1 2. q. 17. art. 9 arg. 1. and 2.
the first mover of all the External actions, and every member works
according to the motion, inclination and will of the Heart; It lives first,
and dies last, and therefore first, and last, and for all, give God the heart,
for that is all: All the faculties of the soul; all the members of the body,
attend the Heart and follow it: the Heart goes before and draws the whole man
after it.

And this is Gods delight the whole man: he loves Integrity; and in calling for
the heart he requires every part: thy head to know him, thy tongue to confess
him, thine eyes to observe him, thine ears to attend unto him, thy lips to
praise him, thy hands by good works to glorify him, thy knees to bow before
him, and thy feet to stand in his Courts. God is not served at all, where any
part is withheld from him, or devoted to any other besides him, sincerity and
integrity are individual companions, If true devotion lodge in the heart,
humble reverence will shine in every part. So sings David Psalm. 84. 2. Cor meum
and caro mea exultaverunt. etc. My heart inwardly and my flesh outwardly have
rejoiced in the living God.

Thus the whole man must apply it self to the worship of God, the outward,
as well as the inward man: by the outward 2 Cor. 4. 16 Oecum in locum.
man, the learned * understand the body: the inward man by St. Peter is
expounded to be the hidden man of the heart: that, as well as this, this in
private, that in public, this with inward and spiritual, that with outward
and corporal worship.

In private then and in thine own Chamber, commune with thine own heart, the
testimony of Gods spirit and thine own is sufficient.

But in publik in Gods presence Chamber the Temple; it suffices not, except
the Church may see too: that all may see and bear witness that God is in you
of a truth, and this cannot be, except men's external actions do show forth
their internal affections. The heart that is unscrutable to man but * gentis
corporis Hirom. Gestus est sermo quidem corporis Cic. de Orat. lib. 3.
vox animi, the outward carriage of the body, is a fair testimony of the
inward disposition of thy mind: and then is discovered what the heart thinks,
by that which the body acts: for grace in the heart is the light of the body,
and this light must shine before men, that they may see as well as God: And that
men may reap the good, and God receive the glory, Gods heavenly inspirations,
and men's holy desires should empty themselves here, that the Church may
outwardly testify, what Ad significandum debitum ordinem mentis humanae in
Deum Aq. pri. se. quest. 102. art. 3.
inwardly each man should be by such outward worship, as might betoken the
Majesty of God, beseem the dignity of Religion, and concur with the
celestial impressions in the minds of men. Idem. 2. 2. q. 92. Art. 2.


The performance of all Religious services respect God and man, to please him,
and edify them: and so must be equally poysed with the two theological
virtues Faith and Charity, Faith toward God, and Charity toward men, without
faith, it is impossible to please God, and cordi creditur man believes with
the heart, it is the heart that seasoneth our devotion, and faith that
seasoneth the heart, directs it to the true object, and in the right end of
pure Religion.

And as faith seeks to please God: so charity to approve it self before men,
and charity in the performance of a duty unto God has respect unto the benefit
of man too.

God sees faith in the internal devotion of the Heart, and therewith he is
well pleased.

Men see charity in the external carriage of the body, and therewith they are
edified.

God calls for that, by Solomon in my text, My son give me thine heart, and
he calls for this by St. Paul in another text, to present your bodies aliving
Romans 12. 1
sacrifice etc. and then concludes, and not til then your devotion to be (...),
your reasonable service and good reason there is, God should be served both in
body, and soul; for at the first he made both, and he once redeemed both, he
daily preserves both, and finally saves both: and therefore glorify him in
both.

And thus the Christian offers that Holocaust to God in substance and truth,
which the Jews did offer in type and figure, making his approches into the
house of God with David's hymn in his mouth: Introibo Ps. 66. 13.
in domum tuam Holocastis, I will go into thy house, with burnt-offerings: but
now in Gods house there is no use of fire, unless it be the Metaphorical fire
of true zeal, for true zeal is Gods fire, of which St. Aug. in ps. 66. alias
65
Austin thus, totum meum consumit ignis tuus, nihil mei remaneat, totum sit
tibi Let thy holy fire of zeal, O Lord, consume me wholly, and make me thine in
every part; all thine, and then is all his when he has the heart, for as the
powers of it are inclined so are the parts of the body moved: there is a league
of amity between them, like that between Ruth and Naomi the body like Ruth to
Naomi, cleaving to the soul and saying; entreat me not to leave thee Ruth. 1.
16 John 1. 16 Anima intellectiva quamvis sit una secundum essentiam tamen
propter sui perfectionem est mul tiplex in virtute and ideo ad diversas
operationes indigit diver sis dispositio nibus in par tibus corporis cui
ponitur Aq. prima q. 76. art. 5. risp. ad 3. arg.
or toreturn from following after thee, for whether thou go I will go, and
where thou lodgest I will lodge, thy people shall be my people, and thy God, my
God; or as his soldiers did to Josuah all that thou command us we will do
and whether thou sendest us we will go, for albeit the soul in essence be one,
yet to the perfection of it, there are diverse faculties: and for the several
operations of these faculties, there must needs be an answerable disposition in
the parts of the body to which it is united: for as the fire first kindles
the fuel, and that being kindled nourishes the fire: and as the body first
warmeth the clothes, and then they return a reciprocal heat to the body; so
the heart first disposes the parts of the body, and these parts fitly
disposed In divino cultu necesse est aliquibus corporalibus uti ut eis quasi
signis quibusdam men's hominis excitetur ad spirituales actus quib. Deo conjun
gitur Aq. 2. 2. quest. 81. art. 7. Ecclesiam piis quibusdam coeremoni is
elegantibus ritibus and institutis tanquam sponsam ornatam viro suo decorarent
Cornal. Agrippa de van. scientiarum cap. 6.
affect the heart, and make devotion in the heart, like the fire in the
Sanctuary, a flame that goes not out.

And even experience it self teaches us, how merveilously outward form and
solemnity in Gods service does help weakness and inbecility in us;
persuading the will, inciting the affections, and making some impressions of
further knowledge in the mind, winging our thoughts, holding up the heart in
her devotions, and giving stength and vigor to such motions which are
otherwise apt to languish, and conclude in a lazy wish: but the parts of the
body fitly disposed keeps up the heart till Gods will be fulfilled, and man's
duty discharged.

True it is God has sometimes excepted against this outward worship, but then
when it has been alone, when the people drew near him with their lips, and
their hearts were far from him. But when or where Externum cultum non
reprehendit dominus imo etiam ab omnibus piis requirit nec enim tantum intus in
animo colere debemus, sed etiam coram hominibus testari, etc. Calvin. ap. Mart.
in Matthew. 15. 8. Jo. 4. 22.
show me, was ever God offended with the humble, lowly and reverend gesture of
the body in his service, or where did he ever condemn outward Solemnity, when
it was joined with inward sincerity, never did he open his mouth against the
use of that, but the want of this. The true worshippers shall worship God in
Spirit and truth (says the Son of God) but how in truth, if not outwardly in
body, as well as inwardly in heart and spirit, God is robbed of his worship,
when either is withheld, and when both are not exhibited Gods house is made of
a house of Prayer, a den of thieves.

And the same spirit that by the Son of God commends inward worship, does by
the servants of God, and those no mean ones neither, (his Prophet Esaias, and
Esaias 45. To. 14. 12.
his Apostle Paul) command outward worship. As I live (says the Lord) every
knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall confess to God. And thus what
God has joined together in his precept, let not us separate in our practice,
serve God with the inward worship of the Heart, and with the outward worship of
the body also: open impiety cannot away with this, and secret hypocrisy is
glad to hear of that; the hypocrite is all for outward piety, the profane for
inward sincerity.

But it is neither the pretense of inward sincerity that can justify outward
impiety: nor a show of outward piety that will excuse inward hypocrisy: be
not deceived, Deus non illuditur, God is not mocked, but sits in heaven to
laugh all those to scorn, who either by hidden projects, or open practice cast
scorns upon Religious worship.

If any man pretend inward sincerity, let him show it in outward works of
piety, men judge of the inward affection, by the outward action. Or if any
stand upon outward piety before men, let them show it in their inward
sincerity before God, who judges the outward action by the inward affection:
and we know (o Lord) that thy judgment is according to right: A man's works
may pass current, and seem right in foro soli, in the judgment of men, when
as they are nothing so in foro poli, in the sight of God: for God sees not as
man sees; he looks not at the outward appearance, but at the heart: In a duty
performed, men see all well, but what says God, men cry out a Saint, God says
a sinner: heaven and earth do not always agree in their judgments: It is our
daily prayer, that it may be in earth as it is in heaven, that it may be, and
therefore is not: the grant of this petition we must press, that Gods will be
done on earth, as it is in heaven, solemnly and sinceerely too, that there be
an uniformitie on earth, and this uniformitie, in conformity to heaven, for
what shall it avail a man, though the world applaud him, if God and his own
heart condemn him: It is therefore Saint Paul's advice, Gal. 3. 23. Whatsoever
ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. And yet we must not
conceit, as if God simply condemned the outward action: nay he approves it so
far as apparently good: he only dislikes this, that it is not done heartily,
with a sincere intention, which God finds often wanting in those immediate
duties of his worship and service: as prayer without attention, hearing without
meditation, fasting without contrition, Alms and no compassion, knowledge
without devotion, zeal without discretion, repentance without reformation: and
these deficiencies are rather in their agents, then the act, which so far as
good apparently God approves, but dislikes them, and dislikes them for this:
because they did (bonum non been) that which was good: good for the matter, but
not done in that good and seemly manner, nor directed to that good end which
crowns all our works.

For it is not so much the quid, what is done, though that must be justifiable:
and we must have a warrant for what we do, or else we sin in what we do.
Nor is it the qui, the manner of doing, and yet we must have a Rule and Canon
for that too, or else we disobey in what we do; and so with Martha make
choice of the worser part, for Obedience is better then sacrifice.

For the quid then, we must look up to God, who points us to his word, and
that gives direction for the matter of Gods service.

For the qui, we must have recourse to the Church, who by virtue of that grand
Canon of Saint Paul, has power to determine our liberty, 1 Cor. 14. 40
for the manner of Gods worship, in all the circumstances thereof; both for
persons, places, and times, for every gesture, posture and behavior, for
preaching, administering, praying, blessing, hearing, receiving, singing,
confessing, praising and to dispose of all other accidentals according to
decency and good order. And now suppose for the matter, all done as God has
commanded: for the manner, all done decently and orderly as the Church has
enjoined: yet as our Savior said to the man in the Gospel unum tibi deest,
there is something wanting, the intention of the heart that must be right too,
for it is that which makes religious exercises performed, duties of obedience;
Saint Ambrose limits all to this quantum intendis tantum facis, when a man in
his intention swerves from that true end to which his work in hand should tend
he looses his interest in the action; for men to be of the Pharisees cut, of
whom St. Chrysostom, oculi hominum timor eorum, oculi hominum amor eorum,
fearing nothing but the censure of men, loving nothing but the praise of men,
this base popularity, is the bane of true piety.

Omnia fiant, let all be done that God has commanded: omnia decenter and
ordine, all decently and in order as the Church has enjoined.

Omnia cordicitus and ex animo al heartily with a pure intention, in the fear
of God, and reverence of holy Church: and so all will be done as Saint Paul
would have all done: Omnia ad edificationem and omnia ad 1 Cor. 14. 26 1 C. 10.
31.
gloriam Dei: All to edification; and all to the glory of God.

It is the heart then, that adds a goodness to all we say: and gives
perfection to all we do in Gods service; were men's words like Herod's, divina
oracula the voice of God and not of men: their works like the Pharisees
admiranda spectacula admired of all: It avails nothing at al; Act. 12. 22
if their hearts in the mean time be Daemoniorum receptacula replete with
guile and iniquity.

Good words without the Heart, is plain flattery, and good works without the
Heart, is gross hypocrisy; now God is not so weak, to be dilighted with
flatering words: nor so unwise to be deceived with hypocritical works: when
therefore we draw near unto God it must be (...) with a true Heart, void of
flattery Heb. 10. 22
and hypocrisy: he is not delighted with that, nor can he be deceived with
this: he requires truth in the inward parts the heart is his desire and
delight too.

My Son give me thine Heart.

It is not the Hecatombs of the Gentiles, nor yet the Holocaustes of the Jews,
but the Heart of the Christian is the Sacrifice God accepts the heart is the
quid the thing required but the cujus whose it is, comes now to be scanned the
text says, tuum, thine heart, and thine, looks abroad and relates unto man,
It is cor hominis the heart of a man, not cor belluinum a brutish and
barbarous heart the savage and undomitable heart of a beast, but the corrigible
gentle and pliable heart of a man, such a heart that may be wrought upon, not
an obdurate stubborn rebellious and impenitent heart, this is no fit present
for God, who has regard to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at his word. It must be cor humanum thine heart, O man. Isay 66. 2.


And is man's heart so precious a Jewel that God should become a suitor for it.

Moses tells us, that Genesis 6 7.
God sees every imagination of man's heart, that it is only evil continually.

Jeremie says, that the heart is deceitful above Jer. 17. 19.
all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it?

Christ has taught, that out of the heart proceed Mat. 15. 19.
evil thoughts, murders adulteris etc.

Shall such a heart be offered unto God, or will the searcher of the heart
accept of such an offering? he is a God of purer eyes then to behold iniquity,
neither shall any Matthew: 5.
wickedness dwell with him, (our Savior says) the pure in heart shall only
see God; take the Apostles Jam. 4. 8.
counsel therefore; and purify the heart and that it may be purified, deal
with it as with gold, melt it, or if thou can not melt it, break it; for a
broken and a contrite Ps. 51. 17
heart O Lord thou will not despise.

It is (you have heard) cor hominis the heart of a man that must be offered;
but not the pharisaicall heart of the proud man full of hypocrisy, nor the
wanton heart of the lascivious man full of vanity, nor the covetous heart of
the worldly man full of iniquity, nor the heretical heart of the malicious man
full of obstinacy: but the contrite and broken heart of the penitent man full
of humility: ad hunc respiciam (says God) to this man will I have regard Esaias
66. 2.
and to his offering.

But this tuum in my text looks nearer home, and points out the owner here, and
the owner here is a son. It is cor filii, thine heart my Son, and a sons
heart is a loving and dutyfull heart: the servant does his duty as well as the
son but he for fear, this for love, that constrainedly this most willingly,
his obedience is not mercinary, and arises from love not hire; as the dog
serves his Master pro osse and offa: for a bone and a bite, but as a son his
Father in reverence and love: It is the loving and tender heart of a son that
is here required, thine heart, my Son.

And first my son! thine heart, tuum; that is proprium cor, thine own, in thine
own power, and in thine own possession, it must be thus thine: If lent to
vanity thou must recall it, if bound to sin thou must release it, if sold to
Satan thou must redeem it, thine heart must be released from sin; recalled
from vanity, and Satan dispossessed; and then, when it is purged and purified,
set at liberty and enlarged, and so made thine, when none other has any
interest in it, or can lay any claim unto it, but that it is thine own; not
enthralled to Satan's tentations, not entangled in carnal lusts, not
distracted with worldly cares, when it is no more the heart of a sinner but of
a son; then such it is as God would have: thine own heart.

Again thine heart my Son, that is cor unicum and simplix, one single heart:
for one man has but one heart: Solomon tells us the fool has none heart Prove.
17. 16. But David the Father of Solomon sets out the wicked with a heart and a
heart Psalm. 12. 2. in Saint Hieroms translation: with a double heart in our
allowed translation the context tells us whom he means he that does one thing
and intends another says one thing but thinks another, this (...) Sent.
Theog
man the scripture cries out upon voe duplici cordi: nor will God have any
thing to do with him: the Prophet discovers him Psalm 55. 21. by his fair
tongue and false heart, the words of his mouth are smoother then butter, having
war in his heart, Judas like, he ushers in his treason with a kiss, and like
to Joab makes a smiling face and a friendly salute the prologue to a mortal
stabbe, the double hearted man is dangerous and uncertain for when his mouth
speaks safety, his heart speaks ruin; and there is one that understandes the
language of the heart: and for that any man has said in his heart, that is,
has entertained envious and malicious thoughts against the godly, treacherous
and rebellious thoughts against Church or State, he must be answerable to God
for these thoughts, for even these thoughts come within the compass of the
laws transgression; of Gods law, but not of man's, man's law punishes only the
notorious: Gods law takes notice of the heart: And so God Psalm. 5. 9.
knows though men do not; the thoughts of the heart: that their inward parts
are very wickedness albeit the mouth be muzled that it dare not speak it: and
the hands bound that they cannot effect it for when he speaks his thought it
is ruin to the godly, when shall he dye and his name perish.

Destruction to the Church, down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

Desolation to the State, come and let us make Jerusalem a heap of stones.

Thus the malicious or double-hearted man, like Esaias 5: 8. Ps. 36. 4. Ps. 139.
3.
the covetous, would be alone upon the earth, for mischief ever delights to be
solitary; never considering that God is about his bed, and about his paths, and
espieth out all his ways: God understands his thoughts afar off, nor is
there a word in his tongue, but lo, O Lord thou know it altogether: God
sees, and abhorres to see a false Heart under a fair Simulata sanctitas duplex
iniquitas.
tongue, for this with God is a double sin: the Heart is his delight, but it
is simplex cor, a single heart, a Heart without guile and hypocrisy, the
faithful are called Doves, and innocence and simplicity are the properties of
a Dove: and yet for protection from injury, for the prevention of evil, and
preservation of piety; It is best to take our Saviors counsel, and join to
the Doves Matthew. 10. 16.
heart the Serpents head: for harmless simplicity, and Christian policy may
well stand together: for Christian policy is to true Religion as sugar to
fruit, keeps and preserves the sent and taste: and often causes that they who
distaste them raw and uncompounded, sweetly to relish them thus fairly
ordered: thy heart for God then, and although it be Corsapiens, let it be
simplex, a wise and wary, but a single harmless heart; and the good Lord
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary. 2. Chron. 30. 19.

Lastly here is one property more of the Heart, it must be totum or integrum,
thy whole Heart, like the true mother of 1 King. 14. 8. 2 King. 23. 25. 2 Chronicles. 22. 9. 2. Chron. 31. 21.
the child, his fatherly affection will not admit a division: It was the
commendation of David, Josiah, Jehosophat, and Hezekiah, in the old Testament,
that they sought the Lord with all their heart: and it is Christ's commandment
in the new Testament, that we love him with all our Heart: for to love God with
all the Heart, is in effect as much as to give him the Heart: but not the whole
heart, there is something more in the heart then Love, for Discretion,
Perception, Consideration and Meditation, are affirmed of the Heart: And all
these are acts of the understanding, and God is said to bless Solomon, and to
give him an understanding heart. 1. K. 3. 12. and the Heart is said to be the
seat ofwisdom, so that God in calling for the heart, requires the understanding
to know him, as well as the affections to love him, and he has not the whole
heart, except he have both; I will not dispute whether of the two is more
useful for us, or acceptable to him; he requires both, we can lack neither,
nor can the one well subsist without the other, and the heart is not perfect
where either is wanting; Knowledge begets Love, and Love increases
knowledge, if knowledge preceed not, it is a natural instinct, not Love, for
how can we love God before we know him; It is a true Rule, Invisa diligere
possumus, incognit a nequaquam. Aug. apud Amb. de spiera. ser. 15.
ignoti nulla cupido, no knowledge, no love: It is the knowledge of the worth
of the object of our love that spurs on the affections; the judgment of the
understanding goes before, and there follows the election of the will, that
discernes; this chooses: the understanding, by discourse, examines the object,
and having found it [utile and jucundum] right and good: commends it to the
will, which readily embraces it under those terms, 1. Jo. 4. 7.
and so the better we know God, the more we love him, and the more we love him
the better we know him, Love and be wise then the Apostle makes use of one word
to signify both (...), Col. 3. 2. by this manner of speech giving us to
understand that our love to God must not be an irregular passion, but a well
ordered affection: for (...) from whence the word comes signifies the mind
or understanding, to teach us that our love must not be directly bolted out
from the will but must pass by the understanding: and have there allowance,
before it break forth, therefore first you must labor to know God, and that
knowledge will reform your love, love him entirely and that love will inform
your knowledge, for knowledge without love is vain, knowledge 1 Cor. 8. 2.
puffs up, it is love that edifieth: had a man all knowledge if he have not
love it is nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 2
the holy Scripture advances it above its fellows, gives the pre-eminence to
it, determins all in it, as the perfection of all virtues: and it is love that
moves them all to their proper Acts: that makes faith believe hope rely,
patience endure, temperance abstain, humility submit.

Yea in love there are two passions, desire and fear.

A desire to please God in all things.

A fear to offend him in any thing.

The fear to offend God begets an awful reverence to his dreadful name.

The desire to please him incites to a cheerful obedience of his heavenly
will, and the trial of obedience is the performance of our duty, and the duty
here enjoined is, Give. God that gives all requires something not by way of
requital or compensation, for so man has nothing to render him for all his
benefits: but by way of thankfulness or gratulation, and so it is fit, very
fit, that some present be tendered and given to him, that has given all to us
and lo what it is, the heart that must be given, My Son give me thine heart.

And shall we then call this donum, and not debitum, our free gift, and not our
bounden duty. Is it not he, that has made us and not we our selves: and so he
may challenge our hearts as his own jure creationis by the right of creation
as the maker of them. It is he that has redeemed and bought us at a dear rate
the life of his Son: pretio empti estis magno says St Paul and thus the
heart it his jure redemptionis by right of purchase as the Savior and redeemer
of it. Besides in Baptism we devoted ourselves wholly to him and so jure pacti
by right of sale or covenant the heart is his; and yet he says give, as if it
were ours, whereas he may justly take it as his own, may; but will not: he
that made thee without thee, will not save thee without thee, and though
Salvation be the free gift of God and a work of grace, yet there must concur
the act of man's will who if he would be saved must work out his own Salvation
with fear and trembling. It is certain, God can by violence take the heart of
man but he will have it freely given: drawing by fair means the will of Qui
fecit te sine te no^ salvabit te sine te Aust
the flesh into conformity to the law of the spirit.

But does not he who here says give, in the 4 chapter of this book verse
twenty three, say keep thy heart with all diligence, and how can a man do
both give and keep, for by a gift there is transitus rei ad alium, a thing is
made over to another: And yet in temporal things, we know, the same thing may
be both given and kept when a man makes over his right to another retayning the
use to himself for a time: but God in this case will admit of no such
reservation nor will he be content to accept of the heart in reversion, he will
have it in present, the very actual and real possession, and when once
Hieroms trans.
the heart by faith and obedience is consecrated to God, he bids keep it, not
from him, but for him, the word is serva * save it for him, sell it not to
another: omni custodia serva, with all manner of keep: with watching, fasting,
praying: with watching, that Satan with his tentations ensnare it not, with
fasting, that the flesh with it is lusts entangle it not; with praying, that the
world with it is cares distract it not: and thus to keep it, is absolutely to
give it.

Or if thou will not absolutely give it, yet da mutuo lend it God, bring it to
his house, and let him have the use of it here, It may be the pleasures of Gods
house may so affect thine heart, that what at first thou did barely lend,
afterward thou will most cherefully give: And even present thy self before thy
heavenly Plautus in. Tri.
father with the son in the comedy: pater adsum impera quod vis neque tibi
ero in mora. Father command me what thou will, lo here I am ready to do thy
will and this the heavenly father kindly accepts from his Terent. in And.
son, and with the father in the comedy commendes him for it; facis ut te
decet cum isthoc quod postulo, impero cum gratia. Or if thou will not freely
give yet lend it God whilst thou art here: remember that God is in this place
though you know it not and when you come into this place it is with intention
to meet your God, or else you might as well keep away, and meet him you must
not without your heart, that is his Benjamin, and his charge is like that of
Joseph to his brethren Genesis 43. you shall not see my face except your brother
be with you, let not us have occasion to say unto you as Isaac to his father
Genesis 22. 7.
behold the fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for a burnt offering,
here are your bodies your ears to hear, your knees to bow, your tongues to
give praise (and well it were if in this place these parts were so well
disposed) but where is the heart for a burnt offering: Oh let not your hearts
be in your fields in your houses in your shoppes, in your coffers, running
after covetousness and vanity when your bodies are in the Church, let no
coveteous voluptuous, ambitious or malicious thoughts divert your heart from
Gods service but lend him your hearts whilst here you are.

Or if it will not be lent yet da pretio sell it him, he is so taken with the
heart, that he will have it at any rate; the blessings of this life, and that
which is to come, glory and immortality; yea if it cost the glorious kingdom
of heaven, and the death of Gods natural son stake but the heart and take all.

Or if thou will not dare pretio, sell it him, nor give it him, nor lend it
him: if neither the exhibition of present blessings, nor the promise of future
happiness can win the heart to the reverence of Gods holy name nor'to the
obedience of his heavenly will, why then your blood will be upon your own
heads, God has done his part your destruction is from your selves, he would,
but ye would not, nay quoties voluit how often would he, alluring by his
mercyes persuading by his Ministers who in his name and in his stead do second
Solomon in his suite for the heart My son give me etc. And must God for all
this go without the Heart, for us (it seems) he may, but for his own names
sake he will not: for, as he alone is the searcher and knower of the heart, so
he alone can rule it: turn and alter it: as it seems best to his godly
wisdom: yet he compels it not: perswads it rather, and so winning: are his
persuasions, that they have the force of a law, and the most Volunt as non
cogit ur
stony and stout heart cannot stand out, when he bids yield; and still it is
not compulsion but persuasion, monendo and movendo with such motions and
monition he works upon it, non compellendo sed suaviter inclinando, not
violently compelling but sweetly inclining it, for when the stiffenesse and
stubbornness of the Heart rejects kindness, he works it by afflictions and
punishes not in anger, but in love: and Rev. 3. 19.
so his punishments are chastisements, not judgments levamina non gravamina,
gracious not grievous or if for the present they be somewhat grievous (as no
affliction for the time is joyous) yet in the event they are gracious, working
the Heart to Obedience conforming it to Gods will, and making it pliable to
yield when God calls Give me thine heart.

But if for all this men's Hearts be so stiff that they will not yield, then
God brings them into great extremities, and presses them with manifold
necessities, that (like Noah's Dove to the Arc) in the want and weakness of
other means they may fly to him who is totius necessitatis remedium a sure
supply of all wants, and yet necessities and extremityes may break the heart
not bend it, except Gods holy spirit be with it. It is the effectual and
lively worker of grace in the heart, melting and framing it to such a temper,
that it becomes obedient to the heavenly calling: and when once the Heart is
thus won then ever after the least signification of Gods heavenly pleasure is
a forcible command, and every motion from him is a powerful motive to us,
resigning our hearts most willingly: when he requests so lovingly My son,
give me thine heart. And now at last I am come to the last word of mytext, Me,
mihi, mi fili, to me my son, mihi patri, to me thy father, thy heavenly Father,
thy heart to me: and here we have the equity of his demand, which seems at
first sight to cross the law of equity, whose rule is, suum cuique, to give
every man his own, how then shall we think Gods demand equal and just, which
runs in this style, tuum mihi? thine to me.

Amongst men indeed, where the Relation is no higher then between neighbor
and neighbor, the law of equity is violated, when one man usurps that which
is another, for Gods law forbids every man to covet any thing that is his
neighbors, nor can conveniencie grant a dispensation for the breach of Gods
law.

But betwixt God and Quod homo habet Dei ac domini sui munus est. ac per hoc in
his quae offeruntur ab homine homo non suum reddit dominus suum recipit. Tim.
ad Cath. Ecele siam. l. 1. page 366.
man, the case is altered, for God in justice may require that which is thine
to be given to him, for nothing thou have is so thine, but that it is Gods
also, of all thou have, thou have only the use; the right is Gods, thou the
possessor, he the owner, and so in demanding what is thine, he calls but for
his own, nor is it against equity for God to demand what is thine, seeing
what is thine in keeping, is his indeed; but against justice for man to refuse
to give what in right he has no reason to withhold from the true owner: and
therefore from God to man, da mihi tuum, give me that which is thine, is an
equal demand.

But God has no need of any thing a man has, all the beasts of the forest
are his, and so are the cattle of a thousand hills, etc. His Ocean needs not
our drop, his Alsufficiencie man's wealth: mistake not, his request is not to
supply his own necessity, but first that we should make some expressions of
our duty, and by presenting him with part of our substance, thereby to
acknowledge Nemini dubium est, quod ea quae dei dono accepimus ad dei cultum
refer debeamus. Tim. ad Eccl. cath. lib. 1.
we hold all from him.

Secondly to show our obedience to his blessed ordinance, which enioyneth to
honor the Lord with our substance.

Thirdly for his poor childrens sake, whose case he makes his own.

And so if God stand in need of nothing man can give, yet Christ does, not
Christus merus, sed Christus mysticus.

Not the person of Christ, for God has put all things in subjection under his
feet, and exalted him to be Lord of all.

But the body of Christ Totus Christus est caput and corpus. Aust.
his Church, that labors under many wants, and God expects the necessities of
his Church should be supplied of that which is thine, his Temples beautified,
his Ministers maintained, his poor members relieved, and what is given to any
of these God acknowledges as given to him, so that when God becomes a suitor
unto man, it is not for himself, but for his Church, he makes his Churches
case his own, and when a man gives to his Church, he offers to God, the time
was when the forwardness of the giver prevented all suit: and then so much was
given, that now God needs not to turn beggar for his Church, give him that
which is his own, that which the piety of former times has endowed his
spouse with, and then she may say as Esau to Jacob, I have enough my brother,
keep that thou have unto thy self. Genesis 33.

But yet I have not done with tuum mihi, thy goods, thy body, thy life, omne
tuum, all thou have to God, when by that thou have, thou may do him service,
keep nothing back.

But above all that is thine, thine heart to God: any thing else thou have God
commends into thine hand, and gives thee liberty to dispose of it.

Corpus terrae, thy body Terram terra tegat, demon, peccata resumat, mundus
res habeat spiritus astra petat.
to the earth, earth it is, and to earth it must return, commend it therefore
to the consecrated bed of dust, to sleep with it is fathers, until by the last
trumpe it be awakened to a joyful resurrection.

Bona amicis, leave thy goods to thy friends, to the Saints upon earth, and
such as excel in virtue, and forget not to transport a part before thee in
pious and charitable uses, remember thy friends in heaven as well as thy
kindred upon earth.

Peccatum Dia bolo, thy sin to Satan, he was the first suggester of it, and
a daily tempter to it, stop his mouth with a toll quod tuum est and vade, let
him gain naught from thee but thy sin, that is his, and bid him take his
own and be packing, but Cor mihi, thy heart for God, we must breath out our
souls with David, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum, into thy hands,
O Lord, I commend my spirit, all other parts at times convenient may labor
about the things of this life: but sur sum corda, the Heart must never look so
low heaven is Col. 3. 2.
it is hope, and her conversation must be as high as her hope, where her
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and from this
fellowship she must not stray: when the eyes are abroad in the world, the heart
must still be fixed in heaven, and let nothing remove it from that station,
keep it there, and it keeps the whole man upright: whilst the Heart is devoted
to God, there is no violence, briberie or injustice in the hand; no lust,
covetousness or envy in the eye: the ear is not open to vanity or
blasphemy: there is no Idolatry in the knee, no bitterness or falsehood in the
tongue, no guile in the lips, no impiety to God, no injury to man, and this
is the blessed fruit of the hearts devotion: thy Heart to God then.

Other Competitors there are for the Heart.

The world cries Cor mihi, give me thine heart and thou shall have wealth and
honors.

The flesh cries, Give it me, and thou shall have ease and pleasures.

Give it me (says Satan) and thou shall have all these, the riches of the
world, and the pleasures of the flesh, give him but the heart, and he will give
all, how comes he thus munificent, Paracelfus tells us, he is but a beggarly
spirit, and therefore let him not delude the heart with vain hopes, or deceive
it with false shows, he promises all; but can give none; Matthew. 4.
suppose him able to make his promise good, yet all he promises, even the
whole world, is not a valuable price for the heart, and will any man be so
adventerously foolish, as to sell upon trust, at an under rate; and to Satan
too; so bad a play master, the veriest huckster in the world; Give it him! it is
lost for ever, but in Gods keeping it is sure enough: and this is not all the
heart gains by being devoted to God, not safety Domine quia fecisti nos ad te
irrequiet u^ est cor donec requiescat in te. Aug.
only, but satietie too, he fills the heart, and contents it to the full,
cheering it on earth with his grace, and crowning it in heaven with his glory,
even for his Christ's Jo. 1. 14.
sake, whose is the fullness of grace and glory; to whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit, three Persons, but one LORD GOD Almighty, Be ascribed all
might, majesty and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATUR.

Jan. 26. 1638. GUIL. BRAY.

Good Reader, with thy pen amend the faults escaped in the press thus, ERRATA.
Page. 8. line 5. blot out the. p. 12. l. 20. blot out 4. p. 30. l. 1. read so.
p. 33. l. 20. r. qui se Dei filium. p. 37. l. 6. blot out for. p. 38. l. 18.
Son. p. 40. l. 5. r. recount. p. 43. l. 7. blot out is not. p. 46. l. 23. r.
only, p. 48. l. 3. r. stimulus. p. 52. l. 1. blot out is. p. 58. l. 2. r.
these. p. 60. l. 20. 1. (...) p. 62. l. 12. r. too: l. 13. blot,. p. 64. l. 19.
r. this. p. 67. 19. r. rank. p. 74. l. 2. r. notion. p. 83. l. 20. r. gestus.
p. 84. l. 2. r. the. p. 85. 116. r. cord. p. 87 l. 4. add: p. 88. l. 1. r.
Holocauitis. p. 94. l. 10. r. gald.

In the margent: p. 20. r. dominicam. p. 28. r. substantiam. p. 36. r. proles.
p. 37. r. voluit. p. 55. r. est non. p. 80. r. redun iat. p. 89. r. indiget,
cui unitur. p. 112. r. (...).


