CHRIST'S CHECK TO S. Peter for his curious question, out of those words in
Saint John: Quid ad te? Begun in Paul's Church on S. John's day the Evangelist.
1597. out of part of the Gospel appointed for that day, and prosecuted the same
day this year 1598. in the same place, and else where at other times in six
several Sermons.

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Cuthbert Burbic, and Thomas Gosson. 1599.

To the Honorable, the Right Reverend father in God, Richard, by God his
providence Lord Bishop of London, a careful and most faithful guardiant of his
Church, L. B. most humbly wishes, in this life all the graces of Gods spirit,
and in the life to come the glory of his kingdom.
THose two daughters Ge. 29, 16
of Laban, Rahel, and Leah by which the ^reg. in Ezech.
fathers shadow forth the lives active and contemplative, me thinks may be
taken for a lively resemblance of the worlds two ages, the old world, and this
we live in. For as Leah the elder of those two sisters, Ge. 29. 17
was bleare-eyed for the sight, Ge. 29. 31
but fruitful in her womb, so was the old world something dim sighted: she
saw Nu^ 24. 17
the star of Jacob, but it shone not clearly to her, she beheld Christ
Jesus, but it was a far off with Balaam: yet was she fruitful to the God of
Jacob, she brought him forth great plenty of good works, then men were Genesis
6, 9
just as Noe was, and walked with God, Ge. 5, 22
as Henoch. Eye hence it is that amongst the Gentiles who knew not him which is
Just. lipsi. polit. lib. 3 cap 1
Minerua vera, the 1. Cor. 1 24
eternal wisdom of God his father, and which had not received, nay, which
had not Act. 19. 2
heard of the holy Ghost, yet for external virtues they lived so well, as that
with Caelius Rhod. antiquar. lib. 16. cap. 12
Socrates they have left unto posterity Christianae sanctitatis imaginem
quanda^, such worthy presidents of uprightness and justice, as we that are
Christians, may vouchsafe them imitation. And as Rahel the younger was Genesis 29 17
well eyed, very beautiful, yet Ge. 29, 31
barren in her womb, and brought forth no children: so is this latter age,
quickesighted exceeding full of knowledge (for a great light is Matt. 4 16
risen to us which sat in darkness) but (alas) her womb is barren she wants at
her knees those blessed twins Luke 1, 75
of holiness, unto God and righteousness toward men. I need not accuse her,
the Poet long since told it, that aetas parentu^, was peiorauis, in the
Horatius car. lib. 3 ode, 6
race of obedience, our fathers were left far behind their ancetors, as 1.
Cor. 9 24
Peter was of John when they ran to Christ's Sepulcher; but I may well add,
tulit nos nequiores illis, that if the Jews Iere. 7, 26
in Iosiahs days, do offend in small trespasses, their children will be apt to
heap greater transgressions. Of which general dissolution and defect of true
holiness, the lest cause is not that vain idle Curiositye, which at this day
the world so much affects in knowledge. For the devil Mat. 13 39
that envious man which Mat. 13* 25
would not have the seed prosper, used this as his first engine to bring man to
disobedience; when he told Eve, that her Genesis 3, 5
eyes should be wonderfully opened, and that by knowing all things, at least
she should be God-like, and so Bernard. de gradib. humilitatis.
offerendo prohibitum, and auferendo concessum, dum pomum porrigit paradisum
surripit, brought her to an evil match, to change Paradise for an apple. And
so even to this day he assaults us her offspring, For as the sun in the
firmament by his influence in the beams, transfuseth to the earth both his
Eccle. 23 19
light and Psa. 19, 6
heat: so has this bright sun, the Mala. 4. 2
sun of righteousness Christ Jesus, both his Psalm. 119 105
word to enlighten us, and Luke 24 32
his spirit to inflame us: and therefore as the windows of Salomons rich
Temple 1. Kin. 6. 4
which were exceeding spacious and large without, every one turns his souls
eyes to receive his cheerful light, with Psa. 13, 3
illumina meos oculos, Lord give me understanding: but as the flower which from
that planet has his proper name, (God knows*) there are but few which open
their sinful hearts, to entertain the warm heat of his blessed spirit, with
Ps. 119, 5
vtinam sic viae dirigantur meae. O that my ways might once be made direct.
Which custom in the ministry 2 Timothy 1. 6
tends no ways possibly to edification, it ingenders needelesse questions,
but gets not lively faith. For as in Christ's time, Math. 23 23.
the Scribes and Pharisees, whilst they tithed minte, cummin, and anisseede,
passed over mercy and judgment, weighty points in the law: so also in latter
times Hierom. in epist de duob. filiis.
dum nugastenemus, and opinionum riuulos consectamur, ipsum veritatis fontem
amittimus, many whilst they have spent not their hours by the glass, but the
years of their lives in questions of ceremony, and but matters of
circumstance, have omitted that, which Solomon once said should be both the sum
and substance of a preacher, Eccl 12, 13.
to bid the people fear God, and keep his commandments. And for the
multitude, the children of the church, how much this infirmity preiudiceth
their hearing* that they follow nice scruples neglecting greater duties, that
one example of the Ephesians may admonish us Act. 19, 20.
amongst whom it is said, the word of the Lord did grow mightily, and through
Paul's industrious preaching, at length did much prevail, Act 19. 19.
but not till the books of curious arts were burnt, and they which professed
them had left those studies. If then this curiosity be thus obnoctious both
to the prophets and the people, that counsel of Jesus the son of Syrack is
requisite for these our days, Eccl. 3, 22 23
where he bids us not seek out things which are too hard and hie for us, but
look what God in his law has commanded us, and think on that with reverence
to perform it. For advancement of which rule given by the wise man, having of
late time fallen into a reproof of that sin, by occasion of a scripture which
I handled in Powles church, which was part of the gospel appointed for that
day, I have conceived hope through the mercy of our God, that by publishing
these exhortations, to which by some I have been requested, he that has all
men's hearts in his hands, and winds them at his pleasure, as the rivers in
the south, will so turn and guide the hearts of his people, that from
henceforth they shall not with Luke 10. 40
Martha in the gospel, cumber themselves with things less necessary, but with
Mary choose the best part, that one thing which is requisite. In which my
endeavors to accomplish this desire, by the blessing of god upon these few short
sermons, (which I send forth as harbingers to make way for others that I
intend as motives in the like kind of morality) I have thought it my duty in all humble lowliness, and obsequious reverence, to offer these the first fruits
of my slender labors, as the churches due* to your honorable good Lordship,
unto whom specially (next to that Right reverend and most gracious Lord, my
Lord of Canterburies grace, who for holiness and learning, is our English
Churches glory) I doubt not, but all of us stand bound in conscience, to
yield both entire obedience and reverence. Wherefore not this only, but my
self for ever in all such services, I both submit and commend to your
Lordshippe; for whom I will not cease to solicit God by prayer, that from this
tabernacle, on which you wait in this honorable city (the kings seat, the
kingdoms beauty) there never may depart the two complet tables of the blessed
testament, nor the golden pot of the heavenly manna, nor Aarons rod by your
hands well managed. And thus in all duty I humbly take my leave, from
Clarkenwell the first of January. 1598.

Your honorable good Lordships most devoted remembrancer in his prayers.
LAVRENCE BARKER.

Christ's check to Saint Peter for his curious question. Out of the 21.
Chapter of S. John's Gospel, in the midst of the 22. Verse.
What is that to thee? THe five senses of our body, stars of this lesser*
world, which Celius Rh^ do. antiq. lect. li. 13 cap 2.
were ordained for trusty intelligencers to the soul, should be as the Judge.
18. 2
five spies of the tribe of Dan, to discover unto us y^ caelestiall Lachish
which admits Iud. 18. 7 10
no trouble, and affoords all blessings. For such is that mountain of our
eternal happiness, August.
Vbi nihil obest, nihil deest, nihil affluit, nihil defluit; a place of most
divine, most unspeakable contentment, where no evil thing is lurking, nor good
thing lacking, nothing wants, nor nothing wastes. And thus (though not by
nature but by gracious wonder) did the sense Mat. 17, 4
of seeing in Peter, James and John, give them a sweet glimpse of heavens
glorious kingdom, when betwixt Elias and Moses on the mount with his
Sun-bright countenance, and resplendent robes, they saw Christ Jesus as he was
transfigured. And thus did the sense of hearing in that Act. 9, 15
chosen vessel Paul, make the Eccl. 12, 4
quicke-discerning daughters of Music before times unacquainted with such
heavenly acce^ts, 2. Cor. 12 4
partakers of that language which they speak in Paradise. But I know not how
these officers of the mind, though employed in a service of such importance,
are every one subject, (as Albertus Patauinus dom. 1. in quadrag.
Albertus has observed) to five corruptions, as many as themselves are. As
(omitting the rest, to instance in the sight, Julius Scaliger de Subt. Excer 37
sect. 32.
qui seen scit primus, which when the soul goes to rest bids us first
god-night) every one experimenteth it in the current of his life, that the two
eyes which Mat. 6. 22
should be windows for this clayie tabernacle, to let in light ye spirits
co^forter, ofttimes as false doors receive sin into the soul, for Vitiis in
animu^ Quintil. declam. 1
per oculos est via, iniquity through the eie-lids can glide into the heart.
This made David entreat God Ps. 139. 4
the builder of this frame, that he would shut up, or Ps. 119, 37
keep close these passages to his soul, least otherwise vanity should get
entertainment. He knew belike that which I must speak, that this sense makes
default when the eye her (...), is either wandering abroad, or wanton at home,
longs for things forbidden, or deuoureth all she sees, or else prieth too
narrowly into hidden secrets.

By the first she failed Genesis 34, 1
in Dinah whose eyes were no house-doues, but must needs be gadding out of
Succoth into Canaan. By the second she erred even Act, 13* 22
in David though so holy, whose eyes 2. Sam. 11 2, 4
glauncing forth their beams on Beth shebas fair beauty, made their reflection
on his heart with hot burning lust. By the third, she offended in the first
woman that possessed her, who seeing the fruit of the forbidden tree, Genesis 3, 6
lovely to the eye, and like to please the taste, longed till she was
fingering that interdicted fruit, and ceased not, till believing the devils
Gem. 3. 4.
non moriemini, tush woman build on my word, ye shall never die for it, she
made us all obnoxious to Ge. 2. 17
morte morieris, till she had left a double death, as inheritance for her
offspring. By the fourth the sight trespassed in Josh 7, 21
Achan, the son of Charmi, where meeting with so rich an object as a
Babilonish garmente, certain shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold, she so
sharpened the appetite of his dropsie-thirsting soul, that but that treasure,
nothing could suffice her. By the fifth and last way, she misled the men of 1 Samuel 6. 19.
Bethshemesh, whose eyes she made curious to search the holy arc, for whose
least touch (though well meaning) god 2 Samuel 6, 17
fearfully slew Vzza, and which the very Leuits, though attendant on the
sanctuary, Nu^. 4. 15
were straightly charged they should not dare to handle it. And thus our two
eyes ( duo magna luminaria) the Sun and Moon of this our mortal essence
which Pl^to in Time^.
should be for looking Glasses to our sinful soul, in which they might
contemplate Gods works of wonder, as false Glasses represent them with wanton
fantasies, with voluptuous thoughts or covetous desires: and when with humble
modesty and constant Meditations, they should guide us as Mat. 2, 11
the Star did the wise men in the East, till we come to Christ Jesus
himself at Bethlehem, what with vanity, and what with curiosity they
misleade our steps (as Elisha 2. Kin. 6, 19
conducted the host of the Aramites into the midst of Samaria) amongst our
enemies. As this is true in the eye which is the myrrour of the body: so it is
true in our understanding, which is the Aristoteles Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 1
eye of the soul, which when it should advance it self to heavenly
meditation, being in the own nature in the flesh, Caeleus Rh. antiq. lect.
li. 16 ca 18
vt gemma in annulo, as a rich precious pearl in a ring of gold, and yet by
sin in the body Cicero de amicitia.
vt captiua in carcere, as a wretched prisoner in a loathsome cave, is
surprised and kept under Wis. 9, 15
by this earthly burden, and hindered (as the eyes) with the self same five
impediments. To let pass the rest, as not so nearly allied to Saint Peter in
my text, for vain curiosity in affecting knowledge, how much it preiudiceth
all fruitful thoughts of Gods matchless glory, and our endless bliss, it
is undoubtedly certain, Hugo de abusionib. claufiri.
that our knowledge, which as a sparkle covered in the ashes, by holy
meditations should be kindled to a fire, though with smoke, till at length by
contemplation, it be a clear fire without smoke, has no greater enemies then
those two monsters, Otium and curiositatem, idleness, and curiosity, of the
which the first holds the mind, lest she blow up that sparkle, and the
other sleckes it, when the flame is greatest. Wherefore our Lord and blessed
Savior Christ Jesus, who amongst those three kinds of desired good things, the
Math. 6, 33.
eternal, which is the kingdom of heaven, the internal, which is the
righteousness thereof, and the external, which are the things of this life,
would have the first to be most affected; when he found it indaungered in his
beloved Apostle, by his vain curiosity in things of no moment, sharply
encountreth him with this present check, Quid id ad te?

Any far fetched coherence shall not need for this scripture, being an even
tenor of a continued history, recording a dialogue betwixt Christ and Saint
Peter; in which when our savior had bidden Peter to follow him, he
protracting his obedience, and busying himself otherwise, fell a questioning
with Christ, what service it would please him to command Saint John the beloved
disciple, which question as unseasonable for the time, and impertinent to the
purpose, our Savior reprooueth as being too curious, telling Peter that
concerns him not. Quid id ad te? In which short but sharp reproof that
Christ frames against Peter, we may naturally for the text, and profitablie
for this age, observe these four particulars: First the agent in this text,
the person that speaks it: and that is a sovereign Lord, commanding duty,
and answered for the time, not with obedience but with questions. For if ye
look back ye shall find in the first word of this verse, that it is Jesus
that speaks this, even the same which said, Follow me, in the 19. verse. The
second is the action, what this agent does, and that is a sharp reproof of
Curiosity; in which our Savior contenteth not him self to say to Saint
Peter, as he did to all the apostles; but with more vehemency repels his
question. For when Act. 1, 7
they asked him being at Jerusalem, Lord will thou at this time restore the
kingdom unto Israel, he answered, it concerns you not, this is not for you
to know, speaking definitiuely without interrogation: but here when S. Peter
makes his needles motion, our savior speaks earnestly with a sharp
reprehension, saying not, this is nothing to thee, but what is this to thee
Peter, Quid hoc ad te?

The third thing is the subject of this reproof, in which Peter to Christ had
bewrayed his curiosity: and if we look as narrowly to his fact for the faults,
as Act. 3. ^.
y^ beggar did afterward to his hands for an alms, we shall easily descrie
in him three kinds of curiosity. The first for his knowledge, the second for
his care, and the third for his action. The first branch of this sin is his
inordinate desire, to know more then that which god would reveal him; for some
things there be Act. 1. ^
whereof God makes reservation, and never discloseth them to the sons of men,
of which it becomes not the saints to be inquisitiue; and therefore our
savior says If I will that he tarry, what is that to thee? The second branch
is his care in things of no moment, neglecting in the mean season duties of
importance: for what were the actions or passions of S. John, his going to the
grave in peace or from the cross, if it be compared with that obedience which
the apostle did owe to our savior Christ Jesus? So that his master might well
say, Quid id? what is that circumstance of John's death to this substance of
thy dewtie, that needles question to this necessary office? Quid id ad te?
what stand thou about trifles, when I command thee great things? The third
branch is his business in other men's affairs, forgetting the duty that
appertains himself: for he inquireth not of himself, but asks of John;
and therefore our savior says not, Quid ad rem, what is that to the purpose?
but quid ad te? this is an other man's cause Peter, if it must needs be that
this question must be answered to some, it were more fit that John should
demand it, but as for thee Peter what do thou meddling? Quid ad te? This
concerns not thee Peter.

And these are the three parts of S. Peter's curiosity, which may not vnaptlie
be * better distinguished by those three words which the Grecians use to
entitle this sin by. For first sometimes they term it (...) a bootles lost
labor, and this may well agree to the first part of S. Peter's fault in
searching out Gods will which he had not reucaled, in which his attempt is
therefore frustrate. Sometimes they call this sin (...) a needles labor or
pains besides the matter, and so (God wottes) was S. Peter's curiosity,
whilst he intended small things omitting greater. Another name they have when
they call it (...) the busy bodies fault, the medlers infirmity. And this
must needs agree to saint Peter's trespass when questioning of saint John, he
forgotte himself. These therefore are the subject in which the fault was
committed.

The fourth and last thing is the object of this action, the person on whom
Christ fasteneth this rebuke; and that was saint Peter's, one that always before
was sparing in his question, that feared to demand ought when others presumed
to ask; yet him Christ reprooueth with his Quid ad te?

Of these four parcels of this reprehension, the agente, the action, the
obiecte and the subject, in order as they lie, and in measure for the time.
And first for the agent.

The party which utters this demerited reproof, is no meaner then Gods
son the worlds savior Christ Jesus, Math. 4, 19. 20.
who taking Peter from the nets a poor fisher in the sea, to make him in the
Church a fisher for men's souls, Mat. 16, 17.
had instructed him from heaven with his fathers secrets, and had John 21, 7
mightily confirmed him in the faith which he had given him, by working in
his sight strange signs and wonders. Of him therefore as a John 15. 5.
grafte of his fathers planting, which he had Luke 13. 9
hedged in, dug round, and trimmed with such industry I say (not he Esaias
5, 2
expected grapes and gathered bitter clusters) but Mar. 11 13
he looked for pleasante fruit, and (alas) found naught but leaves on it.

For after those Mat. 3, 17 and Matt 4. 18
three years of Peter's following Christ, from his baptism in Jordan, to his
Ioh. 18, 15
passion at Jerusalem, our savior would now try how his scholar had
profited, what progress he had made in his masters school, if he had taken
out his lesson from knowledge to obedience, and therefore in this place he
salutes S. Peter, Matt. 11, 15
not with Qui aures habet audiat etc. Peter if thou have ears listen well unto
me, I Mar. 9, 5
am the Rabbi of the Jews, and the Luke 2, 32
doctor of the gentiles; but Mar. 8, 33
Qui meus est discipulus etc. he that will be my Disciple must use his feet,
and with his cross must follow me; sequere me, says our Savior.

And how proved Saint Peter, was he cunning in his lesson? When his master
called him did he straight way follow him? No (God knows) a raw scholar,
not ready yet in this point: he yields not due obedience, but first
pawseth, and then questioneth. First he pawseth for a while, and looks back
amongst his fellows, before he sets one foot forth to follow Christ on
forward.

And why so S. Peter? knew thou not the danger, Gene. 19, 26
for Lots lingering wife if she turn but back to Sodom, or Luke 9, 62
for him that looks homewarde, if his hand be at the plough once, how the one
was turned into a senseless pillar of salt, and the other proved unfit to
be one of Gods kingdom? Fear thou not the same Lord, whose armorie is
still stored with dreadful ordinance to execute his vengeance, and has his
angels as well in the days of the Gospel, Act. 21, 23
to strike-dead proud Herod for his presumptuous arrogancy, as he had in the
time of the law and the Prophets, to 1. Cor. 10, 10
slay cruel Pharaoh, for his disobedience, or to 2 King. 19, 35
kill so many thousands in the Assirian host? How dare thou then Peter make
stand, yea but a breathing while? when Christ called thee forward, how durst
thou look backward?

None but flesh and blood can stand up to plead for him, reason only but
not grace must make his Apology. It is an easy thing to be a Censor, it is
soon said, why did thou it; but tu sihic esses aliter sentires, not one
amongst a thousand of us, but would do as saint Peter did.

When it comes once to poenam damni, or poenam sensus, that a 1. Mar.* 8, 34
man must deny himself, and take up a Cross too; that he must forgo
ought, or endure ought for the testimony of Christ Jesus, John 6, 6^
Iste sermo durus est, as the Disciples said of another thing, this is a
shrewd Text, it will win but few hearers. For the former of these two which
is poena damni, to part with ought for Gods cause, many can be content,
because Psalm. 105 34
that is one end of his blessings, that we may keep his Statutes, and
observe his Laws) to serve God for wages as Job. 1. 9
the Devil said that Job did, they will own the Lord for theirs, if they
may indent upon conditions, in such words as Gene. 28 20
Jacob did utter as a vow, if he will find them bread to eat, and clothes
to put on, if from time to time he will furnish them with necessaries: but if
it come once to a parting blow between us and our riches, that Mat. 7. 14
because the Gate is narrow where we must follow Christ Matt. 11 29
that stouped low, we must therefore Heb. 12, 1
cast away the earthly load that burdeneth us, then 2, Tim. 4 10
with Demas farewell Christ, ye must walk alone sir, we will not leave the
worlds treasure, no not for the worlds redeemer, if none but these must be
Articles of Christ's calling and our coming, the greatest part with the young
man spoken Matt. 19, 22
of in the Gospel, with sad hearts and drouping heads will turn away and
look backewards.

And for the latter of these two (which is poena sensus, enduring ought, or
suffering in the quarrel of the highest) if with Haman Hest. 5, 3
we might be called to Hesters iunkets, John. 2, 2
or with Christ himself to the marriage at Cana, O that were excellent, that
would right fit our natures, to the banquet of a Queen, or the wedding of a
bride, what messenger could call us but we would straightway follow him?

But if we be offered at Gods hand Psa. 75, 8
not the red Wine of promotion, but Matt. 26, 39
the bloody cup of Christ's bitter passion, such a Act. 9, 16
feast as S. Paul was invited to for his welcome, Matt. 20, 20
the^ with the sons of Zebedee, we had rather be in his Kingdom, we
Matthew. 13 21
will presently complain that the Sun of tribulation, scorcheth too hot in
those holy climates, it will make us give again as men offended at it. The
same cause wrought in Peter his delaying turnebacke, and made him pawse, when
our savior called him. For at the Mat. 4, 18
sea of Galilie when Christ allotted him, with sequere me to an honorable
Apostleshippe, to be a Aug de mirab. scrip. lib. 3, cap, 7
worthy leader of his military forces, Aug. to. ^ epist. 59
a Bellweather of his flock, the sheep of his pasture, May. 4, 20
then adieu all fishnettes, presently he followed him: but if at the Sea John.
21, 7
of Tiberias the same Christ appoint him, with Follow me again to a
painful Martyrshippe, John 21, 18
where he shall not gyrde himself, but give others leave to do it, where he
shall not go at liberty, but be led to grievous torments, when his body
shall be gyrded with Coardes and Chains in, and his hands and feet shall
be fastened to a Cross, it is no marvel if he linger, it is no strange
thing if he turn back. And this may reason allege, but it is but carnal
wisdom, for Peter's first default in his lesson of obdience: to wit, when
Christ called him, how durst he stand to look back? Because it was a
charge of so hot a service.

And this because it pleased Christ 1. Cor. 1, 24
Gods eternal wisdom, graciously to pass over with so gentle silence, let
not us be too straight in our animaduersions.

But and cunctationem and curiositatem importat haec quaestio, as Vill^^^
centius de sanctis.
one has observed upon his words in this Gospel: Saint Peter being posed
in his Lesson of obedience, was found tardie in his answer, not only for
delays, but also for his vain and fruitless curiosity. For had he but
looked back, and then eftsoons followed, some pretense of excuse might have
been made for his loytering, as his was which Luke 9, 61
said, I will follow thee Master, but first let me bid them farewell that
are at home: so might Peter have said, Master I will follow thee, but first
give me leave a while to bid flesh and blood adue. Such old friends as we
are, like 1. Sam. 20. 41
Jonathan and David, can not without weeping so suddenly be parted.

But this was not all, he that for three years had been a daily auditour,
not of Solomon 1, Kin. 10, 1
for Wisdom the worlds renowned wonder, Matthew. 12 42
but of Christ himself far greater then Solomon, whose words as Luke 4, 22
heavens dew distilling from his lips, filled his hearers hearts with deepest
admiration, fell not yet to action, but was still in speculation, yielded not
obedience to that which he had heard, but still was questioning to attein more
knowledge, with Quid hic? quid faciet? one thing more good master, resolve me
in this point, I have something yet to ask you. And this itching humor of
desiring further knowledge, without putting in practice his former lesso^s, our
Savior reproues here in his blessed Apostle, saying, Quid ad te Petre?

It was true amongst the pagans in their humane philosophy, Cornelius Tacitus,
annal. lib. ^ 15.
which the dark writing chronicler has noted in their histories, that multi
erant qui doctrina ore tenus exerciti, animum tamen bonis artib. non induerant,
that there were many which were well seen in their liberal arts, yet not so
excellent in their moral virtues. It is as true, nay it is too true, which a
Anselmus de lib arb. lib. 8.
reverend father and an honorable prelate of this kingdom once said, nititur
homo totis virib. etc. Man mightily laboreth for his souls understanding to
have it enlightened with the godheads brightness, but for the will and affections
to have them well ordered by the guidance and government of the same blessed
Deity, but few regard it, there is scarce any that respect it. Belike men
have placed their knowledge (as one said) on too good grounds) in codice non
in cord, in ore non in more, Men are full of book learning, not
breast-learning, they have appointed wisedoms residence in their mouths, not
in their manners. In deed it is so in all ages, and both sexes, mankind
couets skilfulnesse, but it seeks not righteousness. Let men else take a
view of that unjust Pilate, who asked of Christ Jesus judge of quick and
dead, yet arrayned at his bar as a malefactor, Ioh. 18. 38
Quid est quaeso veritas? I pray thee what is truth, what is that truth thou
talkest on? yet never had intention to defend or hold the same truth.

And let women see their faces in those Ephesian Glasses 2. Tim. 3,
where many of their sex were simple and laden with much sin, yet always
learning, inquisitiue for more knowledge. Then of both sexes and the greatest
number, the Philosopher said long since that which we find at this instant,
Seneca ad Lucillum epist. 19
Plus vitae quam scholae discimus, though we practice not the old lessons,
yet we would feign take forth new; though we exercise not our obedience,
yet we desire to increase our knowledge, how soever that convince us of vain
curiosity. But was this true in Peter? had he such inclination? Yea it is too
apparent, Christ has detected his infirmity. It had been enough for the
heathen Philosophers, much more then enough for Pilate amongst the Jews, and
too too too much for the women of Ephesus which were Christians, always to
have been learners and never followers; and yet in the same crime was blessed
Peter guilty, who had often been taught John. 15, 3
by the Oracle from heaven, whose Psa. 45, 7
lips were full of grace, who was blessed for ever, and yet being called did
not follow Christ Jesus, which had been the inuring of his former lesson,
sequere: but still sought more knowledge, was asking more questions, and this
is that which our Savior reprehendes in this question, saying, Quid ad te?

And well worthy of reproof was this disordered appetite of seeking wisdom
without due obedience, which Christ found in Saint Peter his blessed Apostle.
For there is nothing in the world which may be termed good, but the
Philosophers have Cic. de offic. lib. 2
comprised it in those three words, honestum, vtile and iucundum, the
pleasurable, the profitable, and the honorable good: nor there is none of
these three, but they are concurrent in that true wisdom which breeds
immortality. As (not to waste your time, nor weary your hands in turning
leaf by leaf for the several proofs) see them all knitte together in one
verse, by Jesus the son of Siracke in his Book Wis. 8, 18
of Wisdom, where you shall find that first in wisdoms friendship there
is exceeding ^leasure, and that is the first kind of good things, the
pleasing good, the delightful: secondly, that in her works are infinite
riches, and I know you will all say, that those are goods profitable: and in
the last place, that in her exercise, there is endless glory; and, then that
(I pray you) what is more honest or honorable? But though these be incident to
that true substantial wisdom, which consists Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
not in receiving, but keeping the ordinances of Jehovah, that it is both
pleasant (for Eccl. 23. 27.
nothing is more sweet then to take heed to Gods testimonies) and wondrous
profitable, (for 1. Tim. 6. 6.
godliness is great riches) and to make up the third, that it is passing
honorable (for it is Eccl. 23. 28.
no small glory to follow the Lord:) yet in this learning of Saint Peter's,
which wanted practice, and was 1. Tim. 6. 19
not sound wisdom, but a desire of knowledge, without performance of such
duties as were taught him: there were none of these good things, neither
pleasure, profit, nor honor: it was neither pleasing unto Christ, nor
profitable to himself, nor gracious to the world, which might take notice of
it: and therefore no marvel, being thus void of all goodness, if his master
found fault with it, when he said to him, Quid ad te?

For the first of these three (to point them all out briefly) that Peter's
question did deserve a check, as a thing not well-pleasing unto Christ
himself, I presume that few words will serve to euince it. For Cic. de Off.
lib. 1.
what is the end of all precepts in morality, but to draw us on to performance
of some duty? What is Julius Sc^liger de subt. excer. 256.
the perfection of man's imperfect nature, but to put in execution, what our
selves have invented, or others have advised us? Nay, what is the maine drift
of our first creation, by which God has planted us in these lower regions?
Surely this, Cic. de finib. 2.
as the strong-boned ox seems fashioned for the plough, and the Pro. 21.
last verse.
horse to have been made against the day of battle, as the light Job. 5. 7.
airekindled spark is destined to fly upward: so first was man ordained for
these two purposes, Caelius Rhod. anti. lect. lib. 2. cap. 17.
ad intelligendum, and agendum, to see Gods works, and to do his will. If Peter
then will still be knowing, and never doing, but leave the practice
unperformed, his nature unperfected, his creation frustrated, which way is it
possible that this should please his master, who requires Iam 1 22.
as well action, as contemplation? If the heathen man could say, Cic. de finib.
1.
Non paranda est nobis, sed fruenda sapientia, our office stands not altogether
in attaining learning, but a great part of it in the use and fruition of
wisdom; how should Peter do his office, or how should Christ accept it,
since yet he was questioning, and fell not to obedience?

That sweet father S. Bernard, if he had lived in his days, could have told
Saint Peter Bernard in Cantica.
that the doctrine of the Gospel should accendere charitatem, non acuere
curiositate^, that those which will be disciples in Christ's school, must be
stude^ts in charity, not listners to curiosity, must as well learn to love, as
love to learn, Ioh. 6. 63.
for the words which Christ speaks are both spirit and life.

My son (says Solomon, Eccl. 1. 1.
Ierusalems royal Preacher) what? let thine eyes delight in beholding my
ways: no, but Pro. 23. 26
give me thy heart, let that follow me in my ways: bestow on me (my son) I
ask thee now a boon, do not lend me, but give me, not thine eyes but thy
heart, not to look on me, but to love me; not to behold me, but to embrace me:
give me (good Peter) says Christ Jesus our redeemer, not the hearing but the
following, not the audience, but obedience: and can this be well pleasing, if
he deny him either?

Why, blessed Peter, can thou be ignorant, how God Exodus 28. 30.
commanded Aaron, that honorable high Priest, to put in the breast plate of
judgment, which he should wear on his heart, as well Vrim as Thummin, as well
perfection, as light? Have thou not read what charge Moses Deu. 31. 26.
gave the Levites, as well to keep the covenant of the Law in their hearts,
least it should rise against them as a witness unanswerable, as to lay up the
book in the side of the Arc, there to keep it safe in the Tabernacle for
ever? Do thou not remember holy David's instruction, which he 1. Chron. 28. 9.
gave his successor in the kingdom at his way-gate; Solomon my son, know
the God of thy fathers, there is half, but not all; and serve him with a
perfect heart and a willing mind; there is the finishing of his counsel.
Heardst thou not what thy master himself did testify, of holy John Baptist
his Mal. 3. 1
fore-running harbinger, that he was Ioh. 5. 35.
not only (...), but (...), not only a lamp, whose week gave light to
others, but as well a fire, whose flame gave warmth and heat, as it is Ecc.
48. 1
also true in Elias Ioh. 11. 4
his type? Nay (not to send thee so far back) see thou not thine own
Lord, the great shepherd of the world, the Archbishop of our souls (as thou
thy self can worthily 1. Pet. 2. last.
entitle him) how as a faithful Pastor, he has not only Ioh. 10. 16
a voice with which he makes his poor flock acquainted, but Ioh. 10. 4
also has feet, as a good guide to go before them?

And (not to wander from thy self) is it possible thou have forgotten, what
eue^ now in the last words Christ spoke to thee in particular? how he said Ioh.
21. 15
not only thrice, Pasce, Peter, feed my lambs well, (a work I must needs say,
that would require some knowledge) but thrice also importuned thee Ioh. 21. 15.
with Ecquid Petre, amas me? What Peter? do thou love me? an action which
implies a diligent obedience. And if thou will yet be learning for the one,
and make no practice of the other, will this satisfy thy master? will this be
acceptable to Christ Jesus? No, no S. Peter, if thou le^dest him but thine
ears, and give him not thine heart, if thou make all thy breast plate of
Vrim, and no Thu^mim, if thou layst up the law in the Ark, not in thy breast,
and wilt know God, but not serve him; if thou will have John Baptists light,
and so shine like a glo-worme, and not labor for his heat that thou may
inflame as fire does, if thou will imitate the shepherds voice, and not learn
to tread the shepherds pace, always be feeding, and never following; ever
questioning, and never practicing: this cannot please Christ it must needs make
him check thee; and for thy endless curiosity, omitting due obedience,
chastise thee with this necessary reproof in my text, saying, Quid ad te? this
befits not thee Peter.

Thus Peter's demand has no favor with his master, it sounds nothing well in
the ears of Christ Jesus, he loves not to see his scholars prove always
questionists, and never sue forth their grace ad practicandum; that they should
always be auditors, and never actors, this is a condition that little does
content him. Peter therefore had need bethink himself in the second place,
since his question is not gracious with him to whom he makes it, if it will be
commodious to himself that propounds it. Is it therefore profitable for Peter
to be inquisitiue, without yielding obedience to Christ's former precepts? or is
it not rather hurtful? does it not prejudice his safety, to thirst thus after
knowledge with neglect of duty? Surely I fear it will prove so in both the
branches.

For (touching the former) if Math. 5. 13.
there be serviceable use in unsavory salt, which is good for nothing but to be
trodden under feet, then let Peter also hope for a gainefull harvest after this
dry seed time of his unseasonable questions: but if Plutarch Plutarch de
educand. liberis.
could have told him, that in those two kinds of good lives, the active and
contemplative endeavors without knowledge are not more unprosperous, then
knowledge without endeavors is vain and frivolous, Peter must needs think the
same thing in cases of religion, Iustus Lipsias polit, lib. 1. cap. 6.
that pietas sine morib. vana est imo nulla: profession without devotion is a
vanity, yea it is a nullity: pretended holiness without intended godliness,
is but like the apples which are said to be in Jury, which are fair and fresh
colored to their eyes which behold them, but vanish into soft air if a man
but touch them; such is their religion which are ever learning, and never
practice, and such is Peter's state in this place, who has his Quid hic, what
shall John do, but obeys not Christ's Sequere, himself will not follow him.

If this be profitable, I would you read but that one page Greg. super Euange.
hom. 9.
which S. Gregory thought not much to write in this argument. Quid prodest o
gra^matice: and I wonder what it should profit the greatest linguist in the
world, which without interpreter were able to negociate with strangers of all
kingdoms, and men of all nations, yea could speak the tongues 1. Cor. 13. 1.
both of men and Angels, and yet had no skill n Isa. 19. 18.
in the language of Canaan, which is Luke. 2. 13.
gloria in excelsis, with divine notes of Re^l. 19. 1.
Halleluia, which could neither pray to God nor praise him? I fear me nothing.
What advantage were it to be an Luke 10. 2^
admirable rare Scribe, a skillful expounder of the whole text of the Law, and
yet not be able to find out the narrow path which leads to the inheritance of
everlasting life? surely this were nothing. What were it for a man to equalize
in knowledge either 1. Kings. 9. 33.
Ethan or Heman, Chalcol or Darda, those famous men the sons of Mahol, yea to
be able to enter the lists of comparison which Solomon himself, in 1. Kings.
3. 1.
whom appeared Gods wisdom, who could learnedly discourse the hidden 1.
Kings. 4. 33.
nature of all plants, whether trees, shrubbes or herbs, from the Cedar to
the hysop, nay (one step higher) what if with Adam in his innocence he Genesis 2.
20.
could know every foul in the air, all the cattle in the field, and call
them every one distinctly by their names, and yet Genesis 3. 23.
wanted obedience to keep himself in paradise, alas, what should this profit
him? In one word, what were it with Judas Iscariot, I say, not to be called
John. 12. 6.
to the office of Christ's officer, but to be Lu. 6. 16.
freely admitted a scholar of Christ schole, there John. 15. 15.
to hear and learn the secrets of Gods kingdom, and yet to Math. 27. 5.
die desperate, with his own damned hands; to have his Act. 1. 18.
bowels gush from his body, and his John. 17. 12.
soul drenched in torments? what auailed this knowledge, what could such
learning profit him? Doubt less not any thing, no more then he should gain by
his unhappy bargain, who when he had Math. 16. 26.
compassed the highest honors, the sweetest pleasures, and vnmeasurablest
riches, which the huge circu^ference of this whole world contains, should
loose or let perish that divine part of his essence?

For it must needs be true of knowledge, which is but one single good thing, if
it may be avouched of al other such graces; that it profits a man nothing, if
he could possibly attain, not only Salomons rare wisdom, but al other such
complements as Iud. 16. 3.
Sampsons matchless strength, and Esa. 14. 25.
Absalons fair beauty, Sam. 2. 18.
Azahels swift footmanship, with Augustu^ his royal dignity, and to i Luck.
2. 1.
enjoy all these blessings a long life like Genesis 5. 27.
Methusalems, and yet so to use them as that at the length I siodorus de summo
bon^.
daretur caro vermibus, anima daemonibus, his flesh should be made a booty to
the worms, and his soul a pray to the devils in hell: this must needs be a
loosing match, it profits not the merchant. No more could it benefit S. Peter
this Apostle, though by his busy question he should learn the future
accidents of John's life and death, the manner, time and place; nay though he
should get to see the platform of that government, by which the heavenly
Angels are ruled in their orders, and yet himself should not yield obedience to
Christ's precepts, but when his master bids follow him, should still stand
asking questions; certainly this knowledge could nothing profit him. And
therefore as lost labor or vain beating of the air, our Savior reproues this
learning without practice, saying: Quid ad te Petre? etc.

And worthily did he incur the danger of this check, as wasting his
precious time in bootlesse actions. For 1 Timothy 6. 6.
godliness indeed is exceeding great riches, and has annexed to it sweet
gracious promises 1. Tim. 4. 8.
both for this life present, and for the life to come. But is Peter able to
maintain the same assertion, for his desire of knowledge, in which so much he
sweateth, that either in this world it can make him truly wise, or else in the
next world everlastingly blessed? No, no, S. Peter, thy furdest aim comes
too too short of the nearest scantling; neither sound wisdom nor heavens
felicity, ensue of that knowledge which wants obedience. For as touching the
former, it is an interchangeable verity, that as Aristot. Eth lib. 6.
impossible est prudentem esse non bonum, in matters of morality it is a mere
impossibility, for a wise man to fall into notorious enormities, so Julius
Scal^ ger de subtle exercit. 274
sapiens esse non potest qui sit idem malus, he that is a wicked man (how
learned so ever) has no right to challenge the name of a wise man. For they
which Romans 1. 21.
know God in the volume of the creaturs (a book read in Psalm. 19. 1.
al languages, though but once printed, and never since translated) and yet do
not glorify the same God as creator, how soever they profess themselves to be
wise in the world, yet in the judgment of him that is 1. Tim. 1. 17.
Solus sapiens, their To. 1. 22.
hearts are but dark, and themselves are but fools: we may say of these men
Cicero de finib. 5.
as M. Piso said to Tully of another, Haec quum praeclare didicerint, tamen
nihil scient, When they have learned never so much, and yet practice never a
whit, their knowledge is no wisdom, it is no true Philosophy. We must
rather say as the Orator did of pronunciation, that not to know God, but to
fear him, is both the entrance, the progress, and accomplishment of
substantial wisdom. For the entrance, believe the 1 Sum. 23 1.
sweet singer of Israel, who says Psalm. 111. last.
that the rudiments, the very alphabet of true wisdom, is not the knowledge,
but the fear of the Lord, and that the profoundest understanding of all
others is in the^, not which can define it, but which have entertained it. That
made saint Paul say, Ephesians. 5. 15.
that those indeed are wise men, which take heed to themselves, and whose take
heed to themselves, and whose lives are circumspect. And because such
footesteppes tread always, in those Ps. 34. 13
two paths, which turn from evil, and lead us unto good: for the former
branch, just Job said, Job 28. 2^
that to depart from iniquity, is the highest tippe of mortal man's wisdom:
and for the latter, the wiseman has left us his warrant, that Pro. 28. 7
the keeper of the law is the child of understanding, for Chry sostomus.
non eloquiae Dei scire sed secundum haec viuere est vera sapientia, not to
know Gods commandments, but to walk in his statutes, is that which commendes
a man for his wisdom. If ye look for the progress, a man's commensing in
this Art (which is Ars artium, the Lady of all Sciences) surely Lactantis
contra grates lib. 1.
in hoc vno est vt Deum cognoscamus and colamus, this is the sole subject, in
which consistes sound wisdom, not that we know god only, but that we serve
him semblably, this is the co^pendium of al christianity. It is a delitious
saying, as sweet as the hony-deaw, Sa^. 1. 14. 25
which Jonathan once tasted, which saint Bernard g that good father, has left
to this purpose: which therefore, (lest I impeach the grace thereof in
translating) let me present you with it in such ornaments as himself first
gave it. Si prioris vit ae, peccata defleas, si huius saeculi desiderabili^
paruipendas, si aeternam beatitudinem toto animo concupiscas, si tibi horum
singula sapiunt prout sunt, iuuenisti plane sapientiam veram. If men with holy
David, in sad sorrowful laments, for the Psalm: 25. 6
sins and offenses of their frail oft-sliding youth, can water their Psalm. 6.
6.
night couches with plenteous streams of bracchish water from their weeping
eyes, or if women with Luc. 7. 39
that knotorious known sin of Jerusalem, can wash Christ Jesus his feet
with repentant tears, and with their hair as towelles, can wipe and dry them
soft, if both of them, 1 Io. 2. 15.
as they are commanded to continue this world and her furniture, Phil. 3. 8
can esteem the things of this world, but loss and dross, for the
excellent knowledge of their Lord and savior, and if for the next world they
can say with Saint Paul, Phil. 1. 23
Cnpio dissolut and esse cum Christo, I take no felicity in this long
lingering soiourning, since Ps. 84. 6
in this vale of misery I have Hebr. 12 13
no continuing City, but elsewhere do look for one that is to come, even
Heb. 12. 24
the City of the living GOD, the celestial Jerusalem, where is the company
of the first borne, and innumerable Angels, yea, where my Lord himself is
the mediator of the new Testament, I desire to be loosed from this massy
lump of sin, and as a member to be joined with Christ Jesus my head. O
happy are such men, and thrice happy are those women, which do such works,
which use such wishes, those only have the right Rellice of true heavenly
wisdom, in whose mouths such speeches are not distasteful.

And for the third and last, which is the perfect accomplishment, the final
closing up of this wisdom which we speak of, it is well worthy the observing,
which 2 Pet. 1. 21.
the inspirer of all prophets has left recorded by David his Act 1. 16.
choice (...), in that exquisite description of an ungodly sinner where Psalm.
36. 1
laying his heart open, he finds no one sparkle of Gods holy fear in it,
noting all his words, he says they are either unrighteous or deceitful, and
surueying all his works, taints them all with folly, for he leaves to deal
wisely, he cease to do good, says the psalmist, this is the sinners
proportraiture: as though man might so long be justly termed wise, as holiness
and righteousness were in the works of his hands, and as though then he left his
wisdom unfinished and imperfect, when he ceased or gave over from doing good:
he has left off says David, to behave himself wisely, adding (as a reason)
and ceased to do good. An impregnable argument, for the very Horat. epist. lib.
2. epist posteriore.
poets could tell us, that sapere est non verba sed verae numerosque modosqne
ediscere vitae. Wisdom is no verbal thing, it stands not in learning, but
leading that life which is virtuous. If a man relinguish this, the other
vanishes. If the^ blessed Peter, not to know God, but to serve him, not to
hear him, but to fear him, be true understanding: if obedience to his word be
both the first principles, the progress, and the finishing of all holy
wisdom, it had been thy following of Christ when he called thee, which might
have made thee worthy the name of a wise man: but leaving that undone, and
seeking more knowledge, it aduaunceth thee no whit, to the attaining of true
wisdom. And therefore for this thy neglect of Christ's Sequere, and yet thy
presumption to ask further questions, no marvel if thy master do correct
thee with a check, saying, Quid ad ^e Petre, this becomes thee not Peter,
this knowledge is but frivolous.

If then Peter's labor return thus empty of the first fruits, that it
procures not true wisdom, which is the hope of this life, let us prove how
prosperous it will be in the latter, if in the next life, it will bring forth
eternal happiness. But I fear me this seed like the Egyptian Exo. 9. 21
barley, though it be both above ground, and the blade well eared, before it come
to the harvest, will be smitten with the hail: Peter's knowledge, though he get
it, and never make his practice, will by many staves be short of Ge. 28. 12
Jacobs ladder, it will never be able to reach to the firmament. For though we
should vouchsafe this knowledge of S. Peter's, a borrowed name of some worldly
wisdom, such as S. Paul speaks of in his epistle to the 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Corinths, yet if we compared it with that true wisdom from above, which
being Iam. 3. 17.
peaceable and gentle, is full of mercy and good works, we might well say of it
as Stella de contemptu mundi, part 1. cap. 34. ^Wis. 11. 19
one does, Pluris est vna guttula sapientiae diuinae, quam vastiss. quoduis,
pelagus sapientiae huius mundi: Look what odds there is betwixt the small
dram or grain which is put in the scale of the weying ballaunce, and the
whole huge frame of this globy world, or betwixt the least pearling drop of
deaw, fallen in the morning upon the grassie hills, if it be likened to the
sea that Ps. 106. 6
watery wilderness, and such is this worlds wisdom, whose best part is but
knowledge, in respect of the heavenly which stands most in practice. For
August. in
Laudabilior est animus, cui nota est infirmitas sua, quam qui siderum vias
scrutatur, etc. It is a far more excellent study for a man to know himself and
god his creator, adding to learning charity, the love of God and his neighbor,
than to be able to find out all the sphers in the heavens, the regions of the
air, the climates of the earth, and the channels of the sea: for lossa super 1
Cor. 8. 1.
scientia inflat, but charitas aedificat, these may puff us up in our
selves, but never lift us up to heaven, it is love that builds to that height,
and no other. Therefore small hope shall S. Peter have of success in this
second part, it is not likely that his knowledge will breed him perfect
happiness. It is one step I must needs say, to rise to that kingdom, if
when god says from heaven, Luke 9. 35
This is my son, hear him, we Psa 58. 4
do not as the adder which stoppes his ear, and refuses to listen to the
voice of the charmer charm he never so wisely. But this is not al: he that Ps.
37. 27.
will dwell for ever, must fly from evil too, and do that which is good: and
not sit him down there neither, but mount yet a degree higher; he that will be
blessed, James 1. 25.
though not for his deeds, yet in his deeds, to his hearing must add action,
and to his action perseverance; for Enoch not seeing God, but Genesis 5. 24.
walking with him was translated from amongst us, 2 Kings 2. 11.
and Elias when he was taken up into Heaven, went not only in a whirlewind,
which perhaps might shadow knowledge, but in a chariot of fire, in which
charity was resembled, as though, not knowledge, but obedience were the way to
that happiness. It should seem the very Gentiles were acquainted with the same
path; who (though like clocks they disagreed amongst themselves, what should
be the subject of their farre-sought beatitude, whether Aro^^^. ethic. lib. 1
cap. 5.
virtue or plenty, pleasures or else honor, or if none of al these, some
Aristo^. ethic. lib. 1 cap. 6.
imaginary Idaea,) yet all of them generally accorded in this, that to a true
felicity there was required, Aristo^. ethic. lib. 1 cap. 4.
not only (...), to be well or know much, but also (...), to do well or work
much: wherefore if the Epicure could say, Cic de finibus lib. 1
that was not Art, which might any way be worthy either studying or
professing, nisi quae beatae vitae disciplinam iuuat, which did not further the
attaining of future beatitude. I wonder August. to. epist. 56.
what Dioscorus going on shipboorde for Africa, meant to trouble himself with
nice quiddities out of Tully, Quae ad capiendum actionum illius finem nihil
profueru^t, which were not able to promote him one hair breadth to happiness:
or what might cause Peter the Apostle in this place, to neglect his due homage
to Christ his sovereign, and stand inquiring after John's life or death, of
which though he had gotten perfect knowledge from his master, it should not have
profited, it would nothing have auaild him, either for the attain^ng of true
wisdom in this world, or to the enjoying of blessedness in the world to come.
The same words therefore which a Philosopher once used, Senec^ philos.
Quid te in illa quaestione torques, quam contempsisse quam soluere vtilius
esset? what strainest thou thy self in unloosing that knot, which if it be
still tied, brings no inconvenience? Our Savior might well have taken up
against his disciple; Peter, thy demand, if I should give thee direct answer,
will neither make thee wiser, nor one whit more happy: for thee to understand
John's future condition, can neither indue thee with perfect wisdom, nor give
thee assurance of celestial happiness: what meanest thou to comber thy self
or me with asking or hearing such unprofitable questions. Quid id ad te? this
beseems not thee Peter.

Indeed those trees which David distinguishes, either to be Ps. 80, 12.
fruitful as the Vine with her clusters, Ps. 148. 9^
or fruitelesse as the Cedar, although tall in Lebanon, Coeli^t Rhod. antiq.
let. lib. 10. cap. 2
Cato had woonte to term by other names, calling the first happy trees, which
brought forth to their Masters their yearly revenues: and the other
unhappy, which clad themselves with leaves, but fed not their Lords with
timely fruits. And Peter (I fear) is so far from being happy, as not
yielding unto Christ Jesus that obedience he expected, in being full of
leaves without fruit, questions without duty, it may be doubted lest this
knowledge be prejudicial to his safety. For to omit whole kingdoms, from
whom for the like defaults, GOD in severe justice oftentimes Math. 13. 46.
takes away that gemme, as he threatened to entreat Israel, in A^^. 8. 11
sending them a dearth, which should be, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of
water, but a penurious scarcity of hearing gods word, as Revel. 2. 5
he bitterly denou^ced against the church of Ephesus, that he would remove
from her her golden candlestick, yea Act. 13. 46.
as he dealt with the Jews of Antiochia, from whom he diuerted his legates to
the Gentiles, and as on us, that he inflict not that just vengeance for so long
hearing with so little following: the Lord in mercy turn his face from our sins,
and behold this small Island in the merits of Christ Jesus, I say (to pass over
whole nations as unseen) Peter I presume could not be ignorant, that both
knowledge without charity puffes up the heart with pride, against our brethren,
and the same without obedience makes us stand engaged more deeply to God in his
straitest iugeme^ts.

The first by the same spirit S. Paul has taught since, 1 Cor. 8. 1
that knowledge is a light ware, it bears up the subject, as anger breeds Pro.
6. 34
rage the souls furious frenzy, and Eccles. 5. 9
avarice vnsatiatenes that neuer-quenched dropsy, so knowledge without charity
inge^ders but a timpany, which had almost swelled 2 Cor. 12. 7
in Paul above compass: For, Isiod de summo bono lib. 3. cap. 36
Vt vita sine doctrina invtilem facit, sic doctrina sine vita arrogantem
reddit, as good life without learning to give others direction, is but
unprofitable as a lamp without light, so learning without life is but matter of
vain arrogance, which soon flies up, and as soon goes forth, like a flame
without fuel. Why then blessed Peter, if thy question Quid hic, without
humble listening to Sequere from Christ, was thus like to infect thee with
presumptuous pride, and possess thy heart with such swelling humors, it was
time for Christ Math. 9. 12.
that physician of our souls, to purge thee quickly with this bitter check,
saying, Quid ad te Petre? feed not on the air, it will make thee swel Peter,
this diet is not for thee. But the danger is far worse if Peter would observe
what issue this disease will sort to in the end, when the critic day of this
sickness shall approach; and that is, it shall make him before the throne of the
hiest, inexcusable for his knowledge which wroght not to obedience. For as we
see in nature Isa. 55. 10
the rain and snow Aristot. Meteor. lib. 1. cap, 1.
the refined vapors of gods heavenly closet, descending from the clouds, and
lighting on the earth, go not on bootlesse errands, nor return hence in vain,
but are Ps. 68. 9.
either gracious showers moistning the thirsty land, Wis. 16. 16.
or grievous storms choking the glutted earth: so is it with gods Isa. 55. 10
word, which proceeding from his mouth returns not to him till it have
accomplished that work, for which at first he dispatched it, that 2 Cor. 2. 16
either it prove a savor of life to the^ which shall be saved, or the savor of
death to them that perish. For since his voice as the warme-shining beams of
that Mal. 4. 2
bright sun the sun of righteousness, works in every ma^s heart, either as in
wax which it mollifieth, 2 Chronicles. 34 27.
as it did in Josias that good king of Judah; or else as in tough clay, which it
therefore hardneth, Exodus 7. 3.
as it did in Pharoh that Egiptian tyrant: Hence it is that no man can come to
the prophet, to hear from his lips the message of Jehovah (as those two for
prayer came to the Temple at Jerusalem) but he departs home to his house from
the man of gods feet, Luke 18. 13
either more justified with the poor contrite Publican, or else more condemned
with the proud vain glorious Pharasie: Nor there is no man which can receive a
charge from Christ Jesus, but either for his obedience he shall hear to his
comfort, Math. 25. 21.
Euge serve bone, well done good faithful servant, or else for his negligence
shall be sure to bear a check with Luke 19. 22
Apage serve nequam, fie on thee slothful fellow. Good Lord, with what
diligence need we look to our feet then, when we tread in the courts of thy
holy sanctuary? with what reverence should we approach unto thy sacred Oracle,
to hear thy voice from betwixt the two Cherubins? How should we with David,
though we enter thy tabernacle, in the multitude of thy mercies, which never
can be exhausted, yet worship withal toward thy blessed altar, with humble
fear, and all dreadful trembling? How might we quicken our deaf dul-hearing
ears, or purify our unclean corrupted sinful hearts, that we might open our
gates for thee, O king of glory, and prepare our shallow vessels to receive the
seed of life? Teach us (blessed Lord) O teach us heavenly father, let not thy
law be fruitless in our temples, nor return to thee (without winning souls,)
as the empty echo from the mountains to the speaker. We know (dear God) no
syllable, nay no iota can want his vigor, being spoken from thy councils, but
it either lifts us up nearer to thy courts in heaven, or casts us lower to that
damned pit of hell. O holy one of Israel, let thy holy testimonies not work in
us that bitter fruit of death, but nourish us through thy blessing, to grace
and life, let it so distill into our hearts, as deaw upon the hills, that it may
make the^ fruitful unto al obedience. And for thee ( O Peter) what can
patronage thy knowledge? thy busy questioning, without duty to thy master,
thy inquiring of John's state, without inuring of Christ's Sequere? what can
thou say, for failing in thy action? Surely, if no ways it be profitable unto
thee, neither for the attaining of wisdom in this life, nor for the
atchieuing of true felicity in the next: nay, if it be hurtful and obnoxious
to thy good, that it will endanger thee for falling into pride, and bring thee
more in compass of Gods judgment then thou wast, if thou will still be in
demandes, and not do thy duty, Christ must needs reprove thee with some
sharp reprehension, saying: Quid ad te Petre? this becomes not thee good
Peter, etc.

Thus far (right reverend and beloved men, brethren, and fathers,) have we
sought the two first kinds of acceptable good things, which should be in this
learning of our great Apostles, to wit, if it were gracious with his master,
and beneficial to himself: but hitherto our search returns with non est
inuentus: this inquisitiveness in S. Peter, without obedience to our Savior,
is displeasing to the one, and prejudicial to the other. Wherefore it
remains that we proceed on to the third place: to enquire what
entertainment this quality can find, in the censure and judgment of holy men
and wise. But I fear me, you are weary, in going thus far at once, and
therefore because it is not Coeliu^ Rhodoginu^. antiq. lect. li. 13. cap. 1.
minor virtus scire desinere, quam scire dicere, no less commendable for an
Orator, to end his speech in good time, then to begin with some good liking.
I had rather you should rest here, and breath you for a while, then that
afterward you should complain, that I had tired you clean outright.
Wherefore, as Tully said. Cicero Philippica. orationu^. 2. da.
Non omnia effundam, vt si saepius dicendum sit vt erit, semper nouus veniam, I
will be loath to spend all my store at once, but keep something fresh against I
come again: so I will not hold you now to help me make my search, for the
third and last thing which should be in S. Peter's learning, that is favorable
acceptance amongst the Saints of God. I will spare you so much pains, till I
come amongst you again. In the mean season, for our farewell, let us commend
each other with our interchangeable prayers, into the hands of him, which in
his watching over Israel, Psa. 121. 4.
nec dormit nec dormitat, neither slumbers nor sleeps, but keeps it from all
evil. To that Revel. 1. 5. 6,
faithful witness, which loved us so dearly, as that he washed us from our
sins in his own precious blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God his
father, be glory and dominion for evermore, Amen.

The merciful goodness of the Lord indureth for ever and ever upon you al, if
you fear him: and his righteousness remains unto you and your childrens
children, if ye keep his covenants, and think upon his commandments to do
them.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
THE SECOND Sermon.
RIght Honorable, right worshipful, and well beloved, like Salomons Prou. 30.
15.
quaternion of particular insatiables Reynerius to. 1. ^antheol. cap. 3. de
diuitijs. 1.
an Italian Bishop has observed in generality, that there are three things in
nature, which never can be satisfied: an eternal essence with accidents which
are temporal: a creature which is spiritual, with bodies that are corporal:
nor a substance which is infinite, with finite compleme^ts. Surely, such a
thing is the precious soul of man: eternal in continuance, spiritual in her
essence, and infinite in apprehensions; and therefore never to be filled with
any creatures, whose days are numbered, whose substance is circumscribed, or
whose stint is measured. And if this be true in all the souls of men, that no
created essence can give them full contentment, it may worthily be admired in
S. Peter the Apostle, what should make the cogitations of his mind so
restless, as when not Mat. 16. 17.
flesh and blood, but God himself from heaven, had revealed unto him the
perfect truth concerning Jesus Christ: (whose two complete natures are those
Act. 9. 20.
Duo cardines, the 2. celestial Poles, on which does rest the whole firmament
of divinity) yet not to cease from troubling his master with demaundes, which
though they should be answered, yet could not make him satisfied.

Doubtless his curiosity which he bewrayed in this Chapter, in questioning
of S. John, that beloved Disciple, trespassing in the mean while, by a sin of
omission, in not running after Christ when he said, Come follow me, could
neither be pleasing unto God, nor profitable to himself, nor gracious or
acceptable in the judgment of the world: and therefore extorted from our Lord
and Savior, the severe reprehension which is levied in my Text, with Quid ad
te? why lendest thou me thine ear, but followest not with thy feet?

In the first part of this Text, which is the person of Christ Jesus,
reproouing the Apostle for his desire of knowledge, without a diligent care of
performing due obedience, I have spoken not long since, in that worthy audience
of Poules, touching the two first motives of our Saviors taxing Peter; the one
drawn from his own dislike of such unprofitable studyes, and the other from
that slender crop, which it could afford the Questionist himself.

There remains in that first part, the third and last inducement, which might
urge our Savior to this unusual severity, namely, if there were nothing else
but the hateful, loathed distastfullnes, which it has even in man's corrupted
sinful judgment, it were able to make him which knew al sin, so vile, as
that it had brought him to his shameful bloody cross, to join with the
world, in reproouing of this one sin, and to cry unto Saint Peter, as he does
in this place. Quid id ad te? Fie Peter, my Apostle? this knowledge without
obedience, is not for thy profession.

In opening which one cause of the opinion of the world, give me leave I
beseech you, with as much breuity as I can, to show you what is her judgment
concerning both those sins, which here are found and marked in our Apostle.
For there are two sins Number. 15. 22. 24.
by Moses poynted out in the Law, the one of Commission, and the other of
Omission, and they are both here perpetrated by Saint Peter in my Text, and
both of them reproved in the judgment of the world. The first is his sin of
Commission, in thirsting unsatiably after endless knowledge, and this the
world holds fruitless, because it labors for impossibilities: the other is
his sin of Omission, his neglect of duty, in not following Christ, when he
said Sequere; and this men count odious, because default was made in not doing
that which was so necesary. And verily, if the sons of wretched Adam, do thus
repute, and censure Saint Peter's action, to be either altogether bootelesse,
or else so exceeding odious, the blessed son of God Christ Jesus our
redeemer, must needs check the same faults in his dear Apostle, with Quid ad
te? Peter this is not for thee, I blame thy curiosity.

The former part of their sentence, they firmly ground upon the nature and
condition of man's immortal soul, whose permanence being everlasting, her
essence spiritual, and her apprehensions infinite, the world well knows,
cannot be satisfied with that which is either of a limited continuance, a
grosser substance, or of finite set dimensions. For the first, which is the
temporany blessings of our pilgrimage Didac. Stella de contempt^ mundi. lib. 3.
cap. 32.
Animam nostram implicare possunt, implere vero nequeunt, well may they for a
time peradventure feed our fancies, but never can they to the end, fill our
hungry appetites. You may mark it if you please, in the devils last
temptation to our Savior, where, when he showed him the rich kingdoms of
this earthly globe, with promise to seat him in them by a deed of gift from
his bounty, he discovered unto Christ, says Mat. 4. 8.
one of the Evangelists, all the glory of those Emperies: indeed that might
sharpen his stomach: yea but he did it, says Luk 4. 5.
another of those blessed notaries, in ictu oculi, in a moment of time, in the
twinkling of an eye: they would not tarry with our savior, any time to be
looked: a solemn show, but very sudden, exceeding sweet, but (alas) too
short, which might therefore give a taste, but surely no contentment.

For the second, that spiritual creatures are not satisfied with things
corporal, you may note it by the rich man spoken of in the Gospel: who when
he had filled his barnes with the earths plenteous fruits, and stuffed his
storehouses with his abundant wealth, invited his Luke 12. 19.
soul to a solemn feast: and as though a table with these cates, had been
spread for her diet, bad her fall too, and welcome, eat, drink, and take her
pleasure. But the very Gentiles of their Ephesian Goddess, whom they reputed
the tender nurse of whatsoever lives, could say she was Angel. Policianu^ in
Miscell. cap. 51.
Multimammia, she had several provisions, for sundry creatures. And God
himself in the second age of the world, when he commanded Noe to receive into
his Arc Genesis 6. 19.
some of all creatures, for preservation of their kinds, which was for their
porro esse, that by propagation their natures in the world might be continued,
charged him withal to take with him into his vessel Genesis 6. 21
of al kinds of meat under heaven, which might be eaten, which was for their
esse, that by their proper and natural foodes, every living thing in his kind
might be sustained: according to his own practice in the first age of the
world, when from the creation, he made the earth bring forth psa. 104. 14. 15.
grass indeed for beasts, but wine and bread for men. Wherefore God from
heaven, seeing the rich man so greatly err, as to think a divine spiritual
essence could feed so grosely, as on terrestrial creatures: that his corn in
his garners, or coin in his coffers, were victuals for her nourishment, told
him that he was but Luke 12. 20.
a fool for his labor, for such intellectual and heavenly spirits, with
earthly bodies never can be filled, it is no due food, it is no competent
sustenance.

And for the third and last, that an infinite substance cannot be satisfied
with finite co^plements, it is easily to be learned from the Geometrical
proportions.

For the rule is true in that excellent science, that no circle drawn in the
compass of a triangle, can possibly fill up all the corners of that figure,
but though it be made with never so large a circumference, yet still the angles
will be vnreplenished. Now humanity has taught us, Aristotel de generatione
animalium. li. 2. cap. 4.
that the heart of man which is the souls seat, and life's bloudwarme
fountain, is triangularis figurae, a substance with three corners: of which,
two, and those some what broader, stand upward in the body, as though nature
taught her, that her affections should be ofter and greater upward to heaven,
and things heavenly, and the third, which is pendent, is somewhat more sharp
poynted, as though the fashion of this lodge, should teach her guest this
lesson, that her thoughts should be seldom and sparing downward. And
answerable unto this divinity, has informed us, that mundus is orbis, the
world is framed in a circuler figure: for so the royal Prophet sung long since
in his Psalm, that Psa. 93. 2.
God has made the round world so sure, that it cannot be removed.

So then, if our hearts the mansions of our souls, be shaped (as you have
heard) in a three-squared fashion, and the world with her contents, be molded
like a lump, in so round a form: and if triangles by no means can possibly
be filled with the most spacious circles: what hope is there, that this world
which is finite in dimensions, can ever fill our minds, whose reach is
infinite? never can the will nor understandings of our souls, be satisfied
with any thing which the creature yeeldes. For if any thing in this life, which
the world affoordeth, might give contentment to man's immortal spirit, there is
nothing can come nearer that work of perfection, then learning and knowledge,
then wisdom and understanding. For what may better satisfy the appetite of
any thing, then that food which by nature gives it proper nourishment. And
such a thing is learning* Ci^cro acad quest. lib. 4.
Natural quoddam ingeniorum pabulum, as proper and as natural a diet for the
soul, as 1. Cor. 3. 1, 2.
ever milk was for children hanging at the breast, or Iudicum 14. 8.
honye for the bees which labor in the hiue. But (God wot) this food is far
from filling our understanding; well may we hunger and thirst still for more
knowledge, but never can our hunger be satisfied, nor our thirst be quenched:
our souls in this life, with this precious metal, shall questionless at the
most, be no more then parcel gilt, we can 1. Cor. 13. 9.
know but in part, and that makes us love but in part. The Eccles. 1. 8.
preacher saw long since of two of her servants, that they could never do
enough as yet to please her: not the eye with seeing new and strange
spectacles, nor the ear with hearing fresh and rare instructions, no, rather
wisdom said her self, that such is her condition Eccl. 24. 24.
as they which taste of her, shall ever have more hunger, and they which drink
at her well, their thirst shall still be greater: for the soul, whose
understanding has infinite apprehensions, never can be satisfied with some few
finit lessons. It should seem so amongst others, by Saint Peter the Apostle,
in those two attendants of his understanding. For touching his eyes, the two
watchmen of his soul: many just men with Simeon, had Luke 2. 23.
waited no doubt, for the light of Israel: many Luke 10. 24.
Prophets, nay, many Kings, would feign have seen those things which he saw,
and could not: yea 1. Pet. 1. 12.
the blessed Angels in their heavenly orders, longed to see Christ Jesus
incarnate, but for some ages could not: yet behold our Apostle, admitted by the
almighty, to be a happy spectator of our Saviors presence, contents not
himself with that, but needs will see things future, will know the accidents
of succedent ages. And for the Sensus disciplinae Plutarchus de prudentia
anima^tium.
other which is the sense of learning. Peter had heard not God himself with
his voice of majesty, for that peradventure would have been Exo. 20. 19.
too terrible, nor by the mouth of his poor servants the Prophets, for 2.
Chro. 36. 12
that perhaps might have seemed too contemptible, Heb. 1. 2.
but speaking by his son Christ Jesus our redeemer, whose words were not too
fearful, for Luke 4. 22.
his lips were full of grace, nor yet too simple, for he Math. 7. 28.
spoke with heavenly majesty, and his sermons had taught him John. 5. 39.
al things that were necessary to everlasting life. And yet see this holy man
is not satisfied with this knowledge, he will yet be learning more, he will
hear what shall be John's end; Master, says he, what shall become of this man?

Wherefore, since Saint Peter's eyes will never have enough of seeing, nor his
ears cannot be satisfied with all their hearing, look what the world will
censure of the two precedent errors, that the devils plotte was but weak, when
with his temporany proiects, he thought he could inueigle the sacred soul of
Christ, which was a divine and rare immortal essence, and that the rich man's
hope was fond, whilst he supposed, he might cramme his soul, an excellent and
heavenly intellectual spirit, with his gross and earthly corruptible
provisions: so will all men say, that Peter's conceit was vain, to imagine
that his understanding, which was infinite in apprehensions, could be fully
fraught with this and a thousand more such questions, as though there would
not still evermore be something, which his discoursing thoughts would labor
to attain to. So that if all the world would give this certain verdict,
that his labor must needs be bootelesse, because his work was endless,
our Savior might well return Saint Peter's Quid fiet, good Master, what
shall John do? with his Quid refert, alas Peter what need thou care?
with id ad te? it appertains not to thee, what need thou ask that
question?

And thus much holy and blessed Christians, shall serve for the former part of
the worlds determination, concerning the Apostles first sin, which is his
sin of Commission. Now as shortly for the latter, what all good men may say
as touching the second trespass, which is his sin of Omission. ^or suppose
the world should yield unto Saint Peter, in such terms as our Savior once
used unto the Pharisees Math. 23. 23
Haec fecisse licuit, sed ne alterum quidem infectum reliquisse. Peter let us
grant it had been lavvfull for thee, in this and such like questions to have
been infinitely inquisitiue, yet why did thou altogether fail in thy duty
of obedience? thou would have Christ hear, that he might answer thee;
and why wilt not thou hear that thou may follovv him? what all in
questioning, and never a whit in action? how should the world approve of
such a scholar? how can she esteem this vain and empty learning?

Doubtless I fear she will prize it very meanly, and guess this commodity
to be of no great reckoning. For besides that God by his Prophet Esa. 29. 13.
Esaias disliked such seruitors as drevv near him with their lips, but yet
drevv back from his vvorshippe in their hearts. The very Pagan could now tell
him, that Salustiu^ de bello Iugurth.
Parum placent eae literae quae ad virtutem nihil profuerunt, there is nothing
more unsavory, yea in man's corrupt judgment, then knowledge without virtue,
then letters without manners. I need not to tell him what straight severe
doom our Savior once gave against the slothful servant, which Luke 12. 47.
knevv his masters will, but made no means to do it: let me but tell him
all the world has subscribed, and confirmed that just sentence with their
several hands, saying Pacuuius
Odi homines ignaua opera, sapientia philosopha, men count it a thing most
intollerably hateful, to see one for speculation like a Ex A thenis,
scientiar. fluenta. Coel. Rhodog. li. 16. 24.
Grecian Philosopher, that ( Tanquam per ostrocismum) may be shut out as too
wise, and yet for his action, like a Murmuleius in 7. egl. Mantuani.
Roman Bardus, that for his too much simplicity, may be hist out as a fool:
to see in the same person a head like Salomons, and far unlike it, a heart
like Nabals, let any man say what credit were in this.

I remember a Arist. politic. lib. 1. cap. 7. and Cic, 1. de diuinat.
story of Thales Milesius, a man much renowned for his skill in Astronomy,
that after he had a long time observed the heavens motions, and yet not
enriched himself in his own stations, there were many that would be vying
at the poor Philosopher, and tell him surely his starregazing was a svveet
profession, that was never yet able to make him penny richer. I doubt me, so
all good men would tell our Apostle, that his questioning of Christ without
yielding due obedience, must needs be a fair piece, a goodly kind of
learning, which perhaps might make him vviser, but surely no whit holyer. Let
S. Bernard else as foreman, give his verdict for the rest, and resolve us what
glory there can be in this practice. Verily he will inform us, that Bernardus
de gradib. humilit.
Monstrosa plane res est, gradus summus, and animus infimus, seeds prima and
men's ima, vultus grauis and gestus leuis, ingens autoritas and exiguaprobitas,
as in matters of civil life, it is a monster in a Kingdom to see them have
most worship, that are least worthy, in dignities to be greatest, which in
deserts are smallest: that those to themselves shall receive the richest gifts,
which (God wot) in themselves have but the meanest gifts: that they shall be
garnished with whole pounds of honor, which scarce are furnished with one
dram of honesty: Ita scientiae plurimu^ conscientiae paru^, sermo multus
fructus nullus, lingua magniloqua manus remissa: in cause of Religion it is
altogether as hideous for a man to have in himself a plenty of all science,
and yet withal a penury of good conscience, to have a tongue like him in
Esdras, 1. Esdras 3. 21.
that speaks by the talent, and yet hands like him in Solomon, that Prou. 6.
10.
scarce works by the ounce. So far is the worlds herold from sounding forth
her praises, that he blazeth this learnings arms with bars and notes of
infamy: our Savior therefore must needs correct it with Quid ad te? Fie
Peter, it is disgraceful: if the world censure thy first action to be
fruitless, because impossible: and thy latter demerite odious, and much
abominable; I must needs admonish thee, it beseemes not my Disciple.
Wherefore holy and blessed brethren, pertakers of the heavenly calling, if our
Lord and Savior so severely reproved this thirsting after knowledge, without
working in obedience, this Quid hic in S. Peter, without I prae, sequar, good
Master I will follow thee, let me beseech you that (since this generation, and
many especially in this honorable City, are so much addicted to singularity
of opinion, more then to singleness of conversation, as though Religion
consisted not in this, but in the other, in learning questions, without
following precepts) it would please you to consider, how worthily our Redeemer
bestowed this check upon that kind of wisdom, as being neither pleasing to
himself, nor profitable to the Apostle, nor yet graceful or well reputed of
in the world; estimation. Quid ad te? says our Savior.

Remember, O remember I most humbly entreat you, what Saint James that good
Bishop in old time did advertise us: that James 1. 27.
pure Religion and undefiled before God, is what? to be humerous in maintayning
strange and vain paradoxes, to broche daily to the world some newfound
assertio^s? No, no such matter: this is it which God our Father well accepts,
if we visit the fatherless and widows in their troubles, and if we keep
our selves unspotted of the world. Yea this is sound Religion; he that will be
a pure one, let him be pure in this sort; not to be odd in his learning, but
to be good in his living, else all his quid hic will be naught without Sequere.

Forget not beloved brethren, you that are called to Peter's function, the most
honorable service under Kings and Princes, forget not John Baptist Luke 1. 76.
that Prophet of the highest, how he was not only John 1. 23.
vox clamantis in deserto, one that could cry aloude, that could speak well,
but that also, Math. 11. 18.
Nec edens venit nec bibens, he was one that lived well, his carriage was a
pattern of all grave sobriety: O follow his steps, imitate John Baptist, let
not all be questions, and naught in actions, all care of study, and none of
piety. This is it which our Savior by no means will approve of.

And for you the dear children of the Church our mother, may it please you at
my instance, seariously to consider, that it is indeed a high and excellent
commendation for any one Acts 11. 24.
with Barnabas amongst the Jews, to have this given forth of him, O surely he
is a good man: or Acts 10. 2.
with Cornelius amongst the Gentiles, to receive this testimony of them that
know him, Doubtless this man is one that fears God: But let me by your
patience tell you withal, that he which with Barnabas would be counted a
good man, must procure this opinion by his faith shown to the world, and
specify it by the abundance of Gods graces dwelling in him: Act. 11. 24.
for so did he in the Acts of the Apostles. And he that with Cornelius would
be famous for devotion, or be esteemed of others a man very religious, must not
think it rests in a bare naked knowledge, in multitudes of questions, or in
frequent conference. No, he must do Act. 10. 2
as he did, he must pray often to God, and give much alms to the people: else
all his knowledge is naught without obedience.

In one word, let us al which so joyfully triumph, in that happy name of
professed Christians, fix always in our thoughts that blessed Idaea of Christ
Jesus himself, our Savior and Redeemer, who not only for his wisdom was
able to report what thing soever in former times was acted: (for so said the
woman of Samaria at the Well, d Omnia John 4. 29.
vere dixit, He has told me all things right) but also for his holiness did
work in the world, all the gracious works of perfect righteousness; for so
the Galileans could testify of him Marc. 7. 37.
Omnia rectefecit, He has done all things well too: he knew all things
directly, he did all things justly. An admirable pattern, a worthy president.
Learn then (good Christians) not of Peter in this Scripture, to seek for
knowledge with neglect of duty, to be quick in hearing, yet but slow in
following, to be always learning, but never practicing: for this you see our
Savior finds him blame-worthie: but learn of Christ himself, the Churches
Marc. 11. 29.
heavenly schoolmasters, learn this one lesson, at least study often in the
course of your lives on it, to make wisdom and justice sweetly kiss
together, to make knowledge and obedience lovingly run along like to eeuen
paralells, I mean if so readily you will receive the first part of our Saviors
lecture, Math. 10. 16.
to be wise as Serpents, that like good scholars you would speedily take out
the next; to be innocent as Doves: that you would make the holiness of your
conversation, always concur with the measure of your understanding.

And thus much right Honorable, right Worshipful, and right worthily
respected, shall serve to have spoken for the first part of this Text, to
wit, the agent in this due reproof: which is our Savior commanding service,
but answered of Saint Peter with naught but questions, and therefore checking
him with Quid ad te Petre?

It remains that we beseech God the father of all wisdom, that passing
over the study of that James 1. 15.
kind of knowledge, which being full of nothing but strife and contention, is
altogether earthly, sinful, and devilish, he would power into us from above,
that celestial wisdom, which being Iam. 3. 17
pure and peaceable, gentle, and without hypocrisy, is fraught with all
mercy, and the fruits of goodness. And this God the Father of his mercy, for
Christ Jesus his Sons merits, by the blessed guidance of his holy Spirit,
favorably vouchfafe to grant unto us. To which three persons, one God
Almighty, Immortal, and only wise, be all honor and praise, laud, and
thanksgiving ascribed by us and all his creatures, this day and forever whilst
the world endures. Amen.

Laus Deo.
THE THIRD Sermon.
OVt of this short Scripture (beloved Christians) consisting of four parts, as
a natural body of four principal Elements, I have heretofore in this and
another Auditorie, entreated of the first: to wit, the agent which in this
place keeps visitations with S. Peter, and that was Christ Jesus, the
Archbishop of his soul: I proceed, by your patience, to the second, which is
his Action, and that is his reproof of the Apostles curiosity, which here
our Savior checks with this sharp reprehension, It becomes not thee Peter,
it beseemes not my Disciple.

In unfolding which reproof from the Churches great Reformer, let me first in
all possible humility beseech you, that no man misconceiue or misconstrue
these my speeches, who strive not to restrain the most painful searching
after necessary knowledge, but only to repress the tickling humor of
fruitless Curiosity.

I remember a story of the Judge. 20. 16
men of Benjamin, that the Scripture says, they were excellent at the sling,
so as if they threw stones at any mark, they would not fail to hit it within
the breadth of a hair: but yet as active and as nimble as they were, they were
but left handed people, they threw not with the right. This brings to memory a
saying of King Salomons, who tells us Eccle. 10. 2.
that the heart of a wise man, is at his right hand, but (alas) the fool has
his placed on the left. Indeed not unlike, it wants not probability. For
(God wot) there are many in this vild censorious world, which do not 2 Kin. 4.
41
with Elisha the man of God (in the College of the Prophets which was at
Gilgall) turn bitter Colloquintida into wholesome food, nor with our Lord and
Master John. 2. 8
at the solemn marriage, change weak and thin cold water, into neat and
strong hot wine: but Esa. 5. 20
(cursed as they are) miscall the creatures, speaking good of evil, and evil
of good, putting darkness for light, and sour for sweet. Example of this may
be those two perjured witnesses, who when our Savior had said John 2. 19.
Destroy this earthly building, and once in three days I will raise it up
again, speaking of his own most blessed body, which was but as ours is Job.
4. 19.
a clayie tabernacle, did notwithstanding Mat. 26. 61.
of set pretended malice, pervert his heavenly and most sacred words, as
though he had uttered them of Ierusalems Temple, which was that Cities beauty,
and the whole worlds glory: wherefore since this age and present congregation,
wants not a number of left handed Beniamites, and euil-hearted auditors, let
me not I pray you, be so understood, as though my inuectiue against S. Peter,
should be an Apology Act. 17. 23.
for them of Athens, or as though in reproving this ages curiosity, I would
patronize the old worlds palpable gross ignorance: I mean no such matter. Let
the Cic. de Diuinat. lib. 2.
Philosophers entitle her the nurse of great deep wonders, or Thomas Aquinas
some (which would make knowledge their own peculiar) let them grace her
further, to be Devotions mother: Mother let her be to Religion if they will,
but surely they shall never make her more then stepmother: Romans 10. 14
for how shall men serve that God, of whom they have not heard? or true mother
if they will needs have her, and that there be no remedy, let them better
learn to know her daughters name; it is not Devotion, they mistake her, it is
Superstition: for so Saint Paul said in the street of Mars, that they Act. 17
23.
which worshipped at the Altar of the Unknown God (there was the Mother) poor
people were Act. 17. 22.
exceedingly too much superstitious, there followed the Daughter. Ignorance and
superstition of force must go together. But since I make no question of it,
that as Reave. 22* 2. 3.
to stand before the throne of God and the Lamb Christ Jesus, is the Psa. 17.
etc.
fulness and saciety of the next worlds beatitude; so the entrance in this life
to a Christian felicity, Ioh. 17 3.
is to know God the Father, and his promised Messiah: I hope no man will
surmise, that I purposely declaime, against the true knowledge of our most
merciful God: but only against that vain Curiosity, which is never
satisfied in endless questions: for this is it which our Savior misliketh in
S. Peter, and tells him it befits him not, with Quid ad te Petre?

Now therefore, if it please you, let us examine this attainder: first if our
Apostle were guilty of this crime: and in the next place (if he were) what
should move our blessed Savior with such vehemency of words, to tax this
small infirmity, as not to say nihil refert Petre, it makes no matter, it
concerns not thee Peter, but with an interrogation, what have thou to do with
it? Quid id ad te? What is that to thee Peter?

For the former, which is the inquiry after this fact in S. Peter: Timothy in
in his Diocese indeed had such, 1. Tim. 6. 20. 21.
as of profane bablings and oppositions, mere sophistical cauils, did make
to the world an open plain profession: and Ephesus that great City, renowned
through all Asia, had many scholars of this kind, Act. 19. 19.
students of curious Arts: but is it possible that in Christ's school any bend
their studies that ways? can Peter be any of that society? yes alas, it is
true, Peter is not clear from this infection. For as in generality that
Caluinus instit. li. 3. ^ap. 21. in sect. 1.
late Divine said well, that in Curiositatis huius audaciam multi passim ruunt,
and in ijs quidam alioqui non mali, Many men are subject to be too audaciously
curious, and in this number some, which otherwise are very good men: so in
particular, it is Laurent. villauicentius. de sanctis in ^uan. S. Iohannis.
certain concerning our Apostle, that his question to our Savior, as touching
his fellow John, sauoured a little too much of this fruitless curiosity: he
was right one of Eues sons, troubled with the Call instit. lib. 3. cap. 25.
sect. 10.
hearts itch: whose soul being tickled with lust Genesis 3. 6.
of knowing good and evil, ceased not from her motions till she felt a
merri-gall; Indeed some pleasure in himself had S. Peter by inquiring after
news, but bitterness from Christ, when he reprooues it with this check, Quid
id ad te? thy soul is too ticklish Peter, she lusts too much for knowledge.
But if the disease be no more dangerous, nor the crime more heinous, Quid opus
est gladio vt occidas muscam? What need so bitter pills, to purge so small a
sickness? a word had been enough to chastise that small trespass, what
needed this inuectiue, for one poor question? O sir, Quia Vincentius in spe^.
magnus pastor fuit Petrus, nulla vel leuis in eo ferenda culpa vel curiositas.
Had S. Peter been an ordinary man, one of the common multitude, our Savior
either with silence or more mildness would have passed it over: but being a
pillar of his Church, a Peer of his spiritual kingdom, the least flaw in
such a Pillar, the smallest indecorum in such a beaupeare, might not be
pretermitted without correction. For Vincencius ibid.
Pedibus licet adhaereat puluis, non tam curamus: at in capite inquinamenti
nihil patimur: if a little dust chance to stick on our feet, we do not
heed it: but on our faces, which are the beauteous heavens of our lesser
world; we cannot endure the least disparagement. The Iud. 1. 7.
seventy Princes under Adonibezeo, might happily brook the cutting of their
toes, it was no open deformity, it was not seen in the body: but 2. Sam. 10.
7.
David's Ambassadors, if their visages be disfigured, when the Amonites in
mockery, have shaued their beards to the halfes, cannot but be ashamed, and
blush at such indignities. So could our Redeemer perhaps have winked, if this
deformity had been in the foot of his body, in the least of his little ones:
but in him which was a Prince and Captain of his Companies, Act. 2. 14 15
a choice Prolocutour of his sacred Parliaments, it might not escape without
controlement. Wherefore, though there were manifold graces of the blessed
spirit, refulgent in S. Peter: as his Math. 4. 20
ready obedience to our Saviors first call, when he was chosen to be an
honorable Apostle: his Luke 12. 41.
thirst of heavenly wisdom, when he craved an exposition of his Masters
Parables: Ioh. 13. 37.
his sweet and humble modesty, when he denied the Lord of glory to wash his
sweaty feet: and Ioh. 13. 6.
his resolute magnanimity, to offer his life in his leaders quarrel; yet none
of these, nor all these could beg a pardon, that this default in so great an
Apostle should not be chastised with Quid ad te? Peter, amongst such golden
splendent virtues, this vice of Curiosity not is beseeming.

And surely, though the glory of these celestial ornaments may seem
sufficient to have cast a shade, in which this one infirmity might have been
covered; yet if our Apostle shall duly mark in this his darling which here
so tenderly he has embraced, but some few lineaments: and observe in
Curiosity but three things only, her parentage, her qualities, and her
entertainment, I dare say he will not wonder that our Savior so earnestly
does warn him to disclaim her. When he shall see (I say) the stock of her
ancetours, the qualities of her life, and her entertainment with the wise, he
cannot but submit himself to this reprehension of Quid ad te? from his Lord
and Master.

For the first therefore, which is the original of this sin, the stock from
which the pedigree must be setcht: we must not look (as Cicero de natura.
deor. lib. 3.
Pallas could) to derive it from above: God wot it is a lower house where we
must find her ancetours. For if we should look to bring her offspring from the
heavens, as though Christ were the schoolmasters of such a science: indeed we
shall hear him say Math. 11. 29.
Discite a me, etc. Sirs come to me, I will read you a lecture: yea, but this
Text is of humility, and not of Curiosity: if you will learn of me, learn to
be meek and lowly.

Look as the sun in nature Coelius Rhodog. lib. 19. 22.
which is the heavens bright eye, the worlds warm comfort, and the rich
fountain of delightful light, though ordinarily as Psa. 19. 5.
a mighty Giant he rejoices to run his course from East to West; yet 2. Reg.
20. 11.
once retired himself in Ahaz dial, and went back ten degrees from West to
East: so that shining Mal. 4. 2.
sun of incomparable righteousness Christ Jesus the Messiah, ^hilip. 2. 6.
though equal from eternity in the Godhead with his father: delights in
disroabing himself of that his glory, and in that mutable dial of our
mortal nature, abased himself through ten degrees of his humiliation: when
by his incarnation, his nativity, and circumcision, his ohedience to his
parents, and his refusal of the crown, his mean riding to Jerusalem, and the
washing of his Disciples feet: his death, his burial, and his going into
hell; he gave us a clear light to walk in meekness after him. Is
Curiosity then his daughter, or as his scholar takes she forth this lesson?
does she show she comes of his kindred by her humble lowlines? Alas no such
matter: Bernard. de gradib. humilitatis.
Primus superbiae gradus est Curirsitas, not the lowest ground of Christ's
humility, but the first raised step of swelling pride, is Curiosity: as
near of blood as you will have her, she is too hawtie arrogance, but not in
the furthest removed degree allied to meekness. Let him else speak of her,
which skilfully could blaze her arms, when he told us that Caluinus instit.
lib. 3 ca. 21. sect. 1.
nullis repagulis cohiberi potest quin in sublime se proripiat, nihil si liceat
arcani quod non scrutetur, relictura Deo: she is made all of pride, who
therefore as a puff of wind can no ways be kept in any bounders: but with her
insolence rayseth up her self as high as heaven, there leaving not the
secretest corner of Gods privy closet vnransacked if she might. If she then be
the first staff of that Babilonian ladder, by which men would thrust their
heads into heavens hidden mysteries: and if Christ be the lowly schoolmasters
of meekness upon earth, she can by no means be kyth or kin to our
Savior: though knowledge be a Genesis 3. 5.
chief thing that makes men like to God, yet Christ owneth not the affinity
of this giddish wisdom: and therefore no marvel though he estrange Peter
from her with Quid ad te? be not acquainted with her Peter, she is none of my
familiars.

If then she can claim no kindred from above, we must look for her
progenitors in some lower house: if she came not down from heaven, I pray
God she were not spewed up unto earth from hell: and surely if we ask
counsel of the ancient Heralds, I fear me they will fetch her first
original from the devil. Let that honyfather Bernardus de gradib. humilitatis.
S. Bernard else deliver you his sound judgment, and tell you (as he thinks)
from whence she was begotten. Te attenta ad aliud (says he) latenter in cor
tuum illabitur serpens and blande alloquitur: blanditijs rationem, mendacijs
timorem compescit, nequaquam (inquiens) morieris: sed curiositatem acuit dum
cupiditatem suggerit, etc. I promise you a stock of great antiquity, of no
less age then since Adam and Eve: she was familiar with them in the worlds
beginning. But who was her father? mary let him tell you that too. O mother
Eve says Bernard (for he tells her the tale) there was indeed (as we have
learned since) but Luke 10. 42.
vnicum necessarium, but one thing to be hearkened too (Gods sacred Oracle)
which was Genesis 2. 17
morte morieris, Eve when thou shall eat of that forbidden fruit, the
penalty is death, thou shall die for disobedience: this was it which charilie
in the closet of thy heart, thou should have laid up, as Luke 2. 29.
since did the second Eve a better message: but thy mind like an evil huswife,
gadding from thy heart, left room for the old Serpent subtly to slide
himself in, where with allurements he bewitched thy reason, when he told thee
one bit of it would make thee as wise as God was: and where with lies (of which
he is still the greatest mint-master) he suppressed thy fear of judgment, which
he said was but a bugbeare: with these he spedde thee with a longing for the
fruit, and here he begat the insatiable thirst of knowledge: this was the
first conception of sinful curiosity, thus was she bred and brought forth to
the world. Hark good Saint Peter: S. Bernard has drawn you lines of Eues
diverse progeny: she had indeed by Adam, Abel and Cain, the two Churches
lively figures, but by the devil she conceived and brought forth Curiosity:
indeed the former, but the worser teeming: so that if you would know the house
she came from, and who was her great Grandfather, hell was her native soil,
and the devil did first begette her. And doubtless, not more sweetly then
soundly has Saint Bernard spoken, for from the devil, yea, from that infernal
spirit which first is spoken of in the holy Scriptures, had she her beginning.
The multitude of those powers of darkness is exceeding great, of which
sometimes Marc. 16. 9.
in one woman no less then seven are: sometimes in Marc. 5. 9
one man a whole legion, full 6000: every day about each of us Anselma^.
Tot daemones in aere, quot atomi in sole, as many spirits in the air, as
moates are in the sun: but of all these millions, the sacred Writ
vouchsafes to name but only four: and of them the first and most ancient in
record, is he which begot this minion in the world. It was not Mat. 6. 24.
Mammon the peny-fathers Saint, the Ioh. 14. 30.
Prince of this world: for against his Ephe. 5. 5.
idolatours our Savior would have cried, Luke 12. 20.
you fools, this night shall your souls be taken from you: nor it was not
Tobit. 3. 8.
Asmodaeus, that suggestor of uncleanness: for against Eccle. 23. 18.
his filthy works of night and darkness, he would have preached as S. Paul
did, Colos. 3. 5.
Mortify your earthly members, fornication, concupiscence, evil affections,
etc. It was not 2. Reg. 2. 1.
Beelzebub that God of vanities, and Math. 12 27.
lying wonders, for against his seruitours Christ would have exclaymed with
Ierusalems Preacher, Eccles. 1. 2.
O vanity of vanities, all is but vanity. But it was Lucifer, he that first
is mentioned, who shining once in heaven Esaias 14. 12.
as the bright morning star, Iudae. 5. verse.
could not content him self with that matchless state of heavenly blessedness,
but must aspire to raise his throne Esaias. 14. 13.
as high as Gods was, and equalize himself in majesty with the highest. This
was he, which fallen from the firmament himself, like Luke. 10. 18.
a flake of lightning, Reu. 12. 4.
labored to draw the lesser stars to darkness after him, and therefore
knowing not only Aristo^. (...). li. and ca. 1. 3
that (...) all men by nature have an intimate desire to attain to knowledge,
but also Ludoui. in adagijs.
that (...) it is most sweet, and maruailous delicious, to have an universal
knowledge and insight in all things, began to nurse up Eve with this sugered
milk: he told her it was nothing for her which was Empress of the world,
Psa 8. 7.
Dominari leonibus, to have the creatures in subjection, to mount her self
into an iuorie throne borne up with Lions: Reg. 10. 19.
sinful Solomon afterward might do as much as that was: why should not she
so pure a creature, rear up her self a glorious chair of state, supported
with divine and intellectual cherubins? and there Psa. 80. 1.
seat her self, as God himself sits, Supra omnem scientiae plenitudinem, in all plenitude of knowledge? why would not she seek to be as wise as God was?:
thus did he besot poor credulous Eve, and thus begat he in the world, this
fruitless Curiosity, which sithence has evermore infused her self into the
minds of men: here is her stock indeed, old enough and ancient, but her
progenitor impious and hellish. Then bethink thee blessed Peter, will thou
match in such a kindred? will thou converse with one that is of this damned
family? Alas think not strange, since this idle Curiosity is none of the
familiars to thy blessed Savior, but a wicked daughter of the devil himself,
whose stock came first from hell, and whose father was a serpent: think not
strange (good Peter) if thy master seeing thee with her, forbid thee of her
company, saying, Quid ad te? come leave her Simon Peter, have no dealing with
her.

And thus much for the first thing, which was this vipers parentage. Now
follows the next and the second point, which may demonstrate the worthiness
of our Saviors reprehension, and that is the full vewe of the qualities in her
self. For happily she may say Senecai^ Her^. furente. act. 2. s^. 2.
as Lycus did in the old time, Nobiles non sunt mihi aui, nec altis
inclytu^titulis genus, sed clara virtus. Indeed I cannot boast much of my
father and my ancetours, I stand not greatly upon my stock and pedigree, but I
have virtues of mine own, which sufficiently may commend me, I have graces in
me, for which the world admires me. Doubtless bravely spoken, but she wants
good Neighbors, and if that be true which commonly is said, Ludouicus in
adagijs.
that (...) like bird, like egg, like father, like daughter, it were strange
that the devil so ugly as he is, should bring forth Curiosity so fair as
she pretends. Wherefore let us make trial of these her vaunted virtues, and I
presume that if either we respect God, herself, or the world, we shall find
her unpleasing to the highest, unfruitful in her self, and dangerously
hurtful to the souls of men: the least of these able to extort a check from
Christ, when he found his servant Peter so possessed with her.

For the first, if we lift up our eyes to the heavens and our creator, as he
said 1. Cor. 1. 20.
where is the learned scribe, and the grand disputer? we may fitly say, where
is the subtle doctor, where is the curious Questionist? how pleasing unto God
is his sweet profession, is he the Student whose learning is so gracious?
surely we may answer of them as S. Paul did of the other, truly no sir, 1.
Cor. ibidem.
Sapientia huius mundi stultitia apud deum, the great wisdom of these men is
but foolishness with God, it is a knowledge in which he takes no such
pleasure. Of men it is true, and too apparent, Caluinus instit. lib. 3 ca. 25.
sect. 10.
vt immodica cupido plusquam fasest sciendi, nos titillet, that the body is not
more apt to laugh with gentle tickling, then the soul does skippe for joy,
whilst she hunts after needless and subtle questions. Take an instance if it
please you in both the generations: both in the former age, and this we live
in. In old time Dioscorus was so bewitched with such quiddities, sounding in
his ears as sweet as Sirens songs, that's Augustine that good Father, was feign
August. Epist. 56.
abripere illum de medio curiosaru^ inquisitionum, to take him off by hold,
least he should dwell in those studies. And for this giddie-headed age in which
we live, it is daily experimented, that Caluinus instit. lib. 1 cap 14. sect.
4.
maiori voluptati sunt curiosa istaec quam quae in vsu sunt quotidiano. Gods
blessed will which he has revealed, is nothing so pleasing or delightful to
many men, as is this busy prying into his hidden secrets. Now our holy Creed,
the Royal Law, out Saviors prayer, the Churches Sacraments, tush these are
stale things, children are cunning thus far, but if you can, Zanchius de
operib. dei part. 1 lib. 2. cap. 14.
out of Dionisius describe unto us the heavenly hierarchy: if from thence you
can show us how many orders there be of Angels, whether there be nine or
more or less: in every order how many degrees or forms there are: and in
every form how many Angels sit: O this were worth the hearing, such a
Doctor were worthy the following, that in one hours Sermon could make his
audience as skilful, as though in a journey of many years, they had travailed
themselves throughout all the heanens* Silly fondlings, who when S. Paul which
2 Cor. 12. 2.
was rapt up as high as the third heaven, could tell them no such news, nor
report them no such matter, (but contrari-wise, rather 2. Cor. 12 4.
told them that which he heard might not be disclosed, no man could utter it)
do Caluinus instit. lib. ^ cap. 14. sect. 4.
think that Dionisius as though he had been a present guest, not in a
Platonical but an Angelical banquet, had been dropped down from the clouds, as
if it were to bring them tidings, what he had seen in another world, and how
he had parlyed with the Angels. But how acceptable soever this knowledge is to
man, psa. 62. ^.
who is naught but vanity, and follows after leasings, sure I am that
Z^nchiu^ de operib. dei part. 1. lib. 1. ca. 1.
Deo est ingratissima, it is unpleasing to the Almighty, his soul abhorres
it: he can say Ro^. 12. 13
Sapite, my sons, be wise, I would have you to be so: yea but he added ad
sobrietatem, be not too wise, take heed of Curiosity. And therefore if she
be so yrksome in the eyes of his father, no marvel though Christ would repel
her from the heart of his servant with Quid ad te? banish her from thee Peter,
my father does not love her.

But why should not God affect her? is not this she that is fruitful in the
multiplicitie of all knowledge? is not this a blessed grain of that Mat. 13. 8.
Evangelical corn, which brings forth thirty, sixty, an hundred foldes
increase? is not this the nimble motion of man's neuer-resting soul, which
breeds him plenteous measures of all complete skill? Very well remembered,
that is indeed the second thing of which she boasted: but let Bernardus de
gradib. humilit.
Saint Bernard tell her what profit there is in her, he will assure us, and we
may believe him, that Nihil est in homine cui prosit curiositas, sed friuola
prorsus and inanis est ac mutatoria consolatio. If not she in her own cause,
but S. Bernard may be credited, she is good for nothing, there is no
goodness in her, but a little pleasure, and that is but frivolous and vain,
and momentanie. Surely she has bragged fair, but whilst she has told us how
often she has been with child, she has brought forth nothing yet (God wots)
but wind. Alas poor soul, a dry sad lump of earth, not like rich Canaan Exo.
3. 8.
which flowed with honey and milk, but like Iud. 9. 45
Sychems soil, which once sowed with Salt, was always barren: nothing to be
compared to the vines of Engaddi, Cant. 1. 14.
they brought forthful and laden clusters: but resembling that Fig Tree
betwixt Bethany and Jerusalem, Math. 21 19.
which perhaps had leaves on it, but no wholesome fruit: what? she like the
corn in Iewries vales, that with her fruit did z Psa. 65. Ilt.
make the fields to laugh and sing? nay nothing less Psalm. 129. Ilt.
a poor hay-seed rather scattered on the house top, whose increase filles
neither the reapers arm nor hand. She like the happy Matron, Psa. 1^8.
which bred and planted her many children like Olive branches by her husbands
table? nothing like her, rather to be a match with the Mat. 22. 27.
woman of Jerusalem, who though she had seven husbands, yet could not have
no children. If then like Sychems soil, that bare no corn, like the cursed
Fig Tree, that had no fruit, like grass on the house top, that yields no
increase, or like the woman of Jerusalem, that lacked al issue: this
self-co^mending damsel be thus altogether barren, doubtless our Luke 7. 13.
Savior will say to our Apostle as to him in the vineyard: Succidito
infrugiferam, down with the unfruitful graft. Peter though she be barren, let
her not make thee fruitless, but cut her off from thee, away with her Peter,
Quid ad te, and so forth.

And thus far have you heard her two first qualities disabled, how she is
pleasing unto God, how fruitless in her self: now after the comma and the
colon, let us add the period, how well she deserves of the sons of Adam,
whether she be not only not beneficial, but hurtful and pernicious to
them that love her. Verily if he may be taken which in these latter days, as
too true an eyewitness saw the inconvenience of it, Caluinus instit. li. 3.
cap. 25. sect. 10.
Ex curiositate non solum friuolae sed and noxiae etiam quaestiones scatuciunt:
friuolae ex quibus vtilitas nulla potest elici: noxiae quod in illis qui sibi
indulgent, perniciosis speculationibus sese implicant, he will tell us that
from this bitter root of cursed curiosity, do bud and blossom in the minds
of men innumerable questions, not only frivolous, which advantage not the
asker, but hurtful, which bring him loss and detriment. And as he truly has
connexed these two shrewd vices in her, that she is first unfruitful, and then
more then so obnoxious: so has another drawn the first and this together, of
those deserts she makes both to God and man: and tells us that Zanchius de
operibus dei. part and li. and cap. 1.
Intempestiua curiositas praeterquam quod Deo ingratissima est, est etiam
curiositas ipsis pernitiosa: this vile unseasonable and unreasonable
curiosity, as she is offensive unto God, so is she prejudicial to them that
love her. Siluestribus hic ceruis similes fumus and so forth: did you g
Geminianus de similitudinib lib. 5. cap. 34.
ever mark (says one) how the wild staring bucke which runs in the
forest or in the open chase, spying the stalking-horse, stands wistly at the
gaze, whilst the skillful hunts-man by him with his piece or crosse-bow kills
him: such fondlings or madlings are the curious people: which when nice
questions or strange novelties are presented to them, by him which so would
always keep them occupied, do fix their thoughts and pleasures only on
such trifles, till the Genesis 10. 9.
infernal Nimrod, the great hunter for men's souls, do bring them suddenly
to unseen destruction: this is the danger which men live in, that follow
Curiosity. For what is there in man, which may advance him to felicity,
either his knowledge of God, his faith in him when he knows him, or the
fruits of that faith by which he ought to serve him, but they are mightily
impeached by this one sinful quality? so that if all these perilles redound
to man by this infirmity, that she is the enchantresse of his understanding,
the common enemy of his faith, and the corrupter of his manners, it was
necessary that our Savior to prevent this inconvenience, should remove her
from S. Peter with this reprehension, Quid id ad te? beware of her Peter, she
is too too dangerous.

To give you of each of these but a taste, lest I be too tedious, concerning
the souls eye, her hand and her fruit: it is undoubtedly certain as touching
the first which is our intellectual part, that this vice of curiosity does
either make that bright eye of our souls but to cast slight glaunces, so that
it can see nothing of God, or of his works of wonder; or on the other side,
causes it too much to stare on them, so as being dazeled, the sight it has is
but confused: either it restrains the understanding by vagaries that she
searches nothing, or else surchargeth her with too much work, whilst she
would have her seek and find forth all things. Concerning the former, which is
the restraint of the understanding from knowledge: there are but two passages
for wisdom into the heart of man, either by the eyes sight, or the ears
quick hearing, Cor. 2. 9.
for if neither the eye have seen it, nor the ear have heard it, it cannot
enter into the heart of man: and alas, both these passages by this one
infirmity, are ungraciously stopped and intercepted. The eye which by reading
conueyeth sweet knowledge to the understanding, fails in this office (as
once a Guli^l. P^raldus to. 2. de vitijs.
Bishop of Lions told us) by three sundry errors, sometimes by too quick
rolling, when students ride post after the works they labor in: as though
turning their books leaves would thoroughly furnish them with their Autors
judgment: and such a scholar John 18. 38.
was Pilate, which when he had asked our Savior what the truth of God was,
flung forthwith from the bench, and would tarry for no answer. Sometimes by
too slothful moving, soon weary of well doing, when men because Julius
Scaliger de subtle. exercitatione. 308.
continuata lectio dat pertinacius ad languorem, if they read but a little
long, do find it something yrksome, Cicero de senectute.
do not as Hesi^d. Simonides, Stesichoras, and Isocrates, whom neither days,
nor years, nor age could make weary of their studies, but though the Proverb
say Ludouicus adagior. curia. 3.
(...), if thou will needs build, leave not the foundation till it have a
roof on it: notwithstanding, when by reading they have begun a beauteous
frame of everlasting wisdom, like Luke 14. 30.
him in the Gospel, do sit them down and make no end of it, for a little
faintness. And lastly sometimes, (which happens as often as either of the
former) by this vain and fickle inconstant curiosity: when men taking books
in hand to increase their learning, because they long for variety and change of
matter, cannot endure to read right on directly, book after book, and
chapter after chapter: but needs must read here a leaf and there a page,
now in the Preface, straightwaies in the tractate, and anon in the epilogue:
like the ^ linius.
Egyptian Dogs, which at the River Nilus stand not when they are dry, to
make a set drinking of it, but here a little, and there a little lap water
as they are ruuning: thus the souls eye glancing over many things, plainly
discerns nothing: and thus curious readers by this infirmity, are restrained
from attaining knowledge, which so much they long for.

And for the ears, the two fair doors for wisdoms entrance, I will say no
more then Freigius de Cicerone.
that the Roman Moses has said already, that of our non proficiencye, in
hearing wise men's speeches cicero academ questionu^. libro. 4.
Duae sunt potissimum causae: primu^ quod defigimus animos parum, and
intendimus in ea quae sunt perspicua; alterum quod fallacibus and captiosis
interrogationibus circumscripti, eas quas dissoluere non possumus a veritate
desciscimus, there are two special causes why we profit not by hearing,
either defect of attention, when the plainest things not heeded, do as easily
escape from us, as they entered to us: or else excess of vain and busy
curiosity, when intermedling with dark things, and intangling our selves in
them, because we cannot clear them, we loathe all learning. And thus has
this cursed Genesis 26. 15.
Philistin dammed up these lively fountains from whence Isaacks God had
provided for his servants, sweet streams of knowledge to refresh the soul
with: and thus does Curiosity prevent man's understanding lest the eyes or
ears should possess her of that wisdom, which might conduct her to eternal
happiness. And therefore blessed Peter, if this one evil quality, making thee
inquisitiue in needless questions, did hold thee in the mean time from more
sovereign knowledge, it was time for thy master to recall thee from thy chase,
and with Quid ad te? to tell thee thou mistookest thy mark: this is not true
wisdom, this is she which spoils it, and with-holdes thee from it.

But if happily after many and sundry the souls discourses, she do fix and
settle her self at last on something, (as after many tempests, riding in the
harbor) if from hence Curiosity do chance to be her Pilotte, by setting her
in search of things either too difficult, or too many, she surchargeth the
understanding, and makes her faint in the labor: for Caluinus instit. lib. 3
cap. 25. sect. 10.
Quum moduli nostri immemores nimia audacia, in sublime transuolamus, coelestis
gloriae fulgur saepe nos obruit. When men unmindful of their strength and
scantlings, will needs aim at a mark which is too high for them, it is no
wonder if their bows be broken. Ask him else, that drew the fairest length
that ever mortal man did: and he by his own bow and shafts can tell you,
that as though honey be sweet, yet too much will make you sick; so though
nothing be more worthy studying of then the glory of God, yet Pro. 25. 27.
Secundum versionem S. Hieron.
Qui per scrutatur gloriam Dei, is obruetur gloria Dei: He that will be prying
into Gods endless glory, it is a thousand to one but he is overwhelmed with
his majesty: curiosity confoundes them which seek too far in hard things:
for what are these vain speculators in matters difficult, but as unskillful
laborers, which to repair a house, undermining the ground too deep,
Reynerius. de studio 10. cap. 3.
conuulso aedificio seipsos opprimunt, cease not till they bring the building
upon their heads: or like the simple swanes upon the grassie hills, which
Plato in phoedone.
fixing their weak eyes upon the gleaming sun, stare so long upon that
shining substance, till their sights being dazeled, they are feign to be led by
others: or like the pooregnats, (from that quality called Geminianus de
similitudinib. lib. 4. cap. 21.
Lucipetae,) which never rest to fly and flutter about the candles flame, till
(though it be pleasing because it is light, yet not regarding it is dangerous
because it is fire) they scorch their vellam wings, and perish in their joys.
Such pyoners, such swanes, such silly gnats are these vain people, which
curiously dig into the depth of Gods secrets, Romans 11. 33
always to be admired, but never reachte to, needs will gaze upon his
glorious essence, Eccle. 23. 19.
whose eyes ten thousand times are brighter then the sun, and will be
prying into that endless 1. Tim. 6. 16.
light which God inhabiteth, and is inaccessible: and therefore no marvel if
they ouerwhelme themselves in their own devises, and by the sun of majesty,
and light not to be attained to, do clean dazzle and dim their understandings
light. For so in old time did the Pagan Gentiles, which the Romans 1. 20. 21
Apostle speaks of, who when God by the well couched engine of this gorgeous
world, had taught them the eternal power of his unseen Godhead, did not in
thankfulness glorify him for this goodness, but sought him another way, with
their vain imaginations, had therefore their understandings exceedingly
obscured: and when they professed themselves to be the wisest, in their dungeon
hearts became most foolish. Thus then this vilde enchantresse of man's weak
understanding, either by inconstancy keeps her from getting knowledge, or
with too much audacitie, confoundes her in that he gets. Wherefore, since
this dark shade of sinful Curiosity, was in danger to eclipse the beauteous
light of Peter so fair a star in the Churches firmament, graciously did our
Savior hasten in compassion to the Apostle, to remove far from him this
earthly substance, saying Quid ad te? this knowledge is but ignorance, it is
not for thee Peter.

And thus much for the first thing, the minds understanding; now from
observing the humors of her eyes, let us come to her hands, and feel their
pulses, to try if this quality once infused to her, do make them beat more
quick or slowly: to see if Curiosity insinuated to the soul, do make faith,
the spirits hand, more strengthened or more weakened. Verily, if either doubting
in the hard points of our Creed, or error in declining from the true
Apostolic faith, or defectio^ and Apostacy in general from our profession,
may be said to be the strengthening of the souls spiritual hand, then with
such strength does this sin of curiosity supply her; but other aid the^ this
she brings none to man's poor faith, then either uncertain doubts, or palpable
errors, or vild Apostacy.

For touching the staggering and wavering in our faith, it is an excellent
Canon which the Apostle has, Romans 14. 1.
that these which are babes in Christ Jesus, as yet but weak in faith, should
be received and entertained of them that are strong, but how? not with
controversy of disputations, not so by no means, for that in the nouices of
Christ's school (if they be already doubtful) will make the^ in their belief
to be more uncertain. So in the Primitive Church, though that great Doctor
commanded 1. Cor. 1. 10.
even in the virtue and authority of his Master Jesus Christ, that there should
be no dissentions, but that al should speak the same thing: yet because there
had been Act. 2. 15 1.
scrupulous questions of needless circumcision, and curious controversies 1.
cor. 8. 7.
about things offered unto Idols, many doubts were made amongst the Disciples,
what part they might lean to in their own religion; and from these doubts came
divisions in the Church, one 1. cor. 1. 12.
saying he was Christ's, another Paul's, one holding of Apollo, another of
Peter, thus rending Ioh. 19. 23
that seamlesse coat of Christ's union, the church. And so in these latter and
tumultuous days, as is said of the heathen, Coelius Rhodoginus li. 1^ cap. 9.
Facilius inter horologia quam inter Philosophos conueniet, a man may as well
look to have all the clocks in the city strike twelve at once, as to find all
the Philosophers of one opinion: so we may as truly say concerning Christians,
but with unfeigned sorrow to see our holy mother so torn and so massacred: that
these endless and fruitless controversies, which not many years since some
men's either ignorant curiosity, or inconsiderate zeal, or envious
discontentednes, did raise and sweat in in this Church and kingdom, have bred
such doubts in the hearts of many people, that they scarce know what faith to
hold, or what to cleave too in Religion: so that as one said Cicero lib. 1. de
finib. bonor. and malor.
Quot scholae tot sectae, we have almost as many judgments amongst us, as the
city has churches, or rather Quot homines tot sententiae, every particular
man has his own several Religion. Is it not a woeful thing and to be
lamented of all good men with floods of tears, that many in these late days
fall from the blessed faith of Christ Jesus our gracious and sweet Redeemer,
and become hateful Turks or misbeleeuing Jews? and those which abide with us
and continue Christians, thousands cannon resolve ( 1. cor. 1. 13.
though Christ be not divided) what faith in Christianity they may profess.
What shall I be (says one) shall I be (as they term it) a Papist or a
Protestant? and if a Protestant, must I be a common professor, or a
disciplinarian? if a disciplinarian, of what stamp must I then be? shall I
prove an Anabaptist, or a Brounist, or a Baroeist? or if none of these, shall
I be one of the kind Family of love? Thus standing betwixt sundry new-trode
paths, yet knowing not which to enter. O blessed Lord, Ephe. 4. 4. 5. 6. etc.
the God of peace, and fountain of all love, which art the Father of us all,
above, through, and in us all, when thy son our sole Lord, which has but one
spouse, his beloved Church, has admitted us into her bosom by one lauer of
Baptism, and called us to one honorable profession of true Christian faith,
why should her poor children thus strive in her tender arms? why should
Christians divide themselves in such sundry factions? Gracious and glorious
God, which art both founder and Patron of thy Church, since thy invisible power
Math. 8. 27.
ca^ calm the raging of the Sea, and lay the blustering winds, pacify these
contentions amongst us thy humble servants, and once bring (if it please thee)
all Christian Kingdoms to the unity of thy spirit in the bond of peace. But
leaving our hearts desires to his heavenly providence, you see (beloved and
blessed Christians) this first bitter fruit of wicked curiosity, in respect
of our faith, which is a doubtful wavering in our most holy profession.

Yet this is not the worst, for men's gross sins are Oration Manassis
iron chains, and one like draws on another. When I think on Angelius
policianus Epistolar. lib. 9. Epistola. 157.
Alcibiades in former time, that though with Pericles his golden vain of
sugered eloquence, he could not be moved, yet often times he was ravished if
he heard but Socrates, passing a few harsh naked words: me thinks I see a
simple Christian led by curiosity, to the entrance of these ways, like that
poor 1. Reg. 13 16. 81.
Prophet that came from Judah, who having for a while disputed with himself,
which of two ways he were best to take (God wots) made choice of that where a
Lion did devour him. And so (I fear me) many men drawn by needless scruples
into doubts of faith, when they have long studied which part to take, do
join themselves to that which is erroneous. I will not now, as I have not from
the beginning, build this suspicion upon mine own conceit, but I will entreat
that Gregor. moralium lib. 8.
learned and godly Father Saint Gregory to speak it for me, and I know he
will tell us, that Nonnulli dum plus exquirunt contemplando quam capiunt, vsque
ad peruer sa dogmata erumpunt: and dum veritatis discipuli esse necligunt,
errorum magistri humiliter fiunt, many by busy searching, when they would have
their understandings to bear greater burdens then well they can stand under,
do fall into ungodly and perverse opinions, and when by pride they scorn to
be truths humble scholars, yet they blush not to be teachers of most false
errors. But alas, what needed I to have troubled good Saint Gregory? Saint
Paul that was far his ancient would have spoken it for me, that Tim. 6. 20.
21
when men profess these vain or childish bablings, and oppositions of this
sond reputed knowledge, they must necessarily err in matters of their Faith.
As I might show you amongst many things else, in that one mystery of man's
predestination, which indeed is of it self Aliquantulum Caluinus instit. lib.
3 ca. 21. sect. 1.
impedita, sed valde perplexam atque adeo periculosam reddit hominum
curiositas, something obscure and cloudie, but by men's sturring in it, made
much more dangerous: when they having pryed too wistly into it, yet finding not
the depth, frame to themselves this most wicked false conclusion: if Romans 9. 13.
with Esau or Iacoh before my birth, I was elected or rejected for heaven or
hell, caluinus instit. lib. 3 ca. 23. sect. 12.
what boots it me to follow grace, or fly from sin, my bliss or bane
already is prepared; an odious consequent from curious Antecedents. But as it
does in this, so fares it in many other foundations of our faith: for the end
of the commandment 2. Tim. 1. 5. 6.
as that chosen vessel said) is love proceeding and issuing from a heart that
is pure, from a good conscience, and from faith unfeigned: yea, but from all
these do many err, both from true charity, good conscience, and from faith,
whilst they turn aside to these vain foolish ianglings.

And happy it were with men, in these points of faith, if by the graceless
conduct of this curious art, they did but a little divert and turn aside, if
they did not start back and turn away clean from all faith: if men above
their reach meddling in Religion, became not in the end flat Atheists,
irreligious. But God (I beseech him) be merciful unto us: if David in his time
knew psa. 14. 1.
that dixit insipiens in cord suo, etc. the ungodly man did soothe himself in
his heart there was no God, we must needs perceive it in these wicked days,
(in which rebellious sin being grown to a ripeness, must needs ere long
bring upon us utter rottenness) that there are many (if but one, too many)
which not in their hearts, but at their tables, do not only think, but spare
not now to say, that (which blessed Lord forgive me to repeat) the Cal^inus
instit. lib. 1. cap. 3. sect. 2.
Godhead is but a cipher, the Scriptures are but fables, and Religion but a
policy to keep poor men in order. O thou most holy and glorious Trinity,
who but some hellish infernal spirit, or else some damned wretch suggested by
their malice, durst belch or spue forth such hateful blasphemies, to load
the sinful earth, to infect the air, and obscure the heavens with? But alas,
whence rises this? let that one late, but learned divine tell us, what might
be but one cause of this great Apostacy, he will assure us, and he says no
more then truth, that Zanchius de operib. dei part. li. and c^. 1.
Curiositas homines quasi in laberynthos inducit, ex quibus quum se nequeant
expedire, eo tandem adducuntur vt nihil credant, sed (...) effecti in tenebris
pereant: one thing which ingendreth this cursed Atheism, is that intolerable
vice of man's giddie Curiosity, which when it has brought him through
multiplicitie of questions, to a confused maze of his own understanding, from
which he finds no issue: leaves him there desperate of all knowledge
possible, so as having already doubted and erred in many things, he settes
down his rest never more to believe in any thing, but to renounce and abjure
all Religion whatsoever. Here is the bramble, and this is the soil which
bears it, Atheism the stinking weed, and Curiosity the ground that yeeldes
it. But as the Athenians when Coelius Rhodog. antiquar. lectionum li. 22. ca. 1.
Abderites Protagorus that famous sophister, in the forefront of a Book which
he published, put this sentence, that de Dijs neque vt sint, neque vt non
sint, non habuit dicere, whether there were a God, or no God, it was a thing he
would not deal with, for his heinous impiety did both banish him, and burn
his scribblements: I would Christian Kings and Princes, whose Royal Courts
swarm now with Atheists, blushing not to scorn the holy Church, and to contemn
the Prophets, would not suffer the Gentiles to outstrippe them in their
justice, but brandish vengeance against these hellhoundes, whose least
blasphemies deserve sharp death, a thousand times more then the needy fellon:
would God (if not go before them yet) they would imitate the Athenians, that
their devilish blasphemies might be suppressed, and themselves, most horrible
detested Atheists, might be thrust from the presence of Gods anointed. For
then this sin, what transgression is more capital? yet rising from that
which the world deemes no sin, from man's unstayed and endless Curiosity. And
certainly, if it work thus upon man's poor faith, that it makes it either
doubtful, erroneous, or defective, as thus shortly I have showed yon, since
Christ meant Luke 22. 32.
to make Peter's faith strong and impregnable against all the winnowings and
siftings of the devil: it is no wonder if he would clear him of this so
adverse an infirmity, with Quid id ad te? ask no such questions Peter, this
concerns not thy faith, or if they do, these will but either a stonish it,
or else seduce it, this knowledge is not for thee.

Hitherto have ye marked the souls eyes and hand, how clear the one, and how
strong the other is, if ever this vild infirmity be acquainted with them: now
I beseech you in one moment take notice of her fruits which she brings forth
to the world, if the same possess her, and see what are the actions of men's
lives which are so infected: and verily you shall perceive, that if there be
any good thing which the will of man would put in execution, that like a Exo.
1. 15
cruel Egyptian midwife, this monstrous curiosity does murder it in the
birth: or if there be any evil which the heart conceiueth, that as a tender
nurse she fosters and brings it up, as 2. Reg. 19. 37.
Senacharib did Adramilech and Sharizer his sons. For touching the former,
which is the hindering of good actions, if we look back to the first man, to
learn how his affections at the first were poisoned and depraved Eccles. 7.
versu. vltimo. Secundum versionem S. Hieron.
fecit quidam Deus hominem rectum, sed ipse infinitis se miscuit questionibus:
God made man at the first wise in his understanding, and holy in his will, but
he by his many questions impared both these graces, and by his curious
inquiring after Gods hidden will, has over cast his understanding, and
distorted all his passions. And for our selves, the stemmes of that old stock,
there is 1. Tim. 4 7.
nothing holds us more from the practice of true godliness, then old wives
profane and foolish childish fables, then listening to vain and fruitless
curiosity, as said the Apostle, Caluinus instit li. 1. cap. 14. sect. 4.
so that si rite sapere volumus, relinquenda sunt nobis (...) ista, quae ab
otiosis hominibus nobis traduntur, if either Adam at the first, or we which
are since, would have learned or will learn that wisdom which is perfect,
which stands Caluinus ibidem.
not in friuolis questionibus, sed in solida pietate, not in nice quirkes and
quiddities, but in sound unfeigned holiness, there must first be a
disclayming of the sin of Curiosity, for she smoothereth our best thoughts,
she preuents our good endeavors. And not so only, that she 1. Tim. 1 4.
breeds not godly edifying, which is by faith, but she is the mother and the
nurse of much gross impiety, she fraughts men's lives with sin and
wickedness. For how should it be otherwise, says good Saint Barnard, but
that Bernardus de gradib. humilitatis.
Animus dum per multa euagatur, facile inuenit vbi adhaereat, vbi noxiam
experiatur delect ationem, when our minds will needs wa^der through variety of
all things, amongst many they must needs light on some that be evil things,
where the soul, which of her self is prone unto iniquity, takes her solace
and pleasure in sinful delectations. Thus the eye of the understanding, Genesis
30. 37.
like Jacobs sheep, too firmly fixed upon these particolored objects, makes
the affections (as they did) to bring forth spotted fruits, to manifest to
the world naught else but sinful works. So in his time the great Apostle
Saint Paul observed it, 2. Tim. 2. 23.
that the best effects of foolish and unlearned questions, is but contentions
strife, this 1. Tim. 6. 4. 5*
(...) ingendreth nothing but envy and aemulations, raylings and evil surmises,
in one word, vain disputations of corrupt erroneous men. And so we at this day
see it but too plain, that our curious masters, brokers and defenders of our
newfound questions, are too much taynted (I would it were not true) with
covetousness and maliciousness, sure marks of that fond faction. And these
for our will and our affections, are the fruits which Curiosity brings for
men's lives, good works she hinders, evil deeds she still aduaunceth: this
is her disposition to the souls endeavors. Wherefore if she be an obscurer of
the mind, a weakner of the faith, a corrupter of the affections, happy was
Saint Peter that our blessed Savior would remove her from him with Quid ad
te? beware of her Peter, her company is full of danger.

Thus far right Honorable, right Worshipful and beloved Christians, you
have heard the two first arguments, which may demonstrate unto us, how
deservedly our Savior uttered, and how patiently both Saint Peter and our
selves should suffer this reproof of Curiosity. The first drawn from her
parentage, the original of her essence, which she cannot claim from Christ or
from above, but was delineated to have sprung from hell, and from the devil
himself. The second collected from her inhaerent qualities, which showed us,
that if she be unpleasing unto God, unfruitful in her self, and dangerously
hurtful to the soul of man, darkening his understanding, when either she
misleades it by vagaries, or ouerloades it with too much searching, wronging
his poor faith either with doubts with errors or defects, and corrupting his
affections, with suppressing holy actions, and ingendring evil works, our
Savior might justly give forth, and our Apostle gently bear, this so
demerited a check of this sinful Curiosity, in these words Quid ad te?

There remains but the third and the last to be added, observed from the
entertainment, which in all generations this unsavory, barren, and pernicious
art, has had with wise men But as the Roman Rhetorician Cicero pro p. Sest.
said once in his Oration, Mallem ego ante dicendi finem facere quam vos
attente audiendi, I had rather cease to speak too prolixly, then make you
weary of hearing gently, the same course will I hold with this Christian
presence, rather reserving this remainder to be delivered to you next saboth,
then ouer-burden you at this time with heaping up too much. Wherefore, til then
craving your wonted patience, I commit both your meditations upon this, and my
studies for the next, to the blessing of the highest, who in the unity of his
Godhead, and the Trinity of Persons, by us and all his creatures be ever
glorified, Amen.

THE FOVRTH Sermon.
IN the sacred storye of the heavenly inspired Book, reporting the wondrous
creation of this beauteous world, and the gracious redemption of us poor
sinful men, there are two special rules, which a late but learned divine has
excellently praescribed to every Christian, Zanchius de ope^^bus dei. part
lib. and cap. 1.
Vt fides ad sit and sobrius animus: first that when the Prophets and Apostles,
the holy men of God, do relate unto us, 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21.
not from their private motions, but from the Godheads influence, the
praedictions and narrations of these subject matters, we do not expect that
they should be justified by Logical arguments, or Mathematical
demonstrations: but since it went current amongst men, and those Pagans: Cicero
de oratore lib. 2.
Hoc veru^ est, dixit n. Q. Luctatius, hoc sequi necesse est recito enim
tabulas, my assertion is true, for such a great Clarke said it, this must
needs be avouched, for I produce you my authority: we that will be counted
the servants of the highest, do with all readiness of faith, embrace his
speeches, which Heb. 6. 20.
being immutable in all things, cannot possibly lie. The next is, that (like
David) Psalm. 131. 1. 2.
we be not hie-minded, nor exercise our selves in matters too hard for us,
that we seek not to know more then Moses and others which were Gods
Chroniclers could impart unto us, nor labor to learn that which he pleases
not to teach us: but 1. Sam. 6. 19.
since the Bethshemits were punished for looking in the Arc above their Lords
commission, that we keep Psa. 131. 3.
our souls meek as new-weyned children, and prye not too much into Gods
hidden secrets. Two necessary directions of weighty importance for faith,
that we receive al which God has told us, and against curiosity, that we
seek to know no more. Of these two, the former (I praesume) is well observed,
of all which either glory or live in the name of Christians; for it were a
shame for them to let their incredulity to be checked and condemned by the
damned spirits, who (alas) Iam. 2. 19.
for that faith which is historical, do both believe and tremble also. But
for the other rule, which gives the caveat against man's proud ambitious
curiosity, God wots many good men, many Christians, yea, the Apostles
themselves have been taken tardie in listening to this precept, whilst they
have runned with hot foot after needless knowledge: wherefore since Saint
Peter in the narrow verge of this tent, was by our Savior (as his visitour)
found culpable of this fault, I thought good the last saboth, in the second
part of this scripture (which is Christ's action, his reproof of curiosity) to
show you the deseruednes of this reprehension, from three things coincide^t to
this infirmity; to wit, her parentage or offspring, her inhaerent qualities, and
her entertainment and welcome with the wise. The two first of these by the
aeternall assistance and your gentle clemency, I passed over the last day:
which were the stock she came off, and her true deportments; now suffer me I
beseech you, with your accustomed patience, to tender you that debte which then
I left unpaid, and (that I may recompense my last days tediousness with this
hours shortness) breefly to show you thus much: that (if holy men and wise
men in all times and ages, have severely taxed this sin in whomsoever) it is
no marvel if he which was the holiest of holyes and his fathers wisdom,
discovering the same weakness in his dear Apostle, did labor to remove it,
with this sharp check of Quid ad te? Peter this question needs not, it
beseemes not my Disciple.

It is true which the man of GOD known by the name of Eloquente, and Esaias 6. 7.
who had his lips by a Seraphin, touched with a coal from the Altar, did say
in reference of man to God, that Esaias 55. 8. 9.
our ways by no means may be rese^bled unto his, nor are our thoughts to be
compared with Gods: but, as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are his
cogitations much more exceeding ours: wherefore if by their praecepts and
practice I shall make good, that both men prudent and religious, have evermore
disliked this endless curiosity, and both by their council and carriage,
studied and endeavored to draw men from it, it must needs stand agreeable with
our Saviors wisdom, (so Math. 21. 16.
great as in babes mouths it can silence all their learning) to repress the
same humor when he finds it in his Apostle, with Quid ad te? I like not this
vain knowledge, Peter ask no such questions.

First therefore for the former, which is the prohibition of wise and good men I
remember the vain and frivolous speculations, which are reported to have been
made by Animaxander the Philosopher about the sun, how skilfully by his
deep, but dark study, he could tell you the quantity of that substance, how
big that body is, and the distance of his sphere, how far it is from the
earth: sure a man of high reach, that could comprehend such secrets. For had ye
come to him, and asked him this hard question, how great the body of the
sun were (as he thought) or of what largeness was it: he would not stick,
as though he had been in heaven and measured it by inches, or as though he
had taken the just dimension with his line or compass, to assure Plutarchus de
placitis Philosophorum. lib. 2. cap. 2^.
vou out of doubt, how that glorious essence is just two and thirty times as
big as the earths whole globe. Or had ye inquired of him, how far that
triumphant Psa. 19. 5.
giant keeps his royal Court from this our habitation, why he, as if he had
from this climate to that caelestiall place, paced it as often as he had
fingers and toes (if he cannot tell you how many barley corns would reach up to
heaven yet) can tell you as if he had met it with a pole or chain, that
Plutarch. de placitis Philosophorum lib. 2. ca. 31
from this earths face to the suns high sphere, is just and no more, a
million eight hundred and four thousand furlongs: certainly an excellent
fellow, if he had lived in his time to have practiced Arethmeticke amongst
Salomons buildings, that he might have told him how many tuns of brass were
in the temples vessels, 1. Reg. 7. 47.
which the wisest men yet could never number. Such vain and nice fond studies
had Animaxander that poor Philosopher, busying his head, and breaking his dry
brain, about such fruitless and childish questions.

But (I trust may some say) there are no such amongst us Christians, Psa. 1. 1.
who having Gods testimonies to meditate in daily, need not run astray to such
needless scruples. Verily it is more intolerable in a Disciple in Christ's
school, the^ in these heathnish and Pagan students, which had no such voice to
listen too: yet God help, even amongst us there is too much Curiosity, in
searching forth that which is no ways profitable. As not to detain you with
too many examples, I refer you but onley to Melchizedec and Adam, concerning
whom, even amongst divines, you shall find some make too vain and giddie
inquisitions. For as touching Melchizedec, Heb. 7. 1.
that great king and Priest, the scripture says he Heb. 7. 3.
was (...), he had neither father nor mother, (to wit in the register,
though he had in nature:) yet though in the text his parents were not recorded,
now ye shall have one that with his skill in genealogies, is able to piont out
his father which begat him, Albertus Patauinus in primum. ca. Iohannis.
and make him nephew to old Noe and Sem: a far better herald then ever was the
Apostle. And ^et for the other, there is one far passes him, who though the
1. Cor. 15. 54.
earthly Adam, were the first man that breathed, yet as a judicial D. Bar. page
38.
divine has lately taxed him (as though Adam had been but a freshman in the
world, and some other man before him had been a greater Senior) can tell you
that he had one that was his schoolmasters: and if need be, can name you
him, and show you that the man which taught our great Grandfather at the first
his Arts, was called Sombassar: doubtless this Scholar must needs be a great
antiquarie, that can report unto us of men that lived before old Adam. But a
little by their leaves I must be bold to tell them, both the Pagan
Philosopher, the Patauian Doctor, and our English teacher, the same which a
late elegante writer has advertised them, that Iustus Lypsius epistolar. cent.
1. epist. 59.
Quaestionum vorticibus horrere nos oportet, nec his inuolui: assidere and
obambulare earum ripas maximum licet: It is a pretty thing for a man to walk
and sit by the Rivers bank, and laughed to see things wheel about the
whirlepits mouth, but it were dangerous for himself to fall into it, and by
the many turnings thereof, to be drawn down into the depth: so for
bystanders, to see such as these are thus build Castles in air, it is sport
enough (though it should breed pity:) but they which have been taught and
nurtured by the wise, have learned to hold their hands from such childish
labors. For to leave these counselles from humanity, and to listen to the
authority of grave divines, there is no sort of them either ancient or
modern, neither the elder nor the later writers, but they have been very
careful to warn us of this vanity: that since Psa. 49. last.
man being in honor, kept not his understanding, but by this sin amongst
others, made himself like the beasts that perish, therefore we should Peraldus
to. 2. de vitio negligentiae.
Animo quasi fraenum imponere, nec aliquando permittere vt euagetur, bridle our
affections from this madding appetite, of running after every new and
difficult question, that we should rather entreat God in the words of holy
David, Psa. 32. 9. 10.
Lord let me not be like to the horse or mule, for they have no understanding,
their mouths must be curbed, and their unruly heads held in with bit and
bridle, lest they fall upon us: but (blessed God) inform me and teach me in
thy way, that is knowledge all sufficient: and lest I should err in it, Lord
guide me with thine eye, lead me on in thy testimonies, but keep me from
these vanities. These holy meditatio^s against curious arts, all godly and
learned both the fathers and their gleaners will remember to us. As to avoid
prolixitie, let me name you in the first rank but Prosper and Saint
Augustine, the former of which two has an excellent prescription, by which
every one may manage his aspiring thoughts in his greatest atchieuements and
pursuit of wisdom, Prosper de vocatione grati^^.
when he tells us that Vt quae Deus manifesta fecit non sunt necligenda, ita
quae occulta esse voluit non sunt scrutanda: as when the Saints on earth shall
say unto us, Psa. 22. 1.
come let us go up unto the house of the Lord, Psa. 95. 2. 6.
let us before his presence fall down and worship, and at the Altars foot,
let us kneel down to God our maker, we Ier. 7. 13.
may not with them of Judah refrain our feet from Gods courts, nor Psa. 50.
17.
contemning the holy law cast his words behidn us; so when we do come into the
temple, and present our selves before his footestoole, we must not press up
too high, nor look too far, we Leuit* 16. 17.
must not so much as peep into the sanctum sanctorum: as it is a foul
negligence Ioh. 5. 39.
not to search the scriptures which God has revealed to us: so it is proud
arrogance to 2. Esdras. 4. last.
intrude into the mysteries which he would conceal from us Horatius sermonum
li. 2. satyr. 3.
vnus vtrique error, as the Poet said sed varijs illudit partibus, both err in
the same subject about attayning knowledge, but one being too careless, that
would not know enough, the other too too curious, that needs would know too
much, both of them equally condemned by that father, as well this nice vanity,
as that palpable gross folly. And the same judgment is that famous great
doctor of (which worthily is entitled Ingeniorum aquila) as August. to. 2.
epist. 56.
he has testified in an epstile which he writ to Dioscorus, whom when he
found vainly inquisitiue, about trifling quiddities, which he had raked up
out of Tully and other Authors, and that he would needs trouble that good
father for resolution in them: S. Augustine returned him this grave and wise
answer, Ego te ediscere vellem, vt vel non inaniter curiosus esse velis, aut
salte^ curiositatem tuam illis nutriendam non imponere, quorum inter curas vel
maxima cura est, reprimere ac refraenare curiosos. I am sorry that the pleasing
conceit of these mani-knotted questions, has so far besotted your better
judgment, as that you would trouble me with solution of the^, which (God wots)
have my hands full in looking to my Diocese: wherefore I would wish you
either to weine your studies from this giddish curiosity, or if she do bring
forth such a brood of questions, you would at least be wiser then to put
them forth to nurse, to such as I am, which wish them never borne. This
sharp, but safe reply, did that holy man return, to this vainglorious
affecter of vainer Curiosity: consorting just with that which Prosper said
before, that those which have their hearings (...) thus troubled with 2. Tim.
4. 3.
the itche, must either have their ears stopped from listening, or their
mouths lockte for asking such frivolous questions. Wherefore were Saint Peter
now living to read their volumes, which from his Math. 16. 20.
rockie and unmoved foundation have reared their silver, 1. Cor. 3^ 12.
golden, yea, their pearly works, he could not think much that his Lord and
Master, (since mean men, yea his own Scholars have found fault with this
infirmity) should chide him for being curious, with this Quid ad te? Peter in
time every good man which blame this, thine own followers hereafter, will say
thou did not well.

But because the latter days are those, Math. 24. 12.
in which sin and iniquity shall most abound: and amongst all sins, 2. Tim.
4. 3.
that men shall not suffer wholesome doctrine, but tickle thus after choice of
curious teachers: it may be thought that some amongst our later writers, are
grand patrons at least close favorites of this shallow study. Indeed ^^org.
(...) us in (...)
Quum omnes nunc passim scripturiunt, and certatim libros edunt, since every
one in these days that can but join his letters must needs bescribling, and
his fingers itch (...) ink have made his pen and paper meet: it is
inevitable (as the same Doctor says) but that multi (etiam sub praelo) aut
plus sibi arrogent, aut aliter sentiant, quam aut res ipsa aut pietas patitur,
many (yea in print) will discover themselves to the world, and yet either
arrogating more then their merit, or else delivering more then truth and
piety. But amongst our Neotericks, because many impute this to one man
especially: let me show you that diverse as forward as he, but not so learned,
may perhaps be affecters of singularities as he was, yet cannot justly father
their Curiosity on their Master. For as himself was not ignorant that
Caluinus instit lib. 1 cap. 14. sect. 8.
Quaedam ex eo sunt mysteriorum genere, quorum plena reuelatio in vltimum diem
differtur, because 1. Tim. 3. 16.
godliness is a mystery, Act. 1. 7.
therefore there are some things which cannot now be learned, 1. Cor. 13 12
till in an absolute fulness of heavenly wisdom, we come in that Kingdom to
see God face to face: so did he teach them which needs will build their
whole divinity (with contempt of Fathers) upon his sole authority, that
Caluinus instit. li. 3. cap 21. sect. 1.
opportune admonendi sunt in cognitionis studio quis sit officij sui modus,
they must not shoot too short nor gone in this their study And if they would
have a lesson how this scantling may be kept, not for their rouing, but keeping
of their length, himself can well enough direct the^ if he will but hear him,
Caluinus instit. lib. 1 cap. 14. sect. 8.
that a nimia vel in quaerendo curiositate, vel in loquendo audacia cauendum
est, they must not like fond and but questing puppies, either spend their
mouths too freely, or hang their ears too largely in hunting after nifles.
Surely it is well that these misdeeming people, have found him their censor,
but not their Champio^. And because the particular examples perhaps may teach
his duller scholars, more then all his precepts, I would they could waken their
drousie heads, to mark from him but one of his choice instances, as touching
Gods holy and most blessed Angels.

For concerning them, many nimble wits will know (more then all the synod of the
Prophets and Apostles would ever teach them) in which of the six days of this
worlds creation, the celestial Angels had their first beginning: Exodus 20.
11.
for in them God made heaven, earth, and sea, with all their complements.
Doubtless says one, this is my opinion, God made them the first day of all
the week, when in Genesis 1. 1.
the very beginning he created heaven with her ornaments, and so not unlikely
these blessed Spirits amongst them: for in that full Quire of his caelestiall
song-men, psa. 148. 1. 5.
when all the creatures are invited to praise their Creator, before the stars
Ge^. 1. 14. 19.
were set forth glistering as spangles, which was on the fourth day: or ever
the heavens were spread, his psa. 104. 2.
pauilions courtaines, which Ge^. 1. 6. 8.
was the second day: and before the light, this worlds sweet comfort, was
diffused amongst us, Ge^. 1. 3. 5.
which was the first day, psa 148. 2. 3. 4
the Angels are billed and called in the first place, as though they were
before the rest, the eldest singing-men, and had been made before the other
creatures. You say well says another, but I think not so: I suppose rather
God made them in the last day of the week. For nature, which is the Julius
Scaliger de subtilitste. excercit. 77. sect 4.
ordinary power of the aeternall Godhead, or rather (as the Ouidius metam. li.
1. hanc deus and melior litem natura dimerit.
Poet could say) very God himself, Scaliger excercit. 101. sect. 1.
ab ignobilioribus ad nobilioria pro greditur, first produces that which is
less, and afterward that which is more perfect: as almost hudwinckte you may
plainly see it, in both the worlds the lesser and the greater. For if ye view
the whole frame of this bigger engine, and note how by degrees at last it was
made perfect, you may see in the five former days of this worlds creation, the
works of Gods hands serviceable for man, were Genesis 1. ad versum 25.
first produced but in the last day, when this admirable Theater drew near the
finishing, then Genesis 1. 26
even the sixth day came man forth, Scaliger de subtilit. excercit. ^50. sect. 5.
the abridgement of all essence; which in his body bare the cou^terfeit of the
world, and in his soul had engraven the Godheads image, a most rare work of
exquisite perfection: but first was the furniture, then man the Lord created.
And as in this great world, so with like facility you may discern the same in
man, which is the lesser For with much more advise and consultation, (as though
the three persons of the blessed Trinity, had assembled in parliament for man's
creation) when he the last, but best of all corporal substances was forthwith
to be framed, Genesis 2. 7.
first God did temper him a body of the earths small dust (alas) the vilder
part, but Bernardus.
stercoris mar supiu^, a satchell of corruption: but to make him a perfect man
of complete nature, did after Genesis 2. 7.
breathe into him a spirit of life, a most divine and intellectual essence.
Wherefore, if the Angels be more excellent creatures then man Psa. 8. 5.
whom at the first God placed in seats below them, no doubt but if Adam on
the sixth day as a more curious work, was brought into the world after all the
creatures else, but that the Angels more glorious by far then Adam, were
created after him the sixth day also. Very finely, but as vainly, both
demanded and disputed, says this late divine: the first says, they were
created the first day, because the Psalmist named them first, he might as well
have said, the stars were created before the heavens, for Psa. 148. 3. 4.
in the same place they are called before the other: the other says they were
created the sixth day, after man: because their nature had perfection much more
then his, belike not believing Moses, nay not God himself, Ge^. 1. 31. and 2. 2
that after man was made (speaking of no work following, neither Angel nor
inferior) presently God rested from his blessed labor. But I will tell you
(says he) rewarding them both for their scholasticall act, as 2. Sam. 1. 14. 15
David did the Amalekite for his unpleasing news Caluinus instit. lib. 1 cap
14. sect. 4.
Contentio isthaec peruicatiae magis quam diligentiae est. I never knew but
diligence deserved a thank, but I have heard withal, that busy would have a
band: this is not a divine study, but a devilish Curiosity, I like not this.

Thus not our late writers (whom many notwithstanding have called in question
for misprision of this crime) are so far found guilty of this fantastic
Curiosity, but they can afford it controlement where they spy it in another,
much more must the blessed Messiah of the world, countermaund this same sin
in a great Apostle, with Quid ad te? fie Peter, leave this vanity, there is no
wise man in any age but he will reprove it.

Thus far right Honorable and beloved Christians, you have heard the
entertainment of this quality with the wise, what cautions all learned men,
both ancient and later, have given out against this one fruitless study, to
wit, because she is but Augustus ^^mo 2. Epist. 56.
liberalium studiorum nomine palliata, as Saint Augustine says no true
liberal art, but a counterfeit of such science: or if she have in her any one
point of wisdom, it is but Caluinus instit. lib 1 ca. 4. sect. 4.
nugatoria sapientia, a kind of childish and trifling toyish knowledge, as
that Neotericke could confess it: in one word, because she is but 1. Tim. 5.
20.
scientia falso dict^, as Saint Paul, from whom they both borrowed, long since
did determine it, an injurious usurper of true learnings sacred title,
therefore no man should admit her in his serious travails, which he
undertakes for the attaining of immortal wisdom. Now because I fear me I have
kept too long time in passing over this strain* I will run over the next with as
quick breefes as I can: that I may show you after these precepts, by the
presidents of the wise, what welcome Curiosity has had amongst them, if you
observe their affection and disposition to her, either when they see it in the
lives of others, or else find themselves possessed with it.

Touchign the affection of grave and prudent men, when they find this
infirmity in the study of another, either for their approbation or
reprehension of it, I remember there are too faults which the Acute Philosopher
has truly discovered amongst divines, and both of them worthy to be severely
taxed. First Julius Scaliger de subtilitate excercit. 6 8. sect. 1.
there is agrestis quaedam simplicitas, a sottish simplicity in a sort of
silly students, which when by the weakness of their dry and shallow
brains, they cannot find forth the immediate cause of any effect in nature,
straight way do condemn reason and al her true conclusions, as the very plague
and bane of Christian religion: and refer the Original of all such motions to
God, which indeed is the first and mediate, but not the sole cause of such
petty actions: in the mean while, covering either the weakness of their conceit,
or the idleness of their minds, with a holy pretense (as they say of reverent,
but indeed) of a ceremonious and too fearful modesty. These men are too
short to reach the height of wisdom, at least they put not their arms forth
to the length. But there is another sort which strain themselves too far,
who when one shall tell them, that Idem ibidem excercitatione 307. sect. 29.
Humanae sapientiae pars est quaedam aequo animo velle nescire, it is a
special part of man's true knowledge, if in some things he can be content to
confess himself ignorant, by no means will endure such restraint or
limitation, but think their understandings so sharp and nimble, as that they
would scorn there should be ought so hard or difficult, but by a little musing
and discoursing in their thoughts, they can riue it out from the depth of
nature: these are iollye fellows, that naught can escape the^. But I would they
would hear his judgment of their conceit, whose intellectual eye was as pure
and sharp quick-sighted (If I mistake it not) as ever any of theirs. Horum
Idem ibidem excercitatione 65. section^. 4.
equidem ingenia (says o^^) admirari and laudare vt acuta soleo, verum vt
nimis acuta fugere.

Surely I cannot but commend, yea, admire these fine and subtle nimblewitted
heads: it is a pretty thing to see how deft and fleet they be, evermore in
motion, of sudden apprehension: but I dare not follow them by imitation: I
fear they are too subtle, the threads they spinne are doubtless all too fine,
their learning is more admirable then approoueable, so exceeding sleighte, that
it never can be found. This was the kindest greeting that Scaliger could
vouchsafe her, when he spied this curiosity in the students of his age.

Yea, but Plutaren. de educandis liberis.
multi aliorum peccata increpantur, ipsi in eadem prolapsi vitia, many can be
content to carp at that in others, which not withstanding they can wink at in
themselves: therefore that you may see how wise and godly men have not only
disliked this infirmity in the lives of others, but also have abandoned and
renounced it in themselves, as knowing it (belike) to be but Bernardus.
nugarum matrem, virtutum nouercam, a good nurse for vanity, but a dry nurse
for virtue, I refer you to that one example only of the Church of Ephesus:
Act. 19. 19.
Where when many Disciples had heard Saint Paul's two years Sermons, and seen
the wondrous miracles which he strangely wrought, in healing the sick, and
scourging the seven vilde exorists, they perceiving their vain and frivolous
studies to be dangerously obnoxious to the sacred Gospel of Jesus Christ which
that Apostle preached, presently forsook those curious Arts, and publicly did
burn so many Books of that kind, as afterward were valued at two thousand
marks. A notable example of heavenly wisdom, in disclayming such a study as
was altogether fruitless: yet (alas) we are not so wise as to follow their
example. For the Ephesians, which were Graecians, men excellently learned, and
which at the first in respect of their knowledge in humanity, reputed the
doctrine of Christianity, to be but a simple thing, and indeed mere
foolishness, 1. Cor. 1. 23.
like the great Clerks which were in the Church at Corinth, could here submit
themselves at the hearing of Gods Oracles, to the obedience of Christ's Gospel,
and the renouncing of their own studies: but we rude Barbarians, whose
knowledge comes behind theirs in humane literature, but far exceeds them
in the tidings of salvation, never can be drawn (if once we have devised some
conceited quirke, either in the rule of faith, or the form of discipline) to
abandon and forsake our own imaginations, and subject our judgments unto
wholesome doctrine, here is no remoouing of our curious Arts.

They were not ashamed that all the world should know the final abiuring of
their childish studies, for publicly they burnt their books of all such arts,
but with us, me^ have learned that fond and surly rule, Seneca ad Ebutium de
liberalitate lib. 4. 38. cap.
quod semul dixeris qualecumque sit fixum ratumque sit, that which thou have
once affirmed, be it true or false, maintain it to the death: and therefore
howsoever reason or religion convince them of their errors, they will not
stick to say, I have once taught this for sound doctrine, therefore I must not
leave it: Plato in Thaaereto.
though Protagoras the elder he was, was the wiser also, and Saint Augustinus
to.
Augustine that good father blushed not in his age, to pen a retraction of
that he writ in his youth. Or if their palpable ignorance be evidently
confuted by impregnable arguments, that so they are forced to alter their first
opinions, yet they will not have their followers suspect them to be changelings,
oh no Sam. 15. 30.
Saltem coram populo honora me, for Gods sake let not the world know,
notwithstanding all this, but that I am still as I was a disciplinarian: they
will not have men think that they are so wise, as to discarde their own
quiddities, no not for sound divinity. In one word, the Ephesians were content
to leave their Books, though by good estimation they were thought to be
worth no less then fifty thousand pieces of silver; questionless it was a
rich and a goodly Library, yet they burnt them all to make way for the Gospel,
that Act. ^^ 18.
me^ might sooner believe, and bring forth good works answerable: but here a
sort of Ae^ops cocks, will not leave their Barley-corne for the ritchest Gemme,
nor can be brought to part with the least Geneua trick, though perhaps it be
scarce worth thrice three halfepence, for the greatest cause that may be, I
warrant you not for the wealth of the Tower of London. But howsoever some with
us, not of the sou^dest judgment, are too fondly wedded to their curious
paradoxes, you see these new conuerts by Saint Paul in Asia, how readily they
rejected their fruitles curiosity, they left their studyes, and burnt their
helpelesse books. Wherefore if wise men and religious persons have both disliked
this sin in others, and rejected it themselves: if Scaliger amongst the
latest Philosophers, and the Ephesians amongst the ancientest Christians, have
thus abhorred these frivolous inquisitions: well might the son of Sirach
admonish the Jews, Eccles. 3. 24. 25.
not to be curious in things that are superfluous, because the meddling with
such has beguiled very many: and well might the Apostle give order to teach
the Gentiles, that 1. Tim. ^ 4.
they should take heed of endless and fruitless genealogies, 1. Tim. 4. 7.
of profane and old wives doting fables 2. Tim. 2. 23.
of foolish and unlearned iangling questions: but most woorthily of all might
Jesus Christ our Savior, Ioh. 1. 38.
the Rabbi of the Jews, and the Luke 2. 32
light of us poor Gentiles, reprove this in his servant amongst other his
infirmities. For there were more defects in our Apostle, besides that which in
this place remains upon record, as a reverend father of the Church has noted
Augustinus de agone Christiano
Petrus in mare fide vacillauit, a cruce saluatorem reuocauit, sacerdotis
seruum vulnerauit, dominu^ suum abnegauit, religionem denique simulauit. Peter
offended in respect of his trust in God, Math. 14. 30.
for notwithstanding his warrant, one blast could shake his faith: he offended
in respect of his love to his Master, Math. 16. 22.
for that being carnal, would have kept him from the cross. He sinned in
impatience, Ioh. 18. 10.
when (but a word and a blow) he cut off Malchas ear: he sinned in
negligence, when Math. 26. 40.
being commanded to watch and pray, he slept, and could not wake so much as
one hour. Math. 26. 74.
He transgressed in unfaithful cowardice, when for fear of a gyrle he
abiured his Lord and Master: Gal. 2. 13.
and he transgressed in deep dissimulation, when being a Jew, he lived as did
the Gentiles: so that if before this time our Savior and redeemer reproved
his infidelity, with Math. 14. 31
O thou of little faith, and his affection too carnal, with Math. 16. 23
Come behind me Satan: if he found fault with his impatience, Ioh. 18. 1^
bidding him sheath his sword, and with his drowsiness Math. 26. 4.
asking him if he could not watch one hour: if after this time his
white-liuered fearfulness was taxed, Luke 16. 22
with a look and turning of Christ's head, and his dissimulation by Gal. 2. 11.
Saint Paul, with an inuectiue to his face: it is not to be wondered, if this
escaped not scot-free, if when reason and religion amongst men in all ages, be
adverse in curiosity both by rule and pattern, Christ did challenge his
Apostle for that gross infirmity, with Quid ad te? Peter amongst other
faults, I must warn thee needs of this, thy ill pleasing curiosity deserves
sharp reprehension.

Now have you heard the latter branch of this last argument, what countenance
she has with the wise and virtuous, when they meet with her abroad, or in
their private studies, how they dislike her in the one, and disclayme her in
the other, so that by the sum of this one reason, your selves may make this
sure collection, that if both the counsel and carriage of grave and holy men,
have reproved and rejected this unprofitable curiosity: our Savior being
that sun from whom they take their light, must needs control the same sin
in his dear Apostle.

And here holy and blessed brethren, having knitte up the third motive of our
Saviors reprehension, drawn from this sins acceptance even amongst the
sons of men, to wit, that if they have taken acceptions to it, in whomsoever
they discryed it, the son of God must needs check it in so excellent an
Apostle: I would gladly cease to trouble you any further at this present, lest
being altogether in this place feeding of your souls, I should forget you must
have time at home to refresh your selves. But because I remember that Nathans
2. Sam. 12 1.
erat homo quidam dives, there was a certain rich man that wronged his poor
neighbor by him, will do little good without 2. Sa^. 12. 7.
tu ipse es, etc. except it be laid close to the party trespassing: suffer me
I beseech you in the meekness of your spirits, to minister this purging pill
which our Savior offered Peter, to this Christian presence and this honorable
City: and I suppose (if it work well with you) ye will readily confess, that
there are many causes given on your parts, which might move the son of God,
with greater reason to check you in these days for your giddish Curiosity,
then in the days of his flesh he had to reprove Saint Peter: so that
woorthily he might transfer his speech from the Apostle with Quid ad vos? O
foolish Citizens, you are in many things too much exceedingly curious, which
little do concern you, and less avail you.

Saint Peter that great and worthy antesignanus of the Church, which Math.
16. 16.
in the fair streamer of his true confession, did bear the glorious name of
Jesus Christ, the everlasting son of his everliving father, though he were
tainted (as you have heard) with so many scapes and slidings, yet was he also
wonderfully adorned with many rare and admirable graces, as I gave you a short
note of them in my Sermon the last day: and yet all these could not shield him,
but this check must needs fall on him, our Savior could not brook his vain
idle Curiosity. Verily if the son of God were on the earth in these days,
seeing men when he cries o Quaerite viam antiquam, Sirs look ^er. 6. 16.
which is the old way, that is the good way, be sure ye walk in that, yet
hunting after nothing but new and strange devises, he could not possibly keep
silence, but reprove this itching vanity, Ho, keep the beaten way, these are
but newfound tracings, these nouels are not for you.

And if ever that were true which long since was affirmed in things of civil
life, that est natura hominum nouitatis auida, all men from their cradles
delight in uncouth novelties, then it is most apparently true for this present
age in this kingdom, and especially in this City for matters of Religion:
where amongst other kinds no doubt of sundry errors, you shall see men by
four means bewray their curiosity, by which they are led to listen after
novelties. 1 For either they must every day have new teachers to instruct the^,
always one man will be stale, they must have choice, 2 or if the same man
still teach, he must provide them some new doctrine, ordinary dishes will
cloy their dainty stomachs: 3 or if he do deliver them common lessons, he
must not say he has them by common means, the least must be by visions, or by
revelations, they must be far fetched, things bred at home are forbid: 4 or if
he be no new man, nor bring no strange doctrine, nor receive it but by common
means, he must confirm it by extraordinary courses, he must be one that is
able to do some miracles, and at the least to work great wonders: either the
Preacher must be new-come, or his doctrine newfound; either the attayning of
his learning must be by revelations, or else otherwise the confirming of it by
working miracles; or else if none of these, but that it be commune sanctorum,
according to the accustomed form of plain and wholesome doctrine that a man
shall utter, his auditory will not stick to tell him in these days, that they
could have said as much themselves as this is, and that if you can acquaint
them with no other things then these, they had as lieue to hear their own cow
low, as bestow the hearing of such another Sermon. But Gal. 3. 1.
as Saint Paul said, O stulti Galatae quis vos fascinauit, etc. O foolish
Galathians, who has bewitched your minds, that ye should not obey the truth
of Jesus Christ: so may I well say on this behalf; O ye fond and foolish
giddie-headed Londoners, who has besotted your souls and understandings, that
thus you estrange your selves from sound doctrine and holy exhortations, and
are so vainly inamored on every newfound trifle? I must still speak to you in
the Apostles phrase, 1. Cor. 11. 22.
Quid dicam? alas what shall I say unto you? shall I praise you in this? no
(God wot) I cannot praise you; but 1. Cor. 15. 34.
loquor ad vere^undiam vestram, I speak it to your shame, that your hearts
should be so itching, and your heads so full of crochets, that nothing now can
please you but dainty things and new: had ye lived in Christ's time, and been
of such a disposition, he would have been at you with Quid ad vos? why what is
the matter sirs? will naught but strange things serve you? this curiosity
becomes not them that will be my Disciples.

Thus much might serve to have spoken in generality, but because I am taking
my leave of the second part of my text, which is Christ's action, his reproof
of Curiosity, let it not offend you if I stand a little longer in buckling on
every joint of this reprehension, that it may sit the faster to the backs of
such offenders. And first for the first, which is the busy seeking after
newcome teachers. That which Tully said long ago in military discipline, that
Cicero in Philippicis. oratione 11.
Non tam veterani intuendi sunt quam tyrones milites, flos Italiae, and nouae
legiones etc. there is not so much respect to be had of old weather-beaten
soldiers, as of new-trayned men, which are the flower of chivalry: the same
do many amongst us hold concerning Preachers, in the Church of Christ
militant: that for their own poor shepherd it makes no matter for him,
though he have from God the charge of all their souls: God help him poor
man, he is an ouer-worne divine: his learning is now out-dated: but if they
should go to Church, they would wish to hear a young eloquent scholar, new
come from the University, one that will give them the flower and cream of his
flowing wit, and that can deliver his mind in such fine polished terms, as
in admiration will make them hold up their hands and bless them: one that they
never heard before, and every day a new one, or else they care not if they
hold the Church a wild Catte. Indeed such was the affection of the
unthankful Jews, both to John the Baptist, and to Christ his Master, they
were strange Doctors, and therefore had great audience. John was a very rare
man, no ordinary person, if ye look either into his ministry or his
conversation. For touching his ministry, his doctrine was not usual, but God
raised him up as a Prophet, when Gualter. in Marcum cap. 1. homilia 4.
there had been none five hundred years before him: and for his sacrament
that was strange, Math. 3. 6
for he used Baptism, and not Circumcision; prophecy had been intermitted,
and Baptism then first was founded, so that his whole office seemed altogether
new: and as for his life or behavior amongst the people, Mat* 11. 18. 19.
Nec edens venit nec bibens, he came neither eating nor drinking as others,
which because they are sociable, are termed gluttons and wine-bibbers: but he
was of an austere and straight conversation, Math. 3. 4
his garments plain and grave, but camels hair and a leather gyrdle, and his
diet course and sparing, nothing but locusts and wild honey in the
wilderness. When such a man was heard of as now could prophecy, which for so
many years before him no man else had done, when there were tidings of one
that baptized men in Jorden, and a fame was spread of his strickt and spotless
life, Gualterus vbi supra.
Ad visendum illum curiositas and nouarum rerum studium mul^os excitauit, What
for curiosity, and what for other causes, Math 3. 5
all Jerusalem and Iewry, yea, all the regions near them flockte forth in
heaps to see John Baptist: the people must needs hear and see such a
new-come Prophet, exiuit tota Hierosolima etc. says Saint Matthew, all the
City ran forth into the wilderness to behold him. And as the Jews dealt
with the servant, so did Herod the Tetrarch with Christ his Master. For first
when he heard his Sermons and matchless wonders, Luke 9. 9.
he was exceedingly desirous to get but one sight of him, thinking it was
either Elias which should come again, or one of the Prophets which was risen
from the grave, or else good John, whose head he had taken from him; but which
of all these soever it was, assuring himself such a man was worth the seeing:
and afterward when he met with our Savior at Jerusalem, Luke 23. 8
he was maruailously glad that he had gotten a sight of him, whom he longed so
much to see. Thus both the governor and the people were mightily carried with
an insatiable desire of hearing and beholding such persons as were strange.
And as this was true amongst the Jews, so certainly it is too true amongst us
Christians, Ci^^^o de finio.
Chremes Terentianus nouum vic number non vult fodere aut arare, as the old man in
the Comedy would not have his new neighbor work, for fear of hurting him, so
are our Citizens wonderful tender over their new* found teachers, nothing is
too dear for the^, though all the rest be hated. Tell them where they may
hear an Honorable Bishop preach, a reverend Prelate, or an ancient grave
divine, tush, they know what these are, temporising formalists, a sort of
silken Doctors, such as when a man hears their text, he may guess himself
what will be al their Sermon: but if you can tell them of a trim young man,
that will not quote the Fathers (and good reason, for his horse never eat a
bottle of hay in either of the Universities): that never yet took orders, but
had his calling approved by the plain lay elders (for he was too irregular to
be ordered by a Bishop): that will not confound the congregation with latin
sentences, (for he is not guilty of the Roman language): that will not stick
to revile them that are in authority, that his sectaries may cry he is
persecuted, when he is justly silenced: if ye can give them intelligence of
such a man, Oh for Gods sake where teaches he, to him they will run for
haste without their dinners, sit waiting by his church till the door be open,
if the place be full, clyme up at the windows, pull down the glass to hear
him, and fill the Churchyard full, send him home every thing: one man plate,
another hangings, this Gentlewoman naperie, that goodwife money. Let him want
nothing so long as he is new, though within two years after, they leave him on
a lea-land, and never heed him.

This is the malady of many Citizens, they have money for new Tauernes, and
ears for new-come Preachers, but none can please them, except the man be new.
Indeed these Cicero ad Q fratrem. lib. 2. Epis. 12.
(...) libenter sua recentia poemata legunt, these buzzing piddlers love to be
always doing, notable sturring fellows, they will not stick to allow you
three sermons in a day (such as they can) good ordinary table-talke, but as
Tully said, Cicero de legib. lib. 1. and ^lutarchus in vita Ciceronis.
Academia istaec noua rerum omnium perturbatrix est, that the newfound
University which Arch^silas and Carneades had lately founded. was the common
disturber of the whole state of Italy: so we not many years since have
pitifully tasted, that these vpstart teachers have so shaked this Church and
Kingdom, as if the care and wisdom of our gracious Prince (whose life and
government the Lord continue as the firmament) together with the incorrupted
integrity of some reverend Bishops (whom God long maintain and increase their
numbers) had not religiously prevented and withstood them, it had been very
dangerous, and almost inevitable, lest the one (with come down sir Prelate) had
been trampled in the dust, and the other (with are you settled) had been
disioynted with sedition. Wherefore blessed and beloved Citizens, praise God
which has protected this church and commonwealth, from such unlearned, yet
contentious Spirits: and magnify him which has still placed amongst us some
grave and holy churchme^, admirable for their knowledge, and inculpable for
their lives. As for your newfound doctors, take S. Paul's sound counsel, 2.
Tim. 4* 3.
purchase not after your own lusts and itching appetites, every day such huge
heaps of strange and vpstart teachers: for (alas) they will but turn your
ears from the voice of truth, and nuzzle you in their own devised fables, our
Savior which warned you of them by Saint Paul before, would tell you of them
now if he were amongst you, with Quid ad vos? this curiosity is not
tolerable, that you will listen to no Preachers, but those which still are
new. And if I may be so perswasiue with you, as by these exhortations to have
drawn you from these teachers, let me admonish by your patience of that
choice which you make of doctrines, and that is, that many of you will needs
hear either new things or nothing, no Sermon sounds well in your ears, but
that which sounds too strangely. Indeed Act. 17. 21.
the Athenians amongst the Pagans, made it their whole study, that they might
tell and hear of naught but that was new: and the people of Bethania among the
Jews, flockte in great concourse to the house of Mary, whose brother our
Savior had then raised from his grave, but Ioh. 12. 9^
it was not for any love to hear Christ Jesus preach, but because they longed
to see the man which had been dead: Ludolphus part^ 2. cap. 25.
Sperabant enim referente Lazaro, de altera vita aliquid audire, the reason
was, because they were in hope that Lazarus would report unto them some strange
occurrents, which his wandering soul had seen in a foreign world: so were the
Gentiles of news from other countries, the Jews of strange tidings from
another world, exceeding greedy: naught but new impressions might touch their
understandings: and so amongst many of both sorts since it is too manifestly
true, that Erasmu^ in iudicio suo de Seneca.
Communia quanquam optima fastidiuntur, the most commendable things once
waxing common, are but contemptible. For if students will teach other nations
to speak their language, they cannot abide to learn them the same phrases
that others do, but if that Erasmus ibidem.
of Platos (...), be once translated by Tully, that no man is borne for
himself, but partly for his country, and partly for his parents and his
friends: another when he comes to the translation of it, ne similiter dicat
mauult peius dicere, cares not how wide he roaues, so he shoot not near to
that: and therefore will rather say, nemo sibi contigit, no man has his being
allowed him for himself: a little stranger, but a great deal worser. And in
their native speech, when they have abundant choice of fit and proper words,
yet Cicero de oratore li. 3.
in maxima suorum verborum copia translatis and alienis magis delect antur
verbis quam proprijs and suis, in the greatest store of variety in their own,
their mouths are for none but spruse outlandish terms: Cicero de finib. li.
4.
such as Cleanthes and Chrysippus did altogether use, in their curious Book of
painted Rhetoric. But whether run I back to former ages, to prove this in
humanity? your selves will convince this in your learning of divinity. For if
you can hear of one within a church or chapel, lately built with the ends
situate north and south (for east and west were too too superstitious) will
warn you that such a day he will teach or speak, (for to say he would preach
were a word too triniall) and in his exercise will show you a cunning model of
perfect discipline, lately with great travel fetchte from beyond the seas: by
which the meanest in your congregation, shall either bear some office, or at
the least have great authority: O this is excellent, the government
established by our sacred Prince, examined by the Clergy, confirmed by the
Nobility, and yielded to by the Commons: in one word, ratified by the
powerful authority of that Honorable Court of Parliament, and thus long
experimented to have been both peace-full and religious: tush, it is but a
threadbare relic of blind and darkesome Papistrie: the Common Seruice-booke,
should be converted into quick and sudden fresh-conceiued prayers (not
printed in the Book, but new-hatched in the brains:) and these studied
Sermons should be duly changed into extemporany exercises, in a moment
apprehended upon the first view of the text: he that thus powers forth his
petitions, and delivers such doctrines as never any heard before, nor he
himself can well repeat again, this is an Orator for you to pray with, a
worthy teacher for you to learn with, this is a fellow that is for your tooth
indeed: you must have novelties, and naught but new will serve you. And (alas)
what are these wonders, or your selves which so admire them? Surely (for the
things themselves which so much affect you) as in points of action Salust de
coniur. Catilinae.
Cuncta plebs nouarum rerum studio coniuratorum incaept a saepe probat, the
rude and vulgar multitude lendes a ready ear to seditious speeches, and is
exceeding proane to mutinous insurrection, though they neither have cause from
their Prince, nor find safety for themselves, only because they love to see
strange alterations: so in matters of knowledge, and but bare contemplation,
Erasmus in iudicio suo de Seneca.
Raro dicta etiam si pessime frequentissime tamen applauduntur, these things
which gain the great applause in popular assemblies, are not embraced for
their wel-deseruing worthiness, but only for their quaynte newfangled
strangeness; it is their rareness, not their goodness, that makes you like
them. And for your selves, the great masters of these devises, it is true which
Batracus said once in the Poet, Mantuanus in Bembo. ecologa. 10.
Cura viris grauibus rerum solet esse suarum, wise men attend that which
concerns them nearest: but it is as true which his fellow told him in the
same eglogue, that Cura viris leuibus rerum solet esse nouarum, they which are
devoted so to these newfound pageants, are but vain giddie headed
shittlewitted fellows, there is no stayed wisdom, no sound judgment in
them. Therefore I must needs call to you, O ciues, ciues, good gentle
citizens, leave off this running and mad-brainde appetite, of hearing uncouth
and vpstart doctrines, if your new-founde platformes be for the most part
corrupter then plain antiquity, and your selves for following them be
worthily reputed, with grave and wise men to be but vain and childish, I must
needs say to you as Christ did to S. Peter, Quid haec advos? why listen you
after novelties? why should naught content you but strange things and
outlandish?

Peradventure you will say you are not culpable in these faults: you neither
look for new teachers, nor listen for strange doctrines, and therefore you
are wronged in hearing these reprehensions. Indeed non est factum is a good
plea in law, and perhaps truly pleaded in defense for this, for it may be you
offend in the third kind rather, neither nice for the speaker, nor for that
which is spoken, but only curious in the manner how your doctrine is received,
to wit, that it be not by study of Arts, nor by liberal education, but by
heavenly influence into the^ which teach you. Surely I remember Dives his
supplication which he made from hell to father Abraham, that Luke 16. 27.
he would send good Lazarus to his Fathers house, to warn his five brethren
lest they came to his torments: such a Preacher might recall them, but none
save one from heaven: neither the law could inform them, nor the holy Prophets
reform them, it must be a Saint from the clouds at least, none else could
warn them. Doubtless this damned man in hell, has many like him left behind
on earth, which thinking that Cicero acad. quaest lib. 1.
recentissima quaeque correcta sunt and emendata maxim, all things of the
latest are of the best edition, and crying out that Ludonicus adagiorum curia.
6.
piscis nequam est nisi recens, fish is no longer good, then whilst it is taken
new: cannot endure to be taught by men, if they will say they were brought up
with Saint Paul Act. 22. 3.
at the feet of Gamaliell, and so had their learning by study and
instruction: but if with him they have been 2. Cro. 12 2. 7.
wrapped up as high as the third heavens, and so had all their knowledge by
abundant revelations. If some can rudely protest that they never troubled
school, nor saw an University, that they were never infected with those
prophance sciences, which they commonly call the seven Liberal Arts, nor never
stammered in these three dark languages of Hebrew Greek and Latin, which
usually are termed the three great mother tongs, nor never yet could write or
read one English line, but that what they have was taught from God by visions,
that he has sent them Angels to show them things to come, that he has
schooled them by strange dreams, how to reprove the people, that such a one
is Enoch, which should come before doomes day (though thousands know where he
was borne in a poor sorry village): and another is Elias, (though he be a
silly glouer, and for need is feign to work forth to another) if you can
hear of such a one that will bring you these news from heaven, away with your
great Clerks, your learned students, your great divines, they have a little
skill by the Book, and who may not have so: but those which you will hear,
must receive their knowledge like these, by dreams and visions, by Angels
and revelations, and not by every common and usual manner. Thus your
shepherds must Mantuanu^ in eclogo. 10.
N^ua pascua quaerere and amnes, lead you unto new walks and streams which
were never heard of: your Poets must Horatinus carminum. lib. 3. ode. 25.
insigne aliquid discere, recens and adhuc indictum ore alio, tell you things
which no tongue ever spoke of, and your selves must be Coelius Rhodoginus
antiq. lectionum. lib. 18. cap. 22.
hispani olized, always stirring and finding new inuensions, content with
none but them which teach from heaven, your doctors learning whom you will
follow, must be infused by secret inspiratio^. But (one word by your favor) if
that be true which Abraham replied to Dives, Luke 16. 31.
that they which will not listen to Moses nor the Prophets, will not be
persuaded though one should rise from death: if an Angel from the clouds, or
a saint from heaven should come to teach or move them: you were best take that
counsel from me, which Piso gave to Tully, Cicero de finib. lib. 5.
a noua ad veterem academiam reuertite, hold you to Math. 4. 4
Scriptum est, and to them which can deliver it, Ioh. 5. 39.
that is the golden rule which can lead you up to heaven: as for your
revelations, wait not for them, nor give no credit to them. Quid haec ad vos?
you have Moses and the Prophets, what gad you after others?

There is but one company behind, whom I would speak with for my farewell:
which neither seek new teachers, nor gape for new assertions, nor would
advise their Rabbyes to look for inspirations, only they could wish, that the
Religion which they preach might be countenanced with some miracles which
these men should practice. Belike the undoubted verity of the aeternal
Godhead, whose spirit first breathed the holy writ: the sacred majesty of
those heavenly oracles, which every where are full of high authority: that
most divine and blessed harmony, which sweetly soundes in all her holy
scribes: that wondrous preservation of her leaves, her lines, her letters, from
hateful tyrants and their fiery wasting flames: and the meek obedience which
through all the world has been performed to her royal laws, is not able to
win men to believe God or true Religion, except he will yield so far to
feed their faythlesse fancy, as that at every pinch to gain their good
belief, he will work some miracle in the heavens, the earth, or depth. O God
forbid, will men be so incredulous? will not the creature rest in the word of
his creator? or shall not sinful wretched miserable man believe the only word
of Christ Jesus his Redeemer? far be it from the heart of any Christian, to
deny sweet entrance to the message of his Savior. But whether shall I turn
to exclaim of this foul trespass, but only to my Lord which is offended by
it? The Jews not admitting Christ's heavenly Doctrine, importuned him with Math
12. 38.
volumus a te signum videre, Sir we would see your Sermons ratified with some
rare miracles, and doubting of his office, Ioh. 2. 18.
called for his commission: by what sign can thou show us that thy
authority reaches thus far: and so (God help us) many in this age will
ask the poor scorned Leuits, Sir what can ye do to avouch your dear
religion? what can you perform to grace it more then I? can you stay the sun
in his sphaere with your prayers, or with your Orisons strike fire from the
clouds? can you make a gourd in one day bud and blossom? or cause the
greene-leaued fig tree to wither in a trise? can you fill the valleys with
water at a beck? or dry the channels of the red and maine vast sea? let me
see these things and strait I will believe you, but without some sign or
token, if there be no wondrous miracle, if we take not upon us that we can
dislodge the devil (though God knows he were coniured to be for us, or ever
he could be coniurd by us) if we will not profess that we can fling forth
Spirits as they were but Pigmies, why al our testimonies from the Prophets and
Apostles, our observations and relations of the text, single and compared; the
citing of the Fathers, the alleging of the Councelles, and what you will
beside, all is but frivolous, our Religion is but bare, and our proofs too
slender: all our grounds are stale, if new wonders do not grace us. Thus our
age is like In Aemilia comaedia Italica. act. 3. scenu
Eriphila, that will not lend her eyes to any spectacle, except it be some
newpende Comedy: or rather like the toyish Romans, whom not the newest nor
the finest Scene could hold, Terentius in prologo Hecyiae. ob. funam bulum.
for running after the fellow on the ropes: the freshest show with them most
have the most spectators, and the newest proofs with us must needs have all
the auditors. If some unlearned audacious idiot will but pretend that he can
do maruailes, why that is the man, ye must hear none but him. But whilst you
are thus affected, I may say of you as another said of the Jews, Ludol phus
part. 2. cap. 25.
Curiositas vos trahit plus quam charitas, neque vos amor ducit sed admiratio,
as they came to Christ, so you come to the Church, not of pure charity, but
for curiosity; not to gain his love, but to gape at wonders, as boys resort
to the Merchants open stall, not to see his wares, but to view his Monkey, to
stare, but not to buy. For shame leave off such childish trifling fashions,
expect not that which God has never promised, his word he has given, but not
assured you wonders. I would ye would imitate Elianus the sophister, which
because he never travailed beyond the coast of Italy, never went aboorde to
sail, nor never saw the sea; was in the higher estimation amongst the people:
would God ye would keep you within the bounders of the Scripture, and let the
holy men inspired give your souls contentment: God would be pleased, and the
Saints triumph in it: for heaven and earth cries out of this your fancy, Quid
haec ad vos? what look ye now for wonders? the Scriptures are able to make
good servants perfect.

Thus far (men, brethren, and Fathers) I have praeumed to make this
reprehension somewhat acquainted with you, finding you in condition not much
unlike Saint Peter, wherein (for that which is past) I beseech you have
patience with me, not for the matter which I have spoken from my conscience*
but for my tediousness, which is much beyond my custom: and for that which
remains to make up my conclusion, let me add but this one word by your
Christian clemency, to make you abhor this newfangled Curiosity: that for
these newfound teachers, these inspired dreamers, these wonder-workers, they
are but such as Tully spoke of, touching some in his time: Cicero de
diuinatione. 1.
Superstitiosi vates impudentesque arioli: and of what stamp I pray you? a
sort of silly, yet shameless wizzards, aut inertes aut insani aut quibus
imperat egestas, all of them troubled either with a head witless, or a zeal
opinious, or a purse penilesse: and therefore Quid ad vos? what should you
meddle with them, these are not masters for you.

And as for those which needs will be (not their scholars but their
sectaries,) and learn nothing else but news and novelties, let Saint Paul that
great artist show you their just proportions, and he will tell you they 1.
Tim. 6. 4. 5.
are but ignorant people, yet vildely arrogant; and therefore both erroneous in
their judgment, and corrupt of conversation: an ugly shape, unfit for
Christian people. Wherefore blessed and beloved Citizens, passing over in
silence these so important points, touching the nature of these Doctors, and
their deceived followers: and thus abruptly knitting up this second part of my
text: I humbly beseech you in the bowels of Christ-Iesus, for the avoiding of
offense to our gracious God, and for the aduauncing of your souls to eternal
happiness, abandon and disclayme this fruitless Curiosity, whereof this
City of late has been so much detected: as for your new-founde teachers,
their strange assertions, their uncouth revelations, their supposed wonders,
Quid hae^ ad vos? why should these things seduce you? it is enough for you,
(would GOD I might attain it) rightly to know Jesus Christ, and him for us
crucified. To that sweet Savior, with his glorious father and our blessed
comforter, three persons and one God, be all power and majesty, glory and
dominion ascribed for evermore, Amen.

THE FIFTH Sermon.
THat which blessed Vriel in learned Esdras, reputed an infirmity in his high
aspiring thoughts, that eleuatum cor eius vias Domini co^prehendere voluit, 2.
Esd. 4. 2.
his heart being swelled above due compass, meant to reach the secrets of
Gods high wonders, is now a malady universal in the world, which has seized
too deeply on the sons of Adam. For humana ratio diuina facta inuestigare
studet, as Laurentius villauicentius in festo S. Iohannis.
one has well observed, the sore and watrish eye of man's weak understanding,
though it be 1. Sam. 3. ^
like old Elies sight, exceeding dim, or as the poor man's skill, Math. ^. 2^
which knew not men from trees, in on word Arist. Metaph. (...)
(...), as the bats or night-birdes aspects, do stand disposed to the suns
most radiant beams, yet will it still be staring upward to gaze on God his
essence, works, or will.

For the first, as touching the essence of the eternal Godhead, though that be
true which Saint Paul has remembered us, that (...) there Romans 1. 19.
are but some certain things which may be apprehended of the deity, and as
for himself, he inhabiteth inaccessibilem ^. Tim. 6. 6.
lucem, an endless immortal incomprehensible light, to which no creature that
is corruptible can attain, yet has it evermore been too evidently apparent,
how inquisitiue man's nature has been to search that secret, not only amongst
the Gentiles, but with Gods chosen people.

Amongst the Pagans, (those strangers from the covenant) what one thing did
Cicero de diuinat. li. 1
Hiero that infamous tyrant, more busily demand or seek to know of Simonides
that learned and great Philosopher, then Quid esset Deus, of what kind of
essence that heavenly power might be, which rules this world and us poor
mortal men: though perhaps his care was as small to serve that God, concerning
whom he asked the good Philosopher, as Pilates purpose was to defend that
truth, Ioh. 18. 38
of which he questioned his prisoner our Redeemer. Like him I remember a story
of Caius Cotta, in the Roman Orator, to whom when Velleius by the light of
nature had granted there was a God which guided all this engine, it was not
sufficient to rest in that good answer, but needs he must learn of him yet
more instructions, Cicero de na tu^^ deor. lib. 1.
vndenam and vbinam, qualesque cum corpore tum anima essent, from whence and
where they were: their shape and true condition. But to let pass these Pagans,
we have too pregnant examples, in Gods own house, amongst his dearest
servants. For to begin with latter days, and so go backward: how much was S.
Augustinus.
that good Father of the Church Saint Augustine, overtaken with a fit of this
Curiosity? when in his Book which he compiled of the holy Trinity, he
attempted to comprise all these deep dark mysteries, of three persons in the
Godhead, yet but one pure essence: of a generation in the son, yet coeternall
to his Father: of proceeding in the spirit, yet coequalitie to them both: of
two natures in Christ Jesus, yet but one true person, with other inquisitions
of like proportions: how restless was his mind, and how unquiet all his
studies, in seeking and searching forth the Godheads blessed majesty, to
determine all these questions by some like probability? God wot a task of
difficulty, if not impossible.

And to lead you backward to precedent ages, the scripture has true
testimonies of this infirmity, which may show the contagion of this disease,
not only in the people, but in the Prophet also. For if ye look into the
monuments of the sons of Jacob, you may remember in the publishing of the
royal Law, that when God would meet Moses in the mount of Sina, he Exo. 19.
12
commanded the multitude should not ascend the hill, but that their lists and
bounders should be set them by his servant. Nay more then so, as he said by
his Prophets, not only psa. 105. 15.
do them no harm, but touch not my anointed, so wonderful precise was God
in this behalf, that the people were not only interdicted to go up, Exo. 19.
13.
but further they might not so much as touch the mountain: and (alas) all this
was but for fear of one thing, lest they Exo 19. 21.
should gaze or stare on him that spoke with Moses. So proane is man's frail
and sinful nature, to be prying into Gods eternal essence, that to restrain
their busy and lawless Curiosity, he was enforced first to giueforth his
prohibition unto Israel, and (if words might not prevail) to keep them forth
with lists: and if not these neither could be sufficient, Exo. 19. 13.
to terrify them with fear and awe of death, that every offender in breaking
of the bounds, should either be stoned or stricken through with darts. Gods
sacred wisdom foresaw that appetite of looking into hidden things, and things
forbidden, yea even in Israel, that Kingly priesthood, that chosen generation,
the scepter of his inheritance. And no marvel if the multitude were guilty of
this crime, if the common people offended in this trespass, for Moses himself
was not clear from this infirmity. For whereas in special there are two
choice blessings which God imparteth to wretched sinful man, to wit, Psa.
84. 12
gratia and gloria, the graces of his spirit, and the glory of his kingdom:
the first God had bountifully bestowed upon his faithful servant, for he
himself could say, inueni Exo. 33. 13.
equidem gratiam, Lord I have found favor and acceptance in thy sight: and
this (one would think) might well have satisfied him, for God says where he
gives it, 2. Cor. 12. 9.
sufficit mea gratia, my grace is sufficient for them which may receive it. But
were the blessings of his spirit never so excellent, never so manifold, yet all
would not content Moses, or give him satisfaction, till he had exceedingly
importuned God with his second earnest boon, Exo. 33. 18.
ostende mihi etiam and gloriam tuam: once, yea, twice Lord I humbly do
beseech thee, as thou have given me thy grace, so let me see thy glory, as
I have tasted thy sweetness, let me behold thy greatness, as thou have
visited me with mercy, so show me now thy majesty. Ostende mihi gloriam tuam,
O Lord give me a sight of thy glorious essence, let me behold the Godheads
substance, suffer me to see thee in thy blessed nature, I have felt thy grace
Lord, but let me find thy glory. Thus Jews, thus Gentiles, thus the people,
yea, thus Moses have been too audacious in inquiring to the Godhead. But what
though Hiero and Caius Cotta, though beloved Israel and their great lawgiver,
were deprehended in this fault of too much Curiosity, yet this concerns not
Peter, surely he would not search into the blessed Deity.

Indeed for the essence of our glorious God, we cannot challenge him to have
been looking into that: for as he had learned from the son of Amos, that x
nomen dei admirabile est non ^ Esaias 9. 5.
explicabile, the fearful name of great Jehovah, is far more admirable then
explicable, more fit for men to wonder at then easy to expound: so knew he
likewise from the royal Prophet, that Gods high throne y is above the
Cherubines, ^ Psa 80. 1.
supra omnem s^ientiae plenitudi^e^^, above the reach of the greatest students
learning: for z Deo quamuis nihil ^
nol^s sit praesentius, eodem tamen nihil in^omprehensibilius, though nothing
in the world be nearer us then Gods goodness, Act. 17. 28.
by which we live, we move, and have our being: yet nothing is further from
our knowledge then his substance, for what man has seen God, and yet has
lived after it? The impossibility of attayning to that secret wisdom, Peter
had questionless observed by these four branches, which commonly are
distinguished in his unmeasurable greatness: to wit, 1 that if God for his
essence be altogether infinite (for Psa. 145. 3.
the Lord is great, yea there is no end of his greatness) if for 2 place he
cannot be incircled, (for Deuteronomy. 10. 14.
heaven and the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him): and if for 3
stint of time his being be aeternall (for he is Psa. 90. 2.
ab aeterno in aeternum, before the mountains were made, God from everlasting,
and world without end, God still for ever and for ever): he must needs, for 4
our understanding be beyond our apprehension. So that for this point Saint
Peter might well do as afterward Saint Paul did in the like meditation, not
hope to compass the full knowledge of the Godhead, but rather wonder at it,
and in admiration say Romans 11. 33.
O altitudo diui^iarum, etc. O the bottomless depth of Gods wisdom and
knowledge, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.
Indeed past finding out, Psa 139. 9
though his right hand find us forth every where: for Bernardus.
sic Deus in rationalibus est creaturis, vt tame^ ab ipsis non capiatur, though
God Psa. 14. 3.
look down from heaven and view all the sons of men, yet man's understanding is
masked with a 2. Cor. 3. 15.
veil, and Iud. 13. 22.
he cannot see God: for all the world like Joseph in Pharaoes Court, who
perfectly knew his brethren which came to buy some corn, Genesis 24. 8
but was not known of them, they had forgotten their brother.

These things well learned by Peter a great Apostle, might well restrain his
thoughts from studying, and his tongue from asking concerning the essence of
the blessed Deity. But for the other two parcelles in the glorious Godhead,
namely his wo^drous works and his hidden secret will, I fear me if we sift
this question of Saint John, he will be so far spotted with curious
searching them, as that Christ must needs sponge him with thereproofe of my
text, saying, Quid ad te? these are not for thy learning.

In my former Sermons (right Honorable, right Worshipful, and wel-beloued
Christians) I have spoken of the two first parts in my texts division: to
wit, in the first place of the agent in this Scripture, the visitor which
looks into Saint Peter's trespass: of whom (being Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior,) I have spoken in the two first Sermons, in this and another presence.
In the next place I have entreated of the visitours action, his calling Peter
to the Court, or the reproof of his Curiosity: and this through the
assistance of Gods holy spirit, and your accustomed patience, I have finished
in two other Sermons in this Christian auditorie: I proceed now to the third
part of this little text, subiectum in quo, the subject matter in which Saint
Peter sinned, or rather (if you will) the articles objected in his Masters
visitation, for which by him he is so severely taxed. And these (as I hope your
clemency well remembers) were three in number: the first his Curiosity, in
respect of God, whilst he would thrust himself into the fearching of his
secret mysteries, yet passing over such knowledge as God has well permitted:
the second, his busy meddling, to know the affairs of others, yet neglecting
the duties which were enjoined himself: the third and last, his too careful
laboring in matters of small weight, omitting in the mean season more great
important works. Three shrewd offenses, the least of them worthy of an
earnest reprehension, from the great Arch-bishoppe, the shepherd of his soul,
as in each of them by order, I will breefely show you, how they must needs
extort from Christ this short taxation of Quid ad te? Peter these lessons are
not for thy study.

The first Article of our Saviors reproof amongst these three, is that part
of Curiosity which commonly is entitled (...) his bootlesse wastfull labor,
in ransacking the secrets of Gods hidden closet, in prying too narrowly into
his privy chamber, in searching too busily into such dark mysteries, as was
his pleasure to conceal from sinful man. In this part commonly the sons of
Adam do grievously offend by three sundry ways: either by longing to find
forth Gods blessed essence, the substance of his nature: or else by intruding
themselves into his glorious but yet most wondrous works, or lastly by
searching into his hidden abstruse will, which it stands not with his liking to
reveal to mortal men. From the first of which crimes, Saint Peter must needs
stand clear and well acquitted, no exception lies against him for inquiring
of Gods essence: but for the other branches, the discussing of Gods works, and
the sifting of his will, may it please you but a little to observe with me the
drift of Peter's question, which drew this answer from his Lord and Master, and
you shall see how culpable he is of both these trespasses: so that in this
first Article for both these foul defaults, our Savior must needs keep his
corrections with him, saying, Quid ad te? neither of these faults are beseeming
my Apostle.

For the former, which is the discussing of Gods wondrous works, I remember
there have been such in the days of old, as have in this sort been
maruailous inquisitiue. both concerning this worlds creation, and poor sinful
man's most happy restitution. For touching the first of these, it is a common
story which is reported by Tripartita historia.
Sozomen and Socrates in their book, of a certain fellow which on a time came
to an old Religious Father, to ask him this one question. Sir you know that
the frame of this fair world has not as yet continued full six thousand
years, before whose creation (no man will gain say it) there passed many
hundreds thousands million of years, for there was an eternity which never
had beginning: now then if this workmanship of the heavens, the earth, and the
sea, was perfectly contrived in the stint of six short days, I beseech you
resolve me by your deep learned studied skill, what work God had in hand
before he took this task, and how he was employed ere heaven and earth were
made* a bold presumptious man, that durst call God to reckoning how he had
bestowed his long fore-passed time.

And as this was for the building of these remooueable tents, so did another in
the point of man's redemption, the means to raise him to eternal mansions. For
Whereas we hold it a part of our Creed, to believe that Dan. 12. 7
Antiquus dierum, the ancient of days, is he that was Esaias 11. 1.
also Flos de Iessa, the beauteous blossom which sprung from Iessaes root, by
that maine water-bowe the blessed virgins womb: there have not wanted a number
in the world, which leaning still on reason, and not rising unto faith, have
been so injurious to the omnipotency of our God, as to demand this question,
Albertus patauinus in vigilia. not Domini.
Qui fieri potuit vt spiritus sancti virtute, fact a vnquam fuit Jesus Christi
conceptio, how Jesus Christ substantial very man, should be conceived by the
shadowing of Gods Spirit: God help, most impious and irreligious fowls, which
when GOD was able to make the poor earthes moisture, Genesis 1. 13
(apparent in the third day of the worlds creation) to Genesis 1. 12
bring forth herbs and trees of her own accord, without the warm suns
breeding comfort, which (God wot) Genesis 1. 14
a day after was first brought into his Chamber* came not into the sky till
the fourth day of creation, and when his souerain power was able to command,
that Number. 17. 8.
Aarons rod, a stick pilled, dry and sear, should bring forth buds, blossoms,
and Almondes ripe, yet will not receive good Gabriels true assertion, which he
avouched in this selfsame instance, that Luke 1. 37
with the king of heaven nothing can be impossible. But thus you see for both
the well known worlds, the creation of the greater, and the recreation of the
lesser, how sinful, wretched, and miserable man, audaciously has examined the
works of god the Lord.

And as this was true for thing* which had been past, concerning the framing
of the world, and Christ's true incarnation: so it is as easily to be convinced
in Peter for things to come, as touching John's death and dissolution. For when
our Savior had told Saint Peter, that as his seruitour he must duly follow
him, not only in his steps on earth, but by his cross to heaven, the Apostle
being resolved of his own death and farewell, when he saw St. John would
needs enquier of his end, soliciting his Master, with Quid autem hic? Good Lord
I know by thy true prophecy, by what kind of death my self must honor thee:
mine arms must be pinioned, my hands be nailed, and my body crucified; thus
far am I satisfied, I build on thy predictions: yet can I not conteyne, but I
must ask thee further: tell me sweet Jesus what shall become of John, what
shall be the end of thy beloved Disciple? Numquid vt Eno^h et Eliam
reseruabis, Laurentius villauic* in festo. S Iohannis.
as one reports his question. Good Master resolve me what is thy purpose, I
must dye for thee, but what must John do? I must be crucified, how shall he be
dissolved? what shall he dye, or else never taste of death? if he must not dye,
but thou will save him from the divorce of his two natures, that his soul and
body at noe time shall be severed, what will thou then do? will thou
translate him from earth in a moment, as thou did Heb. 11. 5.
Enoch by thy self, 2. Reg. 2. 11.
and Elias by thy Angels? or reserve him till the last day, to thy second
coming, that 1. Cor. 15. 51.
in the twinkling of an eye his body may be changed? Or if not so, but needs
he must taste of death: inform me I pray thee what kind of death it shall
be. What, shall he die a natural death in his bed, and be gathered to his
Fathers in peace Ge^. 15. 15.
like Abraham? or shall the Tyrants Sword untimely hasten his death? shall he
for thy name loose his life, Mar. 6. 28.
as has John baptist lost his head? O everlasting Son of the everliving
Father, answer me to this question, instruct me so far that I may know
Quid hic, how thou have decreed in future time, to dispose of this man my
fellow John.

Thus as the first man which I spoke of in these works of God, would neds find
forth Quid fecerit Deus the sum of his great works, and the next would search
Qui fuerit, the form of his proceedings: so will Saint Peter in the story of
my Text, busy his poor soul that he may know before, Quid faciet Deus, his
works that are to come, the secret ordinances which no where are decreed, but
at the counsel table which is in heaven. Wherefore if he will needs be
boltinge out Gods hidden mysteries, and prye into his future determined
accidents, it is fit he should be sifted for his unlawful curiosity and for
his Quid hic of S. John, hear Quid ad te? from his Master. Peter my secret
ordinance is not for thee to ask of.

And verily the ground work which our Savior well might use, and which Peter in
his own knowledge could not but yield unto, amongst great variety of others
more, might worthily be settled on these foundations for the checking of Saint
Peter in this too bold question: that if this presumtious Curiosity of the
Apostles, in studying to find forth Christ's future purposes, did labor for the
attayning of that kind of knowledge, which was 1 in nature impossible, in 2
reason absurd, and 3 for himself unnecessary, it might well stand with our
Sauiors wisdom to bestow, and with his patience to bear the sharp reproof
of this short Text, where Christ calls him back with Quid ad te? Peter soar
not too hie, be not too inquisitiue of my fathers counselles, Gods works of
wonder are not for thee to search.

For the first, the impossibility of this study in nature, it was perhaps with
S. Peter, in this demand to his Master, as it was with Esdras in his question
to the Angel Vriell, that every 2. Es. 5. 34 35.
hour his reins did pain him, whilst he labored to comprehend the ways of
the highest, and wished his mothers womb had been his sepulcher, because he
could not found the depth of Gods dark judgments, But (alas) if Peter were
sick of his infirmity, he should have remembered what just Job once told him,
that Job. 5. 9.
as the operations of Gods hands are infinite for their number, so are they
marvelous and unsearchable for their strangeness: and that of Jesus the son
of Sirache, that Eccles. 18. 5.
as they are perfect, admitting neither subtraction nor addition, so are they
admyrable, their ground cannot be found: for he which in that one instance
Job. 37. 5
of the dreadful thunder, does maruailous things which man cannot attain,
has also ^sa. 77. 19
in other things his paths in the vast maine sea, so that his foote-steps
cannot be known: but the more 2 Esdr. 4. 26.
men meddle, the more still shall they marvel, so as when they have done
their best, they Eccles 18. 5.
must begin again, and when they think their travail at an end, then must
they afresh return unto their work. And (alas) how should this possibly be
otherwise, if we cast but down our eyes to things inferior: for Wisd. 9. 16
hardly can we discern the things which are on earth, and with great
difficulty do we comprehend that which more nearly is before us, Wisd. 7. 18,
19, 20.
as the terms and changes of times, of seasons, the course of years, and
situation of the stars, the nature of living things, and furiousnes of the
beasts, the power of winds, diversity of plants, and virtue of strange
roots, Wisd. 9. 16. 17
how can we then seek out the things which are in heaven, or sift the
councels of the aeternall God? If then (good Peter) the glorious woorks of God
be altogether unsearchable, and therefore admirable, if his ways be in the
depth, and his paths be too too dark, this knowledge must needs be above thy
poor horizon, to find forth with Quid hic what Christ decreed of John, to
scanne Gods judgments to be wrought in future time.

Else let the Angel instruct thee with that excellent Parable, which once he
told of the forest and the sea. On a o Esdr. 4. 13. to 22.
time (says he) in an open plain, the trees of the Forest held a general
assembly, in which war was concluded against the ocean, that they would
remove the boisterous waves of the sea (and to enlarge their own possessions)
would plant themselves in their new-dryed channels: the waves on the other side
held a famous Parliament, threatening they would swell up to the height of the
forest, and bearing down before them her Oaks and Caedars, would conquer for
themselves another Kingdom: but both their designements were eftsoone
frustrated, for the enkindled fire consumed the Forest trees, and the sea
shore sand kept in the Oceans waves. Now if holy Vriell should make thee vmpier
(as once he did a learned worthy scribe) betwixt these two assaylants, and
their plat-formes laid, which party would thou justify, or who should
get the day? Perhaps thou would answer as did that holy man, that both
their purposes were too too vain: for God ordained the land for trees, and the
sea for floods and waves. Surely (blessed Peter) if thou should frame this
answer, (as hardly thou shall find what better to reply), the Angel would
admonish thee as he did that famous scribe, 2. Esd. 4. 20. 21
that thou have rightly censured these, but can not judge thy self. For as
the ground is appointed for the shading trees, and the sea allotted for the
roaring waves, so thou Deuteronomy. 29. 29
poor mortal man should fix thy thoughts on things which God permits,
but as for the secrets of the King of heaven, they are deep mysteries, thou
must not search them. The Angel if he had dealt with thee but thus far with
this parable, would have said to thee, as in this place does r Reu. 12. 7
the captain of those Pensioners, Quid hic ad te? thou may not seek to know
what God will do hereafter.

He that should think his skill so great, as that by the ingenious dexterity
of his understanding, he could conceive the depth of all Gods wonders, I wish
he would onward be but so good, as to answer to a few questions of far
less difficulty, and that he would but resolve me of those few ^2. Esdr. 4. 7.
Problems which Esdras once expounded. Let him teach me if he can, how many
faddoms it is to the bottom of the deepest gulf in the sea, or how many
springs of running water flow in the veins of our great grandmother the
earth: let him tell me how many showers of rain are wrapped up in the clouds
as thin and aerie spunges: or if he be so cunning, let him draw me a true
map of blessed Paradise, her streams, her trees, her bounders: or if he can
attain to none of these, neither the draught of Eden, nor the earthes sweet
glyding springs, let him never hope to know, nor go about to learn, the
glory that is in heaven, nor what God has decreed.

It may be Saint Peter will yield in generality, that it is not easily for
every one to search Gods sacred ordynance: but for himself an honorable
Peer of Christ's privy counsel, peradventure he may conceive a better
hope, that it may be possible for him to find them. Indeed some advantage: but
not enough for this. For as it is in the point of Gods pure essence, a work
beyond the reatch of shallowe nature, fully to comprehend that sple^dente
glorious substance: so is it semblably in his works of wonder, the wisest man
cannot attain them. For the impossibility in finding Gods true essence: it
was a worthy and a memorable answer, which Simonides the Philosopher did once
return to Hiero: of whom when he had demanded (as before I have reported)
what manner of nature or substance God might be: the wise man required a day of
study, that he might deliberate in a question of such moment: which beeinge
granted and eftsoons past, yet could he not find forth that secret.
Wherefore when the tirant inquired of him, if by this time he were able to
resolve his doubt, he replied, not yet* but craved yet two days respite.
Which also being obtained and soon expired, and he called on for his
answer: confessed that not yet neither he was able to attain it, but still
craved more time: four days to study on it, and from four to eight, from
eight to sixteen, still dubling on his number. Which when Hiero observed, and
that he still protracted, he asked him the reason of so many dilatoryes. Cicero
de natura deo^. lib. 1.
O my Lord (quoth Simonides) quanto diutius cogito, tanti mihires videtur
obscurior, the more I search, the further I am to seek, the more I strive to
find, the more I faint in striving, the longer are my studies the darker is
this question, my trauails cannot find what God is in his essence. Thus could
not the Philosopher by the fairest light of nature, discry the substance of the
Godhead and his glory.

Nay far his betters were notable to atchieue it, not good Saint Augustine
that grave and holy Father, as he Math. 12. 16.
that by the mouths of babes and sucklings can set forth his own honor, did
school him once by a child's sharp reprehension. For on a time when that great
Doctor walking by the Sea, was meditating on the mysteries of the blessed
Trinity, which he meant to digest in a Book which bears August. de Trinitate.
that title, he found a little boy playing just by the shore: which having
with the sand made him a pretty ponde, was lading into that with a little
spoone, the salt Seas brackish water which flowed and past hard by him. Saint
Augustine perceiving the younglinges sport and pastime, drew near and asked
him, my pretty Child what do thou? Father (says he) I mean with this my
spoone, to lade into my pond this great Sea which you see: to which when the
Doctor truly had replied, my boy thou haste undertaken a thing which may
not be: the Sea is deep, thy pond but straight, thy spoone but small to work
with: Indeed you say true good Father said the child, yet is not this a harder
task for me, then that one work which you have taken in hand: for in that
book whereon you study now, and which you mean to write, you purpose to
co^tri^e the Godheads nature, and to disclose these woonderous mysteries, which
secretly are shrined in the blessed deity. O Father father, the sacred
Trinity cannot be founded: it is like this Sea you see, large, deep, and
bottomless: your book is but like my pond too straight to entertain it, her
pages, leaves, and lines cannot contain those secrets: and if they could, your
brain is but like my spoone too shallowe and too weak, to fetch from heaven
such plentye of that skill. So neither Simonides nor yet Saint Augustine,
neither the deep philosopher nor the holy Doctor, with all their studies were
able to attain, the knowledge of that nature which the Godhead has. And
verily no more possible was it for our Apostle, to discover the hidden and
secret works of God. Math. 16. 7.
Be it so, we grant him that he was well seen in many things, which not
flesh and blood but his Masters Father reueyled to him from heaven: yet this
would not enable him, nor any thing else authorize him to search Gods future
works. Surely he that was the wisest, (not by Apollos Oracle as Cicero.
once was Socrates, but by the testimony of God himself, as was King Solomon:
1. Reg. 3. 12.
the wisest man that ever was, is, or shall be, Christ Jesus Math. 12. 42.
only excepted, Gods aeternall wisdom) when he had suruaied and viewed the
works of his creator, Eccles. 8. Vlt.
perceived that man could not search out and find them: no though he
labored to seek and sound them long, yet could not he which was most wise
at any time conceive them. Wherefore if the scripture by authority, the Angel
by his parable, and Solomon by experience have all assured us, that never
mortal man could trace God in his footsteps, nor by his thoughts discourse
his future judgments: when Christ saw Saint Peter so busilye inquiringe what
were his secret purposes in things to come, and how he had disposed of John in
his eternal counsels, it was time to sound a retrait and call him from his
study, with Quid ad te? Peter thou striuest to learn that which is no way
possible.

And this (beloved and blessed Christians,) is that first inducemente which
might move our Savior, to rebuke his servant for inquiring into his councils,
because it was impossible that he should comprehend them: for this demand
being answered would have drawn on further questions, and so his infinite
curiosity could never have been satisfied. The second and the next cause,
which might enforce this reprehension, is the absurdity of this sin in the
sight of reason: that it is unseemly even in man's depraved judgment, that
Saint Peter should ask of these things so far above his reach, and yet
(God wots) be grossly ignorant, in things 1 beside, 2 within, 3 and much
below him. For the first it is a worthy taxation of the 2 Esdr. 4. 10. 11.
Angels to the Scribe, which our Savior might justly have fastened on the
Apostle: that if his own things and such as grew up by him he could not
comprehend, much less should he think his shalow vessel could receive, the
ways and counsels of his blessed Lord. Now touching those things which are
iuxta nos hard by us, it is true which the wise man in the Proverbs told us,
that Proverb. 25. 3.
as the heavens are vnmeasurably high, and the earth exceeding deep, so is the
Kings heart past all men's findinge out. And not the Kings heart only but so
of all men's else, the Prophet Jeremy has thought long since, Ierem. 17. 9.
that prauum est cor hominis et inscrutabile, man's heart is so deceitefull that
none can sound the depthe. For cor humanum (as one says) quamuis exiguum
quoddam sit, esurienti miluo quod vix in prandium suppetat: tot tamen
(laberinthi instar) in voluera et sinus habet, quod ab altero nunquam scrutari
potest: though man's poor heart be but a little substance, scarce big enough
to give the puttocke a good dinner, yet like a laberinth or busy maze, it has
so many windings, and corners and turninges in it, that as (Saint Paul says) g
no man ^ 1. Cor. 2.
can discrye the thoughts of another soul; save only the spirit of that man
himself. Nay often times a man perceiues not his own hearts roauinge motions:
but he shall be enforced to pray with David, Psalm. 19. 12.
ab occultis meis munda me Domine, Lord there are some things in my soul
which my self have not discovered, but how secret soever they be, I beseech
thee pardon them. Now then if Saint Peter could not find his fellows breasts,
like lettice-windowes to peep into their hearts, nay if his own thoughts
sometime fled himself: if at the instant when he asked this question, he
could not tell what Didimus did think, (though Ioh. 21. 2.
at that time he dyned and stood close with him:) if he could not read
Nathanaels secret mind, nor tell what James and John in heart devised: if
their imaginations which were but like himself, did pass the compass of his
greatest skill, how far unfitting and absurd was this, that he which could
not apprehend things by him, would mount unto this question so far above him?
that he which saw not the thoughts of these two brethren* which were the sons
but of good old Zebedee: would think to search the mind of him, which was the
blessed son of God almighty? O Peter Peter, if that low strain be so
above thy reach, the other key must needs be a note too hye: if thou can not
found this heart (poor man) that sits but by thee, how will thou search his
works (good Peter) which has made thee? Quid hic ad te? Peter thou may not
do it.

As for the second concerning things within us, or of our own base nature:
that which a learned Doctor replied to the impious questionist, (which
demanded how it was possible that Christ Jesus the Messiah, should take our
flesh by the shadowing of Gods spirit) may aptly be applied to the Apostle in
this scripture. Confundantur (quoth he) qui sic perquirunt, quomodo de spiritu
sancto ^ Alhertus Patauiuus in Vigil. natiuit Domini.
conceptus fuit Jesus: hi enim vel suam quidem natural replicare requeunt.
Blush, yea blush for shame ye irreligious fo^dlings, which needs will sifte
our Saviors sweet conception, and yet cannot describe you one mean
generation, that cannot well discourse how first your selves were framed.
Indeed the workmanship of God in forming man, is an exquisite, rare and
wondrous piece of work, and of it just Job in an excellent, strange, and
philosophical discourse, has given us a taste ^ Job. 10. 10.
when in his book he tells us, k that first we are powered into our mothers
wombes like milk: there in short time turned into crudds like cheese:
afterward God reares a well shaped frame of bones, which he soon fastneth
with sinnews as with bands: then (as he thatched it) he couers it with flesh
and skin: and lastly as placing his tenant in this house, he breathes into
us the spirit of life and grace; Questionless a singular and true description,
of mortal man's first state and generation. But though this be a glimmering of
Adams sons beginninges, yet can no man perfectly descipher the whole
procedings. If they could I might wonder what should make the Prophet David,
confess his ignorance in knowing his own nature. Thou Psalm. 139. 5.
Lord (says he) have laid thy hand upon me, and fashioned me behind and
before: but such deep knowledge is too excellent for me, it is so wonderful
I cannot attain unto it. Job knew the main, but not David all perticulers: no
man can know his own first propagation, the perfect forming of his spirit and
flesh. Nay less then that, not the vilder parts, the excrementall parcles of
man's poor brickle and claieye tabernacle, are fullye known to man which
bears them. God indeed Mtah. 10. 30.
does number the hairs upon our heds, so as Luc. 21. 18.
without his providence not one of them can perish: but (alas) what can man do
to these small creatures? surely Math. 5. 3^.
not change one hair to white or black. If then man know not his own first
generation, the means of forming his chief substantial parts* what should
he search into Gods more woonderous works, and seek to learn what he will
do hereafter? Amongst these I may say to Saint Peter, for his question of
Christ's decree for John his good Disciple: as he said unto them which inquired
of Christ's conception. Erubesce Petre etc. fie blush Saint Peter, be ashamed
to be so curious: to look so far in Gods secret councels, and yet can not
discourse thine own birth and nativity. Thou know not thy fashioninge in
thy wretched mothers womb, yet will thou know what God decrees in heaven: thou
can not tell how first thou came to live, yet will thou learn how John
shall come to die: thou can not answer for thy self things past, yet will thou ask of Christ the things to come. O blessed Peter, thou chosen vessel,
why will thou strive to find Christ's future purpose, yet canste not know
things present, which are in thee? leave great Apostle, thou holy shepheatd:
Quid hoc ad te? this travel ill beseemes thee: to look so far above thee,
and seeste not things at home.

Now for the third and last, for things inferior to us, the reproof which St.
Augustine did give to some in his dais, may justly make reflection as far back
as Saint Peter. For when he asked on a time the solution of some questions,
whose answeares even in nature were not so too too praegnant, he gave this
advertisement for a farewell to his readers: August. de diuinat. dei.
Si istorum rationem curiosi nequeant reddere, desinant que sunt caelestia
penitius perscrutare. I have asked says that great Doctor a sort of sundry
questions, and I would gladly find the cause of these effects in reason. Cur
it a frigescant palea, vt niuem etiam in aestate serueut: adeo autem
incalescant, vt immaturos fructus maturos reddant: cur calcem accendat aqua,
extinguat oleum, cur ficus Aegiptiaca sicca imumpetat, humefactae natet, why
chafe or branne in summer are so cold, as that snow in them may be preserved
from melting: and why in winter they are found so warm, as that in them raw
fruit may soon be ripened: why water makes lime kindle, and oil should put
it out. These with such like I have propounded, in which since no man can
answer or resolve me: I would wish that they which know not these things on
earth, would not ask too busily of things in heaven, and since they are
plunged in points of lesser weight, they would not venture on that which is more
hard. Indeed it is a good distinction which one has made as touching
questions, Coelius Rho. antiquar. lectionum. lib. 1 6. cap. 11.
that problemata sunt triplicis generis, (...) some problemes and questions are
easy for solution, as why God gave fishes their scales, and fowls their
feathered mantles: some are of middle sort, as what is the cause of the
rainbow: but some are difficult impossible to be answered, as why the Adamant
draws iron, and iette but strawes unto it. The two fitst knots man happily
may loosen, but for the last, there is none that can untie it: man's reason
cannot answer, no not these things in nature, much less find out the works
of him that guides it. But if Saint Peter shall think himself more cunning,
then all that lived before or then, or now, and after him, that though Saint
Augustine could then find no responde^t, nor that great antiquarie an answer
to his problemes, yet had they lived in his time, he could have cleared their
scruples: well, let it be so, and let him then resoule the doubts which were
in his days, let him as an orderly probationer ^ 2. Esd. 4. 5
betake him to his seat, and let Vriel the Angel be the party to examine
him: he will ask him if he know in a pair of scales, how to weigh him a
flame of burning fire, or if with a bushel, and with strickle even, he can
measure him out a blast of whistling wind, or if by his art and al his expert
skill, he can recall the days and years are past. Now let him answer, and
tell if this may be, if he can instruct us how these things shall be done: or
if he cannot, but that such simple creatures as iette, as lime, as straw, can
pose him in their natures, alas, why should Saint Peter then gaze on his
creator? why will he search the secrets of Gods thoughts, and cannot show the
workman-ship of his hands? why will he ask what Christ will do hereafter, yet
cannot find what he has done before? why should he inquire his purpose of S.
John, and yet be ignorant poor man, of many inferior things? Nay this is
wrong Peter, Quid ho^ ad te? this is not fit: if many things hard by thee,
within thee, yea, before thee, be yet above thy learning, this question is not
for thee: as before thou wast told, this was impossible in nature, so now thou
see how absurd it is in reason.

And thus much (beloved in our Savior Jesus Christ) shall serve to have spoken
of our Redeemers second motive, which might lead him to this reproof of S.
Peter in my Text: to wit, because it is absurd in reason, that the Apostle
should inquire into his Masters future councels, yet being ignorant in things
of lesser weight. Now by your patience, in one word I ad the third and last
cause, which is, that it was not needful in respect of himself, and therefore as
a labor of superfluity, to be pruned and lopt off by our Savior with this
check. In which last argument lest our great Apostle should be misled with
opinion, that it needs no such imputation, let him but lend his ear among the
wise, to their assertions, prohibitions, and reprehensions, and he shall find
that holy and prudent men, have first by their auouchers continually
maintained, that the inquiring of Gods works which are yet to come, is no ways
necessary for mortal man: in the next place from hence he shall read what
caueats have been given forth by them to prevent this Curiosity: and lastly,
what bitter and sharp severe taxations have been uttered, when they find men
with this fault so infected.

For the first, which is the naked affirmation, it is not likely but Saint
Peter had heard that saying of that holy and wise man Jesus the son of
Syrache, who has determined it as a sure undoubted truth, 2. Esd. 3. 23. in
fine*
that necessarium non est nobis ea quae sunt abscondita videre oculis, It is
not necessary that man should strive to see the works of God, which he would
still keep secret. Indeed not necessary, if we mark the full sufficiency
of these two books which God has given us to study in, the first, the goodly
book of nature, bound up in three large volumes, the heavens, the earth, the
sea: the other, the golden Book of grace, contained in those two tongs, the
old and newer Testament: either of them able so wholly to possess us, as no
time should be left for these superfluous questions. For of the book of
nature, though it be true in Peter, which justly was observed by Caluinu^
instit. lib. 1. cap. 14. sect. 1^
one of late in others, that vt cupiditati suae morem gerant, multiextra mundum
egredi affect ant, many men to satisfy the insatiable desire, which their
itching souls have for endless skill and knowledge, will with their questions
fly up beyond the moon: yet is it to no end God knows, a needless bootlesse
labor: quasi in tam ampla coeli et terrae circumferentia, non satis multa
occurrant nobis, que inestimabili fulgore suo, sensus omnes nostros absorbeant:
^ Psa. 19. 1.
as u though the heavens did not declare the glory of God, and the firmament
show forth his mighty handywork: as though those shining planets the glorious
Sun and Moon, kepinge Psa. 121 6
their due courses of interchangeable watch and ward: as though those fixed
stars Job. 9. 9.
Arcturus and Orion, holdinge their woonted stations: and as though the year
Wisd. 7. 18. 19.
continuing her old succeeding seasons, might not present to man's weak
understanding, great choye of worthy objects, which might detain him still and
well employed, from searching after Gods secret works o^ wonder. Peter this
one book might have set thy thoughts a work, from listening after Christ's
future and hid designements. So might that other book* he blessed Book of
grace, have set his mind to task, that he need not ask of John. For
questionless he had heard his Masters earnest charge, Ioh. 5. 19
of scrutamini scripturas, search and look through the Bible: let that be
as it was Psa. 1. 2.
to David, your nights and days whole study: as it was to Marie Luke 10. 42.
your Vnicum necessarium, that one thing which is needful: he knew no doubt
as much as James his fellow, that lex Christi is lux Christiani: Iam. 1. 25
speculum humanae animae, etc the royal law is man souls looking glass: and
as much as Jeremy had told him long before, that Ier. 6. 16.
statuta Domini be via regia, the statutes of the Lord are the Kings road way
to heaven: And surely if the holy Apostle were enlightened with thus much
knowledge, it was not for him to leave searching of the Scriptures; and fall to
sift Christ's privy councelles: why should he omit that one thing which was
necessary, and wast his time in questions not permitted? what should move him
to turn from the law, the myrror of his soul, and in the eye of Curiosity,
so vainly look for babyes? why should he leave Gods writ and beaten way to
joy, and stray in such strange by paths as will ensnare his feet, why blessed
Peter, Caluinus instit lib. 1. cap. 14. sect. 1.
numquid in tot annorum millibus satis multa document a Deus noster non edidit,
quorum assiduae meditationi men's tua incumberet? in these many hundreds
thousands years which past before thy time, did not our merciful God record
sufficient learning, in which thy longing soul might study at her pleasure?
but yet thou must be asking what he will do hereafter? What, have not all
Christ's Sermons instructed thee enough, but thou must also know his purpose of
Saint John? O blessed Saint, thou holy man of God, if the worlds beauteous
frame, and the Scriptures sacred text, had been fair Libraries for thee to
rest in for ever, and yet thou will run forth to search Christ's privy closet,
all wise men will say this was not needful for thee. Quid hoc ad te? why
ask thou of Gods secrets?

And verily, as they avouch this truth in generality, so have they always
before-hande given out their prohibitions, to warn men from these needless
and lawless inquisitions. For it is an excellent rule for us, which the great
Philosopher gives forth for the intention and remission of our studyes, that
we should Seneca Philos.
illa quaerere quae inuenire possumus, and illa discere quae volumus scire, men
should seek that, which there is hope to find, but never strive to learn that
which they cannot know: indeed it is but vain to leap up to the moon, or
swell above our compass, for fear in time to burst. Like his our late divine
has such another caution, that Caluinus instit. lib. 3 cap 21. sect. 2.
Libenter ab eius scientiae inquisitione abstinendum est, cuius est cum stulta,
tum periculosa est and exitialis affectatio. Wise men should curb their
thoughts from studying, and seal their mouths from asking of dark and
needless questions, for this fond learning is perilous, vain, and fatal.
And as these might well be directions for our learning, so Peter had in his
time the like and sounder councelles. The wise man in his book has given him
such warning, that Eccl. 3. 23
in many of Gods works he should not be too curious: and he that had been
an universal student, and eccl. 8. vlt.
had run through all things which are under the sun (if that of Jesus
might not be thought enough) said, Prou. 23.
ne erigas oculos tuos ad opes quas habere non potes, never look after with
thine eyes, nor covet with thy heart, that which thou can not compass.

So both of them had warned him, as one did us from Moses, that he should
Zanchius de operib. dei part. lib. and ca. 1.
humilis and sobriusesse in rebus istis, and ad radicem montis stare, vt iussit
Moses, that Peter should teach his soul to take a lower flight, that he
should rest at the hills bottom, and sit at Jesus feet, but not clyme up
to the top, and search his secret works, Nihil hoc ad te? Peter this is not
needful.

But now they cry too late, Peter has done the deed, the word has past his
lips, he has inquired of John, and sought to know Christ's drifts of him
hereafter. Then must he needs hear all wise men's reprehensions, for they will
iumpe with Christ as he speaks in this Scripture, Quid id ad te? this seemed
not him to ask. For if I should speak in general, it is a sovereign
council which one has ministered, that Peter martyr. comment. in lib. Genesis
cap. 1.
Humanae curiositati nisi eam retundendo satisfieri nequit. There is no ways
of dealing with this frivolous curiosity, but by suppression and putting her
to silence, she must with check and frowns be still kept under. And in
particular if ye would have me give you instance, I must entreat you to look
back to the fellow which Tripartita histori^*
I told you of, that asked an old and holy father, what work God did before he
made the heavens, and that not in simplicity, but Caluinus instit. lib. 1 cap.
14. sect. 1.
per ludibrium, as one relates it to mock the good and grave religious man. He
answered him according to his just deserts, with a very necessary, though
taunting reprehension: Son, you say God made this world in six days
compass, and that ere then many thousand years were past, in which you would
know how God did spend his time: your question is sly and subtle: for which
I must tell you, I have often observed that rare hexameron, what God created in
those first six days, to wit, this round globe and those conuexed spheres:
but ere that time what work he had in hand I never studied yet, I have not
sought my Book for such a question: yet lest you should go from me without
your resolution, this is my judgment, that as in those few days God did
create the sea for fish, the air for fowls, the earth for beasts, and heaven
for men and Angels, so questionless before that time he did ordain deep
hell for thee and such fond curious people. A light and foolish question, but
well and fitly answered, to teach presumptuous man not to ask of Gods great
wonders. And as this father dealt with that fond gybing scoffer, which asked of
things long past before the worlds creation, so does our Savior in this place
with Peter, for inquiring things to come of Ihons last dissolution, Laur.
Villauie. in Euang. St. Iohannis.
Tuum non est scire (says he) huiusmodi misteria, tua interest tuae vocationis
satagere, and illi videre rite qui respondeas. Ego te ad crucem voco, de alijs
etiam, and ipsum videro. Peter I have given thee a summons to the cross,
provide thy self for that, as for my resolution in disposing of Saint John,
trouble not thy self with that, I will take order in it, but search not thou
such mysteries, Nihil hoc ad te? Peter this is without the compass of thy
charge.

And thus far (men, brethren and fathers, most dearly embraced in the bowels
of Christ Jesus) I have imparted to your cleme^cie these three grand reasons,
which might lead our savior to object against Saint Peter, the former branch
of his first forenamed article: to wit his searching and prying into Christ's
deep secret councels, whilst he did desire to know of his Lord and Master,
what he had decreed to do with John hereafter. In which I doubt not but you
fully understand, that since this question of our great Apostles, (laboring
for the knowledge of things which were to come) was impossible in nature,
absurd in reason, and unnecessary for himself: it was fit that our Savior
should reprove him with this Text, saying Quid ad te? Peter the least of these
must needs disgrace thy Question.

It remains now (right blessed and holy Christians) that I should either add
the latter branch of Christ's first objected Article, the examinations which
Peter made of our Saviors will, or else cease to hold you longer, and so
commit you to god by prayer. The first of which the time will not afford, the
latter my conscience may no whit less permit. For give me leave (I beseech
you in all simplicity and humility) to let you understand, that there is in
this City a gross offense amongst you, which Christ's reproof to Peter,
constraines me to remember you of. And that is, there are many of you, which
not like Saint Peter do ask Christ the manner of John's death in this word,
but boldly will reason amongst your selves, what shall be the state of your
brothers soul in the next world? thus rudely rauing into Gods eternal law,
of man's election or utter reprobation. But shall I tell you (most dearly
beloved Citizens) shall I by your patience, tell you but one thing? O give me
leave, I will speak it shortly. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Deus is est qui nouit qui sint sui: it is God that knows who are his chose^
servants, t he has his privy ^ Romans 9. 15.
mark by him set on their foreheads, for it is he that will have mercy on
whom he will, and show compassion where his pleasure is: it is he only that
knows the number of the Saints. And therefore in this respect, if he have said
u ne iudicatis be not Lords and ^ Math. 7. 1.
Judges over your brethrens souls, give not your doomes of their endless lives
and deaths: questionless he that reproved Peter for asking of things in this
life, will not hold you guiltles if you be inquisitue of other men's conditions
in the life to come: if you demaudn whether they be ordained for heaven or
hell, whether they shall be elected Saints or reprobates. O blessed brethren
take heed I pray you of this bold inquisitio^, search not into Gods
everlasting dark decrees: for in this place you see Christ checks a lesser
trespass. Or if you will not relinquish this foul fault, let me then
premonish you of the apparent danger. Reu. 20. 11.
There is indeed a rich white sumptuous throne which shall be reared against
that dreadful day, in which all men shall rise, and the records shall be read,
that each one may receive according to his deeds. Yea but for whom shall that
fair throne be set? whose must be that Tribunal? Poor worm it is not for
thee: the Judge that must possess that seat, is Jesus Christ, the Judge of
quick and dead: whose face can make the heavens to vanish, whose foot will
make the mountains quake and tremble: it is not for thee to mount thy self into
it: earth, dust, and ashes, that judgment seat is not for thee. Or if there
be no remedy, but that needs thou will usurp it, and step into thy
Masters chair to censure of thy fellow, to give thy sentence of his life or
death, and enquire his state that shall be everlasting: one day the great King
in the supper of the Lamb, will come and spy thy hawtie arrogance, and to thy
utter shame debase thee, saying Luke 14. 8. 9.
Sede hic inferius, cedo huic locum: Come friend, come down, that same is no
place for thee: I did ordain it for my son Christ Jesus, and not for thee a
sinful wretched man: he must give sentence of theirs and thy life also: and
therefoe for thee to enquire thy brothers state Quid id ad te? it is not
lawful for thee.

And thus (right Honorable, right worshipful, and beloved Christians) trusting
you will apprehend and lay hold of his advertisement, for that which Peter
here endures a reprehe^sion: I commit the success to him that can bless
where I have watered: reserving the latter branch of our Saviors first
article, to be objected against Saint Peter his Apostle, for the inquiring
after his will (as this was into his works) to the next holy day Gods blessed
sabbath. In the mean season let us beseech him for protection and benediction.

FINIS.
THE SIXTH Sermon.
HE which by the testimony 2. Cor. 11 23.
of the great Apostle 1. Cor 14 33.
is not (...) but (...) the GOD and Lord not of confused Babell, but of sweet
concord and well consenting order, has limited in those essences, which are
termed intellectual, degrees of augmentation in their skill and understanding,
so as though poor and mortal sinful man, can entertain the impression of
some few things, yet those divine and nimble-moouing Spirits, can apprehend
much more and greater objects: but God himself (that gracious glorious nature)
knows small and great things, knows some and all that may be. You may well
descrie this if it please you to observe but that one assertion concerning the
day of doom, whose knowledge our Savior once said was dark and hidden: so
far withdrawn from all creatures just praenotio^, as first no man can make
prognostication of it (there is one degree,) c Of that day and hour knows
Math. 25. 13
no man, says Christ Jesus: nay not the Pensioners which attend the Godhead in
the presence (there comes the second step) Math. 24 36.
not the blessed Angels: no, nor the heir himself, Gods well beloved son
(there comes a third and higher reach of knowledge) ne Mark. 13. 32.
filius quidam hominis scilicet quatenus is homo fuit, not Christ himself as
he was the son of man. Man may know much, but the Angels more, and GOD
knows all in all. But though there be these several stints of knowledge,
that men may not presume to soar as high as Angels, nor the Angels look
to mount as hie as Jesus, yet such is the pride of man's ambitious nature, that
he will strive to find as much as both the other: poor Adams sons will
sweat to learn as much as Christ or his Angels. For Petrus Martyr. in Genesis
cap. 1.
Petulaus and procax est humana inquisitio, man's busy meddling in things of
contemplation, is wondrous forward, exceeding too audacious, when Albertus
Patauiuus in Vigil. natiuitis Christi.
neither S. Matthew the Evangelist, nor Gabriel the holy Angel, are able to
tell us more in Christ's most pure conception, then that it was by the holy
Ghosts sweet operation: yet wretched man, (nay rather Psa. 22. 6*
worm the^ man) will not content himself with those sure informations, which
are de facto, the substance of the thing, but needs must ask de modo, the
manner of this action. Qui fieri potuit, how this thing could be possible.
Presumptious, vain, and fond unstayed men, which thus will Psa. 73. 9.
os suum in coelum ponere, stretch their wide mouths as hie as the heaven it
self, and let at randon their lavish slipperie tongues, to raunge the world
and all the works of GOD. Surely in this number was good Saint Peter faulty,
when he would search Christ's future hid designements concerning John, his
death and last departure: the charge which touched himself was not sufficient
for him, but needs he must discuss Gods works which he concealed, he must
inquire what should be done hereafter. But if that advice be good, which erst
has been delivered, Peter martyr. in Genesis cap. 1.
that retundenda est curiositas ista, this too free-metteld sturrer must be
restrained and curbed, our Savior could not choose but check it, when if he
found it in the Apostle, as here you see he does in this short Text with Quid
ad te? Peter forsake this question, why ask thou of futures?

Hitherto right Honorable, right worshipful, and beloved, you have heard in
the visitation which Christ keeps with Saint Peter, the beginning of the first
Article against him read, which was for his sifting in Gods great works of
wonder: I thought the last Sabbath (if the time had suffered) to have read it
forth, that you might have known the whole, what else it was belonging unto
God, which for this question St. Peter should have heard. He has been chidde
for searching of his works, remains there ought beside? what? is he guilty
further? can there on the part of the almighty eternal God, be some thing else
preferred against Saint Peter? is not his first Article yet past and fully ended?
O no (GOD wots) a second branch ensues, there is yet more to be answered to
Christ which here reprooues him. For the Apostle in his question to his Master
of Saint John, did not only inquire into his future works, how it would please
him to dispose of that Disciple, but ransackt further into his secret Will, as
though it were disputing with Christ Jesus, what was the cause, or what might
so induce him to enter this rule, or to set down such an order, that John
should escape, and he should die a Martyr. Verily if S. Peter with his Quid
autem hi^? will call his master unto so straight an answer, it is necessary
our Savior should control him with this question of Quid ad te? who made thee
an examiner?

I remember (amongst other men) such bold and foolish questions have sometimes
been demanded concerning Gods inducements, which drew him unto this to that
or other actions: but sure it is strange in this our great Apostle, that he
should pose his blessed Lord and Master, yea but with one interrogatory of
this sort and condition, that he should ask why do thou this or that thing
For touching others, the examples are too pregnant, of them that have inquired
the cause of Gods hidden will, what moved him thus or so to do this thing or
the other, either in framing the greater man, this world, or else in making the
lesser world, poor man. If I should give you instance in this whole worlds
round globe, (GOD help us) neither his first work in creating the goodly
engine of the heavens and earth, nor yet his daily care in managing and swaying
the affairs and actions of us poor sinful men, can escape the sifting of many
wretched creatures: but they will ask why made he this or that? thy will
demand how chance the world goes thus. So will earth, dust, and ashes
axamine their creator: so will the clay rise up against the Potter: thus will
the axe exult against the workman, and thus will the man on earth, pose him
that guides the heavens: he must call God to reckoning for his labors. To
begin with the whole world, and with her first creation, it is an easy thing
to show you man's insolent attempting, by which he blusheth not to ask and
seek of God; why when this Theater at the first by him was created, he made
but one, but then, but such a creature.

For some are busily enquiring why God that blessed workman, when Psa. 148 5
with the least word issuing from his mouth, he could with ease produce these
works of nature, yet made but one world whilst he was creating: belike their
restless hearts (like Alexanders once, which wished for more worlds which his
sword might conquer) think all the riches of this goodly treasury, which are
contained in the heavens circumference, nothing sufficient to give them
contentation. Others as curiously demand the cause, Caluinus instit. lib. 1.
cap. 14. sect. 1.
cur citius Deo in mentem non venerit, coelum hoc and terram condere, sed
otiosus immensum spaciu^ praeterfluere siuit: why when so many hundred thousand
years before, he might from nothing have brought into existence, all these
fair objects which the world affoordeth: yet he would suffer so great a time
to slip* and make no creature till these latter days. But there is a third
and last sort which with that Julius Scaliger do subtle excercit. 177. sect. 3.
subtle Cardane do naturae inclementiam accusare etc. take great exceptions
against Gods blessed labors, quod sic non secus, that of this sort he framed
the world, not rather of another. Ungracious people which do not well consider,
that Angel ^s Polic^^nus episto^ar. lib. 9. epist. 157.
multa sunt, quoru^ splendori si quid adiu^xeris, elumines non illustres, the
operations of his hads are of such full perfections, as if a man strive to mend,
he cannot choose but mar them. For if that definition be true and
vncontrowled, Julius Scaliger de (...). ^xcercit. ^4. 9. sect. 1.
cui nihil adijci nihilue subtrahi, in quo denique essentiae nihil mutari
potest, id v^ticum perfectu^ est, that that alone is a perfect thing and
complete, which cannot bear addition nor subtraction, and which admits no
manner of alteration: doubtless as Gods word is Psa 19. ^. 8.
pure and true and perfect, Reu 22. 18. 19.
cui nec addi nec adimi quicquam potest, that man may never add nor take one
tittle from it: so are Gods works most rare and passing complete, not Gen ^.
4. 10. 12.
each days labor good, Genesis 1. last valde bona.
but all most wondrous perfect: in so much that the heathen man could thus
far wisely school us, that u Si quis in t Cicero de natura deor. lib. 2.
hac munai machina corrigere aliquid velit, aut deterius faciet, aut id quod
fieri non potuerit, desiderabit, if in this beauteous building any busy bold
suruayour, will take upon him to check the workemans skill, and of a fresh
spectator become a sharp controwler, either he shall wish what never may be
compassed, else his additions shall be staynes in syndon: well may he seek
for change, but never find a better. Yet thus concerning this world and her
creation, men will demand of God the cause and reasons, why when he gave her
at the first her being, he made but one, but then and of this fashion.

The same or like audacious curiosity, is too apparent in the lives of men,
touching the government and swaying of this world: when sinful creatures
will enquier of God, why this man thriues and that man cannot prosper, why all
being made by him are not of like condition? So in particular for evil
things, the Disciples of our Savior, would needs demand of him their Lord
and master, John. 9. ^
why he which from his mothers womb was blind, had such a plague inflicted
from the almighty? whether Gods praenotion of his future wicked life, or Gods
remembrance of his Parents former sins, made him deprive him of this worlds
cherefull light. And contrariwise for good things the holy man of God, Ier.
12. 1. 2
presumed to plead the cause with his Creator, why wicked men should
flourishe, and noted sinners prosper: as did the learned Scribe touching Gods
blessed Saints, dispute the matter 2 Esdr. 5. 23. etc.
when he asked the cause, what might induce the king of heaven and earth: when
from the bounty of his matchless love, amongst all trees he had chose^
himself one vine; amongst all regions he had picked forth but one plot:
amongst all flowers he liked the pure white lillye, amongst all fowls he had
called to him one fair dooue: amongst all cattle he had marked himself one
sheep: and amongst all nations selected one poor people: yet he would suffer
the wild bore to spoil that vine, and let the thorns grow up by his sweet
lillye? Why his white dooue with beauteous silver wings, should fly amongst
the black and hateful ravens, and his poor innocent and harmless bleating
sheep, should foulde amongst the greedy ravening woolues? in one word what
might cause the Lord of hosts, to let his nearest and his dearest Saints,
suffer such wrongs of graceless wicked people? These both together made
David almost fall, Psa. 73. 3. etc
when he would apprehend that which he could not reatch: when he would know
what moved the God of Abraham, to crown the wicked with this worldly bliss,
that they were lusty, strong and still in health, they feared not death, they
came in no misfortune, their hearts were proud, their eyes did swel with
fatness, yet he good man whose Act. 13. 22.
heart was nearest to God, had harder hap: he still was plagued and scourged,
Psa. 73. 13.
God plied him with corrections and every morning scooled him: why should the
Lord deal thus says that great Prophet? why should they thrive when I am
thus afflicted? why should the wicked laughe, when my soul thus is humbled?
So many men, yea good men have sinned in this one trespass, in asking god
the cause of his deportments, why thus or so he guides poor men's conditions:
the eternal God (whose name be ever honored) is thus examined by mortal
sinful men, both for the framing and ruling of this world: man's curious
nature will needs discuss the cause, why so god made, why thus he swayeth the
creatures.

And as this is evident in the whole frame of this engine: so is it true in man
the abridgement of his labors, the fairest parcel of his most sumptuous
building: concerning whose nature both for this life and the future, you shall
find amongst men many curious inquisitions. For this life if you mark his
external shape and fashion, there are Seneca ad Ebuium li. ^. cap. 29.
multi diuinorum munerum iniqui aestimatores, qui quod corporis magnitudine non
aequamus elephantes, velocitate ceruos, leuitate aues, impetu tauros,
saepissime conqueruntur: there are diverse impudent, injurious, graceles
censors, which will not stick to call God to a reckoning, why when at first
he shaped man from the earth, he did not equallize his courage with the lions?
why God did make the elephant more strong then him? why man was not as nimble
as the do, why had he not what all the creatures else have? so durst the
pitcher challenge his maker for the fashion, so man dare ask why he was not
made better? And for our souls those far diuiner creatures, how common is it
with some to make that impious question, Hieron. Zanichius de oberibus dei.
part lib. and cap. 3. ^
cur talem in homine Deus non fecerit animam quae non peccare potuit? why in
that other troop of intellectual spirits, when some Angels fell from their
first blissful state, yet God kept some still in their glorious nature, he
would not do as much for men on earth: why God would not indue some with such
graces, as that at first they never could have sinned. Thus for our earthly
prisons and our souls captiued in them, man will dispute with god the cause of
his creation, why one was mortal the other apt to sin: why god did not
provide to make the^ better, why our souls and bodies had not another te^per.

And as for our condition and state in this world, so touching the next life
and the world to come: many do not fear to move the like objections,
concerning gods decree of man for everlasting: when they will search that dark
and dangerous depth cur Caluinus instit. lib. 3. cap. 21. sect. 1.
ex communi hominum et promiscua turba alios ad salutem Deus, alios ad
interitum prodestinarit, why from this intermingled store of men, which live
and breath alike the common air, some should be Saints for heaven, some imps
and brandes for hell? this man should be received and marked of god for glory,
that man should be rejected; and so reserved for vengeance? why god should save
one here, and damn another by him, this man should be elected, and that man
be a reprobate?

And thus for both the worlds the greater and the lesser, man's proud ambitious
heart is bold to search the cause, of Gods most hidden and secret abstruse
will: why in the former he made and rules it so, and in the latter (for both
parts of our nature, and for our life in this world and the next,) why God
thus framed us here, and disposes of us after. So exceedingly audacious is
man's aspiring soul, to ask both that, and why God will do all things?

But all this beadrowle of offenders in this kind, as yet presents not Saint
Peter's name among them, these may be justly attainted of this crime, but the
accusation concerns not our Apostle: the hudwinckt Philosophers, and our late
fond questionists, nay Es^ras the Scribe, Jeremy the prophet and David the
King, may well be taxed for searchinge of Gods will: but all this touches not
the patient in my Text, what is this to our Saviors reprehension of Saint
Peter? O yes (beloved) if we shall but observe, his question to his Master
with as due circumspection, as since another man has done in latter days, we
shall find him culpable in the same transgression: Peter's Quid autem hic, his
question of Saint John, sauoreth too much of that same imperfection. For Laur
Villauiccntius in vaug. St. Iohannis.
Petrus a Christo vocatus vt illum sequeretur, quid de Iohanne facturus sit
interrogat: quasi rationem postulans istius discretionis: ac si conditionem
illius meliorem iudicans dixisset. Domine Johannes, quid faciet iste: quare et
ego cum illo (siquidem ipse manserit) non manebo? Peter being called by our
Savior to the cross, yet standinge to question with his Master of Saint
John, seems to expostulate the reason with Christ Jesus, why he should make
such difference betwixt him and his fellow: as if he should say. Master I
perceive thou have pricked me for a Martyr: I understand thy meaning, I shall be
crucified. Be it so: but tell me I beseech thee O good Lord, why might not this
man Saint John supply my place? were it not possible that he might serve the
turn? Quid autem hic? I pray you and why not he? But if it be determined and
thou have past the doom, that he shall escape and I must bide the torments,
then tell me blessed Lord, resolve me (O sweet Jesus) what is the reason of
this thy strange appointment, why do thou thus distinguish of thy Servants?
He shall live long why should my death be hastened? he must go loose, and
why should I be chayned? Saint John shall sleep in peace, why should I clime
the cross then? he shall have friends to close his dying eyes, why should I
want such helpers? he shall have Disciples to wrap him in fair sindon, why
should my sprinkled blood be my best winding sheet? he at his death shall
have his Friends to comfort him, and why shall I have none, but such as will
torment me? O son of God, thou Savior of the world, tell me the reason and
let me know the cause of these designements, and of this thy will, why I must
be the martyr, and not this man Saint John? Quid autem hic, Lord why is this
thy judgment? Thus our Apostle as forward as the best, will search the
inducements of his Masters will, and search to know the cause of his hid
pleasure. Master (says he) what shall become of John. Wherefore our Lord and
blessed Savior Christ, as before he had found him inquisitiue in his works,
and therefore chid him because he sought to know what he decreed to do with
John hereafter: so finding him here curious in askinge of his will, what
moved him thus to purpose of them both, he could not refrain but object the
second Article, against the Apostle for his trespass against God: as before he
checked him for searching his future works, so here he must reprove him for
asking the cause of his will, with Quid ad te? Peter why I will have the
sentence so, why John shall escape and thou must dye, is not for thee to know.
etc.

And here, (right worthy and blessed Christians) you shall easily perceive the
deseruednesse of this check, how necessary it was for the visitour of our
souls, to read this latter branch of his first Article against the Apostle,
for sifting the cause of his Lord and Masters will: if it please you to
observe with me but these three short plain arguments: the unlawfulness, the
impossibility and the danger of this question. For if in the first place: it
were unlawful for Saint Peter, but to propound or put forth such a doubt or
scruple: next, if it were by no means to be hoped, that his demand should
have solution granted: and lastly if this question be full of woonderous
danger: I know you will all think that it was hye time indeed that Christ
should controwle him for meddling with such knots, he must needs call to him
with Petre Quid ad te? thou may not search the causes of my will.

For the first of these, the vnlawfullnesse of this question, that it was not
meet for the Apostle to propound it: if interrogations of this narure shall
appear in all your judgments, to be odious even to men, and so much more
unpleasing unto God, I presume you will grant the validitye of this proof.

And surely for the reputation which such questions have with men, it is true
which one says, that de Caluinus instit. li. 1. cap. 14. sect. 1.
rebus incognitis altius inquirere, quam nobis scire permittat Deus, stultum
sane and temerarium est: it is a rash and unadvised attempt, for men to ask
that which God will not teach, or strive to know what he has not disclosed:
and not so only in terms of generality* but also in particular well said the
self same Author, i^stancing in a question about the worlds creation, that
Idem lib. 1. cap 14. (...). 1.
si quis cum Deo expostulet, cur plenum centuplo superet va^uitas, erit haec
pijs omnibus detestabilis petulantia: if any sinful wretch should be so far
presumptuous as to demand what might persuade the Almighty, to enlarge the
regions of the emptieayre, so much beyond the earths incircled globe, all holy
men might justly think and say, such insolence were hateful and to be
abhorred. For whereas Gods blessed and most sacred holy will, is well
distinguished into two parts, that it is either voluntas beneplaciti, his
hidden secret will, Act. 1. 6. ^.
which God reserues in his own only knowledge, or else voluntas signi? his just
reueyled will, Mat. 6. 10.
for whose obedience we daily pray to God: if no manfully know the whole
sum of the latter, for 1. Cor. 13* 12.
here (alas) the best know but in part: how much absurd and far unmeet is
that, that men should search the causes of the former, and ask what moouer
Gods unrevealed will? If Peter for Gods will disclosed in his Writ, knew not
the sum and substance even of that, but in Mat. 8. 1^
a clear point doubted, Acts. 1^. 14. 28*
of the calling of the Gentiles, it was unmeet he should presume to ask,
what were the causes of his secret unknown pleasures: this is no other then if
one should profess to see a needle, but not the place that it sticks in, that
he will spy great wonders, which sees not common objects.

And verily if the world conceive so mean opinion, of this inquiring the cause
of Gods decrees, and of discussing the motives of his will, himself can no
ways chose but mightily mislike such proud and bold demands, from mortal
sinful men. If his most heavenly and secret hidden pleasure, be like the
sacrifice amongst the Megalenses, Cicero. de aruspicum responsis.
quoa tam occultum fuit vt non solum curiosos oculos excluderet, sed etiam and
errantes, so private and remote, that neither curious nor wandering eye might
view it: or like great Plutoes temple amongst the Eleans, Coelius Rho.
antiquar. lectionum. lib. 15. cap. 26.
Quod ne patens quidem ingredi quenquam fas erat, which though it were open yet
might it not be entered: how can God like or suffer such demeanure, that me^
will pry where he would have things secret, or offer to intrude where he
commands their absence? Man may pretend the cause of all his searching, to
find the reason of gods deep designements is but to increase his knowledge
and his skill: yea but a heathen man can herein well advise him that Cicero de
natura. deor. lib. 1.
Mala and impia est contra deos disputandi consuetudo, sieve id ex animo fiat
sieve ex simultate, it ill beseemes a mortal wretched man, to dispute with GOD
the causes of his action, yea, though it were in words of course for fashion:
GOD cannot brook such far sought inquisitions. Indeed it should seem he
would not have us sift the dark inducements of his hidden will, for still he
calls us to his blessed written word, with Ioh 5. 39.
Search that Book, Luc. 10. 26.
it points the way to heaven, my will reueyled is enough for you to learn. If
so much of his pleasure as that Book can impart us, were not sufficient to
chalk the way to bliss, (yea, that which now is extant and remains) why
would Gods wisdom at any time have suffered some sparks of that fair light
to have been clean extinguished as Enochs Jude epist. verse. 14.
prophecy of which St. Jude reports, the 1. Chr. 29. 29.
ancient Books compiled by Gad and Nathan, 1. King. 4. 32.
the natural discourse which Solomon had of plants: his abstruse Parables, and
passing wondrous songs: why did these perish, if the rest were not enough? or
why did Christ in his most happy time, through that sweet story of his words
and deeds, leave so much forth not chronicled nor writ, as if Ioh. last chap.
last verse.
it were penned would fill the world with Books? can we suppose that so much
as remains is not sufficient to draw a line to heaven? or if the rest had
been so needful too, our Saviors power would not have kept it safe? O
doubtless yes, he has preserved for man, such plenteous store of his
reueyled will, as well may guide his soul the way to life. If this therefore
be able to inform us, a means to compass the everlasting joys, why should
man's haughty thoughts aspire and mount up further, to search that will which
god has not disclosed, to ask the reasons why he does this or that thing?
Surely, if nothing can keep him in his bounds, but that such secrecies must be
examined by him, as our Savior refelled the high Priests subtle question,
their Luc. 20. 2 4.
vndenum potestas, with vndenam baptismus, their demand of Christ's commission,
with demand of John's religion: so will he answer such curious inquisitions,
with semblable interrogations, with such like other questions, as here he
does with Peter our Apostle, return his Quid hic with Quid ad te? to let him
know this question was not lawful.

And thus much (beloved in our blessed Lord and Savior) shall serve for the
framing of my first intended argument, to wit, if wise men do hold this
practice odious, if God himself so greatly do abhor it, that men should ask
the cause of his deep councelles, well might he in my Text reprove this
curious scruple, as being a thing absurd and so unseemly.

But as it is true of those most heavenly voices, wherewith in Paracise Saint
Paul was made acquainted, not 1. Cor. 1^ 4.
only that they might not be disclosed to men, that would be no ways
lawful: but that it was impossible for him to speak and utter the^, it past
his skill to tell them: so may we avouch it concerning those hid causes, which
move the Almighty to any of his councelles: not only that the inquiring of
these is interdicted, as simply unlawful of which I have breefely told you:
but that the finding and gaining of such knowledge, is also difficult, nay
rather it is impossible, no man can ever reach it. For voluntas dei causarum
causa est: ibi ergo consistendum, nec extra nec ^ltra illam est ratio
perquirenda: Gods holy will is the mother cause of causes, beyond whose time
there can no search be had: She and she only is that Herculis columna, that
furthest hiest Pillar, in which may worthily be written and ingraue^ Nihil
vltra, past this make no inquiring If the reason of Gods mercy, ^ Ro^. 9. 15.
c be because he will have mercy, and that which sturres his passions to
compassion, be only his will to show his grace and favor, it is but vain
to ask why God resolves so, or what induced him to such great love and
goodness: if once we have found this cause, we must seek for no other: no
more should Peter here have asked of Christ the reason why he should die, and
John should escape the torments, it was not in his power to apprehe^d such
knowledge, and therefore a second cause to make Christ check his question: if
the solution be not possible, the demand deserves reproouing. And certainly
if the very Gospel be 1. Tim. 1. 16
mysterium pietatis, if those blessed news of everlasting life, which in the
Evangelists are openly proclaimed, be notwithstanding mystical and dark, it
must needs be true of Gods more secret will, that 2. Esdr. 4. 26.
quo erimas s^rutati magis, eo magis admirahim^r, the more we search what he
decrees in heaven, the more still shall we wonder, and be amazed on earth:
such questions breed admiration, but bring us no solution, Peter martyr. in
Genesis cap. 1.
Humane curiositati nisi eam retundendo satisfieri nequit, it is not apt and
clear perspicuous aunswears, which curious people should look to have
returned them: no rather due supression: such knotts cannot be loosed, no
answer can be given them. For (tell me I beseech you) is it possible in
your judgments, for Mat. 18. 7
holy men in this world to live and not be scandalized, or for 2. Esd. 16. 15.
unrepentant sinners to escape God in the next world? can Heb. 6. 4.
graceless vild apostataes repent them at their pleasure, Math 19. 26.
or they which trust in riches attain the heavenly kingdom? could Act. 2.
24.
Jesus Christ be chayned of death in his grave, or Heb. 6. 18.
can his Father once falsify his word? O no beloved: to say the first were
error, to hold these last were blasphemy. And yet no more for all his frequent
questions, can man find out the cause of gods hid will, what mooues him thus or
so, man no ways can attain too. Let me (if it please you) exemplyfie this
position, by a question which something resembles this of Peter's.

Our Apostle asks the cause of gods disposinge, of sundry men to several
kinds of death: to wit why he on the cross, and John should dye in his bed:
like which (for men's conditions in this life) some do demand (since all of us
are Gods creatures) why some should flowrish and some should be aflicted: but
never yet could they of theyrs, nor he of his find the reason. For the
example which I told you of King Solomon had observed, Eccle. 9. ^
that omnia omnibus aeque eueniunt, all things to all men do betide alike:
the same condition sometimes befalls the lot, as well of pure ones as them that
are vnpure, as well of just men as of the wicked train: as well of him that
sacrifices, as him that shunnes the temple. Surely this government which God
holds in the world, made him to wonder and not without just cause: but when
his admiration was turned to inquisition, and that his heart would search the
cause of this: at last he was constrained to sit him down, and say, Ecc. 9. 1.
not I nor any man can well find forth the ground, why God should love or
hate this man or that. Thus not wise Solomon could sound the woonderous depth,
of gods great providence amongst poor men on earth. No more could Esdras that
deepe-learned skillful. Scribe, (though p 2. Esdr. 4. 23.
he thought it but a mean question: and not of Gods high secretts, to know
quorsum in opprobrium datus fuit Israel, why Israel became reproachful to
the heathen, and why the Law of Moses was contemned? why Gods choice people
were hated of the nations, and like weak Grasshoppers were tossed in every
Kingdom? Cur vita ^llorum stupor et pauor, why all their life was naught but
fear and tremblinge, and why God held them unworthy of his mercies?) he could
not reach the reasons of Gods purpose; 2. Esdr. 4. 27.
the Angel told him they were above his compass: Albertus patauinus in Euang.
sec. Luc. cap. 16.
iusto hec quidem iudicio dei fiunt, sed occulto tamen, (as one says well):
indeed Psa. 145. 17.
the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, yea, but
Job. 15. 8.
who has known his hidden secret councelles? you see not Solomon nor Esdras
could attain it to know the cause of men's states in their lives: then why
should Peter hope to learn or understand, why Christ will thus dispose of his
or John's departure? Alas this aim was far above his scantling: the cause of
Gods great works can scarce be found of men: why will they then inquire the
causes of his will?

That rule is true which Aristot. (...). li. and cap. 1.
Aristotle has, that (...), where long experience is the mistress of the
school, the scholars see the work, but know not how it is done: that this
or that is so their eyes are true informers, but whence the effects do rise,
their minds cannot resolve them. Else let the Orator ingeniously confess,
how far his learning could serve him in this kind: he knows that Cicero de
na tura deor. lib. 1.
Aristolochia ad morsu serpentis valet, sed cur valeat, nescit: that such a
root will purge the stomach or the brain, that hart-wort is good against the
Serpents sting: but why this root is good for one pain and not another, it
was a point that past his greatest skill. So said another, that there be
Coelius Rho. antiquar. lectionum. lib. 16. cap. 11.
(...) some certain secret and hidden proper qualities, which are inhaerent in
the creatures nature: the truth whereof each child may soon discern, but
whence they come the wisest cannot know, as why the Ostridge can digest cold
iron, but Lions cannot. Questionless, if the wisest men could not attain to
know the cause of secrets even amongst the creatures, why they have this or
that strange operation how should the Apostle so far soothe himself, as to
suppose he could seek out and find the cause of Gods decrees in heaven above?
God wots, this was an open ouerweening, he knows not Gods great works, yet
would he search the causes. But if there be no remedy, but needs he will
discuss, why Christ should thus determine of his death, if he with Esdras will
vex himself with z Esdt. 5. 34
grief, in striving to co^prise the ways of God in heaven, let him first
answer what God demaundes by his Angel, and then expect an answer to this
question. Can blessed Peter by his greatest skill, 2 Esdr. 5. 36. 37.
give a true quotient of all things yet to come? or gather up the drops of
rain which once are scattered? can he make fresh the flowers which have bin
withered? or set wide open the secret vaultes of the earth? can he let loose
the winds from out their caves? or draw a counterfeit of man's thin ayrie
voice? Can our Apostle perform these strange great wonders? If not, then
let him say as did that holy Scribe, 2. Esdr. 5. 38.
O Lord, good Lord, who can know all these secrets? none but such people as
dwell with thee in glory: but as for me (poor simple blined man, I cannot
reed the things whereof thou ask: and he shall hear an answer straight
from heaven, that c if these things on earth do ^ 2. Esd. ^. 40.
so much daunt and pose him, Gods ordinance above must needs be past his
learning. If the vnreueyled will of God which he keeps close in the clouds, be
that high Pillar, beyond which we may not pass: if Solomon and Esdras could
not find forth the cause of men's so turbulent conditions in the world: if he
himself cannot assign the reason of less effects which daily fall in nature,
verily, as the wise man said to all that thirst for knowledge, d that there ^
Eccles. 3. 24.
are many things spoken of above man's weak capacity: so will our Savior
remember to Saint Peter, that the finding of his will passes his
understanding, with Quid ad te? good Peter, my Apostle, why I dispose of John
and thee in such an order, that he shall stay behind, and thou must straight
come after me, is more then thou can learn, thy mind cannot conceive it,
Quid id ad te? and so forth, says his Master, thy soul does fly a pitch
above her strength.

And thus far (most dearly beloved Christians) you have received those two
main arguments, which led our Savior to this taxing of Saint Peter: one
rising from the view of the unlawfulness of this question, August. homilia i^
Iohannem, 35.
for (if the Scriptures be via fidei, quae ad cubiculum regis perducit, in quo
sunt omnes scientiae and sapienciae the sauri absconditi, that delightful way
of faith, which can conduct us to the great Kings wedding chamber) for men to
leave this road, and run by other bypath, must needs be checkte by
Christ, as a practice too unseeming. The other taken from a due regard, of that
event which issues of these questions, to wit, that Caluinus instit. lib. 3.
cap. 21. sect. 2.
Quoniam hic ambulandum est, and proficiendu^ and crescendum semper, capacia
hic non sunt corda nostra earum rerum, quas alibi tamen capere valebimus,
because man whilst he lives, must still and still be learning, and his
knowledge must be maimed till he see God in his Kingdom, therefore for Peter
to think he could attain, even the secretst motives of Gods most holy will,
was but a vain deluding of himself: so that our Savior to wake him from his
dream, might well call to him Heus Petre, Quid ad te? Peter, thou hopest for
that thou can not have.

Now after that ye have heard these two first graund reasons, that g neque ^
Caluinus instit. lib. 1. cap. 14. ^^ct. 1.
fas est neque expedit, it was neither lawful for the Apostle to demand, nor
ever possible that he should learn or know, why Christ determined so of John
and him: suffer me I beseech you* breefely to add the third and last, and you
shall see how requisite it was for Christ to call in Peter's present question,
because it was a matter of such danger. It is true that h Quae nobis
patefacienda ^ Idem ibidem lib. 3. cap. 21. sec^ion. ^.
censuit voluntatis suae arcana, ea verbo suo nobis prodidit Deus, and quatenus
nostra interesse, nobisque conducere prouidebat, censuit, God in the secrets of
his wisdom; and bounty of his love, has in the Scriptures as in a shining
mirror, given us a sight of so much of his will, as he did see might prove
expedient for us, and this we may be bold to view and look on daily: but
there Eccles. 3. 23
are secrecyes in his vnreueyled will, which are not fit for men to search
and scanne, they cannot do it without apparent danger. And if you ask me
what peril may ensue, if we shall dare to pry into the private motives, why
he does thus or so as Peter does of John, why he shall stay behind him): I may
tell you in one word, that from this curious boldness, in this world errors
spring, and in the next world vengeance: either of them able to move our
blessed Master with Quid ad te? to warn us of such danger.

Of the first, he admonished us long since by Syraches son, who wishing us
in many of Gods works, to keep a modesty, and not too busily to sift or to
discuss them, backs his persuasion with this most powerful reason, Eccles 3.
25.
Mulios enim supplantauit suspicio illorum, and sensus eorum in vanitate
detinuit, for the meddling with such questions, has beguiled many people, and
in their judgments engendered evil opinions. And not unlike, when in such
inquisitions, the Father of all lies makes offer of his service. For one has
well observed, that which our days makes proof of, that Peter martyt. in Genesis
cap. 13. Verse 19.
Quum homines curiosi futurarum rerum sciendarum anxietate tenentur, nihil
intentatum relinquunt, vt id consequantur, quare tu^ diabolus facile se videt
admittendum, quu^ tanta alicuius rei cupiditate nos aestuaare sentit: ideoque
suas arts adhibet vt deludamur, etc. when curious sinful men will know what
shall be hereafter and search those things which god has not reue^led, the
devil presents himself: and rather then not find it, men sometimes ask such
questions of evil spirits. So did King Saul when going to the feeld, he
first asked counsel by the holy Priest, whose should the day be, the
Philistines or his but when God made that wicked Prince no answer, neither by
Vrim, by Prophets, nor by dream, forthwith a 1. Sam. 28. 17.
Wizzard must be sought to tell him, the cunning woman of Endor must disclose
the event: if not the man of God, a witch must show him futures, and if the
Lord will not resolve him, the Devil shall do it for him: seek me a woman
(says Saul) that has a familiar spirit. And so to this day (God knows)
there are too many, which not content with that which God has taught them,
must run to Coniurers, and seek Magitians out, to know what things shall
afterward befall them, what marriage, children, wealth, and kind of death:
unwise to sue to such a kind of wisemen, and cursed to have hels mouth to be
their Oracle: yet hither runs man's restless curiosity, which is not
satisfied with that which God delivers. They are hard besteade that for good
turns, crowch to the Devil as Patron: but so do they full often which ask of
things to come, and yet his answeares are but lies and errors, which they
receive in these their inquisitions. So that the first harm which comes from
these demands, is gross delusions in this world from the Devil.

And verily if this be the first fruit of these questions, foul noted errors
which Satan still suggesteth, when man will search into Gods secret counsels:
it is not likely but other evils will follow but God will plague this sin
even in the next world also. Nam Caluinus inst^ lib.
aequu^ non est vt quae abscondita esse Deus 3. Cap 21. sect. 1.
noster voluit, impune homo excutiat, et sapientiae sublimilitatem (quam
adorari non apprehendi voluit) ab ipsa aeternitate euoluat. It is not fit that
sinners should escape scot-free, which will unfold what God has closely
foulded, and spread abroad what he has wrapped together, which needs will
prye into his blessed will, which he would have from all men still concealed.
Peter could not be ignorant of this danger: for he had heard Gods sharp and
dreadful doom, Number. 4. 10.
that if the Levites offered but to see, when by Arons sons the sanctuary
was foulded, nothing but death should expiate that sin: and he had learned what
rigorous execution, God had performed in wrath amongst the Bethshemites, when
1. Sam. 61. 19. 20.
for one glaunce into his holy Arc, above fifty thousand were slain by him
at once: so hot and zealous is Gods inflamed wrath, when men will sift that
which he would have hidden, when they will ransacke more then he permits.

So that if within a few days after this, our Savior reproved the whole
synod of the Apostles, for asking but Act. 1. 6.
an voluerit, if it stood with his good pleasure at that time to restore the
kingdom unto Israel, he must needs here reprehend Saint Peter's dangerous
question of cur voluerit, what did persuade or lead him, to make this
difference between himself and his fellow: if the inquiring of his will were
counted so offensive, to ask the cause of his will must needs be more
displeasing, and urge our Savior to return his answer, not with Non vestr^
refert, sirs this belongs not to you, but with Quid tua refert, Peter why
ask thou such a question?

And thus (right Honorable and beloved in Christ Jesus) you have heard what it
was which might induce our Savior, to tax Saint Peter for making such
pursuit, in finding forth the cause of his Lord and Masters will* to wit,
if in it self the question were unlawful, if from his Savior no answer
could be gotten, if to the Questionist it might have proved obnoxious, his
master had just cause to control him in my text: and when he sought to
learn and know the reason, why John should stay, and he should die a martyr,
to tell him Nihil ad te, thy question is too curious.

And here the dialles hand would persuade me to dismiss you, as having now
read out the latter branch of that first article which Christ does here object
against Saint Peter for his trespass toward him: namely as first he deserved
sharp reprehension, for being curious in his masters future works, whilst he
would learn what should become of John, so here how he is checkte for
sifting of his will, whilst he will know why he, not John should suffer. But
because I hold it a great and gross offense, for men to teach the ear, and
not to touch the heart, to inlighten the understanding, and not to move the
affections, I must needs by your patience tell you of one crime, which
deserves reproof amongst us Christians, like this of Peter's controlled by our
Savior. It is true which a Augustine.
good and holy Father of the Church says, that neminem Deus liberat
nisigratuita misericordia, nec quenquam damnat nisi aequissima veritate, there
was never man yet whom God received to glory, but his felicity did spring
from his mere mercy: nor he never did condemn a sinners soul, but he read
the sentence out of his righteous Book: and yet though our condition which
shall be in the next world, be thus determined by Gods most perfect justice,
Gregorius cap. 27. in Euaug. Iohannis.
Multi sunt qui perscrutari appetunt, cur quum vnus eligatur alius repellitur,
there are a number in this world, and in every place too many, which do not
fear to ask what may be the cause or reason, why God should save some men,
and yet condemn some other, like those which wonder amongst old Iessaes
children, when Sam. 16. 6 11.
Samuel came from God to annoint a King, why he choose poor David, a little
shepheard-boy, and past by Eliab, that goodly man of person: or like Genesis 48.
18.
good Joseph* which when his father Jacob, with his weak trembling hands
blessing his hope-full Nephews, preferred young Ephraim before Manasses the
elder, asked what he meant to lay his arms so cross, with his left hand on
the firstborn, and his right hand on the younger: or like those curious
people which feign would find the cause, why Christ Mat. 8. ^^
amongst the Gergesens would cast Devils out of strangers, and Luc. 22. ^
yet at his own Table let him enter into Judas. Now whereas Peter would
learn of Christ the cause, of living or dyinge in this vilde brickle world:
so these men will strive that God may show a reason, why some shall live or
perish in the next. But let me tell you* O good Christians let me tell you,
if Christ did check Saint Peter's question here, for asking but the cause of
things which were in this life: surely if you will call GOD to his answer for
the other, why he ordaynes our Souls to pain or joy, he can not choose
but plague such boulde impiety, such curious questions may not go long
unpunished. For what is there (I beseech you) in this demand of Saint Peter's,
which did extort our Saviors reprehension, but it is as much, nay far much
more in yours, when you will ask the cause of Gods decrees? was his unlawful,
and did it not beseem him, unto his Lord and master to make so vain a
motion? why yours is worse, your question is more unfitting, for Romans 9. 20.
shall man presume to call God to a reckoning, or Math. 20 15.
the servant ask an auditte of his master, why thus or so he has bestowed
his substance? Horatins
caepit amphora and dum rota vertitur, exit vrceus, the potter sitting down to
work, did mean to make a flaggon, but in turning of his wheel, it proved an
ill-shaped pitcher: Romans 9. 21.
shall the clay start up, and plead the matter with the work man? what Esaias
10. 15.
shall the tool exult against the Carpenter, or the saw against him that
heates it in the timber? what shall the rod resist against the striker, or
the staff dispute with him that holds it for to walk with? O no beloved in
our Savior Jesus Christ, Romans 9. 20.
the creature must not plead with him that did create it, nor man ask
reasons of Gods eternal councils. If he hate Romans 9. 11.
Esau, yea in his mothers womb, why Mat. 20. 15.
may he not with his own do that which is his pleasure? Author de vocatione
gentium.
Nos in quotidiana besitarum mactatione iniusti esse nolumus, nec sumus: dei
tamen respectu nos, non sumus tanti, quanti nobis vel minimus culex. we which
for our sustenance kill sheep, and slay the Oxen, yet will not be thought
injurious in this slaughter: and yet (God wotts) the best of all man's offspring,
is no whit better (if the reference be to God then is to us the smalest gnatte
or fly: if we kill these and put to death at pleasure, Romans 11. 32.
God which did once conclude all under sin, may well reject some men for
their misdooings.

And if God Romans 11. 13.
will take Jacob into favor, why may he not? when sinful mortal man, may in
Author de vocatione gentium.
domum suam recipere aut excludere quem vult et quia vult, receive and
entertain under his Cottage roof, or else exclude and shut forth of his
doors, what man he will and yet not give account, but only this I will
because I will. If this be lawful for us poor men on earth, why should it be
denied to God the King of heaven? why will you ask his reasons? this is too
much unseeming.

Or were this question lawful that you might search the cause, why God
electeth one and yet reiects another, yet what a bootlesse work is this? to
toil your restless souls, in seekinge that which you can never find? Could
Peter learn from Christ, what made him so determine, that John should live to
honorable age, and he must needs be martyred? No, no: you see he is checked,
but never answered, he could not reach such knowledge. No more shall you when
your audacious hearts, have curiouslye entered the depth of Gods great works,
be ever able to attain such skill, as for to find why he has thus decreed
Idem ^ bidem.
liberatur sane pars hominum part pereunte: sed quare horum misertus sit et
non illorum Deus, nulla scientia comprehendere potest.

It is true indeed, God chooses some, and reprobateth others: one in the
field shall escape, another must be damned: one Luke. 17. 34. 35. 36
grinding in the mill shall go to joys; another unto torments: in the
selfsame bed one shall be saved, and the other be rejected: but why this man
goes to heaven, and that man must to hell, no mortal wight can ever know the
reason.

Or say your question were lawful, yea, and possible that God would let you
ask, and you might know the causes, why he thus orders the souls of us
poor wretches, that some are vessels of honor, some of shame: yet remember, I
beseech you (eue^ for his blessed sake that bought us with his bloodshed.) O
remember holy Christians, that Ca^uinu^ instit. lib. 3. cap. 25. sect. 1.
Quum in praedestinationem inquiritis, diuinae sapientiae adyta p^netratis, quo
si confi^enter and secure prorum patis, nec quo curiositatem vestram satietis
assequemini, and laberynthu^ cuius nullus reperietur exitus, ingrediemini: when
you rave so deeply into these hidden orders which by the Trinity were all set
down in heaven, you take indeed a high and stately flight, but you shall find
your wings set on but with soft wax: you seek dark secret causes, but the
effects will be confusion, once peeping into the Arc, will put you in great
hazard.

Wherefore right Honorable, right Worshipful, and beloved in our Savior, if
this one question, which so many in these days, presumptuously dare ask
concerning our creator, why when all of us equally are the workmanship of his
hands, yet some are destinyed for heaven, and some for hell, does so much
resemble this question of Saint Peter's, when he would know why this should be
Christ's pleasure, that he must to the cross, yet John should still remain:
and since you have heard how worthy of reproving both that of Peter's, and this
of yours is deemed: as in propounding, being questions too unlawful, for
getting answer past hope of possibility: and lastly in consequent, exceeding
full of danger: let me in the meekest manner beseech you (holy Christians)
to learn that from this Scripture, which once a holy Saxon, writing the life
of Jesus Christ our Savior, said Peter's master would teach us in this Text:
that is, Ludolphus de vita Christi. part, 2. cap. 73.
vltra ea quae illi placent non quaerere, nec plusquam oportet circumscrutari:
contenting our selves with Gods most sacred will, which he so lovingly has
taught in holy writ, never to seek or strive to know his pleasure, which is
kept secret in his own blessed breast: much less to ask the cause, or search
the reason, why God determines thus or so of his creatures. Or if you knew not
him, or will not need his counsel, then listen to Eccl. 3. 22 23
Jesus that famous son of Syrach, and he will wish you not to seek out hard
things, nor spend your thoghts in points too mighty for you: for what need
you search those things which are secret? to sift Gods hidden will, by no
means can concern you.

But if you will still use this Curiosity, and neither precept nor reason can
withdraw you, then I must tell you (even for mine own discharge) that God will
one day object this sin against you, as here Christ Jesus reprooues it in
Saint Peter, with Quid ad te? Peter, why ask thou such things? why make
thou such a question?

It remains after this second branch of our Saviors former article, imputed
to the Apostle in this present visitation, I should proceed in order to that
which follows, the second maine part of the subject of his sin, which is
his (...) his busy meddling in other men's affairs: for his question is of
John, and nothing of himself. But lest I hold you ouer-long, in reading too
much at once, I think it expedient in regard the time is past, before I
rehearse the second Article of Christ Jesus, (the chief shepherd of the
flock) against Saint Peter's question, to pronounce from the great Lawgiver,
upon your blessed souls, that heavenly benediction which he enjoined by
Moses, Numb. 6. 24. 25. 26.
when he commanded us to say to you his people:

The Lord God bless you, and Abraham's God defend you: the Lord make his face
to shine amongst you, and be merciful to you al: the Lord lift his comfortable
countenance upon you, and give you all his everlasting peace. Amen. *
FINIS.

