PETER'S TEARS.

A SERMON, Preached at S. Mary's Spittle, the xv. of April 1612.

By Thomas Iacksonne Bachelour in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods holy word at
Wye in Kent.

Audeo dicere, superbis vtile esse, in aliquod magnum cadere peccatum, vt sibi
displiceant cadendo; qui placendo ceciderunt.

August. de Ciuit. lib. 14. cap. 13. LONDON Printed by W. W. for Clement
Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of
the Holy Lamb. 1612.

PETER'S TEARS.
And immediately the Cock crew; Then Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which
he had said unto him, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice: so he
went out and wept bitterly.

Math 26 74.75.
IT is a true saying of the Wiseman (Right Honorable, (...). Sept^agint. Tempus
et tempestitas. Tremell.
right Worshipful, and dearly beloved men, breathren, and fathers,) that to
all things, and to every purpose under Heaven, there is (as in most languages
it is varyed) a time and season; Ecclesi. 3.1.
Judas had a time to betray his Master, for Christ left him to himself, but
Peter had the season to repent; for so soon as he had denied, the Cock crew,
and his Master looked back: now it is the season which is as the salt, which
seasoneth all our actions; Salactionu^.
for whatsoever is unseasonable, is distasteful: And therefore, howsoever my
Text may seem vnseasonablely handled (in regard of the particular) and as a
doleful Dittie in this time of mirth: yet (in regard of the general) it is
high time and season, for all to mourn for their sins; and therefore be it
seasonable or unseasonable, (as the Apostle says) 2. Tim. 4.2.
I purpose, by Gods grace, to be instant in this: And as Christ bid his
hearers, Remember Lots wife; Luke 17.32.
so I say to you all, Remember Peter, and let your cheeks be watered, and all
your actions seasoned with the brinish tears of unfeigned repentance: Weep in
sorrow for your sins, the cause of Christ's death: and laugh for joy, for his
resurrection, whereby ye are justified from your sins: Weep in joy, and
rejoice in weeping; keep a mean in both: Romans 4. vlt.
This if I shall procure my Theme, with the time, shall be both fit and
profitable, Commodu^ et accommodum.
and all of us shall depart hence pertaking in Salomons Blessing; A word spoken
in due season, is like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Silver: which God
grant it may be.

The Gospel specially mentions and records the stories of three, that were
led into great temptations; viz. Christ, Peter, and Judas: Christ was led
of that good spirit, whereof he was full: Luke 4.1.
Peter, of that presumptuous spirit, which said to Christ, Though I should die
with thee, I will not deny thee: Math. 26.35.
and Judas, of that wicked spirit, which after the Soppe, entered into him, and
put it into his heart to betray him: Ioh. 13.2.27.
That good spirit which led Christ to the combat, gave him power to overcome:
that presumptuous spirit, which led Peter, fled and forsook him: that wicked
spirit which led Judas, betrayed and overthrew him. Satan thrust at Christ,
and he fell not; he thrust at Peter, and he fell, and rose again, for his
Master helped him; he thrust at Judas, and he fell, and never rose, for his
Master forsook him. Satan winnowed Christ, and found all Wheat; he winnowed
Peter, and found much Chafe; he winnowed Judas, and found nothing but Chafe:
he found all good in Christ, some good in Peter; but no good in Judas: Christ
was the truth, both in heart and tongue; Peter had truth in heart, but not in
tongue (for his Master had prayed for him that his Faith might not fail, Luke
22.32.
) and Judas had neither truth in heart nor tongue; for with words of peace,
he betrayed him; Hayle Master Mark. 14.45.
Christ is the Father of the Elect, who knew no sin: 2. Cor. 5. vlt.
Peter a true Jabez, 1. Cron. 4.9.
the son of Sorrow, for his sin: but Judas, that child of Perdition, John.
17.11.
and dyed in his sin. In Christ, we have the example of a spotless Redeemer;
in Peter, an example of a repenting Elect: but in Judas, the example of a
desperate Reprobate. Christ is a blessed example for imitation, that we may not
sin: Peter a sweet president of consolation, if through weakness we do
sin: but Judas, a fearful pattern of just dereliction, to all such as
continue in sin: But Peter, is the subject of my speech.

The vices as well as virtues, the slippes and falls, as well as the steadfast
standinges, and upright walkinges; the crimminations as well as commendations,
of Gods best Servants, are fully and faithfully in holy Writ recorded; Noah's
drunkenness, as well as his uprightness: Genesis 6.9.9.11.
Lots Incest, as well as the grieuing of his righteous Soul: Genesis 19.33. 2.
Pet. 2.8.
the weakness of Moses at the waters of Meribah, when he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips, as well as his zeal, when he brake the Tables as he came down
from Mount Sinaj: Number. 20.7. Psalm. 106.33. Exodus 32.9.
Jonah his flying toward Tharsis, as well as his preaching in Niniuie: Jonah
1.3 4.
And to conclude with mine example (passing over many others) Peter's denying,
as well as his confessing: nay rather the former, then the latter; for whereas
all the Evangelists make report of his threefold denial, Math. 26.69. Mar
14.66. Luke 22 55. Ioh. 18.25.
only one, records his threefold confession; Ioh. 21.15.
not as if holy men of God were herein led and moved, as carnal men are, who
take a delight to be talking off, and blasing abroad the sins of others, either
because in malice they would disgrace them, as Cham did his father: Genesis 9.22.
or in hypocrisy, commend their own righteousness and holiness, as the
proud Pharisie dealt with the Publicane; Luke 18.11.
but therefore have the holy Scribes, faithfully chronicled their own sins,
as well as others, for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; Iren lib.
4. cap. 45.
for in their sins and repentance, as in a Looking-glass of Crystal, we
may see and observe; First, Satan's malice and subtlety, First use. Satan's
malice.
who goes about seeking whom to devour, and ever hates them most, whom God
loves best; that so we may watch continually. 1. Pet. 5.8. Second use. 2. Man's
weakness.
Secondly, man's frayltie and weakness, if God leave even the best never so
little to himself, that he that thinks he stands, may take heed, least he
fall; 1. Cor. 10.12.
yea condole and commiserate him that is fallen, as that reverend Father, who
with tears lamented the fall of his brother, saying; He has fallen to day,
and I not unlikely to fall tomorrow: Ille hodie, et ego cras. Barn. de
resurrect. dom. ser. 2.
Thirdly, Gods mercy in putting under his hand, in raising his children again,
and forgiving them greatest sins, upon their true repentance, that so we may
never despair.

3. Use. 3. Gods mercy.
And specially, it was requisite that Peter's sin should be known, that therein
we may see Christ's verity, and Peter's vanity. Veritatem Christi, et
vanitatem Petri. Hofmeist. in mar.
Christ prophesied before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice, and he did
so: Peter promised, though I should die with thee, I will in no case deny thee;
Math. 26.34.35.
but he did not so: let God then be true, and all men liars. Romans 3.4. Division.


In this Story, two things are principally to be observed, viz. Peter's Fall,
and his Rising again: his Sin, and his Repentance: As concerning his Sin,
it is to be noted, that though most, or all of the Apostles, be touched in the
Gospel, for some infirmity or other; as the two Sons of Zebodie for
ambitious affectation of Superiority: Math. 20.21.
Thomas for his Incredulity: John. 20.26.
all of them often for their little Faith, as in the Storm upon the sea, Math.
8.26.
and when they so reasoned amongst themselves, because they had no Bread: Math.
16.8.
yea for unbelief, as when they could not cure the Lunaticke; Math. 17, 20.
and for hardness of heart, because they believed not such as had seen him,
being risen up again: Mar. 16.14.
and lastly, for a feare-fullnesse; for when he was apprehended, all the
Disciples forsook him and fled etc. Mar. 14.15.
Yet are the infirmities of Peter, both for number and measure discovered to
exceed all the rest; as his rashness in aduenturing to walk upon the Sea;
Math. 14.29.
his unadvised speech upon the Mountain; Master, it is good for us to be
here, let us build three Tabernacles: Math 17.14.
his uncharitableness, Master, how often shall I forgive my brother, till
seven times? Math. 18.21.
his foolehardinesse in drawing his Sword, and cutting off Malchus ear; John.
18.10.
and his curiosity asking Christ, concerning Jhon, What shall this man do?
John. 21.21.
I say besides these, which were but as common infirmities, and petty slippes,
there are three great sins recorded and aggrauated by the holy Ghost, and
stood upon by the Fathers viz.

First, 1. Sin.
his fearful dissuading of Christ from going to Jerusalem the place of his
Passion; Math. 16.22.
Wherein he was an enemy to the Passion of Christ, and by consequent, to the
Redemption of the elect. Secondly, 2. Sin.
his hipocriticall seperating of himself, by which his evil Example, as by a
law he did constrain or compel the Gentiles to Judaize; Gall. 2.15.
for which Paul zealously withstood him to his face. Thirdly, his desperate, 3.
Sin.
perfidious, and most execrable denyinge, forswearinge, and anathomatizing or
cursinge of himself if he knew the man: which sins, are not discovered by
those holy penmen, to disgrace their worthy Colleague; nor by me rehearsed, to
derogate any thing, from the blessed memory of so worthy an Apostle (as
Porphirie and Faustus the Manithie did:) But that Man may be ashamed for
presuminge, God for ever praised for pardoning; and the preposterous zeal of
the Romanistes brideled, for ascribing two much unto him: and so ceasing any
further to speak of that sin, which is so clearly washed away with the
blood of Christ; forgiven and forgotten of God; I will proceed to break the
Bottle of Tears which he shed for his sin, wherein he is an Example teaching
all that have sinned, how to turn unto God, that they may be pardoned: For the
more profitable handling whereof, these parts are to be observed.

Division.
First, the means of his Repentance, (And immediately the Cock crew, and Peter
remembered.) Secondly, the Testification of his repentance, (So he went our and
wept bitterly.) Concerning the Means; the time is to be noted, when these
Means were vouchsafed unto him, (Immediately:) then the Means themselves,
which were of two sorts, viz. External, and Internal: The means External
two, viz first (the Cocks crowing) and (as S. Luke adds) Jesus his looking
back upon him:) The means Internal two, viz. (his remembering of his Masters
words:) and (as S Mark adds) the waying of things with himself:) The
Testification of his Repentance, was twofold, viz. first his breaking out of
the company, and forsaking of their fellowship, by whom he had been so
occasioned to sin, (so he went out:) and secondly, his sorrow for his sin,
(he wept, yea, and that bitterly:) of which, in order; and though not all that
might be said of every little, yet a little of every part, as the time and your
patience, or both, will give leave.

1. Part, the time when the means of Peter's repentance, were affoorded.
The first thing to be considered, is the Time, when God vouchsafed to Peter,
the blessed means to reclaim or recall him; which is the more carefully to be
observed, because all the Evangelists do purposely front the Story of his
Repentance therewith, and yet dispatch it in one word, (Immediately, (...)
Statim.
) or (as S. Luke has it) while he yet spoke, (...) Adhuc loquente. Doct.
Even whilst he was swearing and cursing, the Cock crew, and (as it were)
took the words out of his mouth; which circumstaunce teaches: That though
God see good to let his Children fall, yet he will not long leave them, and
suffer them to lie in sin (as S. John says this wicked world does) 1. John.
5 19
but will seasonably and speedily put under his hand to help them up again;
and strike their hearts, before they be canterized 1. Tim. 4.2.
through custom, which takes away the sense of sin. No sooner had Adam
eaten of the forbidden fruit, and forfeited that excellent Glory of his
Creation; but in the cool of the day, God came and called unto him, Adam where
art thou? Genesis 3 9.
No sooner had David received the number of his people, but his heart smote
him. 2. Sam. 24.10
No sooner was Jonah got into a ship and under sail for Tharshish, but the
Lord sent out a great wind, Jonah. 1.4.
dispatched a Pursiuant from Heaven, to attache him, shipped vengeance in a
Whirlwind, which sailed aloft in the air, to overtake and bring in again
that fugitive Prophet: And surely Peter received no less grace, for even
whiles he was speaking, swearing, and cursing, the Cock crew, and called upon
him for repentance.

The Reasons hereof are principally these two; first, 1. Reason.
because Satan makes great haste, to drive men down the stairs unto Hell.
What they do, he would have them do quickly; if he might have his will, no
man should swallow his spittle, before he were in the lowermost Hell: see how
hasty he was with Euah, that in so little a time, had gotten her, look upon,
lust for, eat of, and give to her husband. What haste did Jonah make toward
Tharshish, down to the key, found a ship, paid the fare, and down in it?
What haste did Peter make? in how little a while, was he come to the feare-full
height of sin? a presumer, a denier, a forswearer, a curser; Lord what would
have become of him, if his Master had let him alone a while longer? But
(Immediately) the Cock crew.

Secondly, because continuance in sin, and custom, 2. Reason.
takes away sense, and breeds incurable hardness; yea the greater and
nearer danger is at hand, the less it is perceived; Peter is come to the very
threshold of Hell, Ad limen inferni. Orig.
and sees it not: as David swore to Jonathan: As the Lord lives, there is but
a step betwixt me and death; 1. Sam. 20.3.
so there was but one step more, and Peter had been in the bottomless pit:
wherefore as a man that will save the Lame that is already in the mouth of the
Lion, must make haste; that will save the Brand from burning, must make haste
to pull it out of the Fire; so God makes haste to save a sinner. When Peter
walked upon the sea, he no sooner began to sincke, but he cried out, Master
save me; Math. 14.30. serua domine.
But now that he is in far greater danger, sincking into the floods of
sin, yea suncke to the very chinne, he sees no danger, but holds on; yet
such was his mercy, whom he denied, that remembering him, who had forgotten
himself, (Immediately) the Cock crew.

Use.
The use is, that as God is in love hasty, when we have sinned, to afford us
the means of repentance and salvation: So we in wisdom make haste, by the
use of them, to turn unto God; for he is blessedst that sins not: next to
him, is he that soonest repents, according to that of David, Blessed is the
man that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of
sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful: Psalm. 1.1.
For if from suggestion, we proceed to consent; from consent, to delight; from
delight, to action; 1. Means external.
from action, to custom; from custom, to senselessness, to have no prick, no
remorse, no dislike, woe be unto us.

The first external means, whereby Peter was brought to the sight and sorrow
of his sin, was the crowing (of the Cock.) The Grecians will, that a Cock
be so called in their tongue, because by his crowing, he does waken men, and
raise them out of their beds: (...) ex priuatiua perticula, et (...) tubile
quod excitet e tubii, Aristoph.
He crew, as we say in English; or lift up his voice, according to the Greek;
(...), vocem emisit, vociferatus est Montan.
or according to the vulger, he song: Cantauit, Galli cantus.
And this is the ordinary phrase with the Latins, The song or singing of the
Cock: and well may his crowing be called singing, because when he is fattest
or best liking, and finds his hot nature refreshed with the coldness of
the night, and vapors of the air, he croweth most, and (in his kind) as with
a song, does praise his Creator: a sweet domestical Creature, by singing,
teaching us to lift up our hearts, and to praise our God with our tongues;
from whom, every good and perfect gift proceeds: But I proceed from the
Letter, to Observations.

Wise Philosophers have observed, 1. Observation.
that Cocks by crowing, do wake men out of sleep, and therefore lay-on
toward day, when it is time to awake; and also foretell a shower coming.
Zanch. de operib. Dei. lib. 3. cap. 4. Thest. 5. de signis pluuiae.
Peter is fast on sleep in the bed of carnal security, and must be
awakned, or else he sleeps in death for ever; Psalm. 13.3.
a shower of tears is at hand, not for the causing of his bed only to swim,
Psalm. 6.6.
But as when God destroyed the old World, the Windows of Heaven were opened;
Genesis 7.11.
so the Sluices and Floodgates of Peter's eyes are to be opened, and such
Fountains to break out, as if his little world were to be drowned with
tears, no marvel then, though the Cock crow.

Observe we also the extent of Gods gracious providence, who is so great in the
greatest things, 2. Obseru.
as he is not lesser in the least. Ita magnus in maximis, vt non minor in
minimis.
There have been Philosophers who thought, that the Gods had no regard of
humane affairs; whose opinion (says Tullie) if it be true, what piety can
there be, what sanctity, what Religion? Others, though they went not so far,
as to exempt all things, yet they withdrew the smaller from the Heavenly
providence; for it was thought most injurious, to bring down the Majesty of
God so low, as to the husbanding of Bees and Pismyres; as if in the number of
the Gods, there were some Myrmecides, to carue out the smaller works.
Minutorum operum fabricator.
Another sect of Philosiphers, viz. the Peripateticks, who housed the
providence of God above the Moon, and thought it had no desent beneath the
cyrcle thereof, to intend inferyor businesses, like those Epicures who said,
(or at least Eliphaz, in their names) How should God know? can he judge through
the dark clouds? The clouds hide him that he cannot see, and he walks in the
cyrcle of heaven; Job. 22.13.14
Aueroes, surnamed the Commenter, a Spanish Physician, that he may seem to be
mad with reason, by reason fortifieth the former judgment, for he thinks,
that the knowledge, and understanding of God, would become vile, if it were
abased to these inferior, and infirmer obiectes: But from the School of God we
learn, that (whereof these wise Ethnicks were ignorant) that our God, though
he have his dwelling on high, yet he abaseth himself, to behold the things in
Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 113.6.
as he made all things by his word; Psalm 33.6.
so he bears up all things by his mighty word: Heb. 1.3.
or (according to the Hebrew phrase, who use the Abstract for the Concrete, the
Substantive for the Adjective, or Epithet) with the word of his power. D. King
L. B. of Land. on Iona. lect. 10.
His Creation, was as the Mother to bring forth; his Providence, as the Nurse
to bring up: his Creation, a short Providence; his Providence a perpetual
Creation: his Creation gave being; his providence maintayneth in being: his
Creation, erected the Fabric; his Providence keeps reparation Plenus
negotiideus. Cicer. de not. deo.
In a word, (as a Heathen man said) he is full of business; Ioshu. 10.13.
all eye, to observe; and all hand, to dispatch all business: by it the Sun
moves, for he made it to stand, Esaias. 38.8.
yea to go back: Job. 38.25.
the Rain falls, for the Clouds are his Bottles: Psalm. 77.18.
the Air ratleth, for it is the glorious God that makes the thunder: Psalm.
^35.7.
the Wind blows; Math. 10.29.
for he brings it out of his treasure: n Birds do fly, Math. 6 28.
Plants and Grass do grow, Jonah. 1. vlt.
Fishes do swim, Worms do bite; Jonah. 4.7.
yea, and (to conclude with my Text,) Cocks do crow, Immediately the Cock
crew; for he that governs all things, had said, Before the Cock crow, thou
shall deny me thrice. John. 23 vlt.


The second external means, was Christ his looking upon him, for so S. Luke
says; 2. Means external.
The Lord turned back, and looked upon Peter: Luke 22.61.
and this I call External, in regard of the Act, though it were Internal, in
regard of the effect. For this, this, was it that wounded his heart; he denied
and repented not, because his Master looked not upon him; he forsware and
repented not; but when he cursed himself, he repented, for his Master looked
upon him; Peter had thought his Master had not heard or known, or regarded
his words; But he that knew when he was thronged that some faithful body had
touched him, for virtue was gone out of him: Luke 8.46.
now knew that his faithful disciple, had forsworn him, and that it was high
time, that virtue should proceed from him, for to cure him; and therefore most
graciously turned back, and looked upon him, that by seeing Peter, he might
cause Peter to see his sin, and repent of it: Which yet the act of seeing
could not effect, for every one repented not, that Jesus looked on, for
doubtless, he looked on Judas, when he gave him the soppe, yea he spoke most
lovingly and mildly to him when he came with soldiers to apprehend him, friend
wherefore art thou come? Math. 26.50
and Judas betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Luke 22.48.
words which might have broken his heart, if he had not been dead in sins;
He does but look upon Peter, and it serves the turn; For with Christ his
bodily eye, the sweet influence of his grace and spirit, being conuayed to his
soul, he repented unfeignedly, and no marvel, for how could he remain in
the darkness of his denial, whom the light of the world, had so graciously
looked upon? Non enim fieri poterat, vt in negationis tenebris permaneret, quem
lux perspexe rat mundi. Gloss. Ordin.


Now has Peter that blessing, which the Church so earnestly begged, Arise o
North, and come o South, and blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may
flow out: Cant. 4. vlt.
the Garden is the Soul, the Spices are the sweet graces of Faith,
Repentance, Love, Zeal: The Northern wind, are the cold and chilling
blastes of Satan's temptations; the South wind, the warm meelding, and
fruitful breath of Gods spirit: the tender graces of Peter's soul have been
frozen, nipped in the head, and blasted with Satan's temptations. Oh it was a
cold time with Peter, Algebat affectu.
Well does the Evangelist note, that Peter went to warm himself at the Fire,
for it was cold: John. 18.18.
yet was he colder in his soul, Magnu^ frigus est vbi Christus non agnoscitur.
Ferus de pass. page 273.
then in his body, though he perceived it not. But now the South wind blows,
the Sun of righteousness shines: Malach. 4.2.
and he whose eyes are like a flame of fire, Reu. 1.14.
looking upon him, his graces flow, and he does even melt into tears.

1. Obseru.
Our Observations for instruction, are of two sorts: the first is, from the
History we may observe, the infinite love of Christ toward poor sinners: he
is but newly come forth of the Garden, where, in his agony and distress, he
sweat like drops of blood; and is now in the very throng of his enemies,
where his Ears glow to hear their Blasphemies, his Eyes dazzle to see their
derisions, his Cheeks swell with their buffetinges, Inter calumnias
sacerdotu^, inter falsitates testium, inter caedentium et conspicentium
iniurias constitutus, turbatum discipulu^ respicit. Leo. de pass. dom. Sermon. 3.
Apostrophe.
and all his body soar, yea black and blew, with their nippinges and
punsings; yet in the midst of all these his troubles and indignities, he
remembers poor Peter, his most unworthy Disciple, and graciously looked upon
him. Oh sweet Jesus, that vouchsafedst such favor to him, that slept in the
Garden, followed a far off in the way, and has denied in the Hall! that
remembrest him, who forgot thee; and vouchsafest to look upon him, that swear
he never knew thee. Did he thus remember Peter when he was in the deapth of
such mortal misery, and has he forgotten us, now he is in the height of such
immortal Glory? No, no, he remembers whereof we be made, and knows both how
and when we sin; and though we deserve to be left unto our selves, yet will
he not fail in good time, to put under his hand, and help us up again.

Secondly, from the mystery we may observe, 2. Obseru.
the means of a sinners conversion, and means of his recovery by repentance,
the Cock is the Minister of the word, Vox Galli, predicatio resipiscentiae.
Muse.
who cries aloude, and lifts up his voice, like a trumpet, and shows the
people, their transgressions and sins; Esaias. 58.1.
such a Cock, was Nathan to David, thou art the man; 2. Sam. 12.7.
Jonah to Nineuie, yet forty days, and Nineuie shall be destroyed; Jonah. 3.4.
John Baptist to Judeah, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Math.
3.2.
Peter to Jerusalem, Repent and turn, that your sins may be put away. Act
3.19.
But the Cock by crowing could not awaken him, for he crew once, and Peter
repented not; Then the second time he crew; Mar. 14. vlt.
yea he might have crowen a thousand times in vain, had not his Master looked
upon him: whereupon the reverent fathers comment sweetly, he denied first, and
wept not, because his Master looked not upon him; he denied the second time,
and wept not, because yet his Master looked not upon him; but he denied the
third time, and wept bitterly, for his Master, then looked upon him. Negauit
primo, et non fleuit, quia non respexerat dominus. Chrisost. in loc. Alub, lib.
10. Comment. in Luc.
This teaches us, that it is not the outward ministry of the word only, be it
never so excellent, that is able to work repentance in the hearts of the
hearers; let the Preacher be who he will, one of a thousand, Job. 33.23.
for the excellencye of his gifts; as prompt in the law of God, as Ezra; Ezra.
7.6.
as mighty in the Scriptures as Apollos; Act. 18.24.
as eloquent to quicken and enliue his speech, as if he spoke with the tongue
of an Angel; 1. Cor. 13.2.
as paynefull as Paul, who labored more then they all; 1. Cor. 15.10.
As blameles of conversation, Luke. 1.6.
as Zacherie; mar. 6.20.
let the people hear never so gladly, as Herod heard John; Ezech. 33.32.
never so earnestly, as the Jews heard the Prophet, as one that had a
pleasant voice, and could singe well; Acts. 20.7.
let them hear never so long, as those that heard Paul until midnight; let
the matter handled, be never so heavenly and gracious, as all the Synagogue
wondered at the gracious words, which proceeded out of Christ's mouth; Luke. 4.22.
yet if the Lord give not a blessing, it is but the bitter savor of death,
unto death, 2. Cor. 2.16.
for though Paul himself Plant and Apollo water, it is God, and God only, that
must give the increase. 1. Cor. 3.6.


Use.
Let not then any Minister, be puffed up with an high conceit of his gifts,
though never so excellent; for what has any man that he has not received, 1.
Cor. 4.7.
nor yet contemn his brother, though far meaner, for God uses weak means,
to confound the mighty; 1. Cor. 1.29.
neither let the people have the Persons of Gods Ministers, in factious
admiration, to say I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, and I am of Cephas; 1. Cor.
1.12.
But let Ministers give lovingly to one another, the right hands of fellowship;
Gal. 2.9.
and let all the people have all Gods Ministers in singular love for their
Works sake; 1. These. 5.13.
and let both Ministers and people, pray to God for a blessing; and if we see
any fruit of our labors, or ye reap comfort and good by our Ministry; let
not the least of Gods glory cleave unto us, but all, be given unto him, that
has looked upon us, and blessed us.

Application.
To conclude this point, with Application to our selves, consider what I say,
and the Lord, give you understanding in all things; 2. Tim. 2.7.
we have all of us sinned with Peter, God and every man's conscience know best
how, Gods Cocks have crowen again and again, how many hundred times has God
knocked at the portals of our consciences, by the Ministry of his word, to
awaken us, and yet we sleep and snorte in sin: yea his Cocks crow thick,
great is the number of diligent, and faithful Preachers, for the darcke night
of sin and ignorance, is almost over, and the long looked for day of glory,
and eternal salvation, begins to dawne, and no man knows whether this
day, or this night, the last Cock shall crow, even the Trumpet sound unto
Judgment. Look down upon us, Lord Jesus, that at last we may repent, and
mourn for our sins. Amen. And so much for the External means of Peter's
repentance; the Internal follow, which are also two.

First, (he Remembered the words of Jesus, 1. Internal means.
which he had said unto him, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice:)
amongst the manifold graces of God, wherewith the soul of man, created after
Gods image, was endewed; that is none of the least use, which is usually called
Memory, (...).
by virtue whereof, man does safely keep what the mind has once truly
conceived; and as occasion serves, like a faithful Register, it does give the
said knowledge back again to the mind, to be thought upon, Memoria, qua
epetit animus, quae fuerunt. Cicer. in Rhetor secund. Aristotel, de Memor.
and uttered in word, and followed in deed: Great was the holiness and
happiness of this faculty by Creation, so as man in state of innocence had
been able, to have remembered any matter of importance, which either God had
revealed unto him, or himself conceived, by any natural faculty: but though
the memories of some men have been wonderful, as of Mithridate King of Pontus,
who could readily speak two and twenty Languages: Galen, et Plin.
of Severe, that hearing two hundred verses repeated, could rehearse them
again, beginning at the last: Seneca de Scipso. Orat.
of Thom^stocles, that desired to learn the Art of Forgetfulness; yet indeed
generally, by man's fall, this faculty is exceedingly weakened, even concerning
earthly things. Pharaohs Butler forgot Joseph, Cicer. 2. de Orat.
the man that sees his natural face in a Glass, immediately forgets the
fashion of it: James. 1.24.
the Disciples forgot to take Bread with them; Math. 16.5.
and Trapeznutius forgot all Learning: Voleteran. lib. 21.
yea, Messala Coruinus forgot his own name. Iolin. lib. 7. cap. 24.
But much more is the memory brittle, concerning Heavenly things, both
because the mind does not well conceive them, nor the affections take any
great delight in them. How many good Sermons have we heard, good Lessons have
we learned, and comfortes have we received, and have we not forgotten them?
Assuredly, many forget God himself; Deuteronomy. 32.18. Judges. 3.7. 1. Sam. 12.9.
Psam. 50.22.
yea, we should forget the death of Christ, if it were not for the Sacrament
of remembrance: I, and no marvel, for Peter forgot the words of his Master,
but now remembers; yea his memory was not before so dull and forgetful, but
now it is as fresh and lively: Satan wrought upon his memory before, that
remembering nothing, he might presumptuously run on in sin; and now he
works upon his memory, to set an edge upon it, that by remembering all
things, he may despair for sin: If God had left him to himself, I know not
whether Peter had been more miserable in his first forgetting, or after
remembering; for both of them had carried him with a full swing to Hel-ward: but
now through Christ, blessed is Peter; he forgot, and sinned; he now
remembers, and repents.

Doct.
From whose example we learn, that it is the Word, yea the holy Word of God,
which is the preservative and restoratiue Physic of the Soul; it is a
preservative, for so says David, J have hid thy word in my heart, that I
should not sin against thee: Psalm. 119.11.
Yea, assuredly he had not committed Adultery, but that for a time, the God of
this world, had blinded the eyes of his understanding: 2. Cor. 4.4.
and it is a restoratiue, for no sooner did Nathan put him in mind of his
sin, but he repented, and as my Text is, Peter no sooner remembered the words
of his Master, but he went out, and wept bitterly.

For this cause, Satan has a fourfold dangerous policy, whereby to rob
men of the use of the word: Satan a great enemy to the word through a
fourfold policy.
First, to keep men from having the word preached unto them; which policy of
Satan the Apostle descried, when he wrote to the Thessalonians, First policy.
That at the least, once or twice, he would have come unto them, but Satan
hindered him: 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.
If herein he cannot prevail, then has he a second, viz. by suggesting
wandering thoughts, exposing of idle obiectes, 2. Policy.
casting into drowsines and dulnes, as he did Eutichus: Acts. 20.9.
to make the word unprofitable, that in hearing, they may not hear: Esaias. 6.9.
and hence it is, that many hearers of the word yet remain as ignorant, as if
they had never heard at all: or if he cannot herein prevail, then has he a
third, 3. Policy.
viz. to hinder the remembrance of the word; and these hearers, our Savior
compares to the Highway, receiving seed: Math. 13.19.
and thus he dealt with our example here, whom he sifted, as he does daily
such as hear at one ear, and let it go out at the other; nay, whose ears
are like Sieues that take in Water at one place, and let it go out at an
hundred: And this pleases the Devil well, for he cares not how much men
hear, so they remember nothing; nay, to choose, he would have men to hear
much, so they forget all, that so they may stand guilty before God, for that
which they have heard: But if all these fail, he has a fourth policy, 4.
Policy.
viz. to rob men of their Faith, that so they may not believe the Word;
without which, all hearing, knowing, and remembering, are unprofitable; as the
Apostle says, The Word which they heard, profited them not, because it was not
mixed with Faith, in those that heard it. Heb. 4.2.


The consideration whereof, may teach us a fourefold Wisdom: First, (as S. 1
Use.
James bids) To be swift to hear James. 1.19.
and to this end, to pray heartily, (as Christ has taught us) That the Lord of
the Harvest would thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest; Math. 9. vlt.
and to send Preachers, that people may hear the Word at their mouths. Romans
10.14.


2. Use.
Secondly, when we hear, to take heed how we hear; Luke. 8.18.
and to pray unto God to open our hearts, as he did Lydias, Act. 16.14.
and his Disciple, Luke 24 31.
that we may understand the word.

3. Use.
Thirdly, by Prayer, Meditation, Conference, and all good means, let us labor
to remember the Word; for Christ has said, Blessed are they that hear the
Word of God, and keep it. Luke 11.28.


4. Use.
Lastly, let us pray unto God, to increase our Faith* that we may believe his
Word; for if we hear, understand, remember, and believe, we shall never fall:
But if we care neither for hearing, understanding, remembering, nor believing,
we shall sin with Peter; but we shall never repent with him, for he remembered.

But what remembered he?

Quest. Answ.
Many things; Peter's Memory was never better then now; Whilst he was in
sinning, and before his Master looked back upon him, he was like a man that
having received a great rappe on the head, is astonyed and amazed: Peter
thought on nothing; but now that he is come to himself, what is it he does not
remember? Now, he remembers, how he had been but a poor and base Fisherman,
and his Master had called him to be a Fisher of men: Math. 4.19.
how he had cured his wives mother, lying sick of a fever; Math. 8.14.
yea saved his life when he was sinking into the sea; Math. 14 31.
how he made him one of his inwardst friends, took him with him into the
mountain, when he was transfigured; Math. 17.1.
and into the house when he raised Jayrus his Daughter; Luk 8.51.
and into the garden, where he was in such agonye; Math. 26.37.
how he had borrowed money of a Fish to pay his Trybute; Mat. 17. vlt.
and is this the requital of all such favors, to deny and forswear him? he
remembers what a commendation Christ gave him for his confession. Blessed art
thou Simon bar Jonah; Mat. 16 17.
and does he not now know that man, whom before he confessed to be the son of
God? he remembers, how he had, time and time been reproved, as for dissuading
his Master from Jerusalem, Math 16.23.
for his drowsines in the garden, Simon sleep thou? Mar. 14.37.
and for his rash striking with the Sword: John. 18.11.
But what reproof may he now look for, having so denied and forsworn him? It
is hard to say what he did not remember, then what he did remember; assuredly,
whatsoever did aggrauate the greatness of his sin, that did he now perfectly
remember; but this above all other, that his Master had told him, that, Before
the Cock crew, he should deny him thrice; as David, after he had murdered
Vriah* saw nothing but blood: Psalm. 51.14.
so Peter after his denial, could hear nothing from Belles that rung, or
Birds that sung, but this dole-full dittie, Peter, thou have denied thy
Master. By whose example; we are to be warned; Use.
for howsoever our sins may be super-annate, and as old Leases worn out of
date, so as few remember the sins of their youth: yet if we have not
unfeignedly repented of them, the time shall come, when God shall give our
Consciences such a touch, as we shall remember our sins with a witness, yea
be as a thousand witnesses against our selves.

But examine we the words, and with your patience, let me parallel or balance,
a commandment and this promise together, that, concerning a principal
Patriarch and this, a prime Apostle; both of them delivered, in words of
greatest weight, emphasis, and signification, that can be imagined: mark how
God proved Abraham, Genesis 27.1.
he bids him not resign or deliver but (Take) not a beast, or bondsman, but
a ( Son) not one of many, but an ( Only) son; not Jshmaell, but Isaac, the
son of laughter, in whom he was so glad a Father; not stubborn and
disobedient, and therefore hated; but ( Beloved) as the bowels of his own
breast, yea as his own soul, for in him were the Promises of salvation
established; he must not sacrifice him at his door, but travel three days
journey, to the Mount ( Moriah) not leave him there as an Orphant, as Moses was
left in the Arc, but he must kill him, and commit slaughter upon his flesh;
not then bury him, but burn him; and neither spare him living nor dead, till
he be in ashes, which with the least puff of Wind might be scattered into a
thousand places: Oh what weighty words are these! and (if God had not
strengthened him) able to have broken his bones, and crushed him to pieces. D.
King on Ion. lect. 2. page 25.


You have heard the Commandment, now mark this Prophecy; ( 1. Thou) not
Judas, Herod, or Pilate, but Peter; thou that have been with me so long, heard
my Doctrine, seen my Miracles, and made such an excellent Confession. ( 2.
Me) not a forriner, a stranger, an enemy; but ( Me,) thy Friend, Familiar,
Master, God, Creator, and Savior; ( Me,) that was so many thousand Years
desired and looked for (Me) that have every way testified my love and favor
unto thee, even ( Me,) that am now taken and ready to die for thy sins: ( 3.
Deny) not fly from, and forsake, or hang aloof off, or not come near, but
(Deny) 4. not once in rashness and unadvisedness, as thou have been often
inconsiderate, but twice yea (thrice) as it were with purpose, and
deliberation: not in a year, Month, or day, but in a short space, (even this
night before the Cock crow.) Jehu did not march more furiously toward
Jzreell, then Peter did toward Hell; 2. king. 9.20.
as if he had received the posting commission, to salute no man by the way, and
as if he had vowed, not to swallow his spittle, before he had dyued as deep as
he could, into the botomlesse pit; Sic sic iuuat ire sub vmbras.
are not these words of the Prophecy, as heavy (in their kind*) as the words
of the charge? And yet, as the Queen of the South, would not believe, what was
told her of Solomon, till she had seen it with her eyes, but lo then she
said; the one half was not told her: so, a man would not believe this
Prophecye, and yet lo! the one half is not told you, for the least part of
his sin was bare denying; from thence he proceeded to swearing; yea from
thence to cursinge, and that upon small occasions: Satan not contented with a
bare denial, labors by all means, to make him two-folde more the child of
hell, then himself. Math. 23.15. Prevention.


Yet was this no sin against the holy Ghost (as the merciless Nouations
dreamed, who held every gross sin, committed by a Christian, to be the sin
against the holy Ghost, and therefore to such as so fell, (though they testified
never so great repentance, yet) they would not yield the privileges of the
Church; nor communicate with them in the participation of the blessed
Sacraments:) Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 42.
for the Apostle says, first, this sin, is a known sin, yea a known
sinfullnesse; Heb. 10.26.
such was not Peter's; for though he had heard Christ say, 1. Witting.
he that denies me before men, him will I deny before my father which is in
heaven; Math. 10.23.
yea and in particular, told Peter, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me
thryce; yet the holy Ghost witnesses, that he had forgotte this; and therefore,
as he gave comfort to those that had betrayed, and denied Christ, in the
presence of Pylat, that through ignorance they did it; Act. 3.17.
so may he take the like comfort to himself, in the like sin, 2. Willing.
that he did it ignorauntly and forgetfully. Secondly, the Apostle says, that
is a willing sin, a sin without cause; Sine vlla causa, aut causae specie,
aliquid facere. Bez.
yea, this is a despightfull, and malicious sin, a crucifying again of the
son of God, and making a mock of him: Heb. 6.6.
whereas alas Peter would, and would not; Voluit, noluit. Bucer. in Hom. 9.
page 325.
the present danger, and fear of death, 3. Malicious.
extorted these Oaths, and drew these execrations from Peter: his tears did
sufficiently witness, that he could truly protest with Paul, he did not
allow, that which he did; Romans 7 15.
and therefore might with comfort, look toward the mercie-seate, for sin
hurts not if it do displease us. Peccata non nocent, si non placent. Hiero.
General.
Thirdly, the Apostle says, that this sin is not a particular lapse but a
general prolapse and total Apostasy, an utter falling away; (...)
Prolab^ntes. prolapsus.
it is not like a particular ill distemperature (...).
of some one humor, in the body, but as a general ill disposition of the
whole body: (...). D. Denison Sermon at the Cross.
this is an utter falling away from all grace, a renouncing of all Religion,
and a very congeries of all abominations: such was not Peter's sin, for his
Master had prayed for him, that his faith should not fail; Luk 22.32.
the word in the original, signifies an utter failing, or a failing
altogether, neither is it to be referred to the time, but the thing, that
should not fail. Non dicit simpliciter, (...), sed (...), nec refertur ad
tempus s^d ad rem Zanch. mi c. lib. 2 cap 3. page 148.
So that Peter's faith was moved, but not removed; shaken, but not shaken off;
he denied Christ with his mouth, but believed in him with his heart: Mota, non
amota. con^ussa, sed no^ excussa, negauit ore, sed tenuit cord. Tertul.
Peter is like the Church, that said of her-selfe, she slept, but her heart
waked: Cant. 5.2.
that was but a slumber, like Eutichus (...). Septu.
of whom S. Paul said; There is life in him, though he seem dead: Act. 20.10.
that was but a trance; and in deed, such spiritual traunces and apoplexies,
the best of Gods Children are subject unto, to draw the breath of spiritual
life so inwradly, that even to themselves, and others, they seem dead. And
lastly, he is like a Tree in Winter, which by the barrennes of the boughs, and
dryness of the bark, seems dead, yet has life in the Root: the spirit of
the temptor, like a mighty Northern wind, had blasted, and blown away the
leaves of Peter's cheerful and bold confession; but life was in the root,
says remained in the heart. (...). Chrisost. in Luc. 22.


But though this was no sin against the holy Ghost, it was a fearful
proceeding toward that sin; and how far he would have gone, if he had
been let alone, Admonition.
the searcher of hearts knows; and therefore a fair warning this is unto
all, that no man presume of the like Grace, but every man cut off sin betime,
and destroy it whilst it is in the blossom: no man is hardened at the first,
but one sin draws on another; and as the Psalm ^ says, Men fall from one
mischief to another: and as we see a small Spring at the first runs not
far, but becomes a great Stream, breaks down banckes, and carries all
irresistable before it: so in the inundation of sin, the beginning is small;
but if the current be not stopped, in the end it will become violent, break
down the banckes of Gods threatninges, and carry a man irresistably into
destruction. Judas was first a dissembler, Mar. 14.5.
then a thief, John. 12.6.
then a liar Math 26.25.
then a traitor, Luke 22.48.
then a cursed reprobate: Math. 2.57.
Peter, first a presumer, then a denyer, then a swearer, and then a curser; and
if his Master had not looked upon him, God knows what he would have been
next: no man comes to the height of misery at first, Nemo repent fit miser.
wherefore, If through weakness we sin, (as no man lives and sins not,)
yet let us not sleep in our sin, nor suffer the temples of our heads, to
take any rest, till by repentance, we be reconciled unto God, and have a
blessed Quietus est, sealed to our souls, and infallibly witnessed by Gods
good spirit.

Lastly, here we see spiritual pride and arrogancy fearfully corrected,
Instruction.
to teach us all to walk in humility with God, Michah. 6 8.
yea suspecting our selves, to cleave fast unto God, praying heartily, that he
lead us not into temptation; Luke 22.40.
great was the pride and arrogance of Peter, both in regard of his fellow
Apostles, and Romayne power, yea in regard of Christ, and God him self: Christ
told all them, All ye shall be offended with me this night, Math. 26.33.
Peter replied, Though all men be offended, yet will I never be offended: Math.
26.33.
Herein he exalted himself above his Colleagues, yea above all men: the
Romans sent to apprehend Christ, Peter drew forth his sword, Math. 26.51.
and exalted himself against Gods ordinance; Romans 13 2.
Christ told him plainly, that he should deny him, Peter said he would rather
die with him, Math. 26.35.
and herein exalted himself against Christ, and contradicted him; yea when
Christ asked him, shall not I drink of the cup, which my Father has given
me? John. 18.11.
he plainly intimated that in seeking to save Christ from his passion, he
exalted himself against God, as if he were wyser then God, to find out
another way of redemption, then he had appointed: Supra Deum patrem extulit, in
hoc, quod resistit voluntati eius. Brent. de pass full. 695.
and therefore most just with God, that of an egregious presumer, he should
become a most disperate denyer; Ex egregio presumptore, creber negator
effectus. August. Epist. 120.
and as he lifted up himself, so to let him take the greater fall, and that,
first for his own good, for as Paul delivered the incestious Corinthian to
Satan, for the destruction of his flesh, and saving of his spirit: 1. Cor. 5.5.
and Himeneus and Alexander to Satan, that he might learn not to blaspheme;
1. Tim. 1.20.
so God let this man fall, for the destruction of his carnal presumption, and
that he might learn David's lesson, not to lift up his horn on high, 1. Use.
no more to speak presumptuously, nor suffer arrogance to proceed out of his
mouth, yea how good a scholar herein he was, the story of the gospel
witnesses; for when our Savior after his resurrection, was pleased, to renew
Peter's pastoral commission, and to restore him from whence he had fallen, by a
triple denial; by making a triple confession, he asked him, Peter love thou
me? John. 21.15.
yea, and as it were purposely to try, whether he knew himself any more, or
would compare any more he propounded the question comparatively* Peter, love
thou me more then these? But Peter had paid for his comparisons, he had done
with them; Priori periculo doctus causius respondet. Enian. Sa. in loc.
if he had asked him such a question at his last Supper, he had had a ready
comparatiue Answer; Yea Lord, I love thee more then these, and more then all
men: But now mark how humbly, and warily he answers, Non iam se prefert
caeteris. Toll. in loc.
Lord thou know that I love thee; he has learned never to prefer
himself before others again: yea, when Christ asked him the third time, the
Evangelist says, Peter was sorry, as having learned that Christ knew him
better then himself, Re ipsa experius not inrem se Christo quam sibiipsi. Musc.
and as afraid that his own heart deceived him again, he answered with
tears; Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I do love thee: So
that he might well confess to Gods glory with David, and say, Before I fell, I
went wrong, and presumed of that which was not in me; but now I have learned to
know my self.

Secondly, 2. Use.
this is chronicled for the good of all Gods people, to the end of the world;
for at his cost, we may all learn how great the wretchedness of man's nature
is, and that there is no sin we can presume we shall not fall into, if God
leave us to our selves; for, did Peter, that had been with Christ, heard his
doctrine, and seen his Miracles? Did Peter, that had made such an excellent
confession of Christ; and (as it were) tasted the joys of heaven upon the holy
mount? did Peter, a Cephas, a prime Apostle, a pillar in the church, did Peter,
(as it were) the bel-weather of Gods flock, who had protested, he would rather
dye with Christ, then deny him? Did, he I say, in so short a time upon so
small occasion, not only deny, but forswear his master? Then let no man be
high minded, but fear; Romans 11.20.
he that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall; 1* Cor. 10.12.
yea every man work out his salvation with fear and trembling, Phil 2.12.
cleaving fast unto God, and praying him, not to lead him into temptation;
Math. 6.13.
Peter has fallen, let others beware: Cadit Petrus vt reliqui caueant. Hugo.
in locum.
let not the fall of the greater, be the imitation of the less: but the fall
of the greater, the fear of the lesser. Non sit lapsus matorum, imitatio
minorum^ sed casus maiorum, sit timor minorum. Augu. in ps. 51. 2. Means.


The second internal means of his repentance was his wayinge and considering
with himself; for so (in most translations) it is by S. Marcke added, Mar. 14.
vit.
(and waying that with himself) as the careless banckrupt, who being privy to
the weakness of his estate and meaning to break, he borrows of every one
that will lend, and never considers, how to repay it again; or selling his
wares does not waygh them, but deliver at random: so Peter in sinning, runs
in debt unto God, and never once thinks or considers with himself, how it
shall be satisfied; and delivers his sins in gross, as fast as any one came
to be served; but now at the last he begins to weigh and ponder things; and
laying in the one end of the balance, his Masters Prophecy, and the
fulfilling thereof; he found them to carry weight, yea to be as heavy as Lead;
but laying in the other end, his own Promise, and the performance thereof, he
finds it as light as the wind, yea lighter then vanity it self, and most
worthy of the impression of Belthashars Emblem, Thou art weighed in the
Ballaunce, and art found too light; Dan. 5.27. Doct.
and therefore, he went out, and wept bitterly.

Which teaches us how necessary and profitable a thing it is for men to think
and consider with themselves, what God commands, promises, threatens,
rewards, and punishes: and therewith to weigh and ponder our own words,
actions, and behavior, that finding them too light, with Peter we may be
sorry; and with David, make haste to amend; as he said, J considered my ways,
and made haste to keep thy Commandments: but seeing this is not in the
letter of my Text, no nor in the original at all, I will pass it over, and
come to the Testification of his repentance; which is twofold.

1. Testificatio^ of his repentance.
First, (He went out,) if Peter had not been forewarned of the frailty of his
nature, and plainly told, and foretold of his sin, I should have commended
him much for his piety, and honest affection, in following into the
Highpriests Hall, as earnestly desiring to see, what the issue would be, and
what would become of his Master: but seeing he was forewarned and foretold,
and had made himself the more noted, by being such a stickler in his Masters
quarrel, and cutting off one of the high Pristes servants cares; John. 18.10.
he is much to be condemned, that he would so rashly offer and expose
himself, to such violent occasions of sin, and temptations thereunto, oh why
rather did he not fly with his fellows, or hide himself close in some secret
place, til the storm should be ouerpast? Neither do I altogether commend
him for his going out, for if his heart were truly smitten with sorrow, and
remorse for his sin, why did he not make amends, by public confession? Why
does he not in an holy zeal, where and before whom he had denied, there
testify his repentance? Has he sinned in public, and does he run out at
doors to sorrow in private? Oh it had been much more valiant, to have
confessed, where he had denied; and repented, where he had sinned. Fecisset
constantius et fortius, si quo loco peccauerat, eodem paenitentiam egisset.
Mald.
But we see his fear is not altogether over yet: Verisimile Petrum metu
egressum, quia flere coram testibus non audebat. Calu. in Math.
his Repentance is true, but weak; yea the best virtues of Gods Saints, are
stained with some wantes, even their righteousness as a menstrous Cloth: Esaias.
64.6.
and therefore though S. Paul say truly, that Godly sorrow causes repentance,
not to be repented of; 2. Cor. 7.10. Ob. Sol.
yet in some sense I may say, Peter's sorrow brought forth such a repentance,
as when he had repented, he might well repent thereof; because he had not
perfectly repented in his former repentance, for, He went out.

Some say, this was to avoid all appearaunce of hypocrisy. I answer, that as
no sin is more odious to God, or hateful to Gods people, that worship him
in spirit and truth, then hypocrisy, and therefore most carefully avoided by
David, who caused his Bed and Couch to swim with tears: Psalm. 6.6.
And Ezekiah (though he could not go out of the room, yet) be turned his
face to the wall, and wept sore; Esaias. 38.2.
Whereas Hipocrites, never weep but in public; but then they have most
tears at command, when they have most witnesses thereof: Vt sterent oculos
erudiere suos, addidit et lachrymas tanquam mundasset et illas Ovid
Yet sometimes to weep in public, is no note of hypocrisy: are tears the
Preachers praise? Lachrymae auduorum sint lauds tua. Jerome: and are they not
also the hearers praise? yes assuredly, and a sweet argument, as God witnessed
of Josiah, that their hearts do melt; as when the Congregation is assembled to
Preaching or Prayer, and specially in time of some great humiliation; as in the
Ninevites fast: or of the abundance of a sorrowful spirit, the eyes gush out;
as in Hannah, who poured out her soul before the Lord. 1. Sam. 1.15.
Oh then, that Peter had gone so through-stitch with his Repentance, that as
it is recorded, that in the Pharisees house, even before all that sat at Table
with him, a Woman in sorrow for her sins, did wash his feet with tears;
Luk* 7.38.
so it might have been recorded, that in the High-priestes house, there was a
man, an Apostle, yea Peter, who in true sorrow, for denying his Master before
them all, did weep bitterly before them all: but alas, herein he failed,
through fear, he sinned publicly, and is afraid to repent publickely; so,
he went out.

1. Use.
Whose example, affoordeth great consolation, seeing God is well pleased with
the poor endeauours, and desires; the lame and halting obedience of his
children, so that, what they do, be in truth: and also is a fair warning and
admonition, that when we have done any thing, Use.
(and as we conceive in best manner) yet still, to suspect some want, and to
confess, we are but unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. Serui inutiles sumus.
we either, have not done what we ought, or not in that manner we ought; for
Peter went out to weep.

Yet find we here, some good, some sweet, for Peter's commendation, and our
imitation: first, that Peter delayeth not, 1. Commend.
nor deferreth not his repentance, he stays not till his Master be
condemned and executed, but so soon as ever God stroke his heart with remorse,
he made haste into some convenient place, where he might pour out his soul,
and his tears unto God: Doct.
and thereby teaches us, with all speed, to put holy motions in effect; pray,
when God moves thee; read, when God moves thee; repent, when God moves thee;
give alms, when God moves thee: quench not, check not, grieve not the
spirit; with Cras, cras, thou know not, whether ever God will move thee any
more; or at least, it may cost thee dear to recover such motions again:
wherefore whilst it is called to day, harden not your hearts; but let every
soul march valiently, when God sounds and stryketh the drum.

The Reason hereof is, Reason.
because sin and the allurements thereof, do never cleave so fast, as when
men bethink, to part from them; so that he that is not fit to day, without
the great mercy of God, will be less fit to morrow; Qui non est body, cras
minus aptus crit.
wherefore take no day with God, but as Abraham's servant bad Laban and Bethuell,
hinder me not: Genesis 24.56.
and the blind man in the Gospel, cast away his Cloak when Christ called him:
Mar. 10 50.
so let us say to father, mother, husband, wife, or friend, hinder me not: yea
cast away all hindrances, Heb. 12.1.
though as pleasant, profitable, and dear unto us, as right hand, or right
eye; Math 5 29.
yea as Zache came down hastily to entertain Christ; Luke 19.6.
and Lot did escape for his life, out of Sodom; Genesis 19.17
and (as Paul bids) let us flee 1. Tim. 6.7.
from our sins, and make even all the speed we possibly can, to leave our
sins, when God calls and moves.

But now if we make Application to our selves, Application.
Oh Lord how many are there, who hearing their sins boldly and plainly
reproved, and their Consciences thereof powerfully convicted, that during the
hearing of the Word, they have been at least (as Agrippa said to Paul) almost
persuaded, Act. 26.28.
to leave their swearing, lying, drinking, whoring; yea, how many are there,
who when the hand of God is heavy upon them in sickness, will with tears
confess their sins, and promise great reformation; but are no sooner
recovered, but all their good motions vanish like a mornings deaw: Hose. 6.4.
all their almostes come to nothing at all, they return to their former
courses, as the Dog to hivomite; 2. Pet. 2.22.
they live, but their sick repentance is dead; yea even repent, of that their
repentance: Jpsius paenitentiae agunt paenitentiam. Ambros. de paenit. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
so did not Peter, the Wax was warm, and he put too the Seal; the Iron was
hot, and he stroke; God gave a good motion, and he presently put it in
execution; so, He went out.

2 Commend.
The second thing commendable in Peter, is, that finding such great occasions
and temptations, whereby he had been drawn to sin, in the High-priestes Hal,
he staieth no longer there, but went out; yea though our Evangelist use a word
of ordinary and mild signification; yet S. Mark uses a more emphaticall
word, signifying, to rush out with haste, or with a speedy violence: he came
in peakingly, and by leave and leisure; but he goes out with a witness, as if
he would have broken down the door, if it had been shut against him.

Doct.
Whereby we learn, that it is a singular testimony of true Repentance, for a
man to hate, and avoid all the means and occasions of sin; the Proverb is,
The burnt Child, will beware of the Fire: We see by experience, the Horse will
not be forced to the Ditch, where he has been plunged; and the Dog will not
come near, nor abide the man, that has beat him: the Bird will come no more
to the shrape, that has once been in the Net; the Fish will bite no more,
that has been once wounded with Hook; yea, the Mariner that has once
suffered ship wrack, will not only avoid those Rocks and Sands, but is
also afraid even in greatest calmes: Tranquillas etiam naufragus horret.
aquas. Ovid.
Now amongst all the occasions of sin, there is none more dangerous then
evil company; for can a man take Coals in his bosom, and not be burnt? or
handle Pitch, and not be defiled? or fly with Ostriges and Pellicanes, and not
grow wild? or dwell in the Tents of Wickedness, and not learn to be Wicked?
Assuredly, there is no spedier conjunction betwixt Fire and Tow, Tinder or
Gunpowder, or any other such combustible matter, then there is betwixt our
corrupt Nature and Sin, upon the least occasion, unless the grace of God do
prevent it; which thing the true penitent, by woeful experience finding, as God
bids, Come out; so with Peter, they run out, and come no more amongst
such, as it is a thousand to one, he shall do no good unto, but take much hurt
from. Rerum natura sic est, vt quoties bonus malo coniungitur, non ex bono
malus oritur sed ex malo bonus contaminetur, Chrysostom.
So much for the first Testification of his Repentance.

(And wept bitterly.) Wherein two things are to be considered, viz. first, his
Weeping; second, the manner how, (Bitterly.) For the first, it is said, ( That
he wept) or, (as the word signifies) he shed tears abundantly. Lachrymor,
fleo, quasi fluo.
David had so long wept for his fins, 2. Tectificatio^ of repentance.
and mingled his drink with tears, that his moisture was turned into the
drought of Summer, and his very boanes burnt like an hearth: Psalm. 102.3.9.
Peter begins but now to weep for his sins, but his drought is turned
into the moisture of Winter; the Clouds return after the rain; Eccles. 12.3.
one shower of tears follows another, as if his eyes were fountains of
brine, so he wept, as if with Niobe he would transform himself into a Rock,
and become a right Peter indeed; or as having lost the power of Baptism in
Water, he would now be baptized in a flood of tears.

When Christ was borne, it was a joyful time, and there was great mirth;
Simeon sung, and Annah sung, yea the Angels of Heaven sung, and bade the
Shepheardes sing, for they brought them tydinges of great joy, which should be
to all the people: Luke 2.10.13.
but when Christ suffered, it was a doleful time, and there was much weeping;
Christ himself wept, Luke 19.41.
yea, and prayed with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save
him from death: Heb. 5.7.
the Disciples, they wept; Mar 16.10.
the Daughters of Jerusalem, they wept; Luke 23.27.
the Sun was darckned, and that wept; Luke 23 45.
the Temple rent it Veil, and that wept: the Stones were cloven asunder, and
they wept; Math. 27.51.
yea, all senseles creatures in their kinds did lament the passion of their
maker: but Peter wept bitterly: others wept chiefly for Christ; but Peter
chiefly for himself, as his Master counseled, Weep not for me, but weep
for your selves: Luke 23.28.
Peter wept in passion, others wept but in compassion: nay, herein was Peter's
compassion true, because it began at himself, for howsoever, it is good to
pity others, and to wipe away tears from their eyes with the sponge of
compassion; as the Apostle bids, weep with them that weep; Romans 12.15.
yet the greatest compassion, and best pleasing unto God, is for a man to have
pity on himself, as the wiseman bids: Eccle. 30.23.
and to open his own heart vein, with the lance of co^punction; how could
Peter have had pity on his Master, if he had had none of himself? Wherefore
he begins right; first, for himself, and his own sins, he wept bitterly.
Which thing, he well learned from his Cock* which by clapping his wings to
his own sides, first wakened himself, and then Peter.

There are three things required to make the love of Christ perfect in us: 1
Truth: 2. Wisdom: 3. Courage: Ad perfectam dei dilectione tria requiruntur,
1. Veritas, 2. Prudentia, 3. Fortitudo. Ferus de pass. page 277.
for so says the Law, Thou shast love the Lord thy God, 1. with all thine
Heart, 1. truly: 2. With all thy Soul, 1. wisely: 3. with all thy Strength,
Deuteronomy 65.
1. valiantly, and courageously: when Peter said to his Master, pity thy
self, this shall not be unto thee; Mat. 16.22.23.
he loved him truly, but not wisely, therefore his Master rebuked him, Get
thee behynd me Satan: When he put up his sword and followed Christ; Math.
26.58.
he loved him truly and wisely (having learned not to hinder, but to imitate,)
Vera est prudentia passione non impedire. sed etiam imitari.
but he loved him not valiantly, he denied his Master, and wept, that his love
was no perfecter: but after his resurrection, by his threefold confession,
John. 21.17.
he declared, that he had attained the third degree of perfection in love, he
loved him, as valiantly, as he did truly, and wisely: some (I know not in what
besotted charity, or prepostrous Zeal) have gone about to excuse, or (at
least) extenuate Peter's fault; that he might say, he knew not the ^a; for he
knew and had confessed him to be God: Nescio hominem, quia scio ^eum Hill. ^mb
Copus. vide Iuel defense. Apolog. page 665.
but (says another) we must take heed, we do not so iustifye the Apostle, as
we condemn Christ of a lie, who was the truth it self; for he told Peter,
thou shall deny (Me) he says not, my manhood, but (Me.) Me negabis, non
hominem. Heiron.
Christ knew best, that he would do, and Peter knew next that he had done; and
in the guilt of a great sin wept bitterly, and with his tears, does
sufficiently reprehend those that would defend him. Lachrymis, suos defensore^
arguit. August Exposit. in Ps. 140. et tract. in Johann 66.


It is observed by some, that Peter wept, but spoke not a word; and indeed, it
may seem strange, for Daui^ confessed, 2. Sam 12.13
the Mariners cried, Jonah. 1.14.
and the Publicane prayed, God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13.
and Peter do thou hold thy peace, thou that criedst so earnestly to Christ,
when but thy body was in danger of drowning? Master save me: do thou now
hold thy peace, when as thy soul is in danger of destroying? What though he
that made the heart and tongue understand the language of both alike; and is as
near to our reins as our lips, the voice of the one being no more audible to
him that hears without ears, then the intention of the other? Has the
tongue therefore immunitie from doing that homage to the Lord, which he has
enjoined it? No verily, as we must believe with the heart, so must we make
confession with the mouth; Romans 10.1^.
as Gods priests, were appointed to weep betwixt the Porch and Altar, even in
the Body and Navel of the Church; so also to speak, spare thy people, o Lord:
Joel. 2.17.
Wherefore let us learn, (specially in the house of prayer) to pray with David,
Lord open our mouths, and our lips shall show forth thy praise: Psalm. 51.15.
but of Peter's silence, at this time there may be these three Reasons rendered.

First reason of Peter's silence.
First, the Greatness of his Grief; which was such, as stopped the course of
his speech, Curae leaves loquuntur. Senec.
now to remember, upon so small an occasion, in so short a time, to deny, yea
and forswear his loving Master; yea, his blessed Savior. Oh Lord, how it
astonished him! so as for the time, he could not possibly speak, but weep.

2. Reason.
Secondly, the Greatness of his Shame for his sin; which was such, as he was
ashamed to speak of it unto God or men; but it is no shame to weep for that
sin, which it is a shame to confess: Been fleuit, et tacuit, lauat enim
lachryma delictum, quod voce pudorest, confiteri. Amb.
Wherefore Peter does well to weep, and hold his peace.

Thirdly, the Greatness of his Sin required great intercession for pardon;
wherefore he sends not messengers of ordinary nature, as a few penitent
words, J have sinned, 3. Reason.
said Pharaoh and Saul;) but he dispatcheth his Tears as his Ambassadors,
Mittit legatos lachrymas. Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 7.
that (if it were possible) before the cry of his sin should be heard in the
high Court of Heaven, his Tears might pray and plead for pardon: where, of all
Messengers, they are most gracious, being (as one says) Barn. in Cantic.
the Blood of the soul, and Wine of the Angels: which, flowing from the
Wine Press of a bruised and contrite spirit, are more forcible to persuade God,
then all the Eloquence, then all the Rhetoric in the world; (...). Cypr.
therefore says God to Ezekiah, J have seen thy Tears: Esaias. 38.5.
as if these Ambassadors can no sooner appear, but Gods gracious Eye is upon
them. Yea David says, God heard the voice of his weeping: Psalm. 6.8.
whereupon one demands this Question, What should the meaning of this be,
trow you? Have Tears Tongues, I marvel; or can they speak, that they may be
heard? and returns this Answer; The cloud-cleauing Thunder of the Almighty,
cannot make such a rattling sound, and roaring noise in the ears of man, as our
Tears do, in the ears of God: D. Playf. Sermon. mean in mourning. page 19.
so truly, the Heathen man has said, they are weighty words. Interdu^
lachrymae, pondera vocis habent. Ovid. de Pont. lib. 3. Eleg. 1.


It is no disgrace then (as the Heathen man imagined) Nihil viro turpius
muliebri fletu. Natt. de immortal* anim. lib. 1.
for a man to weep; nay, how many Examples have we in the word, of men of
great courage and valor, as David, Ezekiah, Josiah, Manasses, Peter, and
others, who could hardly for any wordly occasion, no not for fear of death,
have wrung forth one Tear; yet for their sins, have wept most bitterly, and
plentifully, as if they had a certain pleasure in weeping, Est piis, quaedam
etiam flendi voluptas. Amb. de obit. valent.
and had tears at command.

Yet must I not thus commend all manner of tears, without difference, for the
Apostle says, there is a worldly sorrow, which causes death, 2. Cor. 7.10.
Cayn, Saul, and Judas, were thus sorry, yea Esau, sought the blessing with
tears, yet found no place to repentance, Heb. 12.17.
wherefore, if we would have our tears acceptable unto God, and put into his
bottle, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 56.8.
and have them comfortably wiped from our eyes, Reu. 21.4.
they must be faithful, and true, and declared to the world to be so, by
bringing fourth fruits worthy of amendment of life; Nihil prosunt lamenta*
vbi explicantur peccata. Aug.
as Peter, who for the world, would not so sin again; Yea was ever after
this time, so far from boasting of himself, that he would never compare with
any man; John. 21.15.
so far from denying his Master, that he did most boldly confess him and
his truth, to the beards of his greatest enemies, even when their hands, and
spear, did reake with his blood; Act. 2.23.
and so of a denyer, was made a pastor; by his tongue to govern others, Alios
regen. dos accepit, qui prius se no^ rexit. Amb.
who could not govern his own:

Exhortation.
Let us not then mock God, with a counterfeit repentance, Jrrisor est, non
vere paenitens, qui adhuc agit, quod peniteat. Bara. medit.
carrying sin in one hand, and sorrow in another; with tears washing away
our former sins, and yet daily defyling our selves, with the filth thereof;
but let us become new Creatures, of proud, humble; of hurtful, harmeles; of
cruel, meek; of Woolues, Lambs; of Adulterers, chaste livers; of Drunckerds,
sober men; of swearers, reverent speakers; of despysers, embracers; of scoffers
and hators of Gods truth, friends and lovers: then shall God be glorified, the
devil confounded, the world amazed, and our salvation exceedingly furthered,
Lapsus sanctorum vtilis est. Amb. comment. in Luc. lib. 10. audeo dicere,
superbis vtile esse cadere in aliquod apertu^ peccatum, vnde sibi displiceant.
August. de ciuti. lib. 14. c. 13
though with Peter we have sinned, if with him, we have truly wept and
repented.

(Bitterly.) This word declares the manner of Peter's weeping, viz. having
greiuously sinned, he now as greatly lamented them: which teaches us, that
true repentance is a bitter, yea and a paynefull thing, the pains of whipping
the body, as the Flagellants do, or of launcing it with knives, as the
Priests of Baa did; Doct.
or of sicknesses, ach, famine; are not comparable to the pains of true
repentance; which thing, the titles and Epithites thereof do declare: the
Prophet calls it a renting of the heart; Joel. 2.13.
what a pain is it to have the heart rent, and (as it were) racked upon
tenter-hookes, and torn with grypes and conuulsions? And David says a man's
heart, must be contryte and broken, Psa. 51.19.
even (as it were) beaten to powder, with Godly sorrow: the Grecians call it,
by such a word as signifies, a careful grief, and sorrow of heart, the
Latins call it, by such a word as signifies, pain or torment; Paenitentia, a
paena: paenitet, quem paena tenet. August.
Examples of true penitentes, show no less: it is said of David, that his
heart did smite him, or scourge him: 2. Sam. 24.10
A fit metaphore to express the nature of Repentance; which is the very
scourge of the soul. Flagellum animae. D. Denison of sin against ye holy
Ghost page 63.
In what pain was the Prophet, when he complained, My leanness, my leanness,
woe is me? Esaias. 24.16.
And that other Prophet, when he complained, My belly, my belly; I am payned
even at my very heart, mine heart is troubled within me, J can not be still.
Ierom. 4.19.
And to conclude with our own Example, in what pain was Peter, when (as if
all were turned into Gall or Worme-wood) he wept bitterly?

The Reason of this Doctrine, is worthy our consideration; which is, because in
Repentance, Reason.
the spirit is wounded with the lively sense and apprehension of Gods wrath
against sin, which in other Plagues of the body it is not; and therefore in
greatest distemperatures of the body, when the Bones are broken, Loins filled
with a sore Disease, Wounds stincke and are corrupt, Psalm 38.5.
and that a man may truly say with him in the Comedy; Mine Heart is sick, my
Reins are sick, my Spleen is sick, my Liver is sick, and all other parts
are out of frame; Cor dolet, renes dolent. Plaut.
yet if a man have peace with God, his Spirit will bear his infirmities: but
if the Soul be sick, and the Spirit it self wounded, who can bear it? Prou.
18.14.
These are the only pains, which are like the pains of Hell, whence the
Proverb came; That good men have their Hell in this life; meaning, that the
pains of Repentance, are so smart unto them, that it differs many times very
little, from the Plagues of the other life: Which doctrine thus confirmed,
yields two very necessary uses.

First, First use.
it may serve to reform the erroneous Judgments of many, concerning
Repentance. Some think, that every Sorrow is Repentance; but then should
Worldlinges repent. Some think every Confession, to be Repentance: then should
Pharaoh and Saul repent; some think every weeping, repentance, M. Dent. Ser.
of repent. page 7.
then should Esau repent; some think every little humiliation repentance, then
should Achab repent; some think every good word and promise repentance, then
should most sick men repent; some think to cry God mercy, is repentance;
then should every Fool repent: but if we remember what has been said, true
Repentance is more then the hanging down of the head like a Bulrush, or to
wring out a Tear, or wear Haire-cloth, or from the teeth outward to cry, Lord
have mercy on me, and so away. Oh it is a scourging, a renting, a racking of
the very Soul, and a filling of the Reins with exceeding bitterness, and
grief for sin.

Second use.
Secondly, here is matter of great comfort for the godly, who are perplexed
with the terrors of God, and troubled minds, for sin; that they can truly
say, The pains of Hell came about us: Psalm. 18.5.
Let them remember what Christ has said, Blessed are they that so mourn, for
they shall rejoice: Math. 5.4.
Heaviness shall endure but for a night; Psalm. 30.5.
the time is at hand, when all sighing shall be turned into singing,
lamentation into laughing; All Tears wiped from their eyes: Reu. 21.4.
and those which they have shed, be rewarded with an eternal weight of
comfort and glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.


(Bitterly,) but not immoderately, like Heraclitus, or Niobe; for Nature,
Reason, and Religion, forbid such immoderate weeping: Nature, (as the
Philosophers have observed) has given unto the Eye, twice as many dry Skins
or Filmes, like Sluices, to damme up the course of Tears; as moist humors like
Channels, to let them run forth; but three of these, and six of the other:
Tol. in lib. 2. Aristot. de anima.
Reason, says to much of a thing is naught; Ne quid nimis.
too many droops of sweet honny are not good; Prou. 25.27.
much less too many tears as bitter as wormwood: but Religion goes further,
and forbids Christians to weep, as those that have no hope; 1 Thessalonians. 4.13
so that nature, which teaches all things; reason, which teaches all men; and
Religion, which teaches all Christians; do join together to teach this
lesson, we must weep bitterly but not Immoderatly; for it is the manner, not
the measure; the quality, not the quantity of our tears, which God
respects: yea even three sillables pronounced with one true tear, are more
powrefull with God; Quantum valent tres sillabae, peccaui. Amb.
Then ten thousand confessions, uttered with a flood of detestable,
Detestandae lachrimae, quae non habent modum. Hierom.
hippocritycall, tears:

Lastly, he wept (bitterly) but not desperately, as Esau and Judas did; Peter,
has sinned, and that was the death of his soul, but there was mercy with God,
to reuyue it again, but had he despayred he had descended into hell, forth of
which, there is no Redemption: Some are bold to affirm, that Judas sinned more
in despayring of mercy, then in betraying of his Master; for in this, he did
but chiefly wornge his humanity, and bring upon it that death which his Father
had everlastingly appointed; Act. 4.28.
but in the other, he wronged his deity, as if this sin were greater, then
his infinite mercy could forgive. Iicron. in ps. 108.


The hope of a Christian, is very nicely and fearfully placed betwixt two
extremities; bold presumption, and timorous desperation: only, she is
accompanied with two Sisters to keep her from this Scylla and Charibdis where
so many poor souls suffer shipwreck and overthrow; viz. Faith and Love;
Faith lays hold upon the mercies of God, and keeps from despair: and Love,
teaches to keep the commandments of God, and beware of a sinful and
lycentious life, D. King on Ion. Lect. 27. page 364.
whatsoever then our sin be, let us beware of despair; which (as it were)
binds Gods Arms, and shuts the Door of Gods gracious Indulgencie against
us; and is therefore a wound which can never be cured. Plaga insanabilis.
Apostrophe.


Say we unto Christ, Oh sweet Jesus, thou came to save sinners: 1. Timo. 1.15.
If I were not a sinner, thou could not be my Savior: Thou call all such
as travel and are heavy laden; Math. 11. penult.
and promisest to cast away none that come unto thee: John. 6.37.
Thou did not cast away the These upon the Cross, confessing: Luke 23.41.
nor Matthew sitting at the receipt of Custom: Math. 9.9.
nor the Woman washing thy feet with Tears: Luke 7.38.
nor the Canaanite, begging for her Daughter: Math. 15.28.
nor the Publicane standing a far off: Luke 18.13.
nor Peter denying, nor Paul persecuting, the savior of these Examples; make
me to love thee, and run after thee. Barn. Sermon. in Cantic. 22. in odore horu^
currimus.
Say we unto God; O Lord, thy name is Jehouah, Exodus 3.14.
thou art a God not in show, but in substance: not for a season, but in
continuance: thy nature, is rich in Mercy; Ephe 2 4.
thou art rich in Power, rich in Wisdom, rich in Justice; yea infinitely rich
in whatsoever may be said, thou art: but as thy Mercy is over all thy Works;
Psa. 145 9.
and as the Oil, which covers all Liquors; so is the riches of thy Mercy,
above all other thy Riches: Thy Covenant is, I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed: Genesis 17.7.
thy Promise is, At what time ( Whenever) a sinner ( Whosoever) shall repent
of his sin, ( Whatsoever) thou will forgive and forget it Psalm. 119.49.
Lord remember thy Name, remember thy Nature; remember thy Covenant, remember
thy Promise; for these things have caused me to trust in thee: And though
thou killest me, I will trust in thee Job. 13.15.


Say we to Peter, Oh blessed man, Christ has suffered Satan to give thee the
foil; but he has raised thee he has suffered thee to shame thy self, that
he might crown thee with Glory: thou have sinned, and have sorrowed; thou
denyedst, and have wept bitterly: thou offendedst in thy Tongue and thine Heart
has been rent for it: thy Tears are come up into remembrance with God, and
the guilt and punishment* shame and disgrace of thy sin, are gone with God,
Angels, and men: so long as the World stands, thou shall be honored in the
Church as a chief Apostle: Gall. 2.9.
Now are all Tears wiped from thine eyes; and now thou keep turns with
those Angels, which did joy in thy repentance; yea, art admitted into the
bottomless and bounlesse joys of thy Master, for ever. Non intrabit gaudium
in gaudentes, sed toti gaudentes, in gaudium domini. August. tuan. Conclusion.


To conclude, we have all sinned, some one way, some another; most, many
ways; but few have yet sorrowed and repented: they can weep extremely for
any worldly Cross or Calamity, even as Rachel did for her Children, and would
not be comforted; Math. 2.18
but for their sins, they have no touch, no remorse, no compunction at all;
their hearts are of as invincible hardness as the Adamant, which can neither be
softened with Fire, nor wrought with Hammer: and their eyes as dry as Pumiest
stones: Corda Adamantiua et oculos Pumi ceos. Plant.
nay, I would there were not a generation so far past grace, as in stead of
sorrowing for sins, to glory in them, and to say unto them, as God did to his
Creatures, Increase and multiply; Genesis 1.22.
proclayming, as with a trumpet, their own damnation: well, the night of
ignorance and sin is almost over, Romans 13.12.
yea all time is wel-nigh gone, Reu. 10.6.
the day begins to dawne, the Cocks do crow thick and shrill, Repent,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Mat. 3.2.4.17.
there remains no more but the crow of the last trumpet, which shall be so
loud and shrill, as shall awaken all that sleep in the dust of the Earth,
Esaias. 26.19.
and cause such as would not weep for their sins in this world, to weep and
wail, and gnash their teeth in hell for ever. Math. 22.13.


Were I then, as happy as Solomon to have whatsoever I would ask, 1. King.
3.5.
this is the greatest blessing which I would or could desire for us all, that
with the crowing of the Cock this day, he would be pleased graciously to look
upon us, and so effectually to touch our souls with his holy spirit, that from
them might flow ryuers of tears of true repentannce, that so sorrowing with
Peter, we might be forgiven, and for ever comforted with him: Which God, for
his infinite mercy grant unto us all, Amen.

FINIS.

