Judah must into Captivity. SIX SERMONS On IEREM. 7. 16. LATELY PREACHED in
the Cathedral Church of Christ in CANTERBVRIE, and elsewhere, by Thomas
Iackson Doctor in Divinity, and one of the Prebends of the said Church.

1. COR. 10. 6. (...).

AUGUST: Illa est poena peccati justissima, ut amittat unusquisque illud, quo
been uti noluit, cum sine ulla difficultate posset, si vellet; id est, ut qui
sciens recta, non facit, amittat scire quid rectum sit; and qui rectum facere
cum posset, noluit, amittat posse, cum velit.

Optimum, aliena frui insania.

LONDON, Printed by I. Haviland for Godfrey Emondson and Nicholas Vavasour, and
are to be sold at their shop at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.
1622.

A GENERAL VIEW of the principal Doctrines, raised, confirmed, illustrated,
objections removed, questions answered, Uses made; with Application of all, to
these times, for the benefit of Gods children.








TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND MINE Honorable friend, Sir ISACK SYDLEY, Knight
Baronet, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be multiplied.
WOrthy Sir, I can truly say, my greatest, and (in effect) only joy, in this
world, is, either to be preaching, or preparing for it; fishing, or mending my
net. That which to many is a great pain and wearisomnesse, is to me greatest
pleasure and content. I find that saying of Saint Augustine most true; Wherein
a man delights there is no labor; or, that labor is loved In eo quod
amatur, aut non (...); aut labor ipse amatur. August.
. It is a true saying, that Printing is a kind of Preaching Ambo verbum
praedi^ion, hic quidem scripto, ille vero voce. Clem. Alex. Stromat. lib. 1.
; and though not Euangelizo, manu, and script^^^^e. Reinold. praesat. in lib.
de Romans Eccles. Idolat.
so plausible and effectual to persuade; (wanting the habit and gesture of a
living man, the life of Oratorie Solet acceptior esse sermo vivus, qua^
scriptus. Bern.
) yet is it both of larger extent, (seeing a man may preach to more with his
pen, than he can with his tongue, and be further heard out of the Press,
than the Pulpit) the matter delivered more memorable, (affording greater leave
to pause and consider) and also of longer continuance; for a dead man may live
in his books, and by them preach to the living, though unborne, when he dies.
I would account it a double happiness, if I could do good both ways, and
could truly say with that blessed and prime Apostle, I think it meet, as long
as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up: Moreover I will endeavor, that you
may be able, after my decease, to have these things always in remembrance 2
Pet. 1. 13.
. Oh, now is the time (if ever) for Ministers of the Gospel instantly to
preach the Word 2 Timothy 4. 2.
; and now (if ever) to press the practice of repentance: Gods judgments are
abroad in the world Esaias. ^^. 9.
, and can no other way be prevented Matthew. 3. 7, 8. Luke 13. 5.
.

As I am bound by mine office to preach the word, (and woe be to me if I do it
not 1 Cor. 9. 16.
) so has my loving master (whom I have now served, in four full
apprentiships) well deserved, that I should faithfully lay out, and trade with
such gifts, as he has committed to my trust 1 Timothy 1. 11.
; as may be for his greatest advantage Matthew. 25. 27.
.

The desire of my soul, is (the evening of my life drawing on, and the
shadows thereof stretching out Ierem. 6. 4.
) not only to be found well doing Matthew. 24. 46.
; and to have my gray hairs a Crown, being found in the way of virtue Prove.
16. 31.
; but that I may bring forth more fruit in mine age Psalm. 92. 14.
; and my last works be more than the first Rev. 2. 19.
; that when I shall lay down this earthly Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1. 14.
, (whose Keepers begin to tremble Eccles. 12. 3.
) and shall come to render an account of my Stewardship Luke 16. 2.
, I may receive such commendation and reward, as he has graciously promised
Luke 19. 17.
.

I do humbly commend these few Sermons to your Worship, as a supply of my
needful and allowable absence Alterius Ecclesia necessitatibus evocatus,
minime vobis solitum studium dependisse videor. Amb. Sermon. 28.
, from that part of the Church, to which my goodwill is, not only to deal the
Gospel of God, but even mine own soul also 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
. Accept them, both as a fruit of my love, to the good things I have observed
in you, and desire the increase of; and also, as a testification of my service,
and thankfulness, for all such manifold courtesies and encouragements, as I
have received from your worthy self, and the rest of your Christian and
religious family Read them at your leisure, regard, remember, and practice; and
Christ bless your hearing and reading, to the furtherance of your salvation:
to whose blessed direction and protection, I commit you and yours; and remain
ever,

At your Worships command, THOMAS IACKSON.

To the Reader.
CHristian and courteous Reader, how I was affected at the appearance of the
blazing Star Nov. 11. 1618.
; and with the Sermon of that stately tongue of Heaven, and shaking of that
fiery Rod, God and mine own conscience know. What I said of it in my next
Lecture In Christchurch Cant.
(being so justly oceasioned by the sequel of mine ordinary Text Mat. 2. 2.
) they that then heard me can testify (whose memories I helped by reducing the
effects, to these six words; Death, Drought, Dearth, Winds, Wonders, Wars.)
How answerably things have fallen out, may lamentably be read in the face of
Christendom: and how I have ever since endeavored (by handling of penitential
Scriptures) to work Repentance, the only way to prevent eminent and imminent
Judgments, they can best witness, where (by Gods providence) I have exercised
my ministry.

Having lately, in diverse Sermons, handled this excellent portion of Scripture,
out of the Prophet Jeremy. Ier. 7. 16.
(one of those whom God extraordinarily raised after the Captivity of the ten
Tribes, and sent him to Judah and Jerusalem, to reprove them for their sins,
exhort to repentance, admonish them to be warned by the example of their
brethren, else to threaten them with the like Captivity) howsoever they were
delivered to many, yet me thought, the matter does so fitly concern these
days and times, as there arose a great conflict in my bosom, and I could not
have peace till I was resolved, to communicate them further: that (by Gods
blessing) I might help to awaken more out of security, and provoke them, by
fasting and prayer, to make up the hedge and stand in the gap, for the Land,
that he should not destroy it Ezech. 22. 30.
. Thus, by Gods providence, these Sermons are come to thine eyes to read, who
(it may be) wast far off when they were preached by word of mouth. Regard
the matter, and be not offended at the manner, though simple, plain and
popular: a plain iron Key may unlock the door of a golden treasure; the
evidence of the spirit is most seen in plainness 1 Cor. 2. 4.
; the Spiders web is curiously wrought, but unprofitable (...).
; curious delivery well pleases itching ears; my desire is to profit, and to
have the praise of tears, rather than of tongue Lachrymae auditorum sint
lauds tuae. Ierom. ad Nepot.
: though I had never so great leisure, I cannot study for words and phrases: If
I could, yet now I had no leisure; being often, thrice in one week, in the
Pulpit In Chapter Church, and Saint Georges Canterb. Aug. 11. 1622.
. My desire was, rather to work upon the affections than the understanding;
there being much more knowledge than devotion. Our forefathers disease, was
ignorance; ours, impiety; they sick in the brain; but we, at the heart:
therefore I am brief in the Doctrines, and larger in Uses, with Application
and Exhortation.

If it shall please thee to accept them kindly, read them devoutly, censure
them charitably and lovingly, correct such errors, as may have escaped Author,
or Printer, being so far asunder; I shall be encouraged, to communicate some
of my Lectures, wherein I have taken greater pains. But if thou shall read,
with a purpose to find matter of dislike and reproof, I shall forbear to
proceed any further in this kind; a duty neither so directly commanded, nor
has the like blessing promised where it is performed, nor the like woe
threatened where it is omitted; yet I friendly advise thee, reprehend not these,
till thou have published better of thine own Carpere vei noli nostra: vel ede
tua. Martial.
. If otherwise, if, in Cynicall disposition, thou love to speak all such
words as may do hurt Psalm. 52. 4.
, and, like an idle drone, can not afford that others should bring any honey
to the Hive: I leave thee to the judgment of the great day, and only
complain, Many dislike, few do like Vndique (...) adest, undique miu^^ abest.
. Farewell, and help him with thy prayers, who will not spare any pains to
help thee forward in the ways of life and salvation.

From mine house in Christ-Church. Cant. Thomas Iackson.

Judah must into Captivity.
SIX SERMONS LATELY PREAched in the Cathedral Church of Christ in Canterbury,
and else where, by THOMAS IACKSON, Doctor in Divinity, and one of the Prebends
of the said Church.
JEREMY 7. 16. Therefore pray not thou for this people, etc.
BEsides the ordinary and settled Office of teaching Priests, whose lips
preserved knowledge, and the people were to seek the Law at their mouths Mal.
2. 7.
; and who did every Sabbath day preach the Law in their Synagogues Act. 15. 21.
; God extraordinarily raised up others, and sometimes endued those Priests with
extraordinatie revelation, whereby they were able to foreknow, and foreshew
things memorable to come, good or evil, to Gods people or strangers, friends
or enemies; in regard of which excellent gift and faculty, they were called
Prophets: i. foretellers of things to come, or Seers 1 Samuel 9. 9. Amos 7. 12.
: both because God was seen of them in visions and dreams, as God himself
said, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known
unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream Numb. 12. 6.
; and also, because they foresaw things to come: which gift of prophecy was
given in the old Testament, as well as the New; and in both, to women as well
as men; so that there were in both Testaments as well Prophetesses as Prophets,
though they much more rare Only five in the old, and four in the new, or at
most but ten in both, if the blessed Virgin be numbered for one. Dan.
fore-notes, page 44.
. This gift of prophecy in the old Testament, began with the world Luke 1. 70.
, for the first man was a Prophet, (and is registered in the Catalogue Dan. sup.
p. 86.
) and ended with John the Baptist: so says Christ, The Law and the Prophets
continued until John the Baptist Mat. 11. 13.
; and the gift of Prophecy under the new Testament began with Christ, the
chief of Prophets, and ended with John, who wrote the Revelation, containing
all memorable things to befall the Church of God, or enemies there of to the
end of the world: For how soever I will not tie the spirit of God, but he may
still at his pleasure endue with this gift; and Justin Martyr speaks of
Prophets in his time (who lived some forty years after the writing of the
Revelation (...). Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 308.
,) yet it may seem, that Justin Martyr by Prophets meant but such as did open
and expound the ancient Prophets of God; as Saint Paul calls the preaching of
the Gospel prophecy 1 Cor. 14.
. It is true that Bellarmine does hold, that this is the twelfth note of the
true Church Lumen Propheticum, Bellar. T. 1. lib. 4. cap. 15. de not is
Ecclesiae.
; and to that end alleges the Prophesies of Benedict, Bernard, Francis,
forged and fabulous things. If we should join issue with him, I might better
allege from true and authentike stories the wonderful prophesies of John Hus,
Jerome of Prague, Luther, Walter Brute, Hooper, which indeed came to pass; yet
I take it the ordinary gift of Prophecy ceased in the Church with John.
Brocard and some others who professed themselves Prophets, and by written
Prophesies foretold many things, the sequel has proclaimed them for fools,
liers, and deceivers, and that they never had any such gift of God.

For the Prophets of the old Testament, in some ages God raised up many, in
some very few, in some none: From the time of Malachie until Christ we have no
writings nor knowledge of any, which was about 400. years at the least. D.
will. Synop. Cont. 2. Quaest. 3.
. Then might the people of God complain indeed, we see not our signs, there
is no more any Prophet Psalm. 74. 9.
. And this was to stir up in Gods people a greater longing for Christ, and
his forerunner John the Baptist, of whom Malachie had so plainly prophesied.
The times in the old Testament which most abounded with Prophets, were the
times before the captivities of Israel and Judah, to reprove them for their
sins, threaten them with judgments, comfort the godly, and make the wicked
excuselesse, who contemned God and his word; this being often and most heavily
laid to their charge, that he did rise up early and late, sending all his
Prophets, but they would not hear Ier. 11. 7. 35. 15.
.

Concerning our present Prophet, he was an excellent man of God, sanctified in
his mothers womb, and abundantly furnished with extraordinary graces and
gifts of God: his name was Jeremy, about the Etymon whereof, the godly learned
are somewhat divided in opinion; two of them are good, you may choose whether
ye will: One deriveth his name from such roots in the Hebrew tongue, as
signify an excellent man of Iirmijah. Ram. Jah. excels. Dom. Ieron.
God; and so was he indeed in regard of sanctifying grace and prophetical
gifts, and is by a learned man proposed to Preachers of the Gospel, as being
an admirable Preacher Concionator admirabilis. Keckerm. de Rhetorica
Ecclesiastica cap. ult.
. Another deriveth his name from such a root as signifies to cast off;
Iirmijah, ramah Iah, the reject of the Lord Projectio Domini. Isidor.
Pel^usiot. Chrysostom. discipulus.
; and so he was in regard of his condition, for of all the Prophets of God he
suffered most, and was most calamitous (...). Castro Isag. in Ier.
. Me thinks when I read his Story and Prophecy, he is even another Paul,
and might say of the Prophets, as he did of the Apostles; Are they Hebrews?
so am I: are they Israelites? so am I: are they of the seed of Abraham? so am
I: are they the Prophets of God? I am more: in labors more abundant, in
stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often 2 Cor. 11. 22.
. So much concerning his name. His Tribe Levi; his father Hilkiah a Priest; his
country Anathoth, one of the Cities allotted to the Levites in Benjamin Josh.
21. 18.
; his Prophecy one of the greatest; and his continuance long, for the space of
forty years Dan. fore-notes, cap. 11. page 60.
.

But that which is precisely registered, and The whole time betwixt the
captivity of the ten Tribes, and of Judah, was 130. years, toward the latter
end whereof our Prophet was sent, and so continued till the captivity. Josep.
Ant. lib. 10. cap. 11.
most material for you to take knowledge of, is the time when he prophesied,
which is said to begin in the thirteenth year of Josiah King of Judah, and to
hold on in the days of Iehoiachim and Zedekiah, to the carrying away of
Jerusalem into captivity Ier. 1. 1, 2, 3.
. So then this Prophet was raised of God, and sent to Judah and Jerusalem,
after that the ten Tribes were carried away into captivity 2 Kin. 17. in the
days of Hosheah, by Shalmanas^r.
, in a loving desire to save that City and Temple, yet withal to reprove them
for their sins, yea and to threaten them with captivity also, if they
repented not. In which his Ministry he was seconded by Ezechiel, Joel,
Sophonie, Habacuk, and others who also labored in the same argument with him.

Oh see the goodness of God, that by so Use.
many his Prophets did thus plainly foreshew their misery, reprove their
sins, the cause thereof, that by repentance they might have repented and
prevented it. But see the obstinacy of the Jews, who being thus fairly and
roundly dealt withal, and warned by the example of Gods judgment on their
brethren the ten Tribes, now carried into captivity; they would take no
warning, nor be reformed, but proceeded from evil to worse, extremely abusing
Gods Prophets, and specially our Prophet Jeremy: wherefore at the last God
swear he would make them desolate, revealed unto Jeremy, and bade him
prophecy their carrying into captivity, that God would do to Jerusalem as he
had done to Shiloh, and serve Judah as he had done Ephraim, in the verse
immediately before: yea and to assure him that it should be, to remove the
peoples odiu^ from him, and to Considerations
prevent discouragement in him, in the words of my text he gives a strait and
express charge, not to pray for them, Therefore pray not for them, for I will
not hear thee* q. d. Oh my servant, son of man, thou see how wicked and
sinful this people The sum of it.
is, how neither my judgments on their brethren, nor thy Ministry does them
any good, but they grow worse and worse; I therefore let thee know, that I am
steadfastly purposed to punish them, and in the same kind I have done their
brethren, and lay this house waste wherein they so vainly trust: and lest thou
should think this sentence mutable, I bid thee go not about to hinder me
or cross me by thy prayer, for it shall stand: yea lest they should conceive a
great fault in thee, that thou art wanting in love, and the testification
thereof by prayer, let them know, and write it down, that I have forbidden
thee to pray for them; yea lastly, lest thou should pour out many prayers
and supplications, and cry to me for them, with sighs, and groans, and tears,
and be discouraged because I hear thee not: for these considerations, and to
prevent all these inconveniences, take knowledge of it, I charge thee, pray
not, nor cry, nor make intercession for them, for I will not hear thee.

Oh an heavy charge: I know not how it moved them, Application.
but I am sure to read it is enough to cast us all into a Balthazars fit, make
our countenance pale, loose the joints of our loins, and make our knees knock
one against another Dan. 5. 6.
: For does it not concern us as much as them? Does not the Apostle say, All
holy Scriptures are written for our learning Romans 15. 4.
; and, Are not examples of old, written to admonish us on whom the ends of the
world are come 1 Cor. 10. 6.
? Assuredly it may be your own case, if England will not repent but provoke
the Lord, trust in vain and lying words, and not be warned by the fearful
judgments of God upon Bohemia, Palatinate, and other places: he may swear in
his just anger to be avenged, and not hear his servants though they pray, and
cry for it. I am no Jeremy, no Prophet to threaten the like calamity to you
that is fallen upon your brethren, but as one of Gods poor servants, desirous
to be faithful, and to be free from the blood of all men, and to find mercy
in time of judgment; I come unto you in the name of the Lord, and from this
Scripture to acquaint you with what I have received from the Lord, not by
vision or dream, but by revelation from the Word written, plainly to lay
before you your sins, and to call upon you earnestly for repentance, and a
Christian use of Gods just judgments both abroad and at home, lest in the end
Aggravation. That I may say of it as Jacob did of Bethel, How fearful is this
place? Genesis 32.
it be too late to pray, and cry for you: and the more to move your attention,
let me tell you, this is one of the fearfullest charges that we read in all
the Scriptures of God, and a preparing of way to execution of one of the
heaviest judgments of God upon his Church and people; yea it is (at least in
appearance) contrary to as many comforts as there are words in it. As first,
call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear and deliver 1
thee Psalm. 50. 15.
; Oh what a comfort is that, that though many troubles may befall Gods people
and servants, yet he has commanded them to call on him, and has promised to
hear and deliver them. But this is fearful, God forbids now, pray not.
David says, that all flesh shall come to 2
God Psalm. 65. 2.
by prayer, and that there is no respect of persons with God; but the poor may
as confidently pray to God as the rich, and the base as well as the noble: but
this is fearful, that now his Prophet, his sanctified Prophet may not come to
him by prayer, but is expressly forbidden, pray not thou. No prayers so
acceptable unto God as those that are made unto him for his Church and people. 3
David bids us pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and for encouragement says,
they shall prosper that love it: and therefore presently falls to practice,
peace be within thy walls Psalm. 122. 6.
. But here he expressly forbids his Prophet to pray for Judah and Jerusalem,
pray not thou for this people. The King of 4
Ninivie commanded both man and beast to put on sackcloth, and cry mightily
unto God Iona. 3. 8.
; and was persuaded God would hear even the cry of bruit beasts: and he did
so. A most comfortable story. But here the Prophet is expressly forbid, to lift
up any cry for them; Oh that is fearful; that God will hear no prayers,
though made with sighs and groans, (which was Moses crying, Exodus 14. 13.
) nor with lamentation and tears (which was David's crying Psalm. 6. 8.
) no cry will now be heard, yea no cry must now be made, that is fearful. The
Lord sometime did complain, I sought for a man among them that should make up
the hedge, and stand up in 5.
the gap before me, for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found
none Ezech. 22. penult.
. Oh that is comfortable, that though the sins of the people being great, and
God said he would destroy, that yet he did even seek for a good man, to stand
up by prayer in the gap, to turn away his wrath, and is sorry that he found
not such an one: but lo, here is an holy Prophet ready to stand up in the gap,
and he is expressly forbidden to do so, (Make no intercession to me.) Again,
Call on me, and 6.
I will answer; cry, and I will say, here I am Esaias 58.
: Oh that is comfortable, that God is more ready to hear and help, than his
people are to call upon him. But here God tells the Prophet, he will not
hear him; oh this is fearful! As then Jacob awaking out of his dream, said,
How dreadful is this place? this is none other, but the gate of Heaven Genesis
28. 17.
; so may I say, when I muse upon these words, Oh how dreadful is this text!
this is none other, but the gate of destruction; Oh sin, oh sin, whither
leadest thou? how vile and odious a thing art thou! that bindest Gods hands,
that he cannot help; stoppest Gods ears, that he cannot hear; shuttest his
eyes, that he cannot see; turnest compassions into cruelties; smiling
countenance, into frowns; promises, into threatenings; mercies, into
judgments; and of a loving Father, make an angry Judge! Oh woeful, the
condition of Gods people now! That it may not be yours, be ware of their sins.
And this is the maine mark I aim at, both in the choice and handling of this
Scripture; which that I may the more orderly and profitably do, I will first
give you the sense of the words, and then raise the Doctrines, with their
several Uses and Applications: and because they are many, and very useful,
let me stand a little longer, in the inlightning of this dark Scripture,
because upon the true understanding thereof, as on an immovable foundation, the
ensuing Doctrines are raised and builded.

The question then is, whether this be an absolute Sense.
interdiction or no? whether God meant, as the words sound, that indeed the
Prophet must not pray for them? if he did, it were a sin of disobedience
against Gods revealed will, or no?

I answer, It was an absolute prohibition, as the letters sound, so as if he
had prayed for them, he had sinned; yet with this qualification, that he is
forbidden to pray for them, that they may not be carried into captivity. Their
captivity in Babylon was the burden of his prophecy, and against that he may
not pray Est speciale interdictum. Piscat. in locum.
; as a judicious Divine says on the place, he might not pray for the state of
the kingdom Non debuit prostatu regni or are. Calv.
; he might, and doubtless did, pray for many blessings of God, yea for
greater blessings than this was, or could be; he might pray to God to give
them knowledge, faith, repentance, remission of sins, redemption from
eternal captivity; he might pray to God, to give them comfort and patience in
their captivity, and to send them deliverance, according to promise; he might
pray for deliverance from some other judgments, as famine, or pestilence; but
to pray for the state of the kingdom, that it might stand and flourish, and
the enemy not prevail, so he might not pray: God was resolved, for their
sins, they should go into captivity, as their brethren before them had
done. That this is the true sense, seems to me sufficiently confirmed by
these four Reasons.

First, after this time, we do not read that ever 1. Reason. He did not pray
for them.
the Prophet did pray for them. It may be, some that are well acquainted with
this prophecy, will say, I failed in memory, for he prayed, and prayed most
earnestly for them, saying, We acknowledge, o Lord, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers, for we have sinned against thee, do not abhor us,
for thy names sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory, remember, and do
not break thy covenant with us Ierem. 14. 20.
: Could there be a more powerful and patheticall prayer made than this? I
answer, that the very next words to that prayer, the last verse of that
chapter, does declare, that at that time there was a great famine, by reason of
drought; and for remove of that judgment, and for the blessing of rain he
prayed, saying, Is there any among the vanities of the Gentiles, that can cause
rain? or can the Heavens give showers? art not thou he, o Lord our God?
therefore we will wait upon thee. But (I say again) he never prayed, that the
people might not go into captivity, which proves that this was an absolute
prohibition.

Yea, for further fortification of this Reason, take notice, that he was so
far from praying for Fortification.
their deliverance, that, occasioned from the great wrongs they offered him, by
the motion of Gods Spirit, he does most fearfully imprecate them, Pour out
their blood by the force of the sword, let their wives be bereaved of their
children, and be widows, let their men be put to death, and their young men
slain by sword in battle Ierem. 18. 21.
. And again, Let me see thy vengeance upon them, for unto thee have I opened
my cause Ierem. 20. 12.
. Thus humbly did the Prophet subscribe to Gods revealed decree, and zealously
pray for the execution of it, though most contrary to his natural desire:
neither did ever any thing so much grieve and afflict him, as his Lamentations
bear witness.

If any object, that herein the Prophet was wanting Object.
in love:

No, no, we must love one another, but it must Sol.
be in God: Abraham must, but love his son Isaac in God: if God command him
to take and sacrifice him, he must rise early Genesis 22.
, and go as cheerfully about that, as if he went to his marriage: Eli must not
love himself, nor his sons, but in God, if he crave such a message against
him and his house, as whosoever hears it, would make his ears to tingle; It
is the Lord (says Eli) let him do what seems him good 1 Samuel 3. 18.
: Has not Christ taught us to pray, that Gods will may be done Matthew. 6.
? This Prophet loved Gods people dearly; and appealeth unto God, Remember that
I stood before thee, to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from
them Ierem. 18. 20. Gods will be done with us, and on us.
: but when God forbids him to pray, he must either hold his peace, or pray
for execution of Gods judgments.

Secondly, the Prophet ever persuaded the King, Princes, and people, without
any resistance 2. Reason. He ever persuaded them to yield.
to yield themselves to the King of Babylon; saying, Thus says the Lord,
behold I set before you the way of life, and way of death: he that abides in
the City shall die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence; but he that
goes out, and falls to the Caldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his
life shall be unto him for a prey; for I have set my face against this City,
for evil, and not for good, it shall be given into the hands of the King of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire, says the Lord Ierem. 21. 9.
. The like he counseled Zedekiah the King, Bring your necks under the yoke of
the King of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live; why will ye die,
thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence Ierem.
27. 8. 12.
? And as he advised the King and people to yield themselves; so he wrote a
letter to those that were carried away captives, requiring them in the name of
the Lord to be quiet, and to pray to the Lord for the peace of the City Ierem.
29. 7.
; which shows, that Jeremy well knew that the Lords purpose was absolute,
and his prohibition to pray for them so too.

If any man shall ask me, whether Gods threatenings Quest.
be not conditional?

I answer, that many of Gods threatenings of Answ.
temporal punishments are conditional: so says God by our Prophet, At what
instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom to pluck
up, pull down, and destroy it; if that nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil I have thought to do unto
them Ierem. 18. 7, 8.
. It was the case of Ninivie, against which Jonah, by commission from the Lord,
pronounced, Yet forty days, and Ninivie shall be destroyed Jonah 3.
: yet Ninivie repenting, Ninivie was not then destroyed, God changed his
revealed will and sentence, the prophecy fell, but the City fell not; yea,
the same punishment, which at the first threatening is conditional, yet
afterward may become absolute and unavoidable; as the destruction of Sodom,
conditionally threatened, when as at Abraham's suit the Lord was brought from
fifty to ten, If there be found but ten righteous persons in Sodom, I will
spare it for the ten sake Genesis 18. penult.
: but because they could not be found, the destruction was absolutely
threatened, when the Angel said to Lot, We will destroy this place, the Lord
has sent us to destroy it Genesis 19. 13.
; and if God had not been merciful to pull Lot away, he had been destroyed
in it. Such was the case of this people. If when Jeremy began his ministry,
reproved them for their sins, and threatened them with captivity, they had
humbled themselves, and repented in sackcloth The beginning of his prophecy is
full of good counsel, and comforts.
and ashes, it might have been prevented He called, O Jerusalem wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. Ierem. 4. 14.

Turn ye backe-sliding children, and I will heal you. Ierem. 3. 22.


: but growing worse and worse, and unto their former sins, adding this of
extremely abusing the Prophet, the Lord grew to be resolute, they should into
captivity as well as their brethren, he revealed it unto his Prophet, and
forbade him to pray for them, which he did, and only counseled them to yield
themselves into their enemies hands.

Thirdly, by way of prevention, God satisfied his Prophet, in what he foresaw
might be objected. 3. Reason. Prevention of objections.
The Prophet might object, that hereby both his justice and truth might be
questioned; he satisfies the Prophet in both: first he clears his justice,
and that two ways; first, by declaring the greatness of this peoples sin;
(whereof you Justice.
shall more hereafter) for a taste, look but the next verse following my text:
See thou not what they 1. Declaration of their sins.
do in the Cities of Judah, and streets of Jerusalem? The children gather
wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough to bake
cakes to the Queen of Heaven: Therefore my fury shall be poured out on such a
people unworthie to be prayed for. Is it not a just thing to send such into
captivity?

Secondly, he declares his sovereign and absolute 2. Declaration of absolute
soveraigntie.
authority, over all people and nations, so as without control, he may justly
build and plant, or pull down and destroy: which he showed in the
pottershouse, in whose hands a vessel that he made of clay being marred, he
made it another vessel, as seemed good to the potter Ierem. 18. 1, 6.
; then came the word of the Lord, saying, O house of Israel, cannot I do with
you, as this potter? behold, as the clay is in the hands of the potter, so are
ye in mine hands. The clay is not beholden to the potter, for it had being
before; and the clay never offended the potter, yet the potter may make what
vessel he will, and the vessel not complain, Why have thou made me thus? But
we are beholding to God for our being, and we have sinned against him, and may
he not do with us as pleases him? This sinful people shall into captivity,
the Prophet must not pray for them, yet is God herein most righteous and just.
Yea, but harken how the Prophet 2. Gods truth.
bemoaneth Gods truth, saying, Ah Lord God, the Prophets say unto them, ye
shall not see the sword, but you shall have an assured peace in this place.
Then said the Lord, the Prophets prophecy lies in my name, I sent them not,
neither have I commanded them, neither spoken unto them, they prophecy a false
vision and divination, the deceit of their own heart, but I will bring the
sword, yea and by the sword shall those false Prophets also be consumed Ierem.
14. 13.
; speak unto the people, and charge them, that they harken not to the
Prophets, Diviners, Dreamers, Inchaunters, and Sorcerers, which say, ye shall
not serve the King of Babel, for they prophecy a lie unto you Ier. 27. 9, 10,
14.
. Thus God preventeth his Prophet, and declares that this judgment is well
deserved, and stands with justice and truth, and would have the Prophet to
rest therein, and not pray for them.

Lastly, though many temporal judgments be 4. Manner of revealing his purpose.
denounced conditionally, yet that this is absolute, and that he means
indeed, his Prophet should 1. Asseveration.
not pray for them, in this may be gathered from the manner of his revealing of
this purpose, which was first with many words of most earnest and vehement
asseveration, saying, The land shall be desolate, the earth shall mourn, and
the heavens above be black, I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and will not
repent, neither will I turn back from it Ierem. 4. 28.
. That must needs stand, which the Lord thus avoucheth; yet to make it, if it
were possible, more sure, the Lord has sworn it, I swear by my self, (says
2. Oath.
the Lord) this house shall become a desolation Ierem. 22. 5.
. An oath (says the Apostle) is amongst men, an end of all strife: and God
that he might fully declare the immutabilitie of his counsel, having no
greater to swear by, has sworn by himself Heb. 6. 13, 17.
. Lo, how the Apostle says, an oath declares the immutabilitie of his
counsel. God never swear, but he performed it. He has sworn, and will not
repent (says David Psalm. 110. 4.
) if God swear, he will never repent of it; he may change his sentence, but
never reverse Mutare sententiam, secundum voluntatem signi.
his oath: yea, God swearing that Moses should not enter into the promised
land, though he repented of his sin, and most earnestly entreated this
favor, could not obtain, but received a kind of rebuke, Let it suffice,
speak no more to me of this matter, Deuteronomy. 3. 28. He cannot lie, much less
forswear himself, he has seldom sworn, but ever made it good. Seeing then
God revealed to Conclusion.
his Prophet, that for their sins they should be carried into captivity, and
with an oath affirmed it, it must needs be granted, the decree and sentence
were absolute, and that, according to the letter of the prohibition, the
Prophet must not pray for them in this: neither did he, but submitted himself
to Gods holy will and pleasure.

The maine objection (which I know of) that may be made either against this
sense delivered, or Object.
the practice of our Prophet, is a like Prohibition to Moses: which yet was but
conditional, for he presently prayed and prevailed; so we read, that in Moses
absence, the people causing Aaron to make a golden calfe, which they
worshipped, God told Moses what a great sin they had committed, and adds,
Now therefore let me alone, that I may consume them, and I will make of thee a
great nation; and Moses besought the Lord, and he repented of the evil which
he thought to do to his people Exodus 32. 10.
. I answer, that betwixt that to Moses, and this to Jeremy, 1. Form.
there is a great difference; for howsoever that be delivered to Moses in the
Imperative as well as this, yet that carries the face of a mild instruction,
and intimates, that it was in Moses power to give leave, or to let God: so as
Moses receives thereby encouragement to pray. What is it for God to say, Let
me alone, but to make him bold to pray Quid est, Dimitte, nisi deprecandi ansam
praebere? Gregor.
; but this charge is with weighty words, Thou shall not pray, nor cry, nor
make intercession, for I will not hear thee.

Secondly, Moses was but once bid let God alone; 2. Repetition.
but our Prophet was thrice expressly forbidden to pray for them Ierem. 7. 16.
11. 14. 14. 11.
. Now if Joseph told Pharaoh his dream was doubled, because the thing was
established of God; he will bring it to pass Genesis 41. 32.
; how much more may I say, this charge is tripled to his Prophet, to signify
that he means good sooth, their captivity is decreed and established of God,
and he will bring it to pass.

Thirdly and lastly, God threatened to Moses, he would utterly consume the
people, yea, and blot 3. Threatening.
out their name from under heaven Deuteronomy. 9. 14.
; that God could not do, but much dishonor his name; and therefore Moses
urges in his prayer, wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, For
mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume
them from the face of the earth. Again, to do so, were to break promise and
oath, which he had made with their fathers, and therefore Moses does specially
urge that, Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and saydst unto them, I will multiply your seed,
as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of, will I give
unto your seed, and they shall inherit it Deuteronomy. 32. 12, 13.
. So that what face soever it carried, Moses saw well enough, God did not mean
he should not pray for them. But the case is here altered; first, Gods glory
is no way endangered, no more than it was by the captivity of the ten Tribes;
nay, this was greatly for his glory; first, that all nations might see what a
just God he is, who will not forbear to punish sin, no not in his own
people; for many nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done thus to this
great City? and they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of
the Lord their God, and worshipped other Gods, and served them Ierem. 22. 9.
; but his deliverance of them out of captivity should be much more for his
glory, for he meant that should be more eminent and glorious than their
deliverance out of Egypt was, so as after that time it should be no more said,
The Lord lives that brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt; but the
Lord lives that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the North,
and from all the lands whither he had driven them Ierem. 16. 14.
. See how greatly their captivity should be for his glory. Neither was this
against any promise or oath: for he had already performed them, he had cast
out the Heathen, and planted Israel in. Yea rather herein God was as good as
his word, for he had threatened them, if they were rebellious and disobedient,
he would give them into the hands of their enemies, and they should reign over
them Deuteronomy. 28. 48.
. Thus I hope, by conference of Scriptures, I have sufficiently cleared the
sense of this, viz. that it was an absolute prohibition Absolute and definite
imperasse Jeremiae, ne oraret. Barrad. Itinerar. lib. 4. cap. 19. page 379.
; and therefore, howsoever the Prophet was exceedingly afflicted; to foresee in
spirit, and afterward to see with the eyes of his body the captivity of the
Jews, and desolation of the City and Temple, neither was he ever wanting to
give them good counsel, and pray in other cases for them; yet in this, he
might not; in this he did not. Now it follows to build doctrines, for
Instruction, Consolation, and Reprehension; and by application to make them
useful unto us: which doctrines naturally arising, are many, and namely these.

First, God commonly gives warning, before 1. Doct.
he bring any judgment upon any place or persons, specially on his Church or
people, or on any place, where his people are. This doctrine will be
sufficiently proved, both from positive and exemplarie Scriptures. Thus says
the Prophet, Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his
secrets unto his servants the Prophets Amos 3. 7.
. Before God brought the flood, God revealed it to Noah Genesis 6. 13.
, who by word of mouth, and building the Arc, gave warning to the old world,
for 120. years 1 Pet. 3. 20.
: before he sent fire and brimstone to consume the Cities in the plain, he
revealed it to Abraham, and then to Lot, and his children Genesis 18. 17. 19. 12,
13.
: before the judgments were executed on Pharaoh and Egypt, God revealed it to
Moses and Aaron Exodus 3. 19, 20.
: before he destroyed Ninivie, he gave knowledge thereof to Jonah, and he
proclaimed, Yet forty days, and Ninivie shall be destroyed Jonah 4. 10.
. The Jews shall not be destroyed, but the day and time shall be first
proclaimed, that Gods people may betake themselves to fasting and prayer.
Before the captivity of the ten Tribes, God revealed it to many of his
Prophets, as Isaiah, Iehu, Eliah, Michaiah, Obadiah, Hosheah, Amos, Joel: that,
as before a great storm the cocks crow loud and thick; so before this great
judgment, the Prophets threatened, and cried loud and shrill; before the
captivity of Judah and Benjamin, many other Prophets knew of it, and were sent
to threaten it, as Esaias, Ezechiel, Zephanie, and our Prophet, who most plainly
told them, for how long it should continue. How were the Jews abundantly
warned, before their final destruction and dispersion? how is Babylon fore
warned? how those golden Churches in Asia Minor? how are we all forewarned of
the destruction of the world by fire? how are we all forewarned of the
destruction of the wicked in hell fire? yea, what judgment can befall us, but
our consciences must needs testify, that some way or other, yea many ways,
God has given us warning? All which do sufficiently confirm our doctrine,
that commonly God does give warning, before he bring any great judgment upon
his people, or any place where his people are. Only this is to be lamented,
that people will take no warning. As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it
be at the end of the world, Matthew. 24. The men of the old world had warning
fair enough, and yet knew nothing, would know nothing: we have warning
enough, but most will take no warning, but walk on still, and will know
nothing, till the heavens be all on a flaming fire, the trumpet sound, yea hell
fire seize upon them; and then it is too late.

You will ask me, by what means does God 2. Means.
give people such warning?

I answer: the means are of two sorts, viz. ordinary, and extraordinary; the
ordinary means, is the ministry of his servants: as of Noah to the old
world, Lot to Sodom, Moses and Aaron to Egypt, Prophets to Judah and Israel,
Christ and his Apostles to the Jews, Jonah to Ninivie, (as you have heard)
Means extraordinary are diverse; as terrible signs in Sun, Moon, and
Stars; earthquakes, thunders, flashes of lightning, raging winds, roaring of
seas; of all which, though some natural reasons may be probably rendered, yet
being extraordinary, they do proclaim, in their kind, Gods anger, and
threaten some judgment. So Christ said, before his coming to judgment, there
should be signs in Sun, Moon, Stars, Air, Earth, Sea, so as men's hearts
should fail with fear, Luc. 21. 25. Josephus and others report strange
things, before the final destruction of Jerusalem, as a dreadful blazing star,
fearful sights, of armies of men, chariots and horses in the air, a voice
heard in the Temple, Migremus hinc, Let us go hence. But of all presages, that
is most remarkable, which Josephus has, De bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 12. De
prodigijs and praesagijs: One Jesus the son of Ananus, four years before
the Romans came, when the City was in great peace and opulencie, he began to
cry up and down in the City, and specially in the Temple, and that upon their
most solemn festivities, Woe, woe to Jerusalem: and being privately by many,
and afterward publicly by Magistrates, both rebuked, punished, and threatened,
to hold his peace; yet he held on, so long as he was able day and night, till
in the end the enemies came, and he walking upon the walls, and crying as
before, Woe to the people, woe to Jerusalem, and woe to the Temple, at the last
he also cried out, And woe to me. At which words, lapis tormento missus, a
stone being thrown by some warlike instrument then in use, it hit him in the
head: so ended he his life and presage; which some accounted to proceed from
divine instinct.

God often gave them into the hands of their enemies, and often delivered them,
and every deliverance was as a warning-peece, to sin no more, lest he would
deliver them no more. Every mercy abused is a warning-peece, and threatens
judgment, Woe to Capernaum, which had been exalted to heaven. Likewise lesser
judgments (when people do not repent) do threaten greater, as every lesser
plague in Egypt did threaten a greater in the heel of it, according to Gods
threatening, If for these things thou will not repent, I will punish thee seven
times more, Levit. 26. Now Judah and Jerusalem must to it, because they would
not be warned by the calamity of their brethren. Deliverances from evils not
thankfully received, nor godly use made of them, threaten judgments: yea,
mercies abused threaten judgment: and the greater mercies abused, the greater
judgments threatened; lo these are the means, besides many others, for it is
not possible to reckon up all.

Thirdly, would you know the Reasons of this 3. Reasons.
the Lords manner of dealing, why he does commonly warn and threaten, before
he bring a judgment? The reasons are principally these three. First, in regard
of himself: Secondly, in regard of the godly: Thirdly, in regard of the wicked.

For the first; This he does, to declare the riches of his mercy; how slow to
judgment, and loath to 1. Reason.
avenge himself he is; and therefore will not smite any, before he discharge a
warning-peece, that all the world may give him glory for his mercy,
goodness, and (when no means will serve) most righteous judgments.

Secondly, for his peoples sake, that being threatened and warned, they
testifying their faith and 2. Reason.
repentance, by fasting and prayer, may either turn away Gods wrath, or find
comfort in the day of calamity.

The third and last reason is in regard of the wicked, that they being
threatened and warned, and taking 3. Reason.
none, but flattering themselves, lulling themselves asleep in security,
winking with their eyes, because they will not see Gods judgments, persuading
themselves there is no such matter, esteeming the Prophets words but as wind,
accounting of all signs from heaven and earth, but as proceeding from natural
causes, and laughing at those as silly fools, that make any divine use, or are
afraid of Gods anger and judgments; Put the evil day far off, say peace,
peace; having made a covenant with death, and are at an agreement with hell,
that all such wickedness may be cut off, and perish without excuse. Lo these
are the reasons.

Now if we make Application, who sees not that the hand of God is very
heavy upon diverse Application.
of the reformed Churches abroad, in famine, war, and all the miseries that
accompany it. But I demand with the Apostle, Have they not heard? were they
not warned? did these judgments come upon them, like a flash of lightning, no
foreknowledge of them? Yes, yes, they had the faithful servants of God, who
zealously reproved their profanation of Sabbaths, taking of Gods name in vain,
drunkenness, whoredom, pride, covetousness, and foretold the judgments of
God without repentance: They saw that terrible blazon, and heard that stately
tongue of Heaven Magniloqua lingua Coeli.
, which preached these things to them that had ears to hear Matthew. 24. 25.
. To come to our selves, we Gods Ministers have told you of these things
before. What have we told you? When and how God will punish this land? No, we
could not tell you so, but we have faithfully told you, the sins of this land
cry unto God for vengeance, God is a just God, and if sin be not repented
of, he will punish; there is no corner of the land, but for many years has
rung with these warnings. We saw also that prodigious star, we heard that
Lecture, (I fear you will forget it.) God has most marvellously delivered us
from foreign Invasion, and fiery furnace of Gunpowder treason. The winds
have roared, and sea broken in, to the destruction of whole valleys, and
dispeopling of many parishes; the last winter has been long and extreme, the
present spring backward, the fruits of the earth in great measure destroyed, a
famine suddenly come upon us: are not all these as warning pieces? And unto
them all add this, as the greatest of all, that by the calamity of our
neighbors he does admonish us to repent, who (for any thing that I know) are
as great sinners as they; so as if God should bring upon us a heavier judgment
than he has done upon them, yet were it most just, our consciences must needs
witness, we have had warning abundantly: But above all, blessed be God, who
has given, and does daily give us such fair and full warning of the last
judgment and destruction of all the Reprobate in hell fire, oh beware of them.

The second Doctrine is, that all Gods true servants, when they see by evident
signs, that the 2. Doct.
Lords anger is kindled against his people for their sins, and perceive some
fearful judgments to come upon them, they are wonderfully affected
therewith, take it to heart, and labor by all good means to pacify and
prevent it.

This doctrine arises from this word, Do not Observe.
lift up a (cry) unto me; which notes, that he would not in a cold and
senseless manner have prayed, but as being wonderfully affected to foresee the
misery of Gods people for their sins, he would with sighs and groans, yea
and bitter tears, have prayed to God for them, if he had not bid him hold his
peace; for to cry in the Scriptures, when it is referred to praying, notes, to
pray unto God in most earnest and vehement manner; as where God asked Moses,
Why criest thou unto me Exodus 14. 15.
? and David complains, O my God, I cry by day, Psalm. 22. 2.
and thou hear not; and the Apostle says, That our Savior, in the days of
his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears
Heb. 5. 7.
: In all which (and many other places which might be alleged to this purpose)
crying does rather signify mournful intention of Examples.
heart, zeal and fervencie of spirit, rather than any loud vociferation and
contentions of words. And from this word our Doctrine arises; which would first
be confirmed and backed with some other Scriptures. And to begin with Moses:
when he saw imminent destruction to the people of God at the red sea, he cried
unto God Exodus 14. 15.
: little did any know the bitter affliction of his soul, but God who saw it,
and revealed it, Moses why criest thou? How was David moved, when he saw the
Angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned and dealt wickedly,
but these sheep what have they done 2 Samuel ult. 17.
? Holy King Josiah, when he heard from reading the Book of the Law that was
found, what great wrath of God was kindled against the people for their sins,
to make them a desolation and a curse, he rent his clothes, his heart melted,
and his eyes poured out abundance of tears 2 King. 22. 19.
. How did godly Mordechai and Hesther take to heart the decree gone out for the
destruction of the people of God, and humble themselves with sackcloth,
fasting, weeping, and praying, crying with loud and bitter cries Hest. 4. 1.
? When Ezrah heard of the great sins of the people, and foresaw some imminent
judgment, he rent his garment, plucked off the hair of his head and beard,
and did neither eat bread, nor drink water, but mourned exceedingly Ezrah 9. 5.
: The Prophet Esaias foreseeing the captivity of Gods people, said, Turn away
from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the
spoiling of the daughter of my people Esaias 22. 4.
: Our Prophet exceeded in this, who thus complained, My bowels, my bowels, I am
pained at the very heart, mine heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my
peace, because I have heard the sound of the trumpet, and alarm of war,
destruction upon destruction is cried Ierem. 4. 19.
; and wished, Oh that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night, for the slain of the daughter of my
people Ierem. 9. 1.
: And again, Let mine eyes run down with tears, night and day, and let them
not cease, for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach,
and a very grievous blow Ierem. 14. 17.
: The Prophet Ezechiel, upon the same occasion, seeing the Angels destroying
Gods people, feil on his face, and cried, Oh Lord God, will thou destroy all
the residue of Israel, in pouring out thy fury on Jerusalem Ezech. 9. 8.
? Our blessed Savior wept, when he prophesied the destruction of Jerusalem
Luke 19. 41.
. The blessed Apostle protests the continual heaviness and sorrow of heart,
for the misery of Gods people Romans 9. 2.
: and forewarned the Philippians with tears, of the g Philip. 3. 18.
evil to come. By which cloud of witnesses, out of the old and new Testament,
our doctrine is sufficiently confirmed, viz. That when Gods anger is seen, and
some great judgment to befall Gods people is foreseen, Gods true servants are
greatly affected therewith, and labor to prevent it. It being then most clear
that it is so, let us now proceed to consider the reasons thereof, why it is
so, and why they are thus affected.

The first is, because there is nothing so sweet 1. Reason. Gods love.
and dear unto them as Gods love and favor, nothing does so much affect them
with joy as the sense thereof. I say again, Gods children are men and women,
and subject to passion, as others, and are glad of the comforts of this life:
but this is the glorious and unspeakable joy wherefore David prays, Lord lift
up the light of thy countenance upon us Psalm. 4. 6.
; and thrice in one Psalm the Church prays, Cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved Psalm. 80. 3. 7. 19.
; Yea, the greatest blessing the Priest could pronounce was, The Lord bless
thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine on thee, and be gracious
unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee Numb. 6. vlt.
. And no marvel, for David says, that in Gods favor is life Psalm. 30. 5.
. And if Solomon say, The favors of an earthly King be as a cloud of the
latter rain, what is Gods? Prove. 16. 15. What more urged by the Apostle than
this pleasing of God, as, Offer up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
pleasing unto God Romans 12. 1.
: and he says this is a maine thing, wherein the happiness of single life
consists, the unmarried cares how he may please the Lord 1 Cor. 7. 32.
; and S. Paul prayed for the Colossians, that they might walk worthy of the
Lord, to all pleasing of him Col. 1. 10.
; and bids children obey their parents in all things, in the Lord, for this
is well-pleasing to the Lord Col. 3. 20.
; and calls alms, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing unto God Philip.
4. 18.
; and beseeches the Thessalonians, so to walk, as they may please God 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.
. Oh, do good children find such comfort and content in the good favor
Simile.
and pleasure of their parents; wives, of their husbands; servants, of their
masters; and subjects, of their Kings? how much more true joy, content and
comfort, do Gods children find in Gods favor and good pleasure? So as if he
be well pleased, they care not though all the world be offended. And as nothing
is so sweet and joyful, E contrario.
and highly esteemed and prized as Gods favor, and does even ravish the heart
with joy unspeakable and glorious: so there is nothing so bitter and grievous,
as sense and appearance of Gods anger: Who (says Moses) considers the power
of his wrath? Psalm. 90. Oh it is a powerful wrath indeed, as Hezekiah and
David say, It crusheth and breaks the bones, it wounds and kills. If the
wrath of a King, who is but a mortal man, be as messengers of death Prove. 16.
14.
: what is the wrath of the King of Kings? Oh (says David) when thou turnedst
away thy face I was troubled Psalm. 30. 7.
; and Solomon said, A wounded spirit, who can bear Prove. 18. 14. No rare
thing, that two may be in one bed, and the one in Heaven, and the other in
hell, on earth.
? Oh it is the sense of Gods anger troubles, wounds, kills, is the hell on
earth, at the appearance whereof, Gods children are so affected, mourn and cry.

The second reason is, because (next unto God) Gods Church and people are
dearly beloved, of all the true members thereof, as being the people 2.
Reason. They love his Church.
that God has redeemed with his blood Acts 20. 28.
, entered into perpetual league and covenant with, yea, the spouse of Christ,
Ephesians. 5. 32. and therefore it wonderfully affects Gods servants with grief,
and makes them cry, when they foresee any judgment or misery befall them;
the rather because Amplification.
in the misery of Gods Church, Gods glory seems to be stained; whereof they
are so zealous, that rather than that should happen, Moses wished to be blotted
out of the book Exodus 32. 12.
; and S. Paul to be separated from Christ Romans 9. 3. Examples.
. Oh how father Eli was afflicted at the report of heavy news, when one told
him, that Israel was fled before the Philistims, his two sons slain, and the
Ark of God taken! It struck him dead at heart, he fell backward from his
seat, and broke his neck 1 Samuel 4. 18.
; and his daughter in law hearing the same news, presently fell into the
throws of travail, and being delivered of a son, called his name Ichabod.
When zealous Nehemiah heard how the people of God were in great affliction,
Jerusalem broken down, and the gates burnt with fire, he could not contain
himself, but sat down and wept, and being the Kings Cup Bearer, (and as much
as his office and life was worth, to appear sad, and he never had been so
before) yet now he could not hide it, his countenance bewrayed it, the King
took notice of it, and asked him, Why is thy countenance sad, Nehem. 1. 3. 11.
2. 1, 2, 3.
seeing thou art not sick, this is nothing else but sorrow of heart? Oh the
ruins of Jerusalem lay at his heart; which also made the people of God so
imprecate themselves, If I forget Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning, yea, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not
Jerusalem to my chiefestioy Psalm. 137. 5, 6.
.

The third and last reason (whereof flesh and blood are more sensible, than the
two former) is, 3. Reason. Wrapping in the same judgment.
That the godly may be wrapped with the wicked* in the same temporal
punishment: and therefore when they see it coming, they are much affected, and
labor to prevent it. I say again, howsoever God is mavelous, in commonly
providing Confirmation By Examples.
for his children, before a judgment come, (as we shall hear more hereafter)
yet many times even the godly are wrapped with the wicked, in the same
temporal punishment, and therefore are so affected. Shall we condemn all that
perished in the waters Genesis 6. 7. 21. 22.
? and all that were consumed with fire Genesis 19. 25.
? God forbid: If ye do, yet know, that though all were not guilty of the
sin, of making and worshipping the golden Calfe, yet it endangered all; Let
me alone, says God, and I will utterly consume them, and blot out their name
from under Heaven Exodus 32. 10. Deuteronomy. 9. 14.
: for Achans sin, Iosuahs army is put to flight, and many slain Josh. 7. 4.
; for Saul's sin in killing the Gibeonites, there came a famine upon the land
for three years together 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 3.
; and you know, for that great villainy committed by the inhabitants of Gibeah,
in abusing the Levites Concubine, not only vengeance came upon the City,
wherein it was committed, but upon all the Tribe of Benjamin, because they
delivered them not up to be punished, but rather would seem to defend them;
yea, not only upon that Tribe which might seem justly accessarie, but upon the
inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead, because they came not up to the war, to see
Gods judgments executed upon those wicked men Judge. 19 20, 21.
. Let him that reads that story, consider how far the judgments of God may
extend themselves, toward all such as are not affected with Gods anger, and
do not to the uttermost of their power endeavor to punish sin. This was it,
made all the people of Israel so much afraid, when they heard how the
Reubenites, Gadites, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, had erected an Altar on
the other side Jordan, and supposed it had been to offer sacrifice on; their
Commissioners told them, if they did so rebel against the Lord, the next
morrow, the Lord would be wroth with all the Congregation of Israel Josh. 22.
18.
. If then the zeal of Gods glory, and love to Gods people will not move, yet
the love to ourselves and estates, may move us to mourn for sins and
abominations of the land, and to take greatly to heart, the tokens of anger,
and threatenings of judgments, because we also may be wrapped up in them.

But me thinks I hear some say, such is Satan's Object.
malice, and bloody murtherous desire, to have Gods judgments general, and
therefore dulleth the spirits of Gods children thus; Alas what profit will it
be for me to mourn and afflict my soul? if the judgment come, I and mine,
all we are, and have, shall be wrapped up in it, as well as those who take
nothing to heart, but live joyfully; and therefore let us even eat and drink,
and let God do his will.

Oh fainting soul, be not abused and deceived, Sol.
step up for thy part into the breach, to stay Gods wrath Ezech. 22. penult.
; seek the Lord amongst the meek of the earth Psalm. 76. 9.
; for Sions sake hold not thy tongue, and for Ierusalems sake give God no rest
Esaias 62. 6.
; be one of his remembrancers day and night, in all thy supplications and
prayers hold up thy hands against Satan and Antichrist, and be thou to the
uttermost of thy power an enemy to all the enemies of the Church, and help
the Lord Judge. 5. 23.
, and his people against them, with prayer, prease, and push of pike (if thou
be thereunto called) and cry mightily unto God for help in this, that God
would generally open the eyes of all men to see our sins, and the judgments
thereby deserved, that all men's hearts may melt into tears, (as Iosiahs did in
the like case 2 Kings 22. penult.
,) and that all (as one man) may go out and meet the Lord by repentance,
before his decree be executed upon us. Yea, if none shall join with thee, but
in this case thou may complain with Eliah, that thou art left alone 1 Kings
19. 10.
, yea so far from helping, as that they do mock and discourage thee, as
David complained, For thy sake I have borne reproach, and shame has covered my
face: when I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was my reproach, I
put on sackcloth, and became a proverb, they that sat in the gate spoke
against me, and drunkards made songs of me Psalm. 69. 7.
; yet for thy part still wrestle with God Genesis 32. 26.
; the prayer of one righteous man avails much with God, if it be fervent Iam.
5. 16.
; one Moses stood in the gap Psalm. 106. 23.
; and one Phinehas turned away the wrath from all Israel Numb. 25. 11.
; Phinehas prayed, and the plague stayed; and Lot by his prayer saved Zoar,
Genesis 19. 22. But how ever God deals, thou shall be sure to Comfort.
deliver thine own soul Ezech. 14. 14.
; God has a tender eye to all such as are affected at the testimonies of his
anger. Before the six destroying Angels are sent forth, one clothed in linen,
with a writers inke-horne by his side, is bid go through the midst of the City,
and set a mark upon the foreheads of all them that sigh, and cry for the
abominations of Jerusalem: then are the Angels sent forth to destroy, but yet
with this charge, Come not near any man on whom is the mark Ezech. 9. 4.
. And again, before the four destroying Angels, went forth an Angel, having
the seal of the living God, cried to them with a loud voice, Hurt nothing,
till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads Rev. 7. 3.
. Before the flood come, God will provide for Noah's safety, he will not only
direct him to prepare an arc, but himself will see him in, yea and shut him in
himself Genesis 7. 16.
, would not suffer or trust any other to do it, but would have the locking and
sealing of the door with his own hand: and shall Lot perish in Sodom, whose
righteous soul had been so vexed with their unclean conversation? No, no, he
shall have warning to be gone, yea if he stay too long, they will take him by
the hand, and draw him away: neither can they do any thing, till he be safe
in Zoar Genesis 19. 22.
. And histories report, that before the last and final desolation of
Jerusalem, there was a voice heard amongst the Christians, Go forth to Pella,
go forth to Pella; which so soon as ever the Christians had done, and that
they were safe there, the City was sacked, and the wrath of God poured out
upon it to the uttermost 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
. You have heard how God advanced Daniel in Babylon, and miraculously delivered
him out of the Lions den Dan. 6. 22.
, and the three children from the fiery furnace Dan. 3. 27.
: But what need we go further than our present prophecy for the clearing of
this point? Does it avail Jeremy, that he has so bitterly wept, mourned and
lamented, and prayed unto God? Yes, yes, because he had been so faithful,
God provided well for him, for Nebuchadnezzar himself gave charge to
Nebuzaradan his chief steward, to look well to Jeremy, and do for him as he
would, and let him go whither he would; and indeed he did so, putting him to
his choice, whether he would go to Babylon and receive kindness there, or
stay in Judah: and because he desired rather to stay in Judah, he gave him
victuals and a reward, and let him go whither he would Ier. 40. 2, 3, 4, 5.
, so as he found a great deal more favor from the enemies, than he did from
his own Princes and people. Yea (and worthy to be noted) Ebedmelech, who had
spoken good to the King, and been a means to deliver him out of the dungeon,
God promised him his life for a prey, Ierem. 39. ult. And Gedaliah, whose
father Ahikam had been his great friend, and saved his life, Ier. 26. ult. And
Baruch his Scribe, and others that feared God, and had been Ieremies friends,
and encouragement, even these had their lives given for a prey, were left
behind in the land, and Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, made their governor in
Mizpah Ierem. 38. 7. 39. 15. 26. 24. 40. 5.
.

Oh thus the Lord has many ways to deliver his out of troubles and miseries,
and he will do it, if it be for his glory and their good; if otherwise, Use.
he be pleased to wrap them up in the common calamity, yet even that shall
turn to the furtherance of their salvation, and God will so enrich them with
patience and comfort in assurance of Gods love, that in such misery, they
shall be most happy. How ever things go, it shall be well with the just.

The Doctrine being thus confirmed, the reasons Testimonies.
thereof rendered, and objection against the practice thereof removed; it now
follows to consider what are the testimonies, whereby Gods servants do
witness to others, and specially to God, and their own souls, that they are
amongst the small number of such as do take Gods anger and judgments to heart:

And they are of two sorts, viz. common to all Division.
Gods good servants, and special or proper to Common.
some sorts of them: the common testimonies are of two sorts, private and
public; private testimonies Testimonies private.
are prayer, and intercession, helped with fasting and humiliation, that so
they may pray the more fervently, and cry mightily unto God to spare his
people. No sooner did God reveal to Abraham, his purpose to destroy Sodom,
but he fell instantly to prayer, and most vehemently importuned him to spare
them Genesis 18. 22.
. When did God ever manifest to Moses his conceived anger against his people,
and threatened a judgment, but Moses was down on his face crying to the Lord,
contending with him, and urging of him, for his name and glory, grace and
goodness, mercies, promises, oath, and covenant, to forgive and spare Deuteronomy. 9.
18.
? When Nehemiah heard of the misery of Gods people, and Jerusalem, he sat
down and wept, and fasted, and prayed, before the God of heaven Neh. 1. 4.
: The second are more public, and are either of gesture, as in Nehemiah, or
words, when every 2. Testimonies public.
man and woman, according to their places and gifts, do call on others, of
their families, or neighbors, to humble themselves, and seek to prevent the
judgment threatened. So Mordechai, (when he heard of the bloody Decree that was
passed) was not contented to put on sackcloth and mourn in secret, but went
into the midst of the City, and cried with a loud and bitter cry, and made it
known to Hesther, and Hesther would have all the Jews in Shushan to fast too
Hest. 4. 1. 16.
. The Prophet says, All such as feared God, stirred up one another, by
speaking often to one another, saying, fear the Lord Malac. 3. 16.
. This is it the Apostle aims at, Exhort one another daily whilst it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin
Heb. 3. 13.
: and provoke one another to love and good works, Heb. 10. 24. And so the
shipmaster wakened Jonah, and bade him call upon his God, Iona. 1. 6.

The more proper and special testimonies, concern Proper testimonies.
two sorts of Gods servants, viz. the Minister and Magistrate. The faithful
Minister of 1. The Ministers.
God, testifies that he takes to heart the anger of 1. Giving warning.
God, and threatened judgment, by three things. First, by lifting up his voice
like a trumpet Esaias 58. 1.
, and giving warning, for which purpose they have the titles of Seers 1 Samuel 9.
9.
, and Watchmen Esaias 62. 6.
, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem. They must have eyes in their
heads, and from their watchtower, As the sleepie and careless watchman is
hanged, that gives no warning, so the Minister must answer for blood of souls.
see anger and judgment afar off, and like faithful watchmen, from the
wall, give warning to the City, as soon as ever they descry the Lord coming
against his people. Secondly, they must labor by their Ministry, to bring the
people to repentance, that so Gods wrath may be 2. Preach repent.
pacified, and judgments prevented; and to that end, they must faithfully
reprove them for their sins, and let them see the heinousness of their
transgressions, and call earnestly upon them for repentance. Thus did Noah
before the flood, Lot before the burning of Sodom, the Prophets Isay, Jeremy,
Ezechiel, Joel, before the Captivities: Rent your hearts and not your garments,
and turn to the Lord your God, Joel 2. 13.
: thus did Christ and John Baptist before the final destruction of the Jews,
Repent, repent, Except ye repent ye shall all perish Luke 13. 3.
: Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree; and, O generation of vipers, who
has forewarned you to flee from the anger to come? bring forth fruits worthy
amendment of life Matt. 3. 7. 10.
: yea thus have all Gods servants done, that desire to be free from the blood
of all men Act. 20. 26.
: for if they give not warning, the blood is required at their hands Ezekiel. 3.
18.
, and therefore it behooves them to bestirre themselves, that if it be possible
they may save Gods people from the wrath to come, or at least deliver their own
souls, and be found a sweet savor unto God, even in them that perish 2 Cor.
2. 15.
.

Thirdly, it is the faithful Ministers duty to be very tenderly affected
toward all such as mourn Thirdly, preach comfort.
in Sion Esaias 61. 3.
; and with David are afraid of Gods judgments Psalm. 119.
; they must be sure to speak a word in due season to such as are weary Esaias
50. 4.
. God gave the Prophet Isay a charge, to speak comfortably to the heart of
Jerusalem Esaias 40. 2.
. And hence it is that the Prophets, Christ, John Baptist, and the Apostles,
did ever interlace reproves and threatenings, with heavenly comforts, to
prepare them for times of trial and tentations; that howsoever they lived
amongst the wicked, and some great judgment and general might come, yet come
what will, it should go well with them; yea let us Ministers be assured, the
Lord will require as strict an account of us, how we have cheared and comforted
the godly, as that we have reproved and threatened the wicked.

And I say upon this occasion, in the word of the Exhortation.
Lord, Be of good comfort all godly Magistrates, 1. To Magistrates.
and Governors, if your hearts be set aright to advance Gods Religion, and holy
Gospel of Christ, and to suppress and beat down Atheism, Popery, and all
wickedness, whereby Gods anger is kindled, and heavy judgments procured. Be
2. To Ministers.
of good comfort ye Ministers of Christ, that watch and warn Gods people,
having continual sorrow and heaviness Romans 9. 2.
to see their sins, and being far off from serving the time, and flattering
them, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace Ierem. 6. 14.
, but faithfully reproving them for all their sins, and earnestly calling on
them for repentance. And be of good comfort, all ye people, 3. To all godly
ones.
whose hearts are broken with godly sorrow, to see the sins of the Land; and
you that strive to keep your selves unspotted of the world Iam. 1. ult.
, and to walk worthy the Gospel Ephesians. 4. 1.
, and such great mercies as God vouchsafes; and humble your souls before God
privately in fasting and prayers, and so far as you can (and is lawful)
labor to draw on others in the like practice of piety: know that you are
sealed and maintained of God; assure your selves the eye and hand of God are on
you for good Nehem. 2. 8.
; his compassions shall not fail Lament. 3. 22.
; the hills shall sooner remove out of their places Esaias 54. 10.
; than his mercy can be removed from you; his covenant with day and night,
shall sooner be broken, than with you Ierem. 33. 20.
; you are written upon the palms of his hands, and are ever in his sight Esaias
49. 16.
; and either God will be pacified, and spare for your sakes; or (as he knows
best) will provide for you, either take you to himself, that you shall not see
the evil to come Esaias 57. 1.
; or whatsoever evil come, his good Angels shall guard you, his spirit support
you, his grace be sufficient for you, he shall enrich you with peace, patience,
and joy, and in good time, make an end of all misery, and set the crown of
immortal glory on your head.

The second duty particular, is for the chief 2. To Magistrates.
Magistrate to command such as are subordinate and inferior, to see execution;
these are to testify, how greatly they are affected with tokens of Gods wrath,
and appearance of judgments, by laboring to reform sin, and enjoining
fasting, and humiliation, for pacifying of Gods anger, and preventing of
judgments. Thus did Moses, Ioshuah, David, Iehoshaphat, Nehemiah, Hesty King
of Ninivie. It would ask too long a time, to show you how wonderfully God has
been appeased, and how strangely judgments have been prevented, by this most
godly and Christian exercise: the Scriptures are plentiful in this point. Yea
it is registered, that even Ahab, only thereunto moved with a base fear of
judgment threatened, and but fasting and wearing sackcloth in hypocrisy, God
deferred the judgment until his sons days 1 King. 21. 27.
. Oh what a blessing did this Land receive hereupon in Ann. 1588. I am
persuaded, never any did humble themselves before the Lord, in true fasting and
prayer, but found a blessing from heaven thereon. Oh that I could but persuade
you to make trial hereof, and to prove the Lord herein: I assure my self, God
is the same loving God, as ready now as ever, most graciously to answer the
soul that sets it self aright to seek God, by such ways and means as he
has prescribed.

Now let us come and make application of these things to ourselves. That God
has many ways Application.
testified his anger and displeasure, and not only threatened, but also in some
measure executed his judgments, who so blind as sees not? But how
Examination.
are men and women affected herewith? Do we, in the conscience of our sins,
judge our selves Sight of sin.
unworthy of any common blessing, peace, food, Unworthiness.
sleep, apparel; and most worthy of all those heavy judgments, which either
he has threatened, or executed on any others? Are we afraid of Gods judgments,
and specially of those that Fear.
are spiritual? I say again, of those that are spiritual, and most
dreadful? Do we grieve exceedingly Sorrow.
and mourn in our souls, that we have so justly offended God, and purchased
his anger and displeasure, and to have the very floudgates and all the sluices
of his judgments drawn up, to our utter overthrow and destruction? Do we
bend our selves with all our strength to pacific Prevention.
God, and prevent his judgments? And to that end, do we with full purpose of
heart, resolve to forsake our own known sins? and to put in practice all holy
purposes and vows? to reform presently whatsoever we know to be amiss in us?
and to show forth more true zeal of Gods glory, and the power of godliness in
our lives, than we have done? Do we pour out our souls in instant prayers
and supplications, with sighs and groans unto God, for ourselves and his
Church? and as our callings and gifts enable and give leave, do we stir up
and provoke others to do so?

If this be so, it is happy, and I cannot but comfortably assure myself, there
are thousands Consolation.
and ten thousands that do so; yea how abundantly have men and women in this
Land, in this Country, and in this City, declared their love to the Gospel,
and compassion to the poor distressed Saints that profess it? which, I doubt
not, but God has registered in his book, and will, in his good time,
remunerate with a large recompense of reward; and I trust we shall yet see
Jerusalem in prosperity, and peace upon Israel. How ever it please God to
deal, yet all such shall find grace, mercy, and peace with God; let such cast
their care on God, for he cares for them.

But let me lament, that there are too too many amongst us, Atheists, Papists,
profane and irreligious Lamentation.
persons, as senseless as blocks and stones of their sins, Gods anger, and
Gods judgments: who being called to weeping and mourning, baldness, and
girding of sackcloth, make songs on those that do so, Psalm. 69. Doe-slay
oxen, and kill sheep, and for their parts, eat flesh, and drink wine Esaias 22.
12.
. Tell them of the afflictions of Gods people, they sit drinking still, let
Shushan be in never so great perplexity Hesth. 3. ult.
; yea, eat the calves out of the stals, and lambs out of the flocks, drink
their wine in bouls, anoint themselves with best ointment, and invent to
themselves instruments of music, like David, but are not sorry for the
afflictions of Joseph Amos 6. 6.
. Yea, I would there were not too many Edomites, who rejoice in the calamity
of the Church, and say, There, there, so would we have it, persecute and take
them, there is none to deliver them, there is no help for them in God, Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground Psalm. 137. 7.
; who would be glad that all religion, and the professors, were utterly ruined
and rooted out, and all as profane as themselves. Tell them of their sins,
they do not know any such things, nor believe that any are better than
themselves. Threaten them with judgments, pestilence, famine, sword, they make
a mock, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die Esaias 22. 14.
; The Prophets words are but wind, tomorrow shall be as to day, and much more
abundant, Esaias 56. ult. Or else desperately say, Let God hasten his work, even
his great work, that we may see it Esaias 5. 19.
; Or else presumptuously say, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
stubbornness of mine heart, and add drunkenness to thirst, no evil shall
happen to me Deuteronomy. 19. 19.
. Others are secure, for They have made a covenant with death, and are at
agreement with hell, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall
not come near them, they have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have
hid themselves Esaias 28. 15.
. Others are angry with the Prophets that threaten, as they accused Jeremy to
the King, that the world was not able to bear his words, that he discouraged
the people, and was never well, till he was in prison, Ierem. 38. 4. Thus they
put off the evil day far from them, and approach to the seat of iniquity,
going from evil to worse, without all fear of God or man, hating to be
reformed.

Oh profane Atheists, Belly-gods, and Worldlings, Conclusion.
know that it is not for your sakes that God spares, it is for his servants
sakes, amongst whom ye live, that ye enjoy so large a share in many good
blessings of God; such as ye despise and make a mock of, yea extremely hate
and persecute, are they, that stand in the breach, and turn Commination
away Gods judgments; but if our sins grow so full, and God make way for his
fiery wrath, by taking away such, and that his judgments do break out, you
shall not escape, nay you shall drink deep of the cup of Gods wrath, yea
suck and wring out the very dregs of the same Psalm. 75. 8.
; you shall find your staves to be but broken reeds Esaias 36. 6.
, and all your shelter for defense, lying, falsehood, and vanity; shift and
shuffle, and fly whither you will, you shall not be able to fly from his
vengeance; though you could dig to hell (as the Prophet speaks Amos 9. 2.
) yet Gods hand would fetch you thence; though climb up to Heaven, he would
pull you down; though hide your selves in most secret caves, and under rocks
and mountains, yet even there shall his vengeance find you out: fly whither
you will, he will command the sword, the pestilence and famine, to pursue you
with terror of heart, and trembling of conscience, the Lord will ever, and
every where, set his face against you for evil, and not for good, till he
has rooted out your names from under Heaven, destroyed you from off the face
of the earth, and cast you into hell, the place prepared for the Devil and all
reprobate ones.

If therefore thou desire to find mercy and comfort, Repent, be sorry for
thy sins, mourn that thou have displeased and offended God, tremble to
think of his judgments, do thy best endeavor to prevent them: for how soever
it shall please God to deal, such and such only shall be most happy. And so
much for the second Doctrine. It follows.

The third Doctrine is, That Gods faithful servants 3. Doct.
are very powerful with God, and as his dear favorites, by their prayers,
to prevent and turn away judgments and calamities, from themselves and Gods
people. This Doctrine I raise from the word (Pagarg) which signifies to
resist, or withstand, as Jerome translateth it (...) Ierom. Translat.
; Non mihi obsist as, Do not withstand me; for the word in native propriety,
intends a kind of force or violence Impetum fecit. Pentoglott.
. One place shall serve amongst many, for to enlighten this point: this word is
used in the book of Judges, where Zebah and Zalmunnah entreat Gedeon, Rise
thou and fall upon us Judge. 8. 21.
; and is, by metaphor, frequently ascribed unto prayer; wherein Gods servants
use an holy force and violence unto God, in their deprecations; which thing
also our English translation signifies, Do not (intercede) which is properly
a Latin word, and signifies to come betwixt Inter and cede.
; and so to let, hinder, withstand, or prohibit the doing of a thing. As if God
had more plainly said, according to the original and Translations, I am
purposed that this people shall be carried into Captivity, and do not thou by
thy prayers come betwixt me and them, to let, hinder, withstand, or resist me.
The Doctrine thus naturally and properly raised, is well fortified and backed
by many other, both positive and exemplarie Scriptures. The Prophet Esaias
Confirmation
complaining of the great want of prayers, does it in this form, There is none
that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee Esaias
64. 7.
. First, observe how in times of greatest need, Gods Observe.
servants may be so dull, as to have need of stirring up, like unto that
elegant metaphorical decomposite of the Apostle unto Timothy, Stir up the
gift of God. The graces of God being like fire, must ever and anon be russled
and stirred up, else will grow cold, (...). Oh stir up your selves.

Secondly, being stirred up by prayers faithful and fervent, men lay hold on
God: And again, I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge,
and stand in the gap before me, for the land, that I should not destroy it
Ezech. 22. penult.
. Our Savior speaks of offering violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
violent taking it by force Matthew. 11. 12.
; wherein prayer has a special part; for woe were it with many, if bodily
strength carried it away, but the poorest and weakest Christian sick in bed,
and scarce able to breathe, yet by sighs and groans may offer violence, and
take Gods kingdom by force: and S. Paul beseeches the Romans, For the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that they would strive with
him in their prayers to God for him Romans 15. 30.
. He would have them pray, but not coldly and negligently, as the Papists
mumbling and tumbling over their beads, when their minds are wandering about
earthly occasions; but he would have them strive with God, and put all their
strength to it; yea, to strive to the shedding of blood, as (...), Simul
contendere.
the word signifies. Christ being in an agony, his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood Luke 22. 44. (...).
. Thus for confirmation of this Doctrine, you have God and his Prophets in the
old Testament, and Christ and his Apostles in the new. To this purpose, sweet
are the sentences of some of the Fathers. An ancient one says, When prayers
join together in devotions, they do (as it were) even band themselves
together to encounter God Quasi manu facta Deum ambiunt orantes. Tertull.
Apolog.
. And another says, The Saints have God so bound, that he cannot punish
without their permission and license Ligatum habent Sancti Deum, ut non puniat
nisi permisermt ipsi. Bernard. in Cantic. Sermon. 30.
. Lo, lo, the incomprehensible mercy and loving kindness of God, toward
such as truly fear and serve him, making them in his goodness, in his
bottomless goodness (I say) so powerful and mighty with him, that their
prayers are as it were bands to tie his hands, and as a wall against him, that
he cannot execute his anger (though most justly deserved) unless they will
suffer him, and (as it were) stand out of his way. How may the consideration
hereof make us exclaim, O Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man, that thou regardest him Psalm. 8. 4.
! or (as Job has it) That thou do set thine heart upon him, Job 7. 17. Will
you Examples.
see how powerful Gods Saints are with God by their prayers, (I mean not to
obtain great blessings, and do great works, the Scripture is so full in this,
I should find no end) but (according to the Text and Doctrine raised) in
preventing threatened judgments to themselves, or the Church of God. Take a few,
selected out of many, for instance. When Jacob soresaw destruction threatened to
himself, and wives and children, by his cruel and bloody brother Esau,
coming out against him with 400. men, then says the Text, was Jacob greatly
afraid and distressed, and falls to prayer unto God for deliverance; yea, and
with that fervencie, that he is said to wrestle with God, and told him he
would not let him go, till he had blessed him Genesis 32. 7. 24.
; and in the end, by his prayers and tears he prevailed Hosh. 12. 4.
; and thereupon was his name changed from Jacob into Israel, which signifies a
Prevailer with God: the evil he feared was removed, his brother that came out
against him as fierce as a Lion, when they met, was as meek as a Lamb; yea,
he confesses he saw his face, as the face of God Genesis 33. 10.
. When the Amalekites came out against Israel, and threatened their destruction,
Moses went up into the mountain and prayed, and when he held up his hands in
prayer unto God, Israel prevailed; but when he let down his hands, Amalek
prevailed Exodus 17. 11. Plus precando, quam praeliando.
: which shows, that the push of Moses prayers, did more than the pikes of all
Israel besides. When again, for that great sin of worshipping the golden
Calfe, God, before he signified to Moses his purpose to consume them, and blot
out their names from under Heaven, bade him let him alone; yet Moses by prayer
prevailed with God, for pardon of their sin, and continuance of his favor
Exodus 32. 10. 14.
; whereof David speaks thus, He said he would destroy them, had not Moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath Psalm. 106. 23.
; where he compares Moses to a valiant Captain, who when besieging enemies
have made a breach in the wall, and the City is like to be lost, steppeth up
into the breach, and defends it, which Moses did by the power of his prayer,
and turned away Gods wrath from his people. Again, for the children of Isreal's
murmuring against Moses and Aaron, the plague began amongst them, and there
died fourteen thousand and seven hundred, wherefore Moses commanded Aaron,
quickly to take fire from the Altar, and put on incense, and stand betwixt the
living and the dead, and so the plague ceased Number. 16. 41. 46.
; whereof in the Wisdom of Solomon we have an excellent paraphrase, and
fitting our purpose: the blameless man made haste, and stood forth to defend
them, and bringing the shield of his Ministry, even prayer and the
propitiation of incense, he set himself against the wrath, and overcame the
destroyer Wisd. 13 21.
; the words in the Greek Text are very significant, (...), propugnavit, he
fought valiantly; he brought forth, (...), Arma Ministerij, the weapons of his
Ministry, and (...), he resisted wrath, non vi, sed precibus: all the created
powers in heaven and earth cannot resist God, yet may a poor man, by the power
of his prayers, turn away Gods wrath, and procure an undeserved blessing, and
remove a most just deserved punishment. As the young infant more prevails
with the father or mother by a tear, Simile.
than the strength of arm; so God pitieth us as a father Psalm. 103. 13.
; has more compassion than a mother Esaias 66. 13.
; he cannot but fulfill the desires of such as fear him Psalm. 145. 19.
. David saw the Angel stretching his hand out upon Jerusalem to destroy it,
and yet by prayer prevailed with God to spare it; who said to the Angel, It is
enough, stay now thine hand 2 Samuel ult. 16, 17.
. In that great tempest by sea, when there was no hope of life, yet Paul
prayed, and God gave him the lives of all that passed, being to the number of
two hundred threescore and sixteen souls; so as though they made shipwreck,
and with the violence of the sea the ship was broken to pieces, yet not one
soul was lost, all came safe to shore Acts 27. 24. 37. ult.
. And if the prayers of one be so powerful with God, how much more the prayers
of many being united? Let Hesther, and Mordechai, and the Jews, fast and pray,
and then comes most wonderful deliverance to Gods people, and destruction to
their enemies Hesth. 4. 16, 17.
. Does there come up an huge multitude of Moabites, Ammonites, and Mount Seir,
against King Iehoshaphat? let but him proclaim a fast throughtout all Judah,
and let them pray, and God will make their enemies destroy one another, and he
and his shall look on, and only sing and praise God 2 Chronicles. 14. 9, 10.
. Oh Peter is in prison, a great calamity is thereby threatened to the Church,
but if the Church make prayers to God for him, the Angel of the Lord came,
with great power and glory into the prison, and brake off Peter's chains,
opened the prison doors, yea and made the iron gate open of it own accord
Act. 12. 7.
. Lo how the prayers of Gods children are stronger than fetters and gates of
iron. Yea Christ is gone on high, and has left his Church; what is now to be
done? let them continue in prayer, and do their duty: after the Holy Ghost
comes, as this day witnesses; which, and much more, that might be said to
this purpose, does abundantly confirm your raised Doctrine, viz. That Gods
faithful servants by their prayers, are powerful with God, to turn away and
prevent threatened and imminent judgments, to themselves or the Church of God:
which made zealous Luther say, There is nothing omnipotent under God, but
faithful prayer Oration fidelis omnipotens, Luth. Est quedam onmipotentia
precum. Alstedius System. Theolog. lib. 4. cap. 2.
: This commands all things, in heaven, earth, hell; in all the elements,
air, fire, earth, water. But it would not be amiss to search, that we may
know the reasons, why the prayers of Gods servants are so powerful with God,
and they are principally these two, viz.

First, our prayers are not our own, as the Reasons.
work of our reason, will, affections, or any thing 1. Gods spirit.
that is natural in us, but the operation of Gods own Spirit in us; For as
for us, we know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes
request for us Romans 8. 26.
: and again, It is the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father Romans 8.
15.
. In nothing is there so evident demonstration of the spirit of God, as in
zealous prayer. To which purpose Gregory has an excellent saying, The Saints
receive from God, what they oppose to his blows, and, as I may say, from him
it is, whereby they lift up themselves against him, and whereby they are
enabled to resist him Ab ipso accipiunt, ut contra impetum percussionis ejus
opponantur: atque ut ita dixerim, cum ipso Deo se erigunt contra ipsum. Greg.
mor. lib. 9. cap. 12.
. Jacob wrestled with God and prevailed, but it was God gave him the strength
so to do; now God cannot but acknowledge the work of his own Spirit, and
therefore, we know that whatsoever we ask of the Father according to his will,
he hears us 1 Ioh. 5. 14.
; and our Savior has said, Whatsoever ye shall ask my Father in my name, he
will give it you Ioh. 16. 23.
. But the prayers of Turks, Jews, Idolaters, Heretics, Infidels, Hypocrites,
are of no power with God, because such are not made by the Spirit of God; the
prayers of a wicked man are abominable, and turn into sin; no more accepted
of God, than if he cut off a dogs neck Esaias 66. 3.
; God has threatened, that though such do multiply their prayers, he will not
hear them Esaias 1. 15.
.

The second reason hereof, is Gods own free 2. Gods free love.
love and mercy, who is pleased to make all the faithful his favorites, so as
Haman, nor any favorite, could ever do so much with those Monarchs and Kings,
that have set their love upon them, as the least of Gods Saints may do with
the Lord: for if earthly Kings be exceedingly offended, favorites must give
way, Hamans face must be covered, he shall never see the Kings face any more
Hest. 7. 8.
: But though God be angry, and have mustred his Armies, yea and besieged, and
battered, so powerful are Gods servants, that they can stand up in the breach,
and by their prayers turn away threatened judgments. Oh who would not be such
a Kings favorite! who cannot deny any thing, which is for his glory, and their
true good? The more I think on this, the more I am astonished, that man,
poor, miserable man, weak, sick, diseased, vile and abominable in his own
eyes, despised of others, yet should be such a favorite to the King of Kings:
Oh the free mercy and love of God! How should the consideration hereof ravish
us?

This being so, when the sins of a people are full, and when the Lord is
purposed to bring a judgment upon a people, he commonly makes way thereunto.
As an earthly King purposing to do a thing which he knows is displeasant to
his favorite, who would hinder him in it, will make way, by sending him out of
the way, or forbidding him to speak, or some way taking him off: So the Lord,
sometimes by taking to himself, 1. Restraint Death.
and calling out of this world, such as else would stand in the gap; whereof
the Prophet Esaias thus speaks; The righteous is taken away from the evil to
come Esaias. 57. 1.
. Thus God took away good King Josiah, that in his sons days he might bring
the threatened evil upon the Land 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.
.: And God took good S. Augustine, when his City Hippo was besieged by the
Vandals, that he should not stand in the breach for them Moritur B. Augustinus
in urbe Hipponae, cum a Vandalis obsideretur, temporibus Theodosij Iunioris,
Anno Dom. 430. Sixth. Senens. lib. 4. 2. Restraint.
.

Or if he suffer them to live, he restrains them from prayer, as here he did
our Prophet; and rebuked Samuel, How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I
have rejected him from reigning over Israel 1 Samuel 16. 1.
. Or else he takes away the spirit of prayer, and does suffer it to be dulled,
as that they cannot pray fervently; as Esaias complained that no man did stir
up himself Malu^, orationem, ejusque vim amovere. Castro. in Ierem. page 73.
to lay hold on God, but as it were grew weary.

As then it is a most comfortable thing to see godly men to live, and to see
men zealous in preaching, praying, and serving God; as when a storm comes,
to see all men betake themselves to their tacklings, as the Prophet says, to
stir up them selves to lay hold on God: so is it a fearful thing to see the
righteous taken away by death; or such as have been zealous, to become cold,
careless, and negligent, set all at six and seven, let others care whom it
does more concern, and so post it over from one to another. For hereby God
even makes way to the execution of some great judgment, by removing such as
might stand in the breach, and stop his course.

And verily, herein lies no small part of our fear, that within these few
years past, God has Application.
taken away a great number of his faithful servants, both Magistrates,
Ministers, and Christian people; and howsoever in his mercy, he has left a
remnant, some few Noah's, and Lots, Nehemiahs, and Esaies, that being sensible
of Gods judgments, do warn this secure and unthankful world, lift up their
hearts and hands with Moses against Amalek, make intercession with faithful
Abraham, mourn for the abominations of the Land, wrestle and weep with Jacob,
(otherwise we had surely been made long ago as Sodom, and like to Gomorrha
Esaias 1. 9.
) yet alas, what are these amongst so many profane, careless, and secure
sinners? and how are these scorned and derided, disgraced and discouraged, how
are such for signs and wonders in Israel, Esaias 8. 18. and generally wished
they were taken out of the way, as those that trouble the world, and if it were
not for them it would be well, and we should have merry times. Oh unthankful
world, oh wretched and unthankful world, that wilt not acknowledge, but hate
and persecute such as stand in the breach, and resist God! Well know, if ever
all the Noah's be is the Arc, and all the Lots out of Sodom; if all these
swallows have once taken their flight there will come the coldest and
wofullest winter, that ever the Church amongst us felt and endured. But of this
more anon. Let us now proceed to the uses of this Doctrine, whereof the first
is.

Seeing Gods servants are powerful with God, 1. Use.
to prevent judgments threatened to themselves and others, and seeing Gods
judgments are not only threatened to our selves, and in fearful measure
executed, specially on our brethren in other Countries; let us practice this
Doctrine, stir up our selves, by most humble, hearty, and devout prayers, to
lay hold on God, and as it were resist him in his course, and not let him go
till his indignation be overpast. Do you profess your selves the servants of
God, and will you not do this? Do you believe, God will hear your prayers,
and yet will ye not pray? Oh be not wanting to your selves, and to the Church
of God in this! In some things, Kings and Princes may do the Church of God
good, wherein subjects cannot; in other things Ministers may do that good,
which common Christians cannot; in other things rich men may do that good,
that poor cannot; in other things strong and able men may do that good, which
weak, and feeble, and impotent cannot; yea in many things men may do that
good, which women cannot; but in this, all men and women, may do alike good,
by prayer for the good of Gods Church: What can we do more easily, or more
fruitfully? It may be we have not silver, gold, food, raiment, but none so
poor, (of Gods Saints) as have not prayer. If we were rich, the poorer sort
are only thereby releeved, but by prayer we do good to all, even the richest.
Again, whereas some other duties, require the presence of friends, and all of
them season and opportunity; it is never out of season to pray; yea therewith
even in the twinkling of an eye, we may help such as are thousands of miles
off. Oh fie on our dullness then, specially the members of Christ Reprehension.
(to whom we cannot otherwise do good) so greatly standing in need hereof,
that we should so seldom and coldly, (if at all) help them with our prayers;
specially God so calling upon us for it, and giving such comfortable assurance
we shall be heard. If an earthly Prince should make Proclamation Simile.
to all his subjects, that if they would come to the Court, and make suit, they
should all of them have Lordships, houses, lands, manors, offices; imagine
what riding and running there would be; how would they think him most worthy
to beg his bread, yea to starve through want, if he would not go and ask? But
that the King of heaven has commanded us to pray, and promised, whatsoever
good thing we shall ask in his Sons name, according to his will, we shall
have it, for this life present, or a better hereafter, for our selves or
others; and we see how well others have sped, yea our selves have had great
experience of Gods goodness in this kind: and it may be God has cut us and
others short, and threatened much evil, and all because he would provoke us to
pray, as delighting to be importuned, and wrestled with: Yet all this will not
serve to provoke us so to pray as we ought. It may be Concession.
sickness, hunger, thirst, nakedness, temporal losses and crosses, may make
us sometimes cry unto God: but who does strive with God for the best things for
themselves? And to speak according to the nature of my Text, How is Ierusalems
good generally forgotten? It may be, we may bear her a good will, and for
fashion or custom, as we walk and talk with others, let good wishes fall,
rejoice when we hear good news; shake heads, shucke the shoulders, and sigh,
when we hear evil tidings; (and yet how few do thus far testify their
love?) but who (even of her best friends) frequently, and fervently, publicly
and privately, at least thrice a day with Daniel, looks toward Jerusalem? and
for Jerusalem, whetting the edge of our zeal and devotion, by premeditation of
what an happiness it were, and how greatly to Gods honor and glory, that
Jerusalem should prosper, and what a misery, and dishonor to God, that she
should go to wrack and ruin; helping our weakness, with abstinence and
fasting, as Nehemiah, and Hesther, and the Jews did, that so we may cry
mightily unto God, and resolved with the woman of Canaan, to take no nay, the
Lord shall never be rid of us, we will never cease knocking at heavens gate
till he hear, and help?

Oh where are these friends? Why does the Church of God suffer so much evil?
Why does she lie open to the execution of such fearful judgments? Because
Gods faithful servants give way, and do not stand in the breach for her, to
resist God. There was a curse, yea a bitter curse, laid upon the inhabitants of
Meroz, because they did not help the Lord against the mighty, Judge. 5. 23. And
no less curse does lie on the Inhabitants of any Place and Country, when the
Lord is in arms, that do not by their prayers help the poor weak Church
against God: that do not lay hold on him and resist him, but suffer him to
crush and destroy. The greatest victories and deliverances that ever we read
of, were obtained by fasting and prayer, yea seldom, if ever, was the Church
in any trouble and danger, and delivered, but it was procured by prayer: and
surely it is not without divine providence and grace, that Gods Ministers do
so labor to stir you up, for even that shows God has a great blessing in
store for his Church, if his servants would but ask it of him. Wherefore I say
again, Pray, pray, pray for the welfare of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love it. Wherefore God Conclusion.
has sent me to you, and to call on all that hear me this day, Pray, pray,
pray, and to make you excuselesse if ye neglect it. And that mine exhortation
hereunto may be the more weighty and powerful, I will deliver it in the
words of the holy Prophet Zephanie, our Prophets fellow laborer, who having in
the first chapter threatened the heavy and severe judgments of God against
Judah for her sins, That the Lord would utterly Zeph. 1.
consume all things from the land, man and beast, fowls and fishes, and that
the great day of the Lord is near, and hastes greatly, when the weighty man
shall cry bitterly, for it is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress,
a day of wastnesse and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of
the trumpet and alarm, against the defenced Cities and high towers: blood
shall be powered out as dust, and flesh at dung: neither shall silver nor gold
be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land
shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy, for he shall make a clean
riddance of all them that dwell in the land. I say, after the Prophet had thus
spent, and concluded the first chapter in denunciation of severe judgments, in
that fearful manner, as might make the knees knock, and hair stand upright:
mark how he begins the second chapter, with heavenly and good counsel,
Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, o nation not desired before
the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chafe, before the fierce
anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come upon
you, seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid, in
the day of the Lords anger Zeph. 2. 1.
.

Where note, that when Gods judgments are 1. Observe.
threatened, men and women must not sit down carelessly with hand over head; Let
God do his will, I shall escape as well as others, it concerns me the least
of many thousands. But God would have men to be exceedingly affected at the
testimonies of Gods anger, and to tremble at his judgments: a Doctrine which
has been raised, and largely handled from this Scripture already.

Secondly, note, that he would not have the faithful content themselves to
mourn and pray 2. Observe.
in secret, but to gather together, so far as their callings and gifts will
serve, to draw on others to the practice of piety and godliness.

Thirdly, note who they are that God specially 3. Observe.
looks should seek him, as being his favorites, and such as are best able
to resist him, even such as are meek on earth, i. Such as are meek to stoop
to the instructions of the Word, such as are meek patiently to bear the
corrections of his rod; and such as are meek, to put up wrongs and injuries,
still crying to God for the good of his people, even when they offer them
greatest injuries. Such a meek man was Moses, most earnest for the peoples
good, when they were readiest to stone him. Moreover, they must be such as have
wrought his judgments; i. Such as have kept themselves unspotted, and
specially from Idolatry, such as have still cleaved unto God, his Word, Law,
and Commandments, doing such things as he has judged to be just and right,
still walking with God as Enoch did; these are the men, who in all ages have
only been in favor with God, and most powerful with their prayers: wherefore
Pharaoh entreated Moses and Aaron to pray for him; and the people in their
distress run to Samuel, and pray him not to cease to one to God for them.
And verily how (...) (...) wicked world esteem of them, all the hope and help
of a people that can come from man, remains in these, and their prayers only.
Again, that their prayers may be 4. Observe.
the more available, it must not suffice that they have been meek, and have
wrought right, but they must seek meekness and righteousnessei. Labor every
day to be more and more meek and righteous, walking with such care and
conscience in all the Commandments and Ordinances of God, that the world
cannot have the least matter against them, except it be as against Daniel, for
the matters, of their God: for the more mortified, sanctified, and holy any
are, in the greater favor they are with God, and the more powerful are their
prayers, for themselves and others. Whereas God will not hear sinners, no not
for themselves, much less for others, it being as dangerous for a sinner to
come near unto God, as for the dry stubble to come near the flaming fire.
Wherefore David would wash his hands in innocence, and so go to his table
Psalm. 26. 6.
; and the Priests had their laver to wash hands and feet in, before they went
to minister to the Lord.

Then lastly observe, what shall be the comfortable 5. Observe.
issue of such seeking God; viz. That if they cannot prevail with Gods
Majesty, for the sparing of his people, yet they shall save their own souls,
and find an hiding place in the day of the Lord. One of these two, or both,
they shall be sure to find; and the very lesser of them is an abundant reward,
for all the labor any can take in seeking, God, though it were day and night.
An example whereof we have in our Prophet, who taking exceedingly to heart, the
misery of Gods people which he foresaw, and wishing his head were waters, and
his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night for his
people Ierem. 9. 1.
: and protesting to God, that he stood before him to speak good for them, and
to turn away his wrath Ierem. 18. 20.
; howsoever therein he could not prevail, and in the end God forbade him to
pray for them, yet his prayers and tears were returned into his own bosom;
for as God promised him, Verily I will make the enemies to entreat thee well,
in the time of evil, and in the time of affliction Ierem. 15. 11.
, so God performed it: For Jeremy being in prison when Jerusalem was taken,
Nabuzaradan the chief Steward, (according to the command which Nebuchad-nezzar
had given him) not only set him at liberty, but gave him victuals, and a
reward, with leave to go whither he would Iere. 40. 2, 3, 4, 5.
; so good a thing it is to be faithful unto God, how ever things go with his
Church.

Upon these grounds from Gods Word, I renew Conclusion.
mine exhortation again, Pray, pray, pray, you shall at the least deliver your
own souls. Yea let me yet speak a word of further comfort Consolation.
unto you; I cannot find one example in all the Book of God, wherein a people
humbling themselves in sincerity, in any measure, according to the ordinance
and word of the Lord, but they were ever delivered from that temporal
judgment threatened, at the least for the present. Oh therefore that it would
please God, that the Lords Ministers could stir up all the meek of the Land,
to seek the Lord in repentance and prayer, to step up into the breach,
intercede, and resist God, I would not doubt, but as to see judgments pass
over us, so to see peace on Gods Israel abroad. There is help for Jerusalem in
her God, and when the Lord has brought her on her knee, and clothed her with
sackcloth, for her sins, he will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the
King of Ashur, and the glory of his high looks, who does not know, that he is
the rod of Gods wrath Esaias 10. 6, 7.
. The stripes of Jerusalem shall be healed, but the wounds of Babylon are
incurable, there is no Balm in Gilead for her; Jerusalem may be shaken, but it
is Babylon shall fall, and never rise again: Oh then pray, and pray heartily,
for the welfare of Jerusalem, and then stand still, and see the salvation of
God Exodus 14. 13.
, who has means that we see not, to accomplish his act, his strange act, and
to bring to pass his work, even his strange work Esaias 28. 21.
.

A second use, is to love, honor, and make much 2. Use.
of such, as are so gracious and powerful with God, as to stand in the breach,
and to withstand and remove threatened judgments. Oh let Noah the Preacher of
righteousness, have double honor; let Lot be loved, that does grieve his
righteous soul; let us make great reckoning of Moses, that stands in the
breach, to stay the Lords anger; for as was said of Elijah, These, these, are
the chariots and horsemen of Israel 2 King. 2. 12.
. These, these, are the protection of the Church, and fortification of the
Land: These are to us, as Paul was unto them in the ship with him, the saving
of houses and goods, lives and liberties; it is for the godlies sake that dwell
amongst us, that the Gospel, and our gracious King and Governor, peace and
prosperity, with all other our blessings are continued unto us: if it had not
been for their sakes, we may well assure our selves, the full viols of Gods
wrath, (as in the Powder Treason, or otherwise) had long since been powered
down upon us.

And here give me leave (upon so just occasion) Reprehension.
to reprove the unthankfulness of the world, toward such, as, under God, are
a singular means of our preservation. Never were Noah, or Lot, more mocked,
scorned, and derided, than the godly in these days, disgraced, and loaded with
all indignities, as the men unworthy to live in the world; who if they humble
their souls with fasting, and put on sack cloth, they that sit in the gate
speak against them, and the drunkards make songs of them, Psalm. 69. And when
it pleases God to take them away by death, they are as glad thereof, as the
inhabitants of the earth were for the death of the two witnesses, who reioiced,
and made merry, and sent gifts one to another Revel. 11. 10.
. Alas that this foolish world should be such an enemy to its best friends, and
from whom it receives most good. Oh little do wicked men know, what a
treasure they lose in the death of a good man, how open then they lie to the
lash of Gods judgments, when he is gone, that used to stand in the breach. It
was said of Elijah (as you heard) that he was the chariots and horsemen of
Israel 2 King. 2. 12.
. And it was said of godly S. Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, and of whom
Theodosius the Emperor pronounced, That he only knew Ambrose worthy to be
called a Bishop (...).
, That he was the walls of Italy: and Stilico the Earl said, his death did
threaten destruction to Italy Sic Paulinus Nolae Episcopus in vita Ambrosij.
. And indeed, how Italy has been harrowed and brought to desolation by the
fire and sword of barbarous Nations, the Goths, Hunnes, and Vandals, and made
the Theater of most lamentable Tragedies, Histories do report. In places where
enemies are up in Arms, chariots and horses are in great request; and when
enemies besiege, there is great regard had to the walls; if they have breaches
made in them, and none to defend, or fall down flat (as the walls of Jericho
did Josh. 6. 20.
) those Cities must needs be surprised: Now good men are as the walls of the
Commonwealth, City, or Town, where they dwell; if it were not for them, the
judgments of God would break in, and destroy them. How are such to be
esteemed? Noah was as a wall to the old world, and no sooner in the Arc, but
the flood came and destroyed them all. Lot was as a wall to Sodom, and no
sooner in Zoar, but fire and brimstone fell and consumed them all. The
Christians were as the wall to Jerusalem, and no sooner in Pella, but Jerusalem
was surprised and sacked. No sooner had Josiah his eyes closed, that he might
not see the vengeance, but be taken to rest, as God had promised, but
straightway the woeful tragedy of Judah and Jerusalem began. Wherefore the
Prophet complains, that good and merciful men are taken away, and men do
not take it to heart Esaias 57. 1.
, as a great loss, and fearful prognostication of evil.

For conclusion, seeing Gods servants are so Conclusion.
powerful with God, and that only by prayer, and we do not know how to pray,
as we ought ourselves, but it is the Spirit which helps our infirmity Romans
8. 15. 26.
, and makes us cry Abba Father Romans 8. 15. 26.
: And God has promised, to give his Spirit to them that ask it Luke 11. 13.
. As every good gift comes down from the Father of lights Iam. 1. 17.
, so specially this most excellent, proper, and peculiar gift of prayer. I pray
you observe, that whereas the Lord by his Prophet promises, I will destroy all
the Nations that come against Jerusalem, he presently adds in the next words,
as the means whereby so great a favor is procured, I will pour upon the
house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and
of supplication Zach. 12. 9, 10.
.

Where note, first, what is the lot and condition 1. Observe.
of all the persecutors of Jerusalem, that first or last, they shall be
destroyed. Secondly, that the 2. Observe.
means whereby destruction is procured, of the enemies of Jerusalem, Gods
Church and people, is prayer. Lastly, that this gift of prayer comes 3.
Observe.
down from God, it is his gift, he will pour out the spirit of supplications:
and verily as there is no gift more necessary and useful, none more rare; how
poor are some in this, that are rich in some other graces? I know, God gives
this in measure, to some more, and some less, according to his good pleasure.
And God forbid, I should discourage any, (and specially novices, and
younglings) for it is most clear, that even the sighs and groans of a
faithful penitent soul, are loud and shrill cries in the ears of God: short
ejaculations, God be merciful unto me; God bless his Church; God prosper his
Gospel; God convert, or confound, the enemies of his Church and Truth; even
these, uttered, not for form, fashion, use, custom, but fervently, heartily,
are most excellent and powerful prayers; yet herein we are not to rest, but to
seek after a growth in this, as in other graces of the Spirit, and never to
cease begging of God, till in good measure, according to the Scripture phrase,
even in the language of Canaan, we be able to express our own wants, and the
wants of his Church; and in his own words, to crave such blessings and graces,
as we, or his people, do stand in need of; Standing in the breach, with his
own weapons, of gracious Covenant, and Promise, and Oath, in one hand, and
urging his own Arguments, of truth, grace, glory. Oh this is an excellent gift
indeed, and this is the way to bring destruction upon the enemies of Jerusalem;
and whosoever seeks this grace, shall in good measure obtain it; and as any
receive, let them use it, and they shall, to their great comfort, see a blessed
increase of it.

Oh most gracious good God, we humbly A Prayer.
thank thee, that though our sins be many, great and grievous, yet thou have
not suddenly rooted us up, and destroyed us, as we have deserved; but have, for
many and many years, from thy word, and works, of mercy, and justice, on our
selves and others, warned us. Thou never gave greater and fairer warning to
any people, than thou have done to us. But seeing thou art a God of justice,
and when thy patience is long abused, and no means will serve, thou visitest
indeed, and in dreadful manner; Lord give us grace, to take to heart thy
threatened judgments, and stir up all thy faithful servants, that they may
stand in the breach, to turn away thine anger from us; yea Lord, give to all
us that have heard thee this day, the spirit of prayer and supplication, that
by our lips and lives, we may cry unto thee. And because Atheism, and Popish
Idolatry, are the common plagues, wherewith thou do scourge a people, who do
not receive the love of the truth, nor walk worthy the glorious Gospel
vouchsafed unto them; Lord deliver us from these plagues, grant thy Gospel a
free and powerful passage, and increase every where the love and obedience of
it, that such judgments as are threatened for contempt of it, may be removed,
and thou may continue a good God, to us and ours, to the coming of Christ.
Amen.

For I will not hear thee.] It is very common Sense.
in the Scriptures of Old and New Testament, to promise and threaten, the grant
or denial of men's prayers, in this form of hearing or not hearing. One place
of Scripture (selected out of a great multitude) may serve for proof of this:
We know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God,
and does his will, him he hears Ioh. 9. 31.
. So then, the meaning (of not hearing) is, God will deny what the Prophet
should thus beg of God. If the Prophet (contrary to his charge) should make
his suit unto God, to spare his people, and preserve them from captivity, he
would not hear, he would not grant his desire; he should but sin against
God himself, and do the people no good; God was now unchangeably resolved,
Judah should into captivity, as well as their brethren the ten Tribes; he was
resolved to cast them out of his sight, as he had done the whole seed of
Ephraim; and it were bootlesse for the Prophet to pray against this, which he
signifies thus, I will not hear thee Non ego exaudiam.
. Indeed it is true, that the judgments of God are commonly conditional, as
God himself has Prevention.
said, At what time I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom, to pluck up, to pull down, and destroy it; if that nation against
whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil
which I thought to do unto them Ierem. 18. 7, 8.
. And in threatenings, sometimes the condition is expressed, as diverse times God
threatens his people thus; If ye walk contrary to me, and will not hearken
unto me, I will punish you seven times more Levit. 26. 18, 21, 24.
. Sometimes the condition is not expressed, but necessarily understood, as when
Jonah threatened Ninivie, Yet forty days, and Ninivie shall be destroyed
Jonah. 3. 4.
; the forty days came, and Ninivie was not destroyed, God changed his
revealed will, because the concealed condition was kept, for Ninivie repented,
and therefore must not be destroyed. Yea the same judgment which at the first
threatening may be conditional, yet afterward may become absolute, and
unavoidable; as the destruction of Sodom was at the first conditionally
threatened, and therefore Abraham so far prevailed with God, that if there
were but ten righteous persons found in it, he would spare them for those tens
sake Genesis 18. penult.
; but that condition failing, it was in the next place absolutely threatened,
the Angels said to Lot; The Lord has sent us to destroy this City, and we will
destroy it Genesis 19. 13.
. It might be the case of this people: if when Gods servants Application.
reproved them for their sins, and threatened them with captivity, they had
repented in sackcloth and ashes, peradventure the Lord would have heard them,
and repented of the evil: But seeing they would not be reformed, but grew
worse and worse, and unto all their other sins, adding this crying one, of
evil entreating, yea most shamefully abusing Gods servants, who dealt
faithfully with them, to bring them to the sight of their sins and
repentance; honoring and esteeming none but the false Prophets, who preached
peace, and pleasing things: God is now resolved to bring a heavy judgment,
even the sword of the enemy upon them, and to give them over into captivity,
reveals this purpose to his Prophet Jeremy: The Land shall be desolate, the
earth shall mourn, and the heavens above be black; I have spoken it, I have
purposed it, and will not repent, neither will I turn back from it Ierem. 4.
28.
. Yea to make it (if it were possible) more sure, he told him, He had sworn by
himself, that house (wherein they so trusted) should become a desolation
Ierem. 22. 5.
. And to add yet more weight thereunto, expressly forbids the Prophet to
pray, cry, or make intercession to him in behalf of the people in this kind,
assuring him, if he should he would not hear him, or grant his request. The
sense being given, and that which might be said against it, prevented, now I
raise your fourth and last lesson, for instruction, viz.

That such may be the sins of Gods dear 4. Genesis Doct.
Church, and people in general, and of his faithful servants in particular,
that he will bring some temporal judgment upon them, and he will not hear
themselves, nor others for them, in this kind Cum Deus semel ab intimis
irascendo disponit. Ordin. gloss. ex Gregor. in Exodus 32. 10.
. This being a Doctrine which does so exceedingly concern us, even as much as
all our lives, and livelihood, bodies, and goods come to, is not slightly to
be regarded, but in the holy fear of God, to be advisedly considered of, and
taken to heart. In the handling whereof, I purpose to spend all my labors here
and elsewhere this day. For method and order wherein, and Method.
help of memory, there being so much now to be delivered, I will first
sufficiently prove it, from both positive, and exemplary Scriptures; (that all
of us may see and acknowledge the truth of it) Secondly, declare the reasons
thereof, that we may see how just and true God is therein; Thirdly, search what
are those sins which do so exasperate and provoke God, that he will not
spare; (that so we may take heed of them) Fourthly and lastly, I will make
application to our selves, and search, whether those sins be found amongst
us; and remove such objections as may be made against it, and accordingly
press the use unto you. And all these, I will deliver with such plain
evidence, as I have received from the word, which has only power over the
soul and conscience. First then, let us see how the word of God makes this
doctrine good.

First, take knowledge, that the Scriptures are 1. Confirmat.
most clear, that such may be the sins of a people, that God will not regard
their own praying and fasting. Hearken how the Lord himself 1. Not hear them.
threatens a rebellious people: Because I have called, and ye have refused, I
have stretched out mine hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught
all my counsel, and would none of my reproof, I will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and
your destruction comes as a whirlwinde. Then they shall call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me Prove.
1. 24.
. Lo, how the sins of a people may come to that height, that in their
greatest calamity and destruction, and when they cry most fervently, and seek
God early; yet God will be so far from hearing and answering of them, that
he will laugh and mock them. And again, When ye spread forth your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you; yea when ye make many prayers, I will not hear
Esaias 1. 15.
. And again, by our Prophet he says; When they fast, I will not hear their
cry, but I will consume them, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence Ierem. 14. 12.
. And again, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to
escape; and though they shall cry, yet will I not hearken unto them Ierem. 11.
11.
. And again, I will deal in fury, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I
have pity; and though they cry in mine ears, with a loud voice, yet will I
not hear them Ezekiel. 8. ult.
. Lo, how plainly and plentifully, this is proved, though but by a few places,
in stead of many.

And as he has threatened, he will not hear 2. Not others for them.
themselves, though they fast, and pray, and cry aloud; so neither will he
hear any others, no not the best of his servants for them. Mark your Text;
Jeremy, an excellent man of God, and sanctified in his mothers womb, yet God
tells him, if he pray against the peoples captivity, he will not hear him;
yea and tells him, (because he should not think that he was out of favor)
that if Moses and Samuel stood before him, yet his mind could not be toward
his people. Cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth; and if they say,
whither shall we go forth? thou shall tell them, Thus says the Lord, such as
are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such
as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the
captivity Ierem. 15. 1.
. See what persons God has picked out of all the bunch, of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Judges, and Kings. Who ever prevailed more by prayer with God for
others, than Moses and Samuel? When the people had committed that foul
Idolatry, in worshipping the golden Calfe, God said, He would destroy them, had
not Moses his chosen stood up in the gap Psalm. 106. 23.
: But Moses he besought the Lord, and prevailed. The Lord repented of the
evil, and did it not Exodus 32. 14.
. And when the Philistims came up against Israel, and they were exceedingly
afraid, Samuel, Oh faithful Samuel the Lords Priest, cried unto the Lord for
Israel, and the Lord heard him, and thundered with a great thunder, and
discomfited the Philistims 1 Samuel 7. 9.
. But if Moses, and Samuel, did now stand before the Lord, his mind cannot be
won toward this people, but they shall go into captivity. And again, by
another Prophet he says; Son of man, when the Land sins against me, by
trespassing grievously, and I stretch out mine hand and break the staff of
bread, and send a famine, and cut off man and beast; though these three men
were in it, Noah, Job, and Daniel, they should deliver but their own souls by
their righteousness. Or if I bring noisome beasts, or bring a sword, or a
pestilence, to cut off man and beast, as I live, says the Lord, though these
three men were in it, Noah, Daniel, and Job, yet should they deliver neither
son nor daughter, they should only deliver their own souls, but the Land
shall be desolate Ezekiel. 14. 13, 14, 15.
. Oh see again, what three Worthies he does instance in? Noah, that upright
man in the old World, when all flesh had corrupted their ways; Job, that
upright man, and fearing God in the Land of Vz; and Daniel, that man of Gods
desire, in Babylon. Three men, who could do much with God, for whom God did
much; yet if they had prayed for this people, God would not hear them, they
should not be able to deliver son nor daughter, but only their own souls.

And as such may be the sins of a nation or 2. Of particular persons.
people, so also of a particular person, yea of Gods dear servants, that he
will not hear them, but bring some temporal punishment upon them. How great a
favorite was Moses unto God? to whom God spoke mouth to mouth, as a man
talks familiarly with his friend Exodus 33. 11. Numb. 12. 6, 7.
; who obtained by his prayer so many and great things at the hands of God for
others; so apparently honored and graced of God, that the Lord asked Aaron and
Miriam., Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses Numb.
12. 8.
? Yet this great and good man, for not sanctifying God at the waters of strife,
yea for once speaking unadvisedly with his lips, and thereunto much provoked by
that rebellious people Psalm. 106. 32.
, was threatened he should not go into the promised land Numb. 20. 12.
: An heavy judgment. And though Moses made it his earnest suit unto God; O
Lord God, thou have begun to show to thy servant great kindness, I pray thee
let me go over and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly
mountain, and Lebanon; yet the Lord would not hear him, but cut him off,
saying, Let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this matter Deuteronomy. 3. 24.
. David Gods dear servant, and a man after Gods own heart Acts 13. 22.
, and for whose sake he did much to others; (how often have we these promises,
for my servant David's sake?) yet he, begetting a child on Bethshebah the wife
of Vriah, the Lord struck the child, that it was very sick; and though David
besought the Lord for the child, and fasted, and went in, and lay all night
upon the earth, yet God would not hear him, but on the seventh day the child
died, according to the word of the Lord by his Prophet Nathan; Because by this
deed, thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme,
the child that is borne to thee, shall surely die 2 Samuel 12. 14.
. And again, for his great sin of numbering the people, the Lord sent him a
message by his Prophet Gad, that he would send either pestilence, famine, or
sword: and though David repented, and complained that he was in a great strait,
yet he could not obtain freedom, but (according to his choice) God sent a
pestilence, whereof in three days there died seventie thousand men 2 Samuel ult.
13.
. Let all men and women then subscribe to this undoubted truth of God, that
such may be the sins of Gods Church in general, or of his own dear
servants in particular, that God will not hear themselves, nor others for
them, but will bring such a temporal punishment as he has purposed upon them.

But now me thinks I hear some say, Oh Object.
this is an heavy and comfortless doctrine indeed, and seems to check all
devotion and humiliation; for will not men, hearing this doctrine delivered,
say, If the case be so, that for sins, yea even small sins (as the sins
of Moses, and David, in speaking unadvisedly, and numbering the people, seem to
be) God will be so far provoked, as no praying, fasting, crying, tears, of
their own, or others for them, can prevail, but God will bring a temporal
punishment; to what end then should we weep and mourn, fast and pray, and
afflict our souls? Let us eat and drink, and be merry as we may, we must
bear that punishment which God has purposed to lay upon us; let us therefore
never make two evils of one, but take that which God has appointed, and there
an end, Gods will be done.

Oh, God forbid that any should hearken and Sol.
give way to such subtle and malicious suggestions of Satan, so seeking to
pervert and abuse even the best things. Mark therefore, and from Gods book
thou shall learn, that the doctrine does not abrogate, but establish the
means of pacification. Do thou dwell in a nation, Country, or City, and
do thou fear, the sins of the people are such, as God will bring some
judgment upon them? Now mark what God requires of thee, even to seek the
Lord Zeph. 2. 3.
; to turn to God, by fasting, weeping, and mourning Iocl 2. 12.
; to stand for the land Ezec. 22. penult.
: and if the Lord will not hear thee for them, yet thou shall save thine own
soul: The Lord is not more mavelous in any thing, than in preserving his, in
some general judgment and calamity, that have mourned, and wept, and sought
his face, as we see in the deliverance of Noah, Lot, Josiah, and the marking
of those in the forehead, that mourned for the abominations of Jerusalem Ezec.
9. 4.
. Thou do not know what good thou may do to others, even to the whole
Church of God wherein thou live; but thou shall be sure to do thy self
good. Or do thou fear that thine own sins are such, as God will bring a
judgment? yet humble thy soul, and if thou can not by repentance, fasting,
and prayer, alter the decree, yet thou may alter the manner of execution. Let
Moses repent, that he did not Examples.
sanctify God, and let him beg leave to enter, and if that will not be
granted, yet see with what favor the sentence shall be executed! he shall have
leave to go up to the top of Pisgah, and see it Deuteronomy. 3. 27.
; and if he go not into the land flowing with milk and honey, he shall be
translated into heaven, which is best of all. Let David fast and pray, and if
the child die, God will give him a Solomon in stead of it. Let the people
repent, and if God will not hear them, nor any other for them, but they must
into captivity, yet God will make, even those that lead them away captive to
pity them Psalm. 106. 46.
. Oh, religion never lost it reward, never did any serve God for naught.
Wherefore Gods will be done: but let us do our duties, it shall one way or
other be requited us; and if God hear us not according to our desire, he will
hear us to our profit Non ^e exaudit ad voluntatem, sed ad utilitatem: non fit
quod vis, sed quod expedit. Aug.
. Now let us proceed to consider the reasons wherefore the Lord sometimes will
not be entreated, but will bring some temporal judgment upon his Church and
people: and they are principally these.

First, to declare the justice of God: for if God 1. Justice.
did threaten, and at every entreaty should forbear to execute, this were
great mercy; but where were justice? Wherefore God (sometimes) will not pardon,
in regard of temporal punishment, no not his dear servants, upon repentance
and entreaty, that thereby he might proclaim to all the world the severitie
of his justice, and thereby men be warned, to take heed of sin, it being a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of God.

And verily (if we had grace) the remembrance Use.
hereof would be a notable bridle, to restrain us from sin, if when Satan
tempts us, and we are in danger of falling, we would say as Joseph did to
his impudent mistress, How shall I commit this great sin against God Genesis
39. 9.
? It may be, this sin will add so much to the measure of my former sins,
that God will not be entreated to pardon it, but bring some heavy temporal
judgment upon me. Would not God hear his Prophet Jeremy, no nor Moses, and
Samuel, Noah, Job, and Daniel, though praying for his own people, but cast
them off, a prey to the pestilence, famine, and sword? Yea would not God hear
his dear servants, Moses and David, praying for themselves; but even for small
sins (in comparison) brought heavy temporal calamities and chastisements
upon them? Oh what am I, a worm of the earth, that I should commit such and
such sins, and presume of impunitie! O ye sons of men, stand in awe, and
sin not Psalm. 4. 4.
.

The second reason, is for declaration of his 2. Truth.
truth: for if God should threaten judgments by his servants, and upon every
humiliation and entreaty revoke the same, his Prophets would be found liers,
and light fellows, and no credit given to their words. This was it that
displeased Jonah so exceedingly Jonah 4. 1.
, that having threatened Ninivie, Yet forty days and Ninivie shall be
destroyed, yet upon their repentance, he also repented of the evil, and did it
not. And indeed some Confirmation
of the wicked have in this respect bolstered up themselves in their sins
against the Prophets of God, saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall die Esaias 22. 13. Ierem. 5. 13.
: but the Prophets words are but wind; tomorrow shall be as to day, and much
more abundant Esaias 56. ult.
: yea desperately call for the execution of their threatenings, Let the Lord
bring to pass, and hasten his great work, that we may see it Ierem. 17. 15.
: but the days are prolonged, and every vision fails, Ezech. 12. 22. For
this cause, both to maintain the credit of his Prophets, and to make the
wicked to tremble at his word Esaias 66. 5.
, howsoever sometimes, upon repentance, he altered the sentence; yet sometimes
he would not be entreated, but executed judgments as he had threatened. Which
Iehu observed, when having stricken Ioram dead, the King of Israel, and son
of Ahab, he said to Bidkar his Captain, Take and cast him in the portion of
the field of Naboth; for remember how that when thou and I rode together after
Ahab his father, the Lord laid this burden upon him. And again, being told
that the dogs had eaten Iezabel, he said, This is the word of the Lord, which
he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Iezreel
shall dogs eat the flesh of Iezabel 2 King. 9. 25. 36
. Thus has God made good his threatenings.

But me thinks I hear some insult, and say, Ob.
Tush, this is no matter of fear unto us, we have no Prophets in these days,
to foretell judgments, or whose threatenings we need to regard.

I answer; Though the gift of prophecy (properly Sol.
so called) be ordinarily (...) Church, neither do the true Ministers of the
Gospel now take upon them to foretell, wherewith, when, and how the Lord will
punish the sins of a people; yet assuredly the providence of God is
wonderful, to direct them in their ministry, what texts of Scripture to
handle, what Doctrines to raise, what promises or threatenings, comforts or
reproves, to use.

If therefore thou art placed under the ministry, or hear such an one, as
thy soul and conscience Use.
does witness, he is the true Minister of Christ; know that the spirit of God
does wonderfully guide and direct his study and meditation, his Sermons and
preaching: and therefore if he be much in the promises of the Gospel, rejoice;
if in reproof of sin, be sorry; if in the threatening of judgments, fear:
he speaks not rashly and at random, the fictions of his own brain, or
publish the suggestions of an evil spirit, but undoubtedly he delivers what
he has received from the Lord: it is the good Spirit of God, directs his
heart, tongue, and pen, to think, write, and speak, what he knows most
needful for his people; and therefore receive it with reverence, as from God;
and submit your selves to such as watch over your souls, and must give account
unto God for you Heb. 13. 17.
.

And verily herein lies no small part of our fear, that as God has many
ways testified his Application.
anger, so has he stirred up his faithful servants, (both here and elsewhere)
by word and writing, (...) and press, zealously to reprove the great and
monstrous sins of this age; and as sons of thunder, to cause every corner
of the Land, to ring with the threatening, and denunciation of some judgment or
other, and to call and cry for repentance, whereby the same may be prevented;
which cannot be without God, who undoubtedly (without repentance) will in his
good time, make good their word, when men's hearts shall break within them, to
remember, they were told so before. And so much for the maine reasons, why
sometimes God will not be entreated to the contrary, but will punish a people,
viz. The declaration of his justice, and truth, that he may be feared, and
believed, when by his servants he does threaten.

It now follows according to my proposed 3. The sins.
method, to declare what sins they are, which then did, now do, and for ever
will, so provoke God, and exasperate him, that he will not spare; and namely
what were the sins, which brought this miserable and inevitable captivity
upon this people, and which threaten the like judgment, wheresoever found. And
therein two things are to be considered, viz. The sins for their kinds; and
the measure or proportion of them. What their sins were, will appear from
the Prophets sent unto them, to reprove them, and threaten their captivity,
which were, our Prophet, Ezechiel, Nahum, Zephany, Habacuck, and Joel Dan.
fore-notes on the small Prophets, cap. 11.
. Wherefore from their Prophesies only, and specially of those two great and
worthy Prophets, I will gather light to this purpose, and from them prove what
I shall deliver. And that I and you, may the more orderly proceed, and better
remember them, I will range them in certain ranks.

As first, the sins of the Priests, and then of the people: the sins of the
Priests, either in regard Method.
of their Ministry, or conversation: the sins of the people, were either the
greater, as against the first Table; or lesser, as against the second Table.
The laying open of these things, will both declare the justice of God, who
would not be entreated to spare so sinful a people, and also admonish all
people to beware of such sins, for fear of a like judgment.

And first note, that judgment begins at Gods Sanctuary Ezech. 9. 6.
. And no marvel; for there began the corruption of all sorts of men Ierem.
23. 15.
. The Prophets did most reprove, and cry out against the Priests, who in their
Ministry, first, 1. For Ministry.
were blind and ignorant. It is true, they were wonderfully conceited of their
learning and 1. Ignorant.
knowledge, and like enough they had a great measure (at least some of them) of
worldly wisdom, and humane learning; but they rejected the word of the Lord,
and then what wisdom was in them Ierem. 8. 8, 9.
? Whereby it appears, that howsoever the Priests lips should preserve the
knowledge of God Malac. 2. 7.
; and God made his Prophets Seers, and Watchmen, to preserve the people from
judgments to come, by declaring their sins, and directing them in the ways
of God; yet before the captivity, they generally rejected the word of God, and
were simple, without any power to tell the people of their sins, or give
direction what course to take, whereby to prevent ensuing judgments. Secondly,
they dealt falsely in their 2. Deceitful dealing.
Ministry, which the Lord complains of, saying; If they had stood in my
counsel, and declared my words to my people, then should they have turned them
from their evil ways Ierem. 23. 22.
. And the Prophet bewaileth this fault: Thy Prophets have not discovered thine
iniquity, to turn away thy captivity Lament. 2. 14.
; but gave themselves to serve the time, and please men, flattering, and
saying, peace, peace Ierem. 6. 14.
; building, and dawbing with untempered mortar Ezec. 13. 10, 11.
. They told the people all was well, and that they should see neither sword nor
famine, nor any evil Ierem. 23. 17, 13.
. And if any one dealt more faithfully with the people, showing their sins,
and laboring to touch their consciences, and to humble them, that so they
might prevent the judgment (as Jeremy, Ezechiel, and some others did) those
wicked Priests and Prophets were angry, and assured the people, they did but
terrify and discourage them, without cause; all was well: Yea that false
Prophet Hananiah, took away the yoke (which by Gods command Jeremy did wear,
whereby to signify their captivity) and brake it, and prophesied falsely. Thus
within two years, will God break the yoke of Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babylon
Ierem. 27. 2. 28. 10.
: yea Pashur could not hold his hand, but smote Jeremy, and put him in the
stocks Ierem. 20. 1.
.

And as they were corrupt in their Ministry, 2. In conversation profane.
and enemies to such as were faithful, so were they most profane in their
lives and conversations, being carnal and earthly minded: From the least to
the greatest, every one was given to covetousness; and from the Prophet to the
Priest, every one did deal falsely Ierem. 6. 12. 8. 10.
. And again, Both Prophet and Priest are profane; yea in mine house, have I
found their wickedness, says the Lord Ierem. 23. 11.
. Whereas God told Baruch, that which I have built, I will break down, and
that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole Land, and seek
thou great things for thy self? seek them not, Ier. 45. 4. As this was the
great corruption of the Priests and false Prophets, so the people did
exceedingly further it, and increase it in them. For first, they approved and
liked well of flattery; so the Lord himself said, A wonderful and horrible
thing is committed in the Land: The Prophets prophecy falselie, and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so Ierem. 5.
ult.
: Whereas a false Prophet is the very tail Esaias 9. 15.
, and a most vile person in the eyes of the godly Psalm. 15. 4.
, and as unsauoury salt, yea and God had cast dung in their faces, Mal. 2. 3.
Now, such as in their Ministry would not trouble them, by telling them of
their sins, and threatening of judgments, but preach pleasing things, heal
all with sweet words, rock the cradle, and let them sleep in security, apply
themselves to their humors, and play the good fellows with them; oh these
were Prophets for the nonst, these were commended, honored, admired, nothing
too good for them: but such as God sent, and in their ministry dealt
faithfully and truly with them, they loved them not, could not away with them;
whereas their feet should have been beautiful unto them Esaias 52. 7.
; they should only have known their voices and obeyed Ioh. 10. 27.
; have esteemed and loved them as their fathers 1 Cor. 4. 15.
; submitted themselves with reverence Heb. 13. 17.
; given them double honor 1 Timothy 5. 17.
; had them in singular love for their works sake 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
; received them even as the Angels and Ambassadors of God 2 Cor. 5. 20.
; yea as Christ Jesus Gal. 4. 14.
; to have encouraged them in their Ministry, that they might have performed
their office with joy Heb. 13. 17.
; duties which God expressly requires at the hands of his people. Now before
the captivity, they heaped all manner of discontents, discouragements, and
disgrace, upon them: they would not hear them, or else it was but to talk of
them, when they came home, as one that had a pleasant voice, and could sing
well Ezech. 33. 31.
: if they reproved them for sin, or threatened them with judgment, they
regarded it no more than wind Ierem. 5. 12, 13
; but said, evil shall not come upon us, we shall neither see sword nor famine
Ierem. 5. 12, 13
. They did but mock, and deride, and reproach him for his Ministry Ierem. 20.
7, 8.
; his own contrymen of Anathoth threatened him, to preach no more unto them,
in the name of the Lord; for if he did, he should die by their hands Ierem. 11.
21.
: yea at another time, when he had in a public and great assembly, delivered
what he had received from the Lord; Priests, and Prophets, and all the people,
caught him, and said, Thou shall die the death Ierem. 26. 8.
. They grievously slandered and accused him, as a man that discouraged the
people by his preaching, and weakened the hands of the men of war, and sought
not the wealth of the people, but their hurt; and therefore the Princes
besought the King to put him to death Ierem. 38. 4.
: his enemies conspired against him Ierem. 11. 19.
; and his own familiar friends watched for his halting Ierem. 20. 10.
; yea they did sinite and imprison him both Ierem. 20. 1.
, and much endanger his life with the filth of the prison; for he did stick
fast in the mire Ierem. 38. 6.
; which made him so bitterly to complain: Woe is me, my mother, that thou have
borne me a man of strise, and a man of contention, to the whole earth: I have
neither lent nor borrowed an usury, yet every one of them does curse me Ierem.
15. 10.
. Yea, he was so discouraged, that he meant verily to have given up his
calling, and to have preached no more unto them; and certainly this he had
done, but that the word and Spirit of God were in his heart, as fire shut up in
his bones, which made him weary of forbearing, and he could not stay Ierem. 20.
9.
. Thus have you seen the great corruption that was in the Priests and Prophets
generally, both in regard of their Ministry, and conversation; and how the
people behaved themselves, both toward the good and bad. Now let us see what
was the general condition, and the sins of the people. As, to begin with
such as were greatest:

First, they were ignorant of God, as he complains: 1. Ignorance.
My people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish children, and
have no understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good, they have
not knowledge Ierem. 4. 22.
: yea they were more blockish and senseless, than the bruit creatures: For the
Storke of heaven knows her appointed times; the Turtle, Crane, and Swallow,
observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgment of the
Lord Ierem. 8. 7.
.

Secondly, Atheism; they professed, The Lord 2. Atheism.
has forsaken the earth, he sees not Ezech. 9. 9.
. Neither was this the sin of the common people only, but the Princes, like
Atheists, devised mischief, gave evil counsel, mocked the threatening of the
Prophet, and said, Judgment was not near, they might build houses Ezech. 11.
2.
. Yea King Iehoiakim himself, like an Arch-Atheist, having heard some of
Ieremies Prophecy read unto him, he cut the roll in pieces, with a penknife,
and cast it into the fire, and consumed it Ierem. 36. 23.
.

Thirdly, foul and gross Idolatry; both private, in the houses of their
imagery, in the dark; 3. Idolatry.
God let his Prophet, through an hole in the wall, see seventy of the Ancients
worshipping Idols Ezech. 8. 8.
; and also public, On every hill, and under every green tree playing the
harlot; saying to a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have
brought me forth Ierem. 2. 20. 27.
: yea in the Cities of Judah, and streets of Jerusalem, offering cakes to the
Queen of heaven, and pouring out drink offerings to other gods Ierem. 7. 18.
; yea they set their abominations in the house, which is called by my name, to
defile it Ierem. 32. 34.
. See how Idolatry grows, from chambers, to hills; from hills in the Country,
to streets in the Cities; yea into the Temple. This was that spiritual
whordome, which all the Prophets with open mouth cried out against: and no
marvel; for as a man will bear with much frowardness and unkindnesse in his
wife, but by no means will endure her to commit whordome; so God will bear
with many sins in his people, but cannot endure Idolatry, spiritual whordome
and adultery; that never escaped heavy punishment.

Fourthly, the taking of Gods name in vain; 4. Taking Gods name in vain.
hearing the word but of fashion, custom, or sinister respects. Behold (says
God) their ear is uncircumcised, they cannot hearken; behold, the word of the
Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it Ierem. 6. 10.
.

Add hereunto their soul hypocrisy, whereby 5. Hypocrisy.
they caused the name and religion of God to be blasphemed. Will ye steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal,
and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my Name? Is this
house become a den of robbers in your eyes? behold, I have seen it, says
the Lord Ier. 7. 9, 10, 11.
. And he told his Prophet Ezechiel, the people would say one to another; Come,
let us hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord: and they come
and sit before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with
their mouths they show much love, but their hearts go after their
covetousness Ezech. 33. 30.
. And again, treacherous Judah has not turned unto me with her 6.
Profanation of the Sabbath.
whole heart, but fainedly, says the Lord Ierem. 3. 10.
.

Profanation of the Sabbaths, another sin causing their captivity, and much
reproved and threatened, by the Prophets of God Ierem. 17. 21, 22, 23.

Ezech. 20. 16. 22. 8.


.

Moreover, the land was full of bloody crimes Ezech. 7. 23.
, 7. Murder.
by reason of murder, man slaughter, quarrelling, fighting. Also polluted with
all manner of carnal 8. Adultery.
uncleanness, adultery and fornication, assembling themselves by troops in
harlots houses: and they were as fed horses in the morning; every one neighed
after his neighbors wife. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord,
and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this Ierem. 5. 7.
? Yea this was so common a sin, that he called them all, adulterers Ierem. 9.
2.
: yea they committed incest, humbling their own sisters, and defiling their
daughters in law; yea humbling such as were set apart for pollution Ezec. 22.
10, 11.
.

Likewise they did oppress, defraud, and wrong 9. Oppression.
one another, by false weights, and measures, and devour one another by cruel
usurie, and unjust gain, and did even set traps and snares to catch men Ierem.
5. 26.
, building houses by unrighteousness, and chambers by wrong: using their
neighbors service without wages, and not giving him for his work Ierem. 22.
13.
: taking usurie and increase, and greedily gaining by extortion Ezech. 22. 12.
. And all this was spent in sumptuous buildings, setting their nests on high,
and making 10. Sumptuous buildings.
glorious houses Hab. 2. 9.
: in pride of apparel, taking up every vain, foolish, and new fangled
fashion. And when Gods Prophets did most threaten vengeance, and they should
have humbled themselves in sackcloth and ashes; lo, then did they 11. Pride in
apparel.
most give themselves to garishnesse, tricking, pranking, and painting
themselves, in scorn of God. Wherefore the Lord threatened them, that he would
punish the Princes, and Kings children, and all such as were clothed with
strange apparel Zeph. 1. 8.
. Also they gave themselves to maintain excess 12. Excess in diet.
in diet, drinking, and making one another drunk; which one of the Prophets
thus threatened: Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, that puts the
bottle unto him, and makes him drunken Hab. 2. 15.
.

Moreover, they were most unthankful for 13. Unthankfulness.
blessings received; never said, Let us fear the Lord our God, that gives
rain, both the former and latter rain in his season; he reserveth to us the
appointed weeks of the harvest Ierem. 5. 24.
. Neither did they amend by gentle corrections: the Prophet 14. Not amending by
gentle corrections.
bewailed it; O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken
them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused
to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock, they
have refused to return Ierem. 5. 3.
. Lo, these are the maine linnes which reigned in Judah and Jerusalem, before
their captivity; which God sent his Prophets to reprove and threaten; but all
in vain, for they did trust, because they had the Temple and worship of God,
no evil should happen unto them; and therefore answered their threatenings,
with these words of vain confidence, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the
Lord, The temple of the Lord. Wherefore the Lord assured the Prophet, he would
cast them out of his sight, they should go into captivity, and he would do
to that house, wherein they so vainly trusted, as he had done to Shiloh in the
days of their forefathers Ierem. 7. 4. 14.
.

As these were their sins for kind, so had they 2. Their measure.
long continued in them, notwithstanding they had had such fair warning in the
captivity of their brethren for the same: which did not a little add to the
measure of their sin; which being full, vengeance must needs come; and the
harvest of their iniquity being ripe, the sickle of Gods judgment must needs
cut them down Joel 3. 13. Rev. 14. 15.
, and God will not hear his Prophet entreat for them.

Now to come to our selves, and make Application 4. Application
of all we have heard; I beseech you with all godly fear and reverence,
receive and consider well these four propositions.

First, that we in England, by Gods mercy, yet 1. Proposition
are, and for many years have been, as happy, Englands happiness.
as ever Judah and Jerusalem were, in our Kings and Queens, Judges,
Magistrates, Ministers; peace, plenty, prosperity, deliverances from dangers,
fatherly corrections for amendment; but above all, for advancing and continuing
of his glorious Gospel, to be so generally professed in such safety; for
making of our kingdom to become an harbor and sanctuary to Gods afflicted
servants of other countries; and for many other blessings, wherein it has
been so enriched and preferred, that with Capernaum, it has been exalted to
heaven Matthew. 11. 23.
, and made the wonder of the world Psalm. 147. ult.
.

Secondly, that we are at this time nothing sound, 2. A sinful people.
but all swellings and sores, a sinful nation; and loaded with iniquity. You
have heard what were the sins of Judah and Jerusalem; do you not see them to
be our own? Shall I go over them again, and search for them with
candlelight Ezech. 1. 12.
? It needs not, they are written in such Capital letters, as he that runs
may read them Hab. 2. 2.
. Whosoever shall with reverence and conscience, read the writings of those
worthy Prophets, and compare our times thereto, shall find, they do so lively
picture out the iniquities of our days, as if they had been sent unto us, and
had prophesied against us; and therefore their writings are ours, either to
admonish us, and turn us away from all our evil ways, and to prevent the
like judgments; or to make our condemnation the more just, and our plagues the
more terrible, if in his justice he shall execute them upon us.

It may be, some exception may be taken against Prevention.
one sin, and indeed one of the greatest; viz. that we cannot be charged with
Idolatry, as Judah was. I answer, it is true, (God be blessed) that Romish
Idolatry, is, by our Christian and wholesome Laws, suppressed, and his
Excellent Majesty, both by peerless labors, and exquisite writings, has
thoroughly discovered the Antichrist, and by godly Edicts and Proclamations,
advances pure Religion to the utmost; wherein the Lord enable him to persist,
that he and his may be blessed for ever. Amen. But give me leave to make a few
Quaeres. Have we not too many Chemarims, Seminaries, Priests, and Jesuits,
sacrificing to Baal? Have we not too many that swear by the Lord and Malcom,
as all our Church-Papists, that profess religion in Gods house, and have also
their close chambers of Imagerie at home? Is not the number of Idolatrous
Recusants greatly increased, even since that most hellish powder treason, (for
which no name can ever be devised able to set forth the nature of it) which a
man would have thought would have been the bane of Popery through the world;
it being a fruit of their Religion, and practice of their positions and
principles: oh, how fearful, that Idolatry (even since that time) should so
increase!

Thirdly, as we have many enemies, so are they 3. Many and most cruel enemies.
most fierce, barbarous, truculent, and sanguinarie; plotting and devising most
cruel and unnatural proiects and stratagems; and where they Benzo. in his
Indian history.
prevail, executing such murders and massacres, Dr. King on Ion. Lect. 13.
page 177.
as were never read nor heard of: witness our powder plot, the merciless
French massacre, and the incredible havocke of thousands and millions where
Romanists have prevailed. Oh, cruel and bloody Rome, how are thy children
every where known by their red liverie!

Fourthly, England has had as many and fair 4. As fairly warned.
warnings, as ever Judah and Jerusalem had; by strange tokens, signs and
wonders. The captivity of the ten Tribes was not a fairer warning to them,
than the calamity of the Churches abroad is unto us. But above all, for these
many years, he has most powerfully reproved sin, and thundered out
vengeance, by his heavenly word, in the mouths of his holy servants, greater
than Jeremy or Ezechiel, yea (by the testimony of Christ) greaterthan John,
who was also greaterthan any of the Prophets Matthew. 11. 9, 11.
; thereby declaring to all the world, how unwilling he is to enter into
judgment with us, of all other people, though we have provoked him, above all
people professing his holy and heavenly truth: and to this end, whereas his
hand is so heavy on our neighbors, he sends us his Ministers unto you; as
on the one side, both to set your sins before your faces, whereby you anger
him, and the means how to pacify and appease him, that he may perpetually
continue a good God to you and yours; so on the other side, to threaten you,
that he will make you a spectacle of wrath and misery to all people, (as he
made Jerusalem) without speedy and unfeigned repentance.

Lastly, and which is most fearful, generally 5. Nothing moved.
men live in security and presumption. Yea do not men and women every where
grow in senslesnesse, and harden themselves against all signs, and tokens, and
warnings? putting far from them the evil day Amos 6. 3.
; and say tush, we shall neither see sword nor famine Ierem. 5. 12, 13.
? Yea, are not too many come to that height of impiety, as to scorn and deride
such as are affected with the threatenings of Gods judgments; and will not
run into the same excess of ungodliness they have done 1 Pet. 4. 4.
? Is it not more safe to commit sin, than reprove it? Nay is not the practice
of piety, and zeal for the Gospel, in many companies more reproachful, than
to lie, speak filthily, swagger, and blaspheme, to scorn and jest at
Religion, and make a sport of sin? Yea, that which is worse than all this;
are not the Ieremies, and Ezechiels, sent unto them, hated, mocked, scorned,
and derided, and even loaded with malicious slanders, as the vilest men on
earth, and not worthy to live?

Who so blind as sees not these things? and Conclusion.
who so simple as from them cannot conclude; therefore surely, God must needs
be avenged on such a Nation, unless we repent speedily, and whilst there is
time, we all meet him with entreaty of peace. Oh England, at the last, know the
time of thy visitation, and awake out of thy deep security; watch, fast, and
pray.

But I foresee, many objections will be made against this conclusion. As first,
some (like the 1. Objection.
proud Pharisie Luke 18. 11.
) may say, I thank God, I am not an Atheist, Idolater, blasphemer, murderer,
adulterer, nor such a sinner as you have named, and reproved, out of the
Prophet; therefore I need not so take things to heart, and humble my self; I
shall escape well enough.

I answer, though thou wertest as just, and Sol.
righteous, as thou braggest for, yea as righteous as Noah, Job, or Daniel; yet
thou know these sins do every where reign, and abound, and thou may be
wrapped in a general judgment. The Scriptures afford us memorable examples,
of great and general judgments, procured by the sins of some few; and
indeed, all make but one body; quilibet homo est pars communitatis; and the
sins of the wicked, are in some sort the sins of all them, where they dwell;
but specially their open and known abominations. If thou see an Atheist,
Idolater, a murderer, a drunkard, and do not to the uttermost of thy power,
seek to stop and reform the same; or if that way thou can do but little,
yet if thou do not mourn in thy soul, to see Religion thereby disgraced,
God dishonored, and his anger kindled, and do not pray to God for pardon;
how just soever thou art in thine own person, yet those sins are in some
sort thine, and the judgments temporal may wrap thee in them.

Let it never be forgotten, that when Achan had Confirmation
stolen the excommunicate thing for which God was angry, and Ioshuah lamented,
saying; Oh Lord God, what shall I say, when Israel turns their backs, before
their enemies? God answered, Israel has sinned, and they have also
transgressed my covenant; they have taken of the accursed thing, and have
stolen and dissembled, and have put it even amongst the stuff Josh. 7. 8.
. See how God challenges, and punishes all Israel for Achans sin: and at
his execution, Ioshuah asked him, Why have thou troubled us?

Oh Lord! if this were remembered and believed, it would justly cause a great
deal of fear, to Conclusion.
see or hear, of the sins of the Land or Country, much more of the City,
Town, or Parish, wherein we live; and therefore how innocent soever we think
our selves, let us be grieved for the sins of others, and labor to prevent
such judgments, as may justly wrap us in them: of which more was said, from
the second Doctrine; this being said to be one of the reasons, why the godly
are so exceedingly affected, when they perceive his anger, and hear his
threatenings.

Secondly, say some, we see such as are professed 2. Objection.
Idolaters, and most corrupt in doctrine, and profane in conversation, in whom
all the forenamed sins do reign, yet live, and thrive, and prosper in the
world: why should we then be so affected for our sins?

I answer, That small sins, of such a people Sol.
as have entered into league and covenant with God, and have received the
knowledge of his truth, and make profession of his fear, are more grievous and
displeasing unto God, than great rebellions of professed Atheists and
Idolaters. God is more offended with the sins of Judah and Jerusalem, than
ten thousand times greater in Babylon. If his children observe not his Laws,
nor keep his Commandments, he will be sure to visit their offenses with the
rod, and their sins with scourges Psalm. 89. 30.
. Hence it is, that the Apostle says, Judgment begins at Gods house 1 Pet.
4. 17.
. If a man have a stranger, yea an enemy come to him, yet he will make him
welcome, carve to him liberally, and of the best, bear with his talk and
manners, though very absurd and displeasing; whereas his child is set at lower
end, and served with leavings, and if he offend but in look, is rebuked; but
the stranger goes his way and comes no more, the son abides in the house,
and enjoieth the inheritance. The wicked whose portion is in this present life,
are filled with Gods hidden treasure Psalm. 17. penult.
, and fatted as against the day of slaughter Iam. 5. 5.
: whereas his children, for whom he has provided better things in the next
life, are cut short, and chastened, that they be not condemned with the world 1
Cor. 11. 32.
: yet all in love; As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten Rev. 3. 19.
. If we be without correction, we are bastards and not sons Heb. 12. 8.
.

I beseech you, remember this; No sins so displeasing, and provoking God, as
the sins of Exhortation.
his people, for whom he has done most, and who profess most: You only have I
known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities Amos 3. 2.
. And this is that which God said, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh
me Levit. 10. 3.
. Nadab and Abihu must die for it, if they presume to offer strange fire. Small
holes in others, are great rents in Moses, David, Solomon; they had best take
good heed to their walking; if they fall, they shall be sure to pay for it.

They are so far greater sinners than our 3. Object.
selves, that God will never suffer them to prevail.

I answer, This is it so offended the Prophets, Answ.
and made them so to expostulate the matter with God; as our Prophet, Righteous
(O Lord) art thou when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy
judgments. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all
they happy that deal very treacherously Ierem. 12. 1.
? And the Prophet Habacuck complained, The wicked does compass about the
righteous Hab. 1. 4.
. And again; Wherefore do thou hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the
man that is more righteous than he Hab. 1. 13,
? Whereby it appears, the Prophet had a great combat in himself, to think
that the Babylonians, more wicked and ungodly, should so prosper, and devour
the Israel of God; as no doubt but it troubles many, that the Papists, such
Heretics, Idolaters, bloody men, and generally most profane, that they
should so devour the Protestants, more righteous than they.

But let Gods children humble themselves; it is Use.
just: and let not the enemies boast; for their day is coming. Hearken what
God says by your Prophet; Lo, I begin to bring evil on the city, which is
called by my name, and shall ye be unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished
Ierem. 25. 29.
. And again; They whose judgment was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly
drunken; and art thou he that shall go altogether unpunished? thou shall not
go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink Ierem. 49. 12.
. If judgment first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18.
?

Grievous was the calamity of Gods people Application, To Eastern Babylon and
the Jews.
the Jews, by the Western Babylonians, and so affected the Prophet to whom
the Lord revealed it, that he wished his head were waters, and his eyes a
fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night Ierem. 9. 1.
; and on which occasion he did write his book of Lamentations, so full of
passion: but it was nothing to the misery of Babylon. Theirs was a captivity
for 70. years, which being finished, they were gloriously delivered: but
Babylon came to perpetual ruin. In the Prophecies of their captivity, many
consolations were mixed; and they made their misery the greater through their
obstinacy, because they did not believe, nor would obey the counsel of the
Prophet, bidding them yield themselves, assuring them they that did so, should
have their lives given for a prey Ierem. 21. 9.
: yea, if the King would have done so, the city had not been burnt with fire
Ierem 38. 17. 39. ult.
. But the Prophecies against Babylon are altogether fearful: let me give you
a taste thereof. When seventie years shall be accomplished, I will punish the
King of Babylon, and the land of the Caldeans, and make it perpetual
desolations Ierem. 25. 12.
. And again; Every one that goes by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at
her plagues Ierem. 50. 13.
. And again; Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lords hand, and all the
earth has been drunken, and the nations mad with her wine, but she is
suddenly fallen and destroyed, her judgment reaches to Heaven, howl for her
Ierem. 51. 7, 8, 9.
. Yea, he spends those two whole large chapters in prophesying the severe
judgments of God against Babylon, in revenge of Israel, and that with such
words, as who can read them, and not tremble? Add hereunto the prophecy of
Esaias. Babylon the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Caldees excellency,
shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha, it shall never be
inhabited, nor dwelt in from generation to generation; the Arabian shall never
pitch his tent there, nor Shepherds make folds there, but wild beasts of the
desert shall lie there, their houses shall be full of doleful creatures, Owls
shall dwell there, and Satyrs dance Esaias 13. 19.
. And again, I will cut off from Babylon the name and remnant, son and
nephew: I will make it a possession for the Bitterne, and pooles of water, and
I will sweep it with the besome of destruction, says the Lord of hosts Esaias
14. 22.
. And lastly, Come down and sit in the dust, o virgin daughter of Babylon, sit
on the ground; there is no throne, o daughter of Caldeans, for thou shall no
more be called tender and delicate. Take the millstones and grind meal,
uncover thy locks, make bare the leg; I will take vengeance, and thou shall no
more be called the Lady of kingdoms Esaias 47. 1.
. All which prophesies have long since been fulfilled by the Medes and
Persians. But wherefore has the Lord brought such destruction upon her? the
Lord tells her plainly, I was wroth with my people, and gave them into thine
hand, and thou shewedst no mercy, upon the ancient have thou very heavily
laid the yoke Esaias 47. 6.
. Oh see what a dangerous thing it is, even to be the rod of Gods wrath (though
his people have well deserved to be scourged) if they think not so, but
exercise all manner of cruelty.

Far greater is the misery, which the western Application, To the Western
Babylon, and the Protestants.
Babylon has brought upon Gods Church, and most cruel instruments are they of
Gods anger to his people, and for many hundreds of years have oppressed Gods
people with the iron yoke of captivity; never more barbarous and bloody acts
heard of, than executed by Papists heretofore in this land: oh how do they
show themselves to be the sons of that father, who was a murderer from the
beginning, and of that mother the great whore, who is drunk with the blood of
the Saints? But that God, who by his Prophets foretold, and fulfilled the
Eastern Babylons destruction, has as plainly foretold by his Apostle, the
destruction of this Western Babylon: and he has a Cyrus Esaias 45. 1.
, the Lord of hosts has a chosen shaft in his quiver Esaias 49. 2.
, wherewith to wound it: we leave the time and means to God; but do
steadfastly believe, that the great whore, which has in her forehead a name
written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of
the earth, so long drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus Rev. 17. 5, 6.
; She shall be hated, and made naked and desolate, yet, they shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire Rev. 17. 16.
; that bloody and persecuting City, which lives so deliciously, and says, I
sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow Rev. 18. 7.
. Her purple flatterers vaunt, that temporal felicite is a note of the Church;
and make Cardin. Bellarm. Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. ult.
a catalogue of the strange) victories which the Catholics have had, and (as
one says) scarcely ever received the foil, in a just war Immo vix unquam
fuerum Haeretici superiores, quando justo praelio dimicatum est.
; yet the holy truth assures us, the Beast and false Prophet shall be taken,
and all the sowles of Heaven filled with the flesh of those Kings, Captains,
and mighty men Rev. 19. 20, 21.
, which have fought against the Gospel. Yea, Babylon, as a millstone cast
into the sea, shall be thrown down and found no more, and she rewarded
double, according to her works, at whose destruction, all the Kings and
Merchants of the earth, who have lived deliciously; and committed fornication
with her, shall bitterly lament, and cry, Alas, alas, that great City, bow in
one boure is she made desolate? So Heaven, Prophets, Apostles, and all the
Martyrs and Saints, shall praise God with many a joyful Alleluiah Rev. 18. 9,
11, 20.
.

Therefore stumble not at it, that for the sins of his people, he gives them
into the hands of such Conclusion.
as are more wicked than themselves; for when his people are sufficiently
scourged, their enemies shall for ever be destroyed.

But some object again: we have continued long in our sins, and have felt
none evil; why 4. Object.
should we now be so earnestly called upon, and urged to repent, and threatened
with judgment? If we repent not, God is not so hasty, I wis, as our
Preachers would make us believe.

I answer: It is the continuance in sin does Sol.
increase our danger; as Judah and Jerusalem were not carried into captivity
for the sins of a few years, but for their sins wherein they had long
continued, even ever since they were brought up out of Egypt 2 King. 21. 15.
; the men of the old world were spared long, even an hundred and twenty years
Genesis 6. 3.
; yet continuing in sin, were in the end drowned: Judah and Jerusalem were
spared long, after their brethren were carried captive, even 130. years; but
continuing in sin, in the end they were carried into captivity too. The Lord
is patient, and slow to anger Joel 2. 13.
; yet if there will be no end of sin, there will be an end of mercy, and
God may repent so often, that he will repent no more; and (as our Prophet
says) he can no longer bear Ierem. 44. 22.
; and (as he says in another place) God is weary with repenting Ierem. 15. 6.
; this we have in the Scriptures illustrated by two familiar and elegant
metaphors.

The first is of a large vessel: which by drops Illustration.
asks a long time of filling: so God told Abraham, the iniquity of the
Amorites was not yet full Genesis 15. 16.
; and our Savior bade the Scribes and Pharisees of his age, Fill ye up the
measure of your fathers Matthew. 23. 32.
.

The second is of an harvest: Corn when it is sown, is not by and by ripe;
The husbandman (says S. James) has great patience Iam. 5. 7.
. Why did not men cut down their corn at Easter? because it was not then
ripe: why are they now in many places so busy with sithes and sickles? because
the harvest is come, and corn is ripe: So God calls to the executioners of
judgments, when wickedness is great, as unto his reapers, Put ye in the
sickle, for the harvest is ripe Joel 3. 13. Use.
.

Oh then do not say, we have sinned often, or long; and what evil has
happened; for a vessel at last may be filled with drops; and corn may so long
grow, till fields be white to harvest Ioh. 4. 35.
, and ready to be cut.

The last objection is: Oh but England is a most happy and flourishing
kingdom, blessed with a 5. Object.
most wise and prudent King, a most hopeful issue; we have many learned and
religious Preachers, multitudes of godly and sincere professors, Gods true
religion established by Law, and maintained by authority, God has heaped such
temporal blessings upon us, that it is another Canaan, flowing with milk and
honey; God has most wonderfully delivered it from matchless dangers, and ruin
intended; it is a very Sanctuary of refuge, for the Saints of God elsewhere
persecuted. Oh, the consideration of these things makes many an one so secure,
that no warning fro heaven or earth, word or works, of mercy or justice, will
do them good, but they proceed from evil to worse, as though no hurt could
come unto them.

But give me leave: as I do most unfainedly acknowledge Sol.
the great mercies of God, so I would pluck away these pillowes from under
their elbowes, whereupon they sleep in security. I say then, that the greater
are the mercies of God unto any people, the greater shall be their judgments,
if they abuse them. The higher that Capernaum is exalted to heaven, the lower
shall it be cast down into hell, if it repent not Matthew. 11. 23.
: And God threatens Coniah; As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son
of Iehoiakim, King of Judah, were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I
pluck thee thence, and I will give thee into the hands of them that seek thy
life Ierem. 22. 24.
. Was there ever any people in the world, could compare with Judah and Israel,
for privileges and prerogatives? yet could they not secure them: but their
sins coming to height, God forsook the house whereon his Name was called,
yea and gave the dearly beloved of his soul into the hands of her enemies
Ierem. 12. 7.
; or (as some Translations read) his beloved soul (...). Septuagint. Dedi
dilectam animam meam. vulg.
. Oh, if God did not spare such a people as he acknowledges to be the dearly
beloved of his soul, who had such a good and religious King, when Jeremy
began to prophecy, viz. Josiah, who reformed Religion, destroyed the
monuments of Idolatry, and strictly compelled all to serve the Lord according
to his word; such excellent Prophets; and some learned and worthy Teachers; and
some good people, that mourned for the abominations of Jerusalem: yet when
their sins came to be full, he would not hear any for them, but gave them
over to a Conclusion.
long and woeful captivity: What have any people to presume on? No, no, this
Doctrine shall stand, against all the subtle objections of Satan, and of flesh
and blood, against it; That the sins of a people may come to that height,
that God will bring some temporal judgment upon them, and not hear any that
shall pray for them.

Now to come to ourselves, that we may make Use.
good use of all that has been spoken and heard. You hearken what I should
say concerning our own estate: and that you shall do; first, from the mouth
of an enemy. When Jeremy heard the false Prophet Hananiah prophecy much good
to Judah; he answered feelingly, Amen, the Lord do so Ierem. 28. 6. Amen. sic
faciat Dominus.
. Pererius the Jesuit, writing on that you have heard in Genesis, The sin of
the Amorites is not yet full Genesis 15. 16.
, says;. If any do marvel, why England continues to flourish,
notwithstanding the cruel persecution of the Catholics there, he does answer
the^ with the words of the Text: Because their sin is not full Si cujus forte
animum subeat inter dum (...). Pererius.
. To which, with our Prophet, I do feelingly say, Amen, Amen, God grant it:
yea I do hope, though the sins of England be many and great, yet the sins of
it are not Charitable opinion.
so full, but that God hears, and will hear, the prayers of his servants for
it; and that the decree is not so far forth, but it may be still suspended or
recalled.

As a great Argument to persuade me so, it is, Argument.
that God does both stir up many his faithful servants, by word and writing,
preaching and Printing, publicly, privately, and every way they can, to
provoke men and women to repentance; and also for that we see, men and women
generally, to take to heart the afflictions of their brethren, and to help
them with their prayers, and purses, and every way they can: yea, me thinks,
in all places I see a quickening of zeal and devotion, and a commendable care
to seek the face of God in his holy Ordinances, both publicly and privately:
Every where, more thankfulness for our peace, and the blessed day of
visitation. Oh, the sanctified use of their troubles, is a sweet assurance,
that our sins are not full, but the Lord will be our protector still, and do
great things for us.

But because the Jesuit (seeing his fellows and the Romish Catholics could
not swallow us up Exhortation.
quick, as they intended in the gunpowder-plot, yet to keep life in them,
that they may with good hope, hold on in their deuillish plots and devices,
against us) does prophecy, saying; The sins of England will shortly be full
Veniet tandem iniquitatis complementum.
. Oh, let us make him a false Prophet; let us repent and turn to God, in
fasting, weeping, and mourning: Let Ministers with word, Magistrates with
sword, make a leake in the vessel of sin, and rouse up ourselves, and one
another, out of deep security, and meet the Lord with all humble and earnest
entreaty of peace. Now (if ever) as we tender the salvation of our souls, and
the good of the Commonwealth wherein we live, the safeguard of his Majesty,
and the royal Issue; the good of body, estate, and all we have; as we love our
selves, husbands, wives, children, friends; let us (seeing Gods judgments are
abroad in the world, and the Lord of Hoasts has raised terrible Armies,
marching furiously for our destruction) mourn bitterly for our sins, and all
our abominations; fall upon our faces, and cry aloud, and mightily, both day
and night, in the ears of the Lord; that he would forgive us our sins, and
turn away the armies of his plagues and punishments from us, and continue a
gracious good God, to us and our posterities, until the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in the clouds to judgment.

I have armed at no man's person, or particular Conclusion.
calling. Only as one of Gods servants, desiring to be faithful, and free from
the blood of all men, I have set Trumpet to my mouth, and according to that
ability I have received, labored to stir up all such as have heard me, to
the practice of speedy and unfeigned repentance. This has been the maine end
of all my discourse, which now by Gods good hand I have finished. If it work
that effect in many, if in any, I have my desire; if but in one, if in none but
my self, my labor is not lost in the Lord. I shall be found a sweet savor
unto God, even in those that perish; and at the least save mine own soul. And
so, to his blessing, from whom I have received it, I do commend it.

FINIS.

