(...) well governed, if thou perceive them that been under thy governance to
be by thy dylygence welthy and more temperate in living.

Set more by leaving to thy children honest fame or renoume / than great
possessions or richesse / for these be transytorie, Honest fame.
the other immortalle. Also goods may be gotten by fame, but good fame can
be bought with no money. Also goods happen to men that be of evil disposytion
/ but so does not good estimation, but comes only to them that endeavor them
self with virtue to get it.

Be delicate in thine apparayle and garments that serve for thy body, in all
other parts of thy living be contynent as it besemeth all pryncis of honor /
that they that behold the / for thine honorable presence may deem the worthy
to be a governor / and thy famyly (...) and servants for thy noble courage
may have of the a like good opinion.

Consider dylygently both thine own words and thy deeds, to the intent thou
may fall in very few errors.

Of all things hit is best to happen on the right point of all things that
are to be done, but for as much as that is very hard to be known, better is
to leave somewhat / than to excede. For moderacyon shall prevail more, where
somewhat does lack than where that any thing is superfluous.

Courteisy and gravity
Endeavor the to be both courtaise and of a reverend grauytie: for the one
besemeth a prince / the other is expedyent and more agreeable to every company:
all be it to use both, it is of al other things the most dyffycile, for thou
shall find for the more part them that use a reverent grauyte to be
unpleasant, them that be courtoyse, to be of base courage and simple. Therefore
the one and the other is to be used, than exchne that thing, which in any of
them is ill or seems not conuenyent.

Experyence and philosophy.
If thou woldeste perfectly know that, which belongs to kings to perceive /
give the to experience and study of philosophy, for philosophy shall declare
unto the the means or ways how to bring to pass thyn affairs: experience
in semblable business shall make the able to do or sustain them.

Behold dylygently / what as well princis as private persons do daily, and
what of their actis does succeed or happen.

Surely if thou remember well things that are passed, thou shall the bettere
consult of things coming.

Think where private persons have died with good will, to the intent that after
their death they might be commended, that it were great shame to princis not
to travail in such study or business, whereby in their lives they may be
worthyly praised.

Desire to leave when thou dyest / rather monumentes or Images of thy virtues
than of thy personage.

Endeavor the specially to keep always thy self and thy contray in surety.

If necessite constrayne the to ieopard thy person, these rather to dye with
honor, than to live in reproach.

In all thine actis remember that thou art a prince: and therefore do no thing
unworthy to so noble a state.

Do not despise so thy nature, that thou suffer thy self all holy to perisshe
/ but in as much as thy body is mortalle, and thy soul immortal, assay to
leave to thy soul an immortal remembrance.

Use the to speak of honest affairs and studies, that by such custom thou
may think on like things as thou speaks of.

Things that in cosultation seem to be best / those execute thou in thy proper
acts.

Whose opynions thou enuyest, his deeds do thou follow.

Lake what thou counsaylest thy children or servants to do, think it
conuenyent that thy self do the semblable.

Either use that which I have aduysed the to do, or inquire for better than
that is.

Suppose not them to be wise men, that sharply can talk of small things and
trifles, but those that can substancially speak in matters of weighty
importance.

Nor think not them wise, that promise to other men welthe and good fortune,
they them self being in great necessyte / but rather those that spekyng of
them selfs moderately, can with other men and in their affairs use them self
well and discretely, and being not troubled with any channge of their living,
know how to bear honestly and temperately as well aduersite as also
prosperity.

And meruaylle thou not, that I have now rehearsed many things that thou
knew before / nor that forgatte I not / but knew well enough, that being
such a multitude as well of princis as of private persons / some of them have
spoken the same that I did, and many have hard it, and diverse have seen other
men done it, and some there be that by them selfs have experienced it.
Notwithstanding in matter concerning instructyon, novelty is not to be souhgt
for, for therein ought not to be founden either synguler opinion, or thing
impossyble, or contrary to men's expectacyon, but suppose that to be in herynge
most gracious or pleasant / which being sown in the minds of other,
may assemble most matter to the purpose / and the same declare best and
most aptly. For this know I well, that the counsayles and wise sentences of
poets and other good authors, are thought of all men to be very
profitable: yet will not they gladly give ear unto them, but be therewith in
the same case, as they be with these that do give them good counsel: for they
praise them all, but they care not how seldom they come in their company,
desiring to be rather with offenders / than with them that of sin be the
rebukers. Example we may take of the poemes or warkes of Hesiodus, Theognes,
and Phocillides, for every man affyrmeth them to be excellent counsayles
coucerning man's life, but al though they say so, yet had they lever use that,
whereto their own madness induces them, than follow that, whereto the others
precepts does advise them. Moreover if one should gader out of the said
authors that which men call sentences, wherein they perchance have been studiouse,
in semblable wise toward them should they be disposed, for they should with
more pleasure here a lyeng fable or fantasy, than the said precepts made by
much connyng and diligence. But what needs it to tarry long upon every matter?
Genyrally if we will consider the natures of men, we shall perceive, that many
of them delight neither in meats that been most wholesome, nor in studies that been
most honest, nor in deeds that is most conuenyent: nor yet in doctrine that is
most commodiouse, but imbracynge pleasant appetites, which be repugnaunt
to profit, would seem to be painful and laboriouse. How may any man content
any such persons, either by preachinge or teaching, or tellyng of any thing
that is profitable: that for the words that be spoken, do ennie and have
indygnacion at them that speak truly, and do take them for plain men or
simple, in whom lacks wisdom: so much they abhor truth in all
things, that they know not what is theyrs, or do belong to their office, but
consultynge or raysonynge of that which does partayne unto them / they be sad
and unpleasant, when they talk of other men's affairs they be merye and
ioyouse. More over they had lever suffer some grief in their bodies / than
in reuoluyng what should be most necessary, travail any thing in their minds.
And if a man take good head, he shall find in their mutual assembles and
companies, that either they reprove other men, or else that they of other be in
some thing reproved. And when they be by themselves / they be ever wisshinge
and never consultinge. I have not spoken this again all men but only again
them that be guilty in that which I have rehearsed. Finally this is apparraunte
and certain, who so ever will make or write any thing pleasant and thankful
to the multitude, he may not seek for words or matters most profitable / but
for them that contain most fables and leasynges. For in herynge such things
they rejoice: but when they perceyne to be labors and contentions in their
affairs / than be they pensife. Wherefore Homere and they that found first
Tragedyes, may be well maruayled at, who in their warkes used both the said
fourmes in writing, for Homere expressed in the contencions and batayles of
them / which for their virtues were named half gods, the other brought
those fables in to actual apparaunce, in so much as we not only may here
them, but also may presently behold them, by such example it is declared to
them that be studiouse to please their herers, that they must abstain from
exhorting and counsayllynge them, and that they apply them to write and speak
that only / where in they perceive the multitude to have most delectation.
This before written have I declared, thinking that it besemeth not the that
are not one of the people, to be of like opinion with the multitude, nor to
judge things to be honest, or men to be plesaunt, according to thy sensual
appetite / but to try and esteem them by their good and profitable acts.
Moreover for as much as they that labor in the study of Philosophy,
concerning the exercise of the minds, be of sundry opynions, some saying
that men become wiser by much disputynge and raysonyng, other affirm that it
happens by exercise in polytyke governance or cyuill causis, diverse suppose it
to come of other doctrynes: but finally they all do confess, that he which is
well brought up, may by every of the said studyes gather matter suffycient to
give good counsel. Therefore he that will leave the doubtful opinions / and
will apply to that which is certain, he must examyne the raysons thereof, and
specially they that be counsailors ought to have consideration of the occasyon,
time, and oportunyte, if they can not bring that to pass, than to reiecte and
put a way as well them which speak in all matters generally, as also those that
know nothing that is expedyent or necessary, for it is apparante and
certain, that he which can not be to him self profitable, he shall in other
men's business do nothing wisely, make much of them that be wise, and do
perceive more than other men, and have good regard toward them: remembrynge
that a good counsaylour, A good counsaillour.
is of all other treasure the most royal and profitable, and think verily that
they which can most aid and profit to thy wit or reason, shall make thy
kyngedome most ample and honorable. wherefore for my part as much as I can, I
have exhorted the, and honored the with such presents as be in my power to
give the. And desire thou not / that other men should bring unto the (as I said
at the beginning) their accustomed presents, which ye should bye much derer
of the giuers, tha^ of the sellers: but couaite thou such presents, which if
thou do use well and dylygently ommyttynge no time, thou not only shall not
consume them, but thou shalt also increase them, and make them of more
estimation and value.

Finis.
Imprinted at london in fletestrete / in the house of Thomas Berthelet, nere to
the cundite at the sign of Lucrece.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


