depiction of ship

A TRVE AND perfect discourse of three great accidents that chanced in Italy
within twenty and six days.

WORTHY TO BE published, the better to know the Lords works, and to teach us,
that with all humility we should accept of whatsoever his will and pleasure
is.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf dwelling in Distaffe Lane near the sign of the
Castle. 1588.

A TRVE AND PERfect discourse of three great accidents that chanced in Italy,
within twenty and six days, worthy to be published, the better to know the
Lords works, and to teach us, that with all humility we should accept of
whatsoever his will and pleasure is.
THere are come letters written to certain Merchants of credit in this town
being strangers, some dated the twentieth of December last, other some the
second of January, and other on the sixth of the same month, wherein are set
down the several accidents hereafter following, the which are worthy to be
read and noted of every good Christian, to the end, that with love one
toward an other, and godly fear toward the majesty of God, we seek in all
dutiful manner to serve him, who suffers not such plagues, but by his
especial secret judgment for the punishment of the ungodly and example of his
chosen people.

On the thirtenth of December, 1587. and according to our course o^ writing on
the third of the same month, being Sunday, about two of the clock in the
after noone, the air being very thick and darkish with often lightenings and
thunder, that di^ beat upon one of the tower of the castle of S. Elmo in the
city of Napels, wherein there was three thousant barrels of gunne powder, the
which being by this means set on fire, made such a terrible noise, that it
seemed the whole went topsie turuey, and overthrew in like sort all the houses
that were within the same castle: Of the which houses there remained not any
stone one upon another, so that, if in some part of the castle the walls had
not remained and some rampires, there would have been no remembrance of any
Castle or Tower that should have been there. And there escaped not above ten
persons that were within the said castle, and already there are two hundred
bodies dead, being men, women and children: it has also spoiled many other,
as it is thought, houses and churches to the number of one thousand, and has
not left so much as the very stones that were paued in their places, there is
almost not one house in this poor city, as it now may be termed, but has
felt in some sort, part of this punishment: and in conclusion, he that has
not seen this miserable act, will hardly believe it, nor the miserable hurt
that was there done. But that, that is more miraculous and worthy to be noted,
is that the wife of the Captain of the said castle, two days before this
chanced, said often times to her husband, that she would not tarry in the
castle, her husband asking her, wherefore, she aunsweared that for three
several times one after an other, she dreamed, that she should with the
castle be blown up into the air, of the which her speeches, her husband for
twice or thrice made b^t a Jest, but in the end, his wife was so importunate,
yt eight days before, he was content to house himself, with all his whole
household in the city, somewhat far off from the castle: and by this means
they avoided the danger which otherwise might have fallen upon them, beings as
it should seem by the special favor of God. And the common opinion of all men
is, that if the said tower had stood toward the city, as it was toward the
sea, it had spoiled the most part of the city. God the author of all goodness
bless and defend both them and us from such like extremities, and give us
grace so to lead our lives, that we may be ready whenever it shall please
him to call us.

From Genoa ye second of January, 1588. the which is according to our order the
xxiii. of December before, they do write as follows: Here is arrived from
Spain a ship called Piuma, the which had taken in, in the I Will of Maiorica
three men that had been taken before by the Turks and made slaves, the which
men told shem of the loss of three Galleys, in order as follows.

Signior Giannettino Spinola in the I Will of Euisa, with the Galleys of the
prince D'Oria, that came out of Spain, being now advertised, how that there
were seven small Galleys of Turkish Pirates in the I Will of Spalmadore, from
thence seven or eight miles off, he was desirous to go and fight with them, and
presently he furnished eight Galleys with his best and readiest men to fight,
as well of Soldiers and Mariners, as others: and thus they set themselves
forward toward the said I Will of Spalmadore, but for that the wind was both
great, and also contrary unto them, the one of the said Galleys could not
pass the point of the said I Will, and so he turned back again, the other
seven with great force went forward, and found the seven Turkish Pirates and
their Galleys, who looked for nothing less than this, notwithstanding they
took courage unto them, and four of those Turkish Galleys gave themselves to
fight, and the other three fled. The four small Galleys of the Turks having
joined themselves with three Galleys of Genoa, and fighting on both sides most
valiantly, there arose such a great tempest, that these Galleys being
entangled together were driven upon a Rock, and so spoiled their Galleys, and
many of their men were drowned, the other who saved themselves being come on
land, they fell to fighting afresh.

And the other three Galleys that were fled, winding about the Island, found
fair weather, and imagining what chanced, they landed two hundred fourscore
and ten men, the which they sent to find the other that were a fighting: they
adjoining themselves with their other fellows Turks five the most part of the
Spaniardes, and got again many other Turks that were slaves to the Spaniards:
and it is thought that the Turks carried away a great quantity of money, but
of this there is no certainty. The one of the three Galleys was of Cigala, the
other of Centurione, and the third of Grillo, all merchants of Genoa, who were
fraught by Spaniards, the which thing is not to them alone a great hinderance,
but also to such others as were interessed in the money.

He that wrote, wrote to the Lords of Genoa in this order. It is not long since
I wrote unto your Exellencies, how that in this town there have been
discovered things never heretofore heard off. That is, of a sect or school
of witches, and that many of them being examined of the fact, confessed. Now I
write again unto you, signifying that after that the Vicars of the Reverend
Signior Albengo, and the Inquisition have taken this matter in hand, there
remained about eighteen or twenty condemned, the greater part of them have
confessed voluntarily, and without any torment at all, besides which there
remains as yet four suspected, who have not yet confessed any thing, and
besides, there is in prison a witch, who has confessed very much. So that the
aforesaid Vicars proceed in their business marvelous well, not respecting
rich nor poor, and this day as upon other days they sit in counsel for the
same purpose. The common people of this place do show themselves in such sort
destrous of the cutting off of these witches, that they have taken up money at
interest to help the said Vicars. Tomorrow ye said Vicars depart hence, to go
to Albenga there to co^sult, with the Reverend Signior of Albenga, and so they
mean presently to turn again hither to make an end.

And truly (right honorable Lords) ye dealings of these evil persons are most
strange, in so much that they can cause tempests with thunder and lightnings
and such other like evil, all the which seem them, as they make show, to be
of account, for that they presume to be able to do far greater things: and
that is more, they kill their own children and kinsmen: and even as it were in
a trise, they will leap upon the back of the devil, who shall be in the
likeness of a Ram: and go to their congregation for to conclude upon the doing
of much evil, even in the presence of the devil, who sits there as chief
judge in likeness of a king, before whom they do openly deny God, and
bequeath them selves to the devil. These ought to be warnings unto every good
Christian to be ready, and prepared against the deceiptful entisements of the
devil, the continual enemy of mankind, and who (as says S. John in his
Gospel) was a murderer even from the beginning, and as S. Peter says in his
epistle, he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour, and therefore
we have great need earnestly to pray unto almighty God, that he will assist us
with his holy spirit, and so to guide us, that we be the better able to resist
the vile temptations of Satan, and following his holy steps, his name may be in
us glorified, and we in the end made partakers of his heavenly blessing,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

