THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST JESUS.

OR THE SEVENTH BOOK OF COMMENTARIES UPON THE APOSTLES CREED: CONTAINING The
first and general PRINCIPLES of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY: With the more immediate
Principles concerning the true Knowledge of CHRIST.

Divided into four Sections.

CONTINVED BY THOMAS JACKSON DR. in Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty in
ordinary, and President of Corpus Christi College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARKE under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.
MDCXXXIV.

REcensui hunc tractum, cui titulus est [The knowledge of Christ Jesus, or, the
seventh book of Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed] in quo nihil reperio
sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium: quo minus cum utilitate Publica
imprimatur, modo intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis October. 10. 1633. Guil. Bray.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL Arguments of the several Sections and Chapters
contained in this BOOK.
SECTION I.
OF the belief or knowledge of Christ in general: and whether Theology be a
true Science or no. Page 2 CHAP. 1. Of the principal points that Christians
are bound to believe. 3 2. Of Historical belief in general, and how it does
variously affect Believers, according to the variety of matters related: the
several esteem of the Historians. 5 3. Whether such knowledge of God, and of
Christ, as the Scriptures teach, be a science properly so called. 11 4. Of the
agreements and differences between Theology and other sciences in respect of
their subjects: that the true historical belief of sacred Historians is
equivalent to the certainty, or evidence of other sciences. 18
SECTION II.
OF the several ways by which the mysteries contained in the knowledge of
Christ were foretold, prefigured, or otherwise fore-signified. Of the diverse
senses of holy Scriptures, and how they are said to be fulfilled, with some
general rules for the right interpretation of them. Page 25 CHAP 5. Containing
the general division of testimonies, or fore-significations of Christ. ib. 6.
Of the first rank of testimonies concerning Christ, that is, of testimonies
merely prophetical. Page 27 7. What manner of predictions they be, or of what
matters the predictions must be, which necessarily infer the participation of
a divine Spirit. 30 8. Of the Sibylline Oracles, whether they came originally
from God or no: that the perspicuity of their predictions does not argue them
to be counterfeit or forged since the incarnation of the Son of God 38 9.
Answering the Objections against the former resolutions; that God did deal
better with Israel then with other nations, although it were granted that other
nations had as perspicuous predictions of Christ and of his Kingdom, as the
Israelites had. 46 10. Of Testimonies in the old Testament concerning Christ
merely typical, and how they do conclude the truths delivered in the New
Testament. Page 53 CHAP. 11. Of testimonies concerning Christ typically
prophetical, or prophetically typical, and of their concludent proof. 58 12.
Of the several senses of Scripture, especially of the literal and mystical.
67 13. Of the literal sense of Scripture not assertive, but merely
charactericall. 77 14. That the Scripture is said to be fulfilled according to
all the former senses: that one and the same Scripture may be oftener than once
fulfilled according to each several sense. 87 15. Whether all Testimonies
alleged by the Evangelists out of the old Testament, in which it is said or
employed [this was done that the Scripture might be fulfilled] be concludent
proofs of the Evangelical truths for which they are alleged. 106 16. Whether
the Prophets did always foresee, or explicitly believe, whatsoever they did
foretell, or fore-signifie concerning Christ. 126 17. Whether divine prophecies
or predictions concerning Christ may admit amphibologies, or ambiguous senses.
139 18. Containing the general heads or topics for finding out the several
senses of Scripture, especially for the just valuation of the literal sense,
whether in the old Testament or in the new. 160 19. Of the use of sacred, or
miscellane Philology for finding out as well the literal, as the mystical, or
other senses of Scripture. 179
SECTION III.
That the incarnation of God, and of God in the person of the Son instiled
(...), the Word, was foretold, prefigured, etc. in the writings of Moses. Of
the hypostaticall union between the Son of God and seed of Abraham, Page 201
CHAP. 20. That God according to the literal sense of Scriptures, was in later
ages to be incarnate, and to converse with men, with the seed of Abraham
especially here on earth, after such a peculiar manner, as we Christians
believe, Christ, God and man did. 201 21. That this peculiar manner of Gods
presence with his people by signs and miracles was punctually foreprophecyed
by the Psalmists. 211 22. That the God of Israel was to become a servant and a
subject to humane infirmities, was foretold by the Prophets according to the
strictest literal sense. 228 23. That God was to visit his Temple after such
a visible and personal manner, as the Prophet Jeremie in his name had done.
232 24. That the God of Israel was to be made King, and to reign not ever
Israel only, but over the Nations in a more peculiar manner than in former ages
he had done. 241 25. That the former Testimonies do concludently infer a
plurality of persons in the unity of the Godhead: and that God in the person
of the Son was to be incarnate, and to be made Lord and King. 249 26. That by
the Son of God and the Word, we are to understand one and the same party or
person: that the Word by whom S. John says the World was made, is coeternall
to God the Father, who made all things by him. 262 27. Why S. John does rather
say, the word was made flesh, then, the son of God was made flesh, albeit the
son of God, and the word, denote one and the same person. 281 28. That the
incarnation of the Word, or of the son of God under this title was
foreprophecyed by sundry Prophets, with the exposition of some peculiar Places
to this purpose, not usually observed by Interpreters. 299 29. Of the true
meaning of this speech, the word was made flesh: Whether it be all one for the
Word to be made. flesh, and to be made man, or whether he were made flesh, and
made man at the same instant* 320 30. Of the hypostaticall and personal union
betwixt the Word and the flesh, or betwixt the Son of God and the seed of
Abraham. 330
SECTION IIII.
Of the conception, and birth of our Lord and Savior, the son of God: of the
circumcision of the son of God, and the name JESUS given him at his
circumcision, and of the fulfilling of the types and prophecyes concerning
these mysteries. Page 347 CHAP. 31. The aenigmaticall predictions concerning
Christ's conception, unfolded by degrees. ibid. 32. S. Lukes narration of our
Saviors conception and birth, and its exact concordance with the Prophets. 354
33. S Matthews relation of the manner of our Saviors conception and birth, and
of the harmony betwixt it and the prophecyes. 370 34. The manner of our
Saviors conception and birth, as it was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah,
exactly fulfilled. The Jews exceptions against S. Matthewes allegation of the
prophet Isaiahs testimony, with the full answer unto them. 383 35. Of the
circumcision of our Savior. 418 36. Of the name Jesus, (...) the title Lord.
428
FINIS.
THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST JESUS. OR The Seventh Book of Commentaries upon the
APOSTLES CREED.
HOW Evil should mingle it self with the works of God, seeing every thing
made by him (and he made all) was good; How that evil which we call sin,
should find entrance into, and hold possession of the heart of man, who was
the accomplishment of all Gods visible works, and upon whose creation it is
said, that God saw every thing that he had made, and it was very good; What
kind of being this evil has, whether merely privatiue, or only positive,
or partly both; Wherein that servitude which Sin did bring upon us, does
consist; What freedom of will is compatible with our natural servitude unto
Satan, (for without some freedom of will, we might be Satan's instruments,
his slaves or servants unto sin we could not be.) These and the like Quares,
with their several branches, in the first project of this long work, had their
place allotted between the Article of Creation, and the Articles concerning
Christ, or in the intended Seventh book of Commentaries upon the Creed. But
the method then intended I have now altered, not out of forgetfulness, but out
of (...), and upon these considerations especially. First, in that the doctrine
concerning sin original or actual, is not expressly mentioned in the Creed.
Secondly, because the most pleasant and most fruitful branches of divine
providence (whose general stemmes have been in the Article of Creation
handled) are no where so conspicuous or so admirable, as in the evangelicall
history of the conception, birth, life, death, resurrection, and ascension of
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. And pity it were to sever them in place,
which accord so well in nature. Lastly, I considered, it could no way be
harmefull to have the plaster ready before I adventured to lance the sore;
specially, in that I am likely to search somewhat deeper, than I have found it
searched by others. The only sore of the humane soul, whose scarres cannot in
this life be perfectly healed, is sin original, and the wounds thereof are
sins actual and habitual; the only medicine or salve for both, is the
knowledge of Christ and him crucified: for he is the only tree of life, whose
leaves are appointed to heal the Nations.

SECT. 1.
Of the belief or knowledge of Christ in general: and whether Theology be a
true science or no.
CHAP. 1.
Of the principal points that Christians are bound to believe.
THat all we which bear the name of Christians did take the name originally
from Christ, the Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos, et quaesitissimis
poenis affecit, quos per flaegitia invisos, vulgus Christianos appellabat.
Auctor nominis ejus CHRISTVS, qui Tiberio imperitante, per Procurator (...)
Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus est. Tacit. Annal. Lib. 15. Page 255.
heathen historian did acknowledge. He did believe that Christ (the author and
finisher of our faith) did suffer under Pontius Pilate, yet this belief was
far from making him a Christian. That which we Christians are in the first
place to believe is, that the man Christ Jesus, whom the Jews by the help of
Pontius Pilate did crucify, was truly the Son of God, his only Son; so
truly and indissolubly the Son of God, as well as of man, that whilst this
man was conceived by the holy Ghost, the Son of God was likewise conceived by
the holy Ghost; whilst this man was borne of a pure Virgin, the true and only
Son of God was borne of the same Virgin; whilst this man was put to death,
crucified, dead and buried, the Son of God was likewise crucified, dead and
buried; whilst this man Christ was raised again from the dead, the true and
only Son of God was so raised; whilst this man ascended into Heaven, the
Son of God ascended into Heaven; whilst this man sits at the right hand
of God, and makes intercession for us, the Son of God there sits and makes
the same intercession; that when we expect the same Jesus, Sect. 1.
whom the Jews did crucify, shall come in visible manner to judge the quick
and the dead, we believe and expect that the Son of God shall come to judge
the quick and the dead. Of the first points we ought to have, at the least, a
true historical belief. Our belief of that article concerning Christ's
coming to judgment, and of our resurrection from the dead, is more
prophetical, than historical.

2. Is then an historical belief of Christ's conception, birth, death, and
resurrection sufficient for us? Sure it is not, unless withal it be
salvificall. No faith can save, unless it be a saving faith: but no faith can
be salvificall, unless it be historical. For he that does not believe the
history of Christ's death and passion, can have no Christian faith at all. Now
the utmost effect whereunto the endeavors of Gods Seedsmen are immediately
terminated, is to plant in the hearts of their hearers a firm persuasion of
the divine truth of the sacred Histories or Prophecies concerning Christ. In
respect of this persuasion they are said to plant and water, and to be
Coworkers with Gods Spirit. But to make this persuasion to be salvificall,
this is the work of God alone. For unless he give this increase to what we
plant and water, all our labors are lost, our best endeavors are to no
purpose. Yet as we are to believe, that without God we can do nothing, so are
we bound to hope that in him and by him, we may do all things, or have all
things done in us and for us, which can be needful or conducent to our
Salvation. No if such as are bound to teach, Cap. 2.
and such as are bound to learn, would daily season their endeavors, (their
prayers especially) with serious consideration of this twofold truth, we could
have no just occasion either of doubt or fear, but that if our belief of the
rehearsed Articles of Christ were once truly historical, it would certainly
become rightly salvifical. For to be historical and to be salvifical are not
me^bra opposita, no such opposite members as divide belief into two parts or
kinds: they are as subordinate one to the other, as natural wit, and
artificial improvement of it.

CHAP. 2.
Of Historians belief in general, and how it does variously affect Believers
according to the variety of matters related: the several esteem of the
Historians.
THat we call historical belief which has no other ground besides the
authority of the Historian or relater, or at the most, experiments suitable to
things related. And such experiments may be known sometimes by sense,
sometimes by reasons demonstrative. And yet all the credit which they can give
to the historian, or all the additions they can make unto historical belief
formerly planted, will be but probabilities or presumptions. Whether the Moon
was eclipsed at the time when Nicias was General for the Athenians against the
Syracusians; Or when Columbus made first discovery of America, are questions
which may be scientifically resolved by astronomicall calculations. But whether
Nicias through ignorance of natural causes and gross superstition, committed
that intolerable oversight which (as But then it fell out unfortunately for
Nicias, who had no expert nor skilful Soothsayer: for the party which he was
went to use for that purpose, and which took away much of his superstition,
called Stilbides, was dead not long before. For this sign of the eclipse of
the Moon (as Philochorus says) was not hurtful for men that would fly, but
contrarily very good. for said he, things that men do in fear, would be
hidden, and therefore light is an enemy unto the^. But this notwithstanding,
their custom was not to keep themselves close above three days in such
eclipses of the Moon and Sun, as Autoclides prescribes in a book he made of
such matters* where Nicias bare them in hand, that they should'then tarry the
whole, and full revolution of the course of the Moon, as though he had not
seen her straight clear again, after she had once passed the shadow, and
darkness of the earth. But all other things laid aside and forgotten, Nicias
disposed himself to sacrifice unto the Gods, until such times as the enemies
came again as well to besiege their sorts, and all their camp by land, as
also to occupy the whole haven by Sea. Plutarch in vita Niciae, infine.
Plutarch relates) occasioned the overthrow of the Athenian forces by Sea and
Land; or whether Columbus made that witty advantage of the like eclipse which
Almirans ob haec ingenti anin^ aegritudineanxius, cum hinc Indoc nec gratia,
nec prece, nec pretio ullo adduci posse videret, ut cibaria exercitus
praeberent, nec armis ab se cogi propter infirmitatem suorum, alia via idem
aggredi statuit. Atque id coelesti quodam instinctu ei venisse in mente^ libens
equidem crediderim, providente viz. Deo, ne tantus vir fa^e periret. Id porro
ita factum est; for te in propinquo tugurium Barbaroru^ erat, hos Columbus
monet, ac praenunciat, ipsos, ni vitae subsidia sibi ac suis suppeditarent,
peste a Deo coelitus missa brevi omnes perituros; cujus rei id habituros signi,
quod duos intra dies Lunam sanguine faedatam visuri essent. Id cum eadem die
and hora, qua Almirans praedixerat, conspicarentur Indi (Lunae aute^ defectus
is erat) subito victi formidine quaecunque ei ad victu^ necessaria fuerunt,
benign praebuere, insuper veniam culpae. orantes, neve ipsis irasci pergeret.
Benzo Hist. novi orbis. l. 1. c. 14.
Benzo in his history of America mentions, cannot be known by any computation
Astronomicall or Chronologicall. This wholly depends upon the authority of the
Historians. Yet if by calculations astronomicall compared with the Annals of
those times, it should appear that there were no such Eclipses in the years
pretended for these practices; this would convince these historians, and those
whom they follow of error, if not of forgerie. On the other side, if
Astronomers should make it clear, that in the points of time assigned by these
Historians, there did fall out such Eclipses of the Moon, this would free them
from suspicion of fiction, so much the more, by how much they were less
skillful, or less observant of the celestial motions or revolutions of times
wherein Eclipses happen.

2. But sometimes the sensible events or experiments may square so well with
historical relations, as to leave no place for curiosity it self, to suspect
either fiction or falsehood in the Historian. As who could suspect the truth of
the Roman Histories, which mention the subjection of this Island to their
Empire, for diverse successions; if he had seen their coins, lately dug out
of the earth, bearing the inscriptions of twenty several Emperors. Or who
could suspect the historical truth of their progress into the Northern parts
of this Kingdom, that have observed the ruins of that wall which they built,
and other monuments as suitable to their Narrations, as the seal is to the
signet. The best is, that the experiments which suite unto the histories of the
old and new Testaments, are more plentiful and and more pregnant, then any
external ratifications of any other historical narrations can be. For of
sacred historical truth, besides the legible testimonies of the great book of
the creatures, every little world may have a world of witnesses in himself.
Now if our belief of the histories concerning Christ and him crucified, be but
equal to our belief of other histories, yet their authority or esteem will
be much greater, because we cannot believe this truth, but we must withal
believe it to be divine; and every man by nature has a more sacred esteem of
matters which he conceives to be divine, then he can have of things merely
mundane or humane.

3. But where the truth of historical belief is to our apprehension the very
same, and the degrees of our assent unto it equal, yet the estimate of the
same truth or its impression upon our affections, is not the same. These vary
according to the several weight of matters related though by the same Author,
and believed by equal degrees of the same kind of belief. Of Edward the
seconds strange defeat by Robert de Bruce King of Scotland; and of Edward the
third, and the black Prince his son, or Henry the fifth their success
against the French, we have but one and the same historical belief, whether
for degree or quality: yet are we not the same way, or in the same degree,
affected with the one story as with the other. The reading of Edward the third,
of Henry the fifts success, delights us English with the ancient honor of
our Nation. The remembrance of Edward the seconds defeat, does so disaffect
us, that we could wish this story were not so true, as the other.

But how unpleasant soever the annals of Edward the second be to some English,
yet we never observed any of this age to weep at the reading of them, whereas
in some provinces of this Kingdom, the battle of Pannierehugh, the rebellion
in the North, and that less disaster, in the year following that rebellion
upon the English borders, could not have been mentioned or seriously related,
within our memory, without many tears of such Auditors, as had no other
knowledge of the events save only from histories, or from traditions which can
produce no better belief than historical.

4. Some cases then there be, in which although the authority of the Historian
be the same, and albeit the matters related by them be for weight or substance
the same, yet shall they not make the same impression upon our hearts or
affections. Yea matters (in themselves considered) of small moment, will
sometimes sway double as much as others of more then double weight unto them,
although the historic^ll belief of both be equal. The circumstances from
which historical truths of lesser weight simply considered, receive these
extraordinary degrees of gravitation, are specially three, Vicinity of place,
Recencie of time, and Peculiar references to our Selves, to our Country, to our
Friends or Allies. The true reason why the history of Christ's death (in some
degree I suppose believed by all) does work so little or so successelesly upon
most men's affections, is because they consider his death, though in it self a
matter of greatest consequence, yet as a matter past a thousand and some
hundred years agone, or as a matter done by the Jews more then two thousand
miles from our coast. And thus they consider it without any peculiar reference
to themselves, as the cause of it; or no more concerning themselves, then as
they are Pars quota humani generis, some little parcells or grains of mankind
or of the humane nature which he redeemed, these being more innumerable than
the sand on the Sea shore.

5. But how firmly soever we apprehend the truth of Christ's death and passion
for the substance, yet this apprehension cannot produce a true complete
historical belief of his death, unless our apprehension of the substance be
seconded with the like apprehension of such circumstances, as are peculiar to
this history above others. What circumstances are these? Although he suffered
but once, and that far off and long ago; yet whatsoever he then suffered or
did, does as nearly and as immediately concern every man this day living in
what place soever, as it did those that were living when he dyed, either such
as were sorrowful spectators of his death, or Actors in it. For albeit he were
offered but once, and that but in one place (without the gates of Jerusalem) yet
this one offering was of value truly infinite, and for efficacy everlasting.
Cap. 3.
And being such, it must be equally applyable to all persons, times, and
places. In his death, in his infinite and everlasting sacrifice every one has
a peculiar interest not Pro rata, but in solidum: by virtue of that atonement
which he made, by that redemption which he purchased once for all, he has an
entire absolute right of dominion over every one of us, and every one of us
has as entire an interest in his death, as if what soever he did or suffered
in the days of his humiliation, he had done and suffered all for us alone. But
this last consideration perhaps is more pertinent to the knowledge of Christ
and of him Crucified, then unto the historical belief of his death or Cross.

CHAP. 3.
Whether such knowledge of God, and of Christ as the Scriptures teach, be a
science properly so called.
ADmitting the objects of our belief might be as certainly and as evidently
known (at least by some) as the subjects of sciences, properly so called, are:
Whether this knowledge and our belief of the same objects may be coincident,
that is, whether it be all one so to know them, and to believe them, I will not
dispute: for this would occasion a controversy about the use of words,
unfitting for a professed Divine to entertain, much more to invite. But that
there is a knowledge of Christ even in this life, which if not for perspicuity
or evidence of truth, yet for the excellency of the truths known, exceeds all
other knowledge, we have our Apostles peremptory sentence for us: For, writing
to his Converts of Corinth, which then abounded with all kind of knowledge
secular, he says, I esteemed or determined to know nothing amongst you, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. He therefore determined to know
nothing besides, because he had no other knowledge in any esteem, in
comparison to this. And what good Christian would desire any other, but as it
is subservient to this knowledge? This comprehends all that we can desire
either to know or to enjoy; all that we can esteem or love, even eternal
happiness it self, as the author and fountain of all happiness instructs
us, John 17. ver. 3. This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. But whether our Savior in this speech or
his Apostle in the former, do use the word knowledge in a strict or in a vulgar
sense, may be questioned. And this question resolves it self into another more
general; as, whether Theology, that is, [knowledge of God] be a science
properly so called; or whether many conclusions of faith may be clearly
demonstrated?

2. Two sorts of men there be, who for the support or securing of their
unreasonable conclusions, have some reason to deny this Queen of sciences,
this Mistress of Arts, and supreme Governesse of all good faculties, to be a
science properly so called: The Agents for the Romish Church, and their
extreme opposites, whether mere Enthusiasts, such as deny al use of
scriptures; or mixed Enthusiasts, men that acknowledge the use of Scriptures,
but abuse them more then such as reject them, by using them too much, or to no
good purpose, or mingle them with the secret inspirations of their private
spirits or wrest them to their own fancies. First, if the conclusions
controverted betwixt us and the Roman Church, may be one way or other
demonstrated, as either to be altogether true or altogether false, or so
sublime that in this life they cannot be punctually or absolutely determined:
then are we not absolutely bound to believe every proposition, which that
Church shall commend unto us as a doctrine of faith, with the same confidence,
as if it were expressly delivered in Scripture, or in the Articles of our Creed.
Nor should every applauded book or Sermon albeit their bulk or substance
consists for the most part of Scripture sentences, be acknowledged to be that
word of God to which all owe obedience; if once it were acknowledged, that
there is a faculty or science of Divinity, which has the same authority to
approve or disprove doctrinall conclusions or their uses, which other Arts or
sciences have to examine the works of all pretenders to them. If Divinity be a
science, then he which is a Divine, or a master of his profession, might
censure the Professors of other Arts, faculties, or sciences, which take upon
them to resolve Theological controversies, or to teach doctrines which the
Church (wherein they live) never avouched, with the self same liberty, which
the Professors of other Arts usually do Divines, if they take upon them to
teach or practice within the precincts of their profession.

Besides these two sects of men, and some other men which cannot be
comprehended under any sect or faction, but have the same temptation to desire
that there might be no true knowledge of God or of Christ, or no demonstration
of the Spirit; that the Atheist or desperate sinner has to wish there were no
God, or no Judge of quick and dead: I cannot conceive, what reason any man or
any sort of men have to deny Theology to be a true and proper science. Yet to
give the ingenuous Reader, if not full satisfaction, yet some Hints (at least)
whereby he may satisfy himself, it will be no digression from our present
argument, (at least no long digression) briefly to show, wherein that
knowledge of God and of Christ, which may in this life be obtained, does differ
from sciences properly so called, and wherein they do agree.

Now all the differences or concordance that can be betwixt any sciences, Arts
or faculties, do either concern the Maxims and Principles, or the conclusions
and the subjects of such faculties.

3. The Maxims or Principles of all other sciences may be clearly
apprehended, and firmly assented unto, by the industrious search and light of
common reason, without illuminations supernatural: so cannot the principles or
Maxims of Divinity; there must be a light or illumination more then natural,
before we can have either a clear and undoubted apprehension of their truth
or a just valuation of their worth. Yet this difference is not much material,
neither part of it positive, or negative, is any way formal or essential to
the constitution of a science properly so called. For by what means soever the
Principles of any science become manifest and certain unto us, whether by our
own industry, or by the teaching of others, or whether we be taught them
immediately from God, (either by the admirable disposition of his extraordinary
Providence, or by special infused grace) is merely accidental to the
constitution or nature of a science properly so called. He that sees the
deduction of Mathematical conclusions from the uncontrovers'd Maxims of the
same Art, as clearly as another does, is never a whit the less skillful
Mathematitian, although perhaps he learned the Principles by the help of an
Extraordinary teacher, which the other attained unto by the industrious
exercise of his own wit. Now if it be merely accidental to the nature of a
science, whether a man be (...), or (...), his own Master or another Scholar
(whether in learning the principles or conclusions:) it can be no prejudice
either to his knowledge, or proficiency in such knowledge, that he has been
(...), immediately taught by God, at least for the Maxims. And I make no
question but that the principles of some other sciences besides Divinity (at
least some principles of such sciences) have been immediately taught by God:
Or, if any man list to move question or Controversy about this truth, I could
entertain many Heathen Advocates for my opinion without any great costs or
pains.

4. But as it is true that the principles of Divinity cannot be known without
illuminations more then natural: so it is certain, that since the ceasing of
extraordinary illuminations or gifts of the Spirit, the most of such
principles, (or so many of them as are required to the science or faculty of
Divinity) cannot be distinctly known without the knowledge of other Arts or
Sciences. Most of the Attributes of God cannot be well unfolded without
competent skill in Metaphysicall learning. Many of his works can never be
known nor admired aright without the science of Philosophy; nor can the
offices or Attributes of Christ be taught aright, without more skill in the
learned tongues, then common Grammarians or general Lexicons will afford. He
that hops to attain to the true knowledge of these principles, must either
use the help of some Lexicon peculiar to divinity, or make one of his own.
Easier it were to learn the terms of Law or Physic, out of Thomasius or
Riders Dictionary, then to know the true Theological use or meaning of many
principal terms in the Old or New Testament, out of (...) or Pagninus his
Thesauras, though both of them most excellent writers in their kind. And yet
after a man has attained by all the means aforementioned, and other like
helps of Arts, unto a competent knowledge of the principles; there is no less
use of good Logic in divinity, then in any other science whatsoever, for the
right deduction of necessary conclusions from such principles, or for refuting
Heterodoxall doctrines, or quelling impertinent or frivolous questions. But the
Principles of Divinity being once known, the dilatation or deduction of them
into form of Art or science, and the establishment of Orthodoxall conclusions,
may be made as certain and perspicuous by Logic, as the like can be in any
other science. For the use not of usual or vulgar, but of exquisite Logic, is
in no Art so necessary as in Divinity. The method for constituting any Art or
science from principles known is twofold, the one direct and positive, by
affirmative syllogismes or by demonstration a Priore; the other by reducing
conclusions contradictory ad impossible, that is, by discovering their manifest
contradiction or irreconcilable opposition unto some fundamental principles
of the same science. Now what conclusions or opinions they be in particular,
which contradict either those theological principles, that concern the nature
and attributes of God; or the personal union of two natures in Christ, his
Prophetical, Sacerdotall, or Royal function; shall (by the assistance of his
grace) be discussed in the second (...) of the Catholic Church. Of this in
the mean time I rest persuaded, that it is neither too much learning that has
made this present age more mad then the former; nor any greater measure of Gods
Spirit than may be found in others, which makes many among us more bold then
their brethren, then their Fathers in Christ, in determining greatest mysteries
of Divinity.

CHAP. 4.
Of the agreements and differences between Theology and other sciences in
respect of their Subjects: that the true historical belief of sacred
Historians is aequivalent to the certainty, or evidence of other sciences.
BUt, in every science oportet discentem credere. Every young Scholar is bound
to believe his teacher, and must take some principles upon trust, until he be
able to try them himself. Yet as he is no perfect Artist, or no master of
Science, who cannot see the evidence of principles, or Maxims, and the
connection between them and the conclusions issuing from them, with his own
eyes: so neither does he deserve the name of a Divine or Teacher of this
faculty, whosoever he be, that cannot in the first place discern the truth of
the Maxims or principles, or cannot in the second place make demonstration of
the coherence or non-coherence, Cap. 4.
or of the discord between them, and such conclusions as are rightly inferred
or merely pretended from them. But the best is, that as a Carpenter may have
skill enough to measure the timber which he buys, or a woodward the wood which
he sells, or every good husbandman the quantity of the ground which he tills;
and yet all their skill put together will not half suffice to make a
Mathematician: so may all of us be in our callings good Christians or true
believers, and yet no true Divines, but more unapt to be Teachers in this
faculty, than an ordinary Carpenter to write a Comment upon Euclide, or a
Husbandman to set forth a treatise of Cosmography. Thus far the faculty or
science of Divinity holds exact correspondencie with other sciences properly
so called: and the practice of Christian men in their several callings bears
the same proportion unto true Divinity, which manual Arts or trades do unto
those sciences, unto which they are subordinate.

2. A difference notwithstanding there is between Divinity and other
Sciences, but I cannot say whether the faculty of Divinity come short of other
Sciences properly so called: or rather exceed them in that wherein they differ.
The difference is this. The total subject of other Sciences, (of some at
least) may be exactly known in this life; though not by any one man, yet by all
that may seek after it. But this subject of Divinity can never be exactly
known by any one man, nor by any succession of men, though all of them should
study no other Art, besides the knowledge of God and of Christ, until the
worlds end. From this incomprehensible amplitude of its subject it is, that
many principal points in Divinity, points necessary unto salvation, must be
believed only, even by Divines themselves; we may not endeavor or hope to
know them, until we be admitted into that everlasting School. And it is a
great part of our profession, or of our proficiency in it, Vide Rugeriu^ de
quaestionibus.
to know what questions belong to this present inferior School; and what they
be which must be reserved unto the high School Everlasting.

3. But other true Sciences there be, and in their kind truly Noble, (whose
just challenge unto both these titles no man gainesayes, no man questioneth)
which have their peculiar problemes as well as unquestionable principles or
conclusions. It is not yet resolved by Geometricians, whether the Quadrature of
Circles be possible, or whether the continued protraction of lines not parallel
make their coincidence necessary. Astronomers are not yet agreed whether there
be so many several Orbs, as there be Planets, or how many spheres above the
Planets, or whether these Orbs or Spheres, (be they few or more) be
concentrique. It is controversed whether not the Planets only, but those which
we call fixed stars do move in the firmament, as fishes do in the water, or
as Eagles soar in the air, or whether the whole firmament from the Region
wherein the fixed stars do move, unto this lower region of the air wherein
we breath, be at all times so uniforme for the transmission of light, or for
the true representation of the exact distance whether of the altitude or
latitude of the stars from us, as at sometimes it is, or as glass or the
clear air is with us. This last Quaere were it agitated, and discussed as it
might be, would (I am persuaded) shake many Astronomicall suppositions or
presumed Notions concerning motum trepidationis, that is, of the supposed
reciprocal motion of those which they call fixed stars from South to North,
from North to South. Great expenses without hope either of gain or of
recovering the principal spent in trying Chymicall conclusions by many in the
former age, will not to this day give satisfaction to some modern Naturalists,
whether the conversion of other metalls or materials into Gold be atchievable.
Many like problemes there be in other secular sciences which will never be
fully resolved until we shall not need their resolution. Yet were the number
of insoluble problemes in every one of these sciences mentioned, or in all that
can be mentioned, much greater then it is, this could be no prejudice to them,
so long as the deduction of many useful conclusions from clear undoubted
principles may be made evident to men which have their wit and senses exercised
in such subjects. That the number then of insoluble Problemes is in Divinity
much greater then in any other faculty, this only argues the subject of it to
be more admirable then the subjects of other faculties. In other faculties or
sciences we are bound to give our absolute assent to no more principles or
conclusions then are clear and evident. But in Divinity we must absolutely
believe many conclusions which we cannot hope in this life absolutely to know,
or that they should be made evident unto us. For we must believe the final
judgment with the joys of the life to come, which no man can know till he
enjoy them: and we must believe the everlasting pains ordained for the Devil
and his Angels, which no man hopes ever to know. Many matters of fact likewise
there be related by the Prophets, Evangelists, and other sacred writers, of
which there can be no ungainesayable proof or demonstration, no other ground
or reason of our assent unto them, besides the authority of the Relator.
Howbeit no man can rightly acknowledge such authority, as may command his
assent without further proof, unless there be better grounds or motives, then
the bare proposal or assertion of the Author. That we are thus bound to
believe many sacred truths which cannot in this life possibly be known, does
no way argue our belief of them to be less rational, then our assent unto
other truths which may be proved by reason; but rather supposes that the true
historical belief of Relations sacred does parallel the truth or evidences of
sciences properly so called. No evidence of any science does so far exceed
true historical belief of matters sacred, as it does all historical belief
of matters secular: and it incomparably exceeds all other historical belief,
not only in respect of the worth or just estimate of matters related, but even
for the rational evidence of the abstract or speculative truth. What esteem
soever we make of Xenophons stories, this participates no authority, no credit
to Plutarch or other Grecian writers of later times. We may give deserved
credit to Plutarch, to Tacitus, and yet justly suspect Herodotus and Livie in
many particulars. All the credit which secular historians that live in or write
of several ages, can expect of us, must grow from their own roots. The
consent of many writers in several ages may serve to underprop a general or
common truth, which happily would decline or fall, if it were supported by the
credit of one alone. But natural propagation of truth, from one secular
historian to another, is not to be expected. And without such propagation, some
addition may be made to our belief of one by reading others, but there can be
no true growth or augmentation of our belief of matters secular, by comparing
diverse Historians. Far otherwise it is in the right historical belief of
matters sacred.

4. The seed of Divine mysteries, which are sown in Mosaicall writings, shoot
out their branches in the ensuing historians the Prophets, and bear flower and
fruit in the Evangelicall stories. So that he that rightly believes the truth
of Mosaicall histories, cannot distrust the Prophets: or suspect the
Evangelists in their relations. This is a truth supposed by the Author of Truth
himself; Had ye believed Moses, you would have believed me: For he wrote of
me. Joh. 5. 46. that is, Christ was if not the sole subject, yet the only
scope of Moses his writings. Now to believe the histories of Moses or matters
related by him, we have inducements many, no less binding then the experiments
or inductions which win, and tie our assent unto the Principles of Arts or
Sciences. These inducements are partly from the visible book of the Creatures,
partly from the estate of the Jews sufficiently known to all Nations from time
to time. Of these inducements somewhat has been said in the first book of
these Comments; somewhat likewise in the Treatise of Creation. Now the
contemplation of that most exact harmony between Mosaicall or Prophetical
delineations of Christ, and that live image of him, which the Evangelists by
his Spirit have exhibited unto our view, is no less rational, then the
contemplation of connection between the Principles of other Sciences and their
conclusions. The progress in this contemplation of the Harmony betwixt the
several passages of sacred stories, is not the same that is between
Mathematical principles or Theorems and their conclusions. The point then next
to be enquired, is, how the mysteries concerning Christ and his Kingdom, which
have been revealed unto us in the new Testament, were delivered by Moses, by
the Prophets; or other Canonical writers of the old Testament.

SECT. 2. Cap. 5.

Of the several ways by which the mysteries contained in the knowledge of
Christ were foretold, prefigured, or otherwise fore-signified. Of the diverse
senses of holy Scriptures, and how they are said to be fulfilled, with some
general rules for the right interpretation of them.
CHAP. 5.
Containing the general division of testimonies, or fore-significations of
Christ.
ALL the prenotions or fore-significations which the Patriarchs had, or their
posterity might have had, concerning Christ, have been elsewhere reduced to
these three general roots, To testimonies merely Prophetical, merely
typical, and Typically Prophetical. The division, though no way misliked by
us now, may notwithstanding upon the revise, be somewhat amended or further
explained. All the prenotions or overtures of Him that was to come, were either
by word, or matter of fact; either Enunciative and assertive, Sect. 2.
or representative, or partly Enunciative, partly representative. All
enunciative or assertive testimonies of Him that was to come, may be reduced to
the first branch of the former division, that is, to testimonies merely
prophetical. But so cannot all representations of Evangelicall mysteries be
reduced to prenotions, merely typical, or prefigurations real. For there may
be a true representation or deciphering of mysteries future, as well in
characters of speech, in single words or proper names, as by matters of fact,
by men's persons or offices, legal ceremonies or historical events. We are
then in the first place to treat in general of prenotions or testimonies
merely prophetical or expressly assertive. In the second, of prefigurations
merely typical, yet (in their kind) Real, as of legal ceremonies, of men's
persons, of historical events or matter of fact. In the third place of
prenotions or Testimonies typically prophetical, that is, in which there is a
concurrence of express prophecy or prediction, and of some matter of fact or
real prefiguration of Christ or mysteries concerning him. In the fourth and
last place, we are to give some Hints or general heads of observations
concerning prenotions or representations of Evangelicall mysteries merely
literal or verbal. More particulars of every kind of prenotions here
mentioned, shall (by Gods assistance) be discussed in the particular Articles
concerning our Saviors Incarnation, Conception, birth, death and Passion.

CHAP. 6. Cap. 6.

Of the first rank of testimonies concerning Christ, that is, of testimonies
merely prophetical.
THese are in number exceeding many, yet sundry of them either not well
observed or not rightly explained by ordinary Interpreters; who, as though they
thought to supererogate in not observing so many as might be observed, or in
not fully displaying such as ordinarily are observed, oftentimes diminish the
number of prenotions typically prophetical to make up the number of
Testimonies merely prophetical. Testimonies merely prophetical we account
all such and only such predictions, as according to the literal assertive
sense of the words, and in the purpose of the holy Spirit, by whom they were
registered, are applyable only to Christ himself, not to any legal type or
shadow of him. For all such predictions or bare assertions as are literally
applyable to any other besides Christ, or to others with him, belong unto the
third member of the former division, that is, to testimonies or prenotions
typically prophetical, or (at least) prophetically typical. For some
difference there is (though not much) betwixt these two expressions, as will
appear hereafter.

2. All the predictions, which we have in that fifty third chapter of Isaiah,
are merely prophetical: they cannot be literally avouched of any man, of any
creature, but only of the Son of God himself, made a man of sorrows and
infirmities for us men and for our salvation. Of the same rank is that
particular prophecy of Jeremy Jer. 31. 22. The Lord has created a new thing in
the Earth, the woman shall encompasse the man. But whether that other prophecy
Isai. 7. 14. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call
his name Emanuel, be merely prophetical, or prophetically typical, will
require further discussion in a more convenient place. But for that prophecy
Zach. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Sion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem:
behold thy King comes unto thee, a King just and lowly, riding upon an Ass,
and upon a Colt the F^ale of an Ass, it is without all question merely
prophetical, and can be literally meant of none, but of Sions and Jerusalems
Savior alone. And however the accomplishment of this prediction might with
more facility have been counterfeited by the fraudulent Jew, then the
accomplishment of any other prophetical testimony before our Saviors coming
in this manner to Jerusalem or immediately after it, yet for this fifteen
hundred years and more, they have had no possible color for disguising the
truth of the prophetical predictio^, or Evangelicall story how it was
fulfilled. Though out of their madness they might set up a King, and cry and
shout before him: yet have they had no Sion, nor Jerusalem, whereunto they could
have brought him for these fifteen hundred years and more, nor have they
been permitted to come near the place where it stood with any other than
counterfeit joy, being enforced for many generations, to purchase the
privilege or liberty of howling over the ruins of that Sion and Jerusalem,
unto which their expected Messiah by the purport of the former prophecy was to
come, at a far higher rate, then they had bought the delivery of Him into
their power.

4. That the coming of their King unto that Sion and Jerusalem which then
were, was foretold by their Prophet Zachary above two thousand years ago, the
Iewist Rabbines of this age confess. That this Prophecy was literally meant
of their expected King or Messiah, they do not deny. That this Prophecy has
been already literally fulfilled according to every circumstance, we
Christians verily believe. The particular manner how it was fulfilled in and by
our Savior Christ, will have its place in the Article of his Passion, and in
the manner of his consecration to his everlasting Priesthood. Now for the
better confirmation of our faith unto this general, that all the predictions
of the Old Testament, which concern our Savior Christ's Incarnation, Death and
Passion, etc. were dictates of the holy Spirit of God, who neither deceives
any man, nor can be deceived by man or wicked spirit, we are in the next place
briefly to show, how sacred testimonies merely prophetical concerning
Christ, exhibit that demonstration of the Spirit, whereof the Apostle speaks
(1. Cor. 2. 4. --) unto all reasonable men that will seriously weigh them,
together with the nature or subject of matters foretold, and with the various
circumstances of time and place, etc. wherein they were uttered or fulfilled.

CHAP. 7.
What manner of predictions they be, or of what matters the predictions must
be, which necessarily infer the participation of a divine Spirit.
EVery Prophecy is a true prediction; but every true prediction is not a
Prophecy. Any ordinary man that is Arbitrator of his own actions, and master
of his word, may truly foretell some events, projected or seriously purposed by
himself, unless death or some extraordinary casualty prevent his
accomplishment of them. And no wise man will foretell the performance of what
he promises, or the accomplishment of his purposes, otherwise then with
subordination (either express or implied) unto his good will or pleasure, who
sees all things, even the very secret purposes of our hearts, much better then
we our selves do; and works all things according to the Counsel, not of our
will, but of his own. However, though by his permission and assistance, we
make performance of whatsoever was for many years before promised or purposed
by us; Cap. 7.
yet this is no demonstration of a divine or prophetical spirit in us. To
arrogate or challenge the name of a Prophet from the truth of such predictions,
were more then enough to prove the party so peccant to be a false Prophet.

Besides those predictions which are common to all men whilst they have the
ordinary gift of memory, discretion, or understanding: there be predictions
peculiar to several Arts or Faculties, which come somewhat nearer to the
nature of Prophecies properly so called, but (well examined) fall further short
of them, then they go beyond the former presages or predictions of ordinary
wise or discreet men.

2. A man of ordinary skill in Astronomy, able by his own or others skill to
foretell the set times of the Eclipses, whether in the Sun or Moon, might
easily gain the reputation of a Prophet or a Southsayer amongst barbarous
illiterat people: yet no civil Nation will account men thus far skillful to
be extraordinarily learned, much less for celestial Prophets. Hippocrates or
Galen (so they had bin disposed to play the Mountebanks) might have gotten a
better opinion amongst the vulgar, or their Patients, then they had of
themselves or their own skill: for both of them could and did discover the
nature of such diseases and alterations ensuing in men's bodies, as the wisest
men then living, but not so good Physicians as they were, could not guess at
aright, much less distinctly foresee. Yet neither of these two famous
Physicians (for ought I can learn) did take upon them to interpret the aspects
or motions of the Stars after such a manner, as many meaner Physicians since
their time have done. So far were they from challenging the name or title of
Prophets or Southsayers, that they did not take upon them to foretell, what the
secret motions or dispositions of their Patients bodies, whether alive or dead,
did presage either to private men, or to public States. Yet to foretell
strange events to come, by observing the alterations in men's living bodies, or
by the Anatomy of them dead; is in any reasonable construction more congruous
and facile, then to foretell the success of war or politic projects by
anatomizing dead brutish Creatures, or by inspection of their intralls. This
later skill many in times past amongst the Heathens have professed, and have
had the reputation of Augures or Southsayers.

But albeit their predictions in this subject might for the most part prove
true (which I do not believe) yet all this was not sufficient to purchase the
just title of Prophets or Diviners: it only argues some deeper insight in
ominous forewarnings or portendments, as Hippocrates and Galen had in
medicinal presages, above ordinary men. That there may be a peculiar skill or
dexterity of conjecture concerning the peculiar signs of times, whether by
interpretation of dreams, of prodigies of Comets, or the like, is a point not
worth the debating in Divinity. That this skill (were it granted to be much
greater then the Professors of it in what kind soever arrogate unto
themselves) does amount to the nature of a true Prophecy or divination
properly so called, all true Divines must deny.

3. That skillful Physicians may truly presage the certain issue of some
diseases settled or growing, as of the life and death of their Patients, far
beyond the capacity of vulgars, and to the admiration of men otherwise more
learned then themselves; is not doubted by any man of understanding. But all
wherein they exceed others not skilled in Physic, is this; that their art and
experience enables them to discern the working or first projects of causes
Physical, or seminall Originalls of alterations in men's bodies, much sooner
and with more dexterity, then men without skill or experience in their art can
do. But so a well experienced, though illiterate Gardener, will distinguish
several herbs or simples at the first peeping out of the mold wherein they
were hid, much better then a mere contemplative Artist (which has pored
oftener and longer upon Mathiolus, Dioscorides, or other Herbalists, then the
most industrious Gardener has done on his plots) shall be able to distinguish
them after a months growth. Yet will not the cunningest Gardener, though a
contemplative Herbalist withal, take upon him to tell what seeds have been
sown by another of his profession so long as they lie hid in the ground. Nor
will the most skillful Physician (unless conceit of his skill far exceed
his wit or understanding) adventure to foretell what diseases in particular
shall befall men for the present in perfect health, for any one or more of the
next seven years to come. Astrologers (for ought I can say against their
profession) may truly foretell or give a happy guess at such events as usually
follow upon the apparition of Comets. But I never heard of any Astrologer that
could prognosticate, at what time, in what degree of altitude, longitude, or
latitude, any Comet (before its appearance) should be seen, neither whether
there should be any Comets at all the next five years to come; much less, if
any appear, what course it shall observe. I dare not deny all artificial or
experimental skill in the interpretation of dreams, but none of this
profession (I presume) will be so bold to foretell what his Neighbor shall
dream of in the several nights of the next month, or to recall his dreams
to mind if happily he have forgotten them. There was more true Divinity in
that brief reply of the Chaldean Astrologers, or supposed Diviners, unto
Nebuchadnezzars unreasonable demand Dan. 2. v. 10. then in all their professed
Art of Divination. The Chaldeans spoke to the King O King live for ever: tell
thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation. The King
answered and said to the Chaldean^, The thing is gone from me* if ye will not
make known unto me the dream with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be
cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a Dunghill. The Chaldeans answered
before the King and said; There is not a man upon the Earth that can show the
Kings matters: Therefore there is no King, Lord, nor Ruler, that asked such
things at any Magitian, Astrologer, or Chaldean. And it is a rare thing that
the King requires, and there is none other that can show it before the King,
except the Gods whose dwelling is not with flesh. Dan. 2. ver. 4. 5, 10, 11. In
this last clause only they failed. For that God which revealed Nebuchadnezzars
dream, and the interpretation thereof unto Daniel was to be God with us, to
have his dwelling in our flesh.

4 However, they knew by light of nature and of reason, that it was but one and
the same skill to tell or retrive matters of this nature past, that is, whereof
they had no hint or notice, either from their own senses, or from History or
tradition; and to foretell things contingent, or not determined in their
comprehensible causes.

Now to foretell things of this nature, any Future that falls not out by the
constant and observable course of nature; or which has no dependence on any
visible cause already attempting its effect (though so secretly as none but a
perfect Artist can discover the project) is that kind of prediction, which
only deserves the title of Prophecy, or Divination properly so called, and is
not communicable to any creature, save only by participation of the divine
spirit. All such predictions must be derived from some revelation immediately
made by God himself unto some one or other of his creatures, from whom the
rest receive it, either by writing or by tradition. This Topicke of Divinity,
the Lord himself immediately taught the Prophet Isaiah, Cap. 41. ver. 21.
Produce your cause (says the Lord,) bring forth your strong reasons, says the
King of Jacob. Let them bring forth and show us what shall happen: Let them
show the former things what they be, that we may consider them, and know the
latter end of them, or declare us things for to come. Show the things that are
to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. This case comes home
against all pretended divinations given by Oracles, by the supposed heathen
Gods, and their Priests and Prophets: So does that other, Isa. the 47. 5, 6, 7.
fully reach all pretended Astrologicall divinations of contingents future.

5. Yet all the predictions concerning Christ, in the writing of Moses or the
Prophets, are of this rank and nature, which God himself denies could be
foreseen or foretold either by supposed Heathen Gods or by Astrologers. Now
this principle being once granted, [That all the Prophecies concerning Christ
alleged by the Evangelists, were uttered many years before the relation of
their accomplishment by them] no rational man can deny, that the first
revealer of them was God himself, who calls things that are not as if they
were, and foretells things to come, as if they were already past. Many things
foretold by the Prophets concerning the incarnation of the son of God, his
birth, his death, and passion, resurrection, etc. demonstratively infer a
creative or Omnipotent power, from whom they received this spirit of
divination. Many again, (besides the supposall of his Omnipotent power)
manifestly argue a wisdom truly infinite. Of the deduction of both these
attributes from prophetical divinations, of legal or other typical
praefigurations of Christ and his Kingdom, hereafter (by Gods assistance:) as
the exposition of types or Prophecies, or of both, either severally or jointly
considered, shall minister matter or occasion.

That predictions of this rank and nature, whereof we now treat, did suppose a
power divine for their Author, was a common prenotion amongst the Heathen,
amongst the Latins especially, in whose language the faculty of foretelling
things thus contingent was called Divinatio. A fuller expression (as Tully
somewhere observes) then the Grecians had of the like skill. For it imports a
great deal more then (...), or other like titles assumed by such Mountebank,
as were the true disciples of the grand Impostor and Father of lies. Nor could
this grand Impostor himself have gotten the esteem of a Deity or power divine
amongst rude people by any other means, then by counterfetting predictions
truly divine. The major proposition [that all prediction of Contingents to
come, or of events not as yet seminally extant in their natural causes, was
from divine inspiration] the Heathens rightly believed and acknowledged. But
that such spirits as demanded sacrifice, or other like observances of them,
could foretell future Events of this rank, was never sufficiently proved unto
them. These infernal Impostors, and the Mountebanks their Scholars, whether
Astrologers, Southsayers, etc. played the Juglers in this assumption or minor:
and by this means wrought their Followers to subscribe unto most desperate
practical conclusions.

CHAP. 8.
Of the Sibylline Oracles whether they came originally from God or no: that the
perspicuity of their predictions does not argue them to be counterfeit or
forged since the incarnation of the son of God.
BUT if the infallible predictions of future events, which have no causes
discernable either by the general eye of nature, or peculiar skill of Art,
coexistent with them, do necessarily infer the spirit of Prophecy, or
divination properly so called; it will be further demanded what is to be said
or thought of the Sibylline Oracles; whether they were from Heaven, or from
Earth, or from the region under the Earth? Whether God or any good Angel did
inspire these Prophetesses with their predictions concerning Christ? That many
things concerning his life, and Kingdom were expressly foretold by these
Heathen Prophetesses, Cap. 8.
the best amongst the ancient Christians did believe, nor did the Heathens that
lived with them or before them, question the Authority of the Records which
they alleged. The only question then was, whether their predictions of
strange alterations to ensue throughout the world, did punctually refer to
Christ whom the Jews did crucify, or to some other Heroic person. That these
Prophecies were extant for many generations before the blessed Virgin, the
mother of Christ (from whom alone he took his bodily substance) was borne or
conceived, no literate Christian or Heathen did ever question. Yet upon her
Nativity to have foretold, that she should conceive and bring forth such a
son as should likewise be the son of God, the great Redeemer of the world,
did far surpass all Astrologians skill, or any other Prognostics which
cannot finally be resolved into the spirit of the only wise immortal God, as
into their first Author or Fountain.

2. But many great Divines, many good Antiquaries and Critiques of best note in
these latter times (which would be accounted the most learned) move question,
whether all, or most, or any competent part of those verses, which now go
under the name of Sibylline Oracles, be the very same either for matter or
form, with the ancient Records, which, it is granted by all, were extant long
before our Saviors coming into the world? Or whether most passages in these
now extant have not been composed by Christians desirous to make a supplement
unto some fragments of the true Originalls, which had been lost? To induce
this suspicion or opinion, that the volume of Oracles now extant, is but a
supposititious brood of later times, it is plausibly alleged by good Writers,
that thus much must be granted, or else we must grant (which may seem worse)
that those mysteries of Christ and his Kingdom which we Christians believe,
were more expressly revealed unto the Heathen by these supposed prophetesses,
then they were to the Jews, Gods chosen people, either by Moses or the
Prophets. For such is the nature and quality of these Sibylline predictions, as
now we have them, that they may rather seem to be exegeticall explications of
Moses and the Prophets, then original Prophecies, which are for the most part
aenigmaticall or parabolicall.

2. All the arguments notwithstanding which can be drawn from this or the like
Topique, are more plausible then pregnant, and (well examined) conclude aut
nihil, aut nimium. Which way soever they be drawn or made to look, either
they do not reach home to the point in question, or else they overreach, or
fall awry of it; none of them do punctually fall upon it. For no Christian or
Heathen Writer whether ancient or modern, has hitherto made question whether
the fourth Eclogue of Virgil, were penned by this Heathen Poet, or composed by
some which lived after our Saviors death, in favor of the Christians. Now if
we had the notes of that plain song (on which this Prince of latin Poets
runs such curious descant) in the very characters wherein Sibylla Cumaea left
it, (for Virgil, as he himself professes, was but a Commentator upon this
one, among many other heathen Prophetesses entitled to this name of Sibyll:) I
do not see, nor can I conjecture, what passages in the old testament do more
literally and plainly express the sacred mysteries concerning Christ and his
Kingdom, which the Evangelists have unfolded unto us, then that one Sibylla
did, on whose writings Virgil comments in lofty and curious verse.

3. The Law and Prophets (says our Savior) continued unto John the Baptist.
His meaning is not that the matter of those writings did then expire or
determine; or that the writings themselves should then become obsolete or out
of use: But rather, that John should take the lamps which they had lighted and
deliver them to such as were to pursue the same course, which he after the law
and Prophets had undertaken. He was Lucerna ardens and lucens, a bright and a
burning Lamp, to enlighten such as lived with him or came after him to follow
his steps with zeal and devotion toward him, whom he did usher into the
world. As John's entrance upon his office was a kind of period to the Law and
Prophets, after which there was a new Epoch, or distinction of times to
follow: so there was to be a determination of Sibylls Oracles about that time
wherein Virgil wrote that fourth Eglogue, Vltima Cumaei venit jam carminis
aetas. Virgil did grossly err in the person or party of whom this prophecy of
Sibyll was literally meant, according to the intention of the spirit of
divination, by which it was first conceived: and err he did, though not so
grossly, in the circumstances of the time wherein it was to be accomplished.
But these two errors and other circumstances being pardoned, the substance of
his discourse, or descant upon Sibylla Cumaea's verses, is Orthodoxall, and
such as concludently argues the text, whereon he Comments, to have been
originally more then humane, truly divine.

4. For however we have learned long ago, that all the gracious promises made
by God unto the ancient Israelites, for continuation of the Aaronicall
Priesthood and other like prerogatives peculiar to that Nation under the style
or tenure of Legnolam, (...)
for ever, were to determine at the revelation of their long expected Messiah:
and although many Christian writers well versed in Hebrew Antiquaries,
assuredly inform us, this was an unquestionable tradition amongst the ancient
Hebrew Rabbis, though now denied: yet no writer either Jewish or Christain
give me so full satisfaction in this point, as Virgil in the forecited Eglogue
does. For after he had said, Vltima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas, He adds
immediately, Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo. This implies, that as
there was then an end of that age or world wherein Sibylla Cumaea lived, so
there was another age or world to begin at the accomplishment of her prophecy,
which was to have no period, but to be as we say, Saecula Saeculorum, a world
of worlds, or a world without end. Such we Christians believe the Kingdom of
Christ to be, which was to take its beginning here on earth at the
accomplishments of the prophecies concerning his resurrection and exaltation.
With his Cross or humiliation Virgil meddles not, having transformed all that
Sibylla prophesied of Him, into the similitude of the Roman Empire as then it
stood goodly and glorious, and so to continue (as he hoped) with perpetual
increase of strength and happiness. If we had all the single threads as
Sibylla left them, which this Heathen Poet has twisted into these and the like
strong lines: Iam redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna.
Iam nova progenies caelo demittitur alto:


5. Me thinks they might lead us by a compendious and gain way unto a clearer
view of many divine mysteries recorded by sacred writers, concerning our
Saviors eternal generation, incarnation, nativity and propagation of his
Kingdom; then we can hope to approach unto by the perplexed Labyrinths of
many modern Interpreters, of diverse Schoolmen, or by any tradition of the
ancient Hebrews as now they are extant. But the exact parallel between the
undoubted Oracles of Gods Prophets, and such hints as Virgil descants upon,
from Sibylla Cumaea, I leave to younger Academick Divines or Moralists. It shall
suffice my present purpose to add some one or two more unto the former. The
first Revelation concerning Christ and his Kingdom which is extant upon sacred
record, is That Genesis 3. ver. 15. I will put enmity (says God to the Serpent)
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed. It shall
bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. That this woman's seed was to
be a man, all that believed the truth of Moses writings, did know: but that he
was to be the son of a pure virgin, was more (as is most probable) then our
Mother Evah, more then the father and mother of Noah at the birth of their
first borne, did apprehend, and perhaps more then some Prophets and many godly
men after them, did explicitly believe. Yet of this mystery, that Sibylla,
whom Virgil follows, had certainly a prenotion, though transformed by Virgil
into Poetical fictions of Astraea. For it is likely by Iam redit and virgo
etc. he meant her return unto the Earth. The accomplishment of that first
prophecy Genesis 3. ver. 15. by our Saviors victory gotten over Satan upon the
Cross, was first declared by himself after his resurrection to his Disciples,
Mark 16. 17, 18. And these signs shall follow them that believe. In my name
shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues: they shall
take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them,
etc. Of all this the Heathen Sibylla had a prenotion, expressed by Virgil in
few, yet pithy words: Occidet and Serpens, and fallax herba veneni
Occidet. --


6. Assyrium vulgo nascetur amonum etc.

Molli paulatim flavescet campus arista;

Incultisque rubens pendebit sentibus uva:

Et durae quercus sudabunt roscida mella.

-- Nec nautica pinus

Mutabit merces: omnis feret omnia tellus.

Nec varios discet mentiri lana colores, etc.

Sponte sua sandix pascentes vestiet agnos.

Aspice venturo Laetentur ut omnia Saeclo.


The wilderness (says the Prophet Isaiah cap. 35. 1, 2.) shall be glad for
them and the desert shall rejoice and blossom. It shall blossom abundantly.
And again cap. 41.

19. I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree, and the
myrtle, and the oil tree. I will set in the desert the fur tree, and the
pine and the box tree together. All these and the like expressions of matter
of joy in these two chapters and elsewhere in this Prophet, have their parallel
in that forecited Eglogue. And, as if he had foreseen that which the Apostle
tells us of, Ecce vetera praeterierunt, nova facta sunt omnia; He concludes --.

CHAP. 9.
Answering the objections against the former resolutions; that God did deal
better with Israel then with other nations, although it were granted that other
Nations had as perspicuous predictions of Christ and of his Kingdom, as the
Israelites had.
BUt if we acknowledge the Revelation of these and the like divine mysteries
unto the heathen, to have been so perspicuous as the Sibylline Oracles
(whether those which now are extant, or those which Virgil did comment upon)
do exhibit; shall we not hereby contradict the Psalmists avouchment of Gods
special favor to his peculiar people, Psalm 147. 19, 20. He shows his
words unto Jacob: his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not
dealt so with any Nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them.
For how can it rightly be conceived, that he should deal better with Jacob or
Israel, then with any other people, if it be granted that the Romans or other
Nations, which were, if not by Gods command yet by his permission depositories
of the Sibylline Oracles, had in them as perspicuous testimonies or revelations
of Christ, as Jacob and Israel had either in the Law or in the Prophets. Most
certain it is, that the measure of Gods gracious dealing with any Nation,
people or State, must be taken from the several manner or model of Revelations
made unto them, Cap. 9.
concerning the incarnation, death and passion, etc. of his only son: for
whose only sake and merits all the blessings which have been, which are, or
which shall be bestowed upon the sons of men, were first promised or intended
unto them; in whom all that have any promise of such blessing, receive their
interest, and immediate title unto them: by whom and through whom all
caelestiall blessings are actually derived unto, and accomplished in all such
as having just title, make right claim unto them.

2. The Psalmist himself (from whose authority this objection is borrowed)
affords a fair hint for a right answer unto it. He does not say, that God
shows his word unto Jacob alone; or that no other Nation besides Israel had
any knowledge of his word, or prenotion of the word which was to be made flesh.
Wherein then did he deal better with Israel, then with any other Nation? In
showing his statutes and judgments unto that Nation alone. For albeit the
Revelations made unto the Sibylls (if now we had the undoubted originalls)
might be more perspicuous than any prophecy in the old Testament; or admitting
they had been delivered in the selfsame words which God did speak to Moses
and the Prophets: this would not infer that the ancient Heathens had as good
means of knowing Christ as Israel had, or that the manner of showing his words
unto both was (as the words are supposed to be) altogether the same. The
statutes and judgments which he had given unto Israel only were given unto
this purpose, that the words which he had spoken by Moses and the Prophets,
might make more legible impression in their hearts. Amongst many statutes and
judgments peculiar unto Israel, these were principal and fundamental, that
the words which God had spoken by Moses and the Prophets, should be publicly
read, often inculcated, and expounded unto them: that all his visitations of
this people, whether in mercy whilst they obeyed his voice, or in judgment
for their disobedience; should be registered, to remain upon record as so many
ruled cases or Presidents.

3. To have the mysteries of salvation however revealed is a great blessing to
any Nation. But it is not one and the same blessing to have the ways of life
perspicuous in themselves, and to have them made perspicuous unto this or that
age or party. This later blessing even those, to whom these Sibylline Oracles
were imparted, did want. And want it they did through their own default, in
that they made no better use of these particular prophecies, then they had done
of the common book of nature. Romans 1. 20, 21. The Lord of heaven and earth was
good and gracious unto many Heathens in dispensing or suffering these or the
like Crummes to fall unto them from his childrens table: yet not so gracious to
them as he was to his children, in that he gave them no laws and ordinances
for the publication of these mysteries, or for observing the times wherein they
were to be fulfilled. Nor had these Heathens the grace or goodness in them to
enact public Laws for this purpose: but like that ungracious servant in the
Gospel, they held it a point of wisdom to imprison these precious talents in
their Archives, not to be looked upon, but upon occasion of state.

4. But suppose the Heathens had been as peremptorily admonished by God
himself, or as strictly enjoined by Laws of their own making, to acquaint
posterity with the Sibylline Oracles, as the Israelites were to instruct their
children in Gods word delivered by Moses; would this have made the meaning of
these prophecies, in themselves (as is supposed) most perspicuous, either more
perspicuous or more effectual to succeeding generations then they were? God
knows that. But the daily experience of this age, of this year current, and
of some few late past, will not suffer us not to know, that abundant plenty
either of spiritual food, or of medicines in themselves most divine, though
daily administered, does not always de facto purify the hearts of Christians
from Heathenish humors or diseases. What then is wanting, where spiritual
meat and medicines do so abound? A want there is, first of severe discipline
to teach Physicians themselves, how to dispense the food or Physic of life
aright. Secondly, a greater want there is of coercive Laws (or of the
execution of them) for binding our patients to a right posture or diet, whilst
they are under our cure. The loud out-crying sins of these times awake the
thoughts of all that are not dead in sin: and the oftener it is thought upon,
the more it will be lamented by every honest heart, That God the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, that Christ who is God and man, our gracious Lord and Redeemer,
should be more traduced, and more grossly mistransformed through liberty of
prophesying (as they term it) amongst us Christians, then they have been in
any age before amongst Turks or Heathens, which have died in their sins for
want of prophesying. But as for Israel of old they wanted no laws or
discipline for these or the like good purposes; and prophecies they had in
abundance: Only they were wanting to themselves in not exercising the
Discipline, in not executing the laws which God had given them. And unto this
defect they added an excess of traditions contrary to the laws appointed them
by God, and extremely opposite to wholesome discipline or doctrine.

5. But such Jewish traditions as were contrary to the Law of God, how
prejudicial soever they were unto their souls which first invented or
followed them, do not prejudice us Christians (of this age) half so much as
the loss of some Jewish traditions or rules for interpreting Scriptures, which
had been constantly received amongst the ancient Hebrew Rabbis, but rejected
by the later Jewish Masters. And it would be a work in it self, worthy any
one man's labors or works of this life, to retrieve the footsteps or progress
of the ancient Rabbis, whereof some scattered prints here and there, may be
observed in ancient Writers. That such rules there were constantly received in
the time of our Saviors conversation here on earth, (though now either
wilfully concealed, or through ignorance not acknowledged by later Jewish
Rabbis) is hence apparent, in that the mouths of modern Jews are widest
open to bark against our interpretation of those passages of Mosaicall and
Prophetical writings, whose bare allegation whether made by our Savior
himself, or by his disciples after his resurrection, did stop the mouths of
those cruel dogs which sought their lives. What these rules or traditions
were in particular, is not of facile conjecture, nay almost impossible to
determine. This general notwithstanding is most certain, that God did show
the incarnation, death, and passion of his only son, even all whatsoever
Israel was to believe concerning the person or Offices of the expected Messiah,
or we Christians concerning Jesus Christ and him crucified, not by mere
Prophecy only, or by words literally and expressly assertive; but withal by
signs of the time, by historical events, by matters of fact, by rites and
ceremonies, by types and shadows. By all these ways God did speak or declare
his purpose. For as the Psalmist says, That the Heavens declare the glory of
God, that days and nights have their words so loud and shrill, that their
sound goes throughout all the world, Psalm. 19. so likewise signs and wonders
are said to have their voices. And it shall be (says God to Moses, Exodus 4.
8.) that if they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the voice of the first
sign (which was the reciprocal conversion of Moses rod into a serpent) yet
they will believe the voice of the latter sign; and that was the smiting of
Moses his hand with leprosy as white as snow, and restoring it to perfect
sound flesh again. If signs and wonders have their voices, then God does
speak unto us by them, as well as by his audible, and written word, but even
where his written word is for the sense most plain, the matters contained in
it have their voice or speech. This manner of Gods speaking unto men, is
excellently expressed by Gregory the first in the Quamvis omnem scientiam atque
doctrinam scriptura sacra sine aliqua co^paratione transcendat, ut taceam quod
vera praedicat, quod ad coelestem patriam vocat, quod a terrenis desiderijs ad
superna amplectenda cor legentis immutat: quod dictis obscurioribus exercet
fortes, et parvulis humili sermon blanditur, quod nec sic c^usa est ut paves^i
debeat, nec sic patet ut vilescat, quod usu fastidium tollit, et tant^ amplius
diligitur, quanto amplius meditatur, quod legentis animum humilibus verbis
adjuvat, sublimibus sensibus levat, quod aliquo modo cum legentibus crescit,
quod a rudibus lectoribus, quasi recognoscitur, and tamen doctis nova semper
reperitur. Vt ergo de rerum pondere taceam, scientias tamen omnes atque
doctrinas ipso etiam locutionis suae more transcendit, quia uno eodemque
sermon dum narrat textum, prodit mysterium; et sic scit praeterita dicere, ut
eo ipso noverit futura praedicare, and non immutate dicendi ordine, eisdem
ipsis Sermonibus novit, and ant^acta describere, and agenda nu^^iare.]
20. of his Morals and 1. cap: To say nothing of the waightinesse of the matter
or subject: the Scripture excells all other sciences in its peculiar manner of
expression. For in plainest and punctual, or textuall narrations it points at
mysteries, and it so speaks of matters past as in them it foretells things to
come, and in the very same words records things done and past, and discovers
things to be afterward done.

This passage of S. Gregory referres especially unto historical narrations in
Scripture, which besides the plain literal have a further mystical and
hidden sense, Cap. 10.
of both which we are to speak hereafter. The next point in order to be
prosecuted, is of testimonies or prenotions of Christ merely typical.

CHAP. 10.
Of Testimonies in the old Testament concerning Christ merely typical, and
how they do conclude the truths delivered in the new Testament.
Under this title we comprehend all prefigurations of Christ exemplified in
the old Testament by the persons and offices of men, by legal rites and
ceremonies, (either annual and solemn, or commanded to be used upon private
special occasions;) or by any matter of fact or event, whereto no express
prophecy, no assertive notation of him, or application unto him who was to
come, is annexed. And herein the wisdom of God appears most admirable, that
the contents of every Article in the Apostles Creed, were respectively
foreshadowed by some one or other of these ways mentioned, and some of them by
all. The manner of his conception was clearly prefigured (for substantially
represented it could not be) by the conception of Isaac, of Sampson, and of
Samuel. And that Generation wherein he was conceived and borne, was
sufficiently warned to observe these three prefigurations (as then to be
accomplished,) by the strange conception of John the Baptist. His circumcision
with the mysteries implied in it, or subsequent unto it, were fore-shadowed in
the covenant established between God and Abraham in the Circumcision of Isaac.
Of his Baptism (though that be not expressed in our Creed) the washing of the
high Priests body in the day of atonement was a type. Of his leading into the
wilderness, (upon the same day) to be tempted by Satan, the ceremony of the
escape Goat was a true prognostique. Of his appearing in the form of a
Servant, and of his performance of all the duties, which can be required from a
servant in the most exquisite manner that can be imagined, holy Job was more
then a type, a living shadow. Of all his trobles and deliverance from them, his
Father David was a live example. Of his depression by his envious and malicious
brethren, and of his exaltation by the immediate hand of God, the history of
Joseph and of his brethren exhibits an illustrious image. Of his death upon the
Cross, and the glorious victory obtained thereby over Satan, the brazen
Serpent erected by Moses in the Wilderness, was a conspicuous Hieroglyphick.
His enclosure three days and three nights in the womb of the Earth, and his
resurrection from the grave, were portended by the imprisonment of Jonas in the
Whales belly, and by his deliverance thence. And of his resurrection in
particular, the offering of the first fruits in the feast of unleavened bread,
from the first institution of that solemnity, was an annual sign or token. Of
this celestial Kingdom of peace, Salomons glory and peaceable reign here on
Earth, was an exquisite map. Of his ascension into Heaven the translations of
Enoch and Elias were undoubted pledges. The Eternity of his person and
everlasting duration of his Priesthood were exquisitely fore-shadowed, the one
by the person, the other by the Priesthood of Melchisedech. The full view and
contemplation of these and the like types, and the examination of their
congruity with the live body, to wit, Christ, whom in some part or other every
one of them did fore-picture, we must refer unto the explication of the
several Articles in this Creed, whereunto they do respectively appertain.

2. The rule or Topic for demonstrating the truth of every Article by these
and the like types, is the same with that forementioned in the former Chapters
concerning testimonies merely prophetical, or predictions of future events as
yet not extant in any causes visible or comprehensible by art. To draw an exact
picture of a child as yet unborne, or whose parents at this time are not
conceived, is a skill as impossible for any Painter or Limmer to attain, as it
is for an Astrologicall Physician to describe the nature, complexion, or
disposition of men that shall have no actual being or existence till he be
dead. Now Christ's acts and offices, his humiliation and exaltation, were not
more exactly fore-described or displayed by the Prophets, then they were
fore-pictured or fore-shadowed by Historical events, or legal types. Every
such type or event was a real or substantial, though a silent Prophecy; and
the most express prophecy concerning Christ, was but a speaking type or
vocal shadow. The spirit of God did speak by the one, and signify his
purpose by the other: his wisdom in both is alike admirable. The most
exquisite Artist living cannot take so true a proportion of a man's face, as it
self without any art or invention, will draw in a true glass: yet this we
admire not because it is ordinary. But to make as perfect a resemblance of a
man's visage by a chaos of Chymaera's, or painted devises which represent no
visible creature, if you look upon them single, or transmit their shapes into
a plain glass, might well seem an invention surpassing all skill of Art, if
a late Artist had not given us an ocular demonstration of this skill, in thus
representing the perfect visage of that great and famous Prince Henry the
fourth of France: however there be no resemblance of any humane face, or of any
part thereto belonging in the painted Base; yet the reflection of such
incondite figures, or confused fancies as are thereon painted, falling upon a
Column of brass or Bell mettle glazed with latten, placed in the center or
point assigned in the plain table by the Author of this invention, does
effigiate this great Princes visage and countenance as perfectly as any
picture, which has been taken of him in his life time. The skill in this
devise is so admirable, as it would require but a very little skill in
Rhetoric to persuade an illiterate man which has seen him living, that his
Ghost were present (though invisible to by standers) looking upon it self in
this artificial visible glass: yet all this skill exhibited in this
masterpiece of modern inventions, how admirable soever it may seem to men not
exercised in the like, is comprehensible to accurate Artists in this kind, and
can afford no true illustration of the incomprehensible wisdom of God, in
forepicturing Christ with his Acts and offices. Of this incomprehensible
wisdom we have a better model by adding this supposition or fiction to the
former invention; that an hundred picture-makers or more having had free
liberty one after another, to draw their lines and postures upon the same
table (none of them acquainting another with his intention or work) should
have framed such a true representation, as this now extant is, of Henry the
fourth French King, in the age before he was borne. But after a more admirable
manner, then this fiction supposes, were Christ and his Cross, etc.
forepictured by matters of fact, by historical events; by types and
ceremonies, and by the concurrence with these of men's free actions and
intentions which knew not one another, much less had notice of their purposes,
the last of the^ living more then 400. years before Christ was co^ceived.

For the right apprehension or imblazoning these merely typical
representations of Christ, no artificial skill is more useful then the true
Art of Heraldy or skill in Hieroglyphics. And no kind of learning more
useful for the right apprehension of the third kind of testimonies or
prenotions concerning Christ, then the insight in Emblemes, devises or impreses.

CHAP. 11.
Of testimonies concerning Christ typically prophetical, or prophetically
typical, and of their concludent proof.
Mere types are true Hieroglyphics, and Hieroglyphics are as bodies without
souls, that is, Pictures without inscriptions. Emblemes or Impreses must have
both body and soul, a devise with its inscription or motto. And so do
testimonies of the third rank proposed concerning Christ, consist of a Type as
the body or devise, and have words prophetical annexed, as the soul or breath.
And this kind of testimony or prenotion of Christ is of two sorts: either
typical and prophetical, or Prophetical and typical. That some difference
there was betwixt these two expressions, not only in the order or placing of
the words, but in the matter also thus transplaced, was intimated before,
Chapter 5. -- Wheresoever the type has precedence, or is concomitant to the
inscription annexed unto it, yet so as both point at Christ to come: there the
testimony or proof is typical prophetical. Cap. 11
Where the words or prophecy have precedence of the type, and both refer
unto Christ; the proof or prenotion is prophetically typical. That the
ceremony of the paschall Lamb was instituted by God himself to prefigure or
forepicture our Savior Christ, no Christian denies. And one Law concerning the
Paschall Lamb was, that not a bone thereof should be broken. Exodus 12. 46. The
words of this Law were no prediction in respect of the first institution of the
passover, but an appendix or concomitant; and yet a most remarkable prophecy
in respect of our Savior Christ, in the manner of whole death both the type
and the Law of the type were, by Gods admirable providence, exactly fulfilled.
Then came the soldiers, says St. John and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other which was crucified with him: But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs, but one of the soldiers
with a spear pierced his side. That our Apostle Saint John did take both these
events as a concludent proof, that Christ was the true Lamb of God
foreshadowed by the Paschall, is apparent from his emphaticall expression of
his observation upon it. He that saw it bare record, and his record is true,
and he kneweth that he says true, that he might believe. For these things
were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled; A bone of him shall not be
broken. And again, Zach. 12. 10. They shall look on him whom they have
peirced. John 19. 32. 37.

2. Those words of the Prophet Hosea cap. 11. 1. according to their literal
sense, refer to an historical event forepast; When Israel was a child then I
loved him, and I called my son out of Egypt. They bear no semblance of
prophecy in respect of the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt by Moses; but
both this deliverance and the prophets observation upon it, have a peculiar
aspect unto Christ, who was by divine appointment to sojourne a while in Egypt,
but to be called thence. So as the same words which are an historical
narration in respect of the type (to wit, Israel, or the sons of Jacob
brought out of Egypt by Moses:) are an express prophecy of Christ's coming
thence, with Joseph and his mother, into the Land of promise. That speech of
the Psalmist likewise Psalm. 118. 22. The stone which the builders refused, is
become the head stone of the Corner; does allude or refer unto some
historical event then fresh in memory. They contain no prophecy in respect of
the event, whatsoever that were, yet are they a most true concludent Prophecy
of Christ's exaltation by his father, after his rejection by the Priests and
Elders. So our Savior interprets it Matthew. 21. 42. All these three testimonies
mentioned, consisting both of word and matter of fact, are first typical, then
prophetical. But oftentimes the same words (though not always according to
the same sense,) are prophetical as well in respect of the type as of the
antitype, and then the proof or testimony is prophetically typical or merely
typical from their first date, and afterward in process of time both
typical and prophetical. Of this rank is that prediction made to David, 2 Samuel 7. 12, 13. etc. And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep
with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thy bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom: He shall build an house for my
name, and I will establish the throne of his Kingdom for ever. I will be his
Father, and he shall be my son; if he commit iniquity I will chasten him with
the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men, but my mercy shall
not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.
And thy house and thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy
throne shall be established for ever. Of the same rank and order is that
repetition of this promise Psalm. 89. from ver. 20. to the 37. Both places
contain an express prophecy of Gods favor unto David and to his posterity,
and both include the prerogative of Solomon above all Kings that had gone
before him. And yet, in as much as Solomon in the height of his glory was but a
shadow or picture (though a fair one) of the son of God, who was to be made
the son of David likewise: the same words which were undoubtedly verifyed of
Solomon in his time, were afterward exactly fulfilled in Christ, who was the
living person or substance whom Solomon did forepicture. No Christian can, no
Jew will deny these words of the Prophet Isaiah cap. 22. 20, 21, 22. etc. to be
prophetical in the first place of Eliakims advancement to be chief master or
high Steward over the house of David in Shebna's steed. And it shall come to
pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah:
And I will cloth him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I
will commit thy government into his hand, and he shall be a Father to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: And the key of the house of
David will I lay upon his shoulders: so he shall open and none shall shut, and
he shall shut and none shall open. And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure
place, and he shall be for a glorious throne to his Fathers house. And they
shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house, etc. But in as much as
Eliakim both by name and office did but prefigure or delineate Christ in his
acts and office, the same words which were literally meant of Eliakim, are in a
more exquisite sense fulfilled in Christ. But of the several senses of
Scriptures and how the Scriptures are said according to these several senses
to be fulfilled, somewhat in the two next chapters following.

These proofs or testimonies whereof we now treat, whether typically
prophetical, or prophetically typical are in number many, and of all the rest
most concludent to Readers but ordinarily observant. For they contain the
entire force and strength of the two former proofs or testimonies (merely
typical or merely prophetical) by way of union, and it is universally true,
Vis unita semper fortier.

3. Imagine a man of ordinary insight in Architecture should come into some
large and curious palace (or City) newly built, and after a diligent survey of
the form and fashion of every particular room, house, or street, should find
a model of elder date then the work it self, which did bear the just
proportion and inscription of every room or building: this would resolve him,
that such exact correspondency could not fall out by chance, but that the City
or Palace had been built by his directions, which made the model, or by some
others which made use of his skill, albeit no handy-workman employed in the
building, albeit none but the Architect, or general director, did perceive as
much. Thus all historical events related in the new testament concerning
Christ his birth, his death, and passion, etc. have their exact Maps or Models
drawn in the history of the old testament, besides the express prophetical
inscriptions, which instruct us how to refer or compare every part of the
legal or historical model unto the Evangelicall aedifice answering to it.
This to every observant Reader is a concludent proof, that one and the same
spirit did both forecast the models, and in the fullness of time accomplish the
work it self, to wit, the building up of Sion and Jerusalem, though this he
effected (as master builders in like cases do) by the hands of inferior
workmen, not acquainted nor comprehensive of his project or contrivances.

4. Every house (says the Apostle Heb. 3. 4.) is builded by some man, but he
that built all things, is God. This power of God by which he made all things,
even the materials of all things whereon men do work, does not farther exceed
the power of other builders, then the wisdom of the same God, which is
manifested in the aedifice of the heavenly temple, does surpass all skill or
contrivance of the most skillful Architects or Projectors. For whatsoever is by
them forecast or projected, does never prosper, never come to any perfection,
unless the workmen employed by them follow their rules or directions. But
this greatest work of God; the erection or edification of his Church, did then
go best forward, when the workmen or builders employed about it, did forsake
his counsel, and followed the directions of his malicious adversary, who
sought the confusion both of it and them. He built up the Kingdom of Sion and
Jerusalem in peace without let or interruption, even whilst the master
builders designed by him did lay the foundation, or chief corner stone of it,
in blood. And after it was so laid, did accomplish whatsoever he would have
done in this great work, by the hands of such workmen, as did nothing less,
then what he would have had them to do. Though Judas, one of the twelve, by
Satan's suggestion did betray his Lord, though the high Priest and Elders became
the Devils agents to condemn him, and though Pilate (lastly) turned Satan's
deputy to sentence him to death: yet all these did that which the most wise,
most righteous and most merciful God had fore-determined to be done. Those
things (says Peter Acts 3. 18.) which God before had showed by the mouth of
all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled. Yet says
S. Paul Acts 13. 27. They that dwell at Jerusalem and their rulers, because
they knew him not, nor yet the voice of the Prophets, which are read every
Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him. So then God is said to
fulfill all things which were written of Christ, because he did order and
direct all the counterplots and malicious intentions of his enemies according
to the models and inscriptions which had been exhibited in the old testament.
Judas his treachery against his Lord and Master, with its accursed success,
was exactly forepictured by Achitophels treason against David. The malice of
the high Priest and elders was foretold and forepictured by the like proceeding
of their predecessors against Jeremie, and other of Gods Prophets, which were
Christ's forerunners, and types and shadows of his persequutions. They then
fulfilled the Scriptures in doing the same things that their predecessors had
done (but in a worse manner and degree) albeit they had no intention or aim to
work according to those models which their predecessors had framed: nor to do
that unto Christ which the Prophets had foretold should be done unto him: For
so S. Peter, Acts 3. 17. Now (Brethren) I wot that through ignorance ye did
it, as did also your Rulers.

5. But here I must request all such as read these and the like passages of
Scriptures, not to make any other inferences or constructions of the holy
Ghosts language or manner of speech, then such as they naturally import, and
such as are congruous to the rule of faith. If we say no more then this, God
did order or direct the avarice of Judas, the malice of the high Priest, the
popularity of Herod, and ambition of Pilat, for accomplishing of that which he
had fore-determined concerning Christ, we shall retain the form of wholesome
doctrine. In thus speaking and thinking, we think and speak as the Spirit
teaches us. But if any shall say or think, that God did ordain either Judas
to be covetous, or the high Priests to be malicious, or Herod and Pilat to be
popular and ambitious, to this end and purpose that they might (respectively)
be the betrayers and murderers of the son of God; this is dangerous. The
orthodoxall truth, and wholesome form of expressing it, in this and the like
point, is acutely set down in that distinction, which (for ought I find) was
unanimously embraced by the Ancie^ts, and by all at this day that be moderate,
acknowledged to be true, Deus ordinavit lapsu^ Adami: non ordinavit ut Adamus
laberetur. God did dispose or order Adams fall (for by his all-seeing
providence, and all ruling power, he turned his fall into his own and our
greater good:) but he did not decree, ordain, or order that Adam should fall,
or commit that transgression by which he fell. For so he should have been
the Author both of Adams first sin, and of all the sins which are
necessarily derived to us from him. For no man (I think) will deny, that God
is the sole Author of all his own ordinances and decrees, or of whatsoever he
has fore-decreed or fore-determined us for to do.

CHAP. 12. Cap. 12

Of the several senses of Scripture, especially of the literal and mystical.
WIthout knowledge of Scriptures there can be no true knowledge of Christ, and
to know the Scriptures is all one as to know the true sense and meaning of them
intended by the holy Spirit. I will not here dispute, whether every portion of
Scripture in the old Testament admit more senses intended by the holy Spirit,
than one; or whether in some sense or other, every passage in Moses writings,
in the Prophets, in the book of Psalms, or sacred Histories, do point either
immediately, or mediatly at Christ, or at Him that was to come. But that diverse
places, alleged by the Evangelist out of the old Testament, to prove that
Jesus, whom the Jews did crucify, was their expected Messiah; admit more
senses, I take as granted. The question is, how many senses either the places
alleged by the Evangelists or Apostles, or other passages in the old
Testament, may respectively admit. And in this Quaere I will not be
contentious, but only crave that liberty which I willingly grant to others in
all like cases, that is, to make mine own division, and to follow mine own
expressions of every several sense or branch of this division, that so I may
refer the particular explication of every type, of every Prophecy, or other
praenotion of Christ, which has been fulfilled, without perplexity or
confusion, to its proper or general head. That sense of Scripture, in my
expression, may happily be referred unto the literal, which in some other men's
language would be accounted figurative or Allegorical. That sense again
(according to my division) may be reduced unto the literal, mystical, or
moral, which some great Divines make a distinct sense from all these, to wit,
Anagogicall. Or admitting all these and more senses of Scriptures, I may
perhaps sometimes touch upon another sense, which is not (to my apprehension)
reducible to any of these.

2. The several senses of Scriptures (especially such as more immediately point
at Christ) cannot be better notified, or more commodiously reduced to their
several heads, then by a review of the several ways, by which God from the
beginning did intimate or manifest his will, his good will toward mankind, in
him and through him which was to come. And the ways, by which God did manifest
Christ to come, were in the general two; either by words assertive, and
express prediction, or by way of picture and representation, or by a
concurrence of both: which third way is no way opposite to the two former, but
rather a friendly combination of them. The second branch of this division, to
wit, praenotions of Christ representative, may (as heretofore it has been) be
subdivided into representations real, as by type, historical event, or other
matter of fact; or into representations merely literal, verbal, or nominall.
The first general branch of this division, (that is, prenotions of Christ
delivered in words expressly assertive) exhibit to us that which we commonly
call the literal or grammatical sense. For that (as best Divines agree) is
the literal sense or meaning of the holy Spirit, which is immediately signified
by words assertive, whether legal, prophetical, or historical, without any
intercourse or intervention of any type or matter of fact. Whether the words be
logical and proper, allegorical, or otherwise figurative, skills not much.
The variety of expressions by words assertive, if so the words immediately
express the matter foretold without intervention of type, or matter of fact,
does not divide or diversifie the literal sense. As when God foretold that the
wilderness should be planted with pleasant trees, Isa 41. 19, etc. That the
Wolf should dwell with the Lamb, that the Leopard should lie down with the
Kid, and the Calfe and the young Lion, and the Fatling together. The form of
speech is figurative, and (in the language of saecular Rhetoritians)
Allegorical. And so that other of the Vineyard, Isay 5 is parabolically
figurative. And yet the sense of all these places is in the School of Divinity
as truly literal, as when it is said, The woman's seed shall bruise the
serpents head; or that in Abraham's seed all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed. For by the trees wherewith the wilderness was to be planted, by the
Wolf, and by the Lamb, by the Leopard and the Kid, etc. diverse sorts of men
were immediately meant: and to the fulfilling of all, or any of the prophecies,
it was not required that there should be a transformation either of men into
trees, Leopards, Wolfes, or Lions, etc. or of these or like creatures into men.
For how ever the sense of Scripture in all these places be literal; yet it is
literally Allegorical. And of the literal or verbal Allegory, that Maxim is
most true, Sensus allegoricus non est argumentativus, No firm argument can be
drawn from the allegorical, parabolicall, or other figurative signification
of words. As we may not infer that the wilderness was to be planted with
trees, or that the Wolf and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, were to consort
as well together on dry land, as sometimes they did in Noah's Arc, whilst the
deluge lasted, before these prophecies could be fulfilled, according to the
literal sense; as this sense in the language of the holy Ghost, is opposed
unto the Allegorical: For that in the Apostles language is said to be spoken
allegorically, which is not immediately foretold or signified by words (whether
proper or figurative) but fore-shadowed by some real event, by men's persons or
their offices, or by matter of type or fact. It is written (says our Apostle,
Gal. 4. 22, 23.) that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other
by a free woman: but he who was of the bondwoman, was borne after the flesh:
but he of the free woman was by promise. Which things are an Allegory, for
these are the two covenants. The Evangelicall mysteries implied in this
Allegory, and unfolded by our Apostle, were not immediately notified by any
words or proposition in the history of Sarah and Hagar, and their sons, but
only fore-pictured by matter of fact, or by the things themselves, which the
words, according to the literal sense, did immediately fore-signifie. For the
word Hagar did in that story literally signify Sarahs handmayd or bondwoman.
But this bondwoman, and her son, and their estate or condition of life did
excellently represent the estate and condition of such as did adhere unto the
Law after the Gospel was proclaimed. And the Gospel with the happy estate of
such as embrace it, was not fore-signified by the name Sarah, or by the name
Isaac, but by their estate and condition who were so named. Most of our
Apostles Arguments throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews are drawn, not from
the literal, but from the allegorical sense. Yet God forbid that we should
say or think, that his arguments did not conclude. I should rather say (if it
be lawful to compare sacred testimonies or authorities, one with another) that
Arguments drawn from the Allegorical sense of Scriptures are most admirably,
if not most firmly, concludent. For they are Arguments of proportion, and
presuppose four terms at the least either expressed or implied, And the
Allegorical sense of Scriptures always includes the mystical, though the
mystical does not always include the allegorical. For wheresoever any
Evangelicall mystery was fore-shadowed by any type, by any historical event or
matter of fact, there is a latent mystical sense, though not expressed by
words or letters.

3. But it oftentimes so falls out, and (as I take it) always in testimonies
either typically prophetical, or prophetically typical, that there is an
inseparable concurrence or combination of the literal and mystical sense,
though not always after the same manner. Sometimes the literal sense,
according to the same propriety or signification of words, does fit the
Antitype or body as well as the type or shadow. As whether we apply that
speech, Exodus 12. 46. Ye shall not break a bone thereof, unto the paschall
Lamb, or to Christ, who was mystically fore-shadowed by it: the literal sense
is the very same, there is no variety in the signification of the words. Christ
had as true bones as the Paschall Lamb, and the preservation of his bones was
literally fore-prophecied in the Law concerning the Paschall Lamb, but withal
mystically fore-pictured by the observance or practice of that law. Sometimes
again the literal sense does better befit the Antitype, then the type. As
those words forementioned, 2. Sam. 7. 14. I will be his Father, and he shall
be my son: are more proper in respect of Christ who was the Antitype, then of
Solomon who was the type or shadow of his Sonne-ship. So that our Saviors
incarnation or nativity is collaterally foreprophecyed with the nativity of
Solomon; and his royal office and favor with God, mystically foresignified by
Salomons person and office.

4. But many times the expressions of the holy Ghost (as well in testimonies
typically prophetical as prophetically typical) are like inscriptions or
mottoes in Impreses or Emblemes. Now these Inscriptions besides the plain
literal native sense of the words, have a further Symbolicall importance, or
moral signification. No man that sees that devise of bulrushes couched in a
swelling stream, with this inscription, flectimur, non frangimur undis: but
will acknowledge, the plain literal sense to point immediately at them. Yet
besides this literal sense, they have this Symbolicall importance (partly
employed in the words themselves, and partly represented by the body of the
devise,) that he which gave this devise, had learned that lesson of the Poet,
Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori* that he was resolved to stoop
awhile unto the iniquity of the times, not without hope to bear up his head
again, and to overtop his Adversaries, after the present tyranny were
overpast, Ad literam traditur fuisle paratus lapis ad templi aedificium, nec
tamen congrue in (...) potuit, donec consummato opere in angulo sursum positus
est ita congrue, quod mirarentun (...), nec praeter significationem factum
intelligerent; hic est Christus qui fundamentum est, ita quod structurae
supereminet. Quod cum audissent sacerdotes and pharisaei, voluerunt cum tenere,
sed (...). Petrus Commestor in histor. Euang. c CXXVII.
as bulrushes do the waters wherein they grow, when the flood (unto whose
violence for a while they yielded) has spent its strength. That forecited
saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 22. [The stone which the builders refused,
is become the head stone in the corner. This is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes:] according to the literal sense, is terminated to an
historical event, then present or fresh in memory. And, if we may rely upon
the authority of the Author of the Scholastic History, the historical event
or matter of fact to which these words literally and immediately refer, was a
remarkable stone for which the builders of the Temple could find no convenient
place in the intermediate structure, which yet unexpectedly proved the fittest
corner stone or finisher that they could have desired. This says he was even
then acknowledged not to fall out by mere chance or without some further
portending meaning or signification. The exceptions taken against this
tradition avouched by this Author Petrus Comestor, are (to men acquainted with
the manner of sacred expressions of things to come,) so weak that they add
strength unto it. But whatsoever the historical event were, at which these
words in the literal sense immediately point, we Christians know, that in the
Symbolicall or spiritual sense they refer to Christ. His exaltation unto
Majesty and glory, after the chief Rulers of the Temple had cast him aside
and rejected him, as not fit to be entertained amongst Gods people, was
mystically foreshadowed by that matter of fact or historical event, whereof
the Psalmist speaks (whatsoever that were:) yet not expressly foretold
according to the direct literal sense of his words, but only signified
according to the Symbolicall importance. After the same manner the forecited
words of the Prophet Isa. 22. 23. [The key of the house of David will I lay
upon his shoulder: so he shall open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and
none shall open:] do in their literal and native sense immediately point at
Eliakim, of whose office in the house of David a material and visible key was
the ensign or pledge, as the like is of some great offices in modern Princes
Courts. But according to the emblematicall or symbolicall importance, both key
and office, both inscription and matter of fact, refer unto the spiritual
invisible power of the son of David, Who has the keys of Hell and of death
Rev. 1. The keys likewise of the Kingdom of Heaven; and where he opens, no
power in heaven or earth can shut, nor open where he is pleased to shut.

That which some call the moral sense of scriptures, is always reducible to
this general branch last mentioned, to wit, to the emblematicall or
symbolicall importance of the words expressed, as they concur with matter of
fact or real representation. Only there may be a moral sense, where there is
no prophecy, no representation truly mystical. As when it is written, Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, which treads out the Corn: this law
was to be observed according to the plain literal sense. And yet both the law
it self, and its observance from the first date of the letter, had that
moral, which the Apostle makes, That such as serve at the Altar, should live
by the Altar.

5. To this branch likewise belong all the significations of legal ceremonies,
which do not immediately point at Christ, in whom they were exactly fulfilled,
but at moral duties to be performed as well by us Christians, as by the
ancient Jews. Christ our Passover (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.) it
sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast; not with old leaven,
neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth. This was the true moral of that legal
observance of the feast of unleavened bread, which was to be kept according to
the strict letter of the law, whilst the law of ceremonies was in force.
Concerning this symbolicall or moral sense (especially when it is not
prophetical,) Maldonats advise is very good; He that will search after such
senses, must hold close to the letter: Propius mihi Rupertus videtur in
quaerendo morali sensu ad literalem accessisse; quod semper faciendum esse ei,
qui ridiculus esse nolit, saepe monumus. And of allegorical, mystical or
symbolicall senses, which are prophetical or prefigurative, none are current
or concludent, but such as hold exact proportion with the sense historical.

6. Some good Divines there be, which would have an anagogicall sense distinct
from all these mentioned. The Allegorical, Spiritual, or Mystical sense is
by them limited to matters already accomplished in the Gospel; whereas the
Anagogicall reaches to matters of the world to come. But this difference in
the subject or time unto which whether words or matters sacred refer, makes
no formal difference in the sense or manner of the prediction or
prefiguration. Whatsoever is in Scripture foresignified or intimated concerning
the state and condition of the life to come, is either literally foretold by
express words, or mystically foreshadowed by matter of fact, or notified by
some concurrence of prediction and representation; and so may be reduced to one
or other of the senses mentioned, either to the mere literal, or to the
merely mystical, or to the literally or symbolically mystical or spiritual
sense.

CHAP. 13. Cap. 13*

Of the literal sense of Scripture not assertive, but merely charactericall.
BUt divine mysteries (as was intimated before) are sometimes neither notified
by express prediction or words assertive; nor by matter of fact, historical
event, or type, nor by the persons actions or offices of men; but represented
only by words or names, by notes or letters, or other secret characters of
speech. Now this manner of representing mysteries divine produces a sense of
Scripture distinct from all the former, which can hardly be comprehended under
one certain denomination, unless it be under this negative, the literal
sense not assertive. Or if the Reader desire a positive expression of it, he
may term it, the charactericall sense. To begin with the first words of
Scripture, In the beginning (says Moses) Bara Elohim, The Lord created etc.
Although these words be assertive; yet the mystery of the Trinity is not
avouched in Logical assertion or proposition, but only represented or
insinuated in the peculiar form or character of the grammatical construction,
if happily it be here either represented or intimated at all. For some both
judicious Divines, and great Hebricians there be, as well in the Romish as in
the reformed Churches, who will acknowledge no intimation of any mystery in
this conjunction of a noune plural with a verb singular; but tell us this
form of speech is usual in the Hebrew dialect, as the like is in some cases
in the Greek. For the Graecians (as every grammar Scholar knows) join nounes
of the neuter gender plural with verbes of the singular number, as (...).
These men's authority would sway much with me, if I did not find it
counterpoised, by observation of Wolphgangus Capito an exquisite Hebrician and
discreet searcher of the mystical sense of Scriptures. Now, if his observation
do not fail him, the construction of verbes singular with nounes plural is
never used amongst Hebrew writers, unless the noune do want the singular
number. In this case alone they do not extend the signification of the verb
into such plurality, as is in the noune, Contrary to the use of the Latins,
who, to make the adjective and substantive agree in number, stretch Vnum, one,
or unity it self, into a plural form as unae literae, una maenia; which
would be a harsh kind of speech in our English or other modern tongues. But the
plural Elohim (as See Capito in his hexameron and Paulus Fagius in his
several Comme^ts upon this place.
Capito well observes) does not want its proper singular Eloah. Therefore
unless the holy Ghost had intended the notification of some mystery in the
form or character of his speech, Moses would rather have said Barah Eloah,
then Barah Elohim.

2. I am the more inclined to this opinion, because many of the ancient and
most orthodoxall writers observe a more distinct expression of the blessed
Trinity throughout diverse places of the first chapter of Genesis, from the
repetition of the name of God or Elohim in the more perfect works of several
days; as in the works of the fourth day ver. 14. And God said, Let there be
lights in the firmament of the Heavens. This is the voice of God the Father
giving out his fiat, and it is repeated again ver. 16. And God made two great
lights. This referres to God the Son by whom all things were made, and by
whom these lights were set in the firmament ver. 17. It is lastly added ver.
18. And God saw that it was good: The note or character of the holy Ghost
approving what was made by the Son from the authority of the Father. So
Moses again describes the works of the first day. And God said, let the
waters bring forth abundantly ver. 20. And in the 21. he repeates again. And
God created great Whales. etc. And again, God saw that it was good. When it is
said ver. 22. of the same days work, And God blessed them saying, Be
fruitful and multiply: this may refer unto the three persons jointly. So in
the works of the sixth day ver. 24. God said Let the earth bring forth the
living creature after his kind, etc. And it is repeated again ver. 25. And
God made the beast of the earth after his kind, etc. And God saw that it was
good. But when Moses comes to the accomplishment of the sixth days work ver.
16. he alters the form or character of speech, and makes the Verb, as well
as the noune, plural. And God said, Let us make man in our Image after our
likeness. This order observed by the ancients in the first creation of all
things is admirably exemplified in the manner of man's redemption, wrought by
the Father, Son and holy Ghost jointly, yet not without distinction of order
in their joint working, in their undivided work. But of this, by the
assistance of this blessed Trinity, hereafter.

3. But however the Ancients, or such as follow them may fail in this or the
like particular search of mysteries, from no better hint then the repetition of
the same words or matter: Yet their endeavor in the general to find out
deep hidden mysteries from these or the like superficial or charactericall
prenotions, is warranted by the word of God according to its literal or
assertive sense. For so we are taught by Moses, that such repetition of the
same things as in secular sciences would incur suspicion of tautology or
superfluity of words, may be the undoubted character of some matter more then
ordinary, and more observable then if it had been represented but once, or
after one manner only. A secular Southsayer or professed Interpreter of
nocturnall representations, would have sought after more interpretations than
one of Pharaohs two dreams; especially seeing the matter represented to him in
the first vision, was so unlike to the matter represented in the second. Yet
Joseph by the guidance of Gods Spirit discovers these two dreams, though
distinct in time and manner of representation, to be for substance but one. And
Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God has showed Pharaoh
what he is about to do. The seven good Kine are seven years: and the
seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one. And the seven thin and
ill favored Kine that came up after them, are seven years, and seven empty
ears blasted with the East wind, shall be seven years of famine, Genesis 41.
25, 26, etc. And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is
because the thing is established by God: and God will shortly bring it to pass.

4. When we say, an honest man's word should be as good as his oath, we suppose
that this moral integrity or perfection in man, has a far more exquisite
pattern in God. He is no less immutable in his promises than in his oath. It
is impossible for him to change his mind, or to deceive men in the one as in
the other: To what end then does he so often interpose his oath, sometimes
when he denounces judgment, otherwhiles for the consolation of men, and
confirmation of their belief in his gracious promises? Sure it is one thing to
say, Gods purpose, will, or promise is immutable; another, that the thing
purposed, willed, or promised by him, is immutable. The absolute immutability
of his purpose, or promise, can yield us no full assurance, that the things
promised or purposed by him are unchangeable, or that sentence denounced
(though in terms peremptory) is irreversible. But unto whatsoever promise or
sentence we find his oath annexed, Vide Authorem Incognitu^ dictum (id est
Aguanum ut Lorinus saepius monet) et patres quos in hunc finem citat, in
Psa^mum CX.
it is an undoubted character, a not most infallible, that the thing promised
is unalterable, that the sentence so denounced is irreversible. This is one of
the most Catholic rules for the right interpreting of many, and for the
reconciliation of diverse Scriptures, which otherwise seem most opposite. But
the proof and use of this rule will come under a more full examination in the
treatise of our Saviors consecration to his everlasting Priesthood; and in
some other discussions, in what sense God is said to repent; in what cases not
to repent. For both assertions are frequent in Scriptures.

5. Sometimes divine mysteries are represented not in some one word or name,
but in the very character or frame of some one letter, or in the addition of a
letter or point. There is no question amongst us Christians, but that he who
called unto Moses (Levit. 1. 1.) from the mercy seat (as we gather from Numb.
7.) was the son of God, the eternal word who since has taken our nature
upon him, and calls unto us with a voice and mouth truly humane, though the
voice and mouth of God. But at that time he called to Moses not in a loud and
thundering voice (like that in Mount Sinai) but with a soft and gentle voice.
And this gentleness of the voice (as the Hebrew Doctors observe, and some good
Christian Hebricians approve their observation) with the mystery foreshadowed
by it, is charactered unto us by the extraordinary smallness of one letter in
the original word.

6. The like mystery is represented unto us after the same manner, (...) Vide
Ainsworth in Levit. 1. 1.
Isa. 9. 7., etc. The Prophet displaying the titles of the Messiah and his
kingdom (contrary to the rules of ordinary Orthography) mutat quadrata
rotundis, begins the Hebrew word rendered by our English of the increase, with
Mem rotundum, with a round letter instead of a square. And this unusual
character, the Jews themselves acknowledge to be a note of some mystery (as
Johannes Baptista in Confutatione Hebraicae Sectae. prima paride primo Messiae
adventu fol. 12. dictioni primae Pematbe litera, quae mem rotunda apud vos
nuncupatur, contra regulam grammaticalem vestram ibi imponitur, quod quidem
mysterium aeternitati imperij, vestri recte attribuunt, per verba prophetae
immediate sequentia, [ut confirmet illud] and corroboret in judicio et justicia
a modo usque in sempiternum; quamvis ipsi prophetam de Ezechia loqui dicant,
quorum falsitas ex eo patet, quod haec perpetuitas in Ezechiae imperio visa non
est. Been autem in Christo Jesus, ut Scripturae omnes testantur, et experientia
docet, verificatum videmus.
one of them being converted to Christianity observes against his brethren
which love darkness more then light.) The mystery notified in this particular
(as this Author tells us) is by their own rules, in cases wherein they are no
parties engaged, the same with that, which is immediately after expressed in
words assertive and plain. That of his government and peace there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever:
the zeal of the Lord of hoasts will perform this. I refer the observation
of the like charactericall representations, unto the diligent Readers of the
old Testament in the original tongue, or of ancient Hebrew Commentators, whose
P^rro placet, christian lector te hic admonere, hanc vocem (...) ubique in
biblijs hebraicis defective, hoc est sine vau alteroscribi, exceptis duobus
locis (...) Et eo qui extat in libello Ruth cap. vltimo, (...) id est, Et istae
sunt generationes peretz, etc. In quibus tantum duobus locis (...) uti vides,
integrescribitur, alias semper sine va^, cum punct^ holem loco vau posito, hoc
modo (...) vel (...). Causam nostri hanc assignant, omnes generationes
imperfectas esse, praeter generationem caeli and terrae a Deo producta^ and
generationem Messiae, qui juxta carnem e familia peretz, unde and Rex David
prodijt, natus est. Qui deus, and homo est, and ab incorrupta virgin,
operatione spiritus sancti, absque omni peccatorum labe, in hunc mundum editus.
Nihil tale enim edit car^, et sanguis. (...) vetores etiam doctiores Hebraei
perhibent (...) hic integre scribi, propter Messiae ex familia peretz (...),
nati^itatem, quodea futura esset absque omni defectu, ut nulla alia. Paulus
Fagius in Genesis 2. verse 4.
testimonies in many cases where they are no parties, are no way to be
contemned. And amongst other branches of that rule for interpreting Scriptures,
which was constantly received amongst the ancient Jews (as Peter Martyr and
Bucer with others somewhere observe) this representation of divine mysteries by
letters or characters unusual, might (for ought I know) be one.

7. As for the representation of like mysteries by proper names of men
especially, who by their place or office were types or foreru^ners of Christ,
that (I presume) no sober Christian will except against or call in question.
And this representaon or prenotification of future mysteries, was exhibited,
either in the first imposition of names, or in the change of names, or in the
several use of diverse names, when the same party retained more names than one,
There was scarce a son of Jacob, whose name did not imply a kind of
prophecy, Rachell did truly prophecy of the state and condition of the
Benjamites, when she called the Father of that Tribe at his birth Benoni, the
son of her sorrow. And Jacob did as truly prophecy when he changed his name
into Benjamin, the son of his right hand. Nun the Ephramite did call his
son Hoseah by divine instinct or direction. And Moses did truly prophecy,
when he changed his name into Iehoshua. With what intention Isaac or Rebecca
did call their younger son Jacob, I know not; or whether they had any other
motive (known to themselves) to give him this name, besides that which the
manner of his birth did minister, for he caught hold of his brothers heel in
the birth. But this name Iadgnakab, hand in heel, made afterward by close
composition (as it seems) Iagnakab, did (as the attempt signified by it in the
birth) portend, that he should supplant his elder brother, and get the
birthright from him.

8. After this name given him by his Parents, he was in his full age named
Israel by God Himself, by way of addition only, without any change or
determination of his former name, or the Omen of it. But it is not without
observation why he is sometimes called Jacob, sometimes Israel in the same
continued historical Narration, the name Jacob characterizing his present
infirmity; the name Israel notifying his recovering or gathering of strength.
But one of the most admirable prerepresentations literal not assertive, of
mysteries plainly afterward avouched and fulfilled, which I have either
observed, or found observed by others, is in the Benedictus, Luke 1. 68, etc.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people; and has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his
servant David, etc. To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers, and to
remember his holy Covenant, the oath which he swear to our Father Abraham, that
he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear; in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of our life. The sum of that which God had spoken by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which had been since the world began, was now
reavouched by Zacharias (being filled with the holy Ghost) in a literal
assertive sense, plain and easy even to the capacity of the natural man. And
yet the sum of all, which Zacharias by the Spirit of Prophecy did now utter,
was clearly represented (to men of spiritual understanding in the Scriptures,
or experienced in their spiritual sense) in the very names of John Baptist and
of his Parents. For Zacharias (the Baptists Father) is by interpretation the
remembrance of God. Elizabeth (his mother) as much as the oath of God. And the
name John, imports the free grace of God. And all these put together sound as
much, as that God did now remember his people with that grace, which he had
sworn to bestow upon them in his Covenant with Abraham, that is, with grace of
deliverance from their enemies (and their own sins were their greatest
enemies) with grace enabling them to serve him in holiness and righteousness
all the days of their life. Of more particulars in this kind, as they shall
fall within the compass of Prophecies or prefigurations concerning Christ,
hereafter.

CHAP. 14. Cap. 14

That the Scripture is said to be fulfilled according to all the former senses:
that one and the same Scripture may be oftener than once fulfilled according to
each several sense.
THe fulfilling of any thing written supposes a foretelling or
presignification of the same. And because matters related by the Evangelists
and other sacred writers of the new Testament were of course and of purpose
either foretold or prefigured in the old testament, hence it is, that this
phrase of fulfilling that which was written, is in a manner peculiar to these
sacred writers, not in use amongst secular historians. Yet the phrase is not
therefore barbarous, because not used by politer writers in the same subject,
that is in historical narrations: For it is used by Tully and other most
elegant writers in the same sense which sacred writers use it: As because every
man (as was intimated before) may foretell those things which were by himself
projected or promised, Cap. 7.. 1.
they are likewise said implere promissa to fulfill their own promises, or to
fulfill the Omen, or signification of their own names: so an elegant Poet
says Maxim, Dicitur autem prophetia, quantu^ equidem observare potui, quatuor
mod^s impleri. Primum, quam id ipsum. fit, de quo proprie, et literali, ut
dicitur, sensu intelligebatur, sicut cap. 1. 22. Matthaeus dixit impletam in
Maria Isaiae prophetiam fuisse; Ecce virgo concipiet, et pariet filium.
Secundo, cum fit non id de quo proprie intell gebatur prophetia, sed id quod
per illud significabatur, ut 2 Reg. 7. 14. Ego ero illi in patrem, et ille erit
mihi in filium, quod proprie de Solomone dictum esse perspicuum est. Diuus
tamen Paulus de Christo, cujus Solomon figura erat interpretatur Hebrae 1. 6*
quasi in eo impetum esset, et quod Exodus 12. 46. d^ctum est: Os non communuetis
ex eo, certum est intelligi de agno, tamen Joan: cap: 19. 36. in Christo, qui
per agnum significabatur, impletum dicit. Tertio cum rec id fit de quo proprie
intelligitur prophetia, nec id quod per illud significatur, sed quod illi
simile est, et omnino ejusmodi, ut prophetia non minus apt de eo, quam de quo
dicta est, dicipotuisse videatur, nam Poptulus hic labijs me honorat, de Iudeis
qui tempore Isai: erant, Deus dixerat Isai: 29. 13. Christus autem in eis, qui
suo erant tempore, impletum significat. Mat. 15. 7, 8. Simile est exemplum Mat.
1^. 14. and Acto: 28. 26. Quarto tum id ipsum, quod per Prophetiam, aut
Scripturam dictum erat, quamvis jam factum fuerit, tamen magis ac magis fit.
Tunc enim Scriptura impleri dicitur, id est, quod per eam dictum erat,
cumulatissime fieri. Observamus enim in Scripturis saepe fieri, dici, non solum
quod fieri incipit, sed quod magis, ac magis fit, sicut Joan. 2. 11. dicuntur
discipuli Christi, viso miraculo aquae, in vinum conversae, credidisse, quia
magis, ac magis crediderunt nam jam certe ante crediderunt. Maldonat in verse.
15. Mat. 2.
qui tanti mensuram nominis imples. Now seeing this phrase [This was done that
the Scripture might be fulfilled] is so frequent in the new Testament; Maldonat
did very well and like himself in unfolding the several ways (as he
conceived them) according to which the Scripture is said to be fulfilled,
almost in the very beginning of his learned Commentaries upon the four
Evangelists. Yet some question there may be, whether he did all this, which was
so well and wisely attempted by him, so well and so judiciously as might in
reason have been expected from him.

2. The Scripture (says he) so far (as I could hitherto observe) is said to
be fulfilled four manner of ways. First when that very thing is done or comes
to pass which was meant by the Prophet or other sacred writers in the literal
and proper sense: As when Saint Matthew (to use his instance) says Chap. 1.
22. That which was spoken by the Prophet, (behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a son, and shall call his name Emanuel) was fulfilled in the blessed
virgin. The rule is true and without exception, but the illustration of it is
not so fit, as Maldonat supposed. For that saying of the Prophet Isaiah was
fulfilled more ways than one, perhaps according to all the four several
ways, which he conceived, in the conception birth and name of our Savior
Jesus Christ. Secondly, the scripture is said to be fulfilled, when that comes
to pass which was foreshadowed by the proper and immediate subject of the
Prophets speech. As that saying Exodus 12. 46. Ye shall not break a bone of
it, was properly and immediately meant of the paschall Lamb, yet fulfilled in
our Savior Christ, of whom the paschall Lamb was the type or shadow. Unto
this second rule or branch he likewise referres that prophecy 2 Samuel 7. 14. I
will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a son. This was fulfilled in
Christ as the Apostle teaches Heb. 1. 5. though properly meant of Solomon, as
Maldonat takes it for granted; although some judicious Commentators of the
Roman Church in his time do question, or rather peremptorily (yet too boldly)
deny it. However, this second rule of Maldonat is good and acknowledged by all,
only his expression of the two instances needs some correction: for the first
place alleged by him was as literally and as properly meant of Christ as of
the Paschall Lamb; and the second more properly meant of Christ than of
Solomon, though literally and properly meant of Solomon and fulfilled in him.
The truth is that both places were two ways fulfilled both in the literal,
and mystical sense, and the second twice fulfilled, once in the literal, and
again both in the literal and mystical sense.

3. Thirdly (says the same Author) the Scripture is said to be fulfilled, when
neither that which was literally and properly pointed at by the Prophet, nor
that which was fore-shadowed by it comes to pass, but some other thing which
is so like unto it, that the same speech may as aptly and as handsomely be
applied unto it, as unto that which was properly and literally meant. For
illustration of this third rule, he alleges that of the Prophet Isaiah cap.
29. 13, 14. For as much as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and
with their lips do honor me; but have removed their heart far from me,
and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: Therefore, behold I
will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people, even a mavelous
work and a wonder. For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid: This (says Maldonat) was
properly meant of the Jews which lived in Isaiahs time; and yet our Savior
Matt. 15. 7, 8. gives us to understand that this was fulfilled of the Jews,
which conversed and disputed with him. Yet Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy
of you, saying: This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth and honors
me with their lips; but their heart is far me. Unto this third rule or
observation, Maldonat would draw that other saying of the Prophet Isaiah cap.
6. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. Yet this prophecy, as
our Savior expressly tells us Mat. 13, 14. was fulfilled in the Jews to whom
he spoke Ore tenus, in parables. And so does S. Paul Acts 28. 26. where he
expounds the Orthodoxall meaning both of our Saviors and the Prophets words.
The truth of this third rule will come in some question in the next chapter:
but admitting it for the present to be orthodoxall and true, yet the instances
or illustrations are impertinent. For all the passages alleged by him were
more literally and more properly meant of the incredulous Jews which conversed
with our Savior than of those Jews which were the Prophet Isaiahs coevalls;
as the understanding Reader will easily collect from the 12. of John 41. being
compared with the forecited 6, of Isaiah.

The fourth way by which (in Maldonats observation) the scripture is said to be
fulfilled, is, when that which was foretold or prefigured though already done
in part, or begun to be done, is afterward more constantly and more fully
done. The observation or rule is unquestionably true, but it is not a rule or
branch distinct from the two first, but rather a transcendent to all the ways
according to which the scriptures may be rightly said to be fulfilled.

4. And these ways can be neither more nor fewer, then are the ways by which
God did either foretell or prefigure things to come, and to be accomplished in
Christ. Some predictions were merely prophetical, some prefigurations were
merely typical, other merely literal or charactericall. And unto these and
their commixtures all the Testimonies or prenotions concerning Evangelical
mysteries have bin reduced. Now according to all these ways the scripture is
said to be fulfilled. Where the testimony is merely prophetical, that is such
as is literally applyable to Christ alone, the scripture is said to be
fulfilled only in the literal sense. When the testimony or prenotio^ is only
typical, as when the representation is made by matter of fact or historical
eve^t, in this case the Scripture is fulfilled only according to the mystical
sense; and after this manner most of the legal ceremonies are said to be
fulfilled in Chr. The history of the brazen Serpent was mystically fulfilled in
his death upon the cross: the story of Jonas his impriso^me^t in the whales
belly was thus fulfilled in his burial, and 3 days abode in his grave: the
Ceremony or rite of offering the first fruits was thus fulfilled in his
resurrection. Where the testimony and prenotion is both typical and
prophetical, as is that of the Paschal Lamb, and of the stone which the
builders refused, there the Scripture is fulfilled both according to the
literal and the mystical sense, whether the words as they are referred to
Chr. be logical and proper, or whether they be allegori: or symbolicall; yet
can we not say that these Scripture were fulfilled as well in the type as in
Christ, but in Christ alone. For neither of these passages [Yee shall not
break a bone of it] [the stone which the builders refused] were prophetical
in respect of the type, but only in respect of the mysteries typified. And no
Scripture is said to be fulfilled, otherwise, then as it is either a prediction
or prefiguration of somewhat to come. But where the testimony is prophetically
typical, there one and the same Scripture is twice fulfilled both in the type
and in the antitype, as that 2 Samuel 7. [I will be to him a Father, and he shall
be to me a sonne] was fulfilled in Solomon in the literal sense, but in Christ
both according to the literal and mystical sense. So was that forecited
passage Isay 22. fulfilled in Eliakim according to the literal sense, but
afterward fulfilled in Christ both according to the literally symbolicall and
the mystical sense. And thus the names given to John Baptist himself, and to
his Parents had their accomplishment when Christ was exhibited in our flesh:
and yet these, and many other of the same rank, were more exactly fulfilled
after his resurrection.

Maldonat his fourth rule (as was before intimated) will hold in all these
several ways, according to which the Scripture is said to be fulfilled,
whether according to the mere literal and assertive sense, or according to
the mere mystical sense, or according to both with their several branches,
or according to the charactericall sense, or literal representative only not
assertive. According to every one of these senses may one and the same
Scripture be oftener fulfilled than once or twice, and in a manner more
remarkable at one time than at another, though always truly fulfilled and
according to the intention of the holy Ghost.

5. To begin with the literal assertive. No man I think will question
whether that of the Prophet Isaiah [with the breath of his lips shall he slay
the wicked] were literally meant of any besides our Savior Christ. And there
is no question but these words were fulfilled within the compass of that age
which brought him forth, and so then fulfilled in sundry wicked ones: yet do
not these words refer to them, or those times alone, but are to be fulfilled
in a more remarkable manner at the day of Judgment, or perhaps before it. For
from this place of the Prophet Isaiah, our Apostle had that revelation 2 Thessalonians.
2. 8. Then shall that Wicked he revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.
Many like prophecies there be concerning the glory of Christ's Church and the
happy estate of his elect, which are even in this life literally fulfilled or
verified by way of pledge or earnest, but shall not be exactly fulfilled, save
only in the life to come. Ignorance of this rule, or non-observance of it, has
been the nurse of dangerous and superstitious error, as well in the Roman
Church as in her extreme opposites: in such I mean, as begin their faith and
anchor their hopes at the absolute infallibility of their personal election
with no less zeal or passion then the Romanist relyes upon the absolute
infallibility of the visible Church:

6. That very instance which Maldonat alleges for the confirmation of his
third rule [This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me
with their lips, etc. Matthew. 15. 8.] was literally meant of the Jews which
lived in Isaiahs time, yet not properly fulfilled in them or of them; for in
respect of them, it was not a Prophecy, but a sharp reproof or tax; yet this
reproof or tax was a most exact prophecy in respect of the Jews which
conversed with our Savior, of whom it was literally meant in a more exquisite
sense than of their Ancestors, and in this sense often fulfilled. The ancient
Jews did not honor God being personally and visibly present, with their lips
as these later did, nor were their hearts so maliciously set, at least their
malice not so diametrally bent, against God at any time, as the hearts and
malice of these later Jews were against Christ, who was the God of their
Fathers. As these later Jews did fill up the measure of their Fathers sins;
so whatsoever God did threaten to this stiffenecked people for their rebellion
against him, was more exactly fulfilled in this last generation, then it had
been in any former. The several generations or successions created no
difference in the true object of the literal sense: that may and did as
equally respect many generations as one man, infinite transgressions as truly
as some few. This Scripture may be as truly fulfilled in all as in one, though
no^ in all according to the same measure. So S. Stephen tells the Jews Acts 7.
5. 52. Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always
resist the holy Ghost: at your Fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophets
have not your Fathers persecuted? And they have slain them which showed before
of the coming of the just one, of whom ye have been now the betrayers and
murderers. And our Savior himself charge the present generation of the Jews
with the blood of Zacharias form of Barachias, whom their forefathers had
slain many hundreds of years before Matt. 23. 35. adding withal, that his
blood should be required of that generation present. Which is a proof
sufficient that this Zacharias was not the Father (as some have supposed) of
John the Baptist. For if he had been slain between the Temple and the Altar,
he must have been slain by that present generation to whom our Savior
directs this speech, and so there had been no matter of observation capable of
that Emphaticall Epiphonema Luke 11. 51. Verily I say unto you it shall be
required of this generation. Now his blood was to be required of this last
generation, because they had fulfilled the measure of their forefathers sins,
who had prodigiously slain their high Priest Zacharias. But how the Prophecy
of this their high Priest, or rather his dying curse, was fulfilled more
exactly of this last generation than of that generation which put him to death,
would require a particular treatise, not in this place to be inserted. His
dying speech (though uttered by way of imprecation) was prophetical. And the
event of his imprecation, though exhibited shortly after his death was
typically prophetical of that which happened to this last generation within
forty years after the death of our Savior, whom Zacharias did in his death
(though not in his dying speeches) exactly foreshadow.

7. As one and the same Scripture may be oftener then once fulfilled or exactly
verified in different measure only by way of growth or increment of the same
literal sense; so likewise may it be of one and the same man in respect of
several times. For out of question it is, that the Scripture Genesis 15. 6.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, was
literally verified of Abraham at that very point of time, when God first called
him from his own kindred and his Fathers house into the promised Land. And yet
S. James says cap. 2. 23. that this very Scripture was fulfilled when Abraham
offered up Isaac his son upon the Altar: and from this last performance of
Abraham he had, if not the first, yet the truest, title to be called the
friend of God. Not altogether after the same manner, but after a manner not
much different was that Scripture Isaiah 53. 4. twice fulfilled of our Savior
before his resurrection: Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our
sorrows, etc. This was most exactly fulfilled in his sufferings (whatsoever
these were) upon the Cross, unto which S. Peter referres it, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He
his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead
to sin, should live to righteousness, by whose stripes you were healed. Yet
was the same testimony truly fulfilled before, as S. Matthew more fully
instructs us cap. 8. ver, 16, 17. When the even was come, they brought unto him
many that were possessed with Devils; and he cast out the spirits with his
word, and healed all that were sick. That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the Prophet saying, Himself took our infirmities and bare
our sicknesses. The testimony alleged by these two Apostles unto several
purposes is one and the same, and yet concludent of what they both purposed or
intended. Nor is it necessary to search out two several senses of one and the
same testimony alleged and twice fulfilled. For of one and the same literal
sense or signification there may be two objects or more. The literal sense of
the words, as forecited by S. Peter, has for its object our Saviors
sufferings, or his bearing our infirmities and the diseases of our souls upon
the Cross. The object whereto S. Matthew referres, was the infirmites or
sicknesses of men's bodies; for these he bare though not (as we say) in kind,
yet by exact sympathy or fellowfeeling, before he bare our spiritual
infirmities upon the Cross; and whether he bare these after such an exact
sympathy, as he did the bodily infirmities of those whom he cured, may be
discussed in the Article of his passion.

8. But as for testimonies either typical prophetical or prophetically
typical, besides that they may be oftener fulfilled then once, according to the
same sense in general, (as either according to the literal or mystical sense
or both) they admit in greater variety of particular senses no way opposite
unto the general, but subordinate and coordinate one to another. Sometimes the
same words fit the type in such a proportion, as the names of shires or
Provinces do those parts of the Maps wherein they are represented; but fit the
Antitype in such a measure as the same name in the Map does the province
which it represents: sometimes in one and the same Prophecy or continued
historical narration, one clause or passage does fit the type only, another
the antitype only, according to the proper literal sense; and some others so
fit both. As in Psalm 72. 1. Give the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy
righteousness unto the Kings son: by the King it is evident David meant
himself, and by the Kings son, both Solomon, and him of whom Solomon was the
shadow or type; the one according to the literal sense only, the other both
according to literal and mystical. These words again in the 2. verse, He
shall judge the people with righteousness, and the poor with equity, refer
both to Solomon, and to Christ; to the one as to the model, to the other as to
the edifice. So does that other passage ver. 8. He shall have dominion also
from sea to sea, and from the River unto the ends of the earth. This prophecy
was fulfilled or exactly verified according to the letter in Solomon: For he
did command from the Phaenician sea unto the sea of Edom, and from the river
Euphrates unto the lands end, according to that ancient terrar which the Lord
himself had given of Iudahs dominion. Yet this dominion whilst it was most
entirely possessed by Solomon, was but a Map of Christ's Kingdom; he was to rule
from Sea to Sea, over all the Seas in the world, and from river to river from
every point of sea and land unto the same point again; For all was to be given
him as well in earth as in heaven. Salomons earthly Kingdom does fit Christ's
Kingdom here on earth, as a Map of paper does a Country or Province; and
Christ's Kingdom here on earth is but the scale of his Kingdom and dominion in
heaven.

9. Sometimes the same passage of Scripture may according to the intent and
meaning of the holy Spirit be fulfilled or verified of the type or pledge in an
ordinary literal or proverbiall sense, (which is somewhat more then the
ordinary literal) and yet be fulfilled of Christ in the most exactly punctual
literal sense that can be imagined. They that dwell in the wilderness (says
David Psalm. 72. 9.) shall how before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust.
This was truly meant and verified of Solomon in the literal and proverbiall
sense, but most exactly fulfilled in Christ, unto whom all knees shall how of
things in heaven, of things in earth, and of things under the earth: and all
his enemies, death it self, and him that had the power of death, shall
inherit the Serpents first curse, that is, to be fed with dust, Genesis 3. 14. No
doubt but Solomon and his share in that prediction v. 12. He shall deliver the
needy when he cries, the poor also and him that has no helper; Him that is
not able to cry or speak for himself. But Solomon could never give sight unto
the blind, or limbs unto the Lame, or speech or hearing to such as were borne
deaf or dumb. These were prerogatives peculiar unto that son of David whom
Solomon did foreshadow. But even the deaf and dumb had some friends to
solicit Christ's aid for them; the lame, the blind, and the sick, could cry
themselves, unto him or make signs of their desire of his help; yet others he
helped which did not either by themselves or by their friends desire his help,
as that impotent man which had laid so long at the poole of Bethesda. Solomon
might deliver the poor from civil oppression or bodily violence, and might
raise them in their temporal fortunes; but it was the promised son of David
alone, that could deliver them from the oppressions of the Devil, or from the
imprisonment of their own bodily senses. Thus he delivered Lazarus from the
very bonds of death, and from the prison of the grave, when he himself could
not, and his sisters would not or did not cry unto him for this deliverance,
but rather dissuaded him from attempting it. Now the very name Lazarus is by
interpretation as much as David in that verse expresses, Him that has no
helper. According to this difference or allowance most passages in that 72
Psalm besides the 5 ver. and the conclusion from the 17, are literally meant
both of Solomon and of Christ. But these prayers of David were prophetical
both in respect of the type and the antitype; so are not many other like
passages in the Psalms, which contain patheticall expressions of the parties
desires, griefs, or sorows, which did pen them; and yet are no less
exquisitely fulfilled in Christ, than the former which were literally meant
both of Christ and of the Psalmist, though prophetical only in respect of
Christ. Every religious man, which had a religious woman to his mother, might
frame his prayers in the same literal form that the Psalmist uses Psalm. 116.
16. O Lord, surely I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid. Yet in as much as this Psalmist (who ever he were) was a type of
Christ, that which he spoke and meant of himself in an ordinary and common
sense was fulfilled of Christ in the most exquisite sense whereof these words
or letters are capable. For he was the son of an handmaid, of Gods handmaid
(...), in such a peculiar manner as no son of man before him was nor after
shall be. And he was the servant of God in such a sense and after such a
manner, as no man could be, no man would desire to be, save only that man who
was the eternal and only son of God. But of this Title of the son of God,
his being the servant of God, in his proper place.

10. The Psalmist again did questionless both act and pen his own part, when
he thus exclaimed, Yea mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did
eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me. Psalm. 41. 9. This was but
an expression of some intolerable ingratitude and wrong, either past or then in
working; the speech was neither altogether figurative nor hyperbolicall, but a
typical prophecy of Judas his Traitorous dealing with his Lord and Master; and
in Judas alone it was properly fulfilled according to the most exquisite and
most punctual literal sense that could have been devised. For Judas being in
an office of trust, did then lay wait for his masters life, and did then fully
resolve upon his intended treason, when he was in the mess, and dipped his
finger in the same dish with him. The Father of lies, of treason, and
ingratitude did enter into his heart at the same instant, wherein he devoured
the bread his master had reached unto him. By the speedy and more disastrous
issue of this prodigious Treason, preventing the Traitor for triumphing in his
masters death, as his bloody confederates did: this people might have known
that Christ was the man whom God did favor, whom the Psalmist did foreshadow
in his complaint; and of whose resurrection he prophesied in his prayer Ver.
10, 11, 12. But thou O Lord be merciful unto me, and raise me up that I may
requite them: by this I know that thou favourest me, because my Enemy does not
triumph over me. And as for me thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and set
me before thy face for ever. All that the Psalmist here pens, was more
exquisitly acted by our Savior, if we subduct the imprecations upon his
enemies, which the Psalmist mingles with his prayers for himself.

11. The Author of the 69 Psalm (were he David the son of Iesse, or some
other so enstiled for the same reason, for which John Baptist is by our Savior
himself called Elias) did not utter that complaint without some urgent cause
or pressing occasions, Ver. 20, 21. Reproach has broken my heart, and I am
full of heaviness, and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and
I looked for comforters, but I found none. They gave me also gall for my meat,
and in my thrist they gave me vinegert^ drink. These passionate expressions
could hardly proceed from such sympathy, as a pure prophetical vision of what
the malignant Jews would do for many generations after unto Christ, was likely
to raise. They seem live characters of experienced grief and sorrow, and it
may be the Psalmist was then a prisoner fed with the bread of affliction, and
compelled to drink water as bitter as his bread was nasty. But whatsoever the
Psalmist here speaks of himself, and of his miserable perplexities, though in
an high and tragical strain, or in a sense somewhat hyperbolicall; was we
know fulfilled in Christ according to the literal and punctual sense.
Briefly, all the Psalmists and other Prophets, in all their causeless and
undeserved sufferings at the hands of worthless and malicious men, were true
types, and yet no more than types or shadows, of Christ in his agony and bloody
passion. But in their importunate and bitter imprecations uttered in their
guiltless sufferings, they were not so much types as foyles of his unspeakable
patience, meekness and long suffering: for he never prayed against his enemies
(as the Prophets did) but always for them. Their demeanor in their
calamities, disgrace, or torments was such as did show themselves to be but
men: His, always such as did declare Him to be, what he often said of
himself, truly God. And yet the bitter imprecations which the Psalmist and
other Prophets used in their indigne sufferings, or against the malicious
enemies of his Church and people did (by divine inspiration) prove most exact
typical prophecies of all the Calamities which befell the Jewish nation after
they had declared themselves to be the enemies of the God of their Fathers, and
put the Lord of life, their promised Messiah, to death. As in particular and
for instance, that imprecation of this Psalmist ver. 23. unto the 28. with that
other Prophecy Isa. 29. S. Paul did see in part fulfilled in the Jews of his
time Romans 11. 8, 9, 10. According as it is written, God has given them the
spirit of slumber: eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear unto this day. And David says, Let their table be made a snare and a
trap, and a slumbling block, and a recompense unto them. Let their eyes be
darkened that they may not see, and bow down their back always. This imprecation
made by the Psalmist (but never resumed by our Savior) did fall upon them by
the law of retaliation. Therefore their Table became a snare unto them, because
they gave the son of God gall for meat^, and vinegar in his thirst to drink.
But in what sense his death, or the indignities which they put upon him, was
the cause of Jerusalems destruction and extirpation of the Jewish Nation, is
more fully set down in other meditations somewhat of which may (if need so
require) be inserted in proof of the undoubted truth of the Articles of his
resurrection and ascension, against the Jews.

CHAP. 15.
Whether all Testimonies alleged by the Evangelists out of the old Testament,
in which it is said or employed, [this was done that the Scripture might be
fulfilled] be concludent proofs of the Evangelicall truths for which they are
alleged.
IT would require a great deal of diligence in later Divines to redeem the
negligence of former, either in not observing, or in not transmitting their
observations to posterity; at what time, on what occasions, and by whom the
several Psalms were written. For that all of them were written at the same
time, or by the same hand, is no way probable in it self, nor so accounted
amongst the best Divines of this age. Theodoret amongst the Ancients,
Melancthen and Moller amongst modern writers, have better attempted this
profitable work, than they have been seconded. The historical occasions, and
other circumstances of the times wherein these Psalms were written, Cap. 15
were they known according to the literal sense, would lead us by a fair and
safe way, as it were by the rule of three, unto the just product or capacity
of the true allegorical and mystical sense, in which they were fulfilled. But
as our case now stands, the luxuriant and perplexed branches of such forced
Allegories, as men fancy to themselves, or frame by guess, without any
perfect scale or proportion from the true historical sense, have occasioned
many judicious Divines, to doubt or question whether those things which by the
Evangelists are said to be done that the Scriptures might be fulfilled do
always imply some concludent proof or demonstration of the Spirit. Calvin,
for being sometimes too bold, sometimes too sparing in the exposition of such
places, as the Evangelists say are fulfilled in Christ is deeply taxed by the
Lutherans generally, and by many of the Romish Church. But Christian charity
will persuade men of sober passions, that it was rather fear lest he should
give offense unto the Jews, then any desire or inclination to comply with
them, which made him sometimes give the same interpretations of Scriptures
which they do, without expression of, or search after farther mysteries than
the letter it self does minister. How ever it be, if Calvin be liable to a
judgment, Iansenius, Sasbout, and Maldonat, three of the most judicious
Commentators of the Romish Church for these many years, are liable to a
Council, for their unadvised presumption in this kind. One of them denies
that often forecited place; I will be to him a Father, and be shall be to me a
son, to be literally meant of Solomon: wherein he gives just offense unto
the Jews, and by superstitious fear of committing that error, whereof Calvin
is often accused, does fall into the contrary. The two others question whether
that of the Prophet Hosea, Out of Egypt have I called my son, were properly
fulfilled in our Savior, or only said to be fulfilled per accommodationem, by
way of allusion, that is, in such a manner as we might say that of the Poet,
Omnis in Ascanio chari stat cura Parentis, were fulfilled in any father or
mother, whom we saw to dote upon, or much to deligt in their lovely son. And
this was the explicit meaning of Maldonats third rule before cited, in what
sense the Scripture is said to be fulfilled.

2. That this was his meaning in that place, may be gathered from his comment
on that other saying of S. Matthew, Chap. 13. ver. 34, 35. All these things
spoke Jesus unto the multitude in parables, and without a parable spoke he not
unto them; that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet saying,
I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things which have been kept
secret since the foundation of the world. His observations upon this place are,
in his own words (englished) thus. The particle, That, does not denote the
cause why our Savior spoke in parables; for he did not thus speak, to the end
that David's sayings might be fulfilled, but because his Auditors were unworthy
of such perspicuous declarations, as he used to his Disciples in private. This
he takes as granted from our Saviors speech ver. 13, 14. Therefore spoke I to
them in parables, because they seeing see not, and hearing they hear not,
neither do they understand. And in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaiah
which says, By hearing, etc. The abstract of his observations upon ver, 34,
35. is this; that it was no part of our Evangelists meaning, to teach us, that
David's prophecy was properly fulfilled by our Saviors parables: seeing David's
discourse (as he conceives) was indeed no prophecy, but an historical
narration of matters past, besides that the word which the Psalmist there
uses, does not signify such parables as our Savior in this 13. chapter
meant; but rather such pithy sentences, as the Greeks call Apophthegmes.
Maldonats conclusion therefore is, that the Evangelist (according to his usual
manner) did only accommodate that which David had spoken, to our Saviors
speeches in this place, to which they have some affinity or similitude, though
no concludent congruity: and for our better satisfaction, he referres us to
his Comments upon Matthew. 2. 15. that is indeed, to his third rule, in what
sense the Scriptures are said to be fulfilled. But in this, and other like
passages to the same purpose, this Author only gives us to understand, how
easy a matter it is for good Divines, sometimes to spend a great deal of
learning and wit to no good purpose; especially when they strive to be
hypercriticall, or to be censorious of others pious endeavors, though perhaps
not so accurate.

3. To revise these his animadversions ordine retrogrado, that is, beginning
with the last, and ending with the first:

No man did say that the narrations in that Psalm were prophetical in respect
of the matters literally and immediately signified by the words themselves; Yet
in as much as these matters though past, as Gods wonders in Egypt and in the
wilderness, the conducting of his people to the land of Canaan, and their
rebellious behavior in it, were true types or shadows of the like events in
future times; there is not any thing in that Psalm related, which in the
mystical sense does not fore-represent some parallel event, when the God of
their Fathers should come in person to expostulate with his people, in such a
manner as David did with the people of his time, which he did not in his own
name or authority, but in the name and authority of his Lord and God. For so he
begins that Psalm, Give ear, O my people, to my Law, incline your ears to
the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in a parable, I will utter dark
sayings of old. This preamble cannot literally be applied to David or any
Prophet, save only as he was a type or shadow of him that was to come. The
Psalmists words immediately following though Apophthegmaticall and pithy, were
plain in respect of the literal sense, (if you consider them only as matters
of fact forepast;) were known and had been taught, at the least by some of
their Fathers, though perhaps forgotten by posterity. However, in respect of
their mystical importance or as they contain a proportionable parallel of the
Kingdom of Heaven with the Kingdom of Israel according to the flesh; they are
sentences both hard and dark, and such as did require a better paraphrast upon
David or the Author of this Psalm, then he was of Moses or of the sacred
Historians before his time. For by the parables meant in ver. 2. of this
Psalm, if we may believe S. Matthewes paraphrase upon these words, were meant,
things which had been kept secret from the foundation of the world Matt. 13.
35. This was the mystical sense of the Psalmists words, and according to S.
Matthewes literal expression of them, they necessarily import the mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven; and so all the parables which our Savior used in that
Chapter (as he there uses many) respect the Kingdom of Heaven, and were hard
and dark to such as were not of Christ's disciples, or such as the Psalmist
there describes, A stubborn and faithless generation. It is true therefore
which Maldonat in his second animadversion says, that the cause why our
Savior spoke to his common Auditors in parables was, because they were
unworthy of cleerer revelatio^s, incapable for the time of greater talents,
having used their former ordinary talents so ill. Thus our Savior resolves his
Disciples ver. 11, 12. Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. For whosoever has, to him
shall be given: and he shall have abundance: but whosoever has not, from him
shall be taken away even that he has. And to the same effect the Psalmist had
prophesied or forewarned this generation, even all generations following. It
was then an allegation unconcludent and impertinent, and no way beseeming
Maldonat, to say our Savior did not speak in parables, to the end that David's
sayings might be fulfilled, but because this present generation did deserve no
other language. For these two are no way opposite, but subordinate. And if it
be ill for men to separate those things which God has conjoined, it is much
worse to set things at odds or in opposition which the Spirit of God has made
coordinate, or set in concord.

Now both these assertions, as well that which Maldonat refuses, as that which
he approves, have a divine truth in them. First it is most true that our
Savior did speak unto the multitude and to the Pharisees, on whom they
relied, in parables, because they were for the time unworthy of such
declarations as he made to his disciples for the increase of their talent which
they had used not so much amiss as the others had done. And no less true it
is, that the Psalmist did foreprophecy that the posterity of Israel from his
own time until the coming of the Messiah should be more unworthy hearers of
divine mysteries then their forefathers had been; unless they seriously
repented both their own sins, and the sins of their forefathers. So that
our Savior did speak^ unto them in parables for these two reasons. First,
because they were unworthy hearers. Secondly, to the end his disciples might
know and believe, that this manner of speaking was foreprophecied by the Author
of the 78. Psalm.

4. Maldonats first animadversion was, that this Latin particle ut, or the
greek, (...) does not always signify the cause of what is said or spoken,
but sometimes the event only. How true soever this be, it no way prejudiceth
the truth now delivered by us. For it will not follow that this particle ut
either in this place of S. Matthew, or in any other place where it imports the
fulfilling of Scriptures, does not signify the cause, because it sometimes or
oftentimes signifies the event only. But seeing the right use of this
particle, or the knowledge of its several references, is much conducent to the
just valuation of many testimonies which have been, and must be hereafter
alleged out of Scriptures; it will be very useful in this place to unfold its
several significations or importances once for all.

Sometimes this particle, as well in the Greek, as in the Latin, and in our
English, is transitive only; and imports neither any true cause nor the event;
as in that of our Savior John 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they may know
thee, the only true God. The resolution of which words, without any wrong
either to their full importance in logical construction, or to their
grammatical elegancy, is but this, Cognoscere te esse verum Deum est vita
aeterna, To know thee to be the only true God is eternal life. From this use
or importance of this particle ut, that other, which Maldonat makes, is not
different, or no otherwise different then the end of a transition or passage
is from the passage or transition it self; as when our Savior says Mat. 23.
34. I send unto you Prophets and wisemen etc, that upon you may come all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous Abel, etc. God
forbid any good Christian should refer this particle That unto the first
words, Behold I send unto you Prophets, etc, and by this means conceive the
end and cause why God did send wisemen and Prophets unto them should be this,
that all the righteous blood shed by their Fathers, should be required of this
generation; it refers only to those words, Some of them shall ye kill and
crucify, etc. The true importance is, as if he had said, ye shall, or you
will, go on in your Fathers sins so far and so long, until at length the
blood of all the righteous whom your Fathers have slain, shall come upon you:
Or, as S. Luke has it, shall be required of you. So that the importance of
this particle ut in this place denotes the event of their practices or
resolutions, not the final cause of the Prophets coming unto them. And it is
the same with that which S. Paul expresses in the infinitive mood Romans 1. 20.
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power
and Godhead, so that they are without excuse, (...). The end why God did
manifest himself unto men in the book of his Creatures was, that they might
know him to be God, and glorify him as God. And it was the ample measure of
manifestations made to this end, which left even the Heathens themselves
without Apology or just excuse; and according to this importance of the
particle ut, (as it notes only the event or some transition to the event)
many good writers would value that of S. John chap. 12. 37, 38. Though he had
done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. That the
saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled which he spoke, ut impleretur
ille sermo; Lord who has believed our report, and to whom has the arm of the
Lord been revealed. And I could wish, that Maldonats animadversions upon the
forecited 35. verse of Matthew the 13. had been as Orthodoxall or discreet, as
they are upon this place of John. For of such Commentators as I have read, none
speaks more pertinently or more discreetly to the difficulty wherewith that
place is charged, unless it be his brother Tolet, who hammers out Athanasius
his exposition as learnedly (and more fully) as Maldonat does upon the
expositions of other Greek Fathers. However, I cannot assent to them, or to
any others, in this one point, in that they would make the particle ut, here,
(as elsewhere it does) to point only at the event, not any cause. That it
cannot in this place denote the final cause, Athanasius carries it clearly
against some heretics of his time or before him, who did so interpret it; who
yet spoke consequently enough to their wicked opinions in that they acquit
these unbeleeving Jews from blame and lay their charge upon Esayas, whose
prediction, they thought, did either cause or infer the necessity of these
Jews infidelity, after so many glorious miracles as had been done by our
Savior in their sight.

5. But that this particle, ut, does in this place denote and import more then
the event, that it refers unto some true Cause, is most evident, in that the
use of it ver. 38. is, in S. John's meaning, aequivalent to that other particle
used by him ver. 39, (...); Therefore they could not believe because Isaiah
said again etc. Now that this particle, (...), therefore, ideo, quia, and such
like, do always refer immediately unto some true cause, we cannot deny
without some wrong to Priscian or without some non obstante, or such licentious
dispensation (as it is said a Pope once gave) ut fiatur contra omnes
grammaticos. It is certain again, that neither particle does immediately
refer to any real cause of the thing it self avouched by S. John or that
Esaias his saying, or the fulfilling of it, should be any cause at all of the
Jews infidelity, neither the principal cause (as the Heretics whom
Athanasius refutes, did conceive) nor any accessory or less principal cause,
as some modern writers imagine, who^ Maldonat (without naming them) well
confutes. But we should consider how that which is the true effect of some
real cause, is oft-times the true cause of our true knowledge or apprehension
of the cause it self, or of its connection with the effect: and such a
causality these and the like causall particles or conjunctions, ideo, quia,
propter, etc do usually import. As if one which had never seen the King or
Court before, should say, Sure this is the King, because the rest stand bare
before him: this speech imports a true cause not of the thing it self
avouched, or why this is the King, but of the parties knowledge or notice of
him as King. And so we know that Mary Magdalen had many sins forgiven her
because she loved much: but her love was the effect not the cause of this
plentiful forgiveness, as the more intelligent sort of Pontifician writers
now grant, and the circumstance of the text will clearly evince it, against
all that shall avouch it to be any more the^ a cause of our knowledge. However
seeing every cause is a cause of some effect, or referres to some things
produced or occasioned by it, The question still remains of what effect the
fulfilling of Isaiahs prophecy, or the co^templation of the event which he
foretold, should be the true cause, if it were no cause at all of these Jews
infidelity?

6 The serious contemplation of this Prophets saying after the holy Ghost had
called the^, and the matter which they so have fitted unto our Evangelists
mind, was a true cause why he did cease to wonder at the stupiditie of this
people. For if Isaiah had not long before decyphered their froward and
stubborn disposition, posterity would have suspected either that S. John's
taxation of their stupidity had been more hyperbolicall than true, or else
that our Saviors miracles had not been so all sufficient in themselves, as
the Evangelist makes the^, for winning crede^ce to his doctrine, or respect
unto his person. But seeing nothing breaks forth in this last generation,
whose seeds and roots had not been discovered by Isaias in their forefathers,
this takes away all occasion in posterity to suspect either the truth of S.
John's narration, or sufficiency of our Saviors miracles. No these causall
particles only, as, ut, or, propter, but adversative also, as verunt amen,
sed, do sometimes refer not to any written clause or sentence precedent, or
any matter contained in them, but unto the secret or tacit thoughts of the
writer or speaker, or to some strong affection seeking to vent it self in such
abrupt or unusual language. To begin a speech with nam or veruntamen would be
a ridiculous soloecisme, unless it were by way of decorum in some appointed to
act or utter a ridiculous part. And yet an exquisite Poet did thus begin his
doleful Elegy;

Hic tamen umbrosum nactus nemus, Hieronymus Vida in carmine, cui titulus
Gelelmi Vide et Leonae Oscasalae parentum manib.
hic loca sola
Ne mea quis nimium carpsit lamenta severus.
The particle, Tamen, without soloecisme or breach of Grammar rule, has an
elegant reference to his former thoughts or affections which had been these or
the like; It is an unseemely part for a man of my place and breeding to blubber
and weep for the death of his Parents: notwithstanding seeing the place
affords opportunity, nature shall take her forth for a while. And after this
manner the Psalmist begins the 73. psalm, Veruntamen Bonus est Deus Israel,
Notwithstanding God is good to Israel, This particle referres to his precedent
thoughts or secret disputations with his own heart, which had been these or
the like; Surely God has forgotten his promise unto Israel, or else he never
meant them so much good as he seemed to promise, in that he suffers them to be
trod under feet by their wicked and blasphemous enemies; and in the crisis or
conquest of these and the like cogitations (which he afterward confesses of
himself) he bursts out into the former expression, Notwithstanding God is good
to Israel. And after this manner, these two causall speeches [ut impleretur
ille sermo Isaiae, Joh. 12. Propterea non potuerunt credere etc.] refer to
these or the like precedent cogitations of S. John; Is it possible that men of
Abraham's lineage, that any creatures endued with reason, should not believe,
after so many miracles done in their sight? Yes, I know it to be more then
possible, because the Prophet Isaiah has foretold as much. Yea, but S. John
goes further, and says, they could not believe because Isaiah had foretold
their unbeleife. Yet if we scan his words aright, S. John does not resolve the
impossibility or difficulty of their unbelief into Esaias his prediction
formally taken, but into the hardness of heart which Esaias had foretold. For
so his words are; Therefore they could not believe; because that Esaias said
again, He has blinded their eyes, and her deued their hearts, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart^, and be
converted; and I should he (...). These things spoke Esaias, when he saw his
glory. The most that can be made of these words, the strongest collections that
can be inferred from them, for inferring any divine causality of their
unbeleife, will amount to no more then this; It is not possible that the
greatest part of men in our times should understand many divine truths about
which they dispute, or be wise unto salvation; because it is said by a good
Author, [Wisdome cannot enter into a froward heart.] This speech is Canonically
true of all such men sensu composito, that is, whilst they continue perverse
and froward, but not true iu sensu diviso. for though it were absolutely true,
that it is impossible for wisdom to enter into a froward heart, yet it is
possible for a froward heart to put off frowardness, and for such as are now a
stifnecked and stubborn people in good time to brook the yoke of Christian
obedience.

7 But does this period of S. John [after so many miracles done before them,
they did not believe, that the saying of Esaias might be fulfilled] import no
more than if a man should say, the factious spirits of our times cannot believe
aright, because it is written that wisdom cannot enter into a froward heart?
In Maldonats exposition on this place of S. John, and of that other Mat. 13.
34. etc, this is the utmost value of both allegations [that the Prophets words
do so well fit the eve^ts related by these two Evangelists, as that they could
not fit them better although 'twere granted that it were meant of them alone,
or had been spoken to no other end, than to notify these two events.] Yet if
we may have the liberty to express the Prophets meaning, or to speak
consequently unto the truth it self (acknowledged by all good Christians) or
to some special truths formerly delivered, the prophecy of Isaiah, alleged by
S. John, was in a more peculiar manner fulfilled in the strange infidelity of
the Jews which saw our Saviors miracles, then any Proverbs of Solomon or
other general Maxims can be fulfilled or verified of any misbeleevers in
these our times, either of such as deny Christ in express words, or confessing
him in words deny him in deeds. For the words of Solomon or other moral sayings
of Canonical writers, how well soever they may fit the errors or infidelity of
our times, had no punctual aspect to them, but were uttered as absolute truths
without respect of age, time, or persons, and fit all men and every sort of
men, of what condition, age, or nation soever they be. Whereas the former
forecited prophecy of Isaiah was punctually or literally meant of the Jewish
Nation, which lived after his time unto the destruction of the City and Temple,
and to the return of the Babilonish captivity. For so it follows in the 6.
chap. ver. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed. Then said I, Lord,
how long? And he said, until the cities be wasted without inhabitants, and the
houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate: and the Lord have removed
men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the Land. But
yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return and shall be eaten, as a Teyle
tree and as an Oak, whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves: so
the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. This very prophecy was more
exactly fulfilled in the excecation and obduration of the Jews which did not
believe our Saviors miracles, and in that desolation of Judea which ensued
upon his death. But whether the last part of this prophecy, concerning their
return again to God, shall be as exactly fulfilled in these outcasts of
Israel, future times would better resolve us or such as shall live after us,
then any living interpreter of Scriptures can. With this question S. John
meddles not, but besides that the former part of that prophecy does according
to the literal sense as truly point at this later generation of the Jews, as
at the former: The real event it self or matter of fact foretold was more
conspicuously remarkable in this later generation, then it had been in the
former: For it was a prediction prophetically typical. The first desolation
was such a real type of the later, as Isreal's casting off God from being their
ruler in the time of Samuel, was of that solemn abrenunciation of Christ which
these later Jews made before Pilate, when they cried; We have no King but
Caesar. Or the like desolation was such a Crisis of that deadly disease,
whereof the excecation and obduration mentioned by S. John was the symptom, as
that calamity which befell Judah the next year after Zacharias death was, of
the calamity which befell the whole Nation within forty years after our
Saviors death.

8. So then the particle Vt, neither in this place of S. John, nor in any
other, does ever import any true causality of excecation or obduration on Gods
part or his Prophets; but in this place of S. John, and in every other, where
it is said, [that this or that was done that the Scripture might be fulfilled]
the same particle does always import, that whatsoever was so done, whether
positively or directly by God himself, or with permission of his just
providence, by the positive intentions of Satan or incorrigible stubbornness
of men, was always ordered by God to this end and purpose that posterity might
believe and know, no such event did follow by chance, or that the Prophet did
foretell such events only in general, without special reference unto the
particular events related by the Evangelist. Seeing every final cause is
purposed or projected by some intelligent nature, one and the same particle,
That, or the like, with reference to several projectures, may sometimes denote
a true final cause, sometimes the event or consequent only, in one and the
same proposition; as in that of our Savior Matthew. 23. 34. Some of them you
shall kill and crucify; etc. that upon you may come all the righteous blood
shed upon the earth, The final cause projected by Satan, was to bring
righteous blood upon these Jews, but this was the event or consequent only, no
final cause, of their projects against Gods messengers: But these messengers
were sent by God only to this end, that they might recall his people to their
allegiance; yet this end or purpose did include this condition, that if they
continued or made up the measure of their Fathers stubbornness, they were to
suffer more grievous punishment, then if they had not been forewarned by the
Prophets. In like manner the excecation and obduration of these later Jews was
the mark at which Satan aimed, no true cause (though a necessary consequent)
of their continued abuse of that talent which God had given them; but no final
cause, no cause at all why our Savior did so many miracles amongst them: their
excecation and perdition was from themselves.

9. That Prophecy of Isaiah, and that other of our Saviors Matt. 23. 35. that
upon you may come all the righteous blood, (or as S. Luke has the same
prediction more emphatically,) Verily I say unto you it shall be required of
this generation: both these and the like were conformable to that general rule
delivered by Jeremy, Chap. 18. ver. 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down,
and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And
our Saviors prediction Luke 11. 31. though the words may seem most
peremptory, did implicitly contain or admit the same condition, which he in
another prediction of his to the same effect does express Luke 13. 3. I tell
you nay, but except you repent ye shall all likewise perish, that is, perish
after the same disastrous manner that the Galileans there mentioned, or the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, had perished. Now however the prediction of Isaiah or
Zacharias his imprecation when he dyed; were no true causes of this peoples
infidelity or destruction, yet in as much as what they threatened, though with
this condition and Proviso [Vnlesse they do repent] did so exactly come to
pass, the event is of most concludent proof to us that they spoke by the
Spirit of God; a true cause of our knowledge that they were Prophets indeed,
and that these events were not causuall in respect of their predictions, though
in themselves contingent, or holding the true mean between necessity of
being, and necessity of not being.

10. But the best way to convince them of error, who teach that prophecies are
sometimes said to be fulfilled only by allusion, will be, to declare the
particular manner how these places at which they stumble most, do conclude
what the Evangelists rather intimate, then fully express. For so it was the
will of God, that even the Evangelists themselves should often times only give us
hints for searching out those demonstrations of the spirit, which they
perfectly knew, but would not set down at large, lest this should occasion
sloathfull negligence in succeeding ages, or prevent our admiration at the
exact consonancy between Prophetical predictions and evangelicall narrations.

To conclude this present treatise: it is always more safe for the most
learned expositor of Scriptures to say, [I do not conceive how this or that
allegation does conclude, or how this or that prophecy was exactly fulfilled]
then peremptorily to avouch of any particular alleged by the Evangelist, that
it was no concludent proof but allusive only, because he, or such as he has
read, cannot conceive how it is fulfilled. It is hard for any one man to see or
hear all that has been said or written by others upon any parts of
Scripture, but it may be easy for others that come after, to say somewhat in
arguments of this nature, which no one before had said or observed, yea
somewhat more then the Prophet himself did distinctly foresee, when he spoke
or wrote these very words which the Evangelists say were fulfilled.

CHAP. 16.
Whether the Prophets did always foresee, or explicitly believe, whatsoever
they did foretell, or fore-signifie concerning Christ.
SOme have resolved upon the affirmative part of this problem, not only as
true in it self, but as one special ground of difference between the
Prophets of the Lord, and the Heathen Soothsayers or Diviners, which sometimes
foretold that which afterward proved true, Cap. 16
but without any apprehension of the truth of it. That Heathen Diviners did
sometimes rave, or speak they knew not what, in their divinations, I will not
deny; that they did always thus; is more then I can affirm. However, between
raving predictions and a distinct apprehension or foresight of matters
foretold, there is a greater difference then between staring and being stark
mad. That the Prophets of the Lord did never rave in their predictions, that
they had always a true apprehension of the truth delivered by them, and a
foresight of the events future which they foretold, I rest assured. But that
this foresight should extend to all the branches of truth, which are said to
come to pass, that their sayings might be fulfilled, I see no convincent
argument to persuade me. The contradictory to his assertion, (if any be pleased
to undertake it) we thus infer. The Evangelists and Apostles, or others
enabled to preach the Gospel with power from above, men visibly anointed with
the holy Ghost to this function, were bound to teach no other things than what
had been foretold by Moses and the Prophets. And yet the Evangelists both knew
and taught others to believe many things, which the Mat. 13. 17. For verily I
say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which
ye hear and have not heard the^.
Prophets, even the Sea Lu. 10. 24. For many prophets and Kings have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them etc.
Kingly Prophets, much desired but could not be admitted to see or hear. And
this is a concludent proof, that the Prophets did not always distinctly
foresee or apprehend all things which were foretold by the^, not those events
which the Spirit of God says came to pass that their sayings might be
fulfilled. Otherwise, they must have seen all that the Evangelists saw, have
known all the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, which the Apostles after
our Saviors resurrection knew or taught: but this is directly contradictory to
our Saviors assertion; and whatsoever is contradictory to truth it self must
of necessity be untrue. Wherein then did the Prophets of the Lord differ from
heathen Soothsayers or raving Diviners?

2. He that can make a good construction of what he speaks or writes, cannot
be said to rave, albeit he know not the issue or full importance of things
uttered by him. Caiaphas did not rave when he said, it was expedient that one
man should die for the people rather then all should perish. Yet was he no
Prophet, although (as S. John tells us) he did in this speech prophecy. For he
did not intend or take upon him to foretell any unusual matter or divine
mystery, but only give his political advise or placet concerning the business
then in hand. Any worldly wiseman might have spoken as wisely as he did. That
his speeches then did prove so happily ominous as they did, this was merely
from the extraordinary disposition of divine providence. He neither spoke as
heathen Diviners did when they raved, nor as the Prophets of the Lord used to
speak whenever they foretold things to come in the name of the Lord. For
they always had a true intention to foretell such things, and to give
assurance unto the people that whatsoever they foretold in the name of the Lord
should come to pass, whether their predictions were for form expressly
disjunctive; or whether they were absolute and peremptory, that is, not charged
with conditions, exceptions, or Provisoes either implicit or explicit.
Somewhat then they always expressly foresaw, as often as they took upon them
to foretell or foreshew things to come, but seldom did they know all which
came to pass, that their saying might be fulfilled.

3. The Problem proposed cannot be distinctly resolved without a review of the
different ways or manner how things future were foretold by the Prophets. Now
of divine testimonies or predictions some were merely prophetical, others
prophetically typical, and both these stemmes again did divide themselves
into more branches. Some predictions merely prophetical were delivered in a
plain grammatical or historical sense of words, others in terms
allegorical or enigmaticall. Of such predictions merely prophetical as are
expressed in the plain grammatical or historical sense of words, some did
refer to one matter or fact, or to some determinate point of time, and in the
intention of the holy Ghost were to be but once fulfilled. Others according to
the same literal sense were to be fulfilled (sometimes in the same; sometimes
in a different measure) oftener than once, at diverse times, and in several
ages. Of such predictions as were to be but once fulfilled, and that according
to the plain literal sense, this affirmative is universally true; [The
Prophets had always a distinct knowledge or apprehension of the sum or
substance of the events which are said to come to pass that their saying might
be fulfilled.] Search all the predictions of our Saviors Incarnation,
Nativity, Circumcision, of his Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension. Whatsoever
places in the Prophets do literally refer to these points, were to be but
once fulfilled. For our Savior was to be but once incarnate, but once to be
borne, to die but once, to be raised from death once for all. Now if the
Prophets which did literally foretell these things, had not distinctly
foreseen the substance (at least) of these Evangelicall mysteries, they must
either have raved in their predictions (as it is presumed the heathen prophets
or Apollo's priests used to do) or else have foretold them only after such a
manner as Caiaphas did foretell his death. And the fulfilling of their
prophecies, though according to their plain literal assertive sense, could
not prove them to have been Prophets properly so called, that is, men endowed
with the true spirit of divination. For no man I think will say, that Caiaphas
was thus qualified, although he prophesied in some sort of our Saviors death.

Jeremy surely did foresee that the promised seed should be conceived of a pure
Virgin, when he uttered that prophecy chap. 31. 22. So did Esaias foresee, that
the Messiah, whom they continually expected, should be despised of many, should
be a man of sorows, should dye and rise again, when he uttered that Prophecy
chap. 35. v. 3. But we have not the like inducement to believe that he did so
distinctly apprehend that the expected Messiah should be brought up in
Nazareth, although this was foretold by him, chap. 11. 1. not in the plain
literal sense, but enigmatically.

4 Where the prediction, according to the plain literal sense, was in the
intention of the holy Ghost to be oftener fulfilled than once, the Prophet which
foretold it, did always distinctly foresee the eve^t in the first place
foretold, or the first fulfilling of his own predictio^. There is not the like
necessity for us to believe or think that he had the like distinct foresight or
apprehensio^ of those events in which one and the selfsame prophecy was the
second, third, or fourth time to be fulfilled. Esaias distinctly foresaw the
future inclination of these Jews by their present disposition to draw near to
God with their lips and be far from him in their hearts, and that their
hypocrisy (if continued) would work their destruction; otherwise he had but
raved, or but spoken by guess, but that the matter of this his reproof or
Prophetical admonition should be more exactly fulfilled of the Jews six
hundred years after his time, as it was; we cannot determine whether he did
foresee this or no. In that vision made unto him, chapter the 6. he distinctly
foresaw this peoples pronesse to wink withtheir eyes, and to harden their
hearts unto their own destruction and desolatio^ of their Country; and out of
his distinct foresight hereof, he did deliver his message in an imperative
sense, excaeca, obdur a, make blind their eyes and harden their hearts, which
in the prophetical use of these words is usually as much (but no more) as if
he had said, I am commanded to forewarne you of such a spirit of slumber and
hardness of heart now creeping upon you, that (unless you repent) your Cities
shall be desolate, etc. But albeit we resume what we formerly granted, and
cannot now deny, that Esaias had a distinct apprehension of our Saviors death
and resurrection; yet whether he had the like distinct apprehension or
foresight of that excecation and obduration of his people, which did presage
the second desolation of Jerusalem and destruction of the second Temple, as he
had of the former made by Nebuchadnezzar, is questionable. And the more
probable part of the question is, that he had not. Of the return of Judah from
the Babylonish Captivity Esaias (as appears from the 6. chapter) had a true
prenotion: yet neither so full nor distinct as the Prophet Jeremy had, when he
saw the Captivity come upon them. For from the book of Jeremy, not of Isaiah,
Daniel (a Prophet no way inferior to either of them) learned the distinct time
of his captived peoples return to their own Land. As for the time of the
second Temples destruction, or for the destruction of it at all: that Daniel
did neither learn from the prophecy of Isaiah or of Jeremy, or of any books
before extant; for it was revealed unto him immediately from the Author of
truth himself, and after such a manner as that we cannot reasonably imagine,
either the substance or circumstance of what was then revealed, to have been
known to any Prophet before him. And yet it is true, that diverse prophecies
both of Isaiah and of Jeremy were more exactly fulfilled in the desolation of
Judah by Titus, than they had been fulfilled in the former desolation by
Nebuchadnezzar.

5 But predictions prophetically typical (as well as testimonies merely
prophetical) were of two sorts. In some such predictions the plain literal
sense did fit the antitype as well as it did the type; as in the prediction
before mentioned. I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a son; and
in the like Psalm. 72. In others the literal inscriptio^ did fit the type only
according to the plain literal or logical sense; and the antitype only in
the moral or symbolicall sense. Of both sorts it is true that the Prophets
always had a view or apprehension of that which was immediately foretold,
according to the literal sense or of the first fulfilling of it; the case is
the same as it was in testimonies merely prophetical. But of that which was
immediately signified not by words but by some matter of fact or historical
event, whereto the words in the literal sense immediately refer, of such
second events, or of the fulfilling of the Prophecy both according to the
literal and mystical sense, the Prophets had not always a distinct foresight
or apprehensio^. Such as they sometimes had, was by extraordinary privilege or
dispensation, it was no necessary appendix of the ordinary gift of prophecy;
less appendant thereon than the prenotion or foresight of the second or third
event was upon the foresight or apprehension of the first. For in that case the
same prophecy, though often fulfilled, was yet always fulfilled only
according to a fuller importance or growth of the same literal sense, without
the intervention or mixture of any matter of fact which could properly be called
a real type or map of that which afterward happened. As, if the Prophet Isaiah
did not by virtue of the ordinary gift of the Spirit foresee the second or
third remarkable fulfilling of that prophecy; This people draw near me with
their lips, but are far from me in their hearts; it is less probable that
the Prophet Jeremy should foresee the second or more exact accomplishment of
that Prophecy: Behold the day is come (says the Lord) that they shall no more
say the Lord lives which brought the children of Israel out of the Land of
Egypt; but the Lord lives, which brought up the house of Israel out of the
North Country: etc. Ierem. 23. 7, 8. For in the second fulfilling of this
prophecy, besides the improveme^t or sublimation of the literal sense, there
was an intervention of matter of fact or type.

6 Again, if it be doubtful whether the Prophets had always or for the most
part such a distinct foresight of the antitype as they had of the type, or if
it be more probable that they had no such apprehensio^ of the antitype, when
the literal sense of their words did (though in a different degree) truly fit
both; then is there no probability that they should foresee the second
accomplishment of such prophecies as no way reach the antitype in the plain
literal or grammatical sense, but by symbolicall or Emblematicall importance.
Isaiah, no doubt, had a clear foresight of Eliakims admission into Shebnah's
office, whose deposition he likewise foresaw: But that he foreknew the harmony
between the deposition of Shebnah (which he knew would shortly be fulfilled)
and the rejection of the Jewish Rulers, or between Eliakims advancement and
our Saviors exaltation after his resurrection, we have no probable inducement
to believe; but inducements many to persuade us that the foreknowledge of
things thus foreprophecied and foreshadowed, was for the most part reserved
unto the holy Spirit, not imparted to the Prophets, who in foretelling or
foreshadowing the antitype were for the most part his Organs only, though his
Agents in the prediction of the type, and did engage their credits only for the
first fulfilling of the Prophecies or for their fulfilling in general. Of the
difference betwixt the knowledge of the Spirit of God, and the Prophets whom he
did employ in representation of mysteries to come, we may have a
proportionable scale in the difference betwixt the extraordinary Herald, or
other inventor of such devices as they give, and the ordinary Painter. An
ordinary Scholar that should see a painted Eclipse of the sun with this
inscriptio^, totio^ adimit quo ingrata refulget, would easily apprehend that
this word ingrata refers to the Moon; but what ingratitude or ungrateful
person the Moon in this devise should represent, that he could not learn
from skill in painting but from the history of the times, or from the Author of
this devise, which (to my remembrance) was an Italian Prince, who had been
brought under a cloud, much prejudiced in his honor and fortunes by an
unthankful plant of his stock, whom his favor and countenance had advanced
to the dignity of a Cardinal. Or if one should entreat a skillful Painter to
represent three small vessels in the same river, distant one from another near
upon the same line, one of the^ using the furtherance of oars and wind to go
speedily against the stream, another the benefit of oars to outrunne the
stream, and a third in the middle moving neither swiftlier nor slowlier then
the stream it self does, with this motto or inscription, videor occursari
utrisque, the ingrosser of this devise from his own experience would easily
conceave the truth of the inscription in the grammatical or natural
construction of the words, and might conjecture in general, that they imported
somewhat more than a bare representation of what we see by daily experience
verified of things floating in the water. For whilst we row swiftly by them,
we think they come against us, when they go the same way which we do, but
more gently. And this is the condition of such men in our times as will not
combine with factions spirits, either with such as by help of Arts and other
potency directly oppose the truth, or such as follow it with furious zeal or
indiscretion. He that seeks to hold the middle course betwixt these opposites,
regulating as well his affections as his opinions by the placide current of the
water of life, neither striving against it, nor seeking to outrunne it, shall
be thought to oppose both parties and come in danger of being crushed between
them. But this moral is more then the ingrosser of such a devise could
apprehend, without further instruction then the review of his own work, or the
grammatical sense of the inscription (suppose he understood Latin) would
afford him. Now the Prophets in many cases were but the ingrossers of such
visions or representations of mysteries to come, as the holy Ghost did dictate
unto them, whether by word or matter of fact, or both ways. The full
importance of many such representations neither was, nor could be revealed,
save only by him which had the spirit of prophecy not by measure.

7. If Enoch, Moses, Elias and the whole fellowship of Prophets which foretold
our Saviors coming (whether first or second) had been spectators of all his
miracles, or eare-witnesses of all his words; every one of them would have
learned more from him, then all of them knew before. Each of them would have
been able to make better construction of one another words, then any of the^,
without his interpretatio^s, could have made of his own. It is a lamentable
negligence in many interpreters, not to observe or seek after the manifest
proofs which our Savior gave of his immense prophetic spirit, from which,
for the most part, they gather only moral doctrines and uses. For that saying
though delivered by Authors not Canonical, is yet canonical and universally
true, Never spoke man like this man. And thus he spoke as well in
interpretation of prophetical predictions or legal Ceremonies, as in his
expositions of the moral Law.

8. Briefly then, if we had no better interpreter of the Prophets then the
Prophets themselves, or no clearer apprehension of the mysteries now exhibited
then they had when they foretold them; this would be sufficient to confirm
our faith, that they spoke by the Spirit of God; more then sufficient to leave
us without excuse, if we should not glorify Christ as God: but when it is said
that we are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, the meaning
is nor, that we are bound to ground our faith only upon the actual
apprehensions or intentions of the Prophets and Apostles, but especially upon
the intent and meaning of the sacred Spirit by whom they spoke and were
inspired. For (as I said before) they were sometimes or in some respects his
agents, in others his Organs only: Nor are we bound to believe, that his
inspirations or instructions, such as concern the particular point whereto
they spoke, were always comprehended by those that were plentifully inspired
by him. For his inspirations were often times more plentiful then their capacity
was, and yet the overflow not spilt, but plentifully diffused to afterages in
matter of fact or historical event, Cap. 17
if we do not so much conte^plate these in themselves, as the sweet
disposition of them by the divine All-seeing Providence.

Lastly, in those places of prophetical predictions which admit either
amphibology of construction, or equivocall sense of words, or both, it was not
necessary that the Prophets themselves should distinctly apprehend both
constructions or senses, but only that which they intended; and yet their
sayings might be and have been fulfilled in both. Yet this last branch of the
resolution of the former question will bring forth another; whether the
prophecies of the Scriptures without prejudice to their sacred truth admit
amphibologies, or equivocall literal senses.

CHAP 17.
Whether divine prophecies or predictions concerning Christ may admit
amphibologies, or ambiguous senses.
WEre I in this place to meddle with the manner of Christ's presence in the
Sacrament (a point which in due time and place will come to be discussed in
these Commentaries:) I should surely balke that saying of S. Peter Acts 3. 21.
(...) etc. that is, in our reading, Whom the Heavens must receive or contain
until the time of restitution. This one place, in some men's judgments, will
sufficiently conclude for us in that great controversy concerning Christ's
transubstantiall, or consubstantiall presence in the Sacrament. For if the
heavens must contain his body or humane nature until the time of restitution;
he neither is nor can be present (according to this nature) in the Sacrament,
whilst it is celebrated here on earth. But to this allegation the Lutherane
long since has shrewdly replied, by making a quite contrary construction of
the words alleged, without alteration of any letter or point, though not
without some amphibologie in the whole sentence, besides an equivocall or
double signification of one word. First then it cannot be denied that the words
forecited may, without violencence to any rule of grammar, be construed as if
they were thus transposed (...), that it, He must receive the Heavens, rather
then the Heavens him. And (...) without fraud or covin may import as much as to
take the possession or government of heaven, which our Savior after his
resurrection did, and is to retain both possession and dominion of heaven and
all things else, until the time of restitution whereof S. Peter there speaks.
Plutar: in vita Camil:
For so Camillus is said by a good Author (...), to have received the city,
that is to have taken the government of it upon him. And the Hebraisme, whereof
the Greek in the new testament has for the most part some tincture or
relish, is not averse from this interpretation. For so says the Psalmist
speaking (I take it) by way of prophetical type, of our Saviors exaltation;
When I shall receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly. Psalm. 75. 2. Now
our Saviors receiving of Heaven and of the world it self, in this sense is
without interruption, without dispensation; for he is perpetual Governor of
it. But that Heaven does so indispensably receive or contain our Saviors body
or humane nature, that he may not at any time go or be out of it, until the
time of restitution or the last day, is more then any man safely may affirm.
Surely he was present with S. Paul and was seen by him after another manner,
then he is present with or seen by the Lutheranes or Papists in their
Sacraments. And how erroneous soever their doctrines concerning the manner of
Christ's presence in the Sacrament be, this text can be of no great use to
refute them.

2. Yet some have replied upon the Lutheran, that by the forecited
interpretation of this Text, they make S. Peter (a most sacred Writer
doubtless) to speak in the language of Ashdod, as ambiguously as Apollo
(whilst he did best deserve or brook the style of (...)) ever did in his
heathenish oracles. But this reply, with what eloquence soever it might be
pressed upon the Lutherans, may by them be as easily, and yet as forcibly
retorted upon such as make it. For if it be a fault to grant that these sacred
oracles may admit amphibologies, or a scandal to give such interpretations as
may occasion others thus to conceive of them: the fault and scandal (for ought
I conceive) must be equally divided between the Lutheran interpreters and
their opposites. For if either would yield to other in their interpretations of
this text, either for the right placing or construction of the words, or for
the various signification of one and the same word, there could be no scandal
given or taken. He in this case gives the greatest scandal, (if a scandal it
be to grant Amphibologies in prophetical or Apostolical writings,) who is
most peremptory in his own opinion, or faster wedded to the interpretations of
his own sect or faction. For my self, (I thank God) I can with patience and
christian charity permit either party to embrace their own interpretation of
this place, being fully resolved that to grant either amphibologicall or
equivocall senses or both in one, and the same sentence whether of moral or
prophetical writings, can be no prejudice to that sacred esteem, which all
men ought to have and may have of them. And he that will take upon him to
distinguish the dictates of the holy Ghost from the answers of Apollo (...),
by this division or difference, that the one did admit ambiguous constructions
(whether for amphibologies or equivocall senses) which the other does not
admit, shall in this doing neither much prejudice the heathen Apollo, nor much
magnify the Oracles of God.

3. To the objection we are to answer anon. Our position for the present is,
that many passages as well in the Prophets, as other sacred oracles, may and
do admit both Amphibologies and ambiguous senses, and that the same prophecies
are often times fulfilled according to both senses: that in the interpretation of
moral precepts, which are ambiguous, we do not offend, unless we choose the
sinister or less safe part in our practice. It is so in this case, as in
doubtful opinions: the one part is usually more safe to be followed in
practice then the other, although there be no absolute resolution whether is
speculatively more true. As suppose it to be equally probable on both sides,
whether tithes be due Iure divino, or no: yet it would be the safer way for
every man to pay his tithes as duly, as if he were fully resolved that they
were due by Gods peremptory Law. For so long as any doubt remains, whether
they be due by Gods Law or no; the detaining of them cannot by any humane law
be made ex fide, Romans 14. 23.
it is (...), and whatsoever is so, is (in our Apostles sense) a most grievous
sin. But to proceed in our assertion.

4. Two grave and learned Angelomus and Rupertus.
writers in their times (and their times were ancient in respect of ours) have
observed an Amphibologie in the directions which Samuel gave to Saul (from Gods
own mouth questionless) 1 Samuel 10. 8. Thou shall go down before me to
Gilgal, and behold I will come down unto thee to offer burnt offerings, and to
sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shall thou tarry till I
come to thee, and show thee what I will do. It was Saul's misfortune, shall I
say, or misdemeanour to make choice of the worse part of that double
construction which these words may admit, for this Amphibologie was not in
scripto, but in words uttered, though afterward committed to writing. Reason
might have taught Saul, that if the war were undertaken, it was to be
administered likewise by the counsel of the Lord; and therefore he did
foolishly in adventuring to offer sacrifice or do any other solemn act,
before the Prophet (who was the Lords Ambassador in this business) came unto
him. Although it be said Chap. 13. ver. 8. That he tarryed seven days,
according to the time set by Samuel, yet in this doing surely he did not as
Samuel appointed him to do: otherwise Samuel had done more foolishly of the
two. He stayed then the just measure of that time which Samuel had appointed,
but he did not observe the season, the end, or purpose which Samuel had
appointed. The seven days were appointed him to offer solemn sacrifice, and
if he had not digressed from Samuels direction herein, the seven days of
sacrifice had been his solemn inauguration to the Kingdom, as may with
probability be gathered from the 13. verse of the 13. Chapter. Samuel said to
Saul, thou have done foolishly: thou have not kept the Commandment of the Lord
thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would the Lord have established thy
Kingdom upon Israel for ever.

5. To admit either an Amphibologie in sentences by mutual transposition of
words or clauses, or ambiguous signification of words by changing of points,
can be no greater disparagement to the sacred authority of the original Text,
then the equivocall or ambiguous signification of the same word without any
alteration of points or letter, would occasion; if either sort of ambiguities
did justly minister any such occasion at all. Now that the selfsame word, or
words, may in one and the same sentence admit ambiguous and much different
significations, no man that reads the Scriptures with as much diligence or
observance as reverence, can make question. There is no difference at all
betwixt Christians and Jews, much less amongst the Christians themselves,
about letters or points in the 8. Psalm in that verse especially. Thou have
made him little lower then the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and
honor. This word little admits two senses grammatically much different, and
yet must respectively be interpreted according to the full purport of both.
This Psalm by the title and inscription is a Psalm of David, and bears the
character of David's pen: The subject or matter of it is thanksgiving to God for
his extraordinary favor unto man above all other visible creatures. That which
raised his thoughts to such an high pitch, and his expressions of them in such
a lofty Prophetical strain as he here uses, was his serious contemplation
of the beauty of these Heavenly bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc, all
which he knew to be the works of Gods own hand: and yet he saw them nothing
so much regarded by him as man, even the meanest of men Enosh or Ben Adam. The
heavens indeed were far above men in situation or place; but man was further
above them in dignity, than he was below the Angels or Celestial Creatures
Elohim. Now if we respect only the plain literal sense of the Psalmists
speech, or consider it as it reflects only upon the history of the first
creation, the Hebrew (...) is an adverbe of quantity, and is rightly rendered by
the Latin paulo or aliquantulum, as it is most true, that man by the gift of
creation was little lower than the Angels, being true Lord and King of this
inferior world. But most Psalmists (David especially) whilst they contemplate
the sacred Histories of times past, not as Politicians do histories soecular,
but as vates praeteritorum, as men rapt with Gods goodness toward their
Forefathers, become withal vates futurorum, true Prophets of better things to
come. In this admiration of man's first estate which was now lost, David had a
view or glimpse of his restoration to it, or a better: Whatsoever his thoughts
or apprehensions for the present were, his expressions by disposition of divine
providence, reached the manner of man's restitution to it, as they do the first
estate it self from which we fell. And in respect of this mystical sense the
same Hebrew (...) without any alteration at all, is an adverbe of time, and is
most divinely rendered by our Apostle Heb. 2. 5, 6. etc. Unto the Angels has he
not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak, but one in a
certain place testified saying, What is man that thou art so mindful of him,
or the son of man that thou visitest him? Thou made him lower for a little
while than the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and did set
him over the works of thy hands. Thou have put all things under his feet,
etc. His inference is admirable: For albeit the former words, thou have made
him but a little lower than the Angels, were literally true of the first man
Adam, yet were they not verified in any son of Adam. Nor were the words
following thou have given him dominion over the works of thy hands etc, ever
fulfilled either in the first man, or in any other creature; nor can they in
their exquisite sense be applied to any beside the second Adam, or son of man
(...). He is now Lord of all, all things are subject to him, even as he is the
son of man. And that he might be thus crowned with glory and honor, and
bring his brethren (miserable men, and the sons of miserable men) unto glory,
he was for a while to be made lower than the Angels through the sufferings of
death, as our Apostle has it ver. 9. But to be made lower than the Angels
after this manner, was to be made a great deal lower than they or the meanest
of men, as the son of man was, though but for a little time.

6 But the utmost extent of that variety of senses which may arise either from
the different signification of one and the same word, or from amphibologie of
construction, from diversity of points or change of letters, is not infinite.
And if we should examine all the possible changes of points or letters which
the Rabbis or others imagine, there will not appear any such difference,
throughout the whole Bible, for the quality or morality of the several
senses thus occasioned, as the alteration of one point often does in secular
writings: not any such as was in that ambiguous answer, which a Bishop of this
Land sometimes gave to a wicked proposal, Edvardum occidere nolite timere
bonum est, Had be pointed this saying as it might have been pointed, his
counsel had been good and Ghostly, but leaving the pointing of it to their
discretion which asked his resolution, his dealing was impious and diabolical.
But the Founder of an Abbey did leave this inscription upon the frontispice
thus rightly pointed Porta patens esto: nulli claudatur honesto: The turning of
one point out of his place thus, Porta patens esto nulli: claudatur honesto,
did turn the Abbot (as the tradition is) out of his place. Sicque anum ob
punctum perdit Robertus Asylum. But the variety of pointing or changing
letters, which has been by diverse imagined in the Hebrew, exposes no man to
the like danger, can give no countenance to any lewd or wicked practices. A
various reading may sometimes hinder or incumber the true mystical or
spiritual sense; it never depraveth the moral sense: and oftimes again it
furthereth the true and mystical sense. As that place of Jeremy chap. 25. ver.
38. is very ambiguous and variously rendered by diverse good interpreters. Some
read, the Land shall be desolate because of the fierceness of the Grecian; as
if Greece had taken the name of Ionia from the Hebrew Jonah, which is the word
used in that place. Others, and those of good note, read, because of the
fierceness of the Dove; most of modern writers read, because of the
fierceness of the oppressor, or Tyrant. The participle or the verbal (as some
good Hebricians observe) is both active and passive, either an oppressor or an
oppressed. From the passive signification the Dove has its name in the Hebrew,
because it is so simple a creature, exposed to oppression, without active
ability to oppress others. Howsoever we translate it in this place or in the
like Ierem. 46. 16. there will be no danger in the moral sense, nor no
controversy about the fulfilling of this prophecy in Nebuchadnezzar, who was
no Dove for disposition, unless it were for his folly after his conquest of
Egypt and the neighbor countries.

7 Yet dare I not condemn the vulgar Thus to think of the vulgar translation
Fagius his testimony of the translator persuades me upon the 8. verse of the 4.
chap. of Genes. Thargum Hierosolymitanum consentit cum Latina v^dgata editione,
sic enim habet, Et dixit Cain ad Hebel fratrem suum, veni, egrediamur for as,
sive in agnum, etc. Quod propterea huc adsere, ne quis temere, et impudenter
vulgatam editionem Lat nam rideat, exibilet explodat, atque plane condemnet,
sicubi illam a veritate hebraica for^e dissen^ire invenerit. Hoc enim fere,
deprehendo, quod ubi ea veritatem hebraicam non sequitur, aut septuaginta, ^ut
Thargum Onkeli vel Ionathae, aut Hierosolymitanum, aut aliquem ex
Commentatoribus Hebraeorum sequitur. Adeo, ut ejus translationis author
quisquis fuerit, non temere ex suo capite finxerit, si qua inre a textu
hebraico discrepare videtur. Fagius in translat. praecip. vet. testam. collat.
p. 22.
translation, or some ancient Interpreters who follow the vulgar, or the same
translation which the vulgar makes: Neither of them (as in charity I presume)
being ignorant, that the words may bear the same translation which the most
now follow. Both of them might have better reasons of the two known senses
which the original might well bear, to choose that sense which they embrace,
than I have to approve the contrary. For however the Dove be a silly impotent
creature in it self, yet was it a nursing mother (as some ancient writers say)
unto Semiramis that great Foundresse of Babylon, and was the royal ensign of
the Babylonish Empire, sometimes as terrible to the Eastern Nations, as the
Roman Eagles were to the Western. And it is not unusual even for sacred
writers, to decipher the tyrannical or revenging power of greatest
Soveraignties by their Ensigns, whether these were by nature terrible or
weak. And thus our Savior himself describes the sagacity and potency of the
Roman forces by their Ensigns. This latter reading a facie columbae does much
better characterize the swiftness of Nebuchadnezzars coming upon the
Egyptians, and the necessity of the Jews speedy flight from out that Land,
than if we read from the face, or wrath of the oppressor, or (as the seave^tie
have it) from the mighty sword. The Prophet in that 46. cap. v. 16. implies,
that unless they take their flight in time, they should wish, when it was too
late, that they had wings like a Dove to fly away and be at rest. The Author
of the vulgar Latin differs in many places from our modern translations, not
out of ignorance of the different senses which the original might bear, but
out of choice. And although he sometimes err, yet for the most part Caus^^
habet error honestas, he had some probable reason so to err: nor does the
error, howsoever occasioned, induce any dangerous depravation either of the
moral or prophetical sense. Sometimes he aims at some further mystery, then
the contrary reading which the Hebrew (supposing it were always pointed, as
now we have it) will reach unto. There is as great a difference in the reading
of one or two words, without alteration of any consonant, in the last verse of
the second Chapter of Isaiah, betwixt the vulgar translation and ours, as in
any place which I have observed. That verse we read. Cease ye from man, whose
breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of? And thus we
read it upon supposition that the original -- (...) was thus pointed. The
vulgar Latin (according to Forerius his eme^dation of it) thus, Quiescite ergo
ab homine, cujus spiritus in naribus ejus est: quia excelsus reputatus est
ipse: and thus both he and the former vulgar read it, presuming that the
original word was not (...) but (...). I refer the determination of this
various reading to accurate and unpartiall Critics of the Hebrew dialect.
Sometimes it signifies the high places appointed for Gods service, as 1 Samuel 9.
13, 14. and Deuteronomy. 32. 13. it signifies the excellency or choice places of the
earth.
For mine own part, I must confess, the material circumstances of the text
may in line unto that reading which the vulgar follows, and S. Ierom approves,
yea is very zealous for it. But it may be questioned, whether the original
Bamah do usually, or in any other place besides this, denote the height or
dignity of any man's person or place, though it be the usual word for
expressing those high places which were dedicated unto Idols. But this question
I submit to the same reference with the former more general. It suffices that
there is no harm in either sense.

8. However if the oracles of God do admit such amphibologies or various
senses, as these places last alleged by us do; why do we Christians blame
the heathen Oracles for giving doubtful or ambiguous answers? or wherein do
the Scriptures afford more manifest documents of a divine spirit speaking in
them, if prophetical oracles be as ambiguous for the sense, as the oracles of
Apollo were? It was not amphibologie or equivocation simply considered, but the
artificial or meditated contrivance of ambiguous or ^^^ivocall senses after
they had been consulted concerning businesses already set on foot and in
agitation, which did convince the heathen oracles of delusion. Had that
ambiguous answer [Ato te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse,] been given by the
Oracle (unconsulted) two or three hundred years before Pyrrhus his birth or
the Roman Empires growth unto that mediocritie, which in Pyrrhus days it had,
the very prediction of such equipoize between the house of Aeacu^ and of
Rom^lus, or of such doubtful conflicts as happened between the Epiroteans and
the Romans, would have been a good proof of a divine inspiration; no
presumption of delusion, on which side soever success had taken. Or if the
like ambiguous oracle (...), had been delivered, unsought after, as long
before the birth of Craesus as that Prophecy of Isaiah cap. 45. 1. etc. was
before Cyrus was conceived, before he could think of God, or be thought of by
men;) Whatsoever in the issue had become of Craesus, the foretelling of his
name, and manner of expedition against Cyrus, would have argued a spirit truly
prophetical, though not so distinctly prophetical or sublime, as that spirit
was by which Isaiah conceived the forementioned prophecy concerning Cyrus. But
seeing the Oracle was dumb until Cyrus was in arms against the Babilonians
and their confederates, until victory did hover betwixt two mighty adversaries
without expressing of her inclination to either, both of them being so deeply
engaged that the one (even in politic conjecture) was to have a mighty fall;
the contrivance of this answer in such doubtful and ambiguous terms, argues
it to have been conceived by the spirit which has proffered his service and
assistance to later Popes, when they were consulted upon like occasions.

Now seeing our sacred Oracles were given many hundred of years before the
events fore^old by them, and since exhibited, had any seminall cause or
observable Original out of which they were to grow: the greater the variety
of their senses or constructions is, the more admirable proof does their
accomplishment exhibit of that infinite wisdom, which did dictate them unto
the Prophets, especially of one and the same Oracle in process of time be
verified or fulfilled according to two or more possible constructions, or in
senses which may seem contrary or much different. After this manner was that
forementioned Prophecy Ierem. 23. 6. 8. fulfilled; first in the ordinary and
usual sense, in the peoples return from Caldaea and those Northern
Countries, through which they had been dispersed: and about five hundred
years after, or from the time of our Saviors death, the same prophecy was
accomplished again in the most exquisite literal sense, and according to the
primevall signification of one and the same word, [(...)] yet these From the
North land, and from the land of darkness.
two senses in which this Scripture was fulfilled, though different, were not
contrary, but subordinate.

9. That place of the Prophet Isaiah chap. 19. ver. 18. is subject to the like
variety of reading or doubtful sense, not by substitution of one or two
points for others, but by the mistaking of one consonant for another being very
like unto it, as of Mem for Samech. The Prophet, no doubt did write and intend
Cherez not Cherem, for it had been Verbum male o^inatum an ill abodance, if
the first of these five Egyptian Cities, which were to speak the language of
Canaan, should be called the City of destruction. It was to all of them matter
of glory to become subjects to Christ's Kingdom, and it was the glory of this
one above the rest, that it should be the first participant of this glory. For
this word [(...)] without any alteration of letter or point, does signify
sometimes the first as well as one, because one is the first in numbers. Now
the first of these Cities did never so well brook its ancient name of
Heliopolis, that is, the City of the Sun, by which it was known amongst the
Heathens, as when it was enlightened by the Sun of righteousness, and yet
this splendor, through its inhabitants default, was not perpetual: for, as I
take it, before S. Hieroms time, it was become the city of destruction or
desolation, having turned Gods blessing (as many others did) into a curse. And
this alteration or change might be truly characterized in the substitution of
one letter for another; whether that happened by the negligence of transcribers
or otherwise. For (as it is In a sermon entitule^ [Nazareth and Bethleam]
toward the later end, and in a treatise of the holy Catholic Church.
elsewhere observed) those things which be aequivoca a casu, in respect of men,
are aequivoca a consilio with reference to the divine providence, which though
it never cause the errors of men, yet does it order and moderate them.

10. It is doubtful (as some good writers observe) whether the Prophet Zachary
cap. 11. 13. did write (...) or (...) that is the Potter or the treasury. That
hebrew Rabbi, whom Vatablus amongst other good Christian writers approves, is
of opinion, that he wrote, (...) and that the letter Iod was added by
negligence of transcribers. Admitting his conjecture to be true, yet it no way
disparageth the sincerity of the Hebrew text, but rather occasioneth a greater
admiration of the all-seeing Providence of the Author of Scriptures, in
representing that devolution of the price of blood (which Judas rete^dred unto
the high Priest) from the sacred treasury, (unto which such brogues or escheats
as this, were by ordinary course due) unto the buying of the Potters field. It
is but one and the same branch of divine providence, thus to turn the
negligence of transcribers to the setting forth of his wisdom, and to divert
the wicked intentions of men unto the manifestation of his justice and
goodness.

11. Sometimes again one and the same original word may have contrary
significations, and have another to parallel it in its contrariety. So the
Hebrew Kalal in its abstract or first signification answers to the Latin
elevare to be light or of no weight: and hence according to the variety of the
matter or subject whereto it is applyable, it sometimes imports vility or
contempt, and sometime exaltation or advancement. If we value the first
signification of it as it is applyable to the balance or just scale, to be
elevated or discovered to be light implies no good, but evil. Yet to be lifted
up or exalted above others, not in just balance, but whiles things compared
stand upon their own bottom or Center, includes matter of glory, or
praeeminence. The Hebrew Cabad which in its prime signification is contrary to
Kalal, and punctually answers to the Latin Grave esse, or (in our English) to
be weighty, heavy, or sway downwards, so long as the comparison stands betwixt
things weighed in just balance, argues matter of better value or preeminence.
And hence it is that one and the same word which in its prime signification
imports weight or heaviness, in the next metaphorical or translated sense
imports praise, honor, or glory: yet if we take it out of the balance and set
it in some other special reference, it implies depression, disgrace, or
ignominy. Now according to the two contrary significations of each of these
words, whose prime significations are directly contrary, that prophecy of
Isaiah cap. 9. ver. 1. was exactly fulfilled. (...) Primo tempore alleviata est
terra Zabulon and terra Nepthali: and novissimo aggravata est via maris trans
Iordanem Galilaea gentium. Populus qui ambulabat in tenebris, vidit lucem
magnam. So the old vulgar reads it; but according to Forerius, thus, Primo
tempore vilis fuit terra Zabulon, and terra Nepthalin, and novissimo honorata
fuit, via maris trans Iordanem Galilaea gentium. Populus qui ambulabat in
obscuro, vidit lucem magnam. Zabulon and Nepthali in our Prophets time had
been waighed, as Balshazzar afterward was, in the balance, and were found
too light. They were the first which were swept away by the rod of Ashur, and
led Captives into a strange Land. Yet wore they the first into whom the Gospel
of the Kingdom was preached by our Savior himself: and so the former
prophecy which had been in our Prophets time fulfilled of them according to
the prime signification of the Hebrew Kalal, which is to be vile or light, was
in our Saviors time fulfilled of them according to the second importance of
the same word, which is, to be exalted or advanced; and according to the first
translated sense or metaphorical signification of Cabad which is to be
honorable or glorious. The former fulfilling of this prophecy ye have in the
sacred history 2 Kings 15. 29. In the days of Pekah King of Israel came
Tiglath Pileser King of Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abelbethmaachash and
Ianoah, and Kedesh, and Haz^r, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the Land of
Nepthali, and carried them captive to Assyria.

12. The second fulfilling of it is exactly related by S. Matthew chap. 4. ver.
12, 13. etc. Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he
departed into Galilee: and leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum
which is upon the Sea coast in the borders of Zabulon and Nepthali: that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the Prophet saying. The Land of
Zabulon and the Land of Nepthali, by the way of the Sea beyong Jordan, Galilee
of the Gentiles; The people which sat in darkness, saw great light, and
tathem which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up, But as
Zabulon and Nepthali changed their minds or opinion of Christ, whom at first
they honored; so the words of this prophecy did change their signification,
and were fulfilled of them again in a contrary sense. It was their glory that
they were elevated or lift up to heaven, at our Saviors first coming to them:
is was their ignominy and misery that they afterward became graves or gravati,
pressed down with their sins to hell. For unto this place of the Prophet
Isaiah that speech of our Savior refertes Matt. 11. 20. etc. Then began he
to upbraid the Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because
they repented not. Woe unto thee Cherazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment, then for
you. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down
to hell: for it the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been
done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. But I say unto you, that
it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of Judgment then
for thee. In this our Savior did speak as never man spoke, and manifest
himself to be the Prince of Prophets, in that all his solemn speeches as well
as deeds (if we would be observant of them) direct us to some Prophetical
Oracle or other, or reveal some mysteries before latent, or (which is all one)
some mystical sense of Scriptures. And however no prophecy can be truly said
to be fulfilled only by way of accommodation or allusion; though there be no
allusive sense of Scriptures distinct from the several senses before
mentioned: yet shall we not be able to perceive either the manner how many
prophecies are fulfilled, or the literal sense of many places in the new
Testament, unless besides the grammatical signification or construction of
the words, we know withal the matter (be it rite or custom etc) whereto they
allude or refer.

CHAP. 18.
Containing the general heads or Topics for finding out the several senses
of Scripture, especially for the just valuation of the literal sense, whether
in the old Testament or in the new.
SUch qualificatios whether for learning or life as Tully and Quintilian
require in a complete orator, Galen in a Physician, or other Encomiasts of any
liberal science; profession or faculty may require in a perfect professor of
it; is but a part of these endowments which ought to be in a true divine or
professor of Divinity. The Professors of every other faculty may without much
skill in any profession besides their own, truly understand the genuine rules
or precepts of it. All the learning which he has besides, serves but for
ornament, is no constitutive part of the faculty which he professes. But the
very literal sense of many precepts, or of many fundamental rules and Maxims
in Divinity, can neither be rightly understood, nor justly valued, without
variety of reading and observations in most other faculties and sciences that
be; besides the Collation of scripture with scripture, in which search alone
more industrious sagacitie is required, then in any other science there can be
use of. The references, without whose knowledge the positive sense of many
scriptures cannot be known, Cap. 18.
are respectively almost infinite, at least incomprehensible to any one man's
reading or observation. It shall suffice in this place to comprehend the
generality of all under this brief division. The matters whereto the
Scriptures whether of the old or new Testament refer, are either rites and
customs civil, or natural experiments not recorded by any Canonical
writers; or rites and customs, practices and experiments recorded in the Canon
of faith. It would be no difficult work to write a large volume of instances
in either kind. Of both I present only these few, first of customs, practices
or experiments not expressed in any Canonical writer.

2. Set thou an ungodly man to be Ruler over him, Post haec rogavit Chilpericus
Pontifices ut aut vestis Praetextati scinderetur, aut centesimus octavus
Psalmus (qui maledictiones Scariothecas co^tinet) super cum recitaretur, vel
certe in perpetuum communione privaretur. Annonius in lib. 3. cap XXVII.
and let Satan stand at his right hand, (says the Psalmist Psalm. 109. 5.)
The imprecations in this Psalm, of whomsoever else they were literally meant,
were fulfilled in Judas Iscariot; and for this reason this Psalm was used at
the degradation of Bishops, when they were found Traitors either to their
calling or to their liege Lords. But the passage forecited has a special
refere^ce to the custom of those ancient times, in which the Adversary or
Accuser was to be placed on the right hand of him, that was to be condemned,
and on the left hand of him that was to be acquitted. The emblematicall or
moral sense of this custom is expressed by the Psalmist in the verse following,
When sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned.

3 Of wisdom, says Solomon Prove. 3. 16. Length of days is in her right hand,
and in her left hand riches and honor. A man of ordinary reading and
observation would conceive by the character of this speech; that length of
days was much better then riches or honor, because those are presented by
wisdoms left hand, but length of days by her right hand. But a learned
Critique (for those times, wherein he lived) has observed a more recondite
sense of these words, In quibus verbis praeter illum sensum qui est in pro^ptu
subest recondita quaedam per digitos computandi ratio, qua omnis antiquitas
utebatur Quamvis enim per longitudinem dierum intelligatur interminabilis vitae
iucunda possessio, respicit tamen ad illud quod qui pertingebat annum vi tae
centesi^um, incipiebat in dextra manis computart, cum in sinistra superiores
numerasset. Vt de Nestore, qui apud Ovidium dixerat; vixi annos bis centum,
nunc tertia vivitur aetas. Iuvenalis ait Rex Pylius magno etc. Ant.
Nebristensis in quinquagena. cap. 16.
charactred unto us in the custom of those ancient times, whereunto Solomon
alludes. It was the manner of the Ancients to express all numbers under an
hundred upon the fingers of their left hand, but hundreds and above hundreds,
upon the fingers of their right hand, as Iuvenal describes the happiness of
Nestor; Foelix nimirum, qui per tot secula mortem
Distulit, atque suos iam dextra computat annos.


His years were more then could be numbered upon his left hand, for he lived
three hundred years; a fair age, yet not comparable to the length of days or
number of years which the right hand of wisdom dispenses to her followers:
these exceed all vulgar scale both for number and happiness.

4. Some places there be even in the new Testament whose force or elegancie
cannot be apprehended without some skill, either experimental or speculative,
in meaner faculties. Most of the parables uttered by our Savior, albeit we
take them with his own expositions of them to his disciples, can hardly be
understood by best Divines of these times, unless they be weighed with the
matter or subject whereon the parable is grounded, or to which his speeches in
particular refer. No parable is more clearly expounded than the parable of
the sower; and yet many good interpreters have erred in the exposition of it;
and from this error have made the Land of Jewry (whilst Gods temporal
blessing was upon it) to be envied for its fruitfulness in respect of others.
To reap twenty bushells of Corn for one of seed, exceeds the rate of fertile
soiles amongst us; and yet this is the lowest scantling of that increase which
the seed sown in good ground did bring forth. But if we measure the increase
mentioned in the parable, not from the measure of the seed which is sown and
reapt, but from the particular grains which took root and prospered in good
ground, we shall shall have no cause to accuse our own fields of Barrenness
in respect of Judea. For one grain in some parts of this Kingdom (not the
most fertile) yields more then seaventie, though others in the same Land yield
not twenty, and some it may be in other places above an hundred.

5 He that knows not so much in the art of grafting, as that the graft does
sweeten the sap and moisture, which it receives from the stock, not
participating of its sowrenesse, shall hardly understand S. Paul's meaning Romans
11. 24. If thou were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by nature, and
were grafted contrary to nature in a good olive tree: how much more shall these
which be the natural branches be grafted into their own Olive tree? To graft
wild plants in sweets stocks (at least for the graft so planted to prosper) is
contrary to the ordinary custom of nature, and it is in particular more
contrary to the nature of the Olive, then to any other tree, because it will
hardly admit of any graft by reason of its fatness, nor will the grafts of it
easily thrive in any other stock, if we may believe such, as write of plants.

6 With sowing and planting, the dressing of Vines has more then affinity, and
without some knowledge or experience of this part of husbandry, some entire
parables and other allegorical speeches uttered by our Savior himself cannot
rightly be interpreted: and for these three parts of husbandry and others, the
rule is but one; [that every one who takes upon him to expound those passages
in the Gospel which refer to these branches of husbandry, peruse such Authors
as write in particular of the customs or manners usual in that climate
wherein our Savior conversed in ancient times:] For neither does the husbandry
of these times, or of this climate wherein we live, in many points well suite
with those practices or rules of husbandary whereunto our Savior alludes.

7 But however many of our Saviors Parables refer unto these or like
experiments in vulgar trades, yet sundry parables and other speeches uttered by
him, and by his Apostles, require either speculative or experimental Knowledge
in more ingenuous and more noble professions; or in civil rites or customs
which vary in several ages, or Nations. A man that had never seen any
marriage celebrated out of his own native soil or neighbor Countries, nor
read of the rites or customs in this kind used by Eastern Nations before or
about the time of our Saviors pilgrimage here on earth, could not be much
edified by the parable of the ten Virgins, or the like which allude to nuptial
customs in those times. Brissonius and Rea would stead a Preacher more which
has occasion to expound these parables, then twenty ordinary Commentators or
Professors in divinity, unless it be such as have been beholding to these
two, or other Authors of miscellane Philologie.

8 To compare the Tabernacle of the Sun which God has placed in the heavens,
and the rising of this glorious light, unto the manner of a Bridegromes coming
out of his chamber after the manner and fashion in use with us, would be but an
homely expression. Yet has it pleased the Spirit of God to describe the
outgoings of this great light which governes the day, in that most elegant
sacred hymn; In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a
Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a
race. Psalm. 19. 4, 5. But the custom or manner of ushering Bridegroomes, in
those times, out of their Chambers by Lamps or Torches in the night time, had a
poetical decorum for representing the manner of the suns recourse unto us
after darkness, the morning star or strayned glimmerings of the dawning
being as his torch-bearers. And as the Bridegroomes coming out of his Chamber
to fetch his Bride, was a silent poem of the Sunns approach unto us; so the
Psalmists description of the Sun in its rising and course is a speaking
picture of the coming of the Sun of righteousness into the world, after the
light of prophecies or revelations, whether by Vrim and Thummim, or by voice
from heaven, had been far removed from the Hemisphere of Judaea, until they
began to return again in John Baptist and his Father Zacharias, who were as
the day star or dawning to usher in the Sun of righteousness, who was to
continue his course from the one end of the Earth to the other, with more
indefatigable courage, and with more comfortable warmth, then this visible
Sun does visit the earth. He was that strong man, that Gebor, unto whom the
Psalmist compares the Sun in its strength, for Gebor is its proper title. And
I make no question but the glory of his kingdom begun here on earth, though
descending from heaven where it shall be accomplished, was by the Holy Ghost
intended according to the Mystical sense of that Psalm, which is not a
History only but a true prophecy.

Sed dico: An non auderunt? Quartum argumentu^ (...) ab eo quod gentes antea
quoqu semper habuerunt praeclaram divinae bonitatis cognitionem. Quo argumento
haud dubie Iudaecrum malitiae plenam retundit invidiam. Quare inquit, hic
tantopere offendimini ac ringimini, semper conantes modis omnibus impedire, ne
Evangelium communicetur Genti^bus. An existimatis Gentes nunquam antea de
bonitate Dei quicquam audivisse? Atqui Psalmographus diserte testatur quicquid
cognosci de Deo potest, vel ex ipsa condition rerum visibllium quae in mundo
sunt ab omnibus mortalibus exploratum abunde teneri. In omnam terram exivit
sonus eorum, et in fines orbis terrarum verba illorum. Andrea Hyperius in D.
Pauli ad Romanos Epistolam exegema cap. 10. verse. 18.
And our Apostles allegation of the fourth verse of this Psalm Romans 10. 18.
Their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the World,
was not allusive only, but argumentative and fulfilled in the preaching of the
Gospel by the Apostles and their Successors in the mystical sense, as it had
been before those times daily verified in the literal.

9 But mere ignorance in these and the like parables of our Savior, whose
knowledge nearly concerned the generation in which and for whose good he
uttered them, (however the knowledge of them much concern us of this age and
nation) cannot be so prejudicial to all good Christians, as the ignorance of
other parables, and proverbiall speeches of his, which alike nearly concern
mankind. Yet an ignorance there is of many rites and customs, unto which both
the words of the Prophets and his explications of them, which concern man's
redemption by him, punctually refer according to the literal sense. Most of
us know not him as our Redeemer, because were know not our selves, nor that
miserable bond of servitude which he did dissolve for us all. And this we
know not, because we consider not the state and condition of legal servants
unto cruel and tyrannical Lords. We were servants to a most cruel Tyrant.
And the Son of God for our Redemption became truly and properly a servant to
his Father, before he became our Lord in special, and so must we be servants
to him in special before we become the sons of God. For we must be sons
before we be heirs, and sons by adoption, before we be made Kings and
Priests unto his Father. I never read that passage of our Apostle Romans 8. 15.
[Yee have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father] but I always
conceived there was somewhat more contained in it, then was to be found in any
lexicon or vulgar Scholiast: yet what it should be in particular I learned of
late from a Et fallor nimium nili ex hoc more et locutionis genere pendeat tum
Phrasis illa sacra apud D. Paulum (...) (...) sive adoptione in Epistola ad
Galatas IV, ut eos quisub lege erant redimeret, ut adoptionem filioram ((...)
liberorum) reciperemus: Quoniam autem estis filij (seu liberi) misit Deus
spiritum filij sui in corda vestra olamantem, Abbae, Pater. Itaque jam non es
servus sed filius aut ^roles et haeres Dei per Christum; tum illa ad Romaenos
VIIII. 14. Quicunquae Spiritu Dei aguntur ii sunt filij (seu liberi) Dei. Non
enim accepistis spiritum servitutis in (...), sed accepistis spiritum adoptions
filiorum (seu liberorum) Dei, in quo (...); eodem vocabulo utroque in loco
utitur, clamamus Abba, Pater. Ipse enim spiritus testimonium reddit spiritus
nostro, quod sumus filij (seu liberi Dei Si autem filij (seu liberi) et
haeredes. Eleguns est, ad receptos Ebraeorum mores allusio. Johannes Sold^^^ de
successionibus in bona defuncti etc. ad leges Haebreorum cap. 4.
learned Professor of another faculty, which he has adorned by his more then
ordinary skill in sacred Antiquity and miscellane Philologie. Now if we value
the Apostles words per quem clamamas Abba Pater with reference to the legal
custom, or manner by which some sort of slaves by birth and condition, did
claim the privilege of manumission or of Adoption amongst the ancient Jews:
the expression is full of elegancie and most divine: the manner of the Adoption
to hereditaments temporal, was a kind of typical prophecy of our Adoption to
our eternal inheritance in the heave^s.

10. Were we as well acquainted either with boys plays in ancient times, as
with our Christmas sports; or with the several kinds of Olympic games, as we
are with our Country Maygames or horseraces; we might be more beholden to our
selves in many points then to ordinary professed expositors of sacred writ. For
even unto childish sports the father of the fatherless, and guardian of the
helpless, our Savior himself, sometimes referres us for the true meaning of
his parables, as in Matthew 11, if we may believe Lyra or Theophilact in
matter of fact; But whereunto shall I liken this generation. It is like unto
children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows, and saying,
we have piped unto you and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and
ye have not lamented. For John came neither eating nor drinking and yet they
say he has a Devil. The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say.
Behold a man gluttonous and a wine bibber, a friend of Publicanes and sinners;
But wisdom is justified of her children. But whether there were any such
positive custom amongst children, as Lyra and Theophilact relate, I will not
dispute pro or con: However, Paulo prepius sensum videtur Huge Card. attigisse:
scribit enim non personas personis; sed negotium negotio: nec parts partibus:
fed totum toti co^ parari. Sensum enim esse, perinde se scribaru^ and
Pharisaeoru^ causam habere, atque si pueri dicant sodalibus suis, cecinimus
vobis, etc. Sic enim posse illis dici, Ioannes vobis lamentatus est, and no^
planxistis; filius hominis cecinit, and non saltostis Hunc esse verum sensum
ver. 19. magis probabimus. Nunc satis est ut moneamus valde esse usitatum, ut
in parabolis non personae personis, non parts partibus; sed totum negotium,
toti negotio comparetur Ca. 13. 24 simile factum est regnum caelorum homini,
qui semi navit bonum semen in agro Non enim regnum caelorum homini, sed potius
semini, aut agro simile est. Itaque sensus est, idem accidit in regno caelorum,
atque si quis seminasset bonum semen in agro suo. and ibidem versiculo 45.
Simile est regnum caelorum homini negotiatori quaerenti bonas margaritas. Non
enim homini sed potius margaritae simile est, and idem accidit in regno
caelorum, atque si quis quarat bonas margaritas, inventa autem una pretiosa
margarita vendat ominia, quae habeat, and e^at eam. Sexcenta sunt exempla
generis ejusdem. Itaque frustra laborat, qui anxie quaerit, quomodo personae
personis, parts paertibus respondeant. Totum sententiae corpus intuendum est,
and integrum ex integra parabola trahendum: ne in parts divisum pereat, atque
dissoluatur. Maldo. verse. 16. cap. undeci: Mat.
Maldonats observation upon the place is of very good use for any that either
intend to make a comment or to read Commentators upon our Saviors parables,
with liberty of judgment or discretion. The best is, Iansenius has better
expounded this place with reference unto Childrens sports in general, then
Lyra or Theophilact have done, although we grant them such a peculiar kind of
sporting as they supposed was then in use. Verum ut ludi genus hoc incertum
est, ita nec convenit literae. Non enim in litera dicuntur hi quidem dicere,
Cantavimus vobis and non saltastis, alijs vero, lamentavimus and non plorastis,
sed utru^que eisdem tribuitur. Et vana est Nicolai interpretatio, qui ideo
dictum put at [coaequalibus suis dicu^t,] quia pueri divisi erant in duas
aequales parts. Coaequales enim proprie dicuntur Coaetanei, and Graece in
Matthaeo, est (...), idest, sodalibus. Proinde simplicius fuerit, sine
specialis alicujus ludi imaginatione exemplum hoc intelligere secundum
consuetudinem communem puerorum, qui in foro and laetioribus locis civitatum
congregati inter se student ludendo effingere, quicquid ab aliis vident serio
agi. Itaque aliquando nupiias effingunt, and nuptiales laetitias tibiarum aut
aliorum instrumentorum cantu imitantur; aliquando vero funeralia obsequia
expriment, in quibus apud Iudaos planctibus and lamentatione quorundam ac
lugubrium decantatione, solent homines ad tristitiam and fletum provocari. Haec
dum imitantur pueri, fit frequenter, ut quod joco agunt, nonsit efficax, vel ad
tripudia nuptialia, vel ad fletus funer ales provocandos.

11. But as for the Olympic games, or the like whether elsewhere instituted in
imitation of them or before them, it is evident, that the Apostles and other
sacred writers (S. Paul especially) had both seen them, and made good use of
them for the more lively expressions of many Christian duties. And unless we
know the particular All that concern this argument are exquisitely handled by
Petrus Faber in his Agonisticon.
Customs unto which their words refer, we shall but play at Blind
man-buffe in our expositions of them, or in our exhortations to such practices
as they prescribe, Consider him (says our Apostle) that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be weary and saint in your
minds, ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. Heb. 12.
3, 4. The words are metaphorical, or Verbo tenus Allegorical, and allude unto
those strivings or conflicts which seldom were determined without blood,
wherein it was a shame to yield, before any blood was drawn. Such was the law
or practice of those games which the Latins call Pugilatus, wherein manus
demittere, to let down the hands, was an acknowledgment of victory; which
happily might have been recovered by the party wounded or remitting his hands,
unless his heart had been weaker then his hands. To this purpose that
exhortation Heb. 12. 12. Wherefore erect the hands which hang down, and the
feeble knees. The duty whereto he exhorts them, was no practice of alms or
charity toward impotent or feeble men, but that the Pastors, whom this precept
does especially concern, should encourage their flock to strive against sin,
with as great courage and resolution as the Olympic or other Gamesters did
against their Antagonists, not to let down their hands, or give over after
many wounds or resistance unto blood; as being sure, though they dyed in fight
to be better rewarded, then the Victors were in these bodily fights. Unto the
same courage and resolution the Prophet Isaiah had exhorted the people of God
in his age, though not them only but all succeeding generations. For his words
are typically prophetical, and point directly to the time of our Saviors
coming to visit and redeem his people: and yet allusive withal unto the
bodily strivings or wrestlings of those ancient times. Isa. 35. 34. Strengthen
ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, say to them that are of a
fearful heart, Be strong, fear not, behold your God will come with
vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you. The end and
scope as well of the Prophet as of our Apostle, was to inspire such life and
courage into Gods people in their heaviest pressures, as that Caesarcan soldier
did into his mates, when Pompeyes followers, in Caesar's absence, had almost
beaten them out of their trenches: -- ^ucanns
Peterem faelicior umbras
Caesar is aspectu, testem hunc fortuna negavit;
Pompeio laudante cadam etc.
Vicimus, O Socij, veniet qui vindicet arces.


12. If we knew the true importance of manus remissas, we might know withal
the true importance of (...), used by our Apostle in the same place; which
sometimes signifies a profane person, but so it signifies by consequence only:
the punctual meaning of it in this chapter ver. 16. (if I be not mistaken) is
better expressed by the Syriack, (...) and by the Latin remissus, then by
profanus, that is, such a one as is ready to yield rather then to endure any
hard conflict; or such as Esau was, who did choose rather to relinquish his
inheritance then to suffer a sharp hunger or thrist for a season.

Usual it was with S. Paul, and with other (whether sacred writers or writers
of sacred mysteries) to draw arguments a minore ad majus, that is, from the
practice of such as were disposed to try masteries for temporary Crowns or
Garlands, to persuade such abstinence or other observances requisite for all
who seek after the incorruptible Crown of glory, which cannot be taken from
them: for the winning or wearing whereof no man can be prevented, so he strive
for it lawfully. Witness that one place, for this present. 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25,
etc, Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one receives
the price? So run, that ye may obtain; And every man that striveth for the
masterie, is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible
Crown, but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so
fight I not as one that beats the air. But I keep under my body, and bring
it into subjection, least that by any means, when I have preached to others, I
my self should be a castaway. But if of all those which run in secular
races, it be not possible for more then one to receive the prize, or (as the
original word imports) to snatch it from the blede or staff whereto they
run; we may be sure that not so many would offer themselves to try masteries
in this kind, as otherwise would be forward, if every one that did his devoire
might be assured of some reward sufficient to acquit or countervaile his
pains. If then this similitude between such as seek a corruptible and an
incorruptible Crown, did run (as we say) quatuor pedibus, few of our Apostles
Auditors would have adventured their pains or endeavors in that Christian
course to which he exhorred all.

Maldonats forementioned rule for the right interpretation of parables or
similitudes of this kind, is as useful for the right interpretation of this
place, as for any other parable or similitude in Scripture: and his rule (or
rather the rule of Hugo Cardinalis from whom he borrowed his animadversions
upon Matthew, 1^. 16.) is thus. See his words noted in the margin, paragraph
the 10, of this chapter.
We are not to compare persons with persons, nor to be curious in suting
particulars to particulars, but to accord the whole businesses handled in
gross: as when it is said, The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
sowed good seed in his field, we are not to parallel the man, but rather the
seed sown, or the field where it is sown, with the kingdom of heaven: or in
this or the like generality; It happens in the plantation of the kingdom of
heaven, as when a man has sown good seed in his ground, the envious man comes
and sowes tares.

13. But what was S. Paul's meaning in the 24. of the forecited Chapter? That
every one which professes Christianity must be more resolutely circumspect in
his undertakings and their managings, then those few in comparison are, who
enter the lists for a temporal prize or garland. Otherwise they shall be sure
to fail of their hopes, to be in worse case then such as come only as
spectators, that purpose to be no actors in such prizes, or then such Actors as
do nihil agere, or after they have run, sit down with loss. To this effect
he expresses himself in the verses following; Every man that striveth for the
mastery, is temperate in all things etc. But the very literal importance of
those three words in the original (...) and (...), cannot be so well learned
from any dictionary or Lexicon, as from such as write of the Olympic games, or
of that kind of trial of masteries which in his time or before was in use.
The word (...) is proper (I take it) unto Wrestlers, whose practice it was to
keep under other men's bodies not their own, or to keep their Antagonists from
all advantage of hold, either gotten or aimed at. But our Apostle did imitate
their practice upon his own body, not on any others, for his own body was his
chief Antagonist. The word (...) has in that place no immediate reference
unto the preaching of the Gospel, but did generally import such as were tryers
of Olympic games, whether wrestlings, whirlebats, or the like. The word (...)
comprehends all which lost the prize for which they contended, whether by
sluggishnesse or foul play.

The same word comes to signify a Reprobate, or a man finally rejected by
God, or irreverfibly deprived of his good spirit, but at the second third or
fourth hand. And those interpreters of sacred writ, who take this title usual
in Scripture to be a metaphor or speech borrowed from false coins or
counterfeit metals, fail more in Logique then in Grammar; though fail they
do in both. It sometimes indeed referres or alludes unto false or counterfeit
it coins, and according to this reference it comes the nearest to the
denotation of a Reprobate, or a man finally rejected by God. For that coin
which is for substance but brass or copper; will hardly (if at all) after it
be cast aside upon trial, go amongst wise men for current money. The
transmutation of baser metals into more precious, however some men profess
this skill, is seldom effected, perhaps not facible: whereas he that was this
year (...) in the Olympic games or other like prizes, might the next year be
(...), or crowned as victor. But the original word, for its formal or
abstract signification, is a great deal more general then to be restrained
either to coined metalls, or to men which strive for mastery in any kind of
activity. It properly imports a rejection upon just trial, and is applyable to
matters and persons almost infinite.

14. Or if we interpret this word by its reference unto money or coins, yet
even these may be (...) more ways then one; either for the baseness of the
metal, or for the counterfeit stamp, or for want of weight. For if it be but
some few grains too light, any man may refuse it, although it bear Caesar's
image and superscription. Or if it be full weight and pure gold withal; yet if
it be elsewhere estamped, then where Caesar shall appoint, or by any stamp or
person not authorized, no man is bound to receive it, and he that tenders it,
is to be punished. And yet both these kinds of Reprobate coins may be
legitimated or made current, by new coining or addition of quantity without
any alteration of the quality. But coins (...) for the metal, as if that be
brass, copper, or silver gilt, and estamped for gold, albeit they be full
weight, are by no Laws current. And yet some there be (as we said) which
profess the art of turning such metalls into gold, but whether this be
facible, or no, is no point of Divinity. But surely the Almighty Creator of all
things has more skill in transforming men of what condition soever, then any
Alchymist has in changing metalls from worse to better. Even such as are said
to be given over by him into a Reprobate sense (...), may (for ought we know)
be afterward refined by him, and become (...), Justifiable men. Many of the
Gentiles were delivered by him into a reprobate sense, not particular persons
only, but even whole Nations; and so has the Nation of the Jews for the most
part bin for these many years. But that God did finally reprobate any person,
whether Jew or Gentile which lived in opposition to the Christian faith, or
whether there shall not be a reversion of that curse which has befalne the
Jewish or other nation, God alone must judge and determine. So that it will be
hard for any man to prove that the word (...) does any where in the new
Testament punctually answer unto that use or notion which custom has now in a
manner prescribed for in many theological disputes; that is for men
irreversibly fitted or designed to everlasting destruction. If in any place it
were to be taken in this strict sense I should suspect that of S. Paul. 2 Cor.
13. 5. above others; but that not from the Grammatical signification of the
word, or from any reference it has in that place more then any other to false
coins, but from the peculiar reference which the matter and circumstances of
that place have to matters of fact or historical types in the old Testament;
without whose knowledge or observation the true meaning or importance of many
words usual in the New, can never be truly valued. The Apostles words in the
forecited place are thus; Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith,
prove your own selves; know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be Reprobates?

CHAP. 19. Cap. 19

Of the use of sacred, or miscellane Theology for finding out as well the
literal, as the mystical, or other senses of Scripture.
WHat shall we say then, that every one that is not certain of his own
salvation, or every one not assured by faith that his name is written in the
book of life, is irreversibly appointed to everlasting death, or (...)
according to our Apostles meaning in this place? God forbid. No Christian man
(I hope) will forbid us, or deny us leave to restrain the Apostles words, in
what sense soever we take them, unto such men only as those Corinthians were,
that is to men which have been instructed in all points necessary for a
Christian to believe, to men that have been baptized in this faith, to men
partakers in a plentiful manner of the word preached and of the Sacraments.
But may we or ought we to apply this peremptory sentence unto every man that
is a visible member of the true Church, or of those Churches in which the pure
word is constantly preached, and the Sacraments duly administered? Are all
these bound upon pain of Reprobation to believe, either that they are already
completely regenerated, or that they have so mortified the deeds of the body,
that they cannot die the death of the soul? If thus we should preach or
teach; how should we be able to comfort afflicted consciences in their
perplexed fears? And would not the best fruits of our labors be presumption
in many, and despair in most of our hearers? Yet if thus we may not say, must
we therefore deny that the word (...) is in the forecited place to be taken in
that strict sense, in which it is usually taken by some modern Divines, not in
that place only but in many others of the new Testament, that is, for men
either irreversibly ordained to death, or finally forsaken of God? That the
word is used by our Apostle in this strict sense, I dare not either
peremptorily affirm or deny. The point more questionable and more useful for
our edification will be, to inquire what the Apostle means by these words,
Know ye not, that Jesus Christ is in you? The branches of the enquiry are two;
the first what manner of Christ's being in them is here to be understood. The
second what kind of knowledge they were to have of his being in them: or
whether for Christ to be in them be all one, as for them to be in Christ by the
spirit of regeneration and adoption, or all one, as to be elected, that is
irreversibly ordained unto glory; and whether they were bound to believe all
this certitudine fidei, by the certainty of faith.

2. To this we answer that neither all nor any of those points were
necessarily to be believed by these Corinthians, much less by ordinary
Christians at this day; albeit we grant the word Reprobates to be taken in the
strictest sense, that is for men irreversibly fitted for destruction. For so it
may be taken, and in my opinion ought to be taken in that place if in any. But
so taking it, we must rate our Apostles meaning in the words precedent [Know
ye not that Christ is in you] by that peculiar reference, which the present
estate of those Corinthians had unto the estate of the rebellious Israelites,
who after so many wonders and manifest documents of Gods peculiar providence
over them, did tempt him and require further signs, whether God were among
them or no. Exodus 17. 7. And he called the name of the place Massah and
Meribah, because of the Children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord
saying; Is the Lord among us or not? Unto the same height of iniquity those
Pharisees were come, who after they had seen so many miracles done by our
Savior, as did fully testify that he was that very God whom their Fathers had
thus tempted in the wilderness, yet came forth unto him, and began to
question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him. Mark 8.
11. And hence it was, that this Heavenly Physician of their souls, upon this
desperate Crisis, sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, Why does this
generation seek after a sign? Verily I say unto you, there shall be no sign
given to this generation: and he left them. ver. 12, 13. Now these Corinthians,
after unquestionable experiments of many miraculous effects of Christ's power
wrought amongst them by the ministry of Paul, did seek after a further proof
or sign of Christ's speaking in him, 2 Cor. 13. 3. and for their satisfaction,
he exhorts them to examine themselves whether Christ were not in them, not in
him alone: and this they might know, unless they were (...) that is, such
Reprobates as the forementioned rebellious Israelites were. For it could be no
other then a Symptom or Crisis of a Reprobate mind, or of men rejected by God
and left of Christ, to murmur, doubt or question, whether the gift of tongues,
of healing, and other wonderful effects of Christ's power manifested by Paul's
ministry, did not truly testify that his Commission was from heaven, or that
Christ was amongst them, to wit, in that Church. For so the original (...) is
in his place to be taken, as it is elsewhere in the New Testament; as when cur
Savior says to the Pharisees Luke 17. 21. The Kingdom of Heaven is within
you, (...), that is, the power of it is manifested amongst you: but he meant
not that the Kingdom of heaven was in the hearts of all them to whom he spoke.
And so the Septuagint (whom the Evangelists and Apostles follow) renders the
Hebrew (...) in the forcited place Ex. 17. 7, not (...), but (...), Is the Lord
in us; or no? So that neither our Saviors expression, nor that of the Apostle
2 Cor. 9. does infer any more then we have said.

3 It is not all one for any amongst us to doubt or question whether the
doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed or in the new Testament, be the
doctrine of life and salvation; as to doubt or be uncertain, whether he
himself be personally in the estate of life or a chosen vessel. To doubt of
the former general is infidelity, a sin not incident to a true Christian.
But many amongst us may doubt of the later point, and yet be as good
Christians, as those who think they have assurance of faith, that they are
predestined, and condemn all others as Reprobates in the worst sense, who
do not as certainly believe that they live in Christ, as that Christ died for
sinners. But this was no part of our Apostles meaning in that passage to the
Corinthians. The question between him and them was not about special belief
of personal election, but about this general, whether he were a true Apostle
or no: Or, whether the miracles which had been manifested amongst them by his
ministry, were wrought by the power of Christ or no. If they continued in this
doubt or tempting of God, they would (as he forewarnes them) hereby prove
themselves to be (...), that is such as the murmuring Israelites had been, or
such as the present generation of the Jews for the most part, were, that is,
cast off from being Gods Church or people. So that if we take the word (...) in
the strictest and severest sense, it rather imports a national or provincial
rejection of that people from being his people, or from his residency amongst
them by his public Spirit, than a personal Reprobation of every particular
or individual. For to pronounce thus much of every Jew, that has not adjoined
himself to Christ's body the Church, since the general rejection of that
Nation, is beyond my Commission, altogether without the praecincts of this
present inquisition, which was only to show the true use of sacred Philologie
for finding out the just extent and value of many passages as well in the old
Testament as in the New, whose grammatical sense is for the substance usually
plain, but indeterminable for quantity, without observance of their peculiar
references either to some special matter of fact recorded in Scripture, or to
some sacred passages more ancient.

4. What place of Scripture is there less controversible for grammatical
signification of the words then that of S. Paul Romans 9. 19? (...), Thou will
say unto me; Why does he yet find fault or chide? for who has resisted his
will? To this effect an ordinary Scholar in any extraordinary Grammar School
in this Kingdom would at first sight render the original. But concerning the
extent of the same words taken in this unquestionable sense, there is and has
been much controversy amongst great professors of Divinity. Many extend them
to Reprobates in general, as if our Apostle had said, [Why does he find fault
with Reprobates, seeing he has irresistibly ordained them to destruction?] But
what occasion S. Paul here had to mention Gods chiding or expostulation with
Reprobates in general, is without my capacity to conceive. Or were it granted
that (...), why does he chide, does refer to all this sort of men; yet would
it still remain questionable, unto what time or part of time the particle
(...) did refer; for it is an adverbe of time not to be universally taken for
all successions of time, but always points at some limited portion of time.
God does not always find fault or expostulate either with all Reprobates, or
with any one Reprobate.

5. The limitation then of this speech in respect of the person, must be taken
from reference to that which the Apostle had said ver. 17. (...), For this very
cause have I raised thee, or stirred thee up, that I might show my power in
thee. Now these words refer to Pharaoh alone, to that Pharaoh whose heart was
remarkably hardened. Nor did God at all times from his birth chide or
expostulate with this very Pharaoh. The word (...) implies, and our Apostle
supposes, that the Lord had expostulated with him before that time, unto which
our Apostles words in special refer. Otherwise the word (...) would have no
place in that passage according to any grammar sense; for that is, as if he had
said, why does he chide or find fault with him any longer, or why does he
expostulate with him at all, after that time wherein he had said, For this very
purpose have I raised thee up, or kept thee alive (being already fitted for
destruction) that I might show my power in thee.

6. This question is very pertinently made by our Apostle, seeing Pharaoh at
this time was so hardened, that he could not repent, without some special
mercy or extraordinary dispensation. For wise men only chide those of whose
amendment there is some, though small hope left. Unto this Quaere our Apostle
frames that answer; Nay but O man, who art thou that replies against God. ver.
20. unto 24. Concerning the punctual meaning of which, I have none for the
present, if any other man have any desire to dispute, my advise unto him is,
that he would weight our Apostles forecited words (...), with that speech of
God to Pharaoh, unto which our Apostle referres us, Exodus 9. 18. (...); and yet
exaltest thou thy self against my people, that thou will not let them go? And
this God spoke unto Pharaoh immediately after he had told him, for this very
purpose have I raised thee up; or (as the Septuagint, and Iunius) for this very
purpose have I reserved thee alive: with whose translation and interpretation
of this place in Exodus, I would request every ingenuous sober reader to
acquaint himself, as well as with the ordinary expositors of the 9. to the
Romans, and not adventure to sail in a narrow uncouch and unsounded sea only
with the help of a general card, as some have done, and for want of an
experienced Pilot have either fallen upon dangerous Rocks, or stricken upon
such shelves as there is small hope of their safe arivall without some such
extraordinary mercy, as S. Paul and his fellow passengers found, yet with loss
of the ship wherein they sailed.

7. Diverse other places of Scripture there be, which (in my opinion) are
usually extended beyond their native compass, though sometimes without any
great danger of bad consequences, yet always with some loss of contentment to
him that desires the true knowledge of the holy Ghosts meaning in them. And
thus they are over-extended through want of observation, unto what matters of
fact, or special circumstances of some peculiar times they punctually refer.
Seeing the Psalmist in the eighth Psalm. does so magnify the goodness of God,
and his special providence over mankind in general; it must needs put an
observant Reader of those sacred Hymns to a demurre, why the Author of the 90
Psalm should so pathetically complain of the shortness and misery of men's
days or years. And to this demurre; I know not how to make any just reply, if
we take the matter of his complaints to concern all men which lived either in
that time or since. But if we consider that Moses the man of God was the Author
of that Psalm, (as the inscription of it directs us to think) and that he
penned it some few years after the deliverance of Gods people by him out of
Egypt; the cause or occasion of the complaint is very justifiable and serious,
yet peculiar to those present times and the people whereof he was governor.
For I think it was never experienced in any age or Nation besides, that of six
hundred thousand living souls, and likely to live in respect of the
constitution of their bodies or any Epidemicall disease, that then did reign,
so few (males at laest) should outlive threescore and ten years, and fewer
fourscore. And yet of all the males which had been delivered out of Egypt,
not one that was but twenty years old did live above threescore years, not
one that was but thirty could live above threescore and ten, not one that was
but forty (two or three only excepted,) could live above fourscore years; or
if some attained to that age or above it, yet their pilgrimage was to be full
of sorrow, all of them, (besides two or three) excluded by oath from entering
into the Land of their promised rest; all above twenty (besides Caleb and
Ioshuah) were to dye within forty years in the wilderness Deuteronomy. 4. 21.
Even Moses the man of God himself, who penned this Psalm. was prohibited to
enter into the Land of Canaan and therefore had just reason to complain, as
there he does (yet without murmuring) not of Gods disrespect unto mankind in
general, but of that heavy doom which he had pronounced against all the
sons of Jacob above twenty years old; of which number we cannot imagine fewer
then two hundred thousand. That the 33. verse of Psalm the 78. [therefore
their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble] does
punctually refer unto that sentence denounced Numb. 14. against those
rebellious Israelites whose carkeises fell in the wilderness, is
unquestionable. Now albeit the words of this verse be not the same with those
of Moses Psalm. 90. 10. [Yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon
cut off, and we fly away] yet their signification is Synonimal.

8. But this error in stretching the native sense of Scriptures beyond its
proper lists or bounds: is sometimes committed by oversight, not in matters of
history or morality only, but in the greatest mysteries of faith, as in that
place Ierem. 31. 22. How long will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter?
For the Lord has created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a
man, (as we usually read it.) Such as acknowledge the great mystery of the
woman's seed, or incarnation of the son of God, to be included in this
prophecy, extend the native signification of the word (...) in the earth, too
far. Howbeit in this error or oversight, there is no falsehood; for that the
woman or female should enclose or compass the male, or that mighty one the
second Adam, was a new thing indeed and a wonder to all the earth. But this
general truth does not hit the punctual meaning of the holy Ghost in that
place, for the word (...) earth, is to be restrained unto the Land of Ephraim
or of Israel, as it was opposed unto the Land of Judah. Thus much the literal
circumstance of this prophecy alone will enforce, and that prophecy of Isaiah
parallel unto this, will persuade us, Isa. 11. 13. The envy also of Ephraim
shall depart, and the Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off, Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex or upbraid Ephraim. The implication is,
that the one Kingdom was to share with the other in the fulfilling of this
grand mystery foretold by these two Prophets in the forecited Chapters. The
Kingdom of Ephraim, of which Nazareth was a Limb (though a smalone) was to be
graced with the Messiah conception and incarnation, and with the Angel
Gabriels presence for the avoucher. The Kingdom of Judah (whereof Bethlem was
a remarkable portion) was to be dignified with his birth; and that was
proclaimed by an host of Angels.

9. Of this mystery I have treated in other See Nazareth and Bethlehe^, or
Isreal's portion in the son of Iesse.
meditations published some fifteen years ago, and should scarcely so much
as have touched it in this place, had not some exquisite Ainswor: upon Deu. 24.
ver. 3.
Hebricians (with whose meditations I have since that time been acquainted)
without any reference to what I had then said or conceived, altogether waived
or slighted the great mystery acknowledged by antiquity as well Jewish as
Christian, in this place of the Prophet Jeremy. In their opinion, the new thing
which the Lord promised to create in the earth, is no more then that the Law
Deuteronomy. 24. 1, 2, 3, 4. (though indispensable in respect of man and wife) should
be dispensed with, or repealed, as it did concern Ephraim or Israel who had
been sometimes Gods spouse, but now divorced for her manifold adulteries, and
yet by Gods special grace had liberty to return unto him again. To this
purpose I am not ignorant that some later Rabbines interpret this place, (as
they do many other) to elevate the mystery of the incarnation; but so do not
those exquisite Christian Hebricians, from whom I must crave pardon to dissent.
All that they say concerning Gods dispensation with that Law, Deuteronomy. 24. is most
true, but not the whole truth, nor any part of the Prophet Ieremies true
meaning in that 31. Chapter. That meaning which they would fasten upon this
place, was expressly delivered by our Prophet, Chap. 3. not to Ephraim, but to
Judah before she followed Ephraim into Captivity; and therefore this could be
no new thing to be created afterward in the Land of Ephraim. They say if a
man put away his wife, and she go from him and become another man's, shall he
turn unto her again, shall not the Land be greatly polluted? But thou have
played the harlot with many Lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord.

10. And howerver the original Non extat apud nos in lingua sancta (vocabulum)
quo productionem rei ex nihilo significamus nisi (...) Bara Similiter and Rabi
David Kimhi Omnis significatio creationis est innovatio rei, and progressio
ejus a non esse ad esse. Secundo, usurpat etiam Scriptura [creandi] verbum, ubi
aliquid non ex mero nihilo, sed ex praeiacente materia; sed quod magnum,
exin^^um, praeclarum, and novum quiddam sit, singulari Dei virtu^e, ac potentia
in lucem profertur. Atque hinc est quodeo utitur, ubi cetorum, and hominis
conditionem proponit. Sunt enim caetivastae, and portentos^ quodammodo
magnitudinis. Homo ob eximias dotes omnibus creaturis praestat imo omnium
creaturarum quasi caput and princeps est. Hunc quoque vim significandi, creandi
verbum in Numeris habet cap. 16. 30. ubi de absorptione Corab, Dathan, and
Abiram agitur. Ibi enim Moses sic loquitur. Sin recens quicquam creaverit
Dominus, aperueritque terra es suum and dev^raverit eos. (...) in collatione in
Ca: (...). Genesis ac etiam in exegesi dictionum hebraicarum in idem caput.
Bara do not always include as much, as some Schoolmen would appropriate to
the Latin creare, that is to make something of mere nothing: yet it usually
imports some great work of the Almighty maker, which one way or other is
aequivalent, or more then aequivalent, to the first creation of Heaven and
Earth our of nothing, if we may believe Capito and Fagius, upon who^ any Novice
in the Hebrew tongue, or ordinary professor of it, may as safely pitch an
implicit belief or trust, as upon any which have lived since their times. Again
however the Prophet Jeremy Chap. 3. 1. avouch a relaxation of that peremptory
Law Deuteronomy. 24. 4. yet does he not intimate, that this relaxation was such an
extraordinary work, as that the Lord might be said to have created it as a new
thing whether in the Land of Judah or of Ephraim, or in the earth or wide world
it self. Nor is there any other word in that 31, of Jeremy ver, 22. besides
the word Lord, which is the same with any other word used either by Jeremy,
chap. 3. ver. 1. or Deuteronomy. 24. 3, 4. In both which places man and wife are
described by their proper characters (...) and (...) nor is the wives returning
to her husband decypherd by a circular motion or compass, but by a plain
return unto him. Whereas in the 31. of Jeremy ver. 21. the charactericall
notion of the persons there meant, is first not Ish an husband or vir, but
Geber, (that mighty man or woman's seed promised Genesis 3. 15.) and this Geber
(not Ishah) the wife or woman simply, but Nekebah the female, was to incompasse
or enclose, the original word (...) sometimes referres to motion, and is as
much as the Latin circumire or circumvenire, to encompasse or go about, which
may be either by a circular or by a sphaericall motion. Sometimes the same word
referres to station or rest, and is as much as our English, to begirt or
inviron; as an Army does a besieged City; or as guests placed at a round table;
and according to the difference of the subject, to enclose or go round about,
or to environ on every side. And so much it imports in that name which Jeremy
gave to Pashur the son of Immer the Priest, Ier. 20. 3, 4. The Lord has not
called thy name Pashur, but Magor Missabib, For thus says the Lord, behold I
will make thee a terror unto thy self, and to all thy Friends, and they shall
fall by the sword of their Enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it etc. And
thou Pashur and all that dwell in thine house shall go into Captivity, and
thou shall come to Babylon, and there thou shall dye, and shall be buried
there, thou and all thy friends to whom thou have prophesied lies, verse 6. As
this Pashur was every way beset with terror, so was the Geber every way to be
enclosed or encompassed by Nekebah the Female. And the new thing which the Lord
promised to Create in the earth has special reference to the first Creation
of male and female in mankind. Genesis 1. 2. 7. (...) Male and female created he
the^. The original which there notifies the female, is the very same which our
English in the 31. of Jeremy renders woman, that is the weaker sex. But the
original Zakar -- rendered (Genesis 1. 27.) by the male, is not so much as Geber,
-- For though every Geber be Zakar, yet every Zakar is not Geber, nor was the
first Adam enstyled by this name. The Prophet Ieremies meaning then was, that
in this new Creation in the land of Ephraim, not the male or man only, but the
mighty male, that Geber of whom Gedeon and Sampson were but types and shadows,
was to be enclosed in the female or weaker sex, as the first woman or female
was in the first male. As she was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, so
was this Geber to be of that females flesh and bones which was to enclose him.
And this was a work of Gods Creation, a new Creation far surpassing the first
Creation, wherein the woman was made of man. For in this new Creation the
Geber, the son of God himself was to be made man of a woman. And it is not
unworthy the observant Readers consideration, that when the Lord does as it
were woo Ephraim or Israel to return again unto their own Land or to him,
he does not entreat them as a husband does his wife, but as a loving Father
does his prodigal son, or roaming daughter as ver. 20. Is Ephraim my dear
son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have
mercy upon him, says the Lord. Set thee up way marks, make thee high heaps,
set thine heart toward he high way, even the may which thou wentest, Turn
again O Virgin Israel, turn again to the sethy Cities, how long will thou
go about o thou backsliding Daughter, for the Lord has created a new thing in
the earth (or in thy Land,) the woman shall incompasse the man.

11 Diverse places there be in the new Testament, which touch not upon any
article in this Creed, which have tortured many good Interpreters, no less
then some vulgar Interpreters have tortured them. I shall at this time instance
only in two. First in that of S. Matthew 23. 34, 35, 36. Behold I send unto
you Prophets and wise men, etc. That upon you may come all the righteous blood
shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of
Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar,
verily I say unto you, all those things shall come upon this generation. The
reason why most Interpreters of S. Matthew have wandered as men overtaken with
a thick mist upon a wild heath or forest, was because they did not consult
the Index Mercurialis, which S. Luke, from the words expressly uttered by our
Savior, had set up for their better direction. For whereas S. Matthew
expresses the Epiphonema or conclusion of our Saviors speech, thus; All these
things shall come upon this generation: S. Luke cap. 11. expresses it; Verily
I say unto you it shall be required of this generation. What was to be required
of this generation? The blood of all the Prophets from Abel to Zacharias, and
Zacharias his blood in particular. For though this present generation by not
repenting for their forefathers sins had made themselves guilty of the blood
of all the Prophets, which stood upon sacred Record from Abels time unto the
destruction of the Temple: yet Abel and Zacharias the high Priest, whose death
was in many respects most prodigious, were the especial avengers of blood. For
the blood of the one after he was dead, and the dying voice of the other, did
cry to God for vengeance. For so it is recorded in the second of Cron. 24. 22.
of Zacharias, [When he dyed he said; The Lord look upon it, and require it.]
Now our Savior in the words recorded by S. Luke, forewarnes this impenitently
stubborn generation, that Zacharias his dying curse (which had been through
his mediatio^ often deferred and often mitigated) should be executed upon them,
as an ungodly race of ungodly Ancestors in a fuller measure then perhaps
Zacharias intended. The exact parallel between the sins of this people in
the days of Ioash King of Judah, who caused Zacharias to be stoned to death in
the Temple, and the sins of this present generation who put the High Priest
of their souls (the Lord of Glory himself) to an ignominious death; in what
sense the blood of Zacharias was more required of this generation then the
blood of our Savior or of his Apostles; in what manner the death of Zacharias
and of our Savior, were the causes of this present generations destruction, I
have elsewhere discussed at large, and, if God permit, mean shortly to publish
amongst other meditations upon our Saviors prophetical function, or of such
prophecies wherein he spoke as never man spoke; which were not to be fulfilled
in himself, as in his death, resurrection, and ascension, or coming to
judgment. For all prophecies of this rank which, shall come unto my memory or
observation, will have their fit place in these Commentaries.

12 So will not that speech of his Mat. 24. 28. Wheresoever the Carkerse is,
there will the Eagles be gathered together. Yet seeing the exposition of this
place has been omitted in the explication of some prophecies with which it
has most affinity, as with the signs of his coming to Judgment, Math. 24.
and Mark the 13. I have thought good to say somewhat of it in this place. Most
Interpreters grant the speech to be proverbiall, and yet (as uttered by our
Savior) to be a Prophecy. The mystery foretold most of the Ancients would
have to be the gathering together of Saints unto Christ's body at the final
judgment; or at least the gathering together of those bodies, which being
alive, shall be raught up into the air to meet him at his coming. But
however the Eagles (at least some kind of Eagles) may be fit Emblemes of Gods
Saints, yet (...) the body or Carkeise whereto the Eagles resort, has no
handsome or comely resemblance of Christ's appearing in glory; although it were
granted that his wounds or skarres should then be conspicuous. I make no
question but our Savior in the forecited place, did mean that kind of
Eagles, whose properties we have described by God himself, even by this our
Lord God and Redeemer, Ioh. 39. 27. Does the Eagle mount up at thy command, and
make her nest on high? she dwells and abides on the Rock, upon the Crag of
the Rock, and the strong place, from thence she s^^keth the prey, and her eyes
behold a far off: her y^^^g ones also suck up blood, and where the slain is,
chere is she. The Eagle here displayed is either the Vulture, or of the
Vultures kind, and their sagacitie whether in smelling slain bodies a far
off, or in presaging where great slaughters are like to happen, as also their
swift resort unto the prey, is well known to secular Philologers. But the
flocking together of this kind of Eagles does rather menace destruction, then
minister any matter of comfort, according to the literal sense either of
proverbiall speech or of prophecy. So the Prophet Habakuk does character the
fierce and swift incursion of the Caldaeans by this kind of Eagles hastening
to the prey, chap. 11. ver. 8. Their horses also are swifter then the Leopards,
and are more fierce then the Evening Wolves, and their horsemen shall spread
themselves, and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as the
Eagle that hastes to eat. And so Moses long before had threatened this people
Deuteronomy. 28. 49. The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee from far from the
end of the earth, as swift as the Eagle flees, etc. And this prophecy was most
exactly fulfilled in the Conquest, oppression, and destruction of this Nation
by the Romans and their Allies, especially the Italians, Spanish, Germane, and
British with other of these Western Nations. And our Savior in the forecited
place foretells the fulfilling of this prophecy of Moses upon the Jews of that
present age; For all that our Savior had said in that 24. of Matthew was to be
accomplished (according to the literal sense) in that age current: for so he
says ver. 34. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all
these things be fulfilled. Now it is evident, that this gathering together of
the Eagles, was to be fulfilled before those signs of his coming to judge
Jerusalem were to be exhibited ver. 29. Our Saviors prophecy then cannot
(according to the literal sense) refer unto his coming to final judgment,
but unto his coming to visit Jerusalem and the Nation of the Jews, of whom,
as he intimates, some few should be strangely reserved, others remarkably
plagued, and so to be plagued by the Romans, whose ensign was the Eagle.
Those whom God had forsaken or appointed to the slaughter within that age
current were (as we say) dead in Law; and whithersoever they fled, the Roman
Eagles, which God had authorized to be his executioners of the heavy Judgments
there denounced, would be more swift then they; more sagacious then they were
subtle. And albeit these wandering Corpse did take the Temple for their
Sanctuary, and make Jerusalem and it, the last seat of that deadly war; yet
even there should these Eagles or Vultures be gathered against them, and teach
their young ones to suck their blood. And indeed if a man would accurately
observe the process and success of the war against them by the Romans, it
would appear to have been begun and ended rather by such secret instinct or
presage, as the Eagles have of great slaughters then by rational project or
humane consultation.

13. To this expression of the literal meaning of the forecited place S. Luke
directs me, who of all the three Evangelists mentions the immediate cause or
occasion of our Saviors proverbiall speech, Luke 17. 37. And they answered or
replied) and said unto him, where Lord? The meaning of the interrogatory is,
where shall the place or seat of these strange Calamities be? and to this he
answers, Wheresoever the body is, there will the Eagles be gathered together.
The importance of his answer is, whithersoever these sons of death shall
repair, thither will the executioners of Gods wrath be gathered together; to
wit, the Romans, who should not spare such as did resist or seek to save their
lives by hostility or strength, and yet be ready to spare such as would submit
themselves unto their mercy. Thus much (in my apprehension) was intimated ver.
33. Whosoever shall seek to save his life, shall lose it, and whosoever shall
lose his life, shall preserve it, I tell you in that night there shall be two
men in one bed, the one shall be taken, the other shall be left: Two women
shall be grinding together, the one shall be taken and the other left. And they
answered and said, where Lord* etc. This I take to be the literal meaning of
this prophecy. As for the mystical, parallel to this literal (if this afford
any such) that cannot elsewhere be so fitly handled, as in the Article of
Christ's coming to judge the world, both quick and dead. Now according to the
mystical sense, we are (I take it,) to understand by the body, the bodies of
the Saints deceased: and then to make the Allegory or proportion (such as the
Scripture always makes) hansome and comely: the Eagles must not be such as
Job describes, either Vultures, or of Vultures kind, but Iovis Aquilae, which
as Philologers tell us, do not use to feed on dead Corpse or slain flesh. These
are fit emblemes of the swift ministry of Celestial Angels in gathering or
summoning the bodies of deceased Saints from the one end of the Earth to the
other.

SECT. 3. Cap. 20

That the incarnation of God, and of God in the person of the Son instiled
(...), the Word, was foretold, praefigured, etc. in the Writings of Moses. Of
the hypostaticall union between the Son of God and seed of Abraham.
CHAP. 20.
That God according to the literal sense of Scriptures, was in later ages to
be incarnate, and to converse with men, with the seed of Abraham especially
here on earth, after such a peculiar manner, as we Christians believe, Christ,
God and man did.
THat which in the first place we are to know concerning Christ and him
crucified, is that he was to be both God and man. And this we are to learn
from the sacred Oracles, whether in the literal or mystical sense, in this
order. First, from such Oracles as teach us that God was to be incarnate and to
converse with men more humano, after an humane manner here on earth. Secondly,
from such divine Oracles as instruct us that God was to be incarnate, and thus
to converse with men in the person of the Son. Sect. 3.
Thirdly, from such as foretell the manner of the incarnation, and of the
permanent union between the son of God and the humane nature.

2. To dispute with the Jew or other Infidel who acknowledges the truth of
the old testament without some manifest ground of the literal sense, were but
to beat the air. For there can be no concludent allegorical or mystical
sense, unless it be grounded on the literal. And of all the branches of the
literal sense none is so evidently concludent against the Jew, the Arian, or
Photinian whether ancient or later (to wit, the Socinian) as that which for the
most part is least observed, or most slenderly prosecuted by such as seek to
confute the Jew, or other Infidells or heretics which subscribe unto the
literal sense of the old Testament. The best Topic or seat of arguments for
this purpose must be borrowed from those passages in the Old Testament, which
according to the plain literal or grammatical sense cannot, without
blasphemy or literal solaecisme, be applied to any person but God, to any
besides the God of Israel, and yet cannot be meant of God himself (according
to the punctual literal sense) save only as he was to be incarnate, or to
have his conversation amongst men, after a more peculiar manner then in the
ancient times of the world he had. And these places be for number many, perhaps
more then all the other prophecies or predictions concerning Christ whether
literal or mystical. My purpose is not in this place to rehearse all of this
kind which I have observed, but rather to explicate some few of these many.

The first shall be that Exodus 29. 45, 46. And I will dwell amongst the
children of Israel, and will be their God, and they shall know that I am the
Lord their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may
dwell amongst them: I am the Lord their God. That this place cannot be
literally meant of any person, man or Angel, but of God himself which brought
Israel out of the Land of Egypt, no modern Jew does or can deny. The same
promise is renewed or repeated, Lev. 26. 11, 12, 13. And I will set my
tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you, and I will walk
among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. I am the Lord your
God, which brought you forth out of the Land of Egypt, that ye should not be
their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go
upright.

3. God before this time had appeared unto them, had conducted them by a cloud
by day, and by a pillar of fire by night, had diverse ways manifested his
special presence, and spoken to Moses their leader in a more familiar manner,
then he had done to any Prophet before or since his time. Yet all those
evidences of his glorious presence amongst them, were but pledges of a more
special manner of his future presence with them, or of walking or talking, not
with some one principal man amongst them only, such as Moses was, but with all
that are willing to walk and talk with him, as Moses had done with that
generation. Neither of those prophecies could be exactly fulfilled, according
to the punctual literal sense, of those ancient times; wherein the first
Tabernacle did wander with them in the wilderness, though verified according
to the vulgar literal sense, in those times. For God their Lord was said to
remove or to arise, when the Ark removed or set forward Psalm. 68. 1. Nor were
the same prophecies fulfilled in those times, wherein the Lord had a permanent
Tabernacle, or constant place of residence amongst them in Jerusalem. Albeit
he was then said to dwell between the Cherubims and to have chosen Sion for
his place of rest, yet Ezekiel after the desolation of the Temple projected by
David and built by Solomon, does promise this people more then a redintegration
of the Temple, or any other material Temple, more then a mere revivall of the
former promises, Exodus 29. 45. and Levit. 26. 12, 13. for so the Prophet
astipulateth in the name of his God chap. 37. ver. 26, 27, and 28. Moreover, I
will make a Covenant of peace with them, and multiply them, and will set my
sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore: my Tabernacle shall be with them,
yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people; and the heathen shall
know that I the Lord do sanctify. Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the
midst of them for evermore.

4. But now we see, and seeing cannot but bewail that the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, whom this promise did (in the first place) concern,
has had no place of dwelling in the land of Canaan almost for these sixteen
hundred years past. Nor has the God of Israel dwelt amongst them, after such
a manner as he did, during the time of the first Tabernacle, or whilst the
first or second Temple were standing. And yet this covenant was (according to
the literal sense of the Prophet) to be an everlasting Covenant, yea
perpetually everlasting, after it once began to be in esse: God was to dwell
with Israel or with the sons of Abraham there meant without interruption in
this life, and everlastingly in the life to come. Besides this everlasting
covenant, was a covenant likewise of everlasting peace to such as were
partakers of it. For the peculiar manner of Gods dwelling with Israel, the Jew
cannot imagine a more punctual fulfilling of this prophecy then the Evangelist
S. John has left upon record chap. 1. ver. 14. And he dwelt amongst us, (and
we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) fall of
grace and truth. Thus he dwelt and conversed with the children of Israel,
according to bodily descent, and with none else; how then is it said by the
Prophet that he was to dwell with them for evermore, or that this covenant of
peace should be an everlasting covenant? Seeing Israel or the sons of Jacob
by bodily descent did for the most part reject this covenant, when God for his
part was ready to seal it unto them, the Gentiles were ingraffed in the
believing stock, when the natural branches were broken off: and yet God still
dwells in medio Israel he has his everlasting Tabernacle in Israel, that is in
the seed of Abraham and of Jacob which he assumed and did choose, not as he had
done Sion or Jerusalem, but for a perpetually everlasting rest. And though this
place of his rest be removed, not only from the sons of Israel, but from all
the sons of men that live here on earth; yet he still dwells with us, who
are ingraffed in the stock of Abraham and of Israel, unto the end of the world,
and so shall dwell with true Israelites world without end. He has his
residence in every Church throughout the world, in as peculiar a manner as he
sometimes did reside in the Temple of Jerusalem: for wheresoever God is truly
worshipped there does he dwell.

5. This covenant of everlasting peace, which the Prophet foretold was to be
established as the first covenant, was by blood, but by far better blood then
the blood of Bulls and Goats, by the blood of the Testator himself, that is,
of God himself. Bellum gessit, ut nos pace fruamur, He was once for all to
war with flesh and blood, with powers, and principalities, that all such as
embraced this covenant avouched by Ezekiel, might enjoy everlasting peace, not
the peace of this world, yet peace in this world, to be accomplished in the
world to come. And our Savior the son of God, for more full declaration that
he was the Author of this covenant, a little before his death bequeathed the
legacy of peace unto his Apostles and Disciples, as feoffees in trust for all
that should follow the faith of Abraham. Peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you: let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid, John 14. 27. And after he had sealed this
covenant with his blood, his salutation unto his Disciples was, Peace be unto
you; and, Behold I am with you unto the end of the world. After his death he
did walk and talk only with his Disciples, but before his death he had walked,
conferred and conversed with all the children of Israel, that would come unto
him, in a more familiar manner, then he had done with Moses himself in Egypt
and in the wilderness. And though his body be removed out of their sight and
ours, yet he dwells in his Church and walks in it by his spirit. These
things says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks
in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks. Revel. 2. 1. and 21. 3. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God. God was said to walk with the
children of Israel, whilst the Tabernacle did remove or wander with them; but
not to dwell with them, until the building of the Temple. Whereas I have not
dwelt in any house, since the time I brought up the children of Israel out of
Egypt even to this day, but have walked in a Tent and in a Tabernacle. 2 Samuel
7. 6. But the same God does now walk in the Church, and dwell in his Church by
his spirit, and the Church shall dwell with him in his heavenly Temple.

6. This prophecy of Ezekiel, is one of that sort and rank before rehearsed
Chapter 14. par: 6, 7. to wit, a prophecy which was oftener to be fulfilled then
once and after different measures in several times. It was to be fulfilled
according to the ordinary scale of the literal sense, and in the intention of
the holy Ghost, at this peoples return from the Babylonish captivity. From
that time Judah and Israel, or Ephraim, were not to strive or contend: and thus
we see it fulfilled, unto the destruction of the Temple. For though many of the
several Tribes of Israel did return to their own land successively or now
and then, yet al were instyled or indigitated by the name of Iudaei or Jews, a
good name, until they forfeited their interest in this promise. And God did
upon their returne^ (...) amongst them, that is his Temple, wherein he did
dwell, as he formerly had done in (...) Temple. Now this covenant, which God
did promise to make with Israel and Judah upon the delivery from the North
Country, and from all the Countries wherein he had scattered them, was to
exceed the former covenant, which he had made with their fathers, when he
brought them out of Egypt, as appears Ier. 23. 5, 6, 7, 8. And to exceed it,
not only in respect of benefits spiritual, or the matter promised, but in
respect of the very form and tenure of the Covenant it self. Not that this
deliverance was either in it self, or in the Nations eyes, greater then the
former, but that this covenant after it once began to be in esse, was to
continue for ever without interruption; whereas the former Covenant was broken,
did expire, or determine. For during the time of the Babylonish Captivity,
neither Judah nor Israel had either a wandering Tabernacle or standing Temple,
God did not dwell amongst them according to the native and literal meaning of
that promise Levit. 26. 1^. But according to this Prophecy of Ezekiel, God even
their God was to dwell amongst them to have his Sanctuary in the midst of them
for evermore. But did this Sanctuary or Tabernacle there promised, continue in
the midst of them since that time? yes, it has so continued, and shall
continue for evermore, though not in the same kind, or quoad materiam, yet by
an aequivalency or more then aequivalency, or by a spiritual and supereminent
manner. For when the second Temple begun to decay, or become as a Carcass, or
body without a soul; the body of our Lord and Savior Christ, which he took
from Abraham and David, became the Temple of God, and continues to this day
our Sanctuary, or Sanctification it self. And we Heathens or Gentiles do now
know, that the Lord has sanctified Israel, and that his Sanctuary is in the
midst of them for evermore.

7. All those places wherein God promised to be their God, all those sacred
hymns and prophecies which enstile him God, even our God, in the exquisite or
sublime literal sense, refer or drive to that point which we Christians make
the foundation and roof of our faith, to wit, that he was to be God with us,
or God in our nature or flesh, God made man of the seed or stock of Abraham,
like us in all things, sin excepted. This new and glorious Temple was according
to strict propriety erected in medio Israel, or in interiore Israel, that is,
in one that was truly an Israelite, the very Center or Foundation of Abraham's
seed, or of Jacobs posterity. But being erected in the midst of Israel or in
the seed of Abraham after this sense it was not erected only for the sons of
Abraham or of Israel by bodily descent, but all were to become true Israelites
that should be united to this seed and worship God in this Sanctuary. For in
that Christ Jesus was the son of God, he was more truly the Israel of God
then Jacob had been, and all that are ingraffed into this Temple of God, all
that receive life from him are more truly the children of Israel than any of
Jacobs sons were, which refuse to be united to him.

CHAP. 21. Cap. 21

That this peculiar manner of Gods presence with his people by signs and
miracles was punctually foreprophecyed by the Psalmists.
BUt for God to dwell with this people, or in the midst of them, is a phrase
not unbeseeming God, even in their judgment, who hold the Divine Majesty to
be altogether incorporeall, immaterially immense, as many of the wiser and more
sober Heathens did. But in most of the Prophets, in the book of Psalms
especially, many characters there be of the divine Majesty's peculiar presence
in his Church, with this people, or in the world, which to any heathen, either
accurate Philosopher, or elegant Poet, would seem more unseemely, then a poor
country man's petition, of his own drawing and penning, to his Sovereign Lord
would be, or then his speech would be; if he were sent Ambassador to a
foreign Prince. Both speech and behavior would in this case be rustic, and
his salutations such as would only befit his honest or worshipful Neighbors.
And thus most Prophets, in the descriptions or displayes of Gods attributes,
speak of him, if we look only in the vulgar literal sense, at the best but
(...), scarce observing that decorum, which an ordinary Courtyer would use to
any greater Prince. Yet may we not think that God did send such Ambassadors to
his people, or appoint such Orators from him to them, and from them to him, as
he had not enabled to speak in such manner, as did become both himself and
them. And surely it is the fault or imperfection, not of the Psalmists or other
Prophets, but of their Interpreters, to make them speak of God, only (...), as
we would do of great men. For even those speeches, which seem most homely, or
least observant of Decoru^, do fit God incarnate, or God made man, more exactly
then the choysest titles that a Secretary of Estate could use unto a King; more
accurately, then a well made garment does the party, for whom it was made; then
the bark does the tree or the skin the body, which not art, but nature has
provided for their covering. All those speeches of God which some would have to
be spoken only (...) will come within this latitude. They are either spoken of
God made man, or from the time of his birth unto his baptism, or whilst he
was in execution of his prophetical function; or whilst he wea in the form
of a servant, or during the time of his consecration to his everlasting
Priesthood, or after he was made both Lord and Christ, that is, after his
resurrection and ascension. As for those passages, which concern the
incarnation of God, his circumcision, or other things concerning him between
his birth and his baptism, these I shall refer to these particular Articles.
The first instance in this kind after he was anointed to preach the Gospel,
shall be that of the Psalmist Psalm. 89. 8, 9. O Lord God of hosts, who is a
strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee? Thou
rulest the raging of the sea, when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest the^.
And again, Psalm. 107. 23. etc. They that go down to the Sea in ships, that do
business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord and his wonders in
the deep. For he commands and raises the stormy wind which lifts up the
waves thereof: they mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depth,
their soul is melted because of trouble, they reele to and fro and stagger
like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. Then they cry unto the Lord in
their trouble, and he brings them out of their distress. He makes the
storm a Calm, so that the waves thereof are still: then are they glad because
they be quiet, so he brings them to their desired haven. For Majesty or
beauty of speech, an heathen perhaps would be ready to compare some
descriptions of Virgil, or other Poet, with either or both of these passages.
But this is not all nor the principal point to be considered in the Psalmists
displayes of the Divine Majesty either in these or most other Psalms. For they
were not only divine Poets or vates praeterit^rum, but true Prophets of things
to come, and did (at least aenigmatically) foretell wonders to be visibly
unfolded, and openly revealed in later ages. Masters and teachers they were,
not only of Orthodoxall doctrines, and their moral uses, but of sacred
mysteries, such as none but true Prophets could foretell. It was a point of
vulgar Catechism amongst the Jews, that unless the Lord did guide the ship
the Pilot labor was but lost; except the Lord did rule the Sea, the Mariners
pains were to no purpose. Every son of Jacob according to the flesh did know,
and many of the^, upon experience of his special providence over the Sea, and
Seafaring men, would heartily acknowledge, that it was the Lord, not their
skill and pains, that brought them to the haven, where they would be. But
whatsoever the Psalmists occasion was to pen this Psalm, the holy Ghost, by
whose inspiration he took occasion to pen it, by whose direction it was
inserted into this sacred Canon of Scripture, did intend, that this
acknowledgement of Gods experienced favors in times past or present, should be
a prophecy for the direction of times to come. And however the Nation of the
Jews were for the most part affected, the understanding of the better, and more
religious amongst this people was enlightened by the Spirit to foresee, all of
them were bound to exact the fulfilling of this prophecy, in a more distinct,
remarkable, and exquisite manner, then the Psalmist, or his forefathers, had
any experience of. If any man desire to know the time when, with the manner
how, it was thus remarkably fulfilled, let him peruse that Evangelicall story
Mat. 23. etc. And when he was entered into a ship his Disciples followed him;
And behold there arose a great Tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the ship was
covered with the waves, but he was asleep. And his Disciples came to him and
awoke him saying, Lord save us, we perish. And he says unto them, why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith? then he arose and rebuked the winds and the
Sea, and there was a great Calm. Or as it is, Mark. 4. 39. And he arose and
rebuked the wind, and said unto the Sea, peace, be still; and the wind
ceased, and there was a great Calm. He used no ceremony, no instrument, such
as Moses, Elias, or other Prophets used in the miracles wrought by their
ministry; but lays his command upon them, in token and testimony that he was
absolute Lord of both, that very Lord of whom the Psalmist had said, Thou
rulest the raging of the Sea, when the waves arise, thou stillest them: that
very Lord unto whom Seafaring men did use to cry in their distress. There were
more passengers at this time with him, spectators of the miracle, and
earewitnesses of his words, for as S. Mark tells us, there were also with him
other little ships ver. 36. And these other Passengers, not his Disciples,
perhaps were those whom the same Evangelist ver. 41. says, did fear
exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the
winds and the sea obey him? His Disciples sure at that time did apprehend him
to be more then man, and though they do not express so much in words, yet by
an implicit or secret instinct, they acknowledge him to be that very God, whom
the Psalmist had described; otherwise they had not presented their prayers
immediately unto him in that form which S. Matthew relates, Lord save us, we
perish, but rather thus, Master pray unto thy God, or, unto thy Father, that we
perish not. But he being with them, though they are not aware of his peculiar,
and immediate presence: So that we may conclude, that all this was done and
said, that the former Scripture might be fulfilled; and the reason perhaps, why
he taxes them so sharply for want of says, was not so much for that they
feared to perish in such a terrible storm, but that they did not apprehe^d,
that there was for this time no such occasion to fear, because the forecited
prophecies were to be punctually fulfilled by their prayers unto him being
visibly present. And for the same reason, it may be, he reprooveth Peter for
want of faith, when he walked toward him upon the Sea: for Peter might and
ought to have conceived, that his Master was that very Lord and God, which
stilleth the raging of the Sea, and that this was the very point of time,
wherein that other prophecy of the Psalmist Psalm. 77. 19. was to be remarkably
fulfilled. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known; and that he could conduct him as safely over the sea
of Tiberias, as he led his people by the hands of Moses and Aaron, through the
Red sea. If we knew the times or occasions of the writing of those Psalms, or
what days they were appointed in the ancient Church of the Jews, it would much
conduce to this or the like search, how and when they were fulfilled; it may be
they were appointed to be read upon those very days wherein these miracles
were done. That there was to be a second fulfilling even of those miracles
which the Psalmists celebrate, as being done before, we gather from the Prophet
Isa. 43. 15, 16. I am the Lord your holy one, the Creator of Israel, your King:
Thus says the Lord, which makes a way in the Sea, and a path in the mighty
waters etc. Remember ye not the mighty things, neither consider ye the things
of old, Behold I will do a new thing: Now it shall spring forth, shall ye not
know it? I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert. Now
this Prophecy of Isaiah was to be remarkably fulfilled, when the Lord their
Redeemer came to visit them.

2. Amongst other Attributes of the God of Jacob, mentioned by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 146. these are inserted ver. 7. He gives food to the hungry, the Lord
loses the Prisoners: The Lord opens the eyes of the blind, the Lord
raises them that are bowed down. No child of Jacob, which had been releeved
in his hunger and thirst by the hand of men, but was ready in the first place,
to thank the Lord God of his Fathers, for his bounty. They knew it was the
Lord, which gave men power to gather wealth, that puts it into the hearts of
the rich to releeve the poor. If the liberality of the Princes and Nobles at
any time did abound, they knew they were Almoners to the God of Jacob. If any
of them being formerly (by law or authority) kept in durance, were set at
liberty, they were taught to thank the Lord, more then man, for their
deliverance. Him they knew to be Lord of Lords, to have the hearts of Kings in
his hands; yet all this was not the only, or the principal use, which the
godly and learned amongst the Israelites made of the Psalmists doctrine. They
were taught by their fathers to expect, that the Lord himself would come to
feed them with his own hand, and would set Prisoners free viva voce, with the
words of his own mouth. That this Lord was to live amongst them, and to
converse with them, from the greatest to the least, in more visible manner,
then he did with Moses on the Mount or in the wilderness, at the time
appointed for the exact fulfilling of this, and other prophecies, Thou openest
thine hand (says the Psalmist) and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing. Psalm. 145. 16. Now that Jesus was that Lord, of whom the Psalmist, in
these two places last cited, speaks, was fully testified by the miracles
which he wrought, in feeding many thousands with some few loaves, and two small
fishes, and in filling so many baskets with the fragments or relics of that
small provision, wherewith he had filled thousands. From these miracles, the
people which had seen him do them, and tasted of his bounty, did rightly
infer, that he was that Prophet, which was to come into the world, as you
may read John 6. 14. and being supposed to be that Prophet, they consequently
presumed, that he was likewise to be the King of Israel; and out of this
conceit or presumption, they would have enforced him to be their King, ver. 15.
But all these good prenotions of him, as their promised Messiah, were drowned
in their bellies, which were indeed to them their gods, and these being
satisfied their religion was at an end; their zeal was come unto a period. For
as our Savior says ver. 26. they sought him not because they saw the miracles
(which did truly prove him to be that God, which fills al things living) but
because they ate of the loaves, and were filled. And that upon condition he
would so feed them with material food continually, they would have made him
King, and have enforced him to undertake this charge, as it is, ver. 15. Who
the Psalmist did mean by the hungry, in the forecited Psalm, is certain, and
how the Lord himself did feed them, is plain; but who are literally meant by
the Prisoners, or what Prisoners Jesus, during the time of his prophetical
function, did unloose or set at liberty, is not so evident from the
Evangelicall story. It is not indeed at the first sight, or according to the
rate of the English phrase. But the learned Commentators upon the 61, of Isaiah
have well observed that by Prisoners or men shut up, the Hebrews usually
understand the deaf, the dumb, the blind, and the phrase is very proper and
elegant. For hearing, as the Philosophers observe, being the sense of
discipline by which man learnes to conceive and speak; deafness, where it is
natural, and implanted has always dumbness for its consort, and is no other
then a close imprisonment of the humane soul. For the greatest misery of close
imprisonment is, that men so imprisoned can neither open their minds to their
dearest friends, nor their dearest friends open their minds to them: their
souls notwithstanding are free to express their grief unto their keepers.
But the souls of men, whose ears have been shut up from the womb, can
neither receive any intelligence from others, nor give any significations of
their own thoughts unto their friends, with whom they converse. Yet many
souls thus shut up from the womb did Jesus, during the time of his
prophetical function, set free by the breath of his mouth. If he said but
Ephphata, the prison doors were opened, and the fetters broken. Such as had
been deaf, and dumb from the womb, had their ears unstopped, and the strings
wherewith their tongues were holden presently untyed.

3. But the Psalmist added, The Lord opened the eyes of the blind, and
blindness is a part likewise of the souls imprisonment, such as before the
Psalmists time had received their sight, by help of Physic or other secondary
means, were said (in the language of those good times) to have their eyes
opened by the Lord; because unless the Lord do bless the medicine, the
Physicians labor is in vain. Yet of many blind men restored to sight by
miracle or by the immediate hand of God, we read not in the old Testament.
Miracles of this kind were altogether, or for the most part, reserved till the
manifestation of God incarnate, as See the Treatise of Christ's answer to John.
we gather out of the 35. of Isaiah. Nor could the Pharisees, though they were
the greatest Antiquaries amongst the Jews, disprove that blind man's testimony
of whom we read John 9. 32. Although he^ exposed himself to great
disadvantage in undertaking an universal negative; since the world began,
(says he) was it not heard, that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne
blind. What then was he bound in conscience to think of Jesus, who had newly
opened his eyes, which had been shut up from the womb? The least he could
think of him was, that which in plain terms he avoucheth against the
Pharisees, If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. But if no man,
since the world began, had done the like, why should he not believe that this
Jesus was more then (...), more then a man sent from God, even God himself?
Why did he not acknowledge, that the clay, which Jesus made to open his eyes,
had been tempered by the finger of that God, which had made the earth it self
of nothing, by whom all things were made, and without who^ nothing was made?
unto this point of belief he came by degrees; and our Savior from this
experiment, begets belief in him unto the maine point of Christianity, and
works his soul unto confession, that he was the son of God. Jesus heard
that they had cast him out, and when he had found him, he said not unto him,
do thou believe on the Prophet that is to come into the world, on the
Messiah or King of Israel? but do thou believe on the son of God? He
answered, who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? And Jesus said unto
him, thou have both seen him, and it is he that talks with thee. And he
said, Lord I believe and he worshipped him. John 9. 35, 36, 37, 38. With what
worship? with which they call (...) or (...) only? Doubtless with that
worship, which was due only unto God. Thus you see, that Jesus by feeding the
hungry with his own hand, by opening the ears of the deaf with the breath of
his mouth, and the eyes of the blind with his finger, does prove him to be
that very Lord and God, in whose praises that excellent hymn (the 146, Psalm)
was written and daily sung by the Jews and Pharisees, although their eyes,
because they winked with them, and hated the light, were not open to understand
the meaning of it.

4. But were there no other Prisoners, besides the deaf and the blind, which the
Psalmist foretells the Lord (in whose praise that Psalm. was conceived and sung)
would unloose? no other whom Jesus during the time of his prophetical function
did unloose? Sure all were prisoners that were bound by Satan, and so bound
were most of these lame and diseased, which our Savior cured, more
particularly that poor woman, mentioned Luke 13. 15, 16. was Satan's prisoner,
as we may gather from our Saviors reply unto the ruler of the Synagogue,
whose heart was inflamed with distempered zeal and indignation as well against
our Savior for healing, as against the people for bringing their sick to be
healed upon the Sabbath day. The Lord then answered him and said, thou
Hypocrite does not each one of you on the Sabbath loose his Ox or his Ass
from his stall, and lead him away to watering? And ought not this woman, being
a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo these eighteen years, be
loosed from this bond, on the Sabbath Day? And when he had said these things,
all his adversaries were ashamed, and all the people rejoiced for all the
glorious things that were done by him. Luke 13. 15, 16, 17. Not only the cure
it self, but his manner of working it, manifestly witnesses that he which
wrought it, was that Lord, in whose praise the Psalmist conceived that song.
For he did not cure her as a messenger sent from God, or as a minister of
delegated power or authority, but by word of majesty as Lord and Author of the
health which he bestowed upon her. Woman says he, thou art loosed from thine
infirmity. And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made
straight, and glorified God. Besides the exact correspondence between the
Psalmists words, [The Lord raises up them that are bowed downe] and the
Evangelists description of the party cured and the cure, [as that she was
bowed together, and could in no way lift her self up;] there is another point
very remarkable in the character or phrase of the Evangelist. For in the
beginning of this relation he says, when Jesus saw her he said unto her: (this
was before she was healed) but when he relates our Saviors reply unto the
Ruler of the Synagogue (after she was healed) he does not say, Jesus then
answered him and said, but the Lord then answered him and said; as if he
himself had conceived, and would lead us into the same truth that this very
fact had sufficiently manifested that Jesus, whom the people took for a
Prophet, to be that very Lord, of whom that Psalm was literally meant, and in
whom this clause of raising up those that were bowed down, was at this time,
and not before, punctually fulfilled.

For conclusion, I would request the Reader to observe that our Saviors answer
unto John Matt. 11. 5. has as special and peculiar reference unto this 146.
Psalm, as it has unto those places in the 35, and 61 of Isaiah, which have
been expounded In Chr: answer to John's question.
elsewhere. All three places, but the 35, of Isaiah and this 146, Psalm
especially, evidently prove Jesus to be not only the Messiah, or him that was
to come, but to be the Lord God of Jacob, whose praises this Psalmist and other
Prophets sought to set forth.

5. The difference between the Evangelists relation, and the Psalmists
prediction of Christ's miracles Matt. 11. 5. is very little, or (to speak
properly,) is no difference, or a difference implying such exact
correspondency, as is betwixt the character and the letter, or impression which
it makes. The verbal difference, and real correspondencie is this. The
Evangelist from our Saviors mouth in the first place relates the miracles,
[tbe blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed,
and the deaf hear, etc.] and from these particulars makes up this general
principles, [Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.] The Psalmist
contrariwise first sets down the same principle, and afterward foretells the
miracles, which were to be as so many proofs or experiments, whereby this
people might know the God of Jacob, when he should come in person, to make
them happy. Happy is he (says the Psalmist) that has the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. Why are they happy which trust in him,
or would not be offended in him, when he came unto them? Because he made heaven
and earth, the Sea and all that therein is, which keeps truth for ever, which
executes judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the hungry, the
Lord loses the Prisoners, etc. Psalm. 146. 5, 6, 7.

6 The sum of all that the Jew or heathen can object against us, for thus
interpreting this place, or for adoring Christ Jesus whom they crucified, as
the very God here meant by the Psalmist, must amount from that general
prohibition, (as they will interpret it) ver. 3. Put not your trust in Princes
nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help, or no salvation. But ye
Christians (will they say) put your trust in the son of man, in the son of
Mary a woman, and therefore transgress the Psalmists precept. But admitting
these words [Put not your trust in Princes etc.] had been expressed in this
universal form [Put not your trust in any Princes, nor in any son of man
whomsoever: for there is no help in any of them] Yet such universal rules do
usually admit some exception, or an exception of some principal particular. As
when it is said, he has put all things under his feet; it is manifest says
the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 27. that he is excepted, who put all things under him,
though He be more then all things that are put under him. And when our Apostle
tells us, that we must utterly renounce all works, and only rely on the mercy
of God in Christ: Yet the renouncing of all works (which is the greatest of
all works) must be excepted from this general rule. For he that renounceth
this work cannot come to Christ, cannot be partaker of Gods mercy in him. And
so in this general prohibition of the Psalmist, put not your trust in Princes,
nor in any son of man, that son of man must be excepted, who is also more
then the son of man, more then any Prince, the son of God, the Lord God of
Israel. In all other Princes, besides this one Prince, who was to reign for
ever, there is no help, no salvation, and because they are void of help and
salvation, they are incapable of our confidence; we may not safely repose our
trust in them, or upon them. But I would demand of the Jew, what opinion his
Forefathers, in the time of Moses, Samuel, David, and the Prophets, had of
their expected Messiah? What opinion the seed of Abraham this day living have
of the son of David, whom they expect shall reign over them? Was he, in the
opinion of their forefathers, to be no more then the son of man, though the
son of David? If he were to be no more then so, there was no confidence, by the
Psalmists rule, to be placed in him; they were not to expect help or salvation
from him; he could be but another David, another Sampson, another Ioshuah or
Moses. If he were to be but a King on Earth, as many others have been before
him, though all others, though put together, of much less power then they
expect he shall be; yet their expectation of him is fuller fraught with revenge
and malice toward others, then with hope of any great good unto themselves, if
so he were to be but a mighty Prince or Monarch, not truly God, or if his
Kingdom were but of this world, or to be bounded within the sphere of the
Moon, for so he might bruise and crush the Nations, as Joshua the Canaanites,
or David his enemies; he could not make all his own followers Kings and
Monarchs. Nor could Monarchies or Kingdoms make them happy, on whom he did
bestow them; there could be no help or salvation general either in Prince, or
Subject. The more bountiful he were in bestowing temporal blessings, wealth,
power or honor upon the seed of Abraham after the flesh, the greater calamity
he should bring upon other Nations. How then could he be that promised seed of
Abraham in whom all the Nations of the earth were to be blessed? Finally if the
ancient Jews (as I think these modern Jews will not deny) expected help and
salvation from their Messiah, if they taught their posterity to put trust in
this promised seed of Abraham, whenever he should be revealed, then it is
concluded, that their expected Messiah was to be that God of Israel, whom the
Psalmist in the 146. Psalm describes. And this is the fundamental article of
Christian faith, unto the acknowledgement whereof this Lord God of Israel in
his good time bring the seed of Abraham after the flesh, and all others which
either deny it, or are ignorant of it.

CHAP 22.
That the God of Israel was to become a servant and a subject to humane
infirmities, was foretold by the Prophets according to the strictest literal
sense.
THough all these Prophecies were punctually fulfilled (according to the strict
propriety of the literal sense) of God incarnate, or whilst he converst with
men here on earth, in the form of a Servant, which is somewhat more, then the
form and essence of a man: yet other prophecies there be, which more
punctually refer unto this estate in particular, and unto those grievances,
which it was impossible for him that was truly God to suffer, unjust for any
man to suffer, who was not by estate and condition a true servant in the
strictest sense of this word. Now we read that when Jesus had said to one sick
of the Palsy, Be of good Cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; the Scribes and
Pharisees (who were then present) begun to reason, saying, Who is this, that
speaks blasphemy? who can forgive sins but God alone? Luke 5. 21. And for
thus censuring his speech, they presume they had the warrant of God himself
Esaias 43. 25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine
own sake, and will remember thy sins no more. It was most true what from
this place they collect, to wit, that God alone could forgive sins. But from
the present miracle, Cap. 22
and the manner of our Saviors conversation with them here on earth, and their
most wicked dealing with him, (had they compared these with the words
immediately precedent in the Prophet) it had been easy for them to have
gathered that he was that only God, which did forgive sins. For so the
Prophet had said to this people in the person of his only God, Thou have made
me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thy iniquities. This in
particular is one of those many places, which even by the Jews confession,
could be literally meant of none, but God himself, and yet could never be
literally and punctually fulfilled or verified, but of God incarnate. For this
people did never make God to serve under their sins, he was never wearied
with their iniquities; save only whilst he took the form of a servant upon
him, and did bear their sins in the substance of their flesh.

2 Of the same observation is that other place, Esaias 63. 9, 10. In all their
affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his
love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all
the days of old. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit. Therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them. And so it is said, that
he was grieved forty years with that generation, which he had delivered out of
Egypt. And both places, were they to be limited only with reference to times
past, could not be meant of God otherwise then (...), or in a metaphorical
sense. But as well that complaint of the Psalmist, as this of the Prophet Esaias,
were not merely historical, but prophetical, both to be fulfilled after a
more exquisite sense in later ages. For all Gods mercies and loving kindness
to their Fathers were but as pledges, or talents given by way of earnest, for
greater goodness, and more tender mercies toward later generations; so they
would be thankful for the former. God, whilst he was only in the form of
God, could not in strict propriety of speech be troubled, could not be grieved
with compassion, could not be wearied. All those are passions, or accidental
affections, incident only to flesh and blood, or at least to natures subject to
servitude and punishment. But of God in our nature, and form of a servant, all
these patheticall complaints were most exactly accomplished. Who was weak
amongst his people, and he not weakened by their weakness? who amongst them
did mourn, and he not mourn with them? who was afflicted in body or soul,
and he not partaker of their afflictions? Of all those duties of Christian
charity, or fellow-feeling of others infirmities, practiced by his Apostles,
and commended to us by them; he by his practice and conversation, set the most
exquisite pattern, more exquisite then any, who was but man, could have set.
For he was a man of sorrows and infirmities to bear all our grievances. He
cured no bodily infirmity (though he cured many) whose grief (until the cure
was wrought) he did not suffer by exact and perfect sympathy. And only by the
anguish of his soul and spirit, not Israel alone, but all people throughout
the world, whoever found, or hope to find any, must find rest and comfort to
their souls and consciences. Yet all this the wicked posterity of that wicked
generation, (whose ingratitude toward the God of their Fathers did minister
both matter of complaint and of prophecy to the Prophet Esaias, and the Psalmist)
no way regarded, but requited all the pains, trouble, and affliction which he
had undertaken for their poor brethrens bodily good, and the comfort of all
their souls, with superaddition of those deadly griefs and sorrows, which by
the Romans help they brought upon him. This God of Israel in former times had
fought for them, and had conducted them in the form of an Angel, Ioshuah
himself being but his deputy, or under Co^mander. But now that they have thus
ungratefully requited him for all his loving kindness toward their Fathers,
whilst he was only in the form of God, or did appear in the garb or figure,
not in the substance of an Angel, and for all the troubles and grievances
undertaken by him for their good, whilst he was in the substance of man, and
form of a servant, he at length became their Enemy, and fought against them.
For as Visitors, though far absent, do yet visit by their Commissaries; so
this God of Israel, that Jesus whom the Jews had crucified being made King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, did judge Jerusalem, and the Nation of the Jews, by
Vespasian and Titus, as by his deputies. It was he, not they, that in that
great war did overcome them. As they had grieved him more then their
Forefathers had done, with whom he was grieved forty years in the wilderness;
so they did remain in the Land of their promised rest, but forty years after
his death, and so they remained in far worse case, then their forefathers had
done in the wilderness: and their posterity since have wandered throughout the
world, as unwelcome guests, for almost these sixteen hundred years.

CHAP. 23.
That God was to visit his Temple after such a visible and personal manner,
as the Prophet Jeremy in his name had done.
THe modern Jew cannot deny that of the Prophet Jeremy chap. 7. ver. 3, 4.
etc. to be meant of God alone: nor is he able to show us how it was, or could
be otherwise fulfilled, then of God incarnate, or of God in the visible nature
and substance of man-comming to visit his Temple: Thus says the Lord of hosts
the God of Israel; Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to
dwell in this place. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these, And again ver.
8. Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit. Will ye steal, Cap.
23.
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely and burn incense unto Baal,
and walk after other gods, whom ye know not: and come and stand before me in
this house which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all
these abominations? Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den
of Robbers in your eyes? Behold even I have seen it, says the Lord. To have
denied, that God at this time did truly hear what this people said, did truly
see what they did, did perfectly understand their secret thoughts, had been an
error much grosser, and more dangerous, then the error of the
Anthropomorphitae, that is, of such as imagined God by nature to have eyes,
ears, and heart like man. For that was but an heresy or transformation of the
Deity; the other was Epicurisme, the worst and grossest error wherewith the
very heathen or Infidels were possessed. And so the Psalmist describes it, Psalm.
94. 7. Yet they say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob
regard it. Understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will
ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the
eye, shall he not see? etc.

2. Sight and hearing were, in those times, as truly attributed to God, as now
they can be: yet in a general or transcendent, not so exquisite, so proper,
and formal a sense, as the patheticall expression, which the Prophet there
used, does literally imply. Behold, even I have seen it, says the Lord. For
certainly that implies a great deal more, then by ordinary Catechismes, or
domestique instructions, they could have learned: thus much at the least; that
the Lord God himself, who sent the Prophet to deliver this message, The Lord
God of Israel, who neither slumbreth nor sleeps, would watch his opportunity,
unless they did amend these misdemenors, to visit them and his temple, not by
a Prophet or deputed Commissary, but in person, and after as evident and
visible a manner to flesh and blood, as the Prophet had done, but with far
greater power. The Prophet had only mere spiritual power to protest against
them, no coercive authority to punish the delinquents, or to banish these
abuses out of the Temple: This case was reserved unto the Lord himself, and
was put in execution by him oftener then once, as I take it, at two several
Passeovers. For so we read John 2. 13. etc. And the Jews Passover was at hand,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found in the Temple those that sold Oxen,
and sheep, and Doves, and the changers of money sitting. And when he had made a
scourge of small cords he drove them all out of the Temple, and the sheep and
the Oxen; and powered out the changers money, and overthrew the Tables, and said
unto them that sold Doves; Take these things hence, make not my Fathers house
an house of Merchandise. This was done, I take it, at the first Passover after
his baptism, but he exercised the same power with greater authority at his
last coming to Jerusalem in triumph, so we read Matt. 21. 12, 13. And Jesus
went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them, that sold and bought in the
Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of them
that sold Doves; and said unto them, it is written, My house shall be called
the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves. It is to me
remarkable, that this Evangelist says, he went into the Temple of God: and yet
when he relates the very words which he then used, he says not, as in the
former place of S. John he did; It is written, my fathers house shall be called
an house of prayer; but My house shall be called the house of prayer, yet ye
have made it a den of thieves. And both S. Mark and S. Luke retain the very
same character of speech: Jesus says he, went into the Temple, etc. and would
not suffer, that any man should carry any vessel through the Temple, (an abuse
for which Jeremy had denounced Gods judgment against their forefathers:) and
he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, my house shall be called of all
Nations the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves? etc. Mark
11. 15, 16, 17. The like is Luke 19. 46. Both by his speech, and by the
extraordinary exercise of his more then royal authority, he gave them
evidently to understand, so they would have been taught by him, that he was
that very Lord, that very God of Israel, unto whom that house had been
dedicated, that Lord which had sent his Prophet Jeremy, to dehort their
forefathers from polluting the Temple, as now their posterity do. And if we
consider the usual condition, or stubborn temper of Church trading men, and
the strong back which long continuance of this plausible custom of making
provision for sacrifices in the temple, had given unto that sharp edge, which
the opportunity of this great and solemn feast had set upon their wonted
desires of gain; it is not imaginable, that so many men would so quickly have
quit their seats of merchandise, for the lash of any one man's hand unless it
had been withal the very hand of God: not credible that all the eyes in the
world besides could have blencht them in their wonted course, unless they had
bin eyed and looked upon, by the very eyes of God himself, of that God who was
chief Lord of the Temple. For so the eyes of Christ, as we Christians believe
and know, were as truly the eyes of God, as the Prophet Ieremies eyes were his
own, and that whilst he saw and looked upon those abuses of the temple with
humane eyes, yet he saw them with the eyes of God in as strict and exquisite a
sense, as Jeremy had seen them with the eyes of man.

3. The contents of this text are a prediction, or presignification, of that
rank and nature, which has been before deciphered in the general, that is, a
prediction typically prophetical; such as that of the Psalmist, The stone
which the builders refused, is become the chief stone in the corner. Or that
which in the literal or historical sense did respect the Paschall Lamb. [Not
a bone of it shall be broken.] For the Prophet Jeremy did by express words
foretell, and by matter of fact foreshadow, that which afterward was most
exactly accomplished. He was persecuted by that generation wherein he lived,
for the delivery of that message Chap. 7. ver. 12, 13, 14. But go ye now into
my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I
did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. And now, because ye have
done all these works, says the Lord, and I speak unto you, rising up early,
and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not:
therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye
trust, and unto the place which I gave to you, and to your fathers, as I have
done to Shiloh. The same message was delivered by him, many years after this
time, by the express commandment of the Lord, chap. 26. ver. 4, 5, 6. And
thou shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord, if ye will not hearken to me,
to walk in my Law which I have set before you to hearken to the words of my
servants the Prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending
them (but ye have not hearkened:) then will I make this house like Shiloh, and
will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth. His persecution
for this delivery of his message from the Lord, is upon sacred record, ver. 8,
9. Now it came to pass when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the
Lord had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the Priests and the
Prophets and all the people took him, saying, Thou shall surely die: why have
thou prophecited in the name of the Lord saying? This house shall be like
Shiloh, etc. The last generation of the Jews, with whom our Savior conversed
in as visible and familiar manner, as Jeremy had done with their forefathers,
did charge him first, and afterward his Martyr S. Stephen, with capital
blasphemy, for saying, the Temple then standing should be destroyed. The
accusation of our Savior for these words (conceived to be uttered by him) you
have Mat. 26. 60, 61. Yea though many false witnesses came, yet found they
none. At the last came two false witnesses and said, this fellow said, I am
able to destroy the Temple of God, and build it in three days. Or, as S. Mark
has the same accusation, Chap. 14. ver. 57, 58, 59. And there arose certain,
and bare false witness against him, saying, We have heard him say, I will
destroy this Temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will
build another made without hands. But neither so did their witness agree
together. If they had agreed, or come home to the interrogatories proposed, he
had dyed (if they had had the power of death) for saying the very same words in
effect, for which their forefathers threatened Jeremy with death. The same
practice you have reiterated against S. Stephen, Acts 6. ver. 12, 13. And they
stirred up the people, and the Elders and the Scribes, and came upon him, and
caught him, and brought him to the Council, and set up false witnesses, which
said, this man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place,
and the Law. For we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall
destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.
Whether S. Stephen said thus or no, I will not dispute, but most probable it
is, that he did never say this in express terms, because the Text says, They
set up false witnesses against him. However, these false witnesses against S.
Stephen. did truly prophecy as Cataphas did. For Jesus being made Christ, did
destroy the Temple by the Romans, and abrogated the ceremonies given by Moses,
because they had made up the measure of their forefathers sins, who
persecuted Jeremy for saying no more, in effect, then they laid to S. Stephens
charge. And that which Jeremy threatened, was in part fulfilled not long after
his persecution and imprisonment. For Sion became like Shiloh, a desolate place
and forsaken of God for a long time; yet reedified again within the age or
generation then living: so was not Shiloh until this day. Nor has Jerusalem
or Sion been restored, since they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, when
he came to visit his Temple, as Jeremy had done, and to be anointed King over
Sion.

4. All that I have to add unto the former testimony, Ier. 7. is this; that
our Savior, at this time of his consecration, or whilst he was a King or
Priest in fieri only, did give some documents of his royal power, or just
challenge to his right over Judah and Jerusalem, in a more special manner, then
at any time before he had done. For we do not read, that he did take upon
him to judge between party and party in matters temporal, nor to dispose of
the goods or possessions, whether of Jews or of Gentiles, save once, when he
gave the Legion of Devils leave to enter into the heard of Swine, and to carry
them headlong into the Sea. And this he did immediately after he had manifested
himself to be God, by commanding the wind and the water, as was before
declared. Before this time he might have said more truly then Samuel did, whose
Ox or Ass have I taken? Yet now when he came to visit his Temple, he gave his
Disciples Commission more then royal, to take an Ass and her colt for his
service, to ride on them in triumph (as the Prophet Zachary had foretold) unto
Jerusalem and to Sion. And this he did jure dominii, by right of Dominion. The
tenor of the Commission, and the execution of it, you have distinctly set
down, Matt. 21. 1, 2, 3. And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come
to Bethphage unto the Mount of Olives, thou sent Jesus two Disciples, saying
unto them. Go into the village over against you, and straight way ye shall
find an Ass tied, and a colt with her; loose them, and bring them to me. And
if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord has need of them: and
straightway he will send them. And S. Mark tells us, Chap. 11. ver. 5. And
certain of them that stood there, said unto them, What do ye loosing the
colt? And they said unto them, even as Jesus had commanded; and they let them
go.

5. This manner of his coming to Jerusalem, his powerful visitation of the
Temple immediately upon it, and the Inscription which Pilate made on his Cross,
some four days after, with other remarkable circumstances of the story or
journall of that sacred week, be a pregnant testimony, that this Jesus of
Nazareth, whom we adore, was that King of the Jews and of Sion, whose coming
Zacharias had so long before foretold. But it is not so apparent out of his
forecited prophecy, either that this King of ^^on was the God of Sion, or that
the God of Sion, and of Israel, was to be made King of both. For in that he was
God, he was the King not of Israel or Judea only, but of all the earth, God
over all from everlasting to everlasting by right of Creation. The next point
then in question betwixt the Jew and us, is this; Whether it may be
concludently proved from the literal sense of those Oracles which they adore,
that he, who was the God of Sion, and of Israel, from everlasting to
everlasting, were to be made King of Sion in later times, or after the gift of
Prophecy did cease in Judea and Jerusalem.

CHAP. 24. Cap. 24

That the God of Israel was to be made King, and to reign not over Israel
only, but over the Nations in a more peculiar manner than in former ages he had
done.
WEre there no other part or volume of the Old Testament left, besides the
book of Psalms; the testimonies contained in it, which according to the
literal sense will abundantly induce this conclusion, are for number more, and
more punctual, then all the testimonies which the Jew can bring out of all
other Scriptures, that they were to have a Messiah, or son of David, whose
throne was to be exalted above the throne of David or of Solomon. Or if this
book of Psalms were the only book, whereby both Jews and Christians were to
be regulated in points of faith, this book alone would condemn both, of such
folly and sluggishnesse of heart, as Christ our God and Savior upbraydeth
those two Disciples with; Luke 24. 26, etc. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his glory? And beginning at Moses, and all the
Prophets, he expounded to them, in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself. He did then enter into his glory, when he was made a King of glory:
and such a King he was not made, until he had endured an harder servitude, or
condition of life more miserable to flesh and blood, then Israel had done in
Egypt, or then any of the Prophets, whether Psalmists or others, had
undergone. Of this servitude or hard condition of life, which was prefigured by
matters of fact, in most of his Prophets, and in all those Psalmists, and
foretold in all those Psalms, which contain matter of complaint, or
imploration of release from oppression, in its proper place. We are now
briefly to peruse some of those Psalms, which according to the literal
sense, imply the exaltation of the God of Israel, or of Sion, to be the King of
Israel or of Sion and for this view it would much avail, if we knew, who were
the Authors of such Psalms, and upon what occasion they were penned.

2 The Author of the seventh Psalm was David himself, and no other, as the
inscription and occasion of his complaints, therein mentioned, do manifest. The
complaints he tenders immediately unto God, and yet this God, who was to be
awaked, was to return to his throne on high. Arise O Lord (says he ver. 6.)
in thine anger, lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine enemies, and
awake for me to the judgment that thou have commanded: so shall the
Congregation of the people compass thee about; for their sakes therefore
return thou on high. The Lord shall judge the people. Judge me O Lord
according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.
He that is to arise, was certainly laid down, and he that is to awake, was
for the time asleep; and he that was to return on high, was questionless
descended from the highness of his throne. Nor are these speeches to be
considered (...), more then that judgment of the people, which he implores of
God. I dare not affirm, that the 47. Psalm was penned or conceived by David
himself, yet authenticke and Canonical among the Jews. Now the whole current
of that Psalm contains a general acclamation, or gratulatory hymn of God
the Lord, who was to be made King. O clap your hands (all ye people) shout
unto God with the voice of triumph. For the Lord most high is terrible: he is a
great King over all the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the
Nations under our feet. He shall choose (...) inheritance for us, the excellency
of Jacob whom he loved. Some passages in this Psalm had their literal
verification in the practice of this people, at such solemn feasts as this
Psalm was appointed to be sung. For they did then exhibit such joyful
acclamations, as are here charactered, and exalt the name of the Lord, by
hymns of praise and thanksgiving. But both songs and ditties, the gestures of
both Priests and people which sung them, did foresignifie matter of more
universal triumphant joy, to be communicated to all Nations, when God should
become such a gracious King over them, as he had been over the seed of
Abraham, ver. 7, and 8. For God is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises
with understanding. God reigns over the Heathen: God sits upon the throne
of his holiness. Was it the chief matter of this public joy, that God
should subdue the Nations under the feet of Jacobs posterity? This had been
rather cause of sorrow to the heathen Nations, then any just cause of comfort
to the Jew, if these words (according to the literal) did import a temporal
or civil subjection of the Nations by conquest of sword. Nor does the
original word import any such thing, but a voluntary subjection or submission
wrought by fair and gentle persuasion. And by the unquestionable meaning of
the very letter; the Nations were to rejoice, in that they were to be thus
subdued, not to the whole Nation of the Jews, but to the inheritance which God
had chosen for them, or to the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. And these (as
Theodores rightly observes) were the Apostles and Disciples, whom God had
chosen out of the Jewish Nation. These indeed have brought not our bodies, but
our souls and consciences, under subjection to the yoke of Christ; who was
the God whom the Psalmist therefore prophesied should be very highly exalted,
not by ascending of the Ark into Mount Sion, nor by propagation of his
Kingdom, or gayning a greater multitude of subjects here on earth, then he had
whilst the Jews only were his chosen people; but by erecting a new throne and
Kingdom in the highest Heavens, where now he dwells, and executes the
royal judicature which he before did in the Tabernacle or in the Temple: there
he had a visible throne, and a visible mercy seat, but there his presence was
not always visible, nor visible at any time but in type or figure. And if we
may believe the later Jewish Doctors, when they speak unwittingly for us
against themselves, that solemn festival wherein this triumphant song was
publicly sung, was first instituted, and afterward continued, as an
anniversary memorial of the dedication of the Temple, Vide Mollerum in
argumentum hujus Psalmi.
or for bringing the Ark into it: and that was as much as the inthronization of
the God of Israel, as peculiar King and Lord of Sion. But they themselves do
grant, that this very Psalm was not only a triumphall memorial of what was
past, but withal prophetical, and to be fulfilled in the days of their
expected Messiah. And so we Christians see it now exactly fulfilled, according
both to the mystical and to the punctual literal sense, in Christ Jesus
their Messiah (though they acknowledge him not) now sitting at the right hand
of God, and designed to be the supreme Judge, not of the Jews only but of all
the world, of quick and dead.

3 That the God of Israel was to become King of all the world, to be crowned
with Majesty and glory, was to judge the world after another manner then from
the beginning of it, or at that time, when these late cited hymns were
consecrated to his praise, had been experienced; many other Psalms do so
punctually import, that without this supposition, or this interpretation of
them, they can have neither any true literal meaning, nor conteyne any
remarkable truth worthy the note of Selah, which is often inserted in Psalms
of this kind. The Lord (says the Author of the 93. Psalm) reigns; he is
clothed with majesty. The Lord is clothed with strength, wherewith he has
girded himself. He was to be thus clothed, thus girded with strength, not as
God, but as King. The world also is stablished; that it cannot be moved. Thy
throne is established (...) of old, a tunc, from then, that is, from the time
wherein he was thus to reign, and thus to be clothed with Majesty. And by
this establishing of his throne, the world was to be established after another
manner then it had been. He himself indeed (as it follows in the same
verse) was from eternity. So was not the throne or Kingdom which the Psalmist
there does not only describe but prophecy of; [his throne is an everlasting
throne] yet everlasting (as we say) a part post, from the time it was
established, not from eternity: and so is the kingdom here meant. And Psalm
96. 10. etc. Say among the Heathen, that the Lord reigns, the world also
shall be established, that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people
righteously. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let the sea
roar, and the fullness thereof: Let the Feilds be joyful, and all that is
therein, then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord: for he
comes, for he comes to judge the earth, he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with his truth. All these are characters of
times future; and that joyfulnesse of the fields and all that is in them, etc.
which the Prophet mentions, is (I take it) no other then the fulfilling or
satisfying of the earnest expectation of the Creature, waiting for the
manifestation of the sons of God. Romans 8. 19.

That of the Psalmist, Psalm. 97. 1. falls under the same line of observation:
The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles
rejoice. This literally implies, that the earth, whether generally taken, or
restrained to the Land of Jewry, should have better cause to rejoice, and the
multitude of the Isles new occasions of greater gladness, then in former times
they had known. When then was this new matter of joy and gladness, there
promised to all the earth and her inhabitants, to begin to bear date, or be
in esse? From that point of time, wherein the Lord began to reign after
another manner, then before he had done. The reign of the Lord over all the
earth, and over all the Islands of the earth (if we consider him only as God)
was from the beginning of the world, and so shall continue without change or
alteration World without end. The reign of the Lord then, in this place
foretold, must be the reign of God incarnate, or of Gods being made King. And
those holy men of God which thus speak, did by the spirit of prophecy foresee
those days which Abraham saw and rejoiced to see. Now the beginning of these
joyful days; was from the time wherein the Lord did loose the Prisoners, did
deal his bread unto the hungry, did open the eyes of the blind, and raised
them, that were bowed down, with his own hands, or with his own voice. For
so the Author of the 146. Psalm (a little before paraphrased) does conclude
that admirable (...), or triumphant song of the God of Israel; The Lord shall
reign for ever, even thy God O Sion unto all generations. All the former
works of mercy and piety toward miserable men, were but praeludia or
portending documents of his future reign, or oecumenicall Kingdom shortly
after to be established.

CHAP. 25. Cap. 25*

That the former Testimonies do concludently infer a plurality of persons in
the unity of the Godhead: and that God in the person of the son was to be
incarnate, and to be made Lord and King.
BUt if the Lord God of Israel were to serve under the sins of this people, or
to be made a servant for their sins; if he were to be anointed King not
over them only, but over all the earth besides; it will be demanded, unto whom
he was to be a servant, and who (after this his service,) was to make or Crown
him King? Surely, being God, he was not to be a servant unto man or Angel: if
he that was God must be a servant, he must be a servant to him who is, and
truly was, God. If he that was truly God, were to be anointed King, and to be
enthronized he must be anointed by him alone, who was as truly God. These
considerations enforce us, and when God shall give them hearts to take these
and the like into serious consideration, will persuade the Jews, that however
the God of Israel be one, yet in this unity of the Godhead; or divine Majesty,
they and we must acknowledge more then an unity or identity of persons. What
it is to be a person, and what manner of distinction is between the persons in
the blessed Trinity, are points which I never had mind to dispute More
Scholarum, since I first knew the Schools, or bent my studies to know Christ;
but was always ready to admire, what I knew not to express.

Nor could I ever well understand the language of such as thought themselves
able to instampe these high mysteries with Scholastic forms of words, but
have taken more delight and comfort, for these thirty years and more, in
rehearsing daily, (as I am bound by oath evening and morning) the Collect
appointed by our Church for Trinity sunday, with the Hymn annexed unto it in
the ancient liturgies; then in all the variety, whether of Schoolmen, or of
such polite writers as seek to adorn and beautify their ruder expressions of
this great mystery. And, I have In the preface to the Treatise of the Catholic
Church.
engaged my self not to meddle with this point until (by Gods assistance) I
have finished the rest of these Comments; and then, by way of meditation or
devotions only. Thus much notwithstanding, the former considerations, and the
very fundamental grounds of true Christianity enforce us to grant; that in the
divine nature, though most indivisibly one, there is an eminent ideall pattern
of such a distinction as we call between party and party; a capacity to give,
and a capacity to receive; a capacity to demand, and a capacity to satisfy:
Capacities sufficiently different for the exercise of justice and love, not ad
extra only, but within the divine nature it self. If there were but one party,
or person in the divine nature, the remission of men's sins without
satisfaction had been more proper and pertinent, then remitting of them upon
satisfaction. For one and the self same party to demand satisfaction of
himself, and to make it to himself (especially by way of punishment or
disgraceful affliction) is so unconceivable to reason it self, that it is
altogether incapable of admiration to reason sanctified, or enlightened by grace.

2. But this is that which some modern heretics labor to prove; to wit,
That God did not exact satisfaction for our sins of our Savior Christ Jesus;
that it had been exact cruelty in God to have laid the burden of all our
sins upon him, who knew no sin. But how then is Christ said to have taken
away our sins? God, (say these man) did freely remit them without
satisfaction, and Christ did take them away, by setting us a pattern of
holiness; and of patience in affliction; That is, in such sort as a Physician
might be said to have taken away an epidemicall disease, by prescribing a
recipe, which every one after might make for himself, and be his own
Apothecary. Briefly, they think that God cannot be excused from cruelty, but
by denying all true and proper satisfaction made to him by Christ. But it is an
oversight usually incident to men enclouded in grosser errors, to object that
unto their Adversaries, as an inconvenience or absurd consequence, which is
such only according to the objecters own tenets, but most true and consonant
to their principles whom they oppugn, if these might be taken into due
consideration. Thus some great Clearks in the Romish Church (but none of their
wisest men) object against us, that we make God a Ty^an^ by teaching that he
has given us a Law which is impossible for us to fulfill. The objection is
unanswerable, according to their principles, who teach, that a man cannot be
justified or absolved from the sentence of death denounced by the Law, without
perfect inherent righteousness or fulfilling of the Law: But the same
objection no way touches us; who teach, that albeit we must still be doing
that which is good, yet after we have done all we can (suppose much better then
either they or we do) we must still deny our selves, and renounce not the
works which we have not done, but the good works we have done, and wholly rely
upon the mercies of God in Christ, who once for all suffered for our sins,
and daily absolves us from them, so often as in sincerity of heart we confess
our sins, and implore his propititation for them. Unless we knew the
fulfilling of the Law, whether by habitual or actual righteousness, or by
doing those things which we ought to do, or leaving those things undone which
we ought not to do, to be impossible for us in this life; our reliance on God
in Christ could not be so firm, or so perpetually constant, as the doctrine of
our Church, (so it be rightly embraced,) will make it.

3. The Socinians wand^r in the like, but much grosser, ^^st of errors,
wounding one another whilst they shoot at us, who are sufficiently armed
against their poisoned arrows by the armor of God on the right hand and on
the left, to wit, the distinction of persons in the blessed Trinity. Indeed,
were there but one party or capacity in the divine nature, which were the only
party or person offended; their arguments for remission of sins after their
way would conclude against us, who press a necessity or convenience of
satisfaction unto God. But their strongest Arguments fall either wide, or
short, of all such as maintain this distinction of parties, or persons in the
divine nature. For if the son of God, or (...), were truly God from
eternity, and remained God after man did make himself the servant of Satan; he
might, without wrong to any man, to any party, without wrong to himself (for
volenti non sit injuria) voluntarily take the form of a servant upon him, and
in that form, or low condition of man, make perfect satisfaction per
translationem paenae, for all our debts, for all our sins; and our debts
being fully paid, restore us to the liberty and privilege of the sons of
God. He both might and did truly purchase that peculiar dominion over us, which
he has over all men, an absolute dominion of punishing all Gods ungracious,
and of crowning all his thankful and faithful servants. This dominion, as it
is peculiar to Christ, was purchased by true and real satisfaction made unto
God.

4. But what it was for Christ, the son of God, to take upon him the form of
a servant, or wherein this condition or form of a servant did properly consist,
are points which neither the Arian nor the Socinian did ever take into serious
consideration. If the Socinian would yet do so, he might clearly see that his
former objections could not reach us, but must rebound upon himself. For the
man Christ Jesus, being so just a man, as we believe, and he grants he was,
unless he had been more then man, truly God, and truly a servant withal, it
could not have stood with the goodness of God, nor with any rule of justice
divine or humane, either to have punished him for our sakes, as we say God did,
or to have suffered him to undergo such hard and cruel usage at the hands of
wicked and sinful men, as the Socinians confess he did undergo; without
murmuring or complaint. But this is a point which cannot be orderly handled,
until we come to the death and passion of our Lord and Savior, which was the
(...) or period (rather,) of his servitude, or of being in the form of a
servant, which was the Basis of his humiliation. And albeit I purpose not in
that place to dispute, whether God could possibly have freely remitted our
sins without any satisfaction (a question to which no wise men will take upon
them to give a peremptory answer, whether negative or affirmative:) yet I shall
by Gods assistance, there make it clear, that no other means of manner of
remitting out sins, of absolving or justifying us, or of bringing us to
glory, which either the Socinian, or the wit of man can imagine, could have
been so admirable to sober capacities, as that way and manner which the
Scripture plainly teaches, and that in brief is this.

5. The divine nature, in the person of the Father, requires satisfaction for
the transgressions of man against the eternal Law and unchangeable rule of
goodness, or those positive Laws which he had given in special to man. The
same divine nature in the person of the son, undertook to make satisfaction
for us, in taking our nature upon him, and He having by right of
consanguinity, the authority and power of redeeming us; the same divine nature
in the person of the holy Ghost does approve, and seal this happy and ever
blessed compromise. This ineffable accord between the divine persons in the
unity of the Godhead, concerning the great work of man's redemption, is most
exactly parallel to that accord, which some of the Ancient have excellently
observed betwixt them in that work of creation, as has been before expressed
in that article. Not to repeat, nor to add to that which was there delivered,
but to continue these present discussions concerning the eternity and person of
the son of God.

6. Some there have been, and are, who granting all that we have said, or can
desire to be granted, concerning the incarnation of God, or Trinity of persons
in the unity of the Godhead, further demand; why God rather in the person of
the son, then in the person of the father, or of the holy Ghost should be
incarnate or made flesh? But might not these men (some perhaps will say) as
well have demanded, why God the Father did make the world rather by the son
then by himself, or by the holy Ghost? Or why this title of Him, by whom all
thing were made, should be peculiar to God the son? And to this question, it
would be a satisfactory answer to say, that we must believe that the world was
so made because the Scripture, which is the only rule and guide of faith, does
so instruct us; or because the persons of the blessed Trinity (for reasons best
known unto themselves alone) would have it to be so, and so to be written. But
many arguments there be well observed by the ancient, and better explicated by
modern Divines, (some of whose works are extant in print, others worthy of the
press) unto which I shall be as far from adding as from detracting. These
reasons alone abundantly satisfy all the desires, which I ever had to be
informed in this point. First, seeing the blessed Trinity was pleased to have
satisfaction made for the sins of mankind, and by this satisfaction to
exhibit an exquisite pattern of justice and equity: Secondly, seeing man's
sin did especially consist in rebellion; the satisfaction was (according to
the rule or pattern of equity and justice) to be made by most exquisite
obedience. Now the most exquisite obedience that can be performed, is from a
son unto his father, or from a servant unto his Lord. Hence it pleased the
eternal wisdom, and son of God, to take not the nature of man only, but
the form of a servant (for a while) upon him, to make the most perfect and
abundant satisfaction, by the most exquisite obedience of which both the state
of a son, and condition of a servant was capable.

7. The stone of offense, whereat the Socinians (who account themselves good
Christians, and do not deny Christ to be the Son of God) do so much
stumble, is in part the very same with the prejudice which the Arians had of
the orthodoxall truth; whose breach or disruption in the Canon of the ancient
Catholic faith, the first Nicene Council sought to repair, not by addition
or superstruction of any new Articles of belief, but by a gentle diduction or
dilatation of that sense, which was included in the Apostles Creed, or in the
ancient rule of faith. I believe in one God, etc, and in one Lord Jesus Christ,
the only begotten son of God, begotten of his father before all worlds, and
again, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of the same substance
with the Father, etc. It is not improbable, that the Arians and their followers
might take offense, or pick a quarrel, at this Title [of being the only
begotten son of God before all worlds] the rather, because some of the most
ancient, and not a few middle-age writers do seek to ground this article upon
that divine oracle, Ps. 2. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee* as
if hodie in that place did not literally and punctually refer to any
peremptory day or time circumscriptible by remarkable circumstances, or notable
historical events, but were put for body aeternitatis, which implies no time,
but an indivisible interminable duration. And if the allegation were true in
this sense, there could be no question between professors of Christianity
about the eternal generation of Christ Jesus, as he is the son of God. But
so it often falls out, that some one impertinent allegation, or weak proof,
being too much stood upon, does provoke or embolden such men, qui ita veritatem
amant, ut velint esse vera quaecunque amant, to deny the general truth, for
whose confirmation weak and impertinent proofs are brought; albeit the same
truth might be most strongly prooved from many other irrefragable testimonies
of Scripture. That the Psalmist Psalm. 2. speaks of our Saviors resurrection
from the grave, is most clear from the Apostles testimony; and in what sense
it was fulfilled, whether in the literal only, or in the mystical, or in
both; whether according to the plain literal sense, it took as well retro as
ante, or have any especial reference to what is past, shall, by Gods
assistance, be discussed in the explitation of that great Article. I dare not
in this place, use the former authority, to prove the eternal generation of
the son of God.

8 That he should be [the only begotten Son of God] otherwise then by his
begetting from the dead unto glory and immortality; or that he should be so
before the World (from all eternity) may seem to imply a contradiction in
terminis. For the Father must be before the son, unless we take these
terms, as terms merely relative, not as importing any substance or persons.
All terms merely relative qua tales are simul natura, coaevall for standing.
Abraham, though an ancient man, was not Isaacs Father, before Isaac was his
son. But if we respect the persons, or substances betwixt whom such
relations stand, the person of the Father is always before the person of the
son, according to precedence of time; or if we consider not the persons or
substances, but that which they call proximum fundamentum relationis, that act
or operation, from which such relations do immediately result; so it is true
that generans est prior generato, Begetting or to beget has priority or
precedencis (though not of time yet of nature) of being begotten. But if the
Son of God be coeternall to his Father, there can be no place for either of
these precedencies or priorities, nor for any thing truly proportionable to
them, seeing in eternity there is nihil prius, nihil posterius, no prioritie,
no succession. How then can Christ Jesus be conceived to be the only son of
God, begotten of his father before all worlds, if to be before all worlds, be
as much as to be from all eternity, or in eternity? To this we answer, that
where the truth of the matter is unquestionable; men soberly minded should not
wrangle about the strict propriety of words; especially in mysteries whose
comprehension far surpasses man's capacity, and are even to blessed Angels
ineffable, or unexpressible in any punctual or proper phrase. The truth which
the Nicen Fathers sought to establish, was this; that Christ Jesus was not made
the Son of God before all worlds, but was the son of God, very God of very
God, from all eternity, coeternall, and coequall to his Father. For so they
express themselves [Hee was begotten and not made] The manner of his eternal
generation or begetting, they seem to resemble to the generation or production
of light. For so they say, light of light, very God of very God, etc. Now that
light which the splendid body of the sun diffuseth through the air (but
especially through caelestiall bodies) is coevall with its Fountain, which
produces or begets it. For it was never held a solecisme, to call Lumen
filiam lucis, to say light is the daughter of the sun. But however it shall
please men to express the manner of the Son of Gods Eternal generation; the
former inductions, that Peter est prior filio natura et tempore, that the
person or substance of the Father has always precedence both of time and
nature in respect of the person and substance of the son, or that generans is
prius natura generato, to beget has always precedence of nature, (though not
of time) of being begotten, are true only in temporal generations, or
successions. All men, and other generable creatures since the world began have
been moratall de facto. The first man was but conditionally immortal. And
albeit he might have lived for ever, yet had he a beginning of life in time;
and so were his sons or successors to have; albeit they had been borne
immortal, or both borne and begotten before he did subject himself and them
to mortality, by sin. If immortal creatures could have sons or successors
by nature, they were to be immortal by nature: otherwise they should be a kind
of monsters, or an equivocall brood. If then he who possesses eternity, have
a true and proper son [which the word only begotten implyes] after what
manner soever he be his son, (though by a manner altogether unconceivable to
us) that son must be coeternall to his Father. For the truly eternal God to
have, beget, or produce a son which is not eternal, but everlasting only a
part post, is as unconceivable to reason, as that an immortal Father should
beget a mortal, or a mortal Father an immortal son. No Schoolmen did ever
acknowledge the generation of the Son of God to be univocally like to other
generation in all points besides the eternity of it. For even in that we
acknowledge it to be eternal, we difference it from all other generations by
such an unexpressible superminencie, as eternity has over time, or divine
immensitie of all bodily magnitudes, or the Divine Essence it self of Created
Natures.

CHAP 26.
That by the Son of God and the Word, we are to understand one and the same
party or person: that the Word by whom S. John says the World was made, is
coeternall to God the Father, who made all things by him.
BUt to wave this point (for the present) concerning the manner how the eternal
God should beget an eternal son: the thread which we are to unwind (as far
as possibly we can without knot or ravell) is this: that Christ Jesus is ^eri,
body, yesterday, to day, the same (only true son of God) for ever, truly
coeternall to his Father. And this being a point of so great consequence, I
will not allot one place only for the clearing of it, but insist upon it (more
or less) in all the articles which concern Christ. For in all of them, we
shall be enforced to encounter the Jew, as well as the Arrian, or Socinian.

2 Whether of these two be the greater sinner, or more dangerous enemy to the
cross of Christ, that I leave to God the Father, and Christ Jesus the judge of
quick and dead, and to the holy Spirit to determine. But seeing it is no sin
to refute or censure both their errors; the error of the modern Jew, who
utterly denies Christ to be the son of God in any sense seems to me more
excusable, Cap. 26
at least less inexcusable then the error of the Arrian or Socinian; who
granting Christ to be the son of God, deny him to be coeternall to his
Father. And my reason is, because it is not more plain or pregnant out of the
writings of Moses or the Prophets (which the Jews only acknowledge) that God
was to be incarnate or to become man (though that be most pregnant;) then it is
from the Evangelist and other sacred writers of the new Testament, (whose
authority the Socinian denies not) that Christ is the only son of God from
all eternity. Two or three testimonies shall suffice for the present. Were
there no other place besides that of the Apostle Heb. 7. 3. and that of S. John
chap. 1. these would captivate my understanding to the obedience of belief in
this point. The Apostle speaking of Melchisedech says, he was without
beginning without end of life, (...), that is, albeit he had both Father and
Mother, beginning and end of days, yet he is represented unto us, without
beginning or end of days, that so he might be a type or shadow of the son of
God. But how far a type of the son of God? only in this, as he was without
beginning of days, or end of life. That the Apostle by the son of God did
mean Christ Jesus and none else, none deny. The very scope and end of this
parallel betwixt Melchisedech and Christ was, to show that Christ the son of
God was truly and really such as Melchisedech was only by shadow or
representation; that is really and absolutely without beginning or end of
days, he who is, who was, and is to come: perfect characters of eternity.
Again, it is evident, that the son of God who died for us, was the same
person and party with that (...), with that word which was made flesh. This
consequence is ungainesayable [that if (...), the Word were without beginning
or end of days; God blessed for ever, and coeternall with him, who said, Let
there be light, Let there be a firmament, etc. then Christ Jesus the son of
God, who not only we but the Socinians grant did die for us, was and is without
beginning or end of days, truly coeternall to God the Father]

3 That (...) [the word of God] was absolutely eternal not made so in time, is
a truth which the wit of man cannot more punctually press against all that in
future times should deny or question it, then S. John does in the beginning of
his Gospel. And the manner of his reiterate emphaticall expressions of
himself, (every later adding strength unto the former) confirms the opinion
or tradition of the Ancient: that he purposely wrote that maiestick proeme to
his Gospel (which is but a paraphrase, though most divine, upon the writings
of Moses, and the Prophets touching this great mystery) for preventing of the
spreading of the Arian or like heresy whose seeds were by the envious man
sown in S. John's time, after Christ's other Apostles were fallen asleep. In
the beginning (says S. John) the Word was; What beginning does he mean? The
same which Moses meant, when he said, In the beginning God made the Heaven and
the Earth. The original phrase, whether used by Moses in the Hebrew, or by S.
John in the Greek, exactly answers to the Latin in principio. Now though
every cause be Principium, the beginning or that which gives beginning to its
proper effect: Yet Omne principium every beginning is not a proper cause of
that which usually follows upon it. For the first dawning or scaring of the
morning is the beginning, yet no true positive cause, of the day following; it
is first in order of time, but not of causality. And this ambiguity of the
Phrase in the beginning is the same both in the Hebrew, and in the Chaldee as
the learned in these tongues (no parties in this business) have observed. Now
in that first of Genesis, we must take the word beginning, not for the cause of
all which followed, but for the first in order or precedence of duration. For
the heavens and the earth (if we take them as now they are) were not made in
that beginning or point of time wherein God is said to have made the heaven and
earth: Nor did any of these, or any other parts of the world spring or result
by way of causality from the first mass which was without order of parts; or
true form; otherwise the distinction of light from darkness, or separation of
the waters which are above the firmament, could not have been works of
creation properly so called, but rather of generation; whereas the Scripture
tells us, that these were the works of the first and second day: much less
could the production of plants or vegetables, or substances endued with sense
have been any proper works of creation, after the heavens and earth were made.
When then Moses says, Inprincipio erat verbu^ hoc est erat ante omnia:
Significat enim differentam filii Dei, and rerum creatarum, quippe hae in
principio fiunt: at aeternus filius nequaquam fit in principio, verum erat ante
omnia sacula. Et que^admodum caelum, and terra in principio, id est ante omnia
fuerunt facta: ita Dei verbum erat ante omnia creata. Nam praeteritum
antiquitatem, and praeexistentiam nobis designat. Adhaec (...) principio fiunt,
sed ^on est (...), ut s^^t: at verbum Dei in principio erat, quod est, non
factum est, sed erat and est. Simon Portius in initio Scholii in haec verba
loannis.
In the beginning God made the Heaven and the Earth, this is all one, as if he
had said, the heavens and the earth had a beginning, and that this unformed
mass was the beginning or first draught of them, and all things else whereof
this mass was the beginning, did begin to be before they had any permanent
or determinate kind of being. And when S. John says, (...). In the beginning
the word was: the Phrase in grammatical construction necessarily implies that
the word had a perfect actual being when all things else did but begin to
be, and having then an actual proper being, it could not at that time, or any
time since, not at the beginning of time it self, begin to be, but was and
is and so continues, without ending.

4. Or lest wits unarmed with arts, or unable to untwist arguments subtly
contrived by sophistry, should be made to stagger in this article of the
eternity of the word, he adds the word was with God, and the word was God, not
by extrinsecall or borrowed appellation (as Princes and Angels sometimes are
called Gods) but by nature God, the Almighty God. Hence he adds, the same was
in the beginning with God, that is, had as perfect being as God himself had,
when all things else begun to be [there is his eternity] or if this were not
enough, he further says, ver. 3. All things were made by him, to wit, by the
Word [This is the character of his Almighty power or coequality with God who
made all things by him.] But here perhaps the Arian, or other involved in his
error, will object, at least in favor of this opinion it may be objected, that
this universal of S. John, all things were made by the Word, is subject to the
same limitation or exception which those two universal before Chap. 21 parag.
6.
mentioned were, the one out of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. [When he says he has put
all things under his feet, he is excepted who has put all things under him:]
the other out of the Author of the 146, Psalm. [that we may not put trust or
confidence in any son of man] which admits of this limitation [unlesse it be
in that son of man, who is also the son of the Lord God of Israel:] why
then may not this universal of S. John [All things were made by the Word,]
admit of this or the like restraint; All other things besides the word were
made by God, and by the word as his coagent, but the word himself made by God
alone? Indeed if our Evangelist had said only thus [All things were made by the
Word] this limitation would be more tolerable; but to prevent this cavil or
captious limitation, he expressly adds [Without him was not any thing made
that was made] This clause reaches home, and caries it clear, that this (...)
the Word, was not any of those things which were made or created, otherwise it
should have been made or created by it self, which is impossible. The addition
of this clause is but an exegeticall, or fuller expression of that which S.
John said before [that the Word was with God in the beginning,] that is, when
all things which have beginning, did begin to he, this word was Gods
coagent, truly eternal and Almighty.

5. The same conclusion is contained (though more closely couched, especially
in our English version) in that of S. Paul, Heb. 1. 2. God in these last days
has spoken unto us by his son, whom he has appointed heir of all things,
by whom also he made the Worlds. Though he be appointed heir of all things,
as he is man, yet this right of inheritance was derived unto him as man, from
the work of Creation, as he was the son of God. For as the Apostle there
adds, God by him made the Worlds. Were there then more worlds then one? If
there were, all were created by the son, and without him neither any world,
nor any part of the world was created. Howbeit the world in the original, does
no signify this visible or quantitative world, non mundos sed saecula, non
(...) sed (...), not the heavens, the earth, the elements, or any other part
which we see, but all things whatsoever, which have any duration or succession,
were made by the son of God; and he had a perfect being before any thing
could he made by him, and is therefore truly eternal. The worlds in the
original comprehends all things which heretofore have been, and now are not;
all things which now are and sometimes were not; all which hereafter shall be,
though after their beginning of being they shall have no end. So that S Paul's
speech expressly extends it self somewhat further then that of S. John, All
things were made by him, and without him was nothing made that was made. S.
John's speech (expressly) refers only to things which were then made, S. Paul's
speech extends it self as well to things future as past, not only for their
making or beginning, but for their preservation or supportance. For so he says
Heb. 1. ver. 3. He upholdeth all things by the word of his power. As the father
then created all things, so were all things created likewise by the son. The
Father preserves all things, and yet the son (who is the express image of
his glory,) preserves and upholdeth all things. And however we render the
original (...) the brightness, or (...), he is the Almighty splendour, and the
Almighty expression or character of the father Almighties glory and person.
Finally, as he is heir of all things else, so is he heir of the Almighty
Essential Attributes; these he enjoyes, not (...), not by adoption or
participation; but (...) by right of inheritance, as being his only begotten
son: yet not his successor but his coequall from eternity. And here (by the
way) I cannot sufficiently admire the care and wisdom of the ancient Church,
in appointing the gospel for that great festival, (wherein we celebrate the
memory of Christ's nativitie) out of the forementioned Chapter of S. John: and
the Epistle for the same festival, out of the first of the Hebrews; to the end
that all Christians might be sufficiently instructed as well in the truth of
his eternal generation, or eternity of his person, as he is the son of God,
as of his nativity in time, as he was the son of David borne of the Virgin,
or of his begetting from the dead. And as for the error of the Arians or
others, who acknowledging the divine truth of the new Testament, deny the
eternity or eternal generation of the son of God; The most compendious way
to refell them is not (as I conceive) fiercely to dispute against them, but
rather to let them be carried with the blast of their own doctrine, or draw
them unto these fundamental Rocks, and let them split themselves.

6. But to follow S. John's expressions a little further, which come nearer to
the point now in handling, ver. 4. In him (that is, in the word) was life, this
is more then if he had said, he is the word of life. For so is the Gospel by
way of efficacy or efficiency; but men only, who live by it, are the seat and
subject of that life which it imparts; which is wrought by the preaching of it.
But when the Apostle says, in the Word was life, this implies, he was that
seat and fountain of life, from whom both the efficacy of the Gospel, and
that life which is subjectively in men or Angels, is derived or participated.
And the life was the light of men, and the light shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not. All these are Attributs or expressions of a nature
truly divine, characters of a living essence, or of life it self, before men
or the world were made, and this is confirmed to us ver. 8. The Word was the
true light, which lightneth every man that comes into the world, And if every
man that comes into the world, then the first man Adam was enlightened by this
word: For he was both the light and life of the world, ever since the first
beginning of either; albeit the world and worldly men did not apprehend him to
be such, as it is expressed ver. 10. He was in the world, and the world was
made by him, but the world knew him not, So them, he was in the world ever
since it was made, and the world was in him (as in its eminent, or ideall
efficient cause) before it was made. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. Who were these his own? If all generations of men, or all
succession of time, or things temporal were made by him, all these were his
own. Yet before the coming into the world, of which the Apostle here speaks,
all these were not his own by the same peculiar right. He always was Lord of
lords, and King of kings, and supreme ruler of such as ruled the nations; yet
were not all nations his peculiar inheritance: this was the prerogative of
Abraham's seed or Jacobs posterity. And albeit he had been in them and with
them after a more special kind of presence for many generations: yet at this
time, whereto the Apostles words refer, he first came by a peculiar manner,
both into the world and unto them, by becoming an inhabitant or sojourner in
the territories bequeathed to Abraham and to his seed. But these who were thus
his own by peculiar redemption from the land of Egypt, for the most part
received him not. Yet his coming (though) after this peculiar manner, to his
own was not lost, nor was Gods promise to Abraham any way impeached by their
refusing, or not receiving of him. For to as many as received him (whether they
were of Abraham's seed after the flesh, or of the Gentiles, to all of both
sorts) he gave a right or privilege to become the sons of God. ver. 12. All
were made the true and lively sons of Abraham by receiving him, who was
before Abraham, but was now made man of the seed of Abraham. Now in that he
made all the sons of God which received him: this presupposes he was the
son of God, not by making, not by taking the seed of Abraham; but the son
of God by nature or eternal generation, the true God of Israel. For so the
Evangelist concludes that heavenly discourse ver. 14. And the word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

7. Why S. John in the proaeme to his Gospel does iustyle Christ Jesus the
word of God, rather then the son of God, why it is rather said, the Word
became flesh, then the son became flesh: in what prophecy the words becoming
flesh was foretold or foreshadowed, with the manner how it was made flesh, or
the meaning of this phrase; must be the subject of some Chapters following.
This, for the present, is evident out of places before alleged, that S. John
did mean no other party or person by the word, then him whom afterward,
throughout his whole Gospel, he styles the son of God: and out of the same
places it is as evident, that the word, (...), was that very God of Israel, who
had promised to erect a Tabernacle and dwell in his people or amongst them, and
to manifest his glory to them after a more peculiar manner, then he had done,
either during the time of the first tabernacle, or of both the Temples. For
that text of S. John John, 1. 14. He dwelt amongst us, and we saw his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten son of God, imports the exact fulfilling of
all those prophecies, wherein the manifestation of Gods glory in succeeding
ages is promised. That the glory of God was to be revealed in the flesh, S.
John did learn from Scriptures, which were extant before our Saviors
incarnation; though this he learned not by study or art, but from Divine
revelation. But that the man Christ Jesus, with whom he conversed here on
earth, was the word, which the Scripture foretold should be made flesh, or that
the glory, which shined in him, was the very brightness of Gods glory; this S.
John knew by experiment; as having seen his transfiguration upon Mount Tabor,
and conversed with him after his resurrection. This both he and S. Paul
believed from sensible evidence of experiments exactly answerable to the
predictions of Moses and other Prophets, concerning the glory of God, which was
in later times morefully to be revealed, then in former.

8 To omit those two places before cited Exodus 29. 44, 45. and Leviticus 26.
11, 12. (unto both which places that of S. John chap. 1. 14. does in special
refer) we will insist a while upon that text Exodus 33. 14. to the 23. The
Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend. The
sum of this dialogue is expressed ver. 14, 15. My presence (says God) shall
go with thee, and I will give thee rest. And Moses said, if thy presence go not
with us, carry us not up hence, for wherein shall it be known here, that I and
thy people have found grace in thy sight? But Moses not satisfied with the
promise of Gods presence, and separation of them from other people, requests a
sight of his glory, and this in part is granted ver. 21, 22, 23. And the Lord
said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon a Rock. And it
shall come to pass while my glory passes by, that I will put thee in a clift
of the Rock, and will cover thee with my hand, while I pass by. And I will
take away mine hand, and thou shall see my back parts: but my face shall not be
seen. For so God had said ver. 20. Thou can not see my face: for there shall
no man see my face, and live. Yet this sight of Gods glory, or so much of it as
Moses saw, left such an impression in his face or Countenance, as you may read
chap. 34. ver. 33. that he was constrained to put a veil upon his face,
whilst he talked with the people, who were not able to behold the glory. But
this veil as our Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3. 14.) is put away in Christ. It is
true. Yet this (...), or the word, was not the Christ to do away this veil,
till he put on the veil of flesh. The flesh then was a veil to him, but as a
glass or mirror to us. We may in Christ with open face behold that glory of
God, whose reflexe on Moses face the Israelites could not behold, but through a
veil. Christ then is that glass or mirror, wherein the brightness of Gods
glory, which the Israelites could not then behold, may now be seen. But did
the Jews or Israelites in the time of the old Testament (or in that time,
wherein the Author of the book of Wisdom wrote) conceive any such matter, as
our Apostle here inferres, that the glory of God should be more fully revealed;
or that men should be more capable of the participation of his presence in
later ages, then they had been in former? Some of them did, others did not;
all of them ought, even by their own prenotions or interpretations of
Scriptures, so to have conceived and believed. For thus some modern Jews
conceive of Moses his request. What was that (says a great Rabbin amongst
them) which Moses our Master sought to attain unto, when he said, I pray thee
show me thy glory?

9 He requeged to know the truth of the being (or essence) of the holy blessed
God, until that he were known in his heart, like as a man is known, whose
face is seen, and whose form is ingrave^ in ones heart: so that man is
distinguished or separated in his knowledge from other men. So Moses requested
that the Essence of God might be distinctly known in his heart from the
essence of other things, so that he might know the truth of his Essence as it
is. But God answered him, that the knowledge of living man, who is compounded
of body and soul, has no ability to apprehend the truth of this thing
concerning his Creator. Ainsworth upon this place, out of Maimony etc.
That knowledge of God or sight of his glory whereof Moses was incapable, was
truly engraven in the heart of the man Christ Jesus, and in his light we see
light. He that saw him with the eyes of faith, did see the father; he did see
the glory of the Godhead. The brightness of the divine glory is alike
inaccessible, alike incommunicable in the Son as in the Father, if we
consider them in their divine nature alone; but in the man Christ Jesus, and in
him alone, we may behold the brightness of the Divine glory, which neither
eye nor heart of man could behold in it self, or in any divine person alone,
but only in the divine person which was incarnate.

10 And it is not here to be omitted that the forecited 29. of Exodus ver. 45,
I will dwell among the Children of Israel is thus translated by Onkelus in his
paraphrase and ponam praesentiam divinitatis meae in medio filiorum Israel. So
Fagius (with some others) render it; and why he so renders it, gives the
reason. Paraphrasi quaedam vsus sum ad explicandu^ vim et energiam vocis
Chaldaicae Shechinah, quam, ad verbum quietem vertere, (...) enim verbum,
quaescere significat. Hinc Hebraei presentiam Dei quae sese in tabernaculo
circa arca^ exerebat, a quiescendo, (quod ibi videretur quasi quietem et sedem
suam babere Deus). Shechinah appellant. Nos jam quietem, jam praesentiam
Divinitatis, jam majestatem illius reddidimus. Fagius in Exodus 29. 45.
And the later Rabbines (as Ainsworth upon this place.
one well conversant in their writings, says) generally observe that
whenever it is said in the person of God, that I will dwell amongst them;
this may not be understood but of the Majesty of the holy and blessed God. To
this purpose they allege the 9. verse of the 8* Psalm, His salvation is near
them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our Land. And Simeon, in his dying
song, does testify, that Jesus the son of Mary, whom he embraced, when he
was presented in the Temple, was the salvation of God. Lord now lattest thou
thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word. For mine eyes have seen
thy Salvation. And although our Savior, whilst he lived here on earth, had
no constant dwelling, no place of inheritance; yet at this time the Godhead, or
that glory of the Godhead, of which the Psalmist speaks, was incorporated in
him. These and the like Scriptures S. John did see fulfilled in Christ, when he
said, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw his glory the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father; that is, such glory as could not
be communicated to any but to him, who was by nature the son of God: such
glory as no flesh could behold, otherwise then as it was in Christ, or in the
word made flesh; such a declaration of the divine Majesty as none besides the
son of God could declare. So the Apostle says, ver. 18. No man has seen
God at any time, but the only begotten son who is in the bosom of the
Father, (...), he has declared, or expounded him. But wherein does this
declaration consist, or how was it made by the son? Not by word only, or by
declaration of his will, but by matter of fact, or real representation. But of
this point more fully in the exposition of the name Jesus. Seeing Moses had
said, that no flesh could see God and live, it may seem strange to men, which
have not their senses exercised in the search of Scriptures; that the Prophet
Isaiah should avouch the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh
shall see it together. Isay 40. 5. Moses speech, and that conceit which the
ancient had, [that man could not see God and live] was universally true, until
the word or brightness of Gods glory was made flesh. But this was the very
mystery which Isaiah in that chapter foretold, as elsewhere has been
declared in part, and shall be (as it comes in order to be handled) more fully
a little after this Chapter.

11 That the modern Jews can expect the God of their Fathers should dwell with
them, should walk with them, should manifest his glory unto them, after such a
manner as their own Doctors interpret his promise made to Moses to al these
purposes, after any other way or manner, then the Evangelist witnessed, he did
walk with, and manifest his glory unto, his Disciples: This (to us Christians)
is an evident demonstration, that the vale, which their Forefathers put before
their faces, when they could not behold the brightness of Gods glory, which
shone on Moses face after he had seen God and talked with him, is to this day
put before their hearts, when they read Moses and the Prophets. For this
glorious Majesty of God, the very express or graven Image of his substance,
which (they say) Moses desired to see but could not, did so personally dwell in
the man Christ Jesus, that whilst he walked with his people, God did walk
with the^; whilst he remained within the territories of Judah or Galilee,
salvation and glory did dwell in their Land. And to this day in whomsoever he
dwells by faith in him God dwells by faith. As he is the express image of
the person of his Father: so every one in whom he thus dwells, in him is the
express image of him as he is man; he is the Tabernacle or Temple of the
living God. The inference is our Apostles 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the Temples of
the living God, at God has said, I will dwell in the^, and walk in the^, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. Our Evangelist S. John Revel.
21. 3. exegetically dilates the former testimonies of Moses, and the Prophets a
great deal further, the^ S. Paul here does, I heard a great voice out of
Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain, for the former things are passed away. But this mortality must put
on immortality, and our corruptible flesh become incorruptible, before this
last clause of S. John's prophecy can be literally fulfilled in us; or begin to
bear date in esse. And before this happy change of our mortal bodies, none of
those other prophecies Exodus 29. Levit. 26. Ezekiel. 37. shall be finally
accomplished; albeit all of them have been already fulfilled in different
measure and manner, both according to the literal, and mystical sense: For
God has dwelt and does dwell more properly in the man Christ Jesus then at any
time he did in the Tabernacle or Temple. These were in their times the seats of
Gods peculiar presence, of the manifest appearances of his divine Majesty,
from which all the blessings upon Israel or Abraham's posterity by bodily
descent were derived, after such a manner as the visible light in this
inferior world is derived from the body or sphaere of the sun. Yet such as
were partakers of these blessings, all the particular Synagogues through the
land of Jury, did not by this participation of his presence in the Temple or
Tabernacle, become Temples or Tabernacles of the God of Israel: these were
never conceived to be or instyled the seat of his rest, or of his peculiar
presence. But since the Word was made flesh, since the seed of Abraham was made
the Temple of the living God; every particular Church, truly Christian,
becomes a more proper seat of Gods peculiar presence, then the material Temple
in its glory and splendor was; and far more communicative of all blessings
spiritual to every true particular member of them. Every individual or
particular man, who is incorporated into this Church, and made a living member
of it, does by the participation of that Spirit which dwells in it, become a
true Temple or Tabernacle of the living God. Whosoever truly believes in
Christ, whosoever eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, Christ (who is the
prototypon and true temple of God) does dwell in him, and he in Christ: he is
in God, and God in him after a more peculiar manner, then either the patriarks
or Prophets were in God, or God in them. But this peculiar manner of Gods
dwelling in us by faith, and we in him, has his peculiar place in other
principal Articles of the Creed, or in the Treatise of the Sacrament,
concerning the mystical union betwixt Christ and his members. The next Quaere,
which in this Section offers it self to be discussed and must be the Title of
the next Chapter, is briefly this:

CHAP. 27. Cap. 27

Why S. John does rather say, the word was made flesh, then, the son of God
was made flesh, albeit the son of God, and the word, denote one and the same
person.
TO this Quaere some judicious Divines make answer, that the second person in
Trinity was (at least implicitly) known unto some heathen Philosophers,
under the title of (...), long before his incarnation, and longer, before S.
John wrote his Gospel. Now it is not improbable, that those heretics which
did call the Divinity of Christ in question, (against whose heresy the
Evangelist did put in that Caveat in the beginning of his Gospel) at the least
such as were in danger to be seduced by them, were (to his knowledge) better
versed in the writings of Plato and Trismegist then in Moses and the Prophets.
And men naturally both conceive and embrace the truth with more facility, when
it is delivered unto them in terms, whereunto they have been inured. Now such
as were well read in Plato or Trismegist, or would be willing to read them,
could not be ignorant of an eternal (...) which they called the son of the
eternal mind or essence. And this (...) the word or image of the eternal
mind was not in their apprehension merely notionall or representative only but
(...) a Word or reason (or however we express it) truly operative, the
invisible cause or maker of all things visible. Unto these and the like
prenotions, which the heathen Philosophers had of an eternal Father in his
eternal son, S. John (in the judgment of some great Divines) did purposely
apply himself, and frame his expressions to their capacity, whom he sought to
reclaim, or to instruct. Nor is it either unusual, or unbeseeming the
Apostles themselves, to alter both the matter and form of speech, according to
the diversity of the parties whom they seek to reform. S. Paul did not
dispute with the Athenians after the same manner, he did with the Jews, nor did
he instruct the Hebrew converts in the same language or form of catechism,
which he used amongst the Gentiles. S. John then (in the conjecture of the
former ancient Divines) did make the (...) advantage of the prenotions which
the heathens had of this truth, which S. Paul did from the inscription of the
Athenian Altar; that God (says he) whom ye ignorant by worship, him declare
I unto you. But did these harmless speculations of these Philosophers require
any such reformation from S. John, as the Athenians superstitious worship did
from S. Paul? Sure their followers were to be better catechized in this truth,
then they had been, or could be, by any Philosophy: their best speculations
(though in themselves true) were to their Professors altogether fruitless, and
(as I take it) without any prenotion or expectance that this (...), that word,
by which they acknowledge all things were made, should be made visible in our
flesh, should exhibit a more exquisite representation of the divine nature, and
essence, in the microcosme or little model of man's body, then had been
exhibited in the making and governing this great universe. They knew, that
(...) was truly God without beginning, but they did not either adore him as
God, neither did they adore their eternal (...) as God, or by him. All this
they were to learn from S. John: for this is a mystery which far surpasses
the capacity of man to conceive or comprehend, without revelation or
instruction, either mediately or immediately made unto us, by this: (...), the
Word himself.

2 Nor is it probable that either Plato or Trismegist did first discover so
much of this grand mystery as was known among the Heathens, before S. John
wrote his Gospel. And it is no less impious then improbable, to suspect, that
S. John should borrow those divine expressions of the Words divinity from any
Heathen Philosopher; as that blasphemous Platonic exclaimed when he read the
beginning of his Gospel, that he had stolen his expressions out of his master
Plato. Nor was S. John himself the first of all sacred writers, which did
display the titles of the son of God by (...), or by the word, light, or life
which was without beginning or ending: most probable it is that Plato and
Trismegist did borrow that light, which they had in that mystery, from the
ancient Hebrews, or from rules received by them, by constant tradition, for
interpreting not one but many passages in Moses and the Prophets; as S. John
there does from the same rule or tradition. No doubt the Chaldee Paraphrasts
did express the divine nature of the son of God by the word; the one before
S. John did write his Gospel; the other near upon the same time. For Jonathan
(as Fagius tells us) did live about the time wherein Herod reedified the second
Temple; Onkelos a little after the destruction of it and of Jerusalem by Titus.

3. The word of the Lord (says an exquisite Shindlerus in vocabulo (...)
Hebrician, Constat enim cum ex Hebraeorum, tum Latinorum scriptis hu^c nostrum
paraphrastem Chaldaeum, quem Onkelos appellant, cui translatio pentates chi
adscribitur, filium fuisse sororis Titi Imperatoris nec diu post devastationem
secundi templi paraphrasim suam conscripsisse. Alteru^ vero paraphrastem, quem
Jonathan filium Vzielis vocant, cui prophetas tribuunt ante devastationem
templi sua scripsisse. Tametsi sint quia elint utru^que tota biblia in linguam
Chaldaicam transtulisse. Sed audiamus hac de re testimonium doctissimi viri
Galatini, qui libro primo de arcanis catholicae veritatis contra Judaeos Cap.
3. sic scribit: Per idem ferme tempus, anno scilicet ante Christi natalem
circiter secundo, and quadragesimo, Jonathas Vzielis filiis, Hillelisque
auditor atque Symeonis justi qui Christum infantulum suscepit in brachijs,
condiscipulus, totum vetus instrumentum in Chaldaeam vertit linguam, atque
exposuit: ita sensum e sensua traduceus, and ita obscurissima quaeque exponens
vocabula, ut quaecunque de Messia dubia and latenter scripta erant, certa atque
clarissima reddiderit. Adeo ut ejus editio, non tam interpretatio, quam glossa,
atque expositio videatur. Quam Hebraei thargum, id est translationem nuncupant.
Tantaeque apud eos est authoritatis, ut non solum ei contradicere nemo audeat,
sed non minus quoque fidei, quam ipsi textui passim omnes eidem adhibeant etc.
Paulus Fagius in praefatione ad versionem Onkeli. Vide simile testimonium
Lyrani in cap. 8. Isaiae.
and judicious peruser of the Chaldee paraphrase) is often used instead of
Jehovah, or Elohim (both being proper names of God) and denotes Messiah, or
Christ, by whom God made all things and preserves them. He instanceth in that
of Isaiah 1. ver. 14. Where the Hebrew text is literally thus, My soul
abhors your new moons etc. The Chaldee or Targum renders it thus, My word
abhors your new moons. And again, Ier. 1. 8. Where God speaking in his
own person says, I am with thee, the Chaldee renders it, My word is with
thee. And according to the Hebrew, where we read Isaiah 45. 17. Israel shall be
saved with an everlasting salvation in the Lord, or by the Lord; the Chaldee
has it, Israel shall be saved with an everlasting salvation by the word of the
Lord. But two places of Onkelus there be, more remarkably pertinent to our
present purpose, then any others which I have observed. The first is Genesis 3. 8.
And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden, that is (as
Onkelus renders that place) they heard the voice of the word of the Lord; or,
the voice of the Lord God the word. So that (...) the Word (which in the
beginning was with God, and was God) did convent our first parents, as having
peculiar reason to examine and convict them of their transgression; because he
in person, not the Father or holy Ghost, was to undertake for their
restoration, was to combat with the Serpent for their redemption, whom
immediately after he convents in the woman's presence, and denounces this
sentence upon both; The Lord God said unto the Serpent, because thou have done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field:
upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life, and I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and hers, etc. Genesis 3. 15. 16. It is no harsh construction to read this place,
and they heard the voice of the word the Lord, per appositionem, not the voice
of the word of the Lord, which the Latin renders in the genitive case, the
voice or the word of the Lord. Yet if we read it so, we shall not dissent from
the forecited meaning of the Chaldee; and the same interpreters refer the
word walking unto God himself, (as if he had said, they heard the voice of
God, which walked in the garden) not unto the voice whether of God, or of the
word of God, though Fagius, with some other, think the word walking may be read
in the accusative case, audiverunt vocem Domini Dei ambulantem, they heard the
voice of the Lord walking, that is, increasing or intending it self by
degrees. But this, otherwise most judicious writer sometime censures the
seaventie Interpreters of ignorance in the Hebrew tongue, sometime sleights
their interpretation, without just cause. For seeing it has pleased the holy
Ghost, in the greatest mysteries concerning Christ, to follow their
interpretation, though not so authentic in it self as the Hebrew Canon is;
this commands my assent, though not to the opinion of some among the ancients,
that these seaventy were as truly inspired by the holy Ghost, as the penmen of
the Hebrew Canon were; yet thus far, that they were directed, either
immediately by the Spirit, or by the rules and traditions, in their times
received, for the right unfolding of many places, which in the Hebrew were
either ambiguous or involved; and better directed by such rules then modern
Hebricians are by Masorets or the later Rabbis: albeit both of them be of good
use. Thus to think of the LXX, their consonancy with the Chaldee Paraphrase, in
many places of great moment, does (besides the former special motives)
somewhat incline me, yet did not the Chaldee (as I am persuaded) borrow ought
from them, or they from the Chaldee; but both were beholden to the prenotions
or received rules of the ancient Hebrews.

4. The second remarkable place, wherein Onkelus does not dissent from the
Hebrews, but rather unfoldeth the mystery implicitly contained in it, is that
of Genesis 22. 15, 16. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, that in
blessing I will bless thee, etc. and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice. So the Hebrew: The
Chaldee, thus, By my word have I sworn (says the Lord,) that blessing I will
bless thee, etc. Because thou have obeyed my Word. This translation of the
Chaldee affords more light for the right and punctual explication of S. Paul
Heb. 6. 17. then most Commentators of that place have done, albeit some greek
Scholiasts which I have consulted (but whose words I now remember not) have
made acute and accurate search for the true meaning of it. God, says the
Apostle, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutabilitie of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath. So our English reads
it; yet with this correction or animadversion in the margin [interposed
himself by an oath] but the original verbatim sounds thus, Deus intermediavit
juramento, God did intermediate by oath. Now the object of this oath (as our
Apostle tells us, ver. 13.) was God himself; When God made promise to Abraham,
because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself (yet this, by my
self have I sworn, is more express in the Septuagint, then in the Hebrew.)
But the Chaldee further instructs us, that the object of this oath was the
word, (...); which did not note only God himself, but the (...), the mediator
between God and man; and the tenor or contents of the oath was, that this
(...), (who was God himself, and the object of this oath) should become the
seed of Abraham, and make mediation by such a sacrifice, as God the Father, for
trial only, did require of Abraham. The coming of the son of God, or (...),
into the world, which had long before been promised, was not newly ratified
only by oath: but from this time the son of God was truly predestined to be
the seed of Abraham, or the seed of Abraham to be the son of God; as
afterward the seed or son of David was; to wit, from that time wherein the
Lord had sworn to David, that his seed should endure for ever, and his throne
as the days of Heaven. Psalm. 89. 29. It is not to be omitted, that where the
Hebrew Psalm. 110. has it, The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou at my right hand
etc. the Chaldee has it, The Lord said unto his Word; sit thou at my right
hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool. And this Word, or this Lord
(for so the Hebrews express it by Adonai) was then destinated, and declared
by oath, to become not only the son of David, but to be a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech, ver. 4. All these three places will require
some further consideration, in the treatise of Gods Covenant with Abraham and
with David, or of our Saviors consecration to his everlasting Priesthood. Thus
much for the present may suffice, that S. John was nto the first, which
conceived the son of God, God himself to be (...); much less did he need to
borrow his expressions from any Writers not truly Canonical. For all this was
contained in the places before alleged, as Jonathan and Onkelus interpret
them; and was likewise expressly contained in the Hebrew, in sundry places of
the Prophets; of some of which (God willing) in the next Chapter.

5 As little probability there is, either that S. Paul Heb 1. 1. should borrow
his characters of the Son of God from the Author of the book of Wisdom; or
that Author his, (though much what the same) from S. Paul: as that S. John
should take his expressions from the former Chaldee paraphrast, or the later
from S. John. Both S. Paul, and the Author of the book of Wisdom, had their
hints, (at least) from such prenotions as the ancient Hebrews had of the
wisdom or son of God, or of their expected Messiah, when he should be
revealed. It is no way improbable, (much less incredible) that such
Interpreters or paraphrasers upon sacred writ, as (for ought we know) did not
expressly believe in the son of God, either before his incarnation or since,
should have the forementioned prenotions concerning the promised Messiah;
seeing the very Samaritans had the like, which they could not gather from the
ordinary reading of original Scripture, if at all they read them. Such a
prenotion that woman John 4. had of the Messiah, before she did believe that
Jesus was the promised Messiah or Christ. I know (says she) that Messiah
comes which is called Christ; when he is come, he will tell us all things.
ver. 25. She had a prenotion and conceit, that the Messiah should tell them all
things in a better manner, then the prophets could do. For she had
acknowledged our Savior to be a Prophet ver. 19; yet rested not satisfied with
his answer to her question there made, until he had told her in express
terms, that he was the promised Messiah.

6 But to compare S. Paul's characters of the son of God with the Authors of the
book of Wisdoms characters of the Wisdom of God.

(...): Heb. 1. 1.


(...).

(...),

(...).

(...) (...).

God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the prophets, Has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son;
whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds.

Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person,
and upholding all things by the word of the power; when he had by himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high,

Being made so much better then the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained
a far more excellent name then they.

For she is the breath of the power of God, Wisd. 7. 25.
and a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty; therefore can no
undefiled thing sal in to her. For she is the brightness of the everlasting
light, the unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the image of his
goodness. And being but one, she can do all things: and remaining in her self
she makes all things new, and in all ages entering into holy souls, she
makes the^ friends of God and Prophets. For God loves none, but him that
dwells with Wisdom. For she is more beautiful then the sun, and above all the order of stars, being compared with the light, she is found before it. For
after this comes night: but vice shall not prevail against Wisdom.

7 There is not one proposition or character in all this passage, which (for
ought I yet know) is not Canonical. No attribute of wisdom, which can fitly
be applied to any person or substance save only to the son of God or at least
to the holy Ghost. But whether this Author did so intend them, or apply them;
or whether the holy Ghost did by his peculiar inspiration, or God by his
special providence, direct him thus to speak or write, after the same manner
he did Moses and other Authors of Canonical Scriptures, is not to me so
evident. Nor is it probable that this book was written by Solomon, albeit the
Author of it does put upon him the person of Solomon, and personate himself
under the habit or Garb of the King of Israel. The opinion is not improbable,
who think this book was written by Philo the Jew, to solace himself, and his
Country men, upon the ill success of his Embassage unto Caius the Emperor,
which was not many years after our Saviors death, nor many before S. Paul did
write his Epistle, or S. John his Gospel. The book it self (whosoever was the
Author of it) is an excellent and a most elegant paraphrase upon many
Canonical Scriptures, and conteynes many exquisite expressions of Gods special
providence, and infinite wisdom in governing the world, and in overruling
both the policy and the power of greatest Princes. The same book
notwithstanding is, (for many reasons) justly denied by S. Jerome, by our
Church, and by many grave writers in other Churches reformed, to be any genuine
part of the old Testament; to be any portion of the rule or Canon of the
Hebrews faith received by them before our Saviors incarnation. And being no
portion of their Catholic rule or Canon, it is no way probable that our
Apostle S. Paul, when he wrote the divine Epistle directed in special to the
Hebrews his countrymen, would borrow his titles or Attributes of our Saviors
glory from this Authors encomiasme of wisdom. Nor can any convincing proof be
brought, to persuade us, that the Author of this book (whosoever he was) did
make application of these characters of wisdom (in the abstract) unto Christ;
or truly believe, either that Jesus the son of Mary (though living happily on
earth before his time) or that the promised Messiah, whose coming he did
expect, should be the wisdom of God, which he so magnifies, or God incarnate
in whom all former Scriptures, and his own encomiasme of Divine wisdom should
in particular and punctually be fulfilled; That the commendations which he
gives to wisdom, (at least the most of them) can really and truly be applied
to none but Christ, who is the wisdom and son of God. All this, and more,
being granted will not conclude, that he did intend or think of Christ's birth
or incarnation, or apprehend the personal union between the son of God, and
the son of David. For Tully and other Heathen writers have made such
panegyricall descriptions of virtues moral and intellectual, of wisdom
especially or of Philosophy in their abstract notion, as can have no real
pattern save only in the divine incomprehensible essence: and yet they
themselves lived, and (for ought we know) dyed without any distinct knowledge
or apprehension of the true God; yea many times committed gross Idolatry with
those virtues, whether moral or intellectual, which they so magnified in the
abstract.

8. Whilst we peruse Authors either Heterodoxall or not Canonical, this rule
(I take it) is of general good use; that for matter of practice, or
application, we are specially to consider quam been, not quam bona; on the
contrary, in point of speculation, not quam been, sed quam bona, not how well,
or to what good end they speak, but how good things they speak or write. The
writings of the modern Jew are, for the most part, malicious and morally
evil; yet (unto such as know to make right use of them) in their speculations
upon the old Testament (even in such of them as are professed enemies to our
Lord and Savior, and to the Evangelical story) there be so many scattered
characters or misplaced syllables, as being rightly put together, and well
ordered by some judicious Aristarchus, or accurate composer, would make up a
more exact commentary upon most of those places in Moses and the Prophets which
we Christians usually allege for proving the truth of sundry articles in this
Creed; then can be gathered out of the Christian Interpreters of the old or new
Testament, which have not the care or skill to beat those enemies at their own
weapons, or to retort those blows, which they offer at us, upon themselves.
Those strange dreams or fancies which they have concerning mysteries to be
revealed in the days of the Messiah, are evident signs that the Lord has
cast them into this long slumber for the instruction of us Christians. And the
right interpretation of their dreams, or their application, is one of the
highest degrees of prophecy, which in this later age can ordinarily be
expected. And I would to God some sons of the Prophets would address their
pains and studies to this purpose, unto which according to our poor talent we
shall have occasion to speak in some special articles following. But to
return unto the point proposed in the beginning of this Chapter; one special
reason why S. John instyles our Savior; (...) the Word (not the son) was to
make up a more exquisite resembla^ce of his inco^prehensible Essence, of the
eternity of his person, and his eternal generation, of his consubstantiality
with God the Father; then (without this particular expression) we could have
had, or perhaps would have sought for. Every one of his several titles,
whether given to him by S. John or by S. Paul, adds something to the better
expression of his unexpressible excellence, unto the raising of our
apprehensions to a higher pitch of admiration of these incomprehensible
mysteries, then one or two, or fewer then are made, could have done. To inform
our understandings, or rectify our faith, that the son of God is more
exquisitely, or more consubstantially like unto his Father, then any son of
man is unto the father of his body; he is by the holy Ghost instyled the
express Image or character of his Fathers person, Heb. 1. 3. No man can be
altogether so like another as the impression is to the print. To instruct us
again that this absolute and perfect expression of the father in the son
far exceed, any such expression, as the Statue can make of man, or such as
the seal leaves in the wax: he is by S. John instyled by the name of life;
being the living substantial image of his Father. Again, to rectify our
apprehensions, that the son of God did not grow into this absolute live image
of his Father by degrees, after such a manner as the sons of men do, (for no
child is altogether like his father from his birth) it has pleased the holy
Ghost further to emblazon his incomprehensible generation or begetting under
the character of brightness or light. He is the brightness of Gods glory
says S. Paul and by S. John, the light. And this is the most exquisite of any
resembla^ce that can be taken from things sensible. The sun and fountain of
visible light does naturally, without interposition of time, without any labor
or operation, produce or beget brightness or splendor. And this it does so
uncessantly, so perpetually, that if we could imagine there had been a sun
or fountain of light without beginning to continue without end of time or
days; we could not but imagine, that there should be a brightness or
splendor perpetually produced without beginning or without ending of such
production, or of the brightness so produced, by this fountain of light. Yet
this supposition being granted or admitted, the resemblance would herein fail;
That this continual production of light, without beginning, without ending, did
yet admit a succession, or continuitie of time, which the eternal generation
of the son of God does not admit, for that only is truly eternal which is
not only without beginning or end of days, but without all succession in
duration, without mensuration of days or years: all which are contained in
eternity, as this visible world, and all the power in it are contained in his
power who is invisible and incorporeall. All these resemblances are taken from
things sensible. Lastly, the eternal generation of the son of God (as most
Divines will have it) is most fitly resembled by the Word, or representatio^ of
the mind or spirit, which for its nature is more immortal then the light. Yet
this resemblance, or any that can be taken from our intellection, or secret
conference between the spirit and soul of man within it self, is in this
point (to omit others) lame or defective: that albeit the spirit or mind of
man be immortal, and as uncessant in his proper acts or operations as the
Sun is in sending forth light to this inferior world; yet our choysest
thoughts or cogitations most internal and most spiritual vanish. The mutual
conference betwixt our spirits and internal senses, is not perpetual and
uncessant. The reason whereof (as the Philosopher teaches) is, because the
passive understanding (whether the cogitative faculty or fantasy) without
whose continual service or atte^dance; there can be no constant record or
remembrance of the Acts or instructions of the understa^ding, is corruptible
especially in its act or operation; and subject to greater change and
alterations then the lower regions of the air, albeit the mind or spirit be
as clear and constant as the Sun. But in the life to come, when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and our inferior faculties become
immortal, not only the proper acts or operations of the mind or spirit, or of
the active understanding, but the apprehension also of what the mind or spirit
suggests, or their impressions upon the inferior faculties of the soul, shall
be incorruptible, uncessant and perpetual. And then no doubt our apprehensions
of this great mystery comprehended under this name or title of the Word, shall
be more clear and perfect to the most illiterate and meanest capacities (this
day living) then in this life it is, or has been to the most profound and
subtlelest School-Divines, which have most studied the meaning of this mystery.
And yet (under correction) the full importance of (...) such as in this life
may be had, and ought to be had, is either not so well conceived, or not so
well expressed, by most Interpreters, (whether of the old or new Testament) as
it might have been, if they had but taken notice of those several places in
both Testaments, in which the son of God is instiled: (...).

CHAP. 28. Cap. 28.

That the incarnation of the Word, or of the son of God under this title was
foreprophecyed by sundry Prophets; with the exposition of some peculiar places
to this purpose, not usually observed by Interpreters.
ANother special reason, besides the former mentioned, why S. John does say
The word was made flesh, rather then the son of God was made flesh, was
because the incarnation of (...) the word, was more expressly foretold than
the incarnation of the son of God; though one and the same person or party be
so really meant and intended by the holy Ghost, that the incarnation of the
Word does concludently infer the incarnation of the only son of God. But
where then was the incarnation of (...) foretold or foreshadowed? It was (I
take it,) not only foretold, but solemnly proclaimed, by the Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 40. and the fulfilling of what he promised, was declared by John Baptist
at our Saviors baptism. John (we know) was the voice of the Crier
foreprophecyed ver. 3. of that chapter, and did perform his function (as it was
foretold he should) in the wilderness. The chief contents of the cry or
proclamation it self are two: the first, prepare ye the way of the Lord, and
make straight in the desert a high way for our God. This was fulfilled by John
Baptists preaching of repentance. The burden of his preaching was repent, for
the Kingdom of God is at hand. But the voice said again (whether to Isaiah or
to John Baptist, or to both) Cry, and he said, what shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field. The
grass withers, the flower fades; because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it: surely the people is grass. The grass withers, the flower fades,
but the Word of our God shall stand for ever. This was the effect, or sum, of
that which John Baptist was to proclaim. Of the exact congruity betwixt John's
doctrine and the Prophets prediction, I have elsewhere (to my remembrance)
treated. Concerning the meaning of the Prophets words, All flesh is grass,
that is handled by most Interpreters, and Preachers, in funeral sermons
especially. Nor can there be a fitter Text for displaying the mortality and
frailty of our Nature: nor (as some think) for setting forth the excellency of
preaching. But to magnify the word of God in general, as it is preached by us
the unworthy ministers of it, is (in most men's interpretations) indirectly to
magnify our selves, or our calling, which (howsoever our persons be) is
questionless honorable, and so to be esteemed by all good Christians. Yet
this excellency whether of the word preached, or of Preachers, was either no
part, or the least part of the Prophets meaning when he says the word of the
Lord endures for ever For the true use and end of that prophecy Chap. 40. is
expressed in the beginning of it: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says our
God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned. For she has received of the
Lords hand double for all her sins. But what comfort could it be to
Jerusalem, or to Gods people, that the word of God which is preached to them
endures for ever* when as they were but as the grass which withers? The
more the Prophet did magnify the immortality of Gods word in this sense, the
more he must have increased the sad remembrance of their own misery and
mortality. And however Isaias and other Prophets had preached the word of the
Lord more plentifully, and more powerfully in that age wherein he lived, then
it had been in any age before, or in any age since, (excepting the times
wherein John Baptist and our Savior and his Apostles lived on earth:) yet
mortality and misery did still grow faster upon this people, then it had done
in any age before; so fast for four or five generations, that this people
became like grass withering by degrees, and at last to be rooted up. The
matter then of comfort which the Prophet there promises to Jerusalem, was not
in his time really exhibited, but to be continually expected, until the word
of the Lord, which he so magnifieth for its glory and immortality, should
become visible to all flesh. The comfort there prophesied of, did consist in
the manifestation of that glory, which he then foretold should be revealed.
For whatsoever in that Chapter he uttered, was not delivered by way of common
place by ordinary catechism of doctrine and uses, but by the extraordinary
spirit of prophecy. The issue of his prophecy was, that the state and condition
of all flesh should be much better in later times, then in his age or any age
before, it was. At what time then was this comfort actually exhibited to all
flesh which before was but grass, and as the flower of grass that fades?
Then assuredly, when the word of the Lord, which endures for ever, did become
flesh, or was incorporated in our flesh. For the life and efficacy of this word
(as the text literally imports) was to be manifested by its admirable effects
or operations upon the mortality or weakness of flesh. Our mortality or
miserable condition (as the Prophet presumes) could not weaken the immortal
efficacy of the Word, whereas the Word might give life and immortality to all
flesh which should see the glory the taste the goodness of it. By the Word of
the Lord then which endures for ever, we are to understand, not Verbum Domini,
not only the word of the Lord as it is daily preached, but the Lord himself,
who if he speak the word, great shall be the number of the Preachers of the
word, both of Prophets, and of Prophetesses.

2. The best interpretation of the prophet Isa. is already made unto our hands
partly by S. Peter, partly by S. John in the beginning of his Gospel. We are
brone again, (says S. Peter) not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible,
by the word of God which lives and abides for ever. 1. Pet. 1. 23. By
corruptible seed, he means our corruptible nature, as we are the sons of
Adam. For so he expounds his own meaning in the words of the Prophet before
mentioned, For that all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass, the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.
Now that which it self withers and falls away can yield no seed of life,
can minister no comfort unto misery or mortality. The antithesis then or
opposition requires, that by the incorruptible seed of which we are borne
again, we must understand the word of God which endures for ever, or somewhat
into which that word does in special manner infuse life, or verbum caro
factum, the eternal word as it is invailed in flesh, but in flesh exempted or
privileged from all corruption. For it is called the word of God which lives
for ever; not so much in respect of its own life, but in regard of its
communication of life to such as are destitute of life. That this is the true
scale of S. Peter's meaning we may gather from S. John's parallel paraphrase upon
the same words of the Prophet Isaiah. In the beginning was the word, and the
word was God, etc. And he came unto his own and his own received him not,
but as many as received him to them he grave power or right to become the
sons of God, even to them which believe on his name. But who are they that
rightly believe on his name? Such as are borne not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, (this is that which S. Peter says, not of
corruptible seed,) but are borne of God. And whosoever is borne of God is
questionless borne of that immortal seed whereof S. Peter speaks. The further
explication of this point will much depend upon the solution of these two
questions. The first, in what sense we are said to be borne of God. The second,
when miserable and corruptible men were first so borne. To assoile the later
question in the first place; Flesh and blood were not capable of this new
birth, whereof S. John and S. Peter speak until that word of God which
endures for ever, that word which was with God and was, God, by whom the world
also was made, came into the world, and being made man was borne of a woman.
The holy Patriarks and Prophets were true heirs of this glorious promise, but
could not be real possessors of the blessing promised, before this time. But
was the incarnation of the eternal word to this purpose concludently
foreprophecyed by Isaiah in that 40. chapter? Yes; this was the principal part
of those glad tidings which the voice of him that cried in the wilderness was
to proclaim, as it is expressed ver. 5. The glory of the Lord shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. The sight of it was to be a
sight of life and comfort to all flesh: and this was the height of that comfort
which the sight of this glory exhibited, that as they had been the miserable
sons of mortal men, so they should become the sons of God, blessed for ever.
Now it is evident out of other Scriptures that no flesh could see the glory of
God and live, save only as the brightness of it was to be alloyed by a veil
a flesh, through which the Apostles themselves, not all, but Peter, James, and
John did behold it, as weakesighted men do the splendor of the sun through a
cloud. Hence says S. John (by way of comment or paraphrase upon the forecited
40. of Isaiah) ver. 5. The word was made flesh, and we beheld his glory (to
wit, the glory of the word of God which endures for ever) the glory as of the
only begotten son of God, full of grace and truth. And of his fullness all that
believe receive grace for grace. When it is said that the son of God was made
man of a Woman, this implies that he was as truly flesh of the woman's flesh,
and bone of her bones, as the first woman was flesh of the first man's flesh,
and bone of his bones. But in this the mysteries of the first woman's creation
is not finally accomplished. How was it then so accomplished? In this, that no
sons of men, none that are borne of women can truly and really become the
sons of God, until they become flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones,
who was not made the son of God, but was the son of God by nature, his only
begotten son before all worlds, the light and life of men. As the^ the word
which in the beginning was with God, and the son of God, are but titles of
one and the same person: so the word of life and the word of God which endures
for ever, are but Synonymall expressions of one and the same mystery to wit, of
the word being made flesh, or become visible and sensible unto flesh. That
(says S. John) which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the Word of life; that we declare unto you. For the life was
manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness and show unto you, even
that eternal life, which was with the Father and was manifested unto us, 1
John 1. 1, 2. This life was always with God, but came not into the world, was
not manifested to flesh and blood; until: (...) the Word, and son of God was
incarnate.

3. The same Antithesis, or opposition which the prophet Isaiah makes between
the mortality and frailety of flesh, and the immortality or everlasting
duration of the word of God, the Psalmist makes between his own misery and
fading estate, and the everlasting happiness of his Lord God. And from the
contemplation of this opposition takes the same comfort to himself, which the
Prophet Isaiah was commanded to minister unto Gods people, and unto Jerusalem.
My days, says he, Psalm: 102. 11, are like a shadow that declineth, and I am
withered like grass: but thou O Lord shall endure for ever, and thy
remembrance unto all generations. And again, Of old thou have laid the
foundations of the earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands: they
shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea all of them shall wax old like a
garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed; thou
art the same, and thy years shall have no end. That this passage of the
Psalmist is literally meant of the eternal God, the Jews themselves cannot
deny. And that it is meant of God incarnate, of the son of God manifested in
the flesh, S. Paul in the first Chapter to the Hebrews does assure us
Christians. For he alleges this very place ver. 10. to prove that Christ God
and man was far above all Angels and principalities, and that after his
enthronization as King, he was to change this world which was made by him. The
very literal meaning of the Psalmist will enforce thus much, that this place
was to be meant of God, not simply or absolutely but of God incarnate. For the
eternal duration of the Godhead is not measurable by days or years, but the
incarnation of the son of God, or his duration in the flesh, may be accounted
by number of years for the time past; yet are his years as man to continue
without end, without any decay or diminution of that nature which he assumed.
The Psalmist foresaw his own interest in the numberless years of his Lord,
whose happiness and immortality was the only comfort of his miserable
mortality. The same comfort the Author of the 103. Psalm (whether he were the
same with the Author of the 102. Psalm, or some other) takes to himself from
the like contemplation of his own misery, and of the happiness of God
incarnate. Like as a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them
that fear him. For he knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust.
As for man his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place
thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens
children: To such as keep his Covenant: and to those that remember his
Commandments to do them. Psalm. 103. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. For the true
interpretation or application of this passage unto this present purpose, it is
in the first place remarkable, that where in the 13. verse we read Jehovah, or
the Lord, the Chaldee renders it, The word of the Lord has pity on them that
fear him: In the second, that the mercy of the Lord, or of the word of God,
verse 17 is Christ is called the mercy or gracious Saint of God Psalm. 16. 10.
Compare that place with the beginning of the 118. Psalm, and Psalm, 136 and
others, wherein it is repeated that the mercy of the Lord endures for ever.
(...), that is, a word or term whose full importance cannot be had from any
ordinary Lexicon, unless it be such as is proper unto Divinity. For it cannot
be understood of that mercy or loving kindness of God which was ordinarily
manifested either toward mankind in general, or toward the people of Israel
in particular. Every Novice in the School of the Prophets did know that this
mercy of the Lord was perpetual. But what could it avail the Author of this
Psalm to consider that this mercy of God had been manifested to his
forefathers before his time, and should be to posterity in their several
generations after him, what comfort could it afford unto the childrens children
of such as feared him, that this mercy of God should be reserved for them, only
after the same manner or measure which their forefathers had tasted, or had
experience of it, and yet complain of their miserable and wretched estate for
the present; and comfort themselves only in the expectation of that abundant
mercy which they hoped afterward should be revealed. The best exposition upon
this place of the Psalmist, or what is in special meant by the mercy of the
Lord, or of the word of God, is given by S. Paul, Titus the 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts, and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one
another. But after the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
this mercy he saved i^, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior:
That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life. Of this mercy and loving kindness the Patriarchs and
Prophets (as we said before) had the promise, but without all hope of enjoying
the thing promised for the present. It was not then the mercy of God or Jehovah
considered in the Godhead only, but the mercy of God to be incarnate, to be
made King and Judge of the earth, which did so comfort these and other
Psalmists in their greatest distresses and perplexities, in all which they had
just occasion to say, as S. Paul afterward did, If in this life only, (or in
the loving kindness of God, as it has been experienced in our days) we had
hope, we were of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

4 That this place, though literally meant of God alone, was yet to be
punctually fulfilled in God incarnate, or in the Word made flesh, besides this
exposition of S. Paul, the very letter and circumstance of the text does
persuade us. For the expected comfort whereupon this Psalmist pitcheth, is this:
The Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens, and his Kingdom rules over
all. And here again, whereas we read the Lord, the Chaldee reads the Word of
the Lord has prepared his throne. And in that it was prepared, it was not from
eternity, though after it were prepared, to continue from everlasting to
everlasting, that is (as we say) world without end. And this is that throne and
that Kingdom which Daniel foretold, that God long after his time would erect,
Daniel, 2. 44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and that Kingdom shall not be left
to other people: but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms,
and it shall stand for ever. And of this throne you have a most exquisite
description by S. John Revel. 4. 1, 2. After this I looked, and behold a door
was opened in Heaven, and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a
trumpet talking with me, which said, Come up hit her, and I will show thee
things which must be hereafter. And immediately I was in the Spirit: and
behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne. And round about
the throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the seats I saw four and
twenty Elders sitting clothed in white raiment. And they had on their heads
Crowns of gold etc. The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that
sat on the throne, and worship him that lives for ever, and cast their
Crowns before him saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor
and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
were created. This praising of him that sat upon the throne, was that whereunto
the Author of the 103. Psalm did solemnly invite the heavenly powers, long
before S. John had this vision. For after he had said, the Lord had prepared
his throne in the heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all; it follows
immediately, Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do
his Commandments, harkening unto the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord,
all ye his hosts, ye Ministers of his, that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord,
all his works in all places of his Dominion: Bless the Lord, O my soul. That
which our Savior says of Abraham, was in its measure true of this Psalmist;
he also saw the day of Christ, the day of his glorious resurrection, that day
whereof it is said, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, and did
rejoice in soul to see it, and his own interest in it, an assured hope of his
inheritance in the heavenly Kingdom.

5. But the vision of David to this purpose in that Psalm, which amongst some
few others bears the inscription of Michtam, David's Ieweler golden song (as
some would have it,) is most punctually clear, Keep me O God, for in thee do I
put my trust: that is (as the Chaldee explaines it) In thy word have I put my
trust, or hope for salvation. Psalm. 16. 1. and ver. 2. I have said unto the
Lord, Adonai. And again ver. 8. etc. I have set the Lord always before me:
because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is
glad, and my glory rejoices; my flesh also shall rest in hope. But here the
Eunuchs question unto Philip will interpose it self, Of whom speaks the
Prophet this, of himself or of some other? I can no way brook their opinion,
who think the Psalmist speaks all this in the person of Christ, as his
figure, but rather in this, as in many other Psalms, and in the two last
forecited especially, some passages there be which cannot be literally applied
but to the Psalmist himself, others which cannot be applied to any one but
Christ, that is to God or the word incarnate: and the 9. verse My heart is
glad, etc. contains a feeling expression of that joy or exultation of spirit,
which did possess all the faculties both of David's body and soul. But what
was the object of this his exultatio^, or the ground of his joy? He expresses
it, ver. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption. But the same question here interposeth again; Does
he speak all this of himself or of some other? Whatsoever may be thought of
the former clause of that verse, thou will not leave my soul in Hell (which as
some think) might be meant both of Christ and David (though in a different
measure;) most certain it is, that the later clause, Thou will not suffer thy
holy one to see corruption, was not literally meant of David, much less
fulfilled in him, but literally meant of him alone, and literally fulfilled in
him alone, whom David in spirit called Lord; though he then foresaw he should
truly be his son. This undoubted truth we learn from S. Peter Acts 2. 29.
Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that he
is both dead and buried; and his sepulcher is with us unto this day Therefore
being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of
the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to
sit on his throne, he seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ,
that his soul was not left in Hell, neither his flesh did see corruption. And
S. Paul, Acts 13. 36, 37. more fully and more punctually to our animadversions
upon this later clause expounds it thus: David after he had served his own
generation by the will of God fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers,
and saw corruption. But he whom God raised again, saw no corruption. In this
as in many other Psalms the comfort which did arise from the sweet
contemplations was David's own, or the Psalmists who foresaw that great mystery
whereof we now treat, that the fountain of their comfort was Christ or God
incarnate, who was to be raised from the dead. David in this Psalm did rejoice
in heart, that albeit he knew his nature to be like the grass that withers,
albeit he knew his soul should be divorced from his body; yet this divorce he
knew (by faith,) should not be perpetual, that albeit he could not but expect
his body, his flesh and bones should rott in his sepulcher as the body and
flesh of his forefathers to whom he was to be gathered, had done; yet he
foresaw in spirit, that even his body should at length be redeemed from
corruption by the resurrection of that holy One, whose body, though separated
for a time from his immortal soul, was not to see or feel any corruption.
Finally though David and other Psalmists forecited, (if others they were) did
perfectly and explicitly foreknow that they were to die; yet had they as true
implicit belief of that which our Apostle explicitly delivers Golos. 3. 3, 4.
That their life was hid with Christ in God, that when Christ, who was their
life, should appear, they should also appear with him in glory.

6. To the former general Quaere [in what sense we are said by S. John to be
borne of God] we answer; that to be borne of God, is all one with that of S.
Peter, to be borne of immortal seed, but what is that immortal seed whereof
S. Peter says we are borne again? That, in one word, is the flesh and blood
of the son of man, who is also the son of God. So he himself instructs us
John 6. 53, 54, 55. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh
of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Who so
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
That is meat and drink indeed which nourishes us not to a bodily but to a
spiritual and immortal life; which presupposes an immortal seed. Unto all
these ends and purposes, to our new birth, to our nourishment and growth in
spiritual life, the flesh and blood of the Word or son of God were consecrated
by his sufferings upon the cross, and by his resurrection from the dead. He
was, according to his humane nature, both the Priest appointed to obtain these
blessings; and to award them ex officio; and withal the sacrifice, by whose
participation they are really and actually conveyed unto all that do or shall
inherit the immortality of soul and body.

7. But if his flesh and blood be the seed of immortality, how are we said to
be borne again by the word of God which lives and abides for ever? Is this
word, by which we are borne, the same with that immortal feed of which we are
borne? It is the same not in nature, but in person. May we not in that speech
of S. Peter by the word understand the word preached in to us by the ministers
who are Gods feeds men? In a secondary sense we may, for we are begotten and
borne again by preaching as by the instrument or means; yet borne again by
the eternal word, (that is by Christ himself) as by the proper and efficient
cause of our new birth. Thus much S. Peter's word is that place will enforce us
to grant according to the letter. For having before declared, that the word of
God (by which we are born again) does live and endure for ever, he thus
concludes, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you. 1.
Pet. 1. 25.

8. The Gospel it self (taken in the largest sense) is but the declaration of
the Evangelists and Apostles upon the prophetical predictions concerning the
incarnation, the birth, the death, the resurrection and ascension of Christ.
And Christ himself, who was put to death for our sins and raised again for
our justification, is the word which we all do or ought to preach. The Gospel
written or preached by us cannot be that word, which by the Gospel is preached
unto us. This Word, in the literal assertive sense, can be no other then the
eternal word or son of God made flesh, and consecrated in the flesh to be
the seed of immortality. And if we take the Gospel, not according to the
outward letter or bark but for the heart or substance of the Gospel, or for
the glad tidings of life (which is the primitive signification of this word
(...), or Gospel) that is no other, then the Word made flesh, or manifested in
the flesh. To this purpose says our Evangelist, or rather the Angel of the
Lord Luke 2. 10. Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy
which shall be to all people: (this is no more then the Prophet says, all
flesh shall see the glory of the Lord:) for unto you is borne, this day in the
city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Lord he was long before, and
this Lord was made flesh before that day wherein he was borne, but first
manifested in the flesh upon that day, and manifested to be the Savior of all
people or all flesh, some eight days after, yet not then completely made
Christ until his resurrection. Again the Gospel in its prime or principal
sense is no other, or no more then the great mystery of godliness which was
inwrapt in the volume of Moses and the Prophets, but not revealed or unfolded
until the word was made flesh, was circumcised in the flesh, and made King and
Christ. Without controversy, says S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. 16. great is the
mystery of godliness: God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into glory. All these testimonies put together amount to this
point, that the son of God manifested in the flesh was that Word which in S.
Peter's language, is preached by the Gospel. And if we do not preach this word
unto our hearers, if all our sermons do not tend to one of these two ends,
[either to instruct our Auditors in the articles of their Creed concerning
Christ, or to prepare their ears and hearts that they may be fit auditors of
such instructions] we do not preach the Gospel unto them, we take upon us
the name of Gods Ambassadors, or of the ministers of the Gospel, more then in
vain.

9. Besides all these testimonies, and others that might be alleged, all most
undoubtedly true in the literal assertive sense, that the mystery of
godliness, or the joyful tidings which Abraham's seed did expect should
consist in the union between the eternal Word or son of God, and our flesh,
we have a most lively character or prefiguration (though not assertive) in the
original word designed by the wisdom of God to express the preaching of the
Gospel or joyful embassage of our everlasting peace. For one and the same word
in the original does signify flesh, and the preaching of glad tidings unto
all people or flesh, without variation of any radical letter, but only of
grammatical mood or declension (...) according to the use of the original
language, does properly signify flesh, that is, men or creatures endued with
life or sense; and being the root or primitive is not a verb, but a noune. The
first verb that is formed of it does signify as much as the Latin nunciavit
or nunciare, to bring or deliver a message, and is always used for some good
or joyful message, and in peculiar for the preaching of the Gospel, which is
the joyful message (...): As, to omit other places, it is thus used Ierem. 20.
15. Cur sed be the man that brought tidings to my Father (...) saying a man
child is borne unto thee, making him very glad. And in the forecited 40. of
Isaiah, ver. 9. O Sion, that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain^. (...)
O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength, lift
it up, be not afraid, say unto the cities of Judah, behold your God. And in the
61 of Isaiah, ver. 1. which is the very place wherein the preaching of the
Gospel by our Savior himself is foreprophecyed, that which S. Luke expresses
chap. 4. ver. 18. by preaching the Gospel to the poor, is in the original
(...) evangelizatum pauperes. Now that flesh, and preaching of glad tidings to
all flesh should be signified by one and the same original word, no grammarian
can easily give any reason. It falls not within the compass of their
Etymologies or derivations: there is not here a primitive and derivative, not a
principal and an Analogicall sense. The true reason that may be given for it
is, that the wisdom of God did thus foreordaine it: that so this great
mystery of the eternal Word's becoming flesh might be foreshadowed as well
by verbal character, as foretold by express prophetical testimonies,
delivered by way of propositions, or prefigured by real types in the Law or in
matter of facts in sacred history.

CHAP. 29.
Of the true meaning of this speech, the word was made flesh: Whether it be all
one for the Word to be made flesh, and to be made man, or whether He were made
flesh, and made man at the same instant?
BUt it being granted (and I hope sufficiently proved,) that the incarnation of
the Word, is the very life and kernel of the Gospel, that the Patriarchs and
Prophets did solace themselves, and taught their childrens children to do the
like, in all their perplexities, by assured hope of this great mystery in the
Lords good time to be revealed: yet the curious fancies of captious wits have
been, and will be ready to question, though not the matter or mystery it
self, yet the manner of our Evangelists expression of it, [the Word was made
flesh.] To be made flesh, is to be made a substance, and the Word which is said
to be made flesh, was more then a substance, the everliving essence, the life
and light of men, before he was manifested in the flesh. Does he still remain
so? So we Christians are bound to believe. Yet might the Jew or mere heathen
artist have liberty to oppose us, they would find matter of argument, to this
or like purpose; whenever one substance is truly made another, the former
substance cease to be what it was before. For the truth of this general
rule, instances are plentiful in all sorts of substances which are said to be
made what they were not before: Cap. 29
when one simple Elements is made another; when the water becomes a vapor, it
cease to be water; when the Vapor is made a cloud, it is no longer a vapor;
when the cloud resolves into rain, it is no more a cloud: when of the Elements
any third body is made, whether perfectly or imperfectly mixed, they cease to be
what they were, they lose both their form and names. Nor skils it whether one
substance be made or becomes another which before it was not by course of
nature, or immediately by the finger of God, or by the exercise of his
miraculous power. For it was a true miracle, and a great one, that pure water
should be immediately made perfect wine, and yet the water being made wine did
cease to be what it was before; it was no longer a simple Element, but a true
mixed body. Now the Word, (as all Christians grant) was an everlasting Essence,
more then a substance, before it was made or became flesh. How then can we
Christians mainteyne, that it still remains the same it was, without any real
alteration, or change, whether substantial or accidental? To this objection
we reply, as before we have done in other cases, that multitude of instances,
how many soever, cannot make up a perfect induction, if in any one pretended
for grounding a rule or proposition absolutely universal, there be the least
diversity or dissimilitude of reason. Every such diversity or disparity
acquits the instance in which it is found, for being comprehended under the
rule or law, otherwise universal. Admitting it then to be universally true of
all other substances or Essences in the World besides; Whenever one is made
or becomes another which before it was not, that substance, which is made
another, does lose it self, or cease to be what it was; Yet this universal
rule will not reach the instance now in debate concerning the Word's being made
flesh. The reason is plain, not from the manner of this miraculous work, but
from the nature or supereminency of that everlasting substance or Essence,
which was miraculously made flesh. All other Essences or substances, which are
capable of being made, or becoming what they were not, are capable of change or
alteration in their substances. They do not either lose their own names, or
suffer the names of other substances to be put upon them, until they have put
off their own natures, or lost possession of themselves. The law of nature
ties eve^ livelesse substa^ces more strictly not to change their names until
they be conquered, or overcome by others, then the laws of Heraldrie ties
Nobles or Gentlemen not to alter their ancient Arms or names, which they
seldom do, unless upon conquest or some marriage, or alliance, beneficial or
advantageous to their house or Family. But the Word of God which endures for
ever, was and is as unchangeable as God himself: was and is from eternity,
more then all things, Essence, or being it self. As all things were made by
him, so he might when he pleased, be made flesh or man without any change or
alteration in himself, either whilst all things were made by him, or whilst
he were made this particular. It is then the pre-eminence or superexcellency
of his nature or Essence, which exempts him from the former general rule or
pretended induction.

2 For the more commodious expression as of diverse other supernatural
mysteries or matters spiritual, so of this great mystery especially the the
fittest resemblance which can be made of the^, must be borrowed not from
experiments or inductions in matters physical, but from cases of civil use or
consequence. Mutations accidental there may be many, physically accidental in
one and the same substance, without any alteration in the substance, in which
such change is made: Yet such changes of accidents properly inherent, for the
most part either add some perfection to the substance, or detract somewhat
from it. But for a person already invested with honorable names or titles, and
with realities answering to them, to invest himself with realities or titles
of an inferior rank, is no disparagement to his former dignities. Thus many
Princes by birth and of great possessions sometimes take the names or titles of
Knights, are solemnly made Knights, created Earls, sometimes made Gentlemen
of Venice, and some Kings of this Land have been made free of particular
Companies or Corporations under their royal jurisdiction, and so made without
any impeachement or diminution of their royal titles, but only to the grace or
advancement of that order whereof they were made Knights, or of those Societies
and Corporations whereof they were made free. And thus although the Word, who
before the beginning of time was with God, was truly God, was in the fullness
of time made flesh, this can be no impeachment to his Deity or Divine person,
but an unspeakable exaltatio^ or advancement of the humane nature which he took
upon him. And herein, we poor miserable men (so we would be thankful for it)
have a pre-eminence of the Angelical nature, in that the son of God, God
blessed for ever, did vouchsafe to become one of our order and rank, in such a
manner as he is not of theirs.

3 The resolution of the second Quaere depends upon another more questioned
point, which I have no mind to dispute, and less to be tied to other men's
conjectures, or voluntary determinations of it without warrant of Scripture, or
any certain deductions from it, warrantable by reason. The point questionable
is briefly this, whether the humane soul of our blessed Lord was infused into
his body immediately upon his conception, which (as the sacred Text to my
apprehension imports) was in a moment, and immediately upon the blessed Virgins
assent unto the Angels message. If at the same instant or moment of time the
humane soul was inspired into his body, the Word was not made flesh before he
became man. If otherwise, the holy seed did after the conception grow by
degrees into a live sensitive reasonable substance, though neither after the
same manner, nor by the same means, yet according to the same measure of time
as other Infants do. The case is unquestionable that the son of God, or the
Word, was made flesh before he was made man; For he was not made man before the
inspiration or creation of the reasonable soul; but even from the very first
moment of his conception, the Woman's seed was hypostically united to the Word
or son of God. The flesh and blood which he took of the blessed Virgin
became the flesh and blood of the son of God from the first moment of their
assumption. Nor can this opinion be justly charged with any suspicion of
error, or other difficulty, as containing nothing which is not exactly
parallel to that which we believe concerning the union of his body with the
Divine nature in his person, after his body was separated from his soul. His
body in that interim of separation or of its rest in the grave, was as truly
the body of the son of God, as it had been whilst it was living. His soul
likewise was as truly the soul of the son of God during the divorce, as it
was whilst it retained union with its body. And whether the blood which was
shed from his most precious body on the Cross, were gathered again into his
veins (a point not to be pryed into by mortal men) or how ever it pleased him
or his heavenly Father to dispose of it; yet I think I may say that not a drop
of it but remains unto this day the true blood of the son of God; it lost no
union, nor degree of union with his divine person: it still retains the power
and efficacy of cleansing or sanctifying our nature.

4 Some I know there be who think all others to speak and think unworthily of
Christ, unless they grant that his soul was not only infused into his body in
the first conception of it, but that it was withal endued with all manner of
knowledge which He afterward had. Yet to bind any man to believe or
acknowledge either of these (the latter especially) is to lay more upon us then
God has in his written Word or in the book of his Creatures tied us unto, if
so these men will give us leave to use the spectacles of reason in reading
either book. For if our blessed Savior during all the time he was in his
mothers womb, had the perfect use of sense and reason, his condition of life
had been more wearisome then in any part of his pilgrimage here on earth it
was; for he was as mortal, and as subject to sad impressions in the womb, as
he was in the strength of his age: and death had been more welcome to him then
such close imprisonment, if the exercise of reason or Contemplation had been
as free there as it was, when he was endued with liberty of sense and local
motion. The only reason I can conceive any man should pretend either for the
infusion of the reasonable soul into his body, at the first conception, or
that the reasonable soul, whether then or at the time wherein other infants
become capable of it, should be endued with such a measure of actual or
explicit knowledge whilst he was in his mothers womb, as afterward it was,
must be grounded on the hypostaticall union between the woman's seed and the
word of God. But if any reason thus grounded could infer either part of the
premises, it would as well infer, that his knowledge as man, should have
been infinite from his conception. This I think no Christian will affirm; for
the personal union of the divine nature with the humane, does not endow it
with the real titles of the divine. Otherwise, Christ's strength as man should
have been infinite from the womb: and his body should have been every where.
And it would be less unreasonable to say that his body is at this day
infinite, and his humane nature every where; then that his wisdom or
knowledge, as man, should have been infinite, or as great whilst he was in the
womb as now it is. If the divine nature did not communicate his infinity to the
humane, nor make the son of God so complete a man for strength of ability of
body from the womb, as at thirty years he was; it exceeds the bounds of my
capacity to imagine, what reason those men have for their opinion, who think
our blessed Lord and Savior did not as truly grow in wisdom and knowledge,
as he did in strength or stature of body. The Scripture is alike literal for
both, Luke 2. 52. Jesus increased in Wisdom and stature, and in favor with
God and man. I make no question but that such as deny his growth in wisdom, do
this out of a religious fear, lest they should speak or conceive any thing of
Christ which might be thought either to derogate from his greatness, or from
his goodness. This fear or zealous care is in the general very good, but
has small ground in this particular. For were it either well grounded or well
guided, it would rather teach us not to deny that Jesus did grow in wisdom and
goodness, then to be peremptory in contradicting others which hold the
affirmative. Simple nescience can be no sin in any Child nor in any man,
unless it be of those things which he is bound to know. But proficiency in
wisdom and knowledge is in the sons of men a praise worthy perfection, which
I should be as unwilling to deny unto my Lord and Savior in his infancy or his
youth, as to rob him now of any royal attributes since he was made King. That
he was without all stain of sin, the most holy Sanctuary of the most holy
and blessed God from the womb, I steadfastly believe: but that he had the same
measure o^ knowledge at his circumcision, at his presentation in the Temple,
which he had and gave proof of when his Parents found him in the Temple
disputing with the Doctors, or no greater measure of this knowledge at his
baptism, then he then had; or as great as his baptism, as since his
resurrection and ascension he has; I shall crave pardon for making these or
the like any points of my belief. If any man be otherwise minded I grudge him
not the liberty of his opinion, but will confess my ignorance, when he shall
show me any express Scripture, or any deduction out of Scripture which shall
not infer aut nihil, aut nimium.

5 It suffices me to believe and know that my Lord was so qualified with all
grace, even whilst he lived in the form of a servant, that he was always more
ready to understand, and comprehend whatsoever it pleased his heavenly Father
to impart or signify unto him, then crystal is to receive the light of the
Sun, or any glass the shape of bodies which present themselves unto it; and
more ready withal to do whatsoever he knew to be his Fathers will he should
do, then we are to eat when we are hungry, or to drink in the extremity of
christ. There was in him, even in his cradle a docilitie or capacity, both for
learning and doing his fathers will, truly infinite in comparison of other
children, yet this capacity was actuated by degrees. This, I take it, is as
much as we are bound to believe concerning his growth in wisdom; and this
we cannot deny to be contained in the hypostaticall union, of which we are
without curiosity to say somewhat in the next place.

CHAP. 30.
Of the hypostaticall and personal union betwixt the Word and the flesh, or
betwixt the son of God and the seed of Abraham.
THe manner of the union between the son of God and the seed of Abraham is a
mystery (that one of the blessed Trinity only excepted) most to be admired by
all, and least possible to be exactly expressed by any living man, of all the
mysteries whose belief we profess in this Apostles Creed. And for this reason
my former resolution to avoid all School disputes about the relations in the
Trinity, and each several persons peculiar properties, ties me to the like
observance in this present point. And in my younger days, I had a greater
desire to learn more exquisite rules of Logic or other good arts, out of
School-disputes in these two kinds, then can be found in the professors of
such arts themselves, then I have in these declining years to learn divinity
from them.

2. The particulars which the most subtle amongst the Schoole-Divines exhibit
concerning the manner of the hypostaticall union, are well summed up by the
learned and judicious D. Field in whose computation they amount to more then I
shall have occasion in this place to make use of: and are withal of so high a
pitch and strain, as surmounts my aim or level for this time; Cap. 30
which is only, to show how truly, how justly, how consonantly to the known
rules of reason in other cases, we Christians believe and acknowledge such a
peculiar union between the son of God, and the son of David, that whilst
the son of man was conceived, borne, crucified, and raised from the dead, the
son of God likewise was conceived, borne, crucified, etc. Now for justifying
these and the like expressions, [the son of God was conceived, was borne, was
crucified, etc.] (whether we find them in the Creed, or in the Apostolic or
Evangelical writings, whence they issued into this Creed;) we can have no
better ground, or fundamental resemblance, then that of Athanasius [As the
reasonable soul and flesh make one man, so God and man make one Christ:] yet
this illustration, or expression of the manner of this mystical union is
excepted against by some great Divines, and by Cardinal Bellarmine by name,
yet excepted against, not as false or impertinent, but as defective. But if
every resemblance of this or other sacred mystery, which is any way defective
were liable to exception, the Church should do well to give a general
prohibition that no man should attempt to make any. For all will come short of
the mystery which we seek to express by them, or of so much of it, as we
shall know in that eternal School. It was the Cardinals fault to stretch
Athanasius his expression further then he intended it, or not to allot it a
certain extent, within which it is most divinely true.

3. The like comparisons sometimes hold firm and true only quoad veritatem,
non quoad mensuram according to the truth, not according to the measure of the
same truth. As when we beseech our heavenly father to forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; or when our Savior
enjoynes us, to be merciful, as our heavenly father is merciful: the meaning
is, not that the measure of his mercies toward us should be but equal to our
mercy, or kindness toward men our fellow servants: and yet, the meaning of
our Saviors injunction is, that we must be as truly merciful and charitable
toward others in some degree, as God is infinitely merciful toward all.
Sometimes the like comparisons are firm and true and quoad veritatem, and
quoad mensuram, both according to the truth, and the same measure of truth, but
not quoad modum, at least not quoad modum specificum proximum, sed quoad modum
genericum aut remotum: true they may be sometimes according to the same manner,
and yet not in all respects, or according to the selfsame particular manner.
And such is this comparison of Athanasius. First it holds quoad veritatem
unionis, As it is not the mere inhabitation of the reasonable soul in the
body, but the peculiar union of these two parts, which makes a man: so is it
not the internal presence or peculiar inhabitation of the Deity in the
manhood, but the true and real union of these two natures, which makes one
Christ. Infernal spirits may, by Gods permission, take up their lodgings in
the bodies of men, may be confined within them, and use them as their
instruments: yet by such residence in them, men neither become Devils, nor
devils men, nor do they make any one realitie, or third thing in part or whole
distinct from both.

4. The former comparison does not hold secundum omnem modum: that is, though
the Godhead and humanity of Christ be as truly, as properly, and really united,
as the reasonable soul and the humane body are, yet the manner of the union is
herein different. The reasonable soul and the body being two distinct natures,
each having their proper existence, though imperfect and incomplete, do by
their union make one perfect complete nature. Their union is made by physical
or natural composition. Now in all such unions or compositions, each part
ingredient must abate or lose somewhat; there must be a mutual fashioning, or
fitting of the one to the other. But the Deity or Godhead as it is all things
else; so it is fitness it self, and cannot be fashioned or fitted to any
creature, as being not subject to any shadow of change, or alteration. The
creatures may be fashioned or fitted to be more or less capable of his
presence, or participation. But this participation in what degree, in what
manner or measure soever it be had, includes no physical composition, or
confusion of natures. Thus much Athanasius, to prevent all captious exceptions
against this similitude, had sufficiently expressed in the place forecited;
though he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ; One, not by the
conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the manhood into God,
One altogether not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person.

5. Some Philosophers there are and have been, who although they grant a
Physical composition of matter and form in man, yet they deny the reasonable
soul (the intellectual part at lest) to be the form of man, or any part of
the Physical compound, which (in their Philosophy) is prerequired to the
constitution of man; not any proper part of his essence or nature. That visible
live-substance, wherein the reasonable soul during her pilgrimage here on
earth does reside, as in a walking prison, is in these men's Philosophy or
Divinity as formally distinguished by its mere organical faculties, or bodily
senses, from all other living sensitive creatures, as any of them is from
another. And they are distinguished each from other, only by the peculiar
manner of the senses, or modification of their organicall faculties. The
reasonable soul, or faculty of reason, is in this opinion rather the Crown or
Diadem, whereby man excells all other creatures as their King or Governor,
then the Physical form whereby he is formally or specifically distinguished
from them. According to this opinion there should be in one and the same man
two distinct complete natures, one bodily physical compound, endued with sense
and subject to mortality, another rational and immortal. And these two
natures make one man, not by physical composition, or union of matter and
form, but by a peculiar subordination of the sensitive Creature unto the
rational, or of sense unto reason, as true, as firm and real, as the
subordination of life is to sense, or bodily mixture is unto life or
vegetation; but not by the same manner of subordination. If Athanasius his
philosophy were of this mould, his comparison would be true quoad modum:
however, leaving the examination of this opinion to the Schools, let us
examime his comparison quoad veritatem and mensuram.

6 Such Philosophers as grant the reasonable soul to be a form truly
physical, and an incomplete part of man's nature, do not for the most part
affirm, that it is propagated from the parents of our bodies, but created by
God, as the soul of the first man was. And yet even these men who deny the
reasonable soul to be ex traduce, do not avouch that only the bodily part or
flesh of man is conceived, but the whole man who consists of a reasonable soul
as well as of a body. The full and perfect conception of every living thing
includes not only a preparation of the bodily substance for receiving the
foul, but besides this, the unition of the foul, (whether sensitive only or
reasonable) with its proper body. And seeing the proper nature of man consists
especially in reason, there can be no perfect conception of man, as man, until
the reasonable soul be seated in and united unto the bodily substance, fitted
or organized for it. Whether that bodily substance were before this union
endued with sense or no, is not much pertinent to the point now in hand.
However Philosophers may dispute that case, this position is proper and
philosophical: [Man does beget man, and woman conceives man, although the
reasonable soul, which is the principal part of man, do not take its
original or beginning of being, either from the man that begets him, or from
the woman that conceives and brings him forth, but immediately from GOD.]

7 This assertion likewise is Christian and Theological; [The blessed Virgin
did truly conceive and bring forth Christ Jesus, God and man, the son of
God, and the son of David:] albebeit the Divine nature, which is the
excellency of Christ, did not take beginning from her, but was from all
eternity without beginning, yet not united to the manhood till the conception
wrought by the holy Ghost in the Virgins womb. though both assertio^s be most
true, yet the ground of this theological assertion is more perspicuous and
firm then the ground of the philosophers assertion wherewith it is paralleld.
We Christians may give a better reason of our faith and form of doctrine,
then the Philosophers can give of their opinion, or manner of phrase in this
point. First in the conception of ordinary or mere men, the bodily substance,
or the material part, has a distinct existence of its own, before it be
united unto the reasonable soul, and the reasonable soul likewise has a
proper existence (at least in order of nature if not of time) precedent to its
union with its body. Nor is the union so perfect as to make simply but one
existence of both. It is actually one, potentially two, and in the dissolution
of body and soul, they are actually severed; there is not then so much as
coexistence, or existence of the one in the other. But neither the substance
which the son of God took from the blessed virgin, nor the reasonable soul
which was united unto it, had any proper existence, before their union with the
divine nature. The bodily substance assumed by his divine person was a part of
the blessed virgins individual nature, and had its whole existence in her
before its assumption, but by the assumption it has existence wholly in him
not as a part, but as an Appendix to his divine person. That which the
Philosophers or School Divines say concerning the creation of the reasonable
soul, and its union with man's body, is more remarkably true of Christ's humane
soul. The reasonable soul (say the Philosophers) infundendo creatur, et
creando infunditur, is created by infusion, and is infused by creation. Christ's
reasonable soul was not in order either of time or nature, first created, then
assumed, sed assumendo creabatur, et creando assumebatur, it was created
whilst it was assumed, and it was assumed whilst it was created. Whether it
were united to the body or flesh from the first moment of their assumption, is
an extravagant to this assertion. The substance likewise which our blessed
Savior took from his mother, was not either in order of time, or of nature,
first conceived or prepared by any praeviall dispositions for the divine
natures habitation in it, and then assumed; sed inter assumendum concipiebatur,
et inter concipie^dum assumebatur; it was conceived by assumption, and assumed
in, or by its conception.

8. The next branch of this inquiry is, what is meant when we say, the fruit
of the Virgins womb was assumed by the Son of God? This form of speech
imports thus much at the least; that the son of God, or the divine nature in
his person, was to be partaker of flesh and blood, as we sons of men are: So
the Apostle teaches, Heb. 2. 14. For as much the^ as the children are partakers
of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil. This participation of flesh and blood with his brethren, is but an
expression of the assumption. Verily, says the Apostle ver. 16, he took not
hold of the Angels, but he took hold of the seed of Abraham. The meaning of
these expressions, as likewise of the original word, is, that albeit the
Angels were created by him, yet were they not so assumed, or so united to his
person, as the seed of Abraham was, and is. Nor is he partaker of their
nature, or of any other nature besides, after such a peculiar manner, as he is
of the humane nature by assuming the seed of Abraham.

Some School Divines and followers of Aquinas will have the former similitude
of Athanasius to consist especially in this; In omnibus autem rebus creatis
nihil inv^^^^^ huic (...) tam simile, sicut (...) animae ad corpus. Vnde
Athanasius in symb^lo ait, Sicut a^^ma et corpus unus est homo, ita Deus and
homo unus est Christus: Sed cum animarationalis uniatur corpori dupliciter, uno
modo sicut materiae, alio modo sicut instrumento: non potest esse sim^litudo
quanti^m ad primum modum unionis; quia tunc ex Deo, and homine fieret una
natura, cum materia, and f^rma constituant propriam naturam specie. Relinquatur
ergo, quod attribuitur similitudo, secundum quod anima comparatur corpori,
sicut instrument^, adquod etiam dictae antiquorum Doctorum concor d^^t, qui
naturam humanam in Christo dixerunt quoddam divi^^^^^^ instrumentum, sicut
ponitur corpus organ^m animae. Aliter (...) se habet ^nima ad corpus (quod est
proprium organ^m ejus:) aliter instrumenta extrinseca. Haec enim non est
proprium instrumentum hujus hominis sicut haec (...) cum per dolabram multi
poss^nt operari: sed haec manus ad propriam operationem animae deputatur, quia
manus est instrumentam (...) and proprium, dolabra vero extrinsecum and
commune. Sic in unione verbi Dei, and hominis considerari potest. Omnes enim
homines comparantur ad Deum, ut quaedam instrument^, quibus operatur; ipse enim
est qui operatur in nobis velle, and perficere pro sua bona voluntate. Sed alii
homines comparantur ad Deum quasi instrumenta e^trinseca separata, nec moventur
a Deo ad operationes proprias sibi, sed ad operationes communes omnis rationali
naturae, ut sunt intelligere veritatem, diligere bona, operari justa. Sed
humana natura a Christo assumpta est proprium instrumentum sibi unitum ad
operandas operationes, quae sunt propri^e, soli Deo convenientes: sicut sunt
mundare peccata, illuminare mentes per gratiam and introducere in perfectionem
vitae aeternae. Nec discrepata rerum naturalium similitudine quod aliquid sit
naturaliter instrumentum proprium alicujus, quod tamen non sit forma ipsius.
Nam lingua (prout est instrumentum locutionis) est proprium organum
intellectus, qui tamen (ut probat Philosophus in tertio (...)) nullius corporis
est forma. Similiter etiam invenitur aliquod instrumentum quod ad naturam
specie non pertinet, and tamen ex part materi^ competit huic (...) ut seaetus
digitus, vel aliquid hujusmodi. Nihil igitur prohibet (...) unionem naturae
humana ad verbum tanquam instrumentum unitum and conjunctum. Nec tamen natura
humana ad naturam verbi pertinet (...) est ejus firma, licet pertinent ad ejus
personam. Praedicta tamen exempla sic posita sunt, ut non omnimoda similitudo
sit in his requirenda. Intelligendum est enim verbum Dei inul^^ sublimius, and
intimi^s humanae. naturae uni^i, qu^mquae cunque alia instrumenta propria.
that as the reasonable soul does use the body of man; so the divine nature of
Christ does use the manhood, as its proper united instrument. Every other man,
besides the man Christ Jesus, every other creature is the instrument of God:
but al of them such instruments of the divine nature, as the axe or hammer is
to the artificer which works by them. The most puissant Princes, the
mightiest Conquerors* which the world has seen or felt, could grow no higher
in titles, then. Attilas, or Nebuchadnezzar did Malleus orbis et flagellum Dei,
hammers or scourges of God to chastise or bruise the Nations. But the humanity
of Christ is such an instrument of the divine nature in his person, as the hand
of man is to the person or party, whose hand it is. And it is well observed,
whether by Aquinas himself, or no, I remember not, but by Viguerius an
accurate summist of Aquinas sums, that albeit the intellectual part of man
be a spiritual substance, and separated from the matter or bodily part: yet
is the union betwixt the hand and intellectual part of man no less firm, no
less proper, then the union between the feet or other organicall parts of
sensitive Creatures, and their sensitive souls, or mere Physical forms. For
the intellectual part of man, whether it be the form of man truly, though
not merely physical, or rather his essence not his form at all, does u^e his
own hand not as the Carpenter does use his axe, that is, not as an external
or separated, but as his proper united instrument. Nor is the union between
the hand, as the instrument, and intellective part at the Artificer or
Commander of it, an union of matter and form, but an union personal, or at
the least such an union as resembles the hypostaticall union between the
divine and humane nature of Christ much better then any material union wherein
Philosophers or School Divines can make instance.

9. These and the like speculations are neither unpleasant nor unprofitable, if
so the Reader will not restrain the former similitude of Athanasius, only to
this kind of union. But after what manner, to what special purposes, or what
peculiar services the manhood of Christ is the instrument of his divine nature
(as the ancient for the most part unanimously affirm) by Gods assistance in
other Articles following, or in the mystical union betwixt Christ and his
members. Thus much in this place, and for the present may suffice, that the
personal union between the divinity and manhood of Christ, (though it be in
it self more admirable then comprehensible or expressible,) is more proper and
firm then any union which can be made by mixture, by confusion, by
composition, or compaction of several natures into one. But what Athanasius
meant in that expression of taking the manhood into God, may (if I mistake not)
to my present purpose (which is only to lay the general grounds of these
communications of properties, which Divines whether ancient or modern observe
between the divine and humane nature of Christ) be yet further explicated by
answering the maine objection that can be made against Athanasius his
similitude, or these illustrations of it.

10. Some happily will object, (and it is all I think, that can be objected
against us) that as we are, such is our flesh, such is our blood. We are by
nature men, and our flesh and blood is by nature only humane, or the flesh and
blood of men; but if the flesh and blood whereof the son of God is partaker
be as truly his, as our flesh and blood is ours, shall they not be such as he
is, that is, flesh and blood truly divine not humane? This must in no wise be
granted, otherwise the son of God should not be (as the Apostle avoucheth he
is) partaker with us of the same flesh and blood. The flesh and blood which he
assumed and was partaker of, are as truly humane, as man's flesh and blood are,
and of the self same nature that man's flesh and blood are of. And of such
flesh he was to be as truly, as properly partaker, as we are. And yet it is
necessary that the same flesh and blood which he assumed, be as truly and as
properly the flesh and blood of the son of God, (who is by nature God blessed
for ever) as our flesh is the flesh, or our blood the blood of the sons of
men. Otherwise, albeit the flesh and blood assumed by him had been as truly,
and as properly humane flesh and blood as ours is; yet could not the son of God
have been as true and proper a partaker of humane flesh and blood as we
sons of men are. For no party or person can as truly and really participate
with another in that which is not his own by as perfect right, as it is the
others who is partaker of it with him. So then the flesh and blood of our
Savior Christ was truly and properly Caro humana, non divina; sanguis
humanus, non divinus, not divine but humane flesh and blood; and yet withal as
truly and properly Caro Dei, and Sanguis Dei, the flesh and blood of God, as
it was caro humana, sanguis humanus, humane flesh, and humane blood: more
properly the flesh and blood of God, then the flesh and blood of man. For eve^
the whole humanity of Christ, as well the reasonable soul as the flesh was and
is the humanity of the son of God. God, says the Apostle, Acts 20. 28. has
purchased the Church (...) with his own proper blood. Now if the Church be
Gods own not by creation only but by true purchase; then the blood by which
he purchased it, was as truly his own, as our blood, or any thing within us,
or without us, which we can own, is ours. But was it Gods own blood, after
the selfsame manner or measure that our blood is ours? It was not in every
respect, or after every manner his own, so as our blood is ours; yet his own
by a more proper, more full, and sovereign title then our blood is any way
ours.

11. Our flesh and blood may be said to be our own in two respects, either as
it is a part of our nature, or an appertinence of our person. In this last
respect the fruit of the Virgins womb was the son of Gods own substance, the
flesh and blood which he took from her were his after a more exquisite
manner, or in a fuller measure of the same manner, then our flesh and blood are
our own. Or if we would speak the language of Philosophy her self, rather
then of Philosophers, or of such as profess themselves to be her followers,
though ofttimes, (as we say) a far off. Our flesh, our blood, our limbs,
are said to be our own, not so much or not so properly as they are parts of
our nature, as in that they are either parts or appurtenances of our persons.
That which is immediately next or linkt unto our person, is by a more peculiar
and sovereign right our own, then any things whatsoever besides we do
possess, or are Lords of; be it Lands, goods or servants. For whatsoever we
possess, being not thus annexed unto our persons, are but externalls, their
possession is communicable, their property may be so alienated, as others may
make as good use of them as we do. A man may be wronged in every thing that
is his own, whereof he is by just title possessed, but the wrongs done to a
man in externalls, do not touch him so nearly, as the wrongs done to his
person, or to any part or appurtenance of it.

12. That there is a true and real distinction between the natures and the
persons of men, or between things which are our own by union of nature, or by
union unto our persons, may thus be gathered. Every part of our nature is
either a part, or an appurtenance of our person: but every part or appurtenance
of our person is not a part of our nature. A man may suffer gross personal
wrong without pain or damage to any part of his nature, without loss of any
commodity that could be made of that wherein he suffered wrong, it being (in
it self considered) incapable of wrong. As in case some joint or part of a
man's body be dead and withered, irrecoverably deprived of sense, of pain, of
vital motion: it thereby cease to be a part of the humane nature, but it
therefore cease not to be an appendance or an appurtenance of his person. He
that should disfigure, mangle, or otherwise handle such a dead number any
otherwise then the party, whose it is, were willing to have it handled, does
wrong his person in a higher degree than if he mangled or maimed his live
goods, or cattle: and yet however he handle it, he puts the living party to no
pain, is being (as it is supposed) no natural or sensible part of his body,
nor could it have yielded any commodity though it had been cut off before it
was disfigured. Offenses of this nature are not to be valued according to the
excellency of the physical complexion or constitution of the bodily part
wounded or contumeliously handled, but according to the excellency or dignity
of the party whose flesh or substance it is that is wounded or abused; whether
it be an entire live part of his nature, or an appendix only to his person, as
being a joint or member in part maimed or deprived of sense before. Generally
whether we speak of men's actions or sufferings undertaken for our behoof, to
the loss of blood or limbs; we are not to value the one or other so much
according to the physical property, or natural worth of the member lost or
damnified, as according to the dignity of the person which voluntarily
undertaketh such hard services for us. And thus we are to rate as well the
indignities and pains which our Savior suffered in body by the Jews or Roman
soldiers, as the anguish of his soul in that great conflict with the powers of
darkness, neither according to the excellency of his bodily constitution, or
exquisite purity of his soul, but according to the inestimable dignity of his
divine person, of which, as well his immaculate soul, as his undefiled body
were no natural parts, but appurtenances only.

13 Lastly, that proper blood, wherewith God is said to have purchased the
Church, was the blood of the son of God, the second person in Trinity, after
a more peculiar manner then it was the blood either of God the Father, or of
God the holy ghost. It was the blood of God the Father, or of God the holy
Ghost, as all other creatures are, by common right of creation and
preservation. It was the blood of God the son alone by personal union. If this
son of God, and high Priest of our souls had offered any other sacrifice for
us then himself, or the manhood thus personally united unto him, his offering
could not have been satisfactory; because in all other things created, the
Father and the holy Ghost had the same right or interest which the son had;
he could not have offered any thing to them which were not as truly theirs as
his. Only the seed of Abraham, or fruit of the virgins womb which he assumed
into the Godhead, was by the assumption made so his own, as it was not theirs,
his own by incommunicable property of personal union. By reason of this
incommunicable property in the woman's seed, the son of God might truly
have said unto his Father [Lord thou have purchased the Church yet with my
blood:] but so could not the man Christ Jesus say unto the son of God, [Lord
thou have paid the ransom for the sins of the world, yet with my blood, not
with thine own.]

SECT. 4.
Of the conception, and birth, of our Lord and Savior, the son of God: of
the circumcision of the son of God, and the name JESUS, given him at his
circumcision; and of the fulfilling of the types and prophecyes concerning
these mysteries.
CHAP. 31.
The aenigmaticall predictions concerning Christ's conception, unfolded by
degrees.
THat the predictions of the prophets, which the Jew acknowledges for sacred,
are of divine infallible authority: that according to many of these
prophetical praedictions, God in the person of the son was to become man,
the eternal word was to be made flesh, (that is, to have our flesh and nature
so united unto him, that whilst our flesh and nature was conceived and brought
forth, Sect. 4.
the son of God was also conceived and brought forth, whilst the man Christ
Jesus did suffer in the flesh, the son of God did also suffer) This is the
brief sum or extract of all that has in this Treatise been delivered. This
is the foundation of faith as Christian, the radical article of Christian
Theology. It follows in our Apostles Creed, that this only son of God
Christ Jesus our Lord was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin
Mary. The name Jesus was given him at his circumcision, and comes there to be
handled. So was not the name Christ, but as often as the Evangelists so instyle
him before his resurrection from the dead, it is by way of anticipation; for he
was made Lord and Christ at his ascension into heaven, though anointed to his
prophetical office at his baptism, (from which time he did declare himself
by word and deed to be the Prince of Prophets) yet not then consecrated, much
less admitted to the function or exercise of his everlasting Priesthood: not
then enthronized King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: these royal titles were
accomplished in his resurrection and ascension. The point for the present to be
handled is* how the conception and birth of the son of God, the Lord God of
Israel, was foretold or foreshadowed, and how accomplished for the substance,
how manifested by the signs of the time, or circumstances concomitant.

2 The conception and birth of the son of God, with other mysteries which
concern his person and offices, were purposely foretold and forepictured from
the fall of our first parents until the sacred Canon of the old Testament was
finished; Cap. 31
yet not foretold, or forepictured in the ^ame measure, or after the same
manner, in every age of this long succession. The first predictions or
representations of these great mysteries were aenigmaticall and implicit, but
for the most part unwrapped and branched in succeeding ages. The later
representations bear the same proportions to the most ancient, that maps of
particular countries bear unto more general, or Chorographie unto Geographie.
In a map of the whole world though accurately drawn, we shall hardly find
any exact proportion of these British Islands, no such distinct evidences of
the several provinces of this Island, as are usually represented in a map of
Europe of the same quantity. And it were in vain to seek so distinct a survey
of every English shire or County in a map of Europe, as we have in our
ordinary maps of England: But if we descend to Chorographical platformes of
every several shire, every one that knows how to use them, may find the
distinct place of his birth, breeding, or dwelling. The first and most general
map of mysteries concerning Christ, or of the Word to come, is that often
mentioned Genesis 3. ver. 15. I will put enmity between thy seed and her
seed, etc. Yet without some further dilatations, or representations of this
promise made by the Prophets, it were impossible for the wit of man to discover
any true proportion of those great mysteries which the Evangelists relate,
although all of them were contained in this, as in their first head or
fountain, or as most Chorographicall descriptions are, in the Cosmographie of
the Universe. Very probable it is, that our mother Hevah did from this promise
conceive, that the seed promised should be Vir Jehovah, a man which should be
likewise the Lord God. But questionless she did not imagine, much less
believe, that this man, the Lord, should be conceived and brought forth of a
pure Virgin, for such she her self was not when she uttered that speech
possedi virum ipsum Jehovah, in his Co^ments upon the 4 first Chapters of
Genesis, and in his Collations.
as Fagius upon several revises reads it. Nor could the parents of Noah
imagine that their son should be so conceived or borne, although (as many good
Authors think) they mistook him as Hevah did Cain, for the promised woman's
seed; presume they might without presumption, that the promised Messiah was to
proceed from him according to the flesh, but seeing Noah had more sons than
one, it was not to him or to others then living distinctly represented, from
what branch of his stock he should proceed; until Noah by divine instinct or
inspiration did bequeath the birthright unto Sem; but Sem had many sons, and
his posterity was great, and it is not probable that Sem himself did know from
which of them the promised seed should issue, until the blessing which Noah
bestowed on Sem was by God himself (and perhaps by Sem as Gods Ambassador)
bestowed on Abraham, unto whom the former mystery concerning the incarnation of
the son of God, was more distinctly represented both by word and fact, then
it had been to any of his Ancestors. He doubtless did conceive, that the
seed in whom all the Nations of the world were to be blessed, should be God,
the son of God, be borne after a more miraculous manner then his son Isaac
had been: but Abraham's seed by Isaac became more numerous then any man's before
his time had been, and was divided into twelve Tribes. In which of these
twelve Tribes the promised seed was to be sought for, was as uncertain, and as
undistinct, as if we should seek for the topographie of some particular Town
of England in an ordinary Map of Europe. Jacob on his deathbed points at his
parentage in this generality, (Genesis 49. ver. 10.) that he was to spring out
of Judah. But God by his spirit directs the Church to seek him in the
Genealogy of Iesse and David in the Land of Judea. David himself had a
distinct representation, that he should not be his son only, but that he
who then was his Lord, should become his son, and be made Priest after the
order of Melchisedech; and no doubt but David conceived withal, that this his
Lord and son should be borne of a virgin, not begotten by any man; for thus
much the holy Spirit, which spoke to him, has literally charactred unto us in
that speech, Psa. 132. ver. 11. Of the fruit of thy womb will I set upon thy
throne, etc. The same mystery or the performance of this promise made to
David, is, more distinctly unfolded by Isaiah Cap. 7. ver. 14. The Lord
himself will give you a sign, Behold the virgin shall conceive, etc. But
whether this long expected son of David should proceed from Solomon or any
of his race, or from the race or lineage of some other son of David, this was
not represented (for ought we read) either unto David or Isaiah; and sure the
Author of the 89. Psalm, (whether David or rather some later Prophet) was
nescient of this particular, and the interruption or extinction of Solomon's
line was (I take it) first revealed unto Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and the
accomplishment of their Prophesies (of Ezekiels especially) first acknowledged
or observed by the blessed virgin in her Luke 1. 52
Magnificat. In David's time the place of his conception and birth were not
discovered. Isa. 11. 1. Isa 53 2.
Isaiah first points at the place of his conception in particular, but See the
Treatise of Christ's answer to John. And Nazareth and Bethlem.
aenigmatically. Jeremiah describes the place of his conception more plainly,
yet in a far greater generality, That he was to be conceived in the Land of
Ephraim, as it was divided from Judah. Yet happily if Herod had asked his Scribes
and others, where the King of the Jews was to be conceived, it is questionable
whether they could so clearly have resolved him of the place of his
conception, as they did certify him of the distinct place of his birth. This
they learned out of the Prophet Micah, Chap. 5. ver. 2.

3. That of our Apostle Hebrews 1. ver. 1. is exactly verified in respect of
the article now in handling. The Prophets and holy men of God, or God by their
ministry spoke of our Saviors conception and birth (...), not at sundry times
only, or in several ages of the Fathers, but piece-meale or by scattered
predictions, (...) sundry ways; sometimes literally and plainly, sometimes
mystically or aenigmatically. But in this later age he has spoken unto us by
his Son, (or, in his Son:) For even the historical passages of his
conception and birth, though delivered unto us by his Evangelists spoken (...),
his very conception, his birth and actions, as well as the words uttered by
him, have their plain, and full language, and if we take them as set down by
the Evangelists, are as the putting together of all what the Prophets had
spoken scatteredly, or represented by broken pictures, or portions of truth.
After that maine head or fountain of Prophecies was opened, and had his course
drawn by God himself, not by any Prophet. [I will put enmity between thee,
and him, etc.] Every succeeding age (especially from the deluge) adds some new
rills or petty streams unto it, the full current of which is conspicuous only
in the Gospel.

CHAP 32.
Saint Lukes narration of our Saviors conception and birth, and its exact
concordance with the Prophets.
TO begin with S. Lukes narration of his co^ceptio^ Cap. 1. ver. 26. In the 6.
month, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a City of Galilee, named
Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of
David, and the virgins name was Mary. In these few lines we have the exact
Chorographie of those general or more obscure descriptions which Isaias and
Jeremiah had made of the place of his conception; and in the words following
we have the particular and most exact survey of all Gods promises made to
David, or related by other Prophets concerning that son of David, who was to
rule over Jacob for ever. When Saint Luke says in the words forecited, the
Angel Gabriel was sent in the sixth month, this may refer either to the time
of John Baptists conception (as in all probability it does) ver. 36.) Behold,
thy Cousin Elizabeth she also has conceived a son in her old age, and this
is the sixth month with her, who was called barren: Or it may refer unto the
sixth month of the year, according to the ancient and civil account of the
Hebrews: for until the time of Isreal's deliverie out of Egypt, the month
wherein John Baptist was conceived (which answers for the past part to our
September) was the first month in which (as most later Divines are of opinion)
the world was created. Cap. 32
The month Abib (which answers unto March with us) became observable to the
Israelites from their deliverance in that month out of Egypt, and continues in
their Ecclesiastical account the first in order. In the same month the
conception of our Lord and Savior was denounced by the Angel, and our
deliverance by him from the powers of darkness afterward accomplished, and
well deserves the title of the first month since his conception and passion:
but in whether of these two respects, or whether in both, the month wherein
the Angel was sent, be termed the sixth month is no matter of such moment or
consideration, as the tenor of his message, ver. 31. 32. And behold thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus:
He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest, and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of his Father David. When the Angel said,
He shall be great, and his mother shall call his name JESUS, it is implied,
that as yet he was not great, that he had not the beginning of that greatness
which is here promised. And may it not be as rightly implied, that when he
says, He shall be called the son of the highest, as yet he was not the
son of the highest, but first to brook the name of Jesus, and then first to
be made and called the son of God, when he was become great, and had received
the throne of his Father David. But it is not without observation, that the
Angel says not, He shall be the son of the highest, nor does he say, that
the blessed Virgin his Mother should bestow this name upon him, as she did the
name of Jesus. The intent and meaning of the holy Ghost in this place, is, that
this fruit of the Virgins womb, who was to be named Jesus by his mother, from
his circumcision, should be called the son of the highest, not in regard of
his future greatness as man, or as he was the promised son of David, but by
reason of his peculiar assumption, or union into the person of the son of
God, who was David's Lord before he was conceived, and was publicly to be
declared the son of God by his resurrection from the dead. At which time and
not before, he took the especial government of that Kingdom upon him, which
had so often been promised to the son of David. This meaning of the holy
Ghost, the Evangelist does open unto us, ver. 33. He shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

2. Unless this holy of holyes, who was now to be borne of the blessed virgin
Mary, had been the son of God before this time, he should in reason be
called the son of the holy Ghost. For unto the virgin Mary, demanding how
this should be seeing she know not a man, ver. 34. The Angel answered, The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, etc. An Emphaticall expression of that which
we believe in the Creed, That the holy Ghost should work his conception. Now
he who is Author of the conception of any person, which before such a
conception had no existence, is in propriety of speech to be reputed the Father
of the party or person conceived. But this very person whom we now adore under
that name or title of Christ Jesus our Lord, being before all Worlds the true
and only son of God, albeit the holy Ghost was the Author of his conception
as man (a more principal cause and Author of his conception, then any mortal
Father is of his mortal son:) yet was not the fruit of the virgins womb to
be reputed the son of the holy Ghost, but of him alone who was the true and
only Father of that person, unto whom the fruit of the Uirgins womb was by the
operation of the holy Ghost personally united. The holy Ghost was not then the
cause or Author of any new person, but only espoused, or betroathed the humane
nature of Christ (which before had no actual existence) unto him who was the
son of God from eternity. Now not he that gives, but he that takes the
spouse given in marriage, is the true husband. And the spouse so taken, from
her espousall, becomes the daughter not of him that gives her in marriage, but
of the Father of her husband, with whom she is now made one flesh. Thus God
the Father (by this espousall thus wrought by the holy Ghost,) becomes the
Father of the humane nature of Jesus, which was now united unto his son,
after another manner then before he had been, of any man; and after another
manner then the holy Ghost was, or is the Father of the man Christ Jesus.
Christ then as God and man is the only son of God the Father: The same Jesus
only as man, is the son of David.

3. That the promised Messiah was, according to the Prophecies, to be the son
of David, is evident: but by what line all descent he was to be the son of
David, or by what legal right the Kingdom of David was derived unto him, is
not without question amongst Christians. David, we know, by Gods free donation,
was King of Judah and Israel, and Solomon by legal right did succeed him in
his Kingdom. And Solomon's heirs or Successors by bodily descent had as firm
a title to the Kingdom of David, as any other Kings or Monarchs have to the
Crowns and dignities of their Ancestors. But whether Solomon's line by bodily
descent, were utterly extinguished before the conception or birth of our
Savior, is a point neither much debated, nor agreed upon by Divines. If it
were extinguished before that time, yet David's line did not determine with
Solomon's. And for this reason (happily) our Savior is instyled by the holy
Ghost, the son of David, not so of Solomon; albeit Solomon was as true a
shadow of him as King, as David had been: And Solomon's Kingdom and reign a
fairer map of his Kingdom then David's was. And though our Saviors
intermediate Ancestors, according to the flesh from David downward, were many,
as S. Luke, and more then S. Matthew relates: Yet he did immediately succeed
David in the Kingdom. For so by the law of most Countries, in case the elder
brethrens sons or issues fail, the third or fourth brother succeeds as
lawful heir, not unto his elder brothers, or their children, but to their
Grandfather or first donor. Many may be immediate heirs unto the^ to who^ they
are no immediate Successors in lineall descent. That Solomon and his line had
no such perpetuity bestowed upon them by virtue of Gods Covenant with David, as
that it might not determine before the promised seed of David, was exhibited,
the tenor of that Covenant (as it is exemplified by the Author of the 89.
Psalm) puts out of question; I have found David my servant, with my holy oil
have I anointed him. ver. 20. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my
God, and the rock of my salvation. Also I will make him my first borne; higher
then the Kings of the earth: my mercy will I keep for him evermore: and my
Covenant shall stand fast with him. His seed also will I make to endure for
ever, and his throne as the days of Heaven, ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. This last he
speaks of David's seed as of one, not of his seeds as of many. For so it
follows, ver. 30. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
judgments, if they break my statutes, and keep not my Commandments; then
will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. This visitation with rods and stripes imports more then fatherly
chastisements: true and real punishments. Yea, heavy judgments upon David's
other children according to their deserts. None are utterly exempted from Gods
heavy displeasure, besides the promised seed, or David's son (...), whose
prerogative is in the next words reserved by oath, Never the loss my loving
kindness will I not take from David, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: my
covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips,
ver. 33. This is in effect, as if he had said, however David's other sons
provoke me, I will not repent of that loving kindness which I promised to him;
it shall be accomplished in David's seed; for in respect of things alterable or
reversible, whether promised for the good of men, or threatened for their woe,
God is usually said to repent, but to whatsoever he swears, of that he never
repents. Every event ratified by oath is either unalterable or irreversible.
The Lord has sworn, says David Psalm. 110. and will not repent, that is, he
will not change or alter that which he has promised. To alter that which was
only promised, but without oath, is in the phrase of the holy Ghost (as we
usually render the original) to fail or break Covenant, that is in more
proper language, to reverse a blessing promised. Hence it is added in the next
verse of the 89. Psalm, [Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not
lie unto David] that is, I will not make void my covenant. His seeds shall
endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me. It shall be
established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in Heaven. This
is that throne, and that Kingdom which the Angel (Luke 1. 32, 33.) foretold
should be given unto the seed or fruit of the Virgins womb. As for David's other
children, or for Solomon's race, their title to the temporary Crown of David
was at the first but conditional or rather mutable: for every conditional
estate presupposes a state in being, but a state mutable, or reversible. Such
was the state of Solomon, or the heirs of his body, as well unto the kingdom
of Judah as of Israel. The Kingdom of Israel they utterly lost in the second
descent. The next Quaere is, whether this their estate unto Judah or Israel,
which was by original tenor reversible, were de facto utterly reversed, and
the Covenant (as it concerned them) finally cancelled.

4 And of this Quaere the branches are two, first, whether Salomons line were
utterly extinguished before the return of Judah from the Babylonish
Captivity, or in any age before the son of God, and the promised seed of David
was manifested in the flesh? The second, whether in case the utter
extinguishment of Salomons line be a point doubtful, or by any authentic
Author or record indeterminable; This line, were not in the same desperate
case, for recovering the Kingdom, that Elies race was for regaining the
Priesthood, from which it was by solemn oath deposed? That Solomon's line was
utterly excluded from inheriting the Kingdom of Judah and Jacob, the Jews and
Christians for the most part agree: And the tenor of that terrible sentence
against Ieconiah (according to the principles acknowledged by both) will
infer no less. As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son of
Jehoiakim King of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck
thee thence: And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life,
and into the hand of them whose face thou fear, even into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and into the hand of the Caldeans. And I will
cast thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into another Country where ye
were not borne, and there shall ye dye. But to the Land, whereunto they desire
to return, thither shall they not return. Is this man Coniah a despised
broken Idol? Is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure? Wherefore are they cast
out, he and his seed, and are cast into a Land which they know not? O earth,
earth, hear the word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord, Write ye this man
childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed
shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.
Ierem. 22. 24, 25, 26, etc. This last clause is (to me) a concludent proof,
that the man Christ Jesus was not of Ieconiahs seed, because he was to sit upon
the throne of David, and to prosper; yea, to be the fountain of all
prosperity to Prince and people: And he that will avouch our Lord and Savior
to have been of the seed of Ieconiah, will hardly be able to fend off that
co^tradiction, which his assertion directly includes, not only to the Angels
promise (Luke 1. 33.) but unto the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 23. ver. 5, 6.
Behold, the day is come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, and a King shall reign and [prosper] and shall execute
judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely, etc. The man Christ Jesus is in this place (and
elsewhere) instyled the branch of David, or a stem of the root of Iesse, but
no where a branch of Solomon, or of his feed which (is most probable) did
determine in Ieconiah, whom his Uncle Zedekiah did succeed for a while in the
kingdom of Judah, but with worse success. For Ezekiels denouncement against
him, and the Crown of Solomon was no less terrible then this of Jeremiah
against Coniah: And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come,
when iniquity shall have an end: Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem,
and take off the Crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and
abase him that is high. I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it shall
be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. Ezech.
21. 25, 26, 27. The contents of this denunciation (as I take it) are these
especially, Both the Crown and the Mitre [the ensigns of the royal and
sacerdotall dignity,] were so to be crushed, that neither should remain the
same they were. The Mitre was to be cast a new, but in a far less mould: the
Crown to be broken, and the relics of it to be united to the Mitre, both put
together to remain, but as models of that dignity, which before they
generally had, until the royal and princely dignity were united in him that
had full right to both, that is, in the promised seed, or Son of David. The
readings upon the 27 verse, are various. The vulgar Latin (following the
Septuagint) thus, iniquitatem ponam eam. The Zuricke or Tigurine thus, curvam
curvam ponam eam. And if this reading be just and straight, it may serve as a
character of that ^^^ked descent and tortuous revolution of the civil and
Ecclesiasticke power, from one Family unto another, not settling in any one
line until the coming of the son of David, unto whom both by right did
belong. Yet some authority in all this Tumble did still remain in the Tribe
of Judah, (though not in the race of Solomon or of David) until Shiloh came.
And I know not whether that cited passage of Ezekiel ver. 27. It shall be no
more (to wit, the same that it was,) until he come whose right it is, have not
special reference to that Prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49. 10. The scepter shall
not depart from Judah until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of
the people be. The Septuagint seem to interpret the name Shiloh according to
the same importance that the original (as our English has it Ezekiel. 21. 27.)
[whose right it is,] as if Shiloh had been as much as Asherle, (...)
cui repositum est. But whether according to the ordinary rules of Grammar
Shilo may stand for as much as Shello, or whether the mystery contained in
this prophecy might require or dispense with some irregularitie in the
grammatical form of speech, I leave it to accurate Critics, or sacred
Philologers: and so I do another question which is emergent as well out of the
forecited words of Jacob, as of Ezekiell, whether both prophecies were to be
understood of Christ's first coming to judge Jerusalem (unto which later the
words of Ezekiel seem most to incline, for so the original, until he come to
whom judgment belongs.) I rest contented with this part of the prophet
Ezekiels undoubted meaning, that neither the civil, nor the Ecclesiastic
dignity of Judah were to be the same they were, until the coming of the
expected Messiah, and yet some relics of both do remain until his coming.

5 Some of the Priestly line after this peoples return from Babylon did take
upon them to exercise princely authority, (as the Maccabees) but with more
honor for a while, then with good success for posterity. Others afterward
did attempt the like, but were put by it, yet permitted or authorized by the
Romans to exercise the Priestly function, some of them executed for their
mutinous aspiring to the Crown. Lastly, when they became Competitors for the
royal dignity, it was collated upon Antipater, and from him derived (or
suffered by Augustus to descend) on Herod the great, in whose days the
promised seed of David, the true heir unto the Crown of Judah was borne. But
though Herod did exercise royal jurisdiction over Judea, as well as over other
neighboring provinces, yet was he not created King over Judea; this was no
part of his royal Title bestowed upon him by Antonius. The first solemn
authorized Title of King of Judah, from the captivity of King Ieconiah and
Zedekiah, was that inscription written upon our Saviors Cross, written by
Pilates command, so peremptorily, that the Jews could not get a change or
reversion of it in any of the three languages wherein it was written [Iesus
Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum.] Pilate I take it did not in this inscription intend
the scoff or scorn of our Savior, or of the Jewish Nation, but only the
style, or Title of the crime for which our Savior was endited: He neither
affirmed nor denied him to be the King of the Jews, but that which the world
might conceive was written in jest or in scoff, the God of Israel made good in
earnest, by making this Jesus whom Pilate and the Jews had crucified, both Lord
and Christ, that is, a far greater King, then Caesar himself, whom they
acknowledge their only King.

6 Joseph his supposed Father (in all Otherwise our Savior at his death would
not have commended his mother unto S. John's care, but unto her husbands.
probability) was dead before this time of our Saviors passion, so that the
lineall right of the Crown of David was now in Christ, as the only son of
the virgin Mary, who had no child by Joseph her husband, nor he any son by
any former wife; so that the whole right unto the Crown of David, which either
or both of them had, was by legal descent devolved upon this dying man, who
after his great humiliation was to be more highly exalted, and in him alone
that which was said by the prophet Ezekiel was accomplished, exalt him that is
low, and abase him that is high. And yet the same Prophecy had been at
several times verified, or fulfilled in part before. And first perhaps in
Ieconiah, who after the debasing of Zedekiah, his uncle by Nebuchadnezzar, was
exalted above other Captives by 2 Kings 25. 27, 28.
Nebuchadnezzars son Evil-Merodach. And again more punctually (according to
the prophets meaning) in Zorobabel, and others of David's line, after Solomon's
line was either extinguished or deposed; but more fully afterward in the
blessed Virgin, as she expresses her thankfulness for it in her sweet song,
Luke 1. 52. He has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted
the humble and the meek. Whether the blessed Virgin in her own right, or
Joseph her husbands while he lived, were the next heir unto the Crown of
David, is disputed by others, unto whose determinations I have nothing to say
in this place. Whatsoever right either or both of them had, was (I take it)
derived from David by Nathan, not by Solomon or his successors. Joseph and Mary
were heirs to the kingdom which Solomon did enjoy, though not of his seed:
and so were Salathiel, and Zorobabel, from whom they directly descended.

7 But whether her son should be the lawful heir of David, was no part of
the blessed virgins doubt or question to the Angel. But how she should
conceive a son according to the purport of the Angels promise, that she
questions, Luke 1. 24. Then said Mary, how shall this be, seeing I know not a
man? To omit the idle fancies of some, who would hence collect that the blessed
virgin had vowed chastity in single life, as if I know not a man, had been as
much, as I am resolved never to know man; The truth is, that however she was
at this time espoused unto Joseph, yet the marriage was not to be consummated
til some competent space after the espousals, within which time she did
rightly apprehend the conception foretold her by the Angel was to be
accomplished, or rather from the very time of this present dialogue; and hence
she demands, how it was possible, that she should instantly conceive, seeing
she knew not a man; yet are not these words of distrust, they have no tincture
of such incredulity or slow belief, as we find taxed in Sarah, and
Zachariah father to John Baptist; yet were both Sarah, and Elizabeth the wife
of Zachariah types or shadows of the blessed virgins miraculous conceiving. So
were Hannah and Sampsons mother. The conception of all their sons (and they
were respectively their only sons) was wonderful and without the ordinary
course of nature; peculiar blessings of him that makes the barren to be a
joyful mother of Children. Sarah and Hannah and John Baptists parents had
been petitioners to the Lord of life for children, and had their petitions
ratifyed, one by the Priest, and others by the Angel of the Lord. But Sampson
was promised to Manoahs wife by the Angel of the Lord, without any petition on
her part made to this purpose, and promised withal to be a deliverer of his
people from the Philistines. And in this particular, or in the manner of the
Angelical Annunciation, the birth of Sampson was a most lively type of the
birth of our Savior, albeit this conception of Sampson was not so strange as
that of Isaac. That Sarah in her decrepit age should conceive a son, was a
matter incredible, and unparalleld in any age of the world before or since, yet
not properly miraculous. Through faith, (says the Apostle Heb. 11. 11.) Sarah
received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was
past age (either for conceiving seed, or for bringing it forth conceived, yet
both she did) because she judged him faithful who had promised. The faith by
which she conceived strength was the gift of God, and the strength which she
conceived by this faith, was such a wondrous effect, as these gifts which are
attributed to the faith of miracles. But Sarah having received this strength by
faith, the conception was according to the course of nature, it was with her
after the manner of women; not so with the virgin Mary, who became blessed by
believing the Angel: She did not receive strength to conceive seed; the
performance of those things which were foretold by the Angel were from the Lord
himself. See Esaias 7. 9.
Unless she had believed, she had not been established; yet her belief did
not cooperate with the effect promised. That was the immediate work of the
holy Ghost by marying part of her substance to the person of the Son of God,
after a manner unknown to her. There was not first a marriage, and then a
conception, nor a conception first and then a marriage, both were accomplished
at once.

CHAP. 33.
S. Mathewes relation of the manner of our Saviors conception and birth, and of
the harmony betwixt it and the prophecies.
IT is well observed by diverse good writers, that S. Matthew begins the
Genealogy of our Savior Christ not from Adam, where S. Luke (ordine
retrogrado) ends it: but (ordine recto) from Abraham, because the Covenant of
the promised seed was first by oath established in Abraham's line, and
afterward more particularly in David's, whose son and heir our Savior was,
though son by adoption, or next heir in reversion unto Ieconiah, who was the
last (as these Authors think) of Solomon's line: the last at least that could
pretend unto the kingdom of David. And though it be said in our Saviors
Genealogy according to S. Matthew, that Ieconiah begat Salathiel; yet this
cannot be meant of a natural begetting, but of a civil. He was the son of
Salathiel in such a sense as the holy Ghost uses in the second Psalm, ver. 7.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: to wit, unto the Kingdom of
Israel; if this place be literally to be understood of David, (as the most
probable opinion is,) though afterward to be mystically fulfilled only in
Christ, who is not only Gods only begotten son from eternity, but his first
begotten from the dead, Cap. 33.
and so made King of Kings and Lord of Lords. But of these points in their due
place.

2 The birth of Jesus Christ (says S. Matthew, chap. 1. ver. 18. etc.) was on
this wise. When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came
together, she was found with child of the holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband
being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to
put her away privily. But while he thought on these things, behold the Angel of
the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou son of David,
fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her
is of the holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. In this
narration some special passages are expressly the same with the former
related out of S. Luke, as that our Savior was conceived by the holy Ghost of
the Virgin Mary, or in the Virgin Mary. So S. Matthew, to denote that the
blessed Virgin was no agent in this conception, says, that which is conceived
in her is of the holy Ghost, Chap. 1. ver. 20.

This, I take it, is of the same character with that message of the Angel unto
the blessed virgin her self in S. Luke 1. chap. ver. 31. (...). Behold thou
shall conceive in thy womb, not (...) thou shall be with child and bring forth
a son; as the Angel said unto the wife of Manoah (Judges 13. 3.) and to
others which beyond expectation or course of nature did conceive and bring
forth sons of promise. Both Evangelists again expressly tell us, that the
virgin Mary was espoused to Joseph the son of David, before the Angel Gabriel
did bring this message unto her; hereby giving us to understand that the works
which the Devil had wrought in our nature should in this particular (as in
many others) be undone by God, after the same way and method that they were
done by this his enemy. The first woman we know did conceive sin, whilst
she was a virgin, at least before she knew her husband Adam, who was the
only man then on Earth: for she was a virgin espoused from her first Creation.
This first woman conceived death by believing the Serpent, and practicing
according to his Counsel, before she had consulted her husband. The blessed
virgin did conceive the Lord of life by believing the Angel Gabriels message
without consent or advise of her betroathed Husband, who at the first suspected
her loyalty, but afterward (admonished by the holy Ghost) did admit of her as
his lawful consort, did permit her to enjoy all the privileges of a wife, and
her son the privileges of his only son and heir, without any further
knowledge of her as his wife,

3 S. Luke gives us the Chronology of our Saviors birth more distinctly then
S. Matthew does; It came to pass (says he) in those days, that there went out
a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed, or booked.
Chap. 2. ver. 1. The exact year from the giving of the law, or from the return
of Judah from Captivity, neither of the Evangelists do meddle with in the
story of our Saviors birth; and for this reason. I omit them. The other
circumstances concerning the time wherein (according to the Roman account) he
was borne, with the place, were more useful for us; because these were, or
might have been, known to all other Nations, not to the Jews only, out of the
Roman Annals. It is agreed by all, that Jesus was borne in the time of
Augustus, and in the days of Herod the King. If any be desirous to know the
exact year, wherein he was borne, the best rule for his direction in this
search must be to find out the time of that tax or inrolement, mentioned by S.
Luke Chap. 2. ver. 1, 2, etc.

Now this taxing or inrolling was first made when Cyrenius was Governor of
Syria, and that (as all agree) was either in the beginning of the 42, or in the
latter end of the 41, of Augustus. Yet whether this taxing or inrollement of
every person capable of such inrollement, were not decreed, or intended before
by Augustus, though first put in execution whilst Cyrenius was Governor of
Syria, may admit some doubt or question: however, we are to calculate the time
of our Saviors birth from the time in which this decree was put in execution
throughout Judea, not from the time of the first design, or intention of
Augustus to have such a tax or inrolement of all that were Subjects to the
Roman Empire.

4 The Spanish Nation as well for their civil, as Ecclesiastic Acts did for a
long time after they became Christians, use a Computation of years different
from all other Christian States or Kingdoms. For all besides them (as far as
I have observed) begin their Computation from our Lords incarnation or birth,
which was at the same time that this decree of Augustus was put in execution
through Judea. The Spaniards begun their Era (so they call their computation)
somes 27 years more or less before this time, and as sundry of their ancient
writers think from that time wherein Augustus did first resolve upon this
taxing and inrolling of all the families under his jurisdiction, and that (as
they allege) was first thought on, and engrossed at Tarracone in Spain after
he had fully subdued the Cantabrians and others which had revolted from him in
Spain.

5 But this most probable opinion of many ancient writers (as others of like
nature usually do) suffers some praejudice by impertinent and disprovable
allegations sought out for the confirmation of it. First, the writers take it
as granted, that the decree set forth by Augustus in Spain, was for raising a
general tax or tribute throughout all his Dominions, that this tribute was to
be paid in brass, a current coin amongst the Romans, as well for the payment
of Soldiers, as for the discharge of civil contracts, or mulcts wherein they
were condemned. And from this supposition (which will not be granted them)
these writers conjecture that the word Era took its original Hence they call
this decree of Augustus, aerea constitutio, as if the word Era which (in their
language) is the computation of times or years, were the plural, (though not
warrantable by Priscian) of the Latin Aes, afterward by common use made a
noune singular. But this supposition it self, [that the (...) whereof S. Luke
speaks, should import as much as a general tax or tribute] is confuted by
Vide Sepulvedae Cordubensis de correctione anni mensiumque Romanorum tractatum.
Sepulveda a professed Spanish Antiquarie, and Chronicler unto Charles the
fifth. And if his observations fail not the Romans did not receive their
Tribute or Taxes either in brass or gold, but in silver only. And because the
imposition of Tribute or Tax is always ungrateful to conquered Provinces or
people, it is an opinion in Sepulveda his judgment void of probability, that
the Spaniards should begin their computation of time from such a distasteful
decree, but rather from the immunities or privileges which Augustus did bestow
upon that Nation. For so the Jews begin their Era, or computation of time from
their joyful deliverance out of Egypt, and from the restoration by Cyrus and
his Successors; as we Christians do ours from the birth or conception of our
Savior Christ. As for the Latin Era, that Sepulveda first, and diverse other
good writers after him, derive more properly from a mistake of ancient writers
not so well acquainted as they might have been, with the abbreviations used in
the date of public civil Acts. Now the ancient Spaniards did date such Acts,
(as we do) by the reign of our Kings; but they of Augustus especially after
this manner A. E. R. A; which stood for as much as Annus erat Augusti, (suppose
20, 30, 40, etc.) But succeeding ages ignorant of this manner of writing,
putting the former scattered letters or syllables together, made one entire
word of them ERA, or ERA.

6. Yet to grant this learned Critic all that he demands concerning this
point, he erres no less (to my apprehension) in his peremptory negative
inferences, then those Writers whom he refutes, had done in their affirmative
conjectures concerning the original of the word ERA, or the supposed occasion
of it. His intended conclusion, is that this ERA or computation of time (which
is peculiar to the Spaniards) has no reference to the decree of Augustus
mentioned by S. Luke Chap. 2. whereas Gerundensis, Vide librum decimum
Paralipomen^^n Gerundensis Episcopi.
besides other good Spanish Writers, brings positive proof that the (...)
whereof S. Luke speaks (were it a tax, or as Sepulveda will have it, an
inrolement or booking of several Tribes or Families, or of particular persons
in every Family) was projected by Augustus in Spain, immediately after he had
subdued his rebellious people there, as presuming that all the world besides,
(at least all that did yield obedience to the Roman Empire) had been quiet.
But finding opposition in other Countries beyond his expectation, he did
defer the execution of the former decree until all were quiet within the
Empire; until bordering or neighbor Countries had professed their desire of
peace, or were admitted into a league of amity with the Romans. Now this being
done, the decree was first put in execution throughout the whole Empire, at the
time (mentioned by S. Luke) of our Saviors birth. In those days (says S.
Luke) there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should
be taxed or enrolled. These words in those days may either punctually refer
unto the days between our Saviors conception and birth, or unto some longer
time between the first setting forth of this decree or design of Augustus,
and the execution of it. So S. Luke in the 2. verse tells us, that this taxing
or inrolling was first made, when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria, and all went
to be taxed or enrolled every one into his own City. A thing, I take it,
neither necessary nor usual among the Romans for gathering of public taxes
or tribute, which might be done either at the place of their dwellings, or in
some chief Cities wherein they were enjoined to pay them. Other christian
Nations begin their ERA or Computation of time from the execution of this
decree, which falls upon the time of our Saviors birth. The Spanish Nation
begun theirs from the first setting forth or design of this enrolement, which
jumps with the time of Augustus his gracious Reign over them, and their
admission into his special favor.

7. The deferring of the execution of this decree, upon the occasions mentioned
by Gerundensis and other Spanish Writers, is most agreeable to the admirable
course of Gods proceeding in like cases; whose pleasure it is, to dispose and
order the projects of greatest Princes, either quite contrary to their
intentions, or to divert them from the point at which they level, unto the
punctual fulfilling of his will revealed, or the predictions of his Prophets.
Had Augustus gone on with his former purpose of inrolling all his Subjects
instantly after his victory upon the Cantabrians, there had been no public
record that Joseph and Mary were of the lineage of David; The blessed Virgin
being at that time according to the common calculation of her years, unborne,
at least incapable of the espousalls, or of inrolement: For (as I take it) the
Romans did not intend to inroll Children or Infants. Or if in any years
intercurrent between the beginning of the Spanish ERA, and that point of time
which S. Luke mentions, the former decree had taken effect in Judea, the son
of David had not been brought forth in the City of David. For neither had
Joseph or Mary any other purpose or occasion to visit Bethleem, besides
obedience to the Emperors decree for their inrolement at the prime seat of
their Family, and perhaps for paying some head-silver, or admission money. But
God in his unsearchable wisdom devolves the execution of Augustus intention
or purpose upon this very point of time, to the end it might appear upon
authentic record, that both Joseph the supposed Father, and Mary the
undoubted Mother of our Lord and Savior, (unto both whom he was the true and
lawful heir) were of the stock and lineage of David, and that this promised
seed of David, and branch of Iesse, which had come into his mothers womb in
Nazareth, might come into the world in Bethleem, where David was borne, and
Iesse dwelt. It is not probable that the Romans did register his birth there,
yet this the Lord would have authentically notified unto the world by the
repairing of the wise men from the East to do their homage unto him there, and
that by the direction of the chief. Priests and Scribes being consulted by
Herod the King. Of the compass of time in which or of the place from which
these wise men came to Bethleem, in its due time and place. But our Savior was
borne before they set forth, and borne at Bethleem upon the occasions mentioned
by S. Luke, and as S. Matthew intimates, to the end, that the fulfilling of a
Prophecy concerning his birth might be so remarkably recorded, as it might
leave both Jew and Gentile without excuse. That Bethleem was the place designed
by God for the birth of the promised Messiah, was a notion clear and evident
to the chief Priests and Scribes, at the time when Herod consulted them. For
as then they had conceived no prejudice against the person, birth, or life of
our Savior: Nor had the malice of their heart wrought any Eclipse in their
brains or understanding: they had their answer ad ^nguem. When Herod the King
(says S. Matthew heard this thing, he was troubled, etc. And when he had
gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes together (...), he consulted them
(as Oracles) where Christ should be borne. And they said unto him, (without
distraction, or scattering of suffrages) in Bethleem of Iudaea. For thus it is
written by the Prophet; And thou Bethleem in the land of Judah, art not the
least among the Princes of Judah. For out of thee shall come a Governor, that
shall rule my people Israel. It is not strange if the chief Priests and
Scribes were so ready with their answers unto Herod, seeing this prenotion
concerning the place of the Messiahs birth, was known unto the vulgar people.
Many of the people (says S. John) when they heard this saying, said, Of a
truth this is the Prophet: Others said, This is the Christ. But some said,
Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Has not the Scripture said, that Christ
comes of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethleem, where David
was?

8. But how clear soever the meaning of the Prophet Micah in those days were
both to Priest and people: some variation there is in the words of S. Matthew,
from the words of the Prophet, as they stand in the original: at which, both
later Jews, and some Christians take more offense then the ancient Jews could
have done. And if this variation were of any moment, or could minister just
offense, either to the Jew, to the Grecian, or to the Church of God, all the
blame were to be laid upon these Scribes and Priests, whom Herod in his
perplexity did consult. For S. Matthew in this particular was but the Register
of their answer, which he did record in the same words that they solemnly
made it. The words of the Prophet in the original, as they are now pointed,
run thus: And thou Bethleem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah; yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be
Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from old, from everlasting.
Micah 5. 2. The answer of the Priests and Scribes, as it stands upon record by
S. Matthew, is verbatim thus; And thou Bethleem in the land of Judea (in
clearer distinction from Bethleem in the Tribe of Zebulon, in which Tribe, or
upon whose borders our Savior was conceived, then the Prophets words import,
for That (it may be) might as truly brook the name of Ephrata) (...),
nequaquam mini^a es inter principat^^, and Chiliadas Iudeae, Art nothing less
then the least of all the Segniories or divisions of Judah. For so it seems
they did divide their Tribes or Provinces, as we do Shires or Counties into
several Hundreds or Liberties. Some good Writers, whom our English follows,
seek to salve this seeming contradiction between the Prophet and Evangelist,
or that answer which he relates, made by the chief Priests and Scribes to
Herod, thus; But thou, (or as for thee) O Bethleem Ephrata, though thou be
little to be reckoned among the Seigniories or thousands of Judea, yet out of
thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, etc. But this
squaring of the Prophets words to our Evangelists relation, is somewhat harsh
and rugged to the modern Jew, who seeks to frame his steps according to the
plain trodden literal sense. And therefore seeing both Christians and Jews, as
well ancient as modern, agree that the promised Messiah was to be borne in
Bethleem: the variation of the reading in the Prophet, and in the Evangelist
should not in reason be too much stood upon by either; yet seeing we are bound
to give no offense to the Jew, nor to press any reading, at which they may
stumble, being inclined to trip at every scruple; we may (I take it) with the
liking and approbation of Drusius (an exquisite Hebrician for point of Grammar)
and without the dislike of any learned Jew, read the first words of the
Prophet Micah, by way of interrogation, thus, And art thou Bethleem Ephrata
little, or too little to be reputed among the principalities of Judah? Now this
interrogation according to both their rules and ours, is equivalent to the
negative used by our Evangelist (...) nequaquam minima, thou art in no wise
little or too little to have place among the Seigniories or principalities of
Iudaea. This interrogation being presupposed, the words following naturally,
admit this paraphrasticall supply; little thou art, and for a long time have
been in re, but great in spe: For out of thee shall he come forth to me which
shall be the Ruler over Israel, whose going forth has been of old, from
everlasting; foretold and expected before Judah was a Kingdom, or David a
King, from the beginning of the world, of mankind, and ever since the fall of
the first man Adam.

CHAP 34. Cap. 34

The manner of our Saviors conception and birth, as it was foretold by the
Prophet Isaiah, exactly fulfilled. The Jews exceptions against S. Matthewes
allegation of the Prophet Isaiahs testimony, with the full answer unto them.
MICAH foretells the particular place of the son of David's birth in terms
plain and literal. Jeremiah the place of his conception in general, as
Isaiah had done before in particular, but both somewhat aenigmatically. The
manner of his conception and birth (abstracted from these circumstances of
place and time) is most emphatically foretold by Isaiah, and as I take it, some
few years before Micah did so punctually describe the place of his birth.
Micah (as it is upon sacred record) Ierem. 26. 18, 19. prophesied in the days
of Hezekiah, and so did Isaias. But whether any prophecy of Micah bear date
before the reign of Hezekiah, is to me uncertain: And that prophecy of Micah
before mentioned, Chap. 5. ver. 2. And thou Bethleem in the land of Judea, etc
in all probability, was delivered in the days of Hezekiah, and after that
other prophecy, Micah, 3. 12. Sion shall be plowed like a field, etc. Whereas
the prophecy of Isaias concerning the manner of Christ's conception and birth
was uttered by him viva voce, in the days of King Ahaz, who was Father to
Hezekiah, as appears Isaiah 7. 1. unto the 17. The prophecy was, Hear ye now
O House of David, is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will you weary
my God also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a
Virgin (or the Virgin) shall conceive and bear* a son, and shall call his
name Emanuel. This is the first prophecy alleged by S. Matthew, Chap. 1. where
having registered the Angels speech to Joseph in a vision by night, ver. 19.
[Then Joseph her Husband being a just ^an, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily. But while he thought on
these things, behold the A^gel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying;
Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that
which is conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost] he thus concludes: Now all
this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the
Prophet.

2. Iunius in his parallel upon this 22 verse, and the forecited testimony of
Isaiah, moves a question, neither so curious nor so dangerous as pertinent
[whether these words be the collections or interpretations of S. Matthew, or
whether in this historical relation he were only the Register of the Angels
speech to Joseph, as in the forecited testimony out of Micah, he was of the
chief Priests and Scribes answer unto Herod's demand, concerning the place
where the Messiah should be born.] This good writer is of opinion that the
Angel himself did unfold the true intent and purpose of the holy Ghost in that
prophecy unto Joseph, as a principal argument to persuade him not to put away
Mary his espoused wife, but entertain her, and her son with the same respect
and love, as if the child conceived in her had been as well his only begotten
son as hers. But however the Angels presence and manner of speech did afford
abundant satisfaction to Joseph's perplexed thoughts for the present; yet to
prevent all future regrettings, after the Angels departure from them (when
happily the dream or vision might be partly forgotten, or the truth of it
suspected) it was convenient to acquaint him with the word of the Lord written
long before to the same purpose; for that was permanent and beyond all
exception or suspicion. And seeing it was so clearly foretold by the Prophet,
that a Virgin should conceive, and bring forth a son, who should be a sign
or pledge of comfort to the house of David, it could not seem strange or
improbable to Joseph, that his espoused wife, who, as he himself also, was of
the lineage of David, should be the virgin meant by the holy Ghost in that
prophecy. S. Matthew then did learn the true meaning of the Prophet by the
Angel, and this meaning of it being avouched by both, there can be no question
amongst Christians of the concludent proof and efficacy of the prophecy it
self, as it is alleged by S. Matthew. We may not suspect or think that it
was fulfilled only by way of accommodation, or allusion, as in the judgment of
some modern Divines, diverse other Scriptures are; which yet are said by our
Evangelist to be fulfilled, or for the fulfilling of which, many events
historically related by them, are said to be done, or come to pass.

3 Yet even this most pregnant testimony of that grand mystery of our faith
[that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the virgin Mary] is
shrewdly opposed by the modern Jews; and their oppositions to our usual
interpretations of this prophecy, are more fiercely mainteyned by them, because
it is in it self so pregnant. (...)*
First, they object that the original word gnalma does not always import a
virgin, but sometimes a childbearing woman; that in this place it points at the
Prophets present wife, who before this time had brought him forth Children, one
at least, and was now to bring him forth another, which was to be the Emmanuel
here meant. But this grammatical exception against the original word is the
weakest they bring, and is clearly refuted by Iunius and many others; and were
it granted that the original word might sometimes import a childbearing woman,
(which is a conceit of theirs, as foolish as impious;) yet could i^ not in
this place denote the prophets present wife. It is questioned whether the
Prophet at this time had any wife at all, though it be apparent that Isaias had
been married before this time from the third verse of the 7 Chapter, [Then said
the Lord unto Isaias, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou and Shear-iashub thy
son,] a son no doubt lawfully begotten. But if his mother had been then
living, or if she had been Hagnalma that virgin or woman, in whom the prophet
did mean to instance in particular, there should have been mention of her
coming, as well as of her sons Shear-iashub, with Isaiah to meet Ahaz at
the place appointed by the Lord himself; for all things contained in his
prophecy, the very circumstances of time and place, are particularized most
exactly.

4. Secondly, the Jews object, that if our Savior Christ had been the seed
here promised, or if the blessed Uirgin, or Joseph her husband had known thus
much, they would have called him Emmanuel, not Jesus, at his circumcision; at
least, this should have been his usual name. For so the prophet expressly
says, And thou shall call his name Emmanuel, whereas the Angel enjoyneth the
virgin to call her son Jesus.

The third and maine exception, which they press most feircely, is, that the
child here promised (whosoever were to be his mother) was to be a pledge of
that strange deliverance of Ahaz and his people (within some few years after)
from the confederacy of Syria and Ephraim, who had then projected the utter
extirpation of the house of David. Now every sign, is either of some future
event to be exhibited after the sign is given, or an assurance that those
things which are said to be foretold in the name of the Lord, were so foretold
by God indeed, not pretended only by the prophet. If this Emmanuel were to be a
sign and pledge to Ahaz and his people, that the Lord would deliver them
beyond their expectation from their present Enemies, he was (according to the
literal and historical purport of the Prophets words) to be borne before this
deliverance was accomplished. If he were only to be a sign or assurance that
the words which Isaias spoke to Ahaz were spoken by the special command of the
Lord, this might be an undoubted sign to us, or to such as lived about the
time of his birth; it could be no sign or assurance unto Ahaz, or the people
then living, either of their deliverance from their Enemies, or that Isaias had
spoken to them in the name of the Lord, if they did otherwise question his
authority. Or to say the very truth, unless the Emmanuel there promised, were
borne at the time limited by the prophet, his birth could yield no assurance
unto us, that Ahaz was delivered from the King of Syria and Ephraim, or that
these two Enemies were cut off within the time limited by the prophet. All this
we are to believe from the historical narration and literal sense of the
Prophet, not from the Evangelicall story concerning the miraculous birth of
our Savior; of which if we have a true historical belief, we must believe
the Evangelist from the praediction of the Prophet, or from the parallel
between the Prophets and the Evangelists words. This inference is good and
sufficient to ground true belief [The prophet foretold the virgin should
conceive and bear a son; therefore the Evangelists allegation and history
is of divine truth] but not e contra, [the Evangelist reports that a virgin did
conceive and bring forth a son, ergo that which the prophet had said of Ahaz
his deliverance from his enemies, is of like truth and authority.] Iunius
therefore with some others, consequently enough to their own interpretations
of this place, deny that the birth of the Emmanuel here prophesied by Isaiah,
was any sign at all of Ahaz present delivery, or of the disaster of Rezin and
Pekah, but of a greater and stranger deliverance of Judah and Israel from their
potent enemies in future ages. And that seeing the Lord from the beginning of
that kingdom had promised to give the house of David so admirable a sign, as
the conception of a son by a pure virgin, it was either hypocrisy or strange
incredulity in Ahaz to refuse a lesser sign of his present deliverance, when
God did so freely offer it, as it is ver. 10, 11, 12. Moreover the Lord spoke
again unto Ahaz, saying; ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God, ask it either in
the depth, or in the height above. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will
I tempt the Lord. This, in the prophets construction was, to weary and vex God,
who had proffered this sign, But what sign? Any that Ahaz would demand for
his present security against the confederacy of Syria and Ephraim. And seeing
he would not choose a sign, the Lord would give him one, better then he
could have chosen for himself, Behold, a virgin shall conceive, etc. But the
question still remains of what this should be a sign? Iunius denies it to be
any sign of that deliverance or assurance, for which Ahaz was commanded to ask
a sign; he adds withal, that of this temporary deliverance Shear-iashub,
whom Isaiah was commanded to bring with him, when he went to meet Ahaz, was
the sign or pledge. But herein I cannot assent unto him, for Shear-iashub was
a pledge of their See the 10 of this Chapter.
return whom Pekah and Rhesin had lately captivated, no sign or pledge of
keeping Ahaz or Hezekiah in possession of the Kingdom. Of all this the
Emmanuel here promised was the undoubted sign or pledge, if we would look
upon the sacred story, whilst we debate those controversies with the Jew, or
with others, that differ in opinion from us in this particular.

5 Not to trouble the Reader with recital of other good Christian writers
opinions concerning this point, or of their expositions upon this place of
Isaiah: the resultance of their confident contestations pro, and con, is but
this. There is more contention than contradiction between them about the true
intent and meaning of the holy Ghost, and of the Prophet.

The Jew indeed flatly contradicts us in our expositions of this place, and so
far as they contradict us in the maine point, we are bound to maintain our
contradiction to them. But the extending of this contradiction unto them in all
their expositions on this place, and of some others, declare the Jew and us
Christians to be two sons of one and the same Father. The Jew being the elder
brother, is careful to preserve the map or terrar of the inheritance
bequeathed unto him, after he has been disinherited. And, frantic as he is,
having the map or terrar, he brags that the inheritance represented in it is
wholly his. We Christians one and other being seized and in possession of the
inheritance, permit him the liberty of raving: (as losers must have leave to
speak) But oftentimes while we laugh at him, we our selves are careless to
take a Copy of the terrar, whose safe custody the Jew makes chief matter of
his Religion; although he oftentimes beslurre it with foolish animadversions of
his own invention, as unskilful students do good books which they understand
not with impertinent ridiculous marginall notes or interlineations. But however
we Christians be in possession of the inheritance promised to Abraham, from
which Abraham's seed according to the flesh have been ejected, it would be no
harm to be beholding unto them for a Copy of the ancient terrars of it, I
mean, of the literal sense of diverse Scriptures, of prophecyes especially,
and of this most admirable prophecy in particular. The blots and stains which
the Jew has made, or suffered to be made, in the literal exposition of this
place may easily be taken out without obliteration of that exact proportion,
which their other expositions on this place hold with the Evangelicall
mysteryes as well forepictured, as foretold in this prophecy.

That the (...) particularized by note of demonstration or special referance,
(...)
should then be a married or Childbearing woman, is a blot or stain in the
literal meaning of this prophecy, which unless it be taken out, will utterly
deface the proportion between the historical event here foretold, and the
Evangelicall mystery represented by it. A greater blot or stain it is which
the Jew has made, by avouching that the Emmanuel, whose birth was here
foretold, should be either Shear-iashub the son of Isaiah, or Hezekiah the
son of Ahaz; both of them being borne before this time, as it is evident, the
one from the literal meaning of the Prophet, the other from the sacred stories
of the books of Kings and Chronicles. As for those Jews, which respectively
avouch both parts of this foolish conjecture, they express the same humor to
reign in them, which Busbequius observes in the modern Turks; who when the
fit comes upon them, will not stick to say, that Job was Steward of Solomon's
household, and Alexander the great, Master of his Horse. Yet these and some few
like stains or blots, which the modern Jew has made in Isaiah his map or
terrar of the Evangelicall mystery, (whose exemplification is fully recorded
by S. Matthew) being taken out: their other expositions of the Prophets words
rather preserve then deface the map it self, and may be of good use to
discover the proportion between it and our royal inheritance represented in
it; or for confirming our belief, as well of the Evangelists, as of the
Prophets relations.

First, when the Jews allege that the Emmanuel promised by the Prophet, was to
be borne within some few years, or rather within the compass of a year, from
the time of his meeting Ahaz, this is most consonant to the literal sense of
these words, Chap. 7. 16. For before the Child shall know to refuse the evil,
and choose the good, the Land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
Kings. This says the marginall note upon our former English, is not meant of
Christ, but of any Child. For before a Child can come to the years of
discretion, the Kings of Samaria, and Syria shall be destroyed. The note is two
ways faulty: First, in denying this to be meant at all of Christ; Secondly, in
avouching it to be meant of any Child. And I wish the note were extant in our
English, or in some other language only, which the Jews for the most part
either do not read, or do not understand. Yet if this place may be meant not of
every Child, but of any one Child besides our Savior Christ; and if the word
Hagnalma in the 14 verse according to its strict propriety, do signify a
virgin, shall we not hence be concluded to grant, that some other virgin
besides the virgin Mary (and before her) did conceive and bring forth a son?
This in no wi^e may be granted, nor any interpretation of any place admitted
from which such impious conclusions as this, may be inferred. To conceive a
son whilst she was a virgin, was the incommunicable prerogative of the
mother of our Lord. Yet will it not hence follow that the Prophet by the
emphaticall character of a virgin Hagnalma might not design some virgin then
present, not the Prophets wife, but rather some virgin of Ahaz kindred, or of
the house of Judah; for whom he astipulates that within the compass of the
year following, she should conceive, and bring forth a son, not whilst she
was a virgin, but by becoming a lawful wife beyond or before her expectation.

7. But here such as are otherwise minded, or take this passage to be literally
meant of the blessed virgin alone, will reply; What wonder was it, or what
matter worthy the ushering in with an Ecce, or other like injunction of
attention, for her who was now a virgin, to conceive and bring forth a son,
after the manner that other women, within a year after they are married,
usually do? But they who thus object, facile pronunciant, quia ad pauca
recipient, they give sentence upon the view of one circumstance only, when as
they should take a great many more into their consideration. The virgin thus
particularized, according to the literal sense of the Prophet, whether then
present (as is most probable,) or otherwise so famously known, that his words
in all men's apprehension then present, had reference to her, might be either
for want of years, or for some other defects, as unlikely to bring forth a
son within the time limited, as Sarah after 90 years age was, more unlikely
than the wife of Manoah, or Zacharias. However, it far surpassed the skill of
Astrologers, Physicians, of men expert in natural Magic, or other kind of
divination whatsoever, (besides the divination which proceeds from the Father
of lights,) to give such full assurance, as the Prophet there does, that any
woman should conceive within such a compass of time, or that she should
conceive a son not a daughter, least of all that she should conceive and
bring forth a Son, who should deservedly brook the name and title of
Emmanuel, that is, to be a pledge of Gods special presence to the house of
David or land of Judah, or to protect them against their potent enemies, or to
be a demonstrative sign or hostage, that before he could know how to refuse
the evil and choose the good, the Land, which Ahaz abhorred, should be
forsaken of both their Kings; who were now ready and able (without Gods
special aid) to devour the Land of Judah. Yet for all these and other like
consequences of Emmanuels birth, the Prophet confidently astipulates in the
name of his God; which without a special warrant from him had been an
intolerable presumption. But as for Ahaz himself, his house, and people,
(because they would not believe this prediction, according to the literal
tenor,) they were to be plagued by that Nation in whose potencie they put
their trust; by the same enemy, which the Prophet had foretold, should by Gods
appointment defeat the present mischievous design of Syria and Samaria against
Judah. And all this they should have done, without any future harm or danger
to the house of David by them, so Ahaz and his people would have relied
entirely upon Gods promise, or faithfully accepted of the sign promised by his
Prophet. But not believing this, they were not established, ver. 9. For so the
Prophet immediately after Ahaz refusal of this sign, did threaten Ahaz and his
people, ver. 17. The Lord shall bring upon thee, and thy people and upon thy
Fathers house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed
from Judah: even the Kings of Assyria. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Lord shall hiss for the Fly that is in the uttermost part of the
Rivers of Egypt, and for the Be that is in the Land of Assyria. And they
shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys; and in the
holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns; and upon all bushes. The demerits of
Ahaz, and of his people which did deserve the denuntiation and execution of the
plagues here threatened, were their too much confidence in the King of Assyria,
and their distrust (hence occasioned) of what the Lord had promised by his
Prophet Isaiah, and would have performed by other means than by the aid of
the Assyrian, so they would have relied upon them. We do not read that either
Ahaz, or his people did distrust, much less that they were punished for their
distrust unto Gods promises concerning the coming of the Messiah in the
appointed time, but for not accepting the sign or pledge as well of his
coming, as of their instant deliverance from the danger wherein then they
stood.

8. But what probabilities or just presumptions be there, that any woman who
was a virgin at the time when Ahaz and Isaiah met, in the high way of the
Fullers field, should, upon the occasion mentioned, become a married woman, and
conceive a son, according to the time intimated by the Prophet? All this I
take it, is more then probable from the true and literal meaning of the 1, 2,
3, and 4 verses of the 8 Chapter, which are no other then an exegeticall
exposition of the former prophecy, Chap. 7. verse. 14, 15, 16. or a more legal
ratification or new assumption of making good the assurance, which in the
former Chapter he had given: Moreover, the Lord said unto me, take thee a great
roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. And
I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Vriah the Priest, and Zechariah
the son of Jeberechiah. And I went unto the Prophetess, and she conceived
and bare a son: then said the Lord to me, Call his name
Maher-shalal-hash-baz. For before the Child shall have knowledge to cry, my
father and my mother, the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria shall
be taken away before the King of Assyria. The Child promised, Chap. 7. ver. 14,
and in this place, according to the true connection of the literal sense, is
(in my apprehension) one and the same, though described by two names, the one
importing comfort to the house of David, and the land of Judah; and this was
given him before his conception: the later importing the sudden execution of
the woes denounced against Syria and Samaria, and was given him after his
conception. And lest we should doubt, whether this Maher-shalal-hash-baz were
the same with the Emmanuel promised in the former Chapter, he is instyled
again by the very same name, Chap. 8. unto ver. 8. The Lord spoke unto me
again, saying, For So Much as this people refuses the waters of Shiloah that
go softly, and rejoice in Rezin, Remaliahs son: now therefore behold the
Lord brings up upon them the waters of the rivers, strong and many, even the
King of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels,
and go over all his banks. Again, that the name Emmanuel did literally import
Gods peculiar presence at that time with his people, not only to deliver them
from Rezin and Pekah, but from the potencie of the Assyrian in future times, is
evidently included in the 9 and 10 verses. Associate your selves, O ye people,
and ye shall be broken in pieces, and give ear all ye of far Countries:
gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: gird your selves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to
naught; speak the word and it shall stand, for God is with us. The strange
defeat of the confederacy here foretold, was not to be expected in the days
of Ahaz, in whose times the Assyrian did attempt no great matters against them,
but in the days of Hezekiah. Thus much the Prophets words in the verses
following import, ver. 16. 17. Bind up the testimony, seal my law among my
Disciples. And I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house
of Jacob, and I will look for him. This binding up of the Testimony, and
sealing of this Law does argue both the Law and testimony to have been of
special moment, yet not to be put in execution, or fully accomplished for the
present. Of the accomplishment of both, whether wholly or in part, the Prophets
sons in the interim were signs and pledges, as is imported, ver. 18. Behold
I, and the Children whom the Lord has given me are for signs, and for
wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hoasts, which dwells in Mount Sion. This
last passage is alleged by the Heb. 2. 11. etc.
Apostle, amongst others, to prove, that the Lord of Hoasts himself, who in
the 14. verse of the 8. of Isaiah, had promised to be a Sanctuary to his
people, was to participate with them of flesh and blood. He that sanctifies,
and they who are sanctified are all of one. For which cause he is not ashamed
to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the
midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee. And again, I will put my
trust in him. And again, Behold I and the Children which God has given me.
Yet that the 18. verse of Isaiah the 8, to which our Apostle in this place
referres us, was literally meant of the Prophet and his Children, is too
apparent to be denied, nor will it be safe to stand upon terms of
contradiction thus far with the modern Jew. One of the Prophets sons was
called Shear-iashub, which by interpretation is, The remn^nt shall return: and
of this return or restoration he was the sign or pledge. The other was
called Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us; a name portending or
foretokening Gods special presence with his people at more times than one. The
imposition of both names, and their importance were literally fulfilled in the
age immediately following, but mistically fulfilled only in Christ, whose
coming to visit his people, was prefigured by both of them. The full
importance or abode of the name Emmanuel, was fulfilled in our Saviors
conception and birth: the true importance of Shear-iashub, shall be mystically
fulfilled, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come, or when the Jew shall be
called to be again the seed of Abraham according to promise.

9. Two points only remain. The first how the prophecy concerning Emmanuel,
was fulfilled according to the literal sense in the Prophets time; and our
resolution in this point we must take from the sacred records of this theme
in the old Testament. The second, how this prophecy was fulfilled according to
the mystical sense; and this we must learn from the Evangelists which
allege the fulfilling of it, and other unpartiall Writers which relate either
circumstances or signs of those times in which they wrote: Out of these two
points the parallel between the Prophet and Evangelists will of its own
accord, without any anxious inquiry, or further discussion, result.

10 The Histories of the old Testament, by which Isaiahs literal meaning may
be best interpreted, are in the 2 of Kings 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 28. 16, 17, etc. We
have a constat from the prophet Isaiah himself, Chap. 7. 1, 2. That this
prophecy concerning Emmanuel was uttered by him in the days of Ahaz King of
Judah, and of Pekah the son of Remaliah; but in what certain year of either
of these two Kings reigns, this revelation was made to Isaiah, and the matter
of it instantly imparted unto King Ahaz, is not so certain. Most certain it
is, that Isaiah delivered this message from the Lord to Ahaz before the twelfth
year of his reign, for in that year Hoshea the son of Elah begun to reign
in Samaria over Israel, 2 Kings 17. 1. and this was after Pekah the son of
Remaliah was dead. And though it be not so certain, yet most probable it is,
that the former prophecy was uttered about the 8 or 9 year of Ahaz, or about 3
years or somewhat more before Pekah, the son of Remaliah was slain. One
year, or somewhat under, we must allow for the conception and birth of the
Emmanuel, or Maher-Shalal-hash-baz, and some two years after until he were
upon the point or period of time, wherein ordinary Children in those days were
enabled to know how to refuse the evil, and choose the good, that is, to
distinguish between other meats besides milk, butter, and honey, and between
his parents and other persons. Before this Emmanuel, or Maher-Shalal-hash-baz
were thus enabled to distinguish between meat and meat, or his parents and
other persons, (but how long before this time, it is uncertain) both Pekah
son of Remaliah, and Rezin King of Syria, (according to the tenor of Isaiahs
prophecy, and the astipulation made by him upon the sign proffered to Ahaz)
were to be deprived of their Kingdoms, or rather their Land and Kingdoms to
be quitted of them, Isaiah 7. 16. and Chap. 8. ver. 4. But before their ruin,
and before this revelation concerning their ruin was made unto the Prophet
Isaiah, they had brought Judah and the house of David exceeding low, 2 Chronicles.
28. 5, 6, 7, 8. Wherefore the Lord his God delivered him into the hand of the
King of Syria, and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them
Captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the
hand of the King of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter. For Pekah the
son of Remaliah slew in Judah, an hundred and twenty thousand in one day,
which were all valiant men, because they had forsaken the Lord God of their
Fathers. And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim slew Maaserah the Kings son,
and Azrikam, the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the King.
And the Children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren, two hundred
thousand women, sons and daughters, and took also away much spoil from
them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. Upon this great disaster, or
captivity of the people of Judah by these two Kings, the Prophet Isaiah did
name one son of his Shear-iashub, as a pledge or token that these captives
should return again unto their own Land, as they did beyond all expectation,
from Samaria. The history is very remarkable both for matter and circumstance,
and recorded at large by the author of the 2 book of Chronicles in the words
immediately following the forecited. But a prophet of the Lord was there, whose
name was O ded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said
unto them, Behold, because the Lord God of your Fathers was wroth with Judah,
he has delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that
reaches up into Heaven. And now ye purpose to keep under the children of
Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you. But are there not with
you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? Now hear me therefore,
and deliver the Captives again which ye have taken captive of your brethren:
for the fierce wrath of God is upon you. Then certain of the heads of the
children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Iohanan, Berechiah the son of
Meshillemoth, and Iehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amala the son of
Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war, and said unto them, Ye
shall not bring in the Captives hither, for whereas we have offended against
the Lord already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass,
for our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel. So the
armed men left the Captives, and the spoil before the Princes, and all the
Congregation. And the men which were expressed by name, rose up, and took the
Captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and
arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed
them, and carried all the feeble of them upon Asses, and brought them to
Ieriche, the City of palm trees, to their brethren; then they returned to
Samaria. And so no doubt, those Captives which Rezin King of Syria had carried
to Damascus, were set at liberty after the King of Assyria had slain Rezin,
meeting with Ahaz there. But the Edomites, and the Philistines, both ancient
Enemies to the house of David, became ungues in ulcere, and kept the wound open
with tooth and nail, which Rezin, Pekah, and Zichri had made, as it is
registered 2 Chronicles. 28. 17. etc. For again the Edomites had come and smitten
Judah, and carried away Captives; the Philistines also had invaded the cities
of the low Country, and of the South of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh and
Ailon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the
villages thereof, Gimzo also, and the villages thereof, and they dwelt there.
After these wounds which these several enemies had made in the state of Judah,
Rezin and Pekah with joint forces beseiged Jerusalem, 2 Kings 16. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Then Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah son of Remaliah King of Israel came up to
Jerusalem to war: and they beseiged Ahaz, but could not overcome him. At that
time Rezin King of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drove the Jews from
Elath: and the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt there unto this day. So Ahaz
sent messengers to Tiglath-Pelezer King of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant,
and thy son: come up and save me out of the hand of the King of Syria, and
out of the hand of the King of Israel which rise up against me. And Ahaz took
the silver and gold that was found in the house of the Lord, and in the
treasures of the Kings house, and sent it for a present to the King of Assyria.
And the King of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the King of Assyria went up
against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it Captive to Kir,
and slew Rezin. This unhallowed submission of Ahaz unto the King of Assyria,
was the very thing which the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah did diswade him from,
foretelling withal that if he persisted in this purpose of casting out one
Devil by another, or by the Prince of Devils; the later would prove worse than
the former. On the contrary, if Ahaz and his people would rely upon the sign
which God had given them, or accept of his immediate aid, both Rezin and Pekah
should within short space be ruinated without either present aid, or future
evil from Assyria. But if they would not believe or rely upon him, although
God for his part would perform the former part of this Prophecy, as it
concerned the death of Rezin and Pekah, and the captivity of Samaria, yet he
would bring all the plagues upon Judah, which the Prophet Isaiah had threatened,
by the hand of Assyria, whose aid they now sought. And yet this present
Emmanuel was to be a pledge of a strange defeat of the Assyrian, after much
mischief done by him as well to Judah as to Israel. For Hezekiah (son and
successor unto Ahaz) was enforced to buy his peace of Senacherib successor to
Tiglah-Peleser at as dear a rate, as Ahaz had purchased the Assyrians aid. Now
in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, did Sennacherib king of Assyria come
up against all the fenced Cities of Judah, and took them. And Hezekiah King of
Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, I have offended, return
from me; that which thou put on me, will I bear. And the king of Assyria
appointed unto Hezekiah King of Judah, three hundred Talents of silver, and
thirty Talents of Gold. And Hezekiah gave him all the silver, that was found in
the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the Kings house. At that time
did Hezekiah out off the gold from the doors of the Temple of the Lord, and
from the pillars which Hezekiah King of Judah had over-laid, and gave it to the
king of Assyria, 2 King 18. 13, 14, etc. Both this distress, whereunto Judah
was now brought, and Hezekiahs strange deliverance from Sennacherib, or
whatsoever the sacred Story, 2 Kings 19. or elsewhere relates concerning both,
were foretold by Isaiah the Prophet, Chap. 8, and 9, as consequences o^ Ahaz
his refusal of the signs which God had offered him, and of the sign which
God did give to the house of David, albeit they would not accept it.

11 But to descend unto the parallel between the historical narrations in the
Book of Kings, of Chronicles, and Intersertions to the same purpose in the
prophecy of Isaiah, and our Evangelists relations how they were fulfilled: In
the days of Ahaz the House of David was brought exceeding low by the Syrians,
by the King of Samaria, by the Edomites, and by the Philistines. From this
extraordinary depression of it, the hopes of Rezin and Pekah for the
extirpation of it, were so advanced, that they confidently resolved upon the
particular man, whom they meant to make King of Judah; that was the son of
Tabeol, Isaiah 7. 6. In the height of this their confidence, and the
perplexity of Judah, and the House of David, the Lord sends his Prophet Isaiah
to give them assurance of their Delivery, by an extraordinary sign.

In the days of Joseph and Mary his espoused wife, the House of David (whereof
they both were branches) was brought much lower, then in the days of Ahaz it
had been. And however no mischief were intended against them in particular,
(as being obscure and private persons, neither in possession nor competitors
for the Kingdom) yet for breaking off the succession of David, or preventing
any of his line to be Lord of Judah, the plot was laid with more cunning, then
it had been by Rezin, and Pekah. Three of those ancient Fochoods which had
sought to wreak themselves against Judah in the days of Ahaz, were now revived
and united in one man, in Herod the great; and the Fochood by this union became
both greater and stronger. He was by birth a Philistine, and by royal Post
haec Caesar in Galliam fecit expeditionem, turbatam nonnihil: Antonius ad
bellum Parthicum profectus est: and S. C. approbatis actis ejus tam fulturis
quam praeteritis, rursum duces passim dimi^ie: and alia cuncta ut voliat
disposuit. Reges quoque aliquot appe^lavit arbitratu suo, d^^ataxat qui certum
tributum pe ^derent. Ponti Darium, Pharnacis filium, M^thridatis nepotem,
Idumaeorum Samaritarumque, Heroden. Appian. Alex andrini de bellis civilibus
Lib. 5. page 715.
title (bestowed upon him by the Romans) King of Idumaea and Samaria, unto
which he sought to annex Judea, as his inheritance. And although the
particulars be not mentioned in the new Testament, yet is it indefinitely
evident out of S. Matthew that Herod had his confederates against the house of
David, and which (as soon as they knew of his birth) did seek the life of the
son of David; When Herod was dead, behold an Angel of the Lord appeared in a
dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the young Child, and his
mother, and go into the Land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the
young Child's life. Math. 2. 19. 20. This argues there were some other that dyed
about the same time with Herod, which with him had sought the life of Jesus. In
this low estate whereunto the house of David was brought before the death of
Herod and his confederates; the Lord did send not a Prophet but an Angel to
assure, not the continuance only of David's succession, but the restoration,
enlargement, and everlasting establishment of his Kingdom unto Mary the
daughter of David, and her husband, by a greater sign than Isaiah had
proffered unto Ahaz. The Angel delivers his embassage, mostwhat, in the same
words that Isaiah did to Ahaz, Behold, says the Prophet Isaiah, 7. 14. this
virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and she shall call his name Emmanuel.
Unto the blessed virgin (then present) says the Angel, Luke 1. 30, 31. Fear
not Mary, for thou have found favor with God, and behold thou shall conceive
in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus. The
imposition of this name Jesus is committed to the care of the virgin: so was
the name of Emmanuel to the virgin to whom the Prophet Isay directs his speech
when he delivered his message unto Ahaz. For in the original, the word which
S. Matthew renders impersonally or in the third person plural ((...)) (that is
according to the Hebrew Dialect, He shall be called) is the second person
singular, and the foeminine, tu vocabis, thou Virgin shall call him Emmanuel.
This variation of the Evangelist from the Prophets precise word, is such, as
breeds no vitiation at all, in the real sense; but such as reason it self,
and rules of Grammar require in like cases. The Virgin being (as we suppose)
present, when the Prophet exhibited the sign unto Ahaz, he was to speak unto
her in the second person. But the Evangelist relating the fulfilling of this
prophecy, not in the literal sense only, but in the mystical, was to change
the person, or to relate it in the third person plural, which is indeed an
impersonall, according to the Hebrew Dialect, Behold a virgin shall bring forth
a son, and they shall call his name (that is, he shall be called) Emmanuel,
which is by interpretation, God with us.

12 But here the Jew demands, first how the particle (...) which is always
emphaticall, should denote the blessed Virgin, and should be transferred from
one virgin to another. Secondly, why the name given our Savior at his
circumcision, was not Emmanuel according to the Prophets speech, but Jesus. To
the first demand, we answer, that the original letter is always emphaticall:
sometimes a note of demonstration, or particularity; and according to this
importance, it referres unto the Virgin then present, as if the Prophet had
said, Ecce, virgo haec, Behold, this virgin shall conceive, etc. Sometime it is
a note of Eminency, and according to this importance, it referres unto the
Virgin of Virgins, the blessed Mother of our Lord, of whom it is meant not only
in the mystical, but in the most exquisite literal sense. To the second we
say, the imposition of the name Emmanuel had been requisite at our Saviors
circumcision, if this prophecy had bin meant of Him only in the literal
sense. But in as much as it was to be fulfilled in Him, according to the most
exquisite both literal and mystical sense, it was requisite there should be
an improvement, as well in the significancie of the name, as in the thing
signified by it. Now the name Jesus imports a great deal more than the name
Emmanuel, as will appear in the explication of it. The importance of the name
Emmanuel, as it referres unto the Child instantly promised by Isaiah, is
applied unto the blessed Virgin by the Angel in his preface to the
Annuntiation, Luke 1. 28. Hail thou that art in high favor, the Lord is with
thee, blessed art thou amongst women. The Lord was with her in a more peculiar
manner, whilst the Angel thus spoke unto her, then he had been with Gideon
to whom the like salutation was tendered by an Angel, Judge. 6. 12. Or with
Judah, in the days of Isaiah or Hezekiah. But after the Lord was conceived by
her, he was both with her, and with us, after a more admirable manner, than at
any time he had been before with Gods dearest Saints. This manner of his being
with us, could not be fully expressed by any other name, then the name Jesus.

13 Ahaz, his distrust unto Gods promise being set aside, or rather if we use
it as a foil to set forth the blessed Virgins facile assent, and fidelity unto
the Revelation made unto her by the Angel: the prophetical and Evangelicall
story hold better correspondencie both for substance and circumstance, th^^ is
between the Model and the Edifice. The Emmanuel promised by Isaiah, was an
assured pledge that Pekah King of Samaria, and Rezin King of Syria, should die,
or be deposed before this Child could distinguish between meats, or cry, My
Father, my Mother. The accomplishment of this sign, or of the promise
confirmed by it, is registered in the sacred story. For Pekah was slain by
Hoshea the son of Elah, within two or three years after the sign was given,
and so was Rezin by Tiglath Pileser at Damascus. Within the like compass of
years after the Evangelicall promise was made to the blessed Virgin, that her
son Jesus should sit upon her Father David's throne; Herod the great who had
usurped it, did die a miserable death: so did his confederates against the
house of Judah, as we gather from Matthew 2. 20. Arise (says the Angel to
Joseph in a dream) and take the young Child, and his Mother, and go into the
land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young Childs life. Now
Joseph returned from Egypt two years after our Savior was borne. Whom the
Evangelist means beside Herod, when he says they were dead which sought the
Childs life, is no where in sacred story expressed: nor is it to me certain
whether Syria at that time had a King of their own, but it is probable they
had, seeing in S. Paul's time Aretas was King of Damascus, 2. Cor. 11. 32. Some
there be which mention the death of one Obedas whom they make King of Syria,
who died about the same time with Herod, but from what authority, they express
not. The Evangelist might mean the Roman Governor of Syria, by whose favor
and potencie Herod was emboldned to tyrannize over the Jews Nation, and to
work his projects against the house of David. Some have accused Quintilius
Varus of this great sin, unto whom and to the Legions under his Government,
the right hand of the Lord of Hoasts had reached a more terrible blow, than
Judah had received from him or Herod, within some few years after the
butcherie of the Infants.

14. The second blessing whereof the Emmanuel was a pledge, whose conception
had been foretold by Isaiah, was not exhibited till many years after, and it
was this, that Judah and the house of David should be more admirably delivered
from the Assyrian, when he should besiege Jerusalem more fiercely then Rezin,
or Pekah had done. And this was in the days of Hezekiah, for so the Prophet
assures the people, that the rod of Ashur should be broken as in the day of
Midian, Isaiah 9. 4. Which is in effect, as if he had said, [The Lord will be
with us after as wonderful a manner as he was with Gideon, when Israel was
oppressed by the Midianites.] And so it fell out in the days of Hezekiah, that
Senacheribs mighty Army was destroyed by a more fearful destruction, then the
Midianites had been by Gideon. And unto this strange defeat of the Assyrian,
the Prophets words Isaiah 9. 4, 5. do refer. Thou have broken the yoke of his
burden, and the staff of his shoulders, the rod of his Oppressor: as in the
day of Midian. For every battle of the Warrier is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood: but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.
Now of this disaster, which befell Assyria, and the strange deliverance of
Judah, and the house of David by it, the Emmanuel there promised by Isaiah was
the pledge or assurance, as the Prophet in the next word intimates, For unto us
a Child is borne, and unto us a little one is given, etc. Isaiah 9. 6. That by
this Child the Prophet meant the Emmanuel mentioned, Chapter 7. is
acknowledged by all, even by such, as admit of no more Emmanuels then one, to
wit, our Savior Christ. But seeing the Emmanuel there literally meant, was
given as a pledge or comfort unto Judah in this particular distress,
certainly he was borne before him, though not borne only as a pledge of this
deliverance, but of a far greater Deliverer or Savior to come, for whose
sake alone this deliverance, and all other of his people from their enemies
(both bodily and ghostly) were sent from God. And best Interpreters take those
words of Isaiah, 2. Kings 9. 34. I will defend this City to save it for mine
own sake, and for my servant David's sake, to be literally meant not of David,
but of David's son, the true Emmanuel. But to return to the 9. of Isaiah;
upon that vision of that great overthrow of Senacheribs Army, the Prophet
takes his rise to view a greater victory a more potent Enemy in the same
place, where Senacheribs Army was overthrown, and that was not near
Jerusalem, but in the borders of Zebulun and Napthali near to Libanus, in that
Country whose Inhabitants Senacheribs predecessor Tiglath-Pileser, had first
captivated, and in the same place our Savior gave his Apostles power over
Satan and his Angels, who had his people in greater subjection then the
Assyrians had them in the time of Isaiah. For he had possessed many of their
bodies after another manner, then any earthly Tyrant could have them in
possession. Now when the Prophet foretells as well the victory of the Angel of
the Lord over the Assyrian, as the victory of Christ's Apostles over Satan, he
gives this one sign of both, For unto us a Child is borne, and unto us a
little one is given, etc. These words may refer, both to the type, and to the
antitype in the literal sense: but immediately after the light of that great
mystery, which all this while had been under the cloud of the literal
sense, breaks forth in its proper native luster: For the words following can
be meant of none but Christ: And his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Of the
increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end: upon the throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with
judgment, and with justice from henceforth even for ever: the Zeal of the
Lord of Hoasts will perform this. As for the former passages concerning the
Emmanuel, and Mahar-shalal-hash-baz, they are literally meant of Isaiah his
son, and yet are withal proofs no less concludent against the Jew, no
less pregnant testimonies of our belief concerning the miraculous birth of
our Lord and Savior Christ, than the testimonies last cited out of Isaiah 9.
6, 7. or of his Godhead, or everlasting Kingdom. For however such immediate
visions, or unvailed revelations of Christ, as Isaiah in these two verses and
in the 53 Chapter, or elsewhere adds, were the most sublime kind of
prophecies, such as few other Prophets besides David, could ever attain unto,
(these having the like privileges amongst the Prophets, that Peter, James and
John had amongst the fellow Apostles, permitted to ascend the Mount with
Christ, and see the transfiguration or glory of his Kingdom;) Yet for our
instruction, predictions of Christ typically prophetical, or prophetically
typical, are most admirably concludent (as was premised Chap. 11.. 2, 3.
before) especially, when the same words according to the literal sense fit
both the pledge and the mystery pledged, or the Evangelicall mystery
according to the improvement in a more exquisite sense, then they did the type
or historical event.

15. To conclude this parallel between the Evangelist and the Prophet, with
the contrary demeanours of Ahaz and the blessed Virgin, upon delivery of the
like message from the Lord. The Lord proffers Ahaz a sign wheresoever, or in
what kind soever he would ask it: but he will not ask it, nor will he tempt
the Lord. Isay. 7. 11, 12. As if not to rely upon the strength of Assyria, had
been to tempt the Lord. Nor will he believe the Prophet when he gives him a
sign most suitable to the signs of that present time. For Ahaz and his people
had a fair introduction to believe all that the Prophet had assumed to make
good, upon the conception and birth of Emmanuel, from the experienced success
or happy Omen of Isaiah his former son, whom he named (upon the occasion
forementioned) Shear-iashab.

The blessed Virgin after she had seen the Angel of the Lord, and talked
with him, did think it no tempting of the Lord to accept this sign which the
Angel proffered, Behold, thy Cousin Elizabeth, she has also conceived a son
in her old age, and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.
Luke 1. 36. After her acceptance of this sign, and solemn passing of her
assent unto whatsoever the Angel said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it
unto me according to thy word, ver. 38. She thought it no tempting of the Lord
to be further confirmed in the truth of this sign, For she arose in th^se
days, and went into the Hill Country with have, into a City of Judah: and
entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to
pass, that when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the Babe leaped in her
womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost. And she spoke out with a
loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of
thy womb. And whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to
me? For lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the
Babe leaped in my womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed, etc. Luke 1.
39, 40, etc. Upon these lively experiments of the truth of the Angels words
unto her, the blessed Virgin immediately conceives that sweet and sacred Hymn,
My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. In her belief and acceptance of this
sign, or rather in her conception which did instantly follow upon it, that
sign which God had proffered to Ahaz, by Isaiah, was most exactly accomplished.
Ahaz was willed to ask a sign either in the depth, or height above, Isai. 7.
1^. Though Ahaz should have requested God that the Moon and Stars might
descend out of the Spheres, and become mountains and rocks on earth; or that
the stones in the bowels of the earth, or rocks in the sea, might ascend into
heaven, and become glorious stars: Neither of these, nor both of them had
been so great a wonder, as that which God now wrought upon the blessed Virgins
belief unto his promise. For now he who was higher than the Heavens, who
fills both Heaven and Earth with his presence (the true and only son of
God,) comes down from heaven, is enclosed in the Virgins womb, becomes her
son: and the fruit of her womb, whose bodily original was from the earth,
becomes the son of God, the King of Heaven, and yet still remains the true
Emmanuel, God with us, or more then so, the Jesus, the Savior.

CHAP. 35.
Of the Circumcision of our Savior.
THE Angelical hymn or testification of the birth of Jesus, made unto the
Shepherds by the celestial Host, is a subject more fit for Sermons, then for
these Comments; at least, the solemnity of that great Festival, would better
become the Commemoration of those joyful Ditties, than a plain historical
narration of them; specially seeing it would require a long search, and a large
discourse to make it clear, where this sacred Hymn sung by Angels upon the
birth day of Jesus, was either foretold by any Prophet, or foreshadowed by
matter of fact. Besides this Hymn, the next Evangelicall narration to his
birth was his circumcision, and imposition of the name Jesus. Now, albeit his
circumcision be not mentioned in the Creed, yet it is a point of belief, not
to be omitted in this place. When eight days were accomplished for the
circumcising of the Child, his name was called Jesus: which was so named of
the Angel before he was conceived in the womb. Luke 2. 21. But was it any where
either expressly foretold, Cap. 35
or concludently portended by matter of fact, that the Son of God, (God
blessed for ever) should be circumcised? Yes: all this was most concludently
fore-signified, and that in such a peculiar manner, as cannot exactly be
paralleld with any of the former general ways, according to which the
incarnation of the Word, or other articles concerning the Son of God, were
either observed to be fore-shadowed, or to be fulfilled. Testimony express and
direct, there is none, I know, that the Son of God should be circumcised, and
yet the circumcision of God in the person of the Son, was more then
fore-pictured, literally included in the Covenant between God and Abraham,
Genesis 17. 6, 7. I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make Nations of
thee, and Kings shall come out of thee. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, etc.
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy
seed after thee, in their Generations. This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every man child among you
shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and
it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and you. And he that is eight
days old, shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your
generations, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. Though Abraham himself, and all his household
were presently circumcised; yet the Covenant whereof Circumcision was the pledge
or token, was to be established not in Abraham or in Ismael, but in Isaac. And
God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shall call
his name Isaac: and I will establish my Covenant with him, for an everlasting
Covenant, and with his seed after him, ver. 19. Abraham feared lest Gods
special favor to this son of promise might exclude Ismael from blessings
ordinary; and hence he preferres this modest petition unto God, ver. 18. O
that Ismael might live before thee. To which he receives this gracious answer,
ver. 20. And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee. Behold, I have blessed him, and
will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly: twelve Princes
shall he beget, and I will make him a great Nation. Lastly, to show that the
prerogative promised to Isaac, was firm, and not subject to contingencie; it
is further repeated, ver. 21. But my Covenant will I establish with Isaac,
which Sarah shall bear unto thee, at this set time, in the next year.

2. It is very observable, that whereas the Hebrew mentions only the Covenant
betwixt God and Abraham, and his seed after him: the Onkelus Fagio Interpret.
Chaldee paraphrase has it expressly, that God did make this Covenant betwixt
his Word and Abraham, as ver. 2. Dabo foedus meum inter verbum meum, et
interte. And ver. 10. Hoc est foedus meum quod servabitis inter [verbum meum]
et inter vos, atque inter [filios tuos] post te: ut circumcidatur in vobis
omnis masculus. What manner of Covenant or rather league this was betwixt God
and Abraham, comes to be discussed in the unfolding of Gods oath to Abraham,
and the consecration of Abraham's seed to his everlasting Priesthood of
everlasting blessing. The legal covenant (afterward confirmed by oath,) was
now begun and solemnized on Abraham's part, (as solemn leagues in those
Eastern Countries usually were,) by effusion of blood, his own, and his
families, and so to be continued in his posterity throughout their generations.
And in as much as circumcision was the sign or solemn ceremony of this
mutual league between God and Abraham, and Abraham's seed; it is necessarily
employed (by the tenor of the same mutual Covenant) that God should subscribe
or seal the league after the same manner, and to receive the same sign of
circumcision in his flesh, which Abraham and his seed had done. Again, in as
much as this league was established with Isaac Abraham's son by promise; this
likewise includes* that the only son of God who was to be Abraham's seed,
should be circumcised in his flesh, as Isaac had been. And this part of the
Covenant was performed on Gods part in the person of his Son at the
circumcision of the child Jesus. It was impossible that the Covenant should be
fully accomplished so long as Abraham's corruptible seed did only bear the
seal or sign. For it was to be an everlasting Covenant: and to seal an
everlasting Covenant with an everlasting seal in Abraham's seed or successor
according to the flesh, was a matter as difficult, as to imprint a permanent
stamp or character upon a stream of running water. This Covenant could not
begin to be in esse, or bear a true and solid everlasting date, until it were
sealed in the flesh of the promised seed. As was his person in whom this
Covenant was to be accomplished, such was the seal; and such did the Covenant
thus sealed, become, truly immortal and everlasting, never to be reiterated
after it was once accomplished in him, which was not done, but begun upon the
eight day after our Saviors birth. That which was now begun by him, and in
part sealed by him, by the seal of circumcision in his flesh; was afterward
to be accomplished, and finally sealed by his bloody sacrifice upon the Cross.
The continual practice of circumcision by the Jew (though he be senseless and
blind, and perceives it not) is unto us a legible character, and an undoubted
visible pledge, that God who made this Covenant with Abraham, was to be
incarnate, or to assume flesh, by assuming Abraham's seed; to the end he might
interchangeably seal this Covenant in his flesh. But seeing as well Abraham's
present seed as their Families, were still subject to mortality; it was most
fitting and requisite, that circumcision should be continued throughout all
their generations, in testification of their hope and expectance of the
promised seed, unto whose flesh the seal of circumcision being once put, the
Covenant sealed was to stand fast for ever, without reiteration or addition of
any other seal. In Him all Gods promises are yea, and Amen. Whilst he was
circumcised God was circumcised, and man was circumcised; and this Covenant or
league between God and man, was mutually sealed by God and man, with one and
the same numericall seal. Howbeit, as was intimated before, this glorious
Covenant thus jointly sealed up in him, was not to bear its everlasting date,
until it were further ratified, and finally sealed by his bloody sacrifice
upon the Cross, unto which service he was initiated by his circumcision. The
Sacrament of circumcision was not so properly abolished as changed into the
Sacrament of Baptism, and so changed by that Commission which this our
everlasting Priest gave to his Apostles and Ministers after his resurrection.
Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations baptizing them in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Math. 28. 19. It was by this new
Commission so changed, that he which now seeks to circumcise others, or
suffers himself to be circumcised; does but labor as much as in him lies to
dissolve, and dissipate this glorious Covenant betwixt God and man, thus
jointly sealed up in one and the same individual person, with one and the same
numericall seal, and afterward authentiquely and finally sealed by the bloody
sacrifice of the same person God and man upon the Cross. And however the
Mahumetans, the Sarazens, and Persians, with other preposterous imitatours of
Abraham's faith, have run mad with love of this ceremony of circumcision;
sometimes most loathsome and odious to flesh and blood, whilst it was pleasing
unto God; yet the practice of it, is now more abominable unto God that gave it
for a sign of his everlasting Covenant, than it was pleasing to him, or
displeasing to men, whilst the Law of ceremonies was in force. And for this
reason, S. Paul wishes the same curse or punishment unto such as pressed the
necessity of circumcision upon Christ's Church, which God himself had threatened
unto such as during the time of the Law did neglect, contemn, or omit it. The
uncircumcised manchilde, (says God to Abraham, Genesis 17. 14.) whose flesh of
his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
I would (says S. Paul, Gal. 5. 12.) or as some read, I would to God they were
even cut off that trouble you. Such he means, and such alone, as did trouble
them by pressing the necessity of circumcision upon them, which had been
baptized in Christ.

3 That the Heathens were concluded in this league, the modern Jew cannot
deny. For not only Abraham's sons, but every Male in his Family, though bought
with money, was to receive the sign of this Covenant in his flesh. But says
the Jew, seeing they came into this league by receiving circumcision, what is
this to you Gentiles which will not be circumcised? The Apostle S. Paul has
most divinely dissolved this knot, Romans 4. 10. His words are so plain that
they need no Comment, but only to add this circumstance which is likely S.
Paul took for granted, when he made that excellent Comment upon Moses his
words Genesis 15. 6. Abraham (says Moses) believed in God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness. Seeing the Scripture as S. James tells us, was
fulfilled when Abraham offered up his son Isaac, why was not this testimony of
God concerning Abraham reserved to that fact, or at least to Abraham's obedience
in circumcising himself and his son Isaac? Both these facts include a
greater measure of belief in Gods promises, than Abraham gave proof of in the
forecited place, and was therefore more capable of that praise or approbation.
But, if that approbation of Abraham's faith had been deferred until the
Covenant of circumcision had been subscribed unto by Abraham, the Jews might
with more probability have conceived, that this righteousness which God
imputes to Abraham, had come by the deeds of the Laws, that none but such as
are circumcised could be partakers of it; Whereas on the contrary, this
testimony being given unto Abraham before he was circumcised, cuts off the
Jews title of boasting in circumcision. This is the ground of the Apostles
reason Rom 4. 9, 10. For we say that faith was reckoned unto Abraham for
righteousness. How was it then reckoned? When he was in circumcision or in
uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision. And he received the
sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had
yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe,
though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them
also.

And again Gal. 3. 8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee
shall all Nations be blessed. So then they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham.

4 Again, God in so disposing of times and seasons that his only son should
be circumcised upon the first of January, did signify that interest which the
Gentiles or Heathens were to have in this Covenant. For this was the day
wherein the Romans, in whose dominions and under whose government he was
borne, did consecrate to Ianus, to them a God of peace and prosperity; the day
wherein they did mutually present their solemn salutations or good wishes for
a happy year, and for good luck sake, as we say, did send gifts one to
another, as honey and other like sweet meats, and coin, ut dulces dies anni a
dulcibus rebus auspicarentur, as Emblemes of their good wishes for many
pleasant and happy days.

And whilst they were thus employed in preventing each other with gifts and
mutual precations of peace and many happy days; God gives his only Son unto
them (and to them all) who was the Prince of that peace; the common fountain
of all that happiness, which they could wish one to another. Albeit the Son
of God were borne eight days before, yet he was given unto us upon the day of
his circumcision. His circumcision was the designement or dedication of him for
the salvation of mankind. Behold (says the Angel, Luke 2. 10) I bring you
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. The Prophet Isay
foretold this joy, not only with reference to the birth, but to the
circumcision also of the true Emmanuel. They joy before thee according to the
joy in Harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil, Isa 9. 3. For
unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is given; and the government shall
be upon his shoulder, and c, ver. 6.

But some there be, who will either deny, or not believe, that our Savior was
circumcised upon the first of January, because we have no better warrant for
this opinion, than the tradition of the church. But some of the ancient and
learned Fathers did think they had the testimony of Scripture besides the
tradition of their Ancients. For so they interpret those words of S. John
Baptist, John 3. 30. He must increase, but I must decrease; as if they did
contain a secret character of the time wherein John Baptist and our Savior
were borne; the one upon the longest, the other upon the shortest day in the
year. And by this account our Savior was circumcised upon the eighth day of
January. For my part I dare not contradict this kind of interpretation of the
Fathers, being fully persuaded that the holy Ghost does oft-times fore-signifie
greatest mysteries as well by mere character of words, as by words assertive
or matter of fact.

CHAP. 36.
Of the name JESUS, and the title LORD.
THE meaning of the name Jesus is expounded by the Angel, Math. 1. 11. She
shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall
save his people from their sins. But this title of Savior may admit many
degrees, partly in respect of the name it self in the original tongue, whence
it descends unto the Greek and Latin: but more principally in respect of the
matter, that is the distress or danger whence men are saved. In respect of
this later at least, Jesus the son of Mary, far exceeds all others that have
been, or hereafter may be termed Saviors. But of the danger or misery from
which he saved his people, there will be better opportunity to speak at large
in the Article of his Cross. The explication of the name it self, is the
work of this time and place. Some there be which think this name Jesus must
necessarily be derived from the essential and proper name of God; a name never
rightly pronounced by the Jews or by any other, as some learned Hebricians
think before our Saviors birth, but then made effable or utterable (as the
Authors of this opinion would persuade us, who derive this word Jesus from
Jehovah, by intersertion of one Hebrew letter, to wit, Shin, which is as much
as Sh.) According to this derivation, Cap. 36
they would make the compound name to be an Emblem or type of the two natures
in Christ; Jehovah, bearing the type of the divine nature, and the letter Shin
interserted into this name, to be an Emblem of the incarnation or humane nature
assumed into the unity of the person of the son of God. This Etymology or
derivation (as the Authors of it imagine) best agrees with the Angels
interpretation of the name Jesus before cited; because Jehovah himself says
(Isay 45. 21.) There is no Savior besides me. If this be (...) current
Cabbalisme, we are in special beholding to Osiander for it. If by sager
judgments it happen to be censured for a fancy, Vide Jacobum Naclantum in
Medulla scripturae.
Iacobus Naclantus, a Romish Bishop must share with Osiander in the censure.
Whatsoever the opinion be in it self, the allegation for confirmation of it,
is not concludent. For that, rightly examined, only inferres, that Jehovah
himself, (he that was essentially God) and none besides him, was to be our
Savior, or the Savior of the world. This is a truth unquestionable, yet a
truth which will not conclude, that whilst he became the Savior of the world,
he was to take no other name or title upon him, besides the proper and
essential name of God, only imbellished with one letter. But admit the name
Jesus, (as we take it in our Creed) given to our Savior by the Angel, must
draw its pedigree from the same Hebrew root or primitive, from which the name
Jesus, given to others, is derived; yet the branches of the same root or
primitive, (from any of which the name Jesus may be aptly alike immediately
derived) differ much. First, we may derive the word Jesus from the future
tense of the Hebrew Iashang [Salvavit] And thus the name in the Hebrew should
be Iehoshuah, whence he whom in our English we call Joshua the son of Nun,
and Jesus the son of God, should have one and the self same name in the
Hebrew, as they have in the Greek and vulgar Latin. According to this
derivation all the prerogatives which Jesus Christ the son of God can
challenge before Jesus the son of Nun, or others which have been called
Jesus, must be deduced only from the matter or manner of the salvation which he
bestows, not from any peculiar property or sovereignty of name. The same name
in the Hebrew is sometimes read shorter, not Iehoshua, but Ieshua, and from
this later contracted name as well the Greek (...), as the Latin Jesus is
more immediately and with less alteration derived. This later kind of writing
(or contraction,) was more familiar among the Jews in our Saviors time. And
for this reason the modern Jews call him Jesus, not in despite or mockery (as
some great Vide Drusium de nominibus.
Clarks have been persuaded) but out of an ordinary custom of omitting the
Hebrew guttur all in this and like words for better facility of pronouncing.
And as Drusi^s notes, the omission of this letter in proper names, grew in use
amongst later Hebricians (such as lived since or about our Saviors time) upon
the same occasions, that moved the ancient Latin Fathers, to render the Hebrew
Hoseang, not as we do now, Hoseas, but Ose. Whether we read Iehoshua, or
Ieshua, or Ieshu in the Hebrew, the name in the greek or Latin is all one;
and the meaning or signification in the Hebrew the very same.

2 But albeit the name of this our Jesus may rightly be derived from the same
branch of the Hebrew Iashang, from which the name of Jesus as it was given to
Jesus the son of Nun, and to Jesus the son of Iosedec, took their
original, yet I like best of their opinion, which derive the name Jesus (as
given to the son of God) not from the participle, verb, or adjective, but
from the abstract or substantive Ieshugnah, which is as much as salus ipsa, or
Salvation it self. And this original of the name Jesus, Simeon seems to
intimate in his divine song Luke 1. ver. 28. 29. He took the child Jesus
(says the Evangelist) in his arm, and blessed God and said, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word; for mine eyes have
seen, (not (...) but (...)) not salvatorem, but salutem, not the Savior, but
the salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all people, a light
to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of the people Israel. Now all
these attributes [of being a light to lighten the Gentiles, to be the glory of
Israel] are properly ascribed unto the person of our Savior, unto God made
man, or unto the man Christ Jesus, in whom the Godhead dwells bodily. The
Hebrew abstract or substantive, which the Greeks express by (...), or (...)
that is, by salvation it self, (not by Savior) is most frequently used in
those places of Scripture wherein Salvation by Christ is promised. As Isay 52.
10. The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the Nations, and
all the ends of the earth shall see the Salvation of our God. And again Isai
56. 1. Thus says the Lord, keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation
is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed. And Abakuk 3. 18. Yet I
will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation, (so our
English,) or in God my salvation, or my Jesus. And again, Isay 49. 6. It is a
light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the end of the Earth.
Instantly after God had saved Israel out of the hand of the Egyptians, and
drowned the Egyptians in the Sea, Moses and the Children of Israel sang this
song unto the Lord. Exodus 15. 1, 2. He has tryumphed gloriously; the horse and
his rider has he thrown into the Sea. The Lord is my strength and song, and
he is become my salvation, etc. This deliverance of Israel from the Egyptian
thraldom and their safe conduct through the red Sea, was but a type or shadow
of a greater deliverance to be wrought by the same God for his people, for
which they were to take up the same song which Moses and the children of Israel
here did; but with some additions or fuller expressions, how the God of their
strength should become the God of their Salvation, or their Jesus. And in that
day, thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with
me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me. Behold, God is my
salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my
strength, and my song, he is also my Salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye
draw water out of the wels of Salvation. Isai 12. 1, 2, 3. Though these and
many other places of the like observation had their true historical occasions,
yet were they not exactly fulfilled according to their prophetical importance,
until he fulfilled them, who was Jehovah, both Lord and God from eternity,
not by a general title, but by a distinct and proper name given unto him by
Gods appointment at his circumcision. How the name and office of Christ Jesus,
a King and Priest, was both foreprophecied, and respectively foreshadowed, by
Jesus the son of Nun, and by Jesus the son of Iehosedec, must be referred
unto his consecration, to be the Priest after the order of Melchisedec.

3 If follows in the Creed, That Jesus Christ who is the only son of God is
our Lord. Now whether this title [Lord] be interserted into this article by way
of anticipation, as the other title Christ apparently is, may be doubted. He
did bear the name Jesus from his Circumcision, as we do our Christen names
from the Font. This was his proper name; the other two were names of office.
Know ye, says the Apostle, Acts 2. 36 that that Jesus whom ye have crucified,
him has God made both Christ and Lord, to wit, after they had crucified him.
He was anointed to his Prophetical office at his Baptism, but thereby rather
initiated to be, then actually made Christ and Lord. Unto these two offices of
everlasting Priest, and everlasting King, he was not actually anointed, or
fully consecrated until his resurrection from the dead. Was not then the Son
of God, Lord before his resurrection? Yes, being God from eternity, he was
also Lord from eternity. So we are taught by Athanasius, The Father is Lord,
the Son is Lord, and the H. Ghost is Lord. Whosoever is truly God, is also
truly Lord. And in this acception of Lord, as there be not three Gods but one
God so there be not three Lords, but one Lord in the blessed Trinity. The
Father is the only God, the only Lord; the Son is the only God, the only
Lord; the holy Ghost is the only God, the only Lord. But whether this title
of Lord, as it is here inserted in this article of the Creed, import no more,
then that the Son of God, is the true and only Lord, with the Father and the
holy Ghost; or whether it were not before his birth in some sort peculiar to
the Son, is a point neither clear in it self, nor easy to be cleared;
because the ancient Translators, (especially the Greek and Latin) render the
three original words, Elohim, Ieh^vah, or the name of four letters (however
it be pronounced) and Adonai promiscuously by Lord. And yet these three words
in the original have their several significations or importances. To omit the
word Elohim. About the name of four letters there is much contention how it
should be pronounced, yet all agree that it (...) and essence of God* is his
most proper name, and admits no plural. The proper signification of the name
Adonai, is as much as Dominus or Lord.

4 The reason, as I take it, why the Greeks and Latins have usually but one
expression of both names, is because the ancient Hebrews did not pronounce the
name of four letters; unless it were in the Sanctuary, or in solemn
benedictions. Nor did they write it so as it might be pronounced, that is, with
any proper vowels, but either with the vowells of Adonai, or of Elohim. Not the
Greeks and Latins only, but the Chaldee paraphrase sometimes reads Adonai,
where we read Jehovah, or the name of four letters. And thus it does not from
mistake of the Hebrew vowells, which in the time of Onkelus the later of the
two Chaldee paraphrases, were not expressed. And God said to Moses, I appeared to
Abraham, unto Isaac, and Jacob, by the name of God Almighty but by my name
Jehovah was I not known to them. Exodus 6. 3. Or as the Caldee, by the name
Adonai, etc. Wherefore say unto the Children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I
will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you
out of their bondage, etc. Some good writers in the interpretation of this
place observe, that albeit Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were in high favor with
God, yet they wrought no miracles as Moses the first among the sons of men
did. And hence they infer, that Moses did work all his miracles in the power
and virtue of this name, whether Jehovah or Adonai, which was first manifested
unto to him. (...) many interpretations of this place Variae su^t Comme^tatorum
interpretationes in hunc locum: quarum aliquot hic refer volumus. Quidam sic
intelligunt; quod Deus quidem generalem quandam sui cognitionem patribus
rev^laverit: sed n^ tam claram and perspicuam, quam revelata est per Mosen. Et
inter patriarchas obscure adhuc de Deo pre^^tatum, per Mosen autem
manifestiorem praedicationem de Deo vulgatam esse. (...) quidam and ^^turum
faerit patriarchis, secundum (...) sed non secundum significatum mysterium, aut
virtutem ejus. videlicet quod Patriarcbae sciverint quidim Deum satis f^tem,
and potentem esse ad aedendamiratu^a and prodig^a, sed non sciverint nomen ^ei
^^^agrammaton (...) nomen illud esse, quo possit homo (...) modum Mosen putant
virtuta hujus nominis (...) Adonai, (...) aedidisse. Mihi videtur omnium
simplicissima sententia esse eorum* (...) ad modum explicant; Quasi. Deus hoc
sens^ (...) verb^ ad Mosen (...) quidem ne esse patribus declaravi and mihi
abund^ esse divitiarum ut (...) divites redder^m. At in nomine (...) Adonai non
fui cogn^^us illis, id est, verum opere non comple^^ quod illis sum pollicitus.
Quasi dicat promittentem (...); sed op^re promissae (...) in nomine meo Adonai
cognitus ero, Id est, videbis me id facere quod nomen sonat, nenpe veracemesse
etc. (...) Exodum Chap 6.
Fagrus best approves this.

Although God were known to Abraham as Omnipotent and All sufficient to
perform whatsoever he has promised: yet was he not known unto Abraham or
other of the Patriarks by that name or title, which did import the instant
performance of what he had promised unto Abraham. This was immediately imported
in the name of four letters or in those descriptions which God there gave to
Moses of his nature and essence, or of his present purpose toward Israel in
the 3 of Exodus ver. 14. I am, (...) I am, etc.

5 And the (...) paraphrase, it is probable, did use the name Adonai in stead
of the name of four letters, as most pertinent and most significant to this
purpose. For it properly pertaines to him who is not only in himself
Almighty or All sufficient, but Lord of all, to dispose of Kingdoms and
inheritances; to depose greatest Lords and advance meanest servants. If the
name of four Letters were to the ancient Hebrews as Drusius with some others
will have it, ineffable; this was a true character of his incomprehensible
nature, which they properly signify. Nor does the usual substitution of
Adonai, for the want of four letters want matter of more than grammatical
observation. This practice was a literal Emblem or Character of that which
our Evangelist has expressed in words assertive. John 1. 18. No man has seen
God at any time: the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. In this declaration or exposition of God (whose
incomprehensible nature was charactred by his ineffable name) made by the Son
of God incarnate, there was a greater improvement of man's knowledge of God, in
respect of that knowledge which Moses and the Prophets had, than there was in
Moses his knowledge of God, in respect of Abraham's, Isaacs, or Jacobs. Moses
and his Successors did see the performance of that, which the name of Jehovah,
or Adonai, first revealed to Moses did import, to wit, deliverance from their
bodily Enemies, and in that deliverance they had a pledge of far greater
blessings promised, which yet they did not receive. For as our Apostle
testifies Heb. 11. 39. Though Moses amongst others, through faith, obtained a
good report; yet he did not receive the promise, that is, the blessing
promised, nor was the nature of man capable of this blessing promised, until
that God, who was first revealed unto Moses, under the name of Jehovah, was
made Lord and Christ.

6. It had been a question more worthy of Drusius his pains, then all the
questions which he makes concerning the name of four letters, whether the name
Adonai were not in some sort peculiar to the Son of God, or to (...), who was
to be made flesh. That this name Adonai is so peculiar to the Son of God as
(...) is, I dare not affirm. For (...) does no where to my remembrance denote
any other person in the blessed Trinity besides the Son; Whereas the name
Adonai is an expression which many times referres unto the Trinity or Divine
nature. And in this extent it must be taken, when it is substituted for the
ineffable name of God, unless some special circumstances restrain it to the
Son. But in many passages of the old Testament, both names are expressed
according to their proper consonants. And in all these places the name Adonai
referres only to the Son, as the name of four letters denotes the Father. As
in that 110 Psalm, where we read, The Lord said unto my Lord, it is in the
original Jehovah said unto my Lord Adoni, or Adonai.] And in this place the
name of four letters referres only to God the Father. But so does not the
name Adoni denote either the Father or the holy Ghost, but the Son alone. I
durst not have been so bold as to have gathered this general rule from mine
own observation, unless I had found it excellently observed and proved at
large by Petru^ Faber in his Dod^^camenon, Cha. 8. It much affected this
learned man, as it will do any that is wise unto sobriety, to see how most of
the Ancients, as well in the Greek as in the Latin Church, albeit they took no
notice at all of any difference between these two names of God in the
original, did yet constantly appropriate the name of Lord to God the Son,
when he is named in the same prayer or gratulatory Hymn with God the Father.
But this they might learn either from S. Paul, or from the Apostles Creed. For
so the blessing is, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
[not of the Lord God] etc. And so in the Apostles Creed the title of Lord is
appropriated unto the Son of God, not added either to the Father Almighty, or
to the Holy Ghost.

7. But in many places of the old Testament, wherein both names of God are
specified, the name of Adonai, is placed before the name of four letters. And
thus it happens, so far as I can observe, especially in the serious
supplications, or gratulatory expressions of Holy men, as in that speech of
Gideon, Judges 6. 13. Oh my Lord, if God be with us, why then is all this
befallen us? And again, Iosuah 7. 7. Joshua said, Alas O Lord God, wherefore
have thou at all brought this people over Jordan etc? The Evangelicall mystery
employed in this form of prayer or supplication is excellently deciphered by
Masius in his Comments upon this place, with whose words gathered from the
tradition or lyturgie rather of the ancient Hebrews of the Cabbalists I
conclude this Treatise.

Compellat Joshua Deum duplici nomine, dum ut Imperator, pro omnibus verba
facit. Alterum est, (...) Adonai; alterum (...): illud ad dominationem
pertinet; hoc Dei essent^am, ut alibi dixi, intuetur. Solent autem duo ista
nomina saepius in vehementioribus precationibus isto modo conjungi a viris
sanctis in sacra historia. Quod eodem illi Spiritu afflati fecere, ut ego certe
existimo quo sacrosancta Ecclesia Deum Patrem omnia orat per Filium. Nam cum
nomen, Adonai, ut dixi, dominationem intueatur, plane filio co^gruit, eumque
nobis repraesentat, per quem Deus Pater, ut fecit mundum, sic mundum moderatur.
Idque adsentiuntur nobis etiam, verbis saltem, diviniores Haebraeorum
Philosophi, quos Cabbalistas vocant; cum tradunt, illud nomen, Adonai, esse
tanquam clavem, qua patefit aditus ad Deum Iehovam: hoc est, ad Deum in sua
essentia veluti latentem; esse Thesaurum, in quo ea, quae ab Jehova nobis
impartiuntur, omnia sunt recondita, Esse insuper oeconomon illum magnum, qui
res omnes dispensat, nutrit, vegetat, per Iehovam; Denique neminem ad Iehovam
penetrare posse, nisi per Adonai: Neque enim ullam aeut viam, aut rationem ad
illum perveniend aliam esse prorsus; Atque ideo Ecclesiam pr^ces suas sacras
sic auspicari: Adonai, hoc est, Domine, Labia mea aperias: et os meum
annuntiabit laudem tuam. Haec enim, et his similia alia, scriptae extant in eo
libro, cui titulum illi fecere, Portam Lucis: et in libro quem vocant (...)
(...) est, Nomen explicatum. Masius Comment in Iosuam, Cap. 7. page 124.
Joshua (says he) calls God by 2 names, when as chief Commander he speaks in
behalf of all the rest. The one is Adonai: the other Iehova. The former
sets out Gods ruling power: the later has respect (as else where I have
showed) to Gods Essence. These 2. names often come together in the most fervent
prayers of the Saints in the sacred Story: as here they do. Namely, they
inspired with the Holy Ghost do, as (I conceive) the Holy Church does, praying
for all things from the Father for the Sons sake. For seeing Adonai (as I
said) has an eye to Gods ruling power; it agrees manifestly to the Son, and
represents him to us by whom as God the Father made the World; so he rules
it. In this point the Diviner sort of Hebrew Authors called Cabbalists, assent
to us; when they teach that the name Adonai is as it were the key, by which
entrance is opened to God Iehova: that is, to God as it were, hid in his own
Essence: and that it is the treasure, in which these things bestowed on us by
Iehova are all deposited; And that moreover it denotes the great Steward, who
disposes of all, and ^o^risheth; and quickneth all things under Iehova; And
finally, that no man can approach near Iehova, but by Adonai: because there is
no other way or course at all to come to him; And that therefore the Church
thus begins her holy prayers: Adonai, that is, Lord open my lips, and my mouth
shall show forth thy praise. These and such like passages are extant in the
book entitled Porta lucis: the ^ate of light: and in the book called (...)
That is, The name explicated.

FINIS.
A CATALOGVE OF the several Treatises heretofore published by the Author. (*)
THe Eternal Truth of Scriptures and Christian belief, in two Books of
Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed.

The third book of Commentaries upon the Apostles Creed, containing the
blasphemous positions of Jesuits and other later Romanists, concerning the
authority of their Church.

Justifying Faith, or the faith whereby the just do live, being the fourth
book upon the Creed.

A Treatise containing the original of unbelief, misbeliefe, or
misperswasions concerning the Verity, Unity, and Attributes of the Deity:
with directions for rectifying our belief or knowledge in the forementioned
points, being the fifth book upon the Creed.

A Treatise of the Divine Essence and Attributes the first and second parts,
being the sixth book upon the Creed.

The Knowledge of Christ Jesus, or the seventh book of Commentaries upon the
Apostles Creed, containing the first and general principles of Christian
Theology, with the more immediate principles concerning the knowledge of
Christ: divided into four sections.

A Treatise of the holy Catholic Faith and Church.

Christ's answer to John's question: or an Introduction to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and him crucified: delivered in certain Sermons.

Nazareth and Bethlehem, or Isreal's portion in the son of Jesse: And
mankindes comfort from the weaker sex, in two Sermons preached at S. Mary's in
Oxford.

Page lin. Errata Sic corrige. 5 15 historians belief historical belief 60
31 typical prophetical. 115 26 upon dele. 127 18 his assertion this
assertion. 140 16 violencence violence Ibi. 18 that it that is 166 23 its
proper his proper 211 22 in on 214 21 exact expect: 258 16 took look 314 1
that but Ibi. 18 did perfectly did not perfectly. Ibi. 19 as true a true 344 2
next annexed 353 8 spoken were spoken 358 29 many as many 365 5 do to


