THE GOOD MAN'S PRIVILEGE.

A SERMON LATELY PREACHED AT PLIMMOVTH IN DEVON, By I. B. AND NOW PVBLISHED AT
the request of some that then were Auditors.

PSALM. 4.6. Who will show us any good?

MICAH. 6.8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good.

LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his
shop, under St. Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in Pope's Head Alley, over
against the sign of the white horse. 1618.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL FRANCIS DRAKE, OF BVCKLANDDRAKE IN DEVON, Esquire, I. B.
wishes all grace and glory.
I Am constrained (good Sir) to satisfy your desire in so small a request, as
the publishing of those lines, whereunto sometimes you in your own person gave
attention; and after the delivery, an acceptable approbation. Now if it be well
done, you were the first mouer, and deserve the honor of the action: but if
not, I cannot impute the fault to any, except my self. Well; howeuer it be, I
have but done your desire, and my own duty: for I freely confess, that your
love (many ways manifested to me) deserves above my ability to make equal
requital, proportionable satisfaction. You are well acquainted with my familiar
phrase, rude manner of speaking; therefore I cease to make any apology or
defense in my own behalf: yet truth is truth, that as good cloth may have
the coursest color; the most precious stone be put in the vncleanest corner,
and sometimes set too in the impurest metal: so may matter of great worth be
couched under a mean style, and come to view in a familiar and plain habit.
For as the silver vessel, in which the meat is dished, does not add to the
essence of the diet, but comeliness and content: no more do choice words to
the truth delivered; only they may give some outward gloss which may delight,
and that's all.

Might I speak my opinion, then it is this: I do affect and commend
Rhetorique and elegancie of speech with any, of any (for therein the wisdom
of God shines): But to have queint phrase, and a neat style amongst the
vulgar, is, though lawful, not expedient. He therefore that will benefit the
rude people, must speak plainly, carry a low sail, and descend to their
capacities. Was not our Lord Christ Wisdom it self? did he not
notwithstanding, draw similitudes from the most familiar and common things; as
the hiding of leaven, the loosing of a groat, and children playing in the
market place?

Who wiser (except the first and second Adam) then Solomon? yet none plainer
then he in his Proverbs: He tells of wringing the nose; churning of milk;
and of a ring in a Swines snout: was this want of art, wisdom, or learning?
Wherefore let him that can and will (amongst the simple) grapple with his
Greek; flourish with his Fathers; bring forth far fetched Etymologies, and
obscure Hebraismes; but as for me, I either cannot, or will not. And thus I
commend you, with all yours, unto God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. Amen.

Your Worships in all duty: JOHN BARLOVV.
From my Study in Plymmouth, July 8. 1618.
TO THE READER.
REader, it is concluded (for our parts, whatsoever our adversaries affirm),
that there are but two ends for all men at the last; either life, or death;
salvation, or condemnation. Then from this truth I collect this necessary
position; that, All men are either tending to the one, or trudging to the
other. If thou be in the narrow path (which is comfortable), these few lines
will yield thee some (though little) room, ease and ability, to go on with
the more cheerfulness; the which to a weary, and almost tired traveler,
cannot but give good content: But, if thou be in the broad (which is fearful),
they may, through the good hand of God, be of force to cause thee smite thy
hand upon thy thigh, and alter thy journey: For the producing of either which
effects, was the cause I first preached it; and now since (though requested)
have penned it. Who knows not the frowardness of man's will: how improne it
is to run after the rule of Gods commands? And what man, but understands that
Good or Evil be the proper objects for to move and allure it to turn the
perfect way? Then this being truth, read these (though ragged) lines; for they
will give thee to see into many mysteries, secret things, that be in the course
of godliness; and declare unto thee, what thing is profitable for all things;
so that, if thou can but obtain one thing, thou shall want nothing. Thou
think this a hard matter: Well, be it so: yet read on, and then consider,
consult, and give sentence.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, I. B.

THE GOOD MAN'S PRIVILEGE.
Romans 8.28. And we know, that all things work together for good, to them that
love God, and are called according to his purpose.


AMongst many, three things have, and do most molest the children of God: One
is, The guilt of sin; another, inbred or original corruption; the last is,
troubles and affliction. Now the Apostle, being a skillful Physician,
prescribes a threefold remedy for his distempered patients; the which being
truly understood, and rightly applied, will expel the danger of the diseases;
and restore them that be sick thereof, unto perfect soundness.

Psalm. 130.3.
For if the Lord should mark what is done amiss, man were never able to abide
it; neither the rigor of the Law, or the severity of his justice: But he that
believes in the Son of God, and is by faith made one with him, becomes
truly and perfectly righteous; 1. Tim. 1.9.
so that the law of God cannot condemn him, or the justice of God lay hold
upon him: for he has in Christ, and by him a righteousness, that can, and
will give a full payment, and an absolute satisfaction, both to the Law, and
the Author of it. Wherefore the Apostle makes this peremptory conclusion;
that to such There is no condemnation, verse. 1. where by the way we may learn
a double lesson.

Papists, that rely upon their own works and worthiness for justification
before the Lord; when as Paul, though knowing nothing by himself, 1. Cor. 4.4.
yet confesses ingeniously, he was not thereby justified.

viz. to labor to be found not having our own righteousness, which will
never answer the justice of the law: Phil. 3 9.
but the righteousness which is by faith in Christ Jesus.

Miserable, or spoiled man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? chap. 7.24. The remedy of this disease, is the powerful operation
of the Spirit, that destroys (by degrees) the cursed work of Satan in us;
and perfecteth the good work he has begun within us. Chap. 8. verse. 11.
whence we are taught,

1. Ioh. 3.3.
and rend this evil tree up at the roots; the other, only to prevent and
hinder the outward buds, and fruits that it produces. Carnal men never look
to the fountain from whence this bitter water springs, bubleth.

power, privilege. It is a work, that requires an infinite workman to
perfect. Pray then with the Prophet; Psalm. 51.11.
Lord take not thy holy spirit from me.

though afflictions be not joyous, but grievous for the present; Heb. 12.11.
yet they shall turn to our good at the latter end.

In which words, for our better proceeding, we may observe two things: The one
is, an affirmed proposition, We know that all things work together for good:
The other, to whom these contrary things do work for good; and they are
described, first, by an effect, that they love God: secondly, by an adiunct,
that they are called: which calling is closely argued, by the Author and chief
efficient, God; by the manner or rule, according to his purpose. In the
proposition note these particulars. First, things: secondly, that these things
work: thirdly, that they all work: fourthly, that they all work together:
fifthly, that they all work together for good: sixthly, and that we know, etc.
This for the proposition: the limitation of its object, or fruit of its
operation follows. But before we come to the several doctrines this verse
affoordeth, we will clearly and briefly open the meaning.

We] That is, I Paul, and other grounded and strong Christians, men and women;
as well of the Laity, as Preachers of the Gospel.

Know] Knowledge is took often in Scripture for faith, because they are
inseparable companions. Romans 10.14.
For how can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And so it is
taken where Job says, I know my Redeemer lives, Ioh 19.25. Ioh. 17.3.
that is, I believe: and, This is eternal life, to know thee; that is, to
believe in God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. And so may it be understood
here, We know, that is, we believe, etc.

Again, Knowledge is either Notionall, or experimental. Notionall is the bare
apprehension of the truth of an Art, Ioh. 3.11. 2. Pet. 2.21.
or rule in any science: but experimental knowledge is, when we have seen and
felt the truth of a thing, verified either in our selves, Genesis 3.6.7.
or others. And so Adam, after he had eaten of the prohibited fruit, did know
the nature of it in the effects, 2 Chronicles. 33.13.
by his own experience. So Manasseh knew God; Romans 1.16.
and so Paul, the power of the Word. And in this place it may be took for a
knowledge of experience, and not notionall only. So that the full sense is
this: We are assured by faith, that all shall work for good; and we know it
too by experience in our selves. Only mark this, that experimental knowledge
looks backward, faith forward; the one, which is faith, relieth on the truth
of the promise to be; the other, that is, experimental knowledge, is grounded
upon the word and will of God accomplished.

That all] All, is took for all kinds, and all of all kinds, that is,
collectiuely; excluding not any thing; or, for of each thing some, that is to
say, distributiuely; excluding some things. For example: The Pharisees did
tithe all herbs: Luke 11.42. 1. Tim. 2.4.
that is, of all kinds of herbs: God would have all men to be saved, viz. of
all sexes; men, women: and of all callings; superiors, inferiors: or of all
nations; Jews, Gentiles, Barbarians, Scythians: And in the largest sense it
may be took in this place. For the Apostle seems to answer a secret
objection. Some might say, What? shall affliction work for good? the answer
is, Yes: whatsoever it be, good or bad.

Things] Things is any thing; from God to the least ens, entity and being: for
sin it self is called a thing; as, These things: Psalm. 50.21.
that is, these sins, have thou done. So that by things here is meant, any
thing that can be named or conceived.

Heb. 12.11.
Worke] To wit, Turn, or fall out in the end and event, by Gods disposing.

Together] Not apart, or as they be simply to be considered in themselves: for
separate affliction from grace, or Gods ouer-ruling and disposing hand, Genesis
50.20.
it cannot work but for evil. As simple poison, by it self received, does
kill; but being mixed with other ingredients, cures the sick patient: so does
sin.

For good] That is, for the good of grace here, Psalm. 119.71.
and glory hereafter: For we exclude natural and civil goodness from this
good, in this place mentioned: though in another respect, they may have their
prize and praise.

To them that love God. Deuteronomy. 11.1. Mat. 10.37.
] Love is sometimes put for all the duties of religion. But Paul does mention
it here, before any other thing, for two reasons. First, because without love
al our proceedings are unacceptable to God: 1. Cor. 13.1. etc.
this is that spiritual salt, that seasoneth all our actions. Secondly, 2.
Cor. 5.14.
in regard that we cannot suffer any affliction for any person or thing, if we
do not love it, and affect him: therefore Jacob served seven years for Rahel,
Genesis 29.20.
and they seemed unto him but a few days, because he loved her.

And are called] Calling is manifold, either from the subject place; so God
called his people out of Egypt: or by the isntrumental causes; Psalm. 19.3.
so God calls by his creatures, judgments, word and actions: or to an
office; so Judas.

Again, it is effectual, or not effectual, Mat. 22.14.
Many are called, but not truly, sauingly.

Now a man is said to be effectually called, in respect of the manner;
ordinarily, or extraordinarily: ordinarily is, 1. Cor. 1.2.
by the Word and Spirit, cooperating in a man's conversion: extraordinarily,
when the Spirit immediately, without the Word read, or preached, speaks to
the heart of a sinner, saying; Arise, thou that art out of the way, Romans 1.6.
turn into the right path, and walk on in the gate that leads to glory. And
this effectual calling, is that, that is here by the Apostle nominated;
whether ordinarily, or extraordinarily effected, that skils not; for so a thing
be well done, it matters not, whether it be effected by a common, or more
special manner of proceeding; for that is not of the essence, but an adiunct
to the thing.

Hebr. 8.5.
According] In this word is a similitude of equal proportion.

To his] That is, Gods; they that refer it to man, are deceived, and corrupt
the Text: for God calls not any for his foreseen faith, 2. Tim 1 9.
or works; but of his own good pleasure; and that, when man has no purpose
to be called at all.

Purpose] This word seems to have in it two things: the one, a rule by which a
thing is done; the other, a settled resolution to do according to that rule:
the first has relation to the understanding; the second, to the will; and we
ascribe both to God. For he effects nothing without knowledge, and all acts
proceed from the will; the one guiding, and the other working, perfecting. Now
both these, without offense to his Majesty, may be ascribed unto him.

And now will you here the Metaphrase in order, as it is summarily in the
verse contained? then thus it is, briefly, plainly: as if the Apostle had thus
more amply reasoned, related:

I cannot deny, but that afflictions and persecutions are troublesome, and not
easily undergone by them that either preach, or profess the Gospel; yet
notwithstanding, this may be a means to strengthen the weak and feeble minds
of the faithful; for we that are the Disciples of Christ, do know by
experience, in respect of times past, and are by faith assured for the future
days; that, there is nothing whatsoever, as sin, sorrow, death, or what can
be named, or conceived; but, to those that love the Lord, and are effectually
called of his good pleasure, it shall, in the event and final conclusion, by
his wise disposing, turn for the bringing of them to the truth of grace here,
and the eternal perfection of glory hereafter. And this I conceive to be the
very true and natural sense of the verse we have in hand: so let us now
proceed to gather some particular Doctrines, for our better and further
instruction: and this I take to be one of the principal, that

All things work together for good, unto the children of God.

The Apostle in another place has a speech something to the same purpose; 1.
Tim. 4.8.
Bodily exercise (says he) profits a very little, yet godliness is
profitable for all things. But for the better prosecution of this point, we
will make a fourefold distribution. All things that are for our good, come
either, first, from God; secondly, Satan; thirdly, others; fourthly and lastly,
from our selves: for in these we may comprehend the most, if not all things,
whereof we have to speak.

Genes. 3.5.
Ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil), we will declare how it works
for the good of all his children.

knowledge he discerns them from all reprobated bastards, and is able to
call them by name. Exodus 33.12.
And is not this good for them? will it not comfort a child, in that his father
knows him? By this he also understands not only who we be, but where we
be, what we be, and the things that be the best for us. Ignorance was a cause
why Isaac blessed Jacob in stead of Esau; for had he known it, Genes. 27.23.
he would not have done it. Ignorance was the ground, why some of the Princes
of this world put to death the Lord of life; for had they known him, 1. Cor.
2.8.
they would not have crucified him. 1. Tim. 1.13.
Ignorance caused Paul to persecute the servants of God; and many more evils
have sprung from this blindness. Wherefore God, that knows his, cannot pass
by them, and give his blessings unto others. So that knowledge in God is for
his childrens good.

Was it not good unto Hagar, Genes. 16. Matthew. 2.
that the Lord knew her in the wilderness? for Jesus, when he was in Egypt?
for David, seeing the uprightness of his heart? and for Paul also, The Lord
knows whether I love you, or not? yea, 2. Cor. 11.11.
by this all-sufficient and seeing eye, he can collect the Elect from the four
ends of the world; single them out of the deformed multitude; gather together
their very bones; number their hairs; make a reunion of the same soul and
body; convent them at the last day before him; and reward them according to
their works. Nay, the discerning of our thoughts is profitable for the elect,
for thereby they shall not be hindered, but helped. And by his Omniscience he
discovers the plots of the wicked, and knows thereby, how to frustrate and
confound their close and cunning enterprises.

The sick patient is comforted, when as the Physician understands the nature
and danger of his disease, and the best way and means that can cure him. It
cannot but be a vexation of spirit to be in calamity, and his best friends
ignorant of his perplexity: Hence have these sorrowful speeches sprung;
Little does my father and friends understand where I am, and my woeful
condition: would to God they did: for then they would use means to free me,
comfort me. Wherefore when men are imprisoned under the Turk, or any Enemy;
the first thing they do, is to let their friends by letters, or other ways,
to have knowledge of it. Truly Gods knowledge is the very first ground of
comfort to all the faithful; for it makes way, that evil may be removed from
them, and all that is good conferred upon them; and the more we think upon
Gods Omniscience, the more will it yield us matter of mirth and great rejoicing.

David, when he would encourage his son Solomon to serve God, 1. Chron. 28.9.
uses it for a strong inducement: for the Lord knows all hearts. Christ
pricketh his people for to pray on the same ground; Matthew 6.6.
Your heavenly Father knows the things whereof ye stand in need. Paul thereby
strengthens the feeble minded, in the apostasy of such as had made great
profession; 2. Tim. 2.19.
The Lord knows who are his. Peter, and others, persuades the children of
God, to do good and suffer affliction, producing it as a reason: for the eye
of the Lord is over the righteous: He knows their works, 1. Pet. 3.12. Revel.
2.19.
and their dwelling place. So that we see, the Omniscience of God in all
respects may, and shall work for his childrens good.

Heb. 11.3.
that he was able to create the world of nothing: that he does, and can
preserve all things that they be not destroyed, Psalm. 114.5. etc.
or the whole order thereof disturbed, ouerturned: that God can procure food
and raiment, rather then we should want, extraordinarily; that he can curb and
bridle the rage and violence of men and devils; raise up the dead; and make a
new heaven, Deuteronomy. 32.39.40. etc. Phil. 3.21. 2. Pet. 3.13.
and a new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness. And what is it that he
wants power to do, if it may make for his glory, and our good? for The Lord
is in heaven, Psalm. 115.3.
and does whatsoever he will.

Furthermore, Romans 4.21.
it will confirm our confidence in the accomplishment of all his promises,
though they be never so many or great, or seem sometimes to exceed or cross
nature. David would not fear, Psalm. 27.1.
when the strong hand of the Lord was with him. Abraham would willingly offer
his son; for God had power to raise him to life again. Heb. 11.17.19.
In a word; if he be with us, what mattereth it, Who, Romans 8.31.
or what is against us? For by his Power he is able to preserve our essence
from perishing; and to keep and support us, as a hand of strength for ever:
Thus you may perceive, that his power is good for his children.

Omnipotency, let us descend to his Mercy, Psalm. 73.1. Lam. 3.22.
and is not that the spring that comfort the thirsty soul? the fountain
of all joy in misery? and that, that must support us from horror and
despair? This will make us willing to come before him in life, bold in death,
and full of joy in the great day of his coming, and our appearing. Yea, it
will work in us compassion to our brethren, Psalm. 103.1.
thankfulness for his benefits; and will not his bountifulness allure a good
heart to true repentance? Romans 2.4.5.
But no man makes doubt of this; therefore the more briefly we will touch it,
and go to the Attribute of his Justice.

Ye take too much upon you, Numb. 16.3. 1. John 1.9.
for all the Congregation is holy: yet is it exceeding comfortable and
profitable to them that are effectually called, howeuer it work with the
wicked: for it will move them to cease from sin, encourage them to do good,
2. These. 1.4.5.6.
strengthen them in faith, and work in them patience, being by the profane
persecuted: for they know, Romans 2.6.11.
that sin must not go unpunished, godliness unrewarded, and that there is
no respect of persons with the Lord. In conclusion, it will make them careful
how to judge the Lords proceedings, Romans 9.14.
not to accuse him as wicked, Psalm. 36.7.
to deny their own merits, tremble at his word, reverence his extraordinary
acts of providence, Acts 16.30.
and to seek for a righteousness, to satisfy the justice of his Law. And
thus could I touch the rest of Gods Attributes, and declare, that as they are
good in God, so to his children: But I omit them; and because this, of all
other things, does most deceive many, I will a little further follow it.

We are to know, that the mercy and justice of God are equal, as they be in
him, and so be all his attributes; for whatsoever is in God, is God; and there
is no difference between the essence and attributes of God, but in our
apprehension: yet though they be equal amongst themselves, it may be demanded.



Justice seems to exceed his Mercy, and enlarge it self beyond it: for how
many have not the means of mercy, the Gospel of Christ? More want it, then
they that enjoy it. Again, Mat. 13.
of the four kinds of grounds, one but received the good seed, which is meant
of them that are in the Church visible. And Christ says, that the way to
heaven is narrow, and few find it; Mat. 7.13.14.
but to hell broad, and many go in thereat. Yet to speak, as I conceive the
truth is; if we regard the profunditie or depth of his mercy, then in that it
has the pre-eminence; and in four things it will appear: first, the Lord
found out a way to save man, Genes. 3.15. 1. Pet. 1.12.
when Satan or the good Angels could not peep into that secret. It went beyond
the Serpents skill for all his subtilty, how a finite creature could make an
infinite satisfaction. Secondly, John 3.16.
in that God gave his own only Son freely to take upon him man's nature,
that there might be a reconciliation. Thirdly, that he was contented to receive
the debt from a suertie, and not at the debtors hands, for it was in his own
election and liberty. Romans 5.8.9. etc.
Fourthly, and herein is his mercy manifested wonderfully, that he has sent
his Word and Spirit to bear witness of this great work to open men's blind
eyes, Romans 8.15.16.
that they might see into it; infuse faith into their unbelieving hearts to
credit it, and in particular to apply it: so that in these respects, they that
understand it, and are assured that they be partakers of this rich mercy, may
say, that it is a depth past finding out. But first get under the act of his
mercy, Romans 11.33.
taste of it, and then may thou justly, and with comfort commend it;
otherwise, be it, as it is, infinite, it will profit thee nothing.



Decree is profitable for them; for though it exclude the reprobate from all
true blessedness, Matthew. 24.24.
yet it includes the Elect within the book of life and salvation. The Apostle
compares it to a foundation, 2. Tim. 2.19. And so it is in three respects:
First, because it comes from God, who is the original and beginner of all
things. Secondly, in regard that it is the basis and ground, on which all the
work of man's salvation stands. And thirdly, in respect of the firmness and
surenesse of it; for it abides constant and steadfast for ever: so that he who
is builded upon this rock (as all the faithful be), cannot fall from the
certainty of perfect blessedness.

Judas, Mat. 26.24.
and the unbelievers, they had never been borne.

Vocation is good too, whether it be sooner or latter: if the Lord call a man
in his youth, why, is not this a rare privilege? and shall he not be better
enabled to resist all evil in the time of age? Suppose the Lord single a man
out in his more ancient years, yet it shall be good for him also: for he
shall discern more clearly, and that with admiration, the patience and long
suffering of the Lord; perceive his power the more, in turning him from that
long, and strong habit of wickedness: he will make the more haste to heaven, as
the shaft to the mark that has been long held in the bow; work the more
willingly in the Lords vineyard so short a time; and he thereby will be the
more hopeful of old sinners, less proane finally to censure any. And is not
this also good for him?

2. King. 22.20.
What if death destroy his days in youth? is he not took from the evil to
come? and shall not a well-led life yield comfort at the day of death? does he
not the sooner take possession of his fathers inheritance, and rest from his
labors? Revel. 14.13.
yea, and is not then the day of a good man's death, better then the day of his
birth?

And if his life and days be prolonged; why? Prou. 16 31.
is not gray hairs a crown of glory, being found in the way of
righteousness?

Satan; and we shall easily discern, that his plots and malice shall work
for good.

Christ the Lord? Secondly, is not his standing more certain, and he not
subject to change, and fall for ever? and this is the reason why Adam had a
Sacrament in the Garden, of good and evil, to seal life or death; but we in
Christ have none, but such as seal up our salvation. Thirdly, shall not our
estate be more glorious, in respect of the place of our habitation? For if Adam
had stood (probably as some think), we had never been translated from earth to
heaven: for every creature (say they) was to be blessed in that state and
place, where the Lord at the first put them; as Angels in heaven, Fishes in the
sea; and consequently, Man and Beast on the earth: and our ascension comes by
Christ; for from the Deity, having more power to carry the humanity to
heaven, then the humanity any ways to move the Deity, springs our so great
exaltation. And Paul seems to confirm this proposition, 1. Cor. 15.47.
when he says; that The first man was of the earth, earthly; the second from
heaven, heavenly: endeavoring not only to prove the resurrection, but the
ascension of the body also, by the merits of Christ Jesus. So that Satan did
not hurt, but help us, though not willingly; yet through the mercy of God, on
his part freely; but on Satan's by necessity.

liberty, why should the devil thus trouble me, tempt me? Luther says, that
he learned much good (meaning in these former respects) from the adversary of
mankind; though the Papists, blind guides, scandalize him for it, and accuse
him to have been familiar with the devil. And no doubt, but as a man learnes
wit by going to Law with a cunning adversary; so the sons of God in our
days have good by his tentations, in finding out his depths, and feeling Gods
strong arm to pluck them out of his mouth: and he that never learned wisdom
from Satan (though he intend not to teach him any), may be justly suspected,
not to be in the way to heaven, 2. Cor. 2.11.



Canaanites be still among the Israelites? is it not good for them? for first,
if the son run from his father, why let him fall into the hand of an
uncircumcised Philistim, he will whip him home again. Secondly, the providence
of God over his, will the more appear in their preservation. Thirdly, it will
make the faithful to look better to their footing, that they have not cause
to blaspheme the name of the Lord, or speak evil of his laws: we see Lot
lived better in Sodom amongst sinners, then when he came to Zoar from out of
them. Fourthly, they prevent much sin, that the righteous are subject unto:
for suppose that a man would wrong the King of his impost and custom; sell
away (as we have heard some do) their powder, shot, and the like provision:
why, an honest man cannot, if he would have way for the wicked; for they lie
at every advantage; and, like dogs, devour that carrion, that might choke and
poison the godly. And do we not see, that a flower growing amongst Onyons and
Garlic is sweeter, then if it were among more pleasant herbs? for the sower
root suckes the bad juice, and leaves the better for the other.

Paul and Mark were sometimes stirred amongst themselves? yet shall not the
falling out of friends, be a means to renew more firmly their former
affection; like a bone, being knit, that has been broken, is the firmer
afterward? yea, such shall be reconciled in due season: for we read, 2. Tim.
4.11.
that Paul willed Timothy to bring Mark with him; for he was profitable to
minister. A rare spirit was this in Paul, and hard to be found in these days;
that would send from Rome to Troas for an assistant.

vile in our own eyes. Secondly cause us to pray earnestly and often: and
thirdly, will we, nill we, to deny our own power and free will: and fourthly,
to seek to God for mercy in Christ his Son. And our actual sins will
work the same effects also: And is not he that is burdened, wounded, humbled;
in the way to be eased, healed, exalted?

I could instance in particulars: Sampson (some think) sinned in matching with
the Philistim; Judge. 14.
yet thereby God brought a great destruction upon the Churches enemies; and
made him a lively type of our Lord. Isaac mist it, through circumstance, Genesis
26.8.9.
insporting with Rebeccah; notwithstanding it was a means of his safe delivery
out of the Kings hands. Jacob may steal his brothers blessing, but cannot the
Lord sanctify it unto him? 1. Sam. 21. vlt.
David's faining of himself mad, cannot well be excused; what of that? God
can so work, that thereby he shall escape death and danger. And let this be
observed: that as a man having tumbled in the mire and mudde, by occasion
whereof washes off his clothes many lesser spots, then which he before that
fall neglected: so the faithful, through the commission of some great and
foul offense, be brought by repentance to cleanse themselves of smaller
sins, then which had not yet been reformed, except the other had befallen
them. And these may serve to manifest the truth of the thing: that actual
sin shall, as it has, work, by the good hand of God, for his childrens
benefit, and great commodity. And now I come to render some general reasons of
the general Proposition.

Prou. 21.30.
Is there any wisdom, counsel, or understanding against him? cannot he tell
that made all things of nothing, brought light out of darkness, how to turn
all for the good of the godly? Who, or what is able to prevent it? no policy or
invention of man or Angel.

^ob 9.4.
for as he is wise in heart, so is he mighty in strength. He can confound the
policy of Achitophel, break the arm of Satan, and turn the fiery bullets of
his foes, bark into their faces, to fight for him and his, and destroy the
adversaries; he can cause all the crooked wheels of the wicked to run
straight, for the execution of his good pleasure. This he has done; and this
he can, and will effect hereafter.

and who is able to hinder that irresistible motion? ^om. 9.19.22.
will chafe, cast on the violent stream, stay the current thereof from
running? shall a feather hinder the turbulent wind from blowing? or the pismire
move the earth out of the worlds center? why then, may his will be prevented,
frustrated?

Isa. 59.5.6.
They may weaue the web of the Spider; but a wind shall huffe it away: sit,
and hatch the Cockatrice eggs; but they shall break forth into a Serpent,
that shall eat out her own and their bowels. And thus we come to make use of
the doctrine, which is profitable every manner of way.

Papists, who maintain, that, A man effectually called, justified, and, in
some measure sanctified, may fall totally and for ever. If the Popes position
be a truth, then the Apostles is a falsehood; for if one may fall from saving
grace, and utterly perish, how can all things be said to work together for
good to such a person? And in my opinion, no one Text (though there be many
for that purpose) does more make against our Adversaries, then this we have in
hand. And what a comfortless doctrine is that, which they defend.

reprehension of those which say, It is in vain to be religious; Job 21.15.
What profit is there in serving the Almighty? What profit? why all profit: for
all things shall work together for their good, sin, Satan, death, judgment
and hell. Yea, the worst thing that befalls any of his children, shall do
them more good, then the best shall, that can befall the wicked. Heb. 11.25.26.
It was better for Moses to suffer affliction with the faithful, then to have
been called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and enjoyed the pleasures of sin
for a season. Oh that the men of our age did consider but this one thing! then
doubtless they would alter their minds, and speedily change their manners. For
many fall into utter desolation, because they do not deeply ponder this in
their hearts.

Psalm. 2.2. Psalm. 11.2.
The Papist, and Atheist may band themselves against the Lords anointed; shoot
at the upright in heart; and make have to the spoil. But the righteous God
shall cut their cords asunder. Why then do the Heathen rage, Psalm. 94.8.
and the people murmr a vain thing? O ye fools, when will ye be wise? I
have often wondered, why they still persevere in their mischief: But either
they believe not the truth; Psalm. 14.1.
for the fool has said in his heart, there is no God: or else with some of
the former Pharisees, and Alexander, they have sinned unto death, and that is a
wickedness implacable: and if not so; yet like Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 5.3.
and 13.10.
they are full of the devil, and pursue them of envy, or for lucre's sake;
and have their hearts so set upon malice, Romans 1.32.
that though they are convinced in judgment, and know that they do evil, and
that God will revenge; yet will they persist in their wicked practices. Do we
not see some wrangling Clyants, that though their learned Counsel tell them
that their case is naught, and will not bear an action: yet they will to Law
notwithstanding, and mispend their time, and waste their wealth? even so Satan's
instruments will pursue of envy, although they labor in vain.



First, we learn, that There is a particular providence of God in all things:
for if not, how should affliction, sin and evil work for good? were it not
a matter impossible? some have dreamed of fortune and chance; others conceited,
that the inferior creatures and their actions have been governed by a general
course of Nature, to produce their effects; and that the Lord does not
distinctly guide and rule them. But by this point we see, that they are all
grossly deluded, deceived.

Secondly, we may gather hence, that There is but one chief Monarchy nor
government in the world; because all things work for that one end, to express
that one sovereign power; for if there were more governors, then it could not
be thus, therefore there is but one Monarchy, the most excellent government.

Thirdly we hence may collect, that, In what condition soever a good man is, he
is never miserable; for be it what it will, all is still in working for his
present and future good.

Fourthly, that some good may be drawn out of the worst thing; else all
things could not turn and fall out for the profit of the Lords chosen.

Fifthly, again, hence we may learn how to direct our prayers; to ask
outward and some inward favors conditionally: for poverty, sickness, bondage
and terror, may (by the over and al-ruling hand of God, be as good for us as
prosperity, health, peace, and freedom. Therefore let us pray with our Lord
and Master, O Father, not mine, Mat. 26.39.
but thy will be done: Do with me as seems best in thine eyes.

Sixthly and lastly, let us, seeing this is so, never except against the Lords
manner of proceedings; we cannot teach him wisdom; 1. Cor. 1.25.
for the foolishness of God is wiser then the wisdom of man: let the Lord
use what instruments he will: for clay and spittle, Diotrephes and the devil,
will serve his turn well enough, and fit his purpose. If thy brethren sell
thee; thy wife betray thee; or thy familiar friend lift up his heel against
thee: yet fret not, complain not, but patiently expect the event rather. And
this is the principal duty of every Christian: dwell where God would have
thee; do what he commands thee; and wash in that water he directs thee; for
this is the excellency of the Saints. Let Shimei curse thee; Alexander resist
thee; or an incarnate Devil pursue thee; still lay thy hand upon thy mouth,
and with Job say, Why, Job 23.13.14.
God is in one mind, and who can turn him? he will bring to pass the thing
he has decreed of me.

consolation. Do but meditate of this point, ponder it well in thy mind; and
it will be a notable stay to support thy feeble and fainting spirit. Are thy
crosses great and many? have thou a long time been exercised by them? what
then? all this is for thy good. Isa. 28.16.
He that believes this, will not, cannot make have. Some mourn that they were
converted no sooner; grieve, that they can find comfort no speedier; sigh,
that they can pray no better; droupe, that they are exalted no higher; and are
tormented in heart, that they see not things in Church and Commonwealth in a
more special manner to prosper: yet, though in some respects this may be
tolerable, they may miss it in the extreme.

This use is worthy to be engraven with a pen of iron in stone; written with
the point of a Diamond in the tables of thy heart; for, next faith in Christ,
it is the chief ground of all comfort here, and full felicity hereafter. Yea
doubtless, this is an herb, though one in number, yet, if thou be Gods, it
will heal all thy diseases, be they innumerable; if so be thou remember it;
and, in the time of need, by faith truly apply it. Wherefore let this point
never slip out of thy mind.

work for good, how should we be encouraged, that have begun well, to go on;
and those that have not, now to begin? Have thou lived a long time leaudly?
followed the fashions of this evil world? obeyed him in the very lusts of it?
been ruled by the Prince that reigns in the children of disobedience; and
given up thy members, as so many servants to work all wickedness and
uncleanness? living in known sins, whereof thy conscience has convicted
thee, and the Minister reproved thee? Yet now turn unto God; repent for thy
sins past, and amend; and all shall work for thy good. Truly if men did give
credit to this, they could not but (I am sure they ought to) amend.

Who would not be willing to go such a journey or voyage, when as every look
of the eye, motion of the hand, step with the foot, and word in the way should
work for good, and produce it profitable effect? Nay, when every fall, wind,
storm, or hurt, should bring great advantage unto the passenger? and this is
the gain of godliness: and thus shall he be rewarded that will travel to
heaven. Would thou then be wise? then know God, and serve him. Would thou
grow in wealth? why, set upon all good actions. What if thou be prevented of
that end thou aimest at, and is first in thy intention? yet, how ever it fall
out, the event shall be good.

Who would not plant such trees in his Orchard, that will never be barren? sow
such seed in his close, whereof not one corn shall miscarry? and be master of
such a vocation, in the which every action would bring profit, great
commodity? Why, Godliness is such a tree, such a grain, and such a calling:
Prou. 3.17.
for all her ways are ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity. If this
then will not move thee to cease from evil, and learn to do good: I can say no
more unto thee, But the good Lord have mercy upon thee.

We have heard the proof and manifold use of the point; yet because wicked
men are prone to draw the worst conclusions out of the best propositions; a
caution (and that not amiss) may be added to the doctrine.

Do not sin because grace does abound, Caution.
and in regard all things may work for thy good; say not (as some have from
this very ground) Let us do evil, Romans 3.8, Jude 4. Romans 2.4.
that good may come thereof: for this is, to turn the grace of God into
wantonness, that should lead thee to true repentance, and the way, not to work
out thy salvation, but thy condemnation. Nay, let us the rather by all means
seek, and turn all things to his glory, that brings so strange and
wonderful things to pass, for our good. I cannot tell what men will do; but
I am sure I know what they ought, and that from this consideration.

And now, out of many, I will briefly collect and handle one other doctrine that
my text affoords me, which is, that

All things work together for good, but to such as are called effectually of
God.

This proposition, I told you at first, had a limitation; for Paul does not
say, we know that all things work together for the good of all men; but for
such as love God, and are called according to the purpose of God: so that a man
cannot be assured of the one, until he can prove himself to be of that
number, and to have the same things, that be in, and of the other. And these
people, of whom the Apostle speaks, were the called of God, Romans 1.6. and the
reason is,



coheires with Christ, and shall assuredly be saved: for if they have the
first, second and third link of the chain; they must needs have the other,
and the end also. And the Apostle himself, it seems, gives the same reason of
the doctrine, in the verses following. Now the maine use of the point is this:

to make our calling sure, otherwise we cannot have any true ground of our
Election, 2. Pet. 1.10.
or justification; and consequently, that any thing shall work for our good,
and glorification. For he that is not called of God, though he may be in Gods
decree, yet he is not actually justified; therefore can never, until that be
effected, make any comfortable use of the doctrine. And for the true trial
hereof, let these signs following be marked.

and mighty in operation, when it works sauingly in the souls of the
hearers: it opens the ear; smites and wounds the spirit; pricketh and
pierces the heart, and makes the face of man look pale and wan. Hence it is
compared to a hammer, Ier. 23.29.
that beats to dust and powder; a two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
that deuideth and cutteth asunder the joints and the marrow; and to a
consuming fire, that burns and wastes up all chafe, and matter combustible;
yea, that will either change, or make the very stones to fly in pieces. Why
then, has this Word broken thy hard and flinty heart? made a separation
between thee and thy sin? and caused thy zeal to burn within thee, and
like a flame of fire to proceed out from thee? then it works naturally, and
to the purpose.

David a King to reply; Psalm. 27.8.
Lord I will seek thy face: Moses to answer at the last; I will go whither
thou will: Paul to cry out; Acts 9.5.
Who art thou that I persecute? and the stoutest heart, and most obstinate
person, with the Iaylor, to fall at a poor Ministers feet, and burst forth;
Sir, Acts 16.30.
what shall I do to be saved? Well: search now thine own soul; consider
with thy self what the Lord spoke, and thou have done. He has called upon
thee to be sober, 1. Pet. 1.13. Luke 6.35.
and thou followest drunkenness; to be liberal, and lend freely, and thou art
become a biting and living Usurer; 1. These. 5.22.
to flee sin above all things, and thou daily runnest after it. Is this to
hear the Lords voice? and to be effectually called? No, no. But if thou repent
that thou have gone astray, smite thy hand upon thy breast, resoluest
hence-forward to obey his Word, and criest out, and often, Luke 18.13.
Good Lord be merciful to me a sinner; then be of good comfort, thy sins
are forgiven thee: for God has effectually called thee.

Can thou say with Job, Job 23.12.
I respect it above my daily and appointed food? Ier. 15.16. Psalm. 19.10.
with Jeremiah, It is the rejoicing of my soul? with David, It is sweeter to
me, then the hony-combe? In a word, do thou love it above much fine gold?
meditate in it day and night? 1. These. 1.6.
delight to hear it? and, with the Thessalonians, receive it with great joy in
affliction? Why, no man dares deny, but that thou art singled out of the world,
and brought into the liberty of Gods children: but if thou stop the ear at the
Word, scoff at the Word, and spit, and spue it out of thy mouth; thou art yet
dead, and God by his voice has not truly called thee.



First, he will call upon them to hear the word: for thinks he, the Lord may
call them, as he has done me. Thus did the poor woman of Samaria, running
home, and crying to her neighbors; John 4.29.
Come, see a man, that has told me all that ever I did. And a good heart, when
he hears the voice of God powerful in the Minister; Oh, thinks he, that
such and such were here now! it might please the Lord to call them.

Secondly, they will call others by exhortation and instruction, 2. Tim. 2.25.
proving if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may come to
amendment of life, out of the snares of the devil. Thus did that good man
call; Come unto me, Psalm. 66.16.
and I will tell you, what the Lord has done for my soul: I will teach you
the fear of the Lord. Psalm. 34.11.

Lastly, besides, they will seek to allure others into the way by a good and
holy example; and (if it were possible, 1. Cor. 11.1. 1. Pet. 3.1.
to win those thereby, that are without the understanding of the word.

Fourthly, when all this will not prevail, then they will give themselves to
prayer; the Father for his son: God persuade Iapheth to dwell in the tents of
Shem: Steven, for his enemies: Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Act.
7.60. Luke 23.34.
And our Lord, for his crucifiers; Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do.

Now may thou try thy self, whether thou be called of God, or not: If these
things be in thee thou art; and all things shall work together for thy good:
but if not, thou art not called; and as yet, all things are working together
for thy evil. The Lord open thine eyes. Amen.

Solisapienti Deo gloria.
FINIS.

