A PRINCES LOOKING GLASS, OR A PRINCE DIRECTION, very requisite and necessary
for a Christian Prince, to view and behold himself in, containing sundry,
wise, learned, godly and Princely precepts and instructions, excepted and
chosen out of that most Christian, and virtuous ASILIKON DOPON, or his
Majesty's instructions to his dearest son HENRY the Prince, and translated
into Latin and English verse (his Majesty's consent and approbation being
first had and obtained thereunto) for the more delight and pleasure of the said
Prince now in his young years: By William Willymat.

Prove. 22.6. Instrue puerum, pro ratione viae ipsius: and quum valde senuerit,
non recedit ab (...).

Phocilides. Dum teuer est natus, generos^ instrue mores.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINter to the University of Cambridge. 1603. And
(...) to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the (...) by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE MOST Virtuous, and famous young Prince, HENRY FREDERICK, Prince of
Wales, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter: Grace from God the Father,
and all manner of happiness and blessings external, internal, and eternal,
through Christ Jesus.
PHillip the King of Macedonia immediately after the birth of his son
Alexander, is said to have written unto that most famous Philosopher Aristotle
after this manner: Philippus Aristoteli salutem dicit. Filium mihi genitum
scito, quamobrem dijs habeo gratiam, non perinde quia natus est, quam pro co
quod nasci contigit temporibus vitae tuae: spero enim fore, vt educatus
eruditusque abs te, dignus existat and nobis, and rerum istarum successione,
etc. But I may write unto you (O most worthy young Prince) Deo Opt. Max.
gratias habeto maximas, non perinde quia natus es princeps, quam pro eo, quod a
tanto Rege, talique patre divina benignitate genitum esse contigit, qui and
potuit, and voluit, te suo ipsius cerebro, suo ipsius calamo, suo ipsius
labor, cura and diligentia ita formare and erudire, vt and illo patres, and
regnorum suerum successione dignus existas. Plato likewise is said to have left
it written that the Kings of Persia with great care and diligence, sought forth
four manner of teachers to instruct such their children, as they hoped should
succeed them in their kingdoms: first the truest that might be found, which
did ever teach them that truth in a king was always most chiefly to be
regarded, and maintained: secondly the iustest, who ever taught them that
justice in a politic government was to be preferred: thirdly the temperatest,
who always set before them examples of temperancie: and fourthly the
valiantest, who ever showed them many things concerning fortitude, theoricall
virtues, and the worthy acts of kings, Princes, and noble men, and exhorted
them diligently to imitate good examples, and to eschew, hate, and utterly
detest the badde examples, and shameful enterprises of wicked tyrants. But I
may write unto you (most virtuous Prince) that as our heavenly father has
liberally provided for you by birthright, (if you live thereunto) the scepters
of diverse kingdoms; so has he also as lovingly caused you to be borne the
son of such a father, who as he is able through the rare and excellent gifts
of God; so by the penning of that his (...) for your only self, he has
showed himself in very deed to be answerable to those four picked, sought
for, and chosen teachers of the Persians. Do but view, I pray you, and
consider a while the four qualities of those four Persian teachers, and then
weigh and examine your own dear fathers Christian, and Princely instructions,
and you shall right soon perceive that his fatherly precepts there, unto you
commended, do not a far off point, and aim at those four virtues by them
severally taught, but rather in such abundant sort (considering his short and
compendious manner of writing) display, and lay open for your instruction, and
admonition, first the truth, I mean the most true prudencie of Gods most holy
word, which he in earnest wise commends unto you, in your self, and among
your subjects to be especially regarded, and maintained. Secondly justice which
teaches you to be careful with great magnanimity, wisdom, and discretion to
preserve your politic government. Thirdly temperance, or moderation, which he
charge you over and over again, to observe, not only in your kingly offices
and duties, but also even in all things indifferent, as in your apparel, in
your meats, and drinks, your sleeping, your bodily exercises, etc. And
fourthly fortitude, describing there unto you, what true fortitude is, and
wherein it truly consists. The which four virtues, and many others, your
fathers book (sauouring of no small pains, diligence, and vigila^t reading,)
entreated of; which after that it came to my hands here in England (since the
decease of our late sovereign Queen Elizabeth) my wits were so ravished
therewith at the first reading, that I again and again read it over, and yet
not sufficed therewith, I took pen in hand, and as my slender wit and ability
served me, I excerpted, and here and there picked out, briefly as I could, the
fittest and principallest precepts and instructions, and those severally have I
translated into Latin and English verses, every sentence into a Tetrastick
Latin, and an Hexastick English, which in that sudden phylauticall heat of
my spirit, I have caused here to be published, and presumed very boldly like a
blind Bauius to commit them to the shrouding of your Princely wings, most
humbly craving that you would pardon mine attempt and grant them your
favorable protection: which if you will vouchsafe to do, then shall both this
hasty birth of my weak brain come abroad with more safety from the nipping
of all busy baweling barkers, curious cauillers, saucy Sycophants, and all
the factious family of Momus his mates, and my self also as otherwise, so
hereby the more bounden continually to invocate the Almighties majesty, so to
direct, govern, and guide all your actions with his holy spirit, that here in
this life you may principally become zealous for his honor and glory, then
that you may in some good measure satisfy the hearty hope and desired
expectation, patriae, parentum, and amicorum ortus tui partem sibi
vendicantium; And lastly, afterward obtain a portion in the number of Gods
elect children in that heavenly Jerusalem.

Ruskington in Lincolnshiere this 6. of December. 1603. Your Fathers Majesty's
most loyal subject and both his and your humble Orator, William Willymat.

SPECVLVM PRINCIPIS.

Lib. 1. Speculum Principis:
1. Praeceptum. Deus cognoscendus, amandus, gratiae deo agendae.
SIt tibi cura Deum cognoscere prima potentem,
Proxima syncero complecti cordie amore:
Quote maiori Deus insigniuit honor,
Is sibi vult; anto referatur gratia mayor.
2. Praeceptum. Regi non conceditur liberior potestas peccandi quod Rex sit.
Non tibi liberior sceleris concessa potestas,
Quod reliquos superas regis diademate clarue.
Juspicitur populo minimus vel Principis error,
Grandia cum nihili priuati crimina pendit.
3. Praeceptum. Reges quantum authoritate, tantum virtute, and bonis operibus,
subditos praecedere debent.
Esto memor reges solio pracellere plebi,
Vt coram populo vigeant virtute serena,
Atque palam niteant operum splendore bonorum,
Lumen vt accensum spissas illuminat vmbras.
4. Praeceptum. In timorem, and notitiam Dei, intendendus est animus.
Vt te sacra docent Salomonis dicta, timorem
Notitiamque dei, pra cunctis arripe rebus:
Haec quaecunque decent profitentem dogmata Christi,
To praestare docent, munusque subire Monarchae.
5 Volenti regis aut Christiani officia and mumera exequi, sacrae scrutandae
sunt literae.
Si cupias populo moderari legibus aequis,
Si vel (...) sanctam traducere vitam:
Scripturas scrutare sacra^, lege, percipe lectas,
Vt verus pateat sensus dominumque precare.
6 Non ad sensus nostros interpretandae sunt sacrae scripturae.
Scripturae a recta nunquam declinet amussi
Tur bidus affectus, sed eum rege lumino verbi:
Nec contra sensum violenter coge sacrata
Verba loqui, (...) quod quidam turpiter audent.
7 Scriptura duo in se continet, mandatum, and prohibitum.
Pagina sacra duo praesertim continet in se,
Quae bona sunt mandat, prohibet contraria, pare
Partem in vtramque libens, tibi nec satis esse putabis
Declinasse malum, bona si non feceris aeque.
8 Non est alicui indulgendum peccato, tametsi plurima alia praestiteris bona.
Neue putes licitum quod sacrae legis adactus
Imperio, bona praestiteris vel plurima, factis
Turpia praetextu justice miscerier isto
Posse; deo scelus hoc est intolerabile iusto.
9 Totus Dei cultus in duobus positus est.
Relligio gradibus constat diuina duobus,
Interiore, Deum prece sollicitare fideli:
Exteriore, sacros vitae producere fructus;
Ille Dei, cultum, docet, hic te fratris amorem.
10 Firmissima religionis fundamenta sunt sacrae scripturae.
Hanc veram solamque putes quam sustinet ipsa
Pagina sacra (basis firmissima) relligionem.
Non scripto verbo fundata superflua sunto;
Huic simul oppositum sit detestabile monstrum.
11 Duae sunt totius sacrae scripturae parts, fundamentum prioris est lex,
posterioris Christus.
Scripturae parts sunt lex, amp; foedera pacis
In Christo mediante ratae, peccata reuelat
Lex iramque Dei, foedo pro crimine iustam:
Foedus habet Christum peccatum morte fugantem.
12 Legis epitome est decalogus, per Mosen and Prophetas fusius explicatus.
Legis summa december praeceptis traditur, atqui
Fusius haec Moses aperit, sanctique Prophetae.
Praemia morigeris proponunt dulcia sanctis,
Et sua consequitur iustissima poena rebels.
13 Summa Euangelij continetur in quatuor historijs de Christi nativatate,
vita, morte, etc.
Quatuor historijs descripta est gratia sacris,
Quae referunt Christum natum, vivum, cruce passum,
Morte resurgentem, coelos, superosque petentem:
Vsus Apostolicis quorum patet ordine scriptis.
14 Peccati cognitio ex lege, cuius commentaria sunt Prophetae, and libri
Proverbiorum, and Ecclesiastae.
Peccattum vis lege tuum cognoscere tetrum?
Perlege diuini Mosis pia scripta Prophetae.
In Mosis libros vis commentaria? prudens
Perlege quae scripsit Solomon, alijque Prophetae.
15 Perlegant reges, divinitus inspiratos regum libros, and annals.
(...) scriptos annals perlege regum,
Hic etenim cernes, moresque modumque regendi:
Hic inter reges vitiosos, sieve beatos,
Te facile invenias, propria seu class reponi.
16 Doctrina, vita, and mors Christi, ex quatuor Euangelistaru^ historijs, and
ex Apostolorum epistolis petenda sunt.
Doctrinam Christi, vitam, mortemque laboras
Scire? Euangelij scriptores perlege sacri:
Scire tamen plus vis? quid mandat epistola Pauli,
Quid Petri pete, quid Iudae, diuique Iohannis.
17 Casto, sancto, lubentique animo legendae sunt sacrosanctae scripturae.
Syncero, castoque legas pia dogmata cord,
Quae superant captum sancto reuerere timore,
Saepius and laeto lege pectore cognita, dura
Perspicere vt possis, summo contend labor.
18 Fides animam Deo conglutinans, precibus nutritur.
Quae promissa dei sibi firmiter applicat ipsi
Hanc (dilecte) fidem rape, vi faelice coactam:
Haec alit, and purae mage relligionis adauget
Semen, and ipsa dei verbo, precibusque fouetur.
19 Precatio dominica, Psalmique Dauidici praecipuae in precibus formae.
Dirigat in precibus breuis and pia forma precandi
A Christo praescripta suis: and Dauidis hymni,
Qui regni fasces gestans, conducere regi,
Qua possunt nouit, precibusque petenda modestis.
20 Saepe deum precare, animo praesertim quielo, vel saltem lecto decumbens.
Sollicita dominum precibus cum libera curis
Men's siet, imprimis dederis cum membra quieti.
Publica namque alijs praebent exempla precandi
Vota magis, quam dant solatia iusta precanti,
21 Quae precibus a Deo petenda.
Non contend tuis solum coelestia votis,
Sed nunc exigui, nunc magni ponderis ora
Accumulet tibi dona deus, quibus ipse potitus
Tandem confirms fidei rata pignora verae.
22 Impetrata a deo gratissimo accipienda animo; non impetrata aequo ferenda
animo.
Si deus annuerit precibus, votique potentem
Fecerit, ipse refer grates mox pectore laeto;
Sin contra: ipse feras, dominum votisque fatiga,
Vt vidua iniusti penetrauit Iudicis aures.
23 Conscientia quid sit, vnde sit, quales eius effectus.
Nil conscire sibi, nihil est nisi mentis opacae
Lumen, ab aterno cuivis motore tributum;
Siqua gerit just, restatur iusta gerenti,
Si sed iniqua facit, sensu compungit amaro.
24 Conscientia quomodo tractanda, and qui eius morbi.
Nil conscito tibi, nulla pallescito culpa,
Non sis securus, tua te malefacta repungant,
Vana superstitio non te perstringat, vt vlla
Grata Deo speres, nisi quae Deus imperet ipse.
25 Quomodo agenda sit vita, vt nullam in animis nostris conscientiae labem
habeamus.
Singula quoque die recolas commissa sceleste,
Iudicioque tuo damnabis turpia, ne te
Vindictam repetendo, deus dijudicet acer
Iudex, abiectaque mora vitiofa relinquas.
26 Dies extremi iudicij assidue recolendus.
Iudicij extremi quo te mors pallida sistet
Esto memor, tanquam rationem iure daturus,
Praesentemque diem tibi diluxisse supremum
Credito, sic nunquam metues fera spicula mortis.
27 A iurando and mentiendo abstinendum.
In vanum domini iurando assumere nomen
Noli: lucra scelus magnum non magna sequentur.
Mentiris metuas, sis audax dicere verum.
Peccat enim pariter mendax, and vera rocondens.
28 Inter substantias and vmbras est discernendum.
In mediis discrimen habe, rebusque salutis,
Externos inter ritus, cultumque supremi
Numinis internum discern, dei petat ipsa
Quid lex, quid figmenta hominum distingue perite
29 Verbum Dei si referant ministri, honor sunt digni; sin contra, cohibendi.
Si domini verbo referant fundata ministri,
Legatos tanquam Christi reuerere ministros:
Sed fines verbi tibi si transire videntur,
Regali sceptro tales compesce vagantes.
30 Sit deus in ore tibi parcius, in cord vero frequentius.
Ore Deus modice, sed pectore plurimus esto;
Virtutem quod ames ipsam, and virtutis alumnos,
Omnigenumque scelus quod detestabile ducas,
Re potius cupias populo, quam voce patere.
31 Non sis hypocrita, sed re potius, quam nomine pius esse studeto.
Non placeant fictae species pietatis, and vmbrae,
Nec potius mundi, quam coeli munera sperus,
Nam tibi pro meritis operum si praemia captes
In terris, coelis quae sunt tibi debita perdes.
Finis libri primi.
Or a Princes direction. 1. Book.
1
CAre first my son your God to know and love,
Which rules all things from azurde skies above:
Who as he has you brought to glorious throne
Of regal state, above the rest, alone,
So does he still expect of you justly,
Redoubled thanks, from heart unfeignedly.
2
Think not you may more boldly sin embrace,
Because you sit aloft in royal place:
But know because you are a Prince of fame,
That vice must not disgrace your Princely name:
A Princes fault, though small, each man does scorn,
When subjects heinous faults are lightly borne.
3
On Princes God does glory great bestow,
Above their subjects far in fame to flow,
Hereby declaring plain as in a glass,
That they in virtues must all other pass:
Their virtuous life to all must cast a light,
As candles clear do shine in darkesome night.
4
First strive for knowledge of your God to have,
And next his fear in heart sure to engraue:
As Solomon does teach in words full plain,
From thence the surest treasures you shall gain,
Your kingly duties here on earth to frame,
And be a Christian true in deed and name.
5
The path that does direct you to the place
Where you may learn to sway your kingly mace,
Is sacred Scriptures; which both read, and hear,
Search out, and learn them with true Christian fear:
And pray to God your senses so to guide,
That from true sense thereof you never slide.
6
Let your affections framde by natures mould
Perverse and vile, directly keep and hold
The sacred steps of Oracles divine,
From sense whereof, do not a jot decline:
Wrest not the same to serve your wicked will,
Like Puritanes who so the Scriptures spill.
7
Two things does holy writ chiefly contain,
First good to do, then evil to refrain,
And both obaid must be with all your heart:
Do good things well, from evil do depart.
And think it not enough to abstain from sin,
Unless you practice good, and joy therein.
8
This error vile, let not your heart assail,
Which does with too too many men prevail:
Although you have performed good deeds before
In former times, and eke of those good store,
Yet as a cloak you may not them pretend,
To sinful acts sometimes to condescend.
9
Gods service pure which he of us demands,
In two degrees, or duties duly stands:
By faithful prayer to invoke his name,
And next, in righteousness our lives to frame:
These twain to practice right from conscience pure,
To God, and man, is our best service sure.
10
Hold this for truth (an axiom sure and sound)
That that religion which is surely found
In sacred holy writ does pure remain:
All points thereon not grounded are but vain.
And all things else contrary to this word
Account them vile, and eke to be abhord.
11
Two parts the sacred Scriptures do contain,
The Law describing sin to sinners plain,
And Justice due to sin: the Gospel then
The ground whereof is Christ, who sinful men,
Derived right from Adams sinful race,
From death redeemes, and offers freely grace.
12
Gods laws has precepts ten laid for his ground,
Whose sense does Moses more at lardg expound,
And Prophets do the same at large dilate,
Describing plain each persons just estate:
Denouncing bliss to such as do obey,
But endless pains to such as go astray.
13
The word of grace the Evangelists unfold,
Wherein the wondrous birth of Christ is told
His life, his death, his resurrection,
And last to heaven his ascension:
The use whereof to every Christians view,
The Apostles sent as commentors to show.
14
Desire you for to know your sins, alas,
Which by the law appear as in a glass?
Read Moses books: a comment would you have
His works to expound? the Prophets grave
Peruse, and works which Solomon the wise,
The pattern great of wisdom did devise
15
The books of kings, and Chronicles often read,
There you your mind with stories may well feed,
There government is seen of kings of old,
There shall you see your self to be inrold.
In Catalogue of kings that lived well,
Or of such as in lewdness did excel.
16
Desire you for to know what Christ has taught,
His life, his death, what miracles he wrought?
The Evangelists to read, then take in hand:
His will yet would you further understand?
The Apostles writings read, which will you train,
In Christ his school true wisdom to attain.
17
Read holy writ with sanctified mind,
Where hidden truth you cannot plainly find,
Such places do with reverence admire,
Your shallowe wits which cannot well aspire
To sense divine, control; read places plain
With joy, let intricat be won with pain.
18
Lay hold on faith, that faith surely embrace,
That apprehends Gods free eternal grace,
By Christ, persuading you still to apply,
His promise to your soul undoubtedly,
This faith religion feeds, this life does give,
And this by holy word, and prayer does live.
19
Let all your prayers for substance be the same,
Which Christ our savior did first for us frame,
And David's psalms, who being king could tell
By practice wantes of worldly princes well;
He knew what might at high Iehouahs hand,
Be craved best, and what he would withstand.
20
Pray often, when mind is not with troubles pressed,
But chiefly, when you are in bed at rest,
In secret to your God see then you pray,
Though often you have performed this by day,
For public prayer does more example show,
Then yield to him that prays comfort true.
21
Request of God not things spiritual
Alone, but sue sometimes for temporal,
Sometimes with greater things, sometimes with less,
Desire that he would you vouchsafe to bless;
That so enjoying often your full request,
Your faith thereby confirmed may surely rest.
22
If God in prayer give you good success,
Then thank him from your heart with ioyfulnes
If not, yet learn with patience true to bear
What he allots, and cease him not to fear:
And as th'vnrighteous judge the widow pore
Did urge, so you your god with prayer implore.
23
What conscience is, if you desire to know,
A light of knowledge which from god does flow,
Within man's heart engraft I do it call,
Attending aie upon his actions all:
If right he does, of right it witness bears,
If wrong, it daunts his heart with inward fears.
24
Your conscience pure if that you will retain,
Let not the same these foul diseases stain,
A cauterizd obdurate sense of sin,
By careless long continuance therein.
No superstitious rite let you withdraw
To serve your god contrary to his law.
25
Your conscience clear to keep (a salve to find)
Your by past actions daily call to mind,
Accuse, condemn, and judge your self of all,
That God your sins do not to judgment call,
Such sins as have your righteous God offended,
Avoid and see the same with speed amended.
26
The final doom of fearful judgment day,
When due account shall come, remember aye:
In living learn to die, your life so cast,
As if each day of life should be the last,
So fear of death from heart you shall extrude,
Which justly deemed is true fortitude.
27
Least that your tender conscience you offend,
By use of swearing, carefully attend,
A sin by which small gain you can possess,
Excuse therefore it does deserve the less,
Untruth to speak, or truth deny beware,
Two sister sins, and God will neither spare.
28
Twixt weighty points of your salvation,
And matters of small estimation,
Learn wisely to discern with might and main,
Twixt substances, and shadows merely vain,
Distinguish right twixt Gods reueyled will,
And man's devised dreams put difference still.
29
Whiles Pastors truly preach Gods sacred word,
And doctrine sound that does thereto accord,
As heralds sent from God do them obey:
But if from holy scriptures bounds they stray,
Account them then as foolish, light, and vain,
And use good means to bring them home again.
30
In common talk your words see so you frame,
That much you do not use Gods holy name:
But in your heart see that he deeply dwell,
And let no vain conceits him thence expel:
How virtue you do love, and vice detest,
By deeds, not words, let plainly be expressed.
31
Joy more your virtuous life indeed to see,
Then of the world accounted so to be,
For more rewards expect, and greater praise
Of God, for works then in your mortal days;
If for good deeds you look for glory here,
Rewards you loose for you prepared else where.
The end of the first Book.
Lib. 2. Speculum Principis:
1 Salubres and bonae leges sunt condendae, and ad earundem obedientiam cogendi
sunt subditi.
QVatenus es princeps leges sancire salubres
Conuenit, and populos latis parere rebels
Cogere, deinde tuae vitae, and pietate tuoru^,
Te decet exemplar populo praebere misello.
2 Vt leges melius sanciantur, inter regem and Tyrannum distinguemdum.
Vt possis leges melius stabilire beatas,
Obserua caute, quid sit discriminis inter
Regnantem just regem, tumidumque Tyrannum,
Hinc proprium munus facili ratione patebit.
3 Quomodo inter se differunt rex and tyrannus.
Rex bonus ad populi se commoda rite creatum
Agnoscit, sceptrumque dei putat esse: Tyrannus
Se credit ciues ideo accepisse regendos,
Vt sibi sint praeda, vt miseros rapiat, lanietque.
4 Boni regis erga subditos suos officia quae sint.
Si tibi regales petis vt tribuantur honores,
Totus in hoc fueris, populi curare salutem,
Commoda venari, ciues pacesque tueri,
Quo natos dulces pater amplexatur amore.
5 Boni regis, qualis vita, mors ita.
Si tibi commissas recte moderaris habenas
Imperij, placida morieris pace, sepultum,
Qui mir abantur vivum, meminisse iuuabit.
Semper and astrigero men's aurea viuet olympe.
6 Tyranni habent suam Nemesin.
Expectes populum te sponte lacessere bello,
Pellere vel regno, vel diro sternere ferro,
Sceptra gubernantem dominantis more tyranni;
Ridiculus fie^, Stygis and tormenta subibis.
7 Reipublicae paucae leges maxim sunt vtiles,
Ne sis sollicitus complures condere leges,
Sit satis impleri paucas, populoque salubres,
Quid populi rabiem metues, vulgique furorem
Quod iusta exequeris^iustum probat improbus ipse.
8 Nimia clementia, nimiaque seueritas quid efficient.
Nec nimis esto tuis clemens, rigidusue Tyrannus.
Hoc damnum capitale ciet, parit illud apertum
Contemptumque tui, pariter legumque tuarum:
Vnde fluent diri sceleris cumuli atque caternae.
9 Crimina non condonanda, sed morte digna.
Non arts magicae, nec non spontanea caedes,
Incestusque veneficium, scelus and Sodomorum,
Fictitij nummi, nec quidquam tale repertum,
Effugiat sine morte graui, quam iure merentur.
10 Qui falsos spargunt rumores non condonandi.
His non absimile est, paenasque meretur easdem
Si quis rumores disiecerit ore nefandos,
Aut scripto, quibus est illata parentibus ipsis,
Princibusque tuis falso nota criminis atri.
11 Oportet regemin subditorum suorum oppressores severe animaduertere.
Qui cruciant spoliantque opibus violenter egenos,
Hos cohibe, causasque inopum defend tuorum:
Nam tibi quae mayor contingat gloria regi,
Quam fraenare auidos inopu^ bona fraud petentos?
12 Coram iusto iudice non est personarum acceptio.
Iudicij dominus sedem sibi vendicat ipse,
Hic neque dextrorsum flectes vestigia index,
Neue sinistrorsum, vitijs causisque potentum
Indulgendo nimis, nec e^enos commiserando.
13 Oportet regem subditorum suorum vitia intueri, eademque statim reprimere.
Vt medicus primo vitiosos scire laborat
Corporis humores, medicas tunc applicat arts;
Sic Princeps sapiens late dominantia primo
Crimina disquirit, mox amputat ense reperta.
14 Superbia, auaritia, and ambitio, tres Ecclesiae morbi.
Pestiferos olim passa est Ecclesia merbos
Nummorum cupidamque sitim, fastumque superbum,
Ambitionem etiam tollentem ad sydera cursum.
Nuper and his cecidit Romana Ecclesia morbis.
15 Puritanorum (quos vocant) vitia.
Obserua (...) (quos dicunt) lumine cauto,
Quos tibi, nec meritum, nec iuramenta fideles
Efficient, rabidae deuotos seditioni,
Quos ciet ambitio, quibus and conuitia cordi.
16 Docti and boni Ecclesiae ministri merito extollendi.
Artibus ingenuis qui se excoluere ministri,
Quique suam degunt expertem crimine vita^,
Illis praecipue iure assignentur honores,
Praeficias gregibus sacris, and (...).
17 Boni Pastores amandi, Puratani vero reijciendi.
Nemo tibi pastore bono sit charior vnquam,
Quique putant vitio se puros prorsus ab omni
Reijce, praecipuam tibi creed obtingere laudem
(...) passim voci^ari (...).
18 Generalia praecepta, in Ecclesiae bonum.
Doctorem grex quisque suum doctumque piumque
Obtineat, sua iura scholis des maxima doctis,
Demissam coelo doctrinam protege, puram
Quo primum a Christo fuit ordine tradita seruot.
19 Alia.
Quodcunque ad victum sanctis cultumque ministris
Doctorumque scholis satis est, id rite parabis,
Illorum and regimen decernas esse decorum,
Promoueas humiles, paenis reprimasque superbos.
20 De officijs pastoris and gregis sui.
Discant praecones renereri iure priores,
Hique suis gregibus iusto decorentur honor,
Hinc pietas populi, pax, and doctrina beati
Maxima terrestris fuerint tibi gloria vitae.
21 Episcopi quales non tolerandi.
Vt (...) resecos, ita siquis Episcopus extat
Indomitos fastus redolens, ritusque Papales,
Hunc cohibe, and duris animos restringe catenis,
Vt sacor hic ordo minima ne labe notetur.
22 Nobilitatis Scotiae triplex morbus.
Nobilitas Scotiae triplici quasi febre laborat;
Vi premit afflictos, causas munitque suorum
Iniustas, gaudet ferro se vindice diro
Vlciscique suos, sontem punire, genusque.
23 Discat nobilitas regis sui legibus sc subdere.
Vt plebs, magnates ita subdere legibus aequis
Se discant, parui pendas ir amve furores.
Namque reformandi reges nunqua^ esse probatum est
Concilium, nisi praecedente tyrannide dura.
24 Oportet regem (nobilibus praesertim and bonis subditis) se clementem and
affabilem praebere.
Qui sunt maiorum generoso sanguine nati,
Conuiuant vitae tibi consuetudine iuncti,
Nec minus and pauper, vitae probitate decorus,
Vt laesis ad te f^acilis fit tranfitus ipsis.
25 Inimicitiae nobilium Scotiae quomodo reprimendae.
Aduersus pugnas magnatum (nomine feidas)
Legibus austeris contendito, quo tibi nemo
Charior eset, capitis primum discrimine mulctam
Is subeat; sic poenas alios aliena docebit.
26 Nobilium quanta cura sit habenda.
Nobilium ne sit vulgaris cura tuorum.
Saepe etenim virtus comitatur stemmate claros;
Nobilium ex numero qui parent legibus almis
Hos cole, seu regni patriarchas hos and honora.
27 Nobiles quomodo tractandi.
Regia nobilibus prognatis sanguine claro
Fulgeat, hinc etenim very nascuntur honores,
Horum consilijs in magnis vtere rebus,
Dilige morigeros, rigide tractato rebels.
28 Magnatum erga regem ministerium optimum.
Instituas Proceres nullum praestare regenti
Posse ministerium tibi quod iucundius extat,
Quam sisponte velint leges implere salubres,
Atque leave exemple trahere ad vestigia vulgus.
29 Mercatores reipublicae invtiles cohibendi.
Quo sine non poterit populus been degere vitam
Nauibus externas non exsportetur in oras:
Non aliunde petat gerras mercator inanes,
Lucrae sibi cumulans vendendo vilia magno.
30 Qualis nummus cudendus.
Materies patrij sit sola numismatis aurum
Argentumque: bonis tua sic respublica dives
Affluet, ingentes sic concumulabis in arcam
Cautus opes, in militiam vel damna paratas.
31 Artifices quomodo tractandi.
Artifices si quid fabricantur forte dolose
Vendentes magno, peregrinos vndique doctos
Accersens, permit tuis operentur in oris:
Horum vesanos cura cohibere tumultus.
32 Aduersus couitia and maledicta, quibus vtendum remedijs.
Si male te dictis audet proscindere quisquam
Improbus, hunc facile tollit sententia legum,
Sic tamen imperium inste tractabis, vt ater
Iuspicient Mo^s timent male dicere regi.
33 Rex se and mitem, and seuerum exhibeat.
Vt Populo mitem, sic aequa lance souerum
Exhibeas vultum, sic qui convitia iactant
Improba, dira metu committere crimina nunquam
Audebunt, meritas motuentes Principis iras.
34 Clementiae regis erga bonos subditos fructus.
At tuti viuent tranquilla pace fruentes
Laudati ciues, plenis opibusque vigebunt,
Et tua tam facilis coget clementia lands
Ore tuas laeto resonare ad sydera coell.
35 De ludis scenicis, publicis spectaculis, etc.
Vt viuant homines (...)uncti foedere amoris,
Publica permittas fie(...)ectacula, ludos
Festaque concelebrent, domini modo Sabbata magni
Ludicra tractando populus ne polluat audax.
36 Semel in triennio oportet regem praecipuas regnorum suorum regiones visere.
Nox ter Zodiaci percurrat signa recurui
Phoebus, quin primas regnorum viseris vrbes;
Quaeque suos habeat prafectos gens ibi natos:
Cum fueris praesens lites compone molestas.
37 Subditi defendendi sunt.
Non mode subiectos, ne quid patiantur iniqui
Mutuo, defendes, sed and extera regna tenentes
Ne damno afficiant curabis, and arma mouebis
Hinc licite, modo sit iustissima causa tuorum.
38 Externi reges quomodo tractandi.
Externos reges summo tractabis honor,
His neque fall fidem, quamuis mala damna sequa^tur,
Hic quid agas, monstrat sanctissima regula Christi;
Feceris hoc alijs, fieri tibi quod cupis ipse.
39 Proditores externi quomodo tractandi.
Proditor esto tibi, qui coniurauit aperte
In proprium regem, talem nec iuueris vnquam,
Nec dabis ipse fidem, sed regibus esse labora
Externis lasis in proditione leuamen.
40 Bello lacessitus primum pacem expete.
Si quis te damnis, aut Mart lacessit iniquo,
Iniusteque tuos ad litem accendit amaram,
Optatam missis legatis expete pacem;
Sin minus hoc valeat, tuus vtere fortiter armis.
41 Si bellandum, causa saltem sit iustissima.
Si bellis opus est hosts contendere contra,
Praesidio summo tibi sit iustissima causa;
Omnibus atque modis illam conare tueri,
Dum nec aruspicium, nec falsa oracla sequaris.
42 Ante bellum susceptum deliberandum.
Ante feri Martis quam praelia dira dira mouebis,
Principis officium prudentis (vt ipse salutis,
Author Christus ait) memori fac mente volutes,
Number valeas hosti rigido concurrere ferro.
43 Quales milites deligendi.
Saeui Martis opus gesturus delige fortes
Magnanimosque viros, quos virtu^ bellica claros
Reddidit, and doctos longa experientia fecit,
His dabis and iuuenes, primaeuo flore iuuentae.
44 Rex in bello quomodo se gerat.
Invigiles bello, multum fagisse labores
Dedeceat tristes, spectata scientia quorum
Claruit, his par est tibi consultoribus vti,
His comes, his facilis, fis mitis, munificusque.
45 Rex in bello quomodo se gerat.
Ipse semel subeas, vel bis, discrimina vitae;
Sed simul ac rigido parta est tibi gloria ferro,
Ne temere incurras manifesta pericula, neve
Miles in assiduis contend gregarius armis.
46 Honorificum bellum turpi paci anteferendum.
Tarde bella move, sancito faedera tarde,
Dumque feris foedus, prudenter consule causae,
Praelia namque aliter just suscepta videntur
Iniustae merito long praecellere paci.
47 Regis virtus populum suum ad virtutis amorem allicit.
Regibus haud satis est moderari sceptera, tuosque
Tutari bello, tua si non inclyta virtus
Subiectos splendore traehit, comitesque benign
Allicit, illius mira dulcedine captos.
48 Regis exemplum and virtus in duabus consistit rebus.
Principis exemplum, populos pietatis ad vsum
Alliciens, binis consistit partibus, harum
Prima domi famulos monet in virtute regendos,
Altera se interius ornari dotibus vrget.
49 David rex optimam and deligendi, and gubernandi seruos regulam docuit.
Aedibus vt virius priuatis luceat alma
Consule Psalmographi clarissima scripta Prophetae,
Optima qui cecinit moderandi iura ministos,
Quae iulit afflatu diuino percitus olim.
50 Ab aulicis exemplum trahit populus.
Aulicus vt vitans sancte, and traducat honest
Hoc, tibi curandum magis est, quod vix scelus vilu^
Invenies tetrum quod perpetrat aulicus, ipsi
Quin populo exemplum dabit impietatis apertum.
51 Aulici quales deligendi.
Anlicus esto tibi duplex, iuuenesque, senesque,
Hi docti atque graves, queis maxima munera creda^;
Illi praeclaro prognati stemmate, quorum
Impia maiores non coniuratio laesit.
52 Serui quales a regibus eligendi.
Elige mendosae vitae sine labe ministros,
Ne similem famulis regem plebs inscia dicat,
Dauidis hic praepone tibi praecepta Prophetae,
Integer vt tecum tectis versetur ijsd^.
53 Rex qualis in seruos veteranos esse debet.
Quorum forte tuis spectata parentibus olim
Intemerat a fides fuit, hos tibi de lige seruos.
Nec been promeritos iusto sine munere iustos
Amandre velis, veteranis dapsilis esto.
54 Qui fidem maioribus tuis fregerunt, eorum credere fidei non est fatis tutum.
Ante tuum tempus si conspexere parents
Forte aliquem falsa detectum fraud Sinonis,
Hunc fuge; namque fidem patri quicunque fefellit,
Non eius natis talem fore creed fidelem.
55 Adulatio Principum pestis, cauenda.
Gnatonem fugito, miseranda peste laborat;
Maxima Principibus solet esse ruina superbis:
Dum blandis patulae patuerunt cantibus aures,
Hoc poriere domus, vrbes, respublica morbo.
56 Regij prouentus receptores quales esse debeant.
Plebeios homines, gnauos, vitaeque probatae,
Praefice cogendis tibi vectigalibus, (inquam)
Plebeios, ratio vt reddatur iusta petenti
Cum placet, illaesa populique salute, tuaque.
57 Peregrinus, nec sit a consilijs, nec gerat honores.
Non a consilijs tibi sit peregrinus, honores
Nec gerat illustres, tibi ne inuideatur and illi;
Indigenas igitur quo rebus rite gerendis
Praeficias, tibi sum, viros grauitate verendos.
58 Serui regij ex nobilioribus sint.
Stemmate praeclaro natos tibi delige seruos,
Hi seruire tibi praesto sint omnibus horis,
Sic etenim firmum tibi conciliabis amorem,
Invidiae minimum; virtus comitatur honores.
59 Regis praecepta diligenter obseruent aulici.
Luceat in famulis sacrae virtutis imago
Plebis in exemplar, stricteque domesticus omnis
Quaelibet obseruet, quae praeceperis ipse:
Nam violata domi, passim violnada videntur.
60 Aulicus regis sui legibus non obtemperans grauiore paena plectatur.
Aulicus in leges peccans, sua crimina quaenis
Suplicio grauiore luat, quam ruris alumnus:
Nec tua quod charum suffulcit gratia seruum,
Cum premit insontes tibi conniuere licebit.
61 Quomodo rex erga aulicos suos se gerat.
Esto humilis, rigidusque tuis, vt quisque meretur,
Sit tibi pestis atrox, gladiator, litis amat or.
Praeditus ingenio facili, vacuusque maglinae
Fraudis, ad eximios prope te sistatur honores.
62 Rex non patiatur seruos suos interesse aliorum litibus.
Non patiare tuos sese interponere duris
Litibus alterius, quamuis sit charus amicus,
Nam quia rex iustus iudex est, omnibus aequus,
Cur comitentur eum consulto litis amantes?
63 Regis famuli morigeros se praebeant.
Morigeros discant tibi se praebere ministri,
Nec suus hos adigat nimium turgescere fastus;
Vtque tibi famulum licat amandare scelestum,
Sic veteres (nisi causa patet iustissima) serves.
64 Scrui quomodo tractandi.
Munere vel paena seruos, vt quisque moretur,
Affice, sic rebus tibi delige quemque gerendis
Vt sua dexteritas patitur, non singula creed
Vni, ne tumidum reddas, alijsque perosum.
65 Quales serui diligendi.
Simplex and fuco vacuus charissimus esto,
Non degat clara malus obtrectator in aula;
Nam rixas litesque creat: sed praecipe seruis,
Seu fratres, tibi qui famulantur, mutuo amaro.
66 Concordia foueatur.
Aedibus alma tuis habeat concordia sedem,
Exulet stygijs liuor rabiosus in antris,
Hanc and in exilium comitetur fastus oportet,
Dependas humiles, paenis reprimasque superbos.
67 Omnia pulchro ordine disponenda.
Sic sibi conueniat res quaeque domestica pulchro
Ordine; sic externi admirabuntur acumen
Ingenij, rerum laudabilis ordo tuarum
Si nitet, and seruos serie moderare decora.
68 Coniugium res optima, aut pessima.
Coniugio nihil est mortale beatius vnquam,
Aut contra: vt domino visum est decernere ab alto,
A cuius solo pendent faelicia nutu,
Sis igitur cautus delectu coniugis ipse.
69 Coniugium castitas praecedat.
Caelebs ante sacrum thalami quam foedus inibis
Illicitae Veneris sectari gaudia sperne;
Stupruminquam fugito, rabido cane peius and angut,
Et caute castum corpus seruare memento.
70 Stuprum leave peccatum non aestimandum.
Exigui quamuis peccatum ponderis esse
Maxima pars stuprum credit, tamen ipse memento,
Non ita ceusendum nobis, vt censet iniquum
De vitio vulgus, sed lex vt iudicat ipsa.
71 Tres praecipui fines coniugij.
Coniugij fines suscepti respice ternos,
Vt mala lethiferifugias coutagia stupri,
Vt tibi contingat proles generosa parenti,
Mutua vt aduersis cedant solatia rebus.
72 Vxor ad sobolem procreandam inepta non ducenda.
Nec tamen vxorem regali dote coactus,
Naturae vitio, tremula ant prohibente senecta,
Non aptam soboli generanda duxeris; isto
Namque tibi pacto noceas, populique saluti.
73 Tres inferiores coniugij fines.
Coniugis affines, dotem, formamque venustam
Respice, magna dei sunt munera (creed) putanda,
Dummodo praecipuo ponas tria prima, secundo
Ista loco: primis quae subseruire videntur.
74 Qualis vxor non ducenda.
Nec tibi tu sociam vinclo coniunge iugali
Quae been non teneris fuit informata sub annis,
Moribus aut prauis; mulierem namque marito
Solamen, deus esse dedit, non esse molestam.
75 Incommoda vxoris a marito in religione dislentientis.
Relligione tibi tua ne dissentiat vxor
Quam sis ducturus, grauis hinc discordia manat,
Hinc tibi suspitio, tua ne condiscat iniqua
Progenies, primis praue informata sub annis.
76 Inter omnia huius vitae negotia coniugium maximi momenti.
Inter cuncta tuae suscepta negotia vitae
Vix vllum maius, vix excellentius vllum
Coniugio inuenies, ergo long inferiorem
Connubio ne iunge tibi, ne fabula fias.
77 Fides inuiolare in coniugio seruanda.
Inviolata fides maneat data, mente benigna
Vxorem tractes, caro sit tua propria, mandet
Vt dominus, for opem, moderare, foveque,
Quae sua sunt tractet, sed non aliena sequatur.
78 Regulae cum vxore seruandae.
Imperet illa domi, sed publica nulla capessat,
Fac castos habeat comites, quia foemina sexus
Est fragilis, facili ferturque ad crimina motu;
Du^ furor hanc agitat, proprium compesce furore^.
79 Liberi quomodo educandi.
Nec tibi cura lenis puerorum mentibus almae
Inserere a teneris virtutis semina, quantum
Diligis ignorent, patrem reuerenter adorent,
Et vero (vt natos decet) amplectantur amore.
80 Legitimus nulla causa reijciendus est haeres.
Si tibi nulla datur soboles optata parenti,
Legitimum tamen haeredem fraudare putato
Esse nefas, pretij quamvis tibi vilis habetur;
Namque dei solum est disponere regna supremi.
81 Vita regis qualis esse debeat.
Subiectis velut aula tuis, virtutis imago est,
Sic sanctae speculum pictatis vita ministris
Sit tua, fit lumen sua quod vestigia spissis
Dirigat in tenebris virtutis scandere colles.
82 In rebus omnibus adhibenda est moderatio.
Non solum vt tumidos possis compescere mentis
Affectus, sed iustitiae cum munera sacrae
Suscipis, egregius tibi dux moderatio fiat;
Hac sine, iustitia est aliquando facta tyrannis.
83 Leges quorsum conditae.
Condita syncerae lex est vt regula vitae,
Conuictusque sacri; sed non vt rete, probatos
Illaqueans ciues ad publica damna; tenendus
Ergo sensus erit, non litera nuda sequendae.
84 Multa legenda, sed quando, and quorsum.
Multa legas, multum quo possis scire, sed apto
Tempore, ne regni grauiora negotia forsan
Impedias, nec tu meditando theoricus esto,
Practicus at praestes bona qua conducere noris.
85 Proxime post sacras scripturas, oportet regem leges a se conditas reuoluere.
Crebrius (vt moneo) scripturas perlege sacras,
Post, grauibus legum studijs incumbe tuarum,
Quae fiant planae, methodo breuiore politae,
Causidico ne plaudenti plebs indiga ploret.
86 Oportet ipsum regem aliquando adesse iudicijs.
Propria consuetum decoret persona tribunal,
Impia funestam subeat largitio paenam,
Et tua patronos adigat praesentia duros
Tristia mox longae componere prolia litis.
87 Iudicij seeds non regis, sed domini est.
Ruminot hoc animas (mi fili) quod tua seeds
Non tuus, at domini thronus est, fac illius ergo
Non favor ad dextram rapiat, non vltio leuam
Iudicis officio fungeus: sua read cuique.
88 Sedeat rex inter apocletos suos.
Inter apocletos sit consuetudo sedere,
Non ibi causidicus causas dilatet, at ille
Sic tibi displiceat, pro se sine quisque loquatur,
Auscultato preces afflicti, aut abijce sceptrum.
89 Lectio chronicorum and eorundem vsus.
Periucunda tuam delectet lectio mentem,
Gestorum veterum chronicis sisdato tuorum;
Nempe exempla docent si sit collatio facta,
Sic cum legatis melius tua verba struentur.
90 Non nimium artibus ingenuis regi studendum.
Artibus ingenuis operam nauare memento,
Sic tamen his, palmam vt tibi speres inde petendam,
Non eris intentus; sic namque negotia regni
Grandia contemnes studiorum pondere pressus.
91 Non se vindicare regis est laus.
Vere magnanimus, vindictae nescius esto,
Irasci cuiuis, fac dedigneris and hosti,
Passio non vincat, succumbat passio regi,
Vt soleas alijs ignoscere maxima laus est.
92 In rege humilitas fouenda.
Exulet ex animo ventosa superbia duro,
Hoc tibi cum reliquis posito discrimine solo,
Munus obis magnum, regalia sceptera gubernans,
Idque dei dono, similis tibi caetera vulgus.
93 Matter honor prosequenda.
Si me defuncto fuerit regina superstes,
Quae mihi te prolem peperit lectissima matter,
Haenc foueas, redames, hanc tu reuerenter adornes,
Inque throno ad dextram tanquam Bersheba locetur.
94 Parents and qui illorum vices supplent sunt honorandi.
Ipse preces gratas fac promereare parentum,
Hos cole, quique vices illorum aut munera supplent,
Nempe magistratus, tutores; gratior illis
Plurima donabis, regali praemia dextra.
95 Rex sit clemens, and vbi res tulerit seuerus.
Regia ventosum contemnant pectora fastum,
Splendida quin humiles ornent diademata gestus,
Sic tamen vt durus si regnis forte quis extet
Oppressor, videat torna te front tuentem.
96 Regem oportet esse constantem, and invicti animi aduersus omne malum.
Non solum vere sis constans inter honestos,
Ast cum te cruciant fortunae tela seuerae,
Grandia nulla tuam pessundent sic mala mentem,
Vt nequeas vti medijs quibus illa fugantur.
97 Regem decet esse munificum, praesertim erga benemeritos.
Dapsilis esto bonis vt honos tuus exigit, vtque
Posse datur, semper posito discrimine: quemuis
Vt decores donis regalibus, vt sua virtus,
Vt dotes animae clarae, meritumque requirunt.
98 Regia liberatas non ad suijpsius, nec ad successorum suorum damnum se
extendat.
Sis frugi, and temere noli dispergere parta,
Praedia praecipue tua regia, quae satis amplos
Suppeditant sumptusque tibi, atque nepotibus olim.
Prodigus hoc faciens, non dapsilis esse videris.
99 Rex subditorum suorum opibus non ditescat,
Noli te censis populi ditare tributis,
Publica thesauros reputabis commoda magnos
Esse tibi, pendat nec vectigalia vulgus
Ni fera vis belli, vel seria causa reposcat.
100 Inter falsos, and veros distinguendum.
Si quis rumores falsos disseminat, ipse
Quid diffamati prosunt huic damna require,
Tunc been propositum spargentis ficta, deinde
Vitam accusati prius actam rite notabis.
101 Delatores reijciendi.
Delator blanda sperans sibi praemia linguae
Exulet, and quamuis taciturna silentia regi
Sint opus, at praestat rumorem exquirere sparsum,
Quam damnare bonum tacit nil tale merentem.
102 Non cito damnandus est, qui prius vitae fuit integer.
Cuius vita nigro nondum carbone notata est
Aegre diffidas, (quamuis mala fama reclamet)
At quorum sceleris remanent vestigia tetri,
His prius expertus credas minus ipse necesse est
103 Regis variae and multiplices virtutes plebi exemplo esse debent.
Quantum praeluces claro diademate plebi,
Fac tantum praestet tua vita innoxia, tandem
Vt virtus habitum speciosa acquirat agendo
Quae decet; and veluti vulgus decreta legendo
Regia fit sapiens, sacrae and virtutis alumnus:
Sic te conspiciens vitae pietate vigentem,
Noxia pellentem, vestigia certa sequatur
Mox tua, quae summam ducant virtutis in arcem.
Finis libri secundi.
or a Princes direction..2 Book.
1
YYour kingly office does consist and stand,
In two maine points expected at your hand:
First for your people wholesome laws to frame,
Striving with justice t'execute the same,
And secondly your commons hearts to win,
By sanctity of life to leave their sin.
2
That wholesome laws for wealth of public weal,
May stand and executed right prevail,
Twixt lawful kings that good and virtuous be,
And tyrants which usurp with cruelty,
Put difference; so shall you soon discern,
Such duties as your regal throne concern.
3
The king acknowledges himself ordained,
Of god, that subjects weal may be sustained,
His scepter as Gods scepter he does swaye,
Thereof to give account at judgment day,
The tyrant lives at ease all void of toil,
His subjects lives and goods he counts his spoil.
4
If regal tytles, praise, and glorious fame,
If honors high you do desire by name,
Noe pains at all refuse, all toiles endure,
Your peoples good and weal still to procure,
As parents love their children dear by kind,
So let your subjects true your favor find.
5
If that with wisdom you shall empire guide,
Not yelding much to each Ill humord sid,
Your subjects that rejoice to see your life,
Shall wail your death with sighs and mournings rife,
And as their joy by your weal was procured,
So griefs increase to Tyrants much inured.
6
If that to tyrannize you shall delight,
Your hateful life your subjects shall excite,
To work your bane, and woeful overthrow,
Few shall lament but laugh to see your woe,
And that which ouerlate you shall lament,
Eternal pains shall sure your soul torment.
7
In multitude of laws do not excel,
Make few, but good, and execute them well,
When justice to perform you do assay,
Noe vprores, sturres, nor broils, let you dismay,
For justice does by kind so far surmount,
That vylest men of her do make account.
8
Let justice so with mercy mixed be,
That neither do exceed their just degree,
If you perhaps shall be too much severe,
In steed of love shall hatred then appear:
But if your self too meek and kind you show,
Contempt, with heaps of mischieffes ouerflowe.
9
Some crimes in kind so great and heinous are,
That conscience such permittes you not to spare.
As witchcraft, wilful murder, and incest,
False coining, Sodomy that hellish guest,
With poisoning vile; these faults of great disgrace,
Let not escape but weed them out in space.
10
Hereto an other crime as heinous (sure,)
Like pains of death deserving to endure,
I add, when persons vile irreverently,
In writing, or by word, your progeny,
Your parents high, and Princes of great name,
By slanders falsely fained do defame.
11
The rage of such as do oppress the poor,
Beat down with force, restrain them more and more,
Attend to hear and try with princely care,
The suits of such as still oppressed are,
Wrongs to redress, oppressions to restrain,
True honors bringes conioynd with surest gain.
12
When you are set as judge on regal throne,
That place take not for yours, but gods alone,
Let judgment sway awry to neither hand,
But judge a right when truth is thoroughly scand,
Be not to poor or rich found over kind,
For justice must be friendless eke and blind,
13
Even as the good Physician first will know,
Before his patientes cure he undergo,
What peccant humors in the body are,
So will a prudent king retain this care,
To learn his subjects faults by natures frame,
And then by Justice duly purge the same.
14
The churches three diseases natural,
Which still have been her ruin and downfall,
Since first the church on earth here did abide
Are avarice, ambition, eke and pride,
And now the same by Gods decree and doom,
Have overthrown the Poopish Church of Rome.
15
Take heed of puritans the churches woe,
And very pestes of common wealths also,
Whom gifts, nor oaths, nor promises can bind,
A railing brood of high aspiring mind,
Who make their fancies fond the very square,
Of conscience pure, of such I say beware.
16
Such men as perfect learning have attaind,
Which godly are, with vicious life unstained,
Accept, approve, and gladly entertain,
And such advance to seats of greatest gain,
On such bestow good store of maintinance,
To Bishoprics, and livings them advance,
17
Let noe man find more favor at your hand,
Then pastors pure that on their watches stand,
Dislike none more I say, none more disdain,
Then puritans which are both proud and vain:
Your fairest style on earth take this to be,
To holy church a noursing father free.
18
See that each church and several congregation,
In compass of your royal domination
His painful pastor have, see schools maintained,
Noe privilege of theirs see you restraind,
See ministers noe doctrine false do preach,
But such as God in holy writ does teach.
19
Let preachers of the word that painful be,
Provision have of store sufficiently,
For schools of learning so thou must provide,
That in their mainteynance noe want be spied,
Set down for them a comely government,
The meek advance, let pride have punishment.
20
Let ministers their betters reverence,
And let their flocks perform obedience
To them again, that so whilst peace does reign,
And learning shine, and godliness remain,
Your chiefest joy may be on earthly moulde,
These passing comforts clearly to behold.
21
Like as the puritans both proud and vain,
You must repress; so suffer not to reign,
Proud papal Bishops, which of Rome do smell,
And as you them advance deserving well,
So chain them in with bounds, when once they stray,
That pure this state may stand with perfect stay.
22
Your Scottish nobles for the greater part,
Threefold diseases foster in their heart,
The weaker sort with wrongs to pinch and strain,
And servants quarrels wrongful to maintain,
And he with all his kin to keep a feide,
With others and their kin, (so mischefes breed.)
23
To keep your laws your nobles force as well,
As subjects mean by fear you do compel,
If discontent they chance themselves to show,
Fear not at all, noe damage thence can grow:
Pretended shows of princes reformation,
Takes only place in cruel domination.
24
With Barons, and your gentlemen frequent,
Whose days in honest traide of life are spent,
Yea each degree and rank of men embrace,
Whom honesty and virtuous life does grace,
That so without your nobles help they may,
Their suits to you make known without delay.
25
Against the barbarous feides of Scotttish land.
Put laws in execution out of hand,
Begine with him whom chiefly you regard,
Let others by his punishment be scared,
Thus dealing first by sage and good advise,
From head to toe the cure shall soon arise.
26
Take heed you make not light regard of those,
That Nobles are in deed; but rather choose,
Such men to magnify, a chief account
Is due to such as do in blood surmounte;
Your nobles subject to your laws embrace,
As peers and fathers to your land with grace.
27
Your courtly train let be of noble blood.
That bringes true honor and your chieffest good,
Acquaint them with the matters of your land,
Employ their skill and use their helping hand,
Use courtesy, to those that will obey,
Stern countenance to those that do gaynsay.
28
Into your nobles ears and hearts instill,
That this your service best befittes your will,
If they themselves before the peoples eyes,
Obedience yield unto your grave decrees,
And by their force and noble power do cause.
The meaner sort for to obey your laws.
29
Permit not merchauntes to transport away,
Such needful things as are your subjects stay,
And bringing home but toys and bables mere,
Provide the baddest ware, and sell them dear,
Whereby they do their own estate advance,
By others loss, and pryse of toys enhaunce.
30
Of gould and silver pure your money make,
In substance let your subjects payment take,
So shall your people soon in riches grow,
Your treasures shall be full or ouerflowe:
That if in wars, or other streites you stand,
Will counteruaile the wantes of all your land.
31
If tradesmen work deceitfully by slight,
Their wares both badd and dear, then by good right,
Tradesmen of foreyn lands you (...) compel,
To practice arts with them which (...) excel,
But whiles they do their trades thus exercise,
See that noe mutines they enterprise.
32
For such as judge and speak irreverently,
Against the kings most royal majesty,
Use rigor of your laws as help in part,
But chiefly rule so right that Momus heart,
May not you justly blame; his spightfull tongue,
Let stopped be by justice thwarting wrong.
33
Like as a countnaunce mild and full of grace,
To subjects must be showed in princely face;
So must you show sometimes severity,
With myldnes mixed always equally;
Thus shall you cursed railers keep in awe,
And justly force them to obey your law.
34
But loving subjects shall not only rest,
In surety, and in wealth of peace possessed,
But for your courtesies they shall be bent,
To speak your praises due with full consent,
Whereby your fame shall far and wide resound,
For ruling scepter right by virtues ground.
35
That love and friendship may increase and grow,
Amongst your people neighbors high and low,
Deny them not both sportes and games to have,
Debar no feasts that neighborhood does crave,
So that the Sabbath be not lewdely spent,
In pastimes vain and sportes vnreuerent.
36
In each three years be sure your self to see,
The chiefest parts of all your kingdoms three,
To Viceroyes do not all together lean
But hear yourselfe sometimes the poor complain;
Let home-borne nobles judge in every land,
But when you come, great causes take in hand.
37
Strive not alone your subjects to defend
From mutual wrongs at home, but more contend
From wrongs of foreign kings to keep them sure,
And in their quarrels, wars you may procure:
Yet ever see the cause be good and just,
In wars to wrongful causes do not trust.
38
Use foreign kings in kindest sort you may,
Although you damage do sustain, yet aie
Keep promise sure, and strive in thankfulness,
Your hearty love to them for to express,
And look what thing of them you do expect,
To do the same to them do not neglect.
39
Rebellion wrought against a foreign king
Account your own, no aid nor succor bring
To such as do against their Princes rise,
And trust them not, but rather such despise;
But lawefull Princes in their time of need,
To help in arms, with hearty love proceed.
40
If neighbor Princes do your people wrong,
Redress thereof seek, though by leisure long;
But if no lawefull offer will prevail
To stay their rage against your subjects wail,
The justness of your cause to God commend,
And raise up arms your quarrel to defend.
41
If needs you must to wars, examine well,
The goodness of your cause, let that excel;
And use all lawful means you can devise,
To back your cause against your enemies;
But of the event by magic art to know,
By necromancer, or by witch forgo.
42
Before that you yet take such wars in hand,
One lesson more see that you understand,
Play you the wise kings part by Christ described,
Who wisely for his wars before prouid^c,
Cast all your needful chardges long before,
See that of men, and money, you have stoore.
43
When wars you take in hand thereto constraind,
Of captains bold in martial trade well traind
Make careful choice, next lusty soldiers brave
Of tender youthful years needs must you have:
In martial discipline to be severe,
The honor of a Prince does not impair.
44
In time of wars use watchful diligence,
Expelling quite all slothful negligence,
In doubtful case consult with those whose skill,
In warlike feats may answer to your will;
To win their hearts with courtesy have care,
Be liberal in wars, you may not spare.
45
Your person once or twice in hazard set;
But when you shall the fame of courage get,
Do not your self to danger still expose,
With rashness over great, but rather choose,
Your person sure in saftie to retain,
For peoples weal whose cause you do maintain.
46
As rashly wars you must not undertake,
So peace with headlong speed you must not make;
Before you do a peace conclude, provide
That in your peace the cause be satisfied,
Else wars with justice made do far exceed,
A cowardly peace unjustly so decreed.
47
To rule by laws will not suffice, nor yet,
By force of arms your people to protect,
Unless in virtues rare your life excel,
Yourselfe, and those that in your court do dwell,
That thus you may your peoples hearts affect,
Virtues to choose and vices to reject.
48
The Example of a prince to virtues lure,
Which by his person must his flock procure,
Of branches two consistes, his courtly train,
In godly life and virtue to maintain,
And next with Godly gifts t'inrich his mind,
To rule his people right to him assigned,
49
That courtly train you may direct aright,
The Psalmist David yields the clearest light,
Whose precepts best befit a christian king,
That court to comely order you may bring,
For which to train it up in christian fear,
A careful mind, and watchful, you must bear.
50
That courtiers may their life deuoyde of blame,
In sight of common sort to virtue frame,
Your princely eye with careful watch must ward,
For else noe crime so vile your royal guard
Can possibly commit, but by abuse,
Your subjects hence to sin will take excuse.
51
Let court consist of ancient men and grave,
Discreet, and wise, let such high places have,
And next of younger lords of noble race,
Whom trayning up in court you may them grace,
But chiefly choose of those whose ancient blood,
Has not been staind with treacherous false-hood.
52
Your household servants choose of honest fame,
Whose life is sound and also void of blame,
Else will the people think that you retain,
Like persons to yourselfe in manner vain,
Herein let David's counsel still you guide,
Who choose the just with him for to abid.
53
Let those I say your gracious favor find,
Which unto your parents have been kind,
For reason faith that they that have been true
To them, the like they will perform to you:
Such as by age are made vnceruiceable,
Bestow on them rewards most honorable.
54
Love, trust, reward, and still to those be kind,
Which to your parents bare a faithful mind;
Whom parents erst did hate for treachery,
In them repose you no fidelity,
And him that to your parents was unkind,
Trust not, least that the like in him you find.
55
Of courtyers flattering baits in time beware,
A stayne unto your court such Gnathoes are,
An heinous vice condemned of each degree,
From which see that your Princely house be free,
A vice that noble Princes bringes to woe,
And stately kingdoms great does overthrow.
56
Receauers of your rentes, and of your fee,
Choose honest men, and those of mean degree,
That when a reconing just you shall demand,
None dare attempt biddinges to withstand:
Thus shall you free your person from debate,
And work the surety of your royal state.
57
No stranger borne in stately office set,
For that be sure will daily hatred get,
And cause your country men with spightfull mind,
Both you and him to hate against their kind,
Wherefore your in borne men for counsel choose,
As fitting best, but forreyners refuse.
58
That servant be of noble stem descended,
Of whom you purpose still to be attended
Take chief delight, for that shall work good will,
And envy drown, and procure saftie still,
And yet one profit more you shall purchase,
That virtue is conioynd with noble race.
59
Take narow view that courtiers do observe,
Your laws decreed, take heed they do not stray,
For how can laws a broad be duly kept,
When as your househould train do them neglect?
60
When courtiers do against your laws offend,
Your punishment to them do more extend,
Then to the vulgar sort, by open wrong,
As though by you they thought their causes strong;
Your subjects poor let none of them oppress,
But strive your self such wrongs for to redress,
61
Both strange and homely with your servants be,
As you perceive each man's deserts agree,
A man that is a quarreller detest,
And count him in your court a deadly peste,
Prefer to rooms next to your person those,
That will refuse your secrets to disclose.
62
Permit not any of your how should train,
The causes of their kindred to maintain,
But if they will their quarrels needs defend,
Away from courtly office let them wend,
For since you ought to good men to be just,
No factious servants sure maintain you must.
63
Let servants learn obedience to your will,
Not leaning much unto their wits or skill,
And as offenses great when they have made,
You may chastise, and justly them disgrade,
So seek not them to change at every year,
Unless apparent cause there doc appear.
64
As servants do deserve, reward them so,
With honors, gifts, with punishments also,
Employ each man in order in his place,
As nature has him decked with gifts of grace,
But use not one in every thing, least pride
Infect, and he of others be envied,
65
Who plainly deals abhorring flattering lies,
Love him the best, who will not truth disguises;
Such as backbite with slanderous mouths most vile,
Those whom they deadly hate, from court exile,
Command all those to love as breethren dear,
Whom you maintain about your person near.
66
Peace in your royal court keep, and maintain,
Envy expel out of your noble train,
Let modesty find favor love and grace,
Let insolency have noe resting place,
Humility let grow, defend, and save,
But pride repress with countnaunce stern and grave.
67
Such orders brave and decent in their kind,
In service for your person be assignd,
That strangers when they do to court aspire
With Shebaes Queen your wisdom may admire,
When they such orders in your servaunts see,
And in your house such royal majesty.
68
The greatest weal or woe here in this life,
That man befalls, is marriage of his wife,
Which thing man in his power does not possess,
But as it pleases God to curse or bless;
To marriage then your self wisely prepare,
And in your choice have still a special care.
69
To marriage that you may prepare aright,
From fleshly lusts abstain with all your might,
Your body let noe whoredom foul deslower,
Until your loving wife thereof have power,
All burning lusts warely you must expel,
And chastity see that therein do dwell.
70
Though some of whoredom lightly do esteem,
A tryfeling sin, and venial do it deem,
Yet must you judge each slip and error small,
Which God condemns by law, and sins does call,
Not as the world does judge most void of awe,
But as the lord, who first did make the law.
71
In marriage choice respect the causes three,
For which it was ordained from God on high,
First to avoid foul filthy fornication,
And next for childrens godly procreation,
And last for mutual joy and help indeed,
That each of other had in time of need.
72
For douries great, or glittering beauties grace,
For wealth that rules almost in every place,
Take not a wife, by natures want, nor yet
By fading years for childrens birth unfit,
For this a double trespass in a king,
Both for his own, and peoples weal would bring.
73
Both freindes and dowries great, and beauties glee,
Somewhat in marriage must respected be,
So that the causes principal before
Expressed, of you regarded be the more,
And these set you in rank, or second place,
As waiting maids, the first some what to grace.
74
You shall not take in marriage bond a wife,
Of known conditions vile, or vicious life,
Who has not been in virtues school vptrain'd,
But from her tender youth with vices stained,
For woman was ordayn'd from God on high,
A help to man, and not a cross to be.
75
A chief regard unto your self propound,
To marry one in Christ's religion sound,
For if therein from you she shall dislent,
Great iarres thereof may rise and discontent,
Besides the dangers great, and deprauation,
That follows of your childrens education.
76
Remember this imprinted well in mind,
That hardly any action shall you find,
Of greater count, nor weight in all your life,
Then is the choice and marriage of your wife;
And if you match far under your degree,
Of less account then after shall you be.
77
When marriage knot is knit, your promise past,
To God perform, while vital breath does last,
As flesh of flesh and bone of bone her use,
Command her as her lord, do not refuse
To cherish, help, and please her still; but teach
Her things to leave that are above her reach.
78
Permit not wife in any case to deal,
With government of state or common weal,
With private rule of house acquaint her well,
Let chaste and honest mates about her dwell.
When angry passions do her mind torment,
Let youres be qualified with sweet content.
79
Be careful that your children dear may be
In virtues school trayn'd up from vices free,
How dear they are to you let them not know,
Unless their nature kind require it so;
Teach them a dutiful obedience,
Teach them your self to love and reverence.
08
If that you have no issue to succeed,
Your regal crown to wear, then take good heed,
The rightful heir you do not dispossess,
Though you mislike his person more or less,
For kings of kingdoms may not here dispose,
But god above which best succession knows.
81
Even as your court example ought to be,
Of virtuous life in every subjects eye,
So should your person be a lamp most bright,
Unto your household servant giving light,
That they your virtues rare beholding, may
Both rightly choose, and hold in virtuous way.
82
Not only in your headstrong passions,
But in your weightiest virtuous actions,
Let moderation be your guide and stay,
For why, aright your scepter she will sway,
On justice seat choose her to be your guide,
Least justice else to tyranny do slide.
83
The laws are made as rules of virtuous life,
Of social intercourse, but not of strife,
Nay yet as snares whereby your subjects may,
Intrapped be unto their great decay;
Therefore expound them as the sense will bear,
Not as the letter sounds to the ear.
84
In reading much that knowledge you may find,
In each good thing delight your busy mind,
Yet times appoint that hindrance may not bring
To regal charge, and every godly thing
In practice put in life, and conversation,
Read not for curious ostentation.
85
Next sacred writ it stands you most in hand,
Your countries laws to read and understand,
Abridge them to a brieffe, yet make them plain,
For over tedious laws breed lawyers gain,
Whereby to honors high themselves do grow,
By pooremens woeful spoil and overthrow.
86
Delight to Sessions duly to repair,
What there is done observe with special care,
Let none take bribes without due punishment,
And let your presence help the innocent,
Their causes to dispatch with lawful speed,
Who crossed by the rich cannot proceed.
87
Remember when thou sittes in judgment throne,
That seat is Gods on high, and not your own,
No favor there, nor love, no powerful might,
Of worldlings great let move you from the right,
There are you set for justice sake alone,
And justice truly gives each man his own.
88
Your privy counsel table much frequent,
Let lawyers justly thence away be sent,
Who causes seek to linger and prolong,
Let each man's mouth unfold his proper wrong;
Faint not the poor afflicted wretch to hear,
Unworthy else you are a crown to bear.
89
Read ancient chronecles with diligence,
From thence theoricall experience,
Shall flow, if by past things you do apply,
To present time and state most prudently;
This still with forreyners shall you enforce,
Of their estates with fullness to discourse.
09
In liberal arts your self to exercise,
And reasonably converse I you advise,
Yet press you not by pains too curiously,
In any one a pass master to be,
Least whilst the Arts you do too much respect,
The affairs of state you carelessly neglect.
19
Embrace from heart true magnanimity,
Not by revenge, or fierce hostility,
But think the party who offends your mind,
Not worth your wrath, a conquest this I find;
Your passions ouerrule and them persuade,
To pardon crimes against your highness made.
29
Embrace humility, and banish pride,
Within your heart let not this sin abide,
Neither toward God your lord, nor parents kind,
Considering this most justly in your mind.
That from the vulgar sort both poor and base,
You differ not in stuff, but only place.
93
If that my noble Queen by Gods decree,
Shall me survive, as you desire of me
A blessing due from parent to his child,
Comfort, love, reverence your mother mild,
Set her like Bersheba on a throne,
Offend her not, nor force her once to moan.
94
Give parents honor due, and strive you may
Their blessing have by just desert always,
And next to them you may not here neglect,
Those which from youth your person did protect,
As Tutors, guides, and governors, whose pains
Requite, for honor to yourselfe it gains.
95
True humblenes both foster and maintain,
Exiling from your thoughts pride and disdain,
But let not humblenes so far proceed,
To hinder irefull wrath in time of need,
But when oppressors great appear in place,
Then frown on such, it is your greatest grace.
96
Your constancy appears not only then,
When kind yourselfe you show to honest men,
But when you can all worldly crosses bear,
With pacient mind, and in your crosses fear
No whit, to take the nearest course that may,
Your woes redress, and bring the safest way.
97
Reward all honest men with liberal hand,
As with your honor high, and weal may stand,
But here you must discern with good discretion,
That each man have his due proportion,
And here observe that every person have,
As place, as just desert, and need shall crave.
98
Provide to have, but needeles nothing wast,
The old revenues of your crown forecast,
For all your liberal gifts still to retain,
By which you may yourselfe and yours maintain,
Least otherwise your bounteous liberality
To your dacay be turned to prodigality.
99
Let not exactions raised from subjects poor,
Your cooffers fill, or else encreasse your store,
Your subjects wealth account your treasure best,
No subsedies demand, unless oppressed
By wars, or needful cause; the money so
Exacted, on his lawful end bestow.
100
Discern a right twixt false reports and true,
The nature of the Author rightly view,
What interest he has in that man's woe,
Or wail, whom he to you accuses so,
Then scanne the truth, and lastly see you try,
The accused parties life led formerly.
101
Exclude vain tatlers from your company,
And though a prince of faithful secrecy,
Has often need, yet better is to try,
Reports, then by too light credulity,
Within your heart suspicion to retain,
Against a man whose life no vices stain.
102
Mistrust no man whose name has pure bin found
From heinous crimes, though fame against him sound,
But such as have in former times bin tainted
With vile and filthy practices acquainted,
By wise foresight their wily sleights prevent,
Least afterward too late you do repent.
103
As in your royal state, so seek to shine
Before your subjects all in life divine,
That virtue pure may take by frequent action,
An habit firm in times procession,
And as by hearing of your laws decreed,
Your subjects may to obedience proceed,
So when they see your virtues rare expressed,
Both ears and eyes may teach them what is best,
And them allure your virtues to imitate,
And likewise vices heartily to hate.
The end of the second book.
Lib. 3. Speculum Principis:
1 Regis gestus in externis, and medijs rebus qualis esse debeat.
TAlis in externis existat gestio rebus,
Talis and in medijs, vt te vel Zoylus ipse
Internis animi been cernat dotibus almum,
Tantus es in regno, quantum tua practica praestant.
2 Decet regem public, (raro priuatim) comedere, and quare.
Mensa tibi raro priuata, frequentius esto
Publica, conspectum populi spreuisse Tyranni est,
Fac caueas isto ne sis carbone notatus,
Aut hoc, te genio nimis indulcisse gulofi est.
3 Sit regi prandeti apparatus magnificus, pastus vero modicus.
Sit tibi prandenti sumptus regalis, and ordo,
Farcula magnates apponant lauta ministri,
Omnia ne gustes, paucis contentus abito,
Nam decet hoc regem, sobrium nec dedecit illud.
4 Qualibus praesertim cibis rex vescatur.
Aurea saepe ferant plebeia cibaria vasa,
Ne pigeat crassas carnes comedisse salubres:
Aptius ad Martem sic reddas corpus, ineptus
Et conuina tuis aliter maerentibus extes.
5 Optimum condimentum fames.
Esto fames condimento tibi parta labor,
Scriblita ne placeat, vel quod componitur vllum,
Romany olim inuisum genus hocce ciborum,
Vnum sit simplex omnis medicaminis expers.
6 Liberalior pastus, and potus regem dedecent.
Largior humanos obtundit pastio sensus,
Praecipue Bacchi procul absit plurimus vsus,
Non decet hoc regem, tu mores inter edendum
Fac Cynicos fugias, nimium non ipse pitisses.
7 Inter edendum res eliae seriae sunt deponendae.
Seria ne peragas comedens, nec pectore tristi
Sis nimis, ust hilari vultu, simul ore faceto.
Fabula lecta iuuat, frontemque extendere cogit,
Aut si sermones respersi sunt sale dulci.
8 Quies quomodo capienda sit regi.
Languida tranquilla capiantur membra quiet,
Nec tamen hac nimia, semper lanugine strata,
Tempore nec certo, saltem te belligerante,
Et cibus, and potus, concedant omnia rebus.
9 Praeceptum octavum de quiet regis, allter hic versum.
In somno atque, cibo, quanquam stata tempora regi
Sunt seruanda, tamen sic haec disponere discas,
Vt possis facile, si res ita postulet, horas
Corpore non laeso cum vis mutare statutas.
10 Ministri and satellites regis in cubiculo suo sint pauci, ijdemque
fidissimi.
Dum dormis pateant nocturna cubilis paucis
Quorum fama, fides, minima vel labe nigressit,
Et secreta quibus possis committere tuto,
Tales secreto peragant tua iussa cubili.
11 Vestitus regis qualis esse debeat.
Non preciosa tibi, non vestimenta placebunt
Vilia, nec Coridon, nec semper conchyliatus,
Elige quod medium est, and eris virtutis alumnus,
Rustica nec regem, nimium nec compta dece^bunt.
12 De regis vestitu.
Vestes sint nitidae, nec multum respice formam,
Neue paludati speciem, nec habeto togati,
Inter vtramque mane, reputes cur instituantur,
Vt decus, vt scutum fierent, ne nudus and esses.
13 De vestitu idoneo.
Temporibus varijs been quadret amictus, and annis,
Tuque nouos habitus muliebres effuge saltem,
Iudicio populi leuis est thymiamate multus,
Oris and ornati splendorem praeliamarrent.
14 De comarum and vnguium abvsu.
Est ornamentum capiti coma dedecus ingens
Humanis humeris, nisi malit Erynnis haberi:
Sic vngues digitis; haec excrementa fouera
Vindicis, aut vani naturam monstrat: abhor.
15 Quibus armis in aula regali vti conuenit.
Non gerat arma domi bello magis apta cruento,
Seu quibus aduersos tectus contendat in hosts,
Sen quibus euadat lethali tutus ab ictu
Aulicus, esto satis pugio, satis ensis and illi.
16 Quale sermonis genus regi conuenit.
Colloquio plauus sit sermo, decorus, honestus.
Clarus, and ille breuis, grauitate, and acumine mistus,
Sires permittat, placidus, carpsisse sacratis
Elogijs quenquam, ducas scelus esse nefandum.
17 Gestus regis qualis.
Nec stupide simplex, gestu nec mobilis esto,
Vt mos gentis erit, causas solio grauiore
Legatosque audi, sed maiestate verenda,
Esto tuis humilis, sed formidabilis hosti.
18 Si rex aliquid fortasse sit scripturus, ne sibi in eo nimium placeat.
Si tibi Pierides faueant vt opuscula scribas,
Non tua, seu dominum catuli pes, dextratetillet,
Scripta legant docti, sed saepius ipse reuise,
Quam videant alij: nescit vox missareuerti.
19 De quali argumento, seu subiecto regem scribere decet.
Si cupias clarum scribendo arquirere nomen,
Elige scriptorum subiectum principe dignum,
Ludicra pelle, tuis complectere seria scriptis,
Non ea siut densis consulto offusa tenebris.
20 Quales corporeae exercitationes regi maxim conueniant.
Talia defessam recreant certamina mentem,
Qualia corporea prosint experta saluti,
Ista iuuant vary, prosteruunt ocia, vires
Exaugent, faciunt corpus vel ad ardua promptum.
21 Certamina vtilia and salubria corpori.
Sphaeristeriam adi raro cursu, atque palestra,
Aut gladiatura, saltu, celeriue sagitta
Parcius vtaris, sed equos domitando forores
Praestabis cunctis, quid enim regalius isto?
22 De venatione.
Ipse sequare canes, ceruos sectentur and illi,
Sic belli speciem videat, venatio bellum est,
Dignior aucupio; valles montesque veredus
Transvolet, hinc durus fies calcaribus acer.
23 Modus in corporis exercitationibus est adhibendus.
Aurea perpetuos mensuret regula lusus,
Nec nimis, hoc vitium est, rorum memor esto, nec isti
Te multum teneant, sed alacrior inde redire
Ad quid praestandum, quae sunt praestanda memento.
24 Tesseris and pictis chartis quando vtendum.
Cum tibi nilrestat fieri (vix contigit vlli
Quod regi) pleceant tum tessera, pictaque charta,
Aut cum languescas studio, aut satieris, and ether
Imbribus obsessus, sed dedecet alea regem.
25 Tria ludenti obseruanda.
Haec tria ludenti sunt obseruanda, putato
Perdere depositum, laxandi ludito causa,
Quantum conijceres pueris discrimen adito;
Lucrandum nihil est falls o, nec decipe tactu.
26 Quorum maxim consortium rex effugere debet.
Probi sint comites tibi, ceu tu seria tractas,
Ceu leuiora facis, subduc te nomine laesis,
Lasciuos calebs mulierum spernito caetus,
Ad venerem stimulant, irritamenta malorum.
27 Barbarae gentes ad exempla gentium been moratarum formandae sunt.
Sedulus aduertas quae gens vrbanior extet,
Ad leges quae sit propensior omnibus horis
Seruandas, operam dabis vt tua barbara regna
Exutis proprijs ornentur moribus illis.
28 Deus colendus vt prospere cuncta succedant.
Depend a domino fungendo vt munere fausti
Sint tibi progressus, externo cuins in vsis
Integra vel toti pateant praecordia plebi,
Luceat in medijs rebus virtutis imago.
29 Ira compescenda.
Ira furor breuis est, nolito percitus ira
Iudicis officio fungi, sedatus at illud
Aggredieris opus, sacrato pectore clauso
Hoc Pauli clogio, Sic irasceris vt insons.
30 Vnusquisque pro meritis suis remuneretur.
Pro gestis palmae meriti decorentur honor;
Extollendo bonos stat maxima gloria regis,
At caueas ne sit quisquam magis arduus aquo;
Quisque sui sceleris damnetur, nemo suorum.
31 Virtute praediti amandi.
Virtutis mensura tuum mensuret amorem,
Quantula sit virtus, tua gratia tanta; quovsque
Quis bonus est, faueas; post si sceleratior idem
Euadat, scelus esse puta fauisse scelesto.
32 Vindicta (proxime post deum) ad regem solum pertinet.
Aequior ad iustos spectat punitio reges,
Nemo sui vindex sit damnum passus iniquum:
Principis est gladius, priuatus nemo feriret,
Principis est populus, princeps modo vind icetillum.
33 Aliena exempla and pericula prudentes docent.
Te, (prudens dici si vis) aliena docento
Exempla: vt caueas moneant aliena pericla:
Ne te paeniteat sero, resipiscere sero
Est imprudentum, quos huc dementia adegit.
34 Rex secum semper cogitet quantum onus humeris suis incumbat.
Hoc animo semper quantum sit munus habeto
Incumbens humeris, cuius perfunctio fida
Mente sit, hoc centro tibi ne quid aberret agendum,
Omnia centralem hanc contingant spicula metam.
35
Excellant alijs alij, tua gloria summa
Esto tuos longum moderari pace Britannos.
Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos,
Aenea Anchises, Henrico sic pater eius.
Or a Princes direction. 3. Book.
1
THat all your virtues rare, which inwardly do grow
In secret seat of mind enstald, may show
Themselves apparently to each man's eye,
Let all your actions flowing outwardly,
In things that be merely indiferent,
To virtues rule be still equivalent.
2
In open sight take most of your repast,
So name of odious tyrant fly thou may,
For rare in sight shows hate of company,
Of old adiud'gd a marck of tyranny,
Or else of gurmandize, asha'md to eat,
(A glouttons note) before your nobles great.
3
Let royal service fitting regal state
Your table furnish, base attendance hate,
But let few dishes well your self suffice
Which wholesome are and freest from all surmise,
Of delicace; amongst true soberlings,
Deemed high disgrace is glouttonic in kings.
4
Let stomach learn gross meats for to digest,
Eat common food with double reason pressed:
First that your body durable and strong,
May prove to endure your martial peers among,
Then to inure yourselfe with subjects cheer,
Whereby your welcome shall be hearty there.
5
Let hunger sauce your palate help to please,
And simples not compoundes you best appease,
The ancient Romans wise did such detest,
Of all sauces accounting hunger best,
The filthy wish of cranye cragge defy,
Lest you partake Philoxens infamy.
6
In banqueting se you abhor excess,
Let not Bacchus sweet juice your brains oppres,
Then dronkennes what worse vice in a king?
Gross cynick eating count a loathsome thing,
Coy nicenes shun, a dainty dames delight,
But roundly feed and with a manly spright.
7
Dipatch n' affairs whilst you at meat do sit,
Both time, and place for weighty things unfit,
Nor pensive be but of a merry cheer,
What ere befalles; then joyfully appear,
Let pleasant histories your mind solace,
So profit with your pleasures shall have place,
8
Yield not to much to droosie Morpheus bayte,
Nor downie pillowes let your head awayte
Always, nor always certain hours do keep,
Accommodat your meat, your drinck, your sleep
To your affairs, as business command,
But chiefly then, when wars you have in hand.
9
Although times ordinary for your sleep,
And sustenance at meals you ought to keep,
Yet so dispose of diet, and of rest,
That times may changed be as seems best,
When great affairs of state are ordered right,
You may yourselfe refresh by day or night.
10
Let not the place appointed for your rest,
Be too much throngd, for that is not the best,
Let them be trusty, secret, and full dear,
Who in your chamber serve your person near,
Let not your dreams what ever they seem to be,
Molest your mind for that vere vanity.
11
In your attire be not superfluous,
Observe a mean for that is virtuous,
Be not to base like caytiffe covetous,
Be not like curtizant too curious,
Nor clownish Coridon, nor vain courtier
Do imitate, nor yet grave minister.
12
In garments use be clean, and eke decent,
Hansome in form, for fashions negligent,
Regarding the ends why God did clothes ordain,
First for to cover nakedness our stayne,
And secondly our comelines to show,
And last to harbor us from weathers woe.
13
Be suited like to season and your age,
Youthlike in youth, in grauer years more sage,
Use most the common form, now rich attire,
And sometimes meaner as affairs require,
Too sweet perfumd in garments delicate.
Bewraies the mind to be effeminate.
14
Long hairs, nor nails your feature let disguise,
As if from hellish furies up you did rise,
These are but excrements of nature, then
To brag of these it shows but foolish men,
The abuse of these shows a vindictiue brain,
The authors eke to be but light and vain.
15
Accustom not your men in court to bear,
Such armor as in war is fit to wear,
All gunnes and pistolles far from howsehold train,
For public use, and needful shows maintain,
But armor worn in court let knightly be,
As daggar, rapier, sword in due degree.
16
Let speech be short, sententious, and plain,
Without reproof, honest, comely and clean,
According to the subject, time, and place,
With gravity, quickness, and mirth does grace;
Spare both quippes and tauntes in theology,
In drincking company especially.
17
Let not unsettled gestures you delight,
But manly, grave, after your countries rite,
Maiestick, befitting a judgment seat,
Or when with legates straung you sit to treat;
In private homely, and at pastimes merry,
Courageous in wars, daunting the enemy.
18
If that you do your wits thereto dispose,
Ought for to write either in verse or prose,
Soath not your self, nor publish that I say,
Till learned censure do it thoroughly way,
Often reui'sd no loss it can sustain,
Once published cannot be called again.
19
If worthy praise you mean some work t'indite,
A subject choose fit for a prince to write,
With virtue fraught, far from all vanity,
Nor purposely affect obscurity,
But still delight and strive for to be plain,
That to the sense the reader may attain.
20
Addict yourselfe to exercise such sport,
As health maintains, and members does comfort,
Its commendable for double respect,
For first it helps greatly for to reject
Base idleness, and secondly to make
Your body fit hard labors to undertake.
21
Use exercise, to run, to leap, to dance,
To wrestle, shoot, and play at tennise chance,
But sparingly: your special exercise,
Let be to ride, and often enterprise
To daunt great horses kept for warlike use,
On horseback games to use do not refuse.
22
A noble game and full of honor count,
With runnig hounds on courser swift to mount,
Because this play semblance of wars displayes,
And makes men skild to ride all dangerous ways,
Hauking i will not commend, nor greatly praise,
A stirrer up of passions always.
23
Use measure in your pleasant pastimes brave,
Loose not time that belonges to matters grave,
Let this remain deep fixed in your breast,
The ends for which pastimes were first addressed,
That they your regal charge might better ease,
And not the same to hinder or displease.
24
When naught remains to do, as seeld befall
Good kings, or Muse is tired, or body thrall
Now ill at ease, or heavens tempests threate,
Your wits at arts on tables then do wheat,
But dicing yet I do not you command,
Not meet for Prince, but debosht soldiers hand.
25
Three rules observe I counsel you in play,
Resolve to loose what you on stake do lay,
Nor hazard more then you would throw to page,
Thirdly play fair by falsehood get noe gage,
Nor yet in jest false lying tricks do use,
Those are not play, but greatest plays abuse.
26
Have special care when play you do intend,
With men of honest name that time you spend,
Shune those that vicious are, and filthy speech,
That mix with mirth: but chiefly I you teach,
Haunte not lewd dames, before your marriage,
Lusts they provoke, and spoil good carriage.
27
In regiment of kingdoms ponder well,
What people most in ciuiltie excel,
And easiest are to rule, and laws obey,
The ruder sort to join to these assay,
By fair allurements do affect the same,
That Britaynes all may have one heart and name.
28
On God depend, to him be constant true,
To bless you in your office to him sue,
By the externe use whereof let all men see,
How the inward heart is fraught with piety,
In things indiferent let your gesture show,
An image plain of virtues decent hew.
29
Remember well your passions to digest,
Before you seek great suits to set at rest,
For wrath short madness is; do nothing mad,
The effects whereof have always proved bad,
The Apostles rule choose rather to observe,
Let anger none from Gods laws make you swerve.
30
Gladly advance the good and virtuous,
With royal gifts that are most glorious,
Yet see that none though noble, too high grow,
Least stately kingdom thereby be brought low;
Due punishment let wicked men still have,
For own deserts not others, right does crave.
31
To every one your love so far extend,
As he himself to virtuous life does bend,
And let none longer have your gracious favor,
Then he in virtuous deeds does strive to labor,
And favor him where virtues do increase,
If virtues he forsake your love let cease.
32
Permit no man to wreack his proper wrong
Done unto him, though he be great and strong,
For so great wrong against you he should commit,
Usurping power for subjects far unfit,
To king alone the sword does appertain,
TO auendg his people which do wrong sustain.
33
Make others harms examples good to be,
That you thereby may learn harms for to sly,
Too late repentance by your trial made
Eschew: for that fools scholmaister is said,
Wise shall you be if former you do choose,
But foolish sure if it you do refuse.
34
Before your eyes set still your greatest chardg,
The which be careful well for to dischardg,
As principallest marck at which you shoot,
In all your deeds let not your mind hence flote,
And all other your actions see you make,
Helps to your greatest, this rule do not forsake.
35
In other things let other men excel,
In your own trade contend to bear the bell,
Which counsel grave Anchises long a go,
Gave his Aeneas when he went him froe,
The like to you my dearest son I give,
Deface the proud, in peace do rule, and live.
Deo soli gloria. Amen.
Certain epithetes, and excellent titles wherewith Julius Pollux, who was
governor to Emperor Commodus in his young years, set forth and described the
properties of a good king, applied to the name of Henry Frederick the most
noble Prince of Wales.
His knowledge must in making laws excel,
Each one must easy access to him find
No passions strong within his heart may dwell,
Right willing to do good with princely mind.
Justice to all he must alike maintain,
Exceeding affable to poorest swain.
Providing things that bring his people gains,
Ready to profit all of each degree,
Industrious, deuote to restless pains,
Noble in mind, from fear of fortune free;
Courteous in gesture to his subjects all,
Ever constant not tossing like a ball.
One and the same, not turning once aside,
Fraught with religion pure by scriptures tried.
With watchful eye respecting subjects weal,
Affairs dispatching with convenient speed,
Laboring for peace where discord does prevail.
Exceeding slow to take revenge indeed,
Skillful in princely duties to proceed.
The author his vale to the young Prince Henry.
Farewell young impe of British soil the stay,
Read, see, and tread your fathers chalked way,
O how much then shall God us in you bless,
Tongue, scroll, and quill, cannot the same express.
Heir of your fathers crown by natures course,
Heir to his virtues these precepts you force.
Far spread your root and branches of your line,
Long may they budd like stems of some fair vine,
So shall our seed no less your fame adore,
Then we your parents names have done before:
O noble Prince pardon I pray the while,
My bold attempt, harsh verse, and ^uder style.

