An Apology for the Oath of ALLEGIANCE. FIRST SET FORTH WITHOUT a name: And
now acknowledged by the Author, the Right High and Mighty Prince, JAMES, by
the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland; Defender of the
Faith, etc.

Together with a PREMONITION of his Majesty's, to all most Mighty Monarchs,
Kings, free Princes and States of Christendom.

PSALM. 2. Verse. 10. Et nunc Reges intelligite: Erudimini qui iudicatis terram.

ROMANS 14. Verse. 13. Non ergo amplius inuicem indicemus. Sed hoc iudicate magis,
ne penat^s offendiculum fratri, vel scandalum.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

April. 8. ANNO 1609. Cum priuilegio Regali.



TO THE MOST SACRED AND Invincible Prince, RODOLPH the II. by GODS Clemency
Elect EMPEROVR of the ROMANS; KING OF GERMANY, HVNGARIE, BOHEME, DALMATIE,
CROATIE, SCLAVONIE, etc.

ARCH-DVKE OF AUSTRIA, DVKE OF BVRGVNDIE, STIRIA, CARINTHIA, CARNIOLA, and
WIRTEMBERG, etc. Earl of TYROLIS, etc.

AND TO ALL OTHER RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY KINGS; AND RIGHT EXCELLENT Free PRINCES
and STATES of Christendom: Our loving BRETHREN, COVSINS, ALLIES, CONFEDERATES
and FRIENDS:

JAMES, by the grace of GOD, King of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND;
Professor, Maintainer and DEFENDER OF THE True, Christian, Catholic, and
Apostolic FAITH, Professed by the ancient and Primitive Church, and sealed
with the blood of so many holy Bishops and other faithful crowned with the
glory of Martyrdom;

WISHES everlasting felicity in CHRIST our Savior.

TO YOU, MOST SACRED AND INVINCIBLE EMPEROVR; RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY KINGS;
RIGHT EXCELLENT FREE PRINCES AND STATES, MY LOVING BRETHREN AND COVSINS.
To you, I say, as of right belongs, do I consecrate and direct this Warning
of mine, or rather Preamble to my reprinted Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance. For the cause is general, and concerns the Authority and
Privilege of Kings in general, and all supereminent Temporal powers. And if
in whatsoever Society, or Corporation of men, either in Corporations of
Cities, or in the Corporation of any mechanike craft or handie-worke, every man
is careful to maintain the privileges of that Society whereunto he is
sworn; nay, they will rather cluster all in one, making it a common cause,
exposing themselves to all sorts of peril, then suffer the least breach in
their Liberties; If those of the baser sort of people, I say, be so curious and
zealous for the preservation of their common privileges and liberties, as if
the meanest amongst them be touched in any such point, they think it
concerns them all: Then what should we do in such a case, whom GOD has
placed in the highest thrones upon earth, made his Lieutenants and
Vicegerents, and even seated us upon his own throne to execute his
Judgments? The consideration hereof has now moved me to expone a Case unto
you, which does not so nearly touch me in my particular, as it does open a
breach against our authority, (I speak in the plural of all Kings) and
privilege in general. And since not only all ranks and sorts of people in
all Nations do inuiolably observe this Maxim, but even the Civil Law, by
which the greatest part of Christendom is governed, does give them an
interest, qui fouent consimilem causam; How much more then have ye interest in
this cause, not being similis or par causa to yours, but eadem with yours? and
indeed ye all fouetis, or at least fouere debetis eandem causam mecum. And
since this cause is common to us all; both the civil Laws and the municipall
Laws of all Nations, permits and warn them, that have a common interest, to
concur in one for the defense of their common cause; yea, common sense
teaches us with the Poet, Ecquid Ad te post paulo ventura pericula sentis?
Nam tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet.


Awake then while it is time, and suffer not, by your longer sleep, the
strings of your Authority to be cut in singulis, and one and one to your
general ruin, which by your united forces, would rather make a strong rope
for the enemy to hang himself in, with Achitophel, then that he should ever
be able to break it. As for this Apology of mine, it is true, that I thought
good to set it first out without putting my name unto it; but never so, as I
thought to deny it, remembering well mine own words, but taken out of the
Scripture, in the beginning of the Preface to the Reader, in my (...), that
nothing is so hid, which shall not be opened, etc: promising there, which with
GOD his grace I shall ever perform, never to do that in secret, which I shall
need to be ashamed of, when it shall come to be proclaimed in public.

In deed I thought it fit, for two respects, that this my Apology should first
visit the world without having my name written in the forehead thereof. First
because of the matter, and next of the persons that I meddled with. The matter,
it being a Treatise, which I was to write, containing reasons and discourses in
Divinity for the defense of the Oath of Allegiance, and refutation of the
condemners thereof; I thought it not comely for one of my place, to put my name
to books concerning scholastic Disputations; whose calling is to set forth
Decrees in the Imparatiue mood: for I think my self as good a man as the
Pope, by his reverence, for whom these my Answerers make the like excuse; for
that his Breues are so summary without yielding any reason unto them. My next
reason was the respect of the persons whom with I meddled: Wherein, although I
shortly answered the Popes Breues; yet the point. I most labored, being the
refutation of Bellarmines Letter, I was never the man, I confess, that could
think a Cardinal a meet match for a King: especially, having many hundredth
thousands of my subjects of as good birth as he. As for his Church dignity,
his Cardinalship I mean, I know not how to rank or value it, either by the
warrant of God his word, or by the ordinance of Emperors or Kings; it being
indeed only a new Papal erection, tolerated by the sleeping conniuence of our
Predecessors (I mean still by the plural of Kings.) But notwithstanding of
this my forbearing to put my name unto it, some Ambassadors of some of you (my
loving Brethren and Cosins) whom this cause did neereliest concern, can
witness, that I made Presents of some of those books, at their first
printing, unto them, and that auowedly in my own name. As also the English
Paragraphist, or rather perverse Pamphleter Parsons, since all his desciption
must run upon a P. has truly observed, that my Arms are affixed in the
frontispice thereof, which uses not to be in books of other men's doing;
whereby his malice in pretending his ignorance, that he might pay me the
soundlier, is the more inexcusable. But now that I find my sparing to put my
name unto it has not procured my sparing by these answerers, who have neither
spared my Person directly in naming me, nor indirectly by railing upon the
Author of the Book: it is now high time for me no longer to conceal nor
disauow my self, as if I were ashamed of my own deed. And therefore that ye
may the better understand the nature of the cause, I will begin at the first
ground thereof.

The never enough wondered at and abhorred POVVDER-TREASON (though the
repetition thereof grieueth, I know, the gentle hearted Jesuit Parsons) this
Treason, I say, being not only intended against me and my Posterity, but even
against the whole house of Parliament, plotted only by Papists, and they only
led thereto by a preposterous zeal for the advancement of their Religion; some
of them continuing so obstinate, that even at their death they would not
acknowledge their fault; but in their last words, immediately before the
expiring of their breath, refused to condemn themselves and crave pardon for
their deed, except the Romish Church should first condemn it; And soon after,
it being discovered, that a great number of my Popish Subjects of all ranks
and sexes, both men and women, as well within as without the Country; had a
confused notion and an obscure knowledge, that some great thing was to be done
in that Parliament for the weal of the Church; although, for secrecies cause,
they were not acquainted with the particulars; certain forms of prayer having
likewise bin set down and used for the good success of that great errand;
adding hereunto, that diverse times, and from diverse Priests, the Arch-traitors
themselves received the Sacrament for confirmation of their heart, and
observation of secrecy; Some of the principal Jesuits likewise being found
guilty of the foreknowledge of the Treason it self; of which number some fled
from their trial, others were apprehended (as holy Gamet himself and
Ouldcorne were) and justly executed upon their own plain confession of their
guilt: If this Treason now, clad with these circumstances, did not minister a
just occasion to that Parliament house, whom they thought to have destroyed,
courageously and zealously at their next sitting down, to use all means of
trial, whether any more of that mind were yet left in the Country; I leave it
to you to judge, whom God has appointed his highest Depute-Iudges upon earth:
And amongst other things for this purpose, This Oath of Allegiance, so unjustly
impugned, was then devised and enacted. And in case any sharper Laws were then
made against the Papists that were not obedient to the former Laws of the
Country; if ye will consider the time, place, and persons, it will be thought
no wonder, seeing that occasion did so justly exasperate them to make seuerer
Laws then otherwise they would have done. The time, I say, being the very next
sitting down of the Parliament, after the discovery of that abominable
Treason: the place being the same, where they should all have been blown up,
and so bringing it freshly to their memory again: the persons being those
very Parliament men whom they thought to have destroyed. And yet so far has
both my heart and government been from any bitterness, as almost never one of
those sharp additions to the former Laws have ever yet been put in execution.

And that ye may yet know further for the more conuincing these Libellers of
wilful malice, who impudently affirm, That this Oath of Allegiance was
devised for deceiving and intrapping of Papists in points of conscience; The
truth is, that the Lower house of Parliament at the first framing of this Oath,
made it to contain, That the Pope had no power to excommunicate me; which I
caused them to reform; only making it to conclude, That no excommunication of
the Popes can warrant my Subjects to practice against my Person or State;
denying the deposition of Kings to be in the Popes lawful power, as indeed I
take any such temporal violence to be far without the limits of such a
Spiritual censure as excommunication is. So careful was I that nothing should
be contained in this Oath, except the profession of natural Allegiance, and
civil and temporal obedience, with a prom^se to resist to all contrary
uncivil violence.

This Oath now grounded upon so great and just an occasion, set forth in so
reasonable terms, and ordained only for making of a true distinction between
Papists of quiet disposition, and in all other things good Subjects, and such
other Papists as in their hearts maintained the like violent bloody Maxims,
that the Powder-traitors did: This Oath, I say, being published and put in
practice, bred such evil blood in the Popes head and his Clergy, as Breue
after Breue comes forth, vt vndam vnda sequitur; prohibiting all Catholics
from taking the same, as a thing clean contrary to the Catholic faith; and
that the taking thereof cannot stand with the salvation of their souls.

There comes likewise a letter of Cardinal Bellarmines to Blackwell to the
same purpose; but discoursing more at length upon the said Oath. Whereupon,
after I had entered in consideration of their unjust impugning that so just and
lawful an Oath; and fearing that by their untrue calumnies and Sophistry the
hearts of a number of the most simple and ignorant of my people should be
misled, under that fair and deceitful cloak of conscience; I thought good
to set forth an Apology for the said Oath: wherein I proved, that as this Oath
contained nothing but matter of civil and temporal Obedience, due by Subjects
to their Sovereign Prince: so this quarrelling therewith was nothing but a
late usurpation of Popes (against the warrant of all Scriptures, ancient
Counsels and Fathers) upon the temporal power of Kings, where with only my
Apology does meddle. But the publishing of this Book of mine has brought
such two Answerers, or rather Raylers upon me, as all the world may wonder at.
For my Book being first written in English, an English Oath being the
subject thereof, and the use of it properly belonging to my subjects of
England; and immediately thereafter being translated into Latin, upon a desire
that some had of further publishing it abroad it comes home unto me now
answered in both the Languages. And, I think, if it had been set forth in all
the tongues that were at the confusion of Babel, it would have been returned
answered in them all again. Thus may a man see how busy a Bishop the Devil
is, and how he omitteth no diligence for venting of his poisoned wares. But
herein their malice does clearly appear, that they pay me so quickly with a
double answer; and yet have never answered their own Archpriest, who has
written a book for the maintenance of the same Oath, and of the temporal
authority of Kings, alleging a cloud of their own Scoolemen against them.

As for the English Answerer, my unnatural and fugitive Subject; I will
neither defile my pen, nor your sacred eyes or ears with the describing of
him, who ashames, nay, abhorres not to rail, nay, to rage and spewe forth
blasphemies against the late Queen of famous memory. A Subject to rail
against his natural Sovereign by birth; A man to rail against a Lady by
sex; A holy man (in outward profession) to insult upon the dead; nay, to take
Radamanthus office over his head, and to sit down and play the Judge in hell;
And all his quarrel is, that either her Successor, or any of her Servants
should speak honorably of her. Cursed be he that curses the Anointed of God:
and destroyed might he be with the destruction of Korah, that has sinned in
the contradiction of Korah. Without might such dogs and swine be, cast forth,
I say, out of the spiritual Jerusalem.

As for my Latin Answerer, I have nothing to say to his person; he is not my
Subject; he stands or falls unto his own Lord: But sure I am, they two
have casten lots upon my Book, since they could not divide it: the one of
them, my fugitive, to rail upon my late Predecessor, (but a rope is the
fittest answer for such an Historian;) the other, a stranger, thinks he may
be boldest both to pay my person and my book, as indeed he does; which how
justly either in matter or manner, we are now to examine.

But first, who should be the true Author of this book, I can but guess. He
calls himself Matthaeus Tortus, Cardinal Bellarmins Chaplain. A Being a
proper word to express the true meaning of Tortus.
thrown Evangelist indeed, full of throward Divinity; an obscure Author,
utterly unknown to me, being yet little known to the world for any other of
his works: and therefore must be a very desperate fellow in beginning his
apprentisage, not only to refute, but to rail upon a King. But who will
consider the carriage of the whole book, shall find that he writes with such
authority, or at the least tam elato stylo, so little sparing either Kings in
general, or my person in particular; and with such a greatness, P. 46.
Habemus enim exemplaria Breuium illorum in manibus, and P. 63.
Decernimus: as it shall appear, or at least be very probable, that it is the
Masters, and not the man's labor; especially in one place, where he quarrelleth
me for casting up his moralis certitudo and pie credi unto him; he there
grossly forgetting himself, says, mala fide nobiscum agit, Page 69.
thereby making this Author to be one person with Bellarmine. But let it be
the work of a Tortus indeed, and not of a personated Cardinal; yet must it be
the Cardinals deed, since Master Tortus is the Cardinals man, and does it in
his masters defense. The errand then being the Cardinals, and done by his own
man it cannot but be accounted as his own deed; especially since the English
Answerer does four times promise, that Bellarmine, or one by his appointment,
shall sufficiently answer it.

And now to come to his matter and manner of Answer: Surely if there were no
more but his unmannerly manner, it is enough to disgrace the whole matter
thereof. For first, to show his pride, in his Printers preface of the Po^itan
edition of this elegans libellus, he must equal the Cardinals greatness with
mine in every thing. For though he confesses this Master Tortus to be an
obscure man; yet being the Cardinals Chaplain, he is sufficient enough
forsooth to answer an English book, that lacks the name of an Author: as
if a personated obscure name for Auhour of a Cardinals book, were a meet match
for answering a Kings book, that lacks the name of an Author; and a
Cardinals Chaplain to meet with the Deane of the Kings Chapel, whom
Parsons with the Cardinal have (as it seems) agreed upon to entitle to be
the Author of my Apology. And not only in the Preface, but also through the
whole Book does he keep this comparatiue greatness. He must be as short in
his answer, as I am in my book, he must refute all that I have said against
the Popes second Breue, with equal breuity, and upon one page almost, as I
have done mine: and because I have set down the substance of the Oath in 14.
Articles in just as many Articles must he set down that Act of Parliament of
mine, wherein the Oath is contained: And yet, had he contented himself with
his own pride, by the demonstration of his own greatness, without further
wronging of me, it had been the more tol^rable. But what cause gave I him to
farce his whole book with injuries, both against my person and book? For
whereas in all my Apology I have never given him a foul word, and especially
never gave him the Lie: he by the contrary gives me nine times the Lie in
express terms, and seven times charge me with a falsehood, which phrase is
equivalent with a Lie. And as for all other words of reproach; as nugae,
conuitia, temeritas, vanitas, impudentia, blasphemiae, sermonis barbaries, cum
eadem foelicitate scribendi, cauillationes, applicatio inepta, fingere
historias, audacia que in hominem sanae mentis cadere non potest, vel sensu
co^muni caret, imperitia and leuitas, omnem omnino pudorem and conscientiam
exuisse, mala fide nobiscum agit vt lectoribus per fas and nefas imponat: of
such like reproaches, I say, I doubt if there be a page in all his book free,
except where he idly sets down the Popes Breues and his own Letter. And in
case this might only seem to touch the unknown Author of the book, whom
notwithstanding he knew well enough, as I show before; he spares not my Person
with my own name: P. 47.
sometimes saying, that Pope Clement thought me to be inclined to their
Religion: P. 98.
sometimes, that I was a Puritan in Scotland, and a persecutor of Protestants.
In one place he concludes, P. 87.
Quia Iacobus non est Catholicus, hoc ipso Haereticus est. In another place, P.
98.
Ex Christiano Caluinistam fecerunt. In another place he says, Ibid.
Neque omnino verum est, Iacobum nunquam deseruisse Religionem quam primo
susceperat. And in another place, after that he has compared and ranked me
with Julian the Apostate, he concludes, Cum Catholicus non sit, P. 97.
neque Christianus est. If this now be mannerly dealing with a King, I leave it
to you to judge, who cannot but resent such indignities done to one of your
quality.

And as for the matter of his book, it well fits indeed the manner thereof:
for he never answers directly to the maine question in my book. For whereas
my Apology handles only two points, as I told you before; One, to prove that
the Oath of Allegiance does only meddle with the civil and temporal
obedience, due by Subjects to their natural Sovereigns; The other, that this
late usurpation of Popes over the temporal power of Princes, is against the
rule of all Scriptures, ancient Councels and Fathers: he never improoues the
first, but by a false inference; that the Oath denies the Popes power of
excommunication directly, since it denies his authority in deposing of Kings.
And for the second point, he brings no proof to the contrary, but, Pasce
oues meas: and, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum: and, That no Catholic ever
doubted of it. So as I may truly say of him, that he either understands not,
or at least will not seem to understand my Book, in never directly answering
the maine question, as I have already said; and so may I justly turn over upon
himself that doom of ignorance, which in the beginning of his Book he rashly
pronounces upon me, saying that I neither understand the Popes Breues, his
Letter, nor the Oath it self; And as he delights to repeat over and over, I
know not how often, and triumphs in this wrong inference of his; That to deny
the Popes power to depose Kings, (...) ^o deny the Popes Primacie, and his
spiritual power of Excommunication: So does he, upon that ground of Pasce
oues meas, give the Pope so ample a power over Kings, to throne or dethrone
them at his pleasure (and yet only subiecting Christian Kings to that
slavery) as I doubt not but in your own Honors ye will resent you of such
indignities; the rather since it concerns so many of you as profess the
Romish religion, far more then me. For since he accounts me an heretic,
and like Julian the Apostate; I am consequently extra caulam, and none of the
Popes flock, and so am in the case of Ethnicke Princes, over whom he
confesses the Pope has no power. But ye are in the Popes fold; and you,
that great Pastor may lead as sheep to the slaughter, when it shall please
him. And as the asses ears must be horns, if the Lion list so to interpret
it; so must ye be removed as scabbed sheep from the flock, if so be the Pope
think you to be, though your skin be indeed never so sound.

Thus has he set such a new goodly interpretation upon the words of CHRIST,
Pasce oues meas, as if it were as much to say, as depose Christian Kings; and
that Quodcunque solueris gave the Pope power to dispense with all sorts of
Oaths, Vows, Penalties, Censurers and Laws, even with the natural obedience
of Subjects to their Sovereign Lords; much like to that new coined gloss that
his brother Senten. Card. Baron, super excom: Venet.
Baronius made upon the words in S. Peter's vision, Surge Petre, occide and
manduca; That is, (said he to the Pope) Go kill and confound the Venetians.

And because I have in my Book (by citing a place in his controversies)
discovered him to be a small friend to Kings, he is much commoued. For whereas
in his said Controversies, speaking de Clericis, Lib. de Cler. cap. 28.
he is so bold as to affirm, that Churchmen are exempted from the power of
earthly Kings; and that they ought them no subjection even in temporal
matters, but only virationis and in their own discretion, for the
preservation of peace and good order; because, I say, citing this place of his
in my Book, I tell with admiration, that he freeth all Churchmen from any
subjection to Kings, even those that are their borne-Subiects: he is angry
with this phrase, and says it is an addition for breeding envy unto him, and
raising of hatred against him. For says he, although Bellarmine affirmed
generally, that Churchmen were not subject to earthly Kings; yet did he not
insert that particular clause [though they were borne and dwelling in their
dominions] as if the words of Churchmen and earthly Kings in general imported
not as much: for Layicks as well as Churchmen are subject to none but to their
natural Sovereign. And yet does he not stick to confess that he meant it,
though it was not fit (he says) to be expressed.

And thus quarrels he me for revealing his Printed secret. But whose hatred
did he fear in this? was it not yours? Who have interest, but KINGS, in the
withdrawing of true Subjection from Kings? And when the greatest Monarchs
amongst you will remember, that almost the third part of your Subjects and of
your Territories, is Churchmen and Church-liuings; I hope, ye will then
consider and weigh, what a feather he pulls out of your wings, when he denudeth
you of so many Subjects and their possessions, in the Popes favor: nay, what
briars and thorns are left within the heart of your Dominions, when so
populous and potent a party shall have their birth, education and liuelyhood
in your Countries, and yet owe you no Subjection, nor acknowledge you for their
SOVEREIGNS? So as where the Churchmen of old were content with their tithe of
every man's goods; the Pope now will have little less then the third part of
every Kings Subjects and Dominions. And as in this place so throughout all the
rest of his book, he does nothing but amplify the Popes power over Kings,
and exaggerate my unreasonable rigor for pressing this Oath; which he will
needs have to be nothing but a renewed Oath of Supremacy in more subtle and
crafty terms only to rob the Pope of his Primacie and spiritual power:
making his temporal power and authority over Princes, to be one of the
chief ARTICLES of the Catholic faith.

But that it may the better appear unto you, that all my labor and intention
in this errand, was only to meddle with that due temporal Obedience which my
Subjects owe unto me; and not to entrap nor inthrall their Consciences, as he
most falsely affirms: Ye shall first see how far other Godly and Christian
Emperors and Kings were from acknowledging the Popes temporal Supremacy over
them; nay, have created, controlled and deposed Popes: and next, what a number
of my Predecessors in this Kingdom have at al occasions, even in the times of
the greatest Greatness of Popes, resisted and plainly withstood them in this
part.

And first, all Christian Emperors were for a long time so far from
acknowledging the Popes Superiority over them, as by the contrary the Popes
acknowledged themselves for their Vassals, reuerencing and obeying the
Emperors as their Lords; for proof whereof, I remit you to my Apology.

And for the creating of Popes; the Emperors were in so long and continual
possession thereof, as I will use for my first witness a Pope himself; who
(in a Sigebert, ad ann. 773. Walthram. Naumburg. lib. de Episc, inuestitura.
Mart. Polon. ad ann. 780. Theod. a Niem. de priuileg. and Iurib. Imper. and
did. 30. C. Hadrian. 2.
Synod of an hundredth fifty and three Bishops and Abbots) did ordain, That the
Emperor CHARLES the Great should have the Right of choosing the Pope, and
ordaining the Apostolical Seat, and the dignity of the Roman Principality:
nay, farther he ordained, That all Archbishops and Bishops should receive
their Inuestiture from the Emperor, or else be of no avail; And, that a Bishop
wanting it should not be consecrate; pronouncing an Anathema against all that
should disobey this Sentence.

And that the Emperors assent to the Popes Election was a thing ordinary for a
long time, See Platin. in v^t. Pel^g. 2. Gregor. 1. and Seuerini.
Platina, and a number of the Popes own writers bear witness: And Lib. de
Clericis.
Bellarmine himself, in his book of Controversies, cannot get it handsomely
denied. Nay, the Popes were even forced then to pay a certain sum of money
to the Emperors for their Confirmation: And this lasted almost seven hundredth
years after CHRIST; witness In Chron. ad ann. 680.
Sigebert and in vit. Agathon and Anast. in vit. eiusd. Agath. and Herm.
Contract ad ann. 678. aedit. poster. and Did. 63. c. Agatho.
Luitprandus, with other Popish Historians.

And for Emperors deposing of Popes, there are likewise diverse examples. The
Emperor Iuitpr. Hist. lib. 6 c. 10, 11. Rhegino ad an. 963. and Platin in vit.
Joan. 13.
Ottho deposed Pope John the twelfth of that name, for diverse crimes and vices;
especially of lechery. The Emperor Marianus Scot. Sigeb. Abbas. Vrsp. ad ann.
1046. and Platin in vit. Greg. 6.
Henry the third in a short time deposed three Popes; Benedict the ninth,
Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixth, as well for the sin of Avarice, as
for abusing their extraordinary authority against Kings and Princes.

And as for Kings that have denied this temporal Superiority of Popes; First,
we have the vnanime testimony of diverse famous Historiographers for the
general of many Christian Kingdoms. As, Walthram. Naumburg. in lib.
Walthram testifies That the Bishops of Spain, Scotland, England, li^. de
inuest. Episc. Vixit circae ann. 1110.
Hungary, from ancient institution till this modern novelty, had their
Inuestiture by Kings, with peaceable inioying of their temporalities wholly and
entirely; and whosoever (says he) is peaceably solicitous, let him peruse the
lives of the Ancients, and read the Histories, and he shall understand thus
much. And for verification of this general assertion; we will first begin at
the practice of the Kings of France, though not named by Walthram in this his
enumeration of Kingdoms: amongst whom my first witness shall be that vulgarly
known Letter of See Annals Franciae Nicolai. Gillij in Philip. Pulchro.
Philip le Bell King of France to Pope Boniface the viij. the beginning whereof,
after a scornful salutation, is Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, nos in
temporalibus nemini subesse.

And likewise after that Anno 1268 ex arrestis Senatus Parisiens.
Jews the ninth, surnamed Sanctus, had by a public instrument (called
Pragmatica Sanctio) forbidden all the exactions of the Popes Court within his
Realm: Pope Pius Joan. Maierius, lib. de Scismat. and Council.
the ij in the beginning of Jews the eleventh his time, greatly misliking this
Decree so long before made, sent his Legate to the said King Jews with Letters
patents, urging his promise which he had made when he was Dolphin of France, to
repeal that Sanction if ever he came to be King. The King refers the
Legate over with his Letters Patent to the Council of Paris: where the matter
being propounded, was impugned by Joan. Romanus, the Kings Attorney; with whose
opinion the University of Paris concurring, an Appeal was made from the
attempts of the Pope to the next general Council; the Cardinal departing
with indignation.

But that the Kings of France and Church thereof have ever stoken to their
Gallican immunitie, in denying the Pope any temporal power over them, and in
resisting the Popes as often as ever they pressed to meddle with their temporal
power, even in the donation of Benefices; the Histories are so full of them, as
the only examples thereof would make up a big Volume by it self. And so
far were the Sorbonists for the Kings and French Churches privilege in this
point, as they were wont to maintain; That if the Pope fell a quarrelling the
King for that cause, the Gallican Church might elect a Patriarch of their own,
renouncing any obedience to the Pope. And Gerson was so far from giving the
Pope that temporal authority over Kings (who otherwise was a devout Roman
Catholic) as he wrote a Book de Auferibilitate Papae; not only from the
power over Kings, but even over the Church.

And now permitting all further examples of foreign Kings actions, I will
only content me at this time with some of my own Predecessors examples of
this Kingdom of England, that it may thereby the more clearly appear, that
even in those times, when the world was fullest of darkened blindness and
ignorance, the Kings of England have oftentimes, not only repined, but even
strongly resisted and withstoode this temporal usurpation and encroachment of
ambitious Popes.

And I will first begin at Matt. Teris. in Henr. 1. anno ^100.
King Henry the first of that name, after the Conquest; who after he was
crowned gave the Bishopric of Winchester to William Gifford, and forthwith
invested him into all the possessions belonging to the Bishopric, contrary
to the Canons of the new Synod, Idem ibid. ann. 1113.
King Henry also gave the Archbishopricke of Canterbury to Radulph Bishop of
London; and gave him inuestiture by a Ring and a Crosiers staff.

Also Pope Idem. ibid. anno. 119.
Calixtus held a Council at Rhemes, whither King Henry had appointed certain
Bishops of England and Normandy to go; Thurstan, also, elected Archbishop of
York, got leave of the King to go thither, giving his faith that he would
not receive Consecration of the Pope; And coming to the Synod, by his liberal
gifts (as the fashion is) wanne the Romans favor, and by their means
obtained to be Consecrate at the Popes hand. Which as soon as the King of
England knew, he forbad him to come within his Dominions.

Moreover King Edward the first, prohibited the Abbot of Ex Archiuis Regni.
Waltham and Dean of Paul's, to collect a tenth of every man's goods for a supply
to the holy Land, which the Pope by three Bulls had committed to their charge;
and the said Deane of Paul's compering before the King and his Council,
promised for the reverence he did bear unto the King, not to meddle any more
in that matter, without the Kings good leave and permission. Here (I hope) a
Churchman disobeyed the Pope from obedience to his Prince even in Church
matters: but this new Iesuited Divinity was not then known in the world.

The same Edward I. impleaded the Deane of the Chapel of Vuluerhampton,
because the said Deane had, against the privileges of the Kingdom, given a
Prebend of the same Chapel to one at the Popes command: whereupon the said
Deane compeered, and put himself in the Kings will for his offense.

The said Edward I. deprived also the Bishop of Durham of all his liberties,
for disobeying a prohibition of the Kings. So as it appears, the Kings in
those days thought the Church men their SVBIECTS, though now we be taught
other Seraphicall doctrine.

For further proof whereof John of Ibstocke was committed to the goal by the
said King, for having a suite in the Court of Rome seven years for the
Rectorie of Newchurch.

And Edward II. following the footsteps of his Father; after giving out a
Summons against the Abbot of Walden, for citing the Abbot of S. Albons and
others in the Court of Rome, gave out letters for his apprehension.

And likewise, because a certain Prebend of Banbury had drawn one Beuercoat
by a Plea to Rome without the Kings Dominions, therefore were Letters of
Caption sent forth against the said Prebend.

And Edward III. following likewise the example of his Predecessors; Because a
Parson of Liche had summoned the Prior of S. Oswalds before the Pope at
Auinion; for having before the Judges in England recovered the arrerage of a
pension; directed a Precept, for seasing upon all the goods both spiritual and
Temporal of the said Parson, because he had done this in prejudice of the
King and Crown. The said King also made one Harwoden to be declared culpable
and worthy to be punished, for procuring the Popes Bulls against a Judgment
that was given by the Kings Judges.

And likewise; Because one entered upon the Priory of Barnewell by the Popes
Bull, the said Intrant was committed to the Tower of London, there to remain
during the Kings pleasure.

So as my Predecessors (ye see) of this Kingdom, even when the Popes
triumphed in their greatness, spared not to punish any of their Subjects, that
would prefer the Popes obedience to theirs even in Church matters: So far
were they then from either acknowledging the Pope for their temporal Superior,
or yet from doubting that their own Churchmen were not their Subjects. And
now I will close up all these examples with an Act of Parliament in King
Richard 2. his time; whereby it was prohibited, That none should procure a
Benefice from Rome, under pain to be put out of the Kings protection. And thus
may ye see, that what those Kings successively one to another by four
generations have acted in private, the same was also maintained by a public
Law.

By these few examples now (I hope) I have sufficiently cleared my self from
the imputation, that any ambition or desire of Novelty in me should have
stirred me, either to rob the Pope of any thing due unto him, or to assume
unto my self any further authority, then that which other Christian Emperors
and Kings through the world, and my own Predecessors of England in especial,
have long agone maintained. Neither is it enough to say (as Parsons does in
his answer to the Lord Cook) That far more Kings of this Country have
given many more examples of acknowledging, or not resisting the Popes usurped
Authority; some perchance lacking the occasion, and some the ability of
resisting them: for even by the civil Law, in the case of violent intrusion
and long and wrongful possession against me, it is enough if I prove that I
have made lawful interruption upon convenient occasions.

But the Cardinal thinks the Oath, not only unlawful for the substance
thereof, but also in regard of the Person whom unto it is to be sworn: For
(says he) The King is not a Catholic; And in two or three other places of his
book, he sticks not to call me by my name very broadly, an Heretic, as I
have already told. But yet before I be publikly declared an Heretic; by the
Popes own Law my people ought not to refuse their Obedience unto me. And (I
trust) if I were but a Subject, and accused by the Pope in his Conclaue before
his Cardinals, he would have hard proving me an Heretic, if he judged me by
their own ancient Orders.

For first, I am no Apostate, as the Cardinal would make me; not only having
ever been brought up in that Religion which I presently profess, but even my
Father and Grandfather on that side professing the same: and so cannot be
properly an Heretic by their own doctrine, since I never was of their Church.
And as for the Queen my Mother of worthy memory, although she continued in
that Religion wherein she was nourished, yet was she so far from being
superstitious or Iesuited therein, that at my Baptism (although I was baptized
by a Popish Archbishop) she sent him word to forbear to use the spettle in my
Baptism; which was obeyed, being indeed a filthy and an apish trick, rather in
scorn then imitation of CHRIST. And her own very words were, That she would
not have a pockie Priest to spet in her child's mouth. As also the Font wherein I
was Christened, was sent from the late Queen here of famous memory, who was
my Godmother; and what her Religion was, Pius V. was not ignorant. And for
further proof, that that renowned Queen my Mother was not superstitious, as
in all her Letters (whereof I received many) she never made mention of
Religion, nor labored to persuade me in it; so at her last words, she
commanded her Master-houshold, a Scottish Gentleman my servant, and yet alive,
she commanded him (I say) to tell me; That although she was of another
Religion then that wherein I was brought up; yet she would not press me to
change, except my own conscience forced me to it. For so that I led a good
life, and were careful to do justice and govern well, she doubted not but I
would be in a good case with the profession of my own Religion. Thus am I no
Apostate, nor yet a deborder from that Religion which one part of my Parents
professed, and an other part gave me good allowance of. Neither can my Baptism
in the rites of their Religion make me an Apostate, or Heretic in respect of
my present profession, since we all agree in the substance thereof, being all
baptized In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: upon which
head there is no variance amongst us.

And now for the point of Heretic, I will never be ashamed to render an
account of my profession, and of that hope that is in me, as the Apostle
prescribes. I am such a CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN, as believes the three Creeds;
That of the Apostles, that of the Council of Nice, and that of Athanasius; the
two latter being Paraphrases to the former: And I believe them in that sense,
as the ancient Fathers and Councels that made them did understand them. To
which three Creedes all the Ministers of England do subscribe at their
Ordination. And I also acknowledge for Orthodoxe all those other forms of
Creeds, that either were devised by Councels or paticular Fathers, against such
particular Heresies, as most reigned in their times.

I reverence and admit the four first general Councels as Catholic and
Orthodoxe. And the said four general Councels are acknowledged by our Acts of
Parliament, and received for Orthodoxe by our Church.

As for the Fathers, I reverence them as much and more then the Jesuits do,
and as much as themselves ever craved. For what ever the Fathers for the first
five hundredth years did with an vnanime consent agree upon, to be believed as
a necessary point of salvation, I either will believe it also, or at least will
be humbly silent; not taking upon me to condemn the same: But for every
private Fathers opinion, it binds not my conscience more then Bellarmines;
every one of the Fathers usually contradicting others. I will therefore in that
case follow S. Lib. 2. con. Cresconium. cap. 32.
Augustines rule in judging of their opinions, as I find them agree with the
Scriptures: what I find agreeable thereunto I will gladly embrace; what is
otherwise I will (with their reverence) reject.

As for the Scriptures; no man doubts I will believe them. But even for the
Apocrypha; I hold them in the same account that the Ancients did. They are
still printed and bound with our Bibles, and publicly read in our Churches. I
reverence them as the writings of holy and good men: but since they are not
found in the Canon, we account them to be secundae lectionis, or Lib. 1. de
ve^b. Dei. c. 4.
ordinis (which is Bellarmines own distinction) and therefore not sufficient
whereupon alone to ground any article of Faith, except it be confirmed by some
other place of Canonical Scripture; Concluding this point with Ruffinus (who
is no Nouelist, I hope) That the Apocryphal Books were by the Fathers
permitted to be read; not for Confirmation of Doctrine, but only for
instruction of the people.

As for the Saints departed; I honor their memory, and in the honor of them
do we in our Church observe the days of so many of them, as the Scripture
does canonize for Saints; but I am loath to believe all the tales of the
Legended Saints.

And first for the blessed Virgin MARIE, I yield her that which the Angel
Gabriel pronounced of her, and which in her Canticle she prophesied of her
self: that is, That Luc. 1.28.
she is blessed amongst women, and Ibid. ver. 48.
That all generations shall call her blessed. I reverence her as the Mother of
CHRIST, whom of our Savior took his flesh, and so the Mother of GOD, since
the Divinity and Humanity of CHRIST are inseparable. And I freely confess,
that she is in glory both above Angels and men, her own Son (that is both
GOD and man) only excepted. But I dare not mock her and blaspheme against GOD,
calling her not only Diua but Dea, and praying her to command and control
her Son, who is her GOD, and her SAVIOVR. Nor yet can I think, that she has
no other thing to do in heaven, then to hear every idle man's suite and busy
her self in their errands; whiles requesting, whiles commanding her son,
whiles coming down to kiss and make love with Priests, and whiles disputing
and brawling with Devils. In heaven she is in eternal glory and joy, never to
be interrupted with any worldly business; and there I leave her with her
blessed SON our Savior and hers in eternal felicity.

As for Prayer to Saints; Christ (I am sure) has commanded us to Come all to
him that are laden with sin, Matthew 11.28.
Colos. 28.23.
and he will relieve us: and S. Paul has forbidden us to worship Angels, or
to use any such voluntary worship, that has a show of humility in that it
spares not the flesh. But what warrant we have to have recourse unto these
Dij Penates or Tutelares, these Courtiers of God, I know not; I remit that to
these philosophical neoterike Divines. It satisfies me to pray to God through
Christ as I am commanded, which I am sure must be the safest way; and I am
sure the Safest way is the best way in points of salvation. But if the Romish
Church has coined new articles of faith, never heard of in the first 500.
years after Christ, I hope I shall never be condemned for an Heretic, for not
being a Nouelist. Such are the private Masses, where the Priest plays the
part both of the Priest and of the people; And such are the Amputation of the
one half of the Sacrament from the people; The Transsubstantiation, Elevation
for Adoration, and Circumportation in procession of the Sacrament; the works of
Supererogation, rightly named Thesaurus Ecclesiae, the baptising of Bells, and a
thousand other tricks: But above all the worshipping of Images. If my faith
be weak in these, I confess I had rather believe too little then too much.
And yet since I believe as much as the Scriptures do warrant, the Creeds do
persuade, and the ancient Councels decreed, I may well be a Schismatike from
Rome, but I am sure I am no Heretic.

For Relics of Saints, If I had any such that I were assured were members of
their bodies I would honorably bury them, and not give them the reward of
condemned men's members, which are only ordained to be deprived of burial: But
for worshipping either them or Images, I must account it damnable idolatry.

I am no Iconomachus, I quarrel not the making of Images, either for public
decoration, or for men's private uses: But that they should be worshipped, be
prayed to, or any holiness attributed unto them, was never known of the
Ancients: and the Scriptures are so directly, vehemently and punctually against
it, as I wonder what brain of man, or suggestion of Satan durst offer it to
Christians; and all must be salued with nice Philosophical distinctions: As,
Idolum nihil est: and, They worship (forsooth) the Images of things in being,
and the Image of the true GOD. But the Scripture forbids to worship the
Image of any thing that GOD created. It was not a nihil then that GOD forbade
only to be worshipped, neither was the brazen Serpent, nor the body of Moses a
nihil; and yet the one was destroyed, and the other hidden for eschewing of
Idolatry. Yea, the Image of GOD himself is not only expressly forbidden to be
worshipped, but even to be made. The reason is given, That no eye ever saw GOD;
and how can we paint his face, when Moses (the man that ever was most familiar
with GOD) never saw but his back parts? Surely, since he cannot be draawen to
the viue, it is a thankelesse labor to mar it with a false representation;
which no Prince, nor scarce any other man will be contented with in their own
pictures. Let them therefore that maintain this Doctrine, answer it to CHRIST
at the latter day, when he shall accuse them of Idolatry; And then I doubt if
he will be paid with such nice sophistical Distinctions.

But Christ's Cross must have a particular privilege (say they) and be
worshipped ratione contactus. But first we must know what kind of touching of
Christ's body drew a virtue from it; whether every touching, or only touching by
faith? That every touching of his body drew not virtue from it, is more then
manifest. When Luke 8.
the woman in the bloody flux touched him, she was healed by her faith: But
Peter then told him that a crowd and throng of many people then touched him;
and yet none of them received any benefit or virtue from him. Judas touched him
many and many a time, besides his last kiss; so did the villains that
buffeted and crucified him, and yet I may safely pronounce them accursed, that
would bestow any worship upon their relics: yea, we cannot deny but the
land of Canaan it self (whereupon our Lord did daily tread) is so visibly
accursed, being governed by faithless Turks, full of innumerable sects of
heretical Christians, and the very fertility thereof so far degenerated into
a pitiful sterilitie, Luc. 11.28.
as he must be accursed that accounts it blessed. Nay, when a certain woman
blessed the belly that bare Christ, and the breasts that gave him suck; Nay
rather (says he) Blessed are those that hear the Word of God and keep it.
Except then they could first prove that Christ had resolved to bless that
tree of the Cross whereupon he was nailed; they can never prove that his
touching it could give it any virtue. And put the case it had a virtue of doing
miracles, as Peter's sh^dow had, yet does it not follow, that it is lawful to
worship it, which Peter would never accept of. Surely the Prophets that in so
many places curse those that worship Images that have eyes and see not, that
have ears and hear not, would much more have cursed them that worship a piece
of a stick, that has not so much as any resemblance or representation of eyes
or ears.

As for Pugatorie and all the Jubilees, In dulgences, satisfactions for the
dead, etc.
trash depending thereupon, it is not worth the talking of, Bellarmine cannot
find any ground for it in all the Scriptures. Only I would pray him to tell
me; If that fair green Meadow that is in Purgatory, have a brook running
through it, Lib. 2 de Purgat cap. 7.
that in case I come there, I may have hawking upon it. But as for me; I am
sure there is a Heaven and a Hell, praemium and poena, for the Elect and
reprobate: How many other rooms there be, I am not on God his counsel. John
14.
Multae sunt mansiones in domo Patris mei, says CHRIST who is the true
Purgatory for our sins: But how many chambers and anti-chambers the Devil
has, they can best tell that go to him: But in case there were more places
for souls to go to then we know of, yet let us content us with that which in
his Word he has revealed unto us, and not inquire further into his secrets.
Heaven and Hell are there revealed to be the eternal home of all mankind: let
us endeavor to win the one and eschew the other; and there is an end.

Now in all this discourse have I yet left out the maine Article of the Romish
faith; and that is the Head of the Church or Peter's Primacie; for who denies
this, denies fidem Catholicam, says Bellarmine. That Bishops ought to be in
the Church, I ever maintained it, as an Apostolic institution, and so the
ordinance of GOD; contrary to the Puritanes, and likewise to Bellar lib. 4. de
Romans Pont. cap. 25.
Bellarmine; who denies that Bishops have their Jurisdiction immediately from
God. (But it is no wonder he takes the Puritanes part, since Jesuits are
nothing but Puritan-Papists,) And as I ever maintained the state of Bishops and
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy for order sake; so was I ever an enemy to the
confused Anarchie or paritie of the Puritanes, as well appears in my (...).
Heaven is governed by order, and all the good Angels there; nay, Hell it self
could not subsist without some order; And the very Devils are divided into
Legions and have their chiefetaines: how can any society then upon earth
subsist without order and degrees? And therefore I cannot enough wonder with
what brazen face this Answerer could say, Page 98.
That I was a Puritan in Scotland, and an enemy to Protestants: I that was
persecuted by Puritanes there, not from my birth only, but even since four
months before my birth? I that in the year of GOD 84 erected Bishops, and
depressed all their popular Paritie, I then being not 18. years of age? I that
in my said Book to my Son, do speak ten times more bitterly of them nor
of the Papists; having in my second Edition thereof affixed a long Apologetike
Preface, only in odium Puritanorum? and I that for the space of six years
before my coming into England, labored nothing so much as to depresse their
Paritie, and re-erect Bishops again? Nay, if the daily Commentaries of my life
and actions in Scotland, were written (as Julius Caesar's were) there would
scarcely a month pass in all my life, since my entering into the 13. year of
my age, wherein some accident or other would not convince the Cardinal of a
lie in this point. And surely I give a fair commendation to the Puraitnes in
that place of my book, where I affirm that I have found greater honesty with
the high-land and border thieves, then with that sort of people. But leaving
him to his own impudence, I return to my purpose.

Of Bishops and Church Hierarchy I very well allow (as I said before) and
likewise of Rancks and Degrees amongst Bishops. Patriarchs (I know) were in
the time of the Primitive Church, and I likewise reverence that institution for
order sake: and amongst them was a contention for the first place. And for my
self (if that were yet the question) I would with all my heart give my consent
that the Bishop of Rome should have the first Seat: I being a Western King
would go with the Patriarch of the West. And for his temporal Principality
over the Signory of Rome, I do not quarrel it neither; let him in God his
Name be Primus Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps Episcoporum; so it
be no other wise but as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum. But as I well allow of
the Hierarchy of the Church for distinction of Orders (for so I understand it)
so I utterly deny that there is an earthly Monarch thereof, whose word must be
a Law, and who cannot err in his Sentence, by an infallibility of Spirit.
Because earthly Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs; it does not follow,
that the Church must have a visible Monarch too: for the world has not ONE
earthly temporal Monarch. CHRIST is his Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost
his Deputy: Reges gentium dominantur eoru^, Luke 22.25.
vos autem non sic. CHRIST did not promise before his ascension, to leave Peter
with them to direct and instruct them in all things; but he promised to send
the holy Ghost unto them for that end. John 14.26.


And as for these two before cited places, whereby Bellarmine makes the Pope to
triumph over Kings; I mean Pasce oues, and Tibi dabo claues: the Cardinal
knows well enough, Matthew. 18.18.
that the same words of Tibi dabo, are in another place spoken by Christ in the
plural number. And he likewise knows what reason the Ancients do give, why
Christ bade Peter pascere oues: and also what a cloud of witnesses there is,
both of Ancients, and even of late Popish writers, yea diverse Cardinals, that
do all agree that both these speeches used to Peter, were meant to all the
Apostles represented in his person: Otherwise how could Paul direct the Church
of Corinth to excommunicate the incestuous person cum spiritu suo, 1. Cor. 5.4.
whereas he should then have said, cum spiritu Petri? And how could all the
Apostles have otherwise used all their censures, only in Christ's Name, and
never a word of his Vicar? Peter (we read) did in all the Apostles meetings
sit amongst them as one of their number: And when chosen men were sent to
Anti^chia from that great Apostolic Council at Jerusalem (Acts 15. Act.
15.22, 23.
) The text says, It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders with the whole
Church, to send chosen men, but no mention made of the Head thereof; and so in
their Letters no mention is made of Peter, but only of the Apostles, Elders,
and Brethren. And it is a wonder, why Paul rebukes the Church of Corinth for
making exception of Persons, because some followed Paul, some Apollos, some
Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12.
if Peter was their visible Head, for then those that followed not Peter or
Cephas, renounced the Catholic faith. But it appears well that Paul knew
little of our new doctrine, since he handles Peter so rudely, Galat. 2.^
as he not only compares but prefers himself unto him. But our Cardinal
proves Peter's superiority, Gal 1.18.
by Paul's going to visit him. Indeed Paul says, he went to Jerusalem to
visit Peter, and confer with him; but he should have added, and to kiss his
feet.

To conclude then, The truth is that Peter was both in age, and in the time of
CHRIST'S calling him, one of the first of the Apostles; In order the principal
of the first twelve, and one of the three whom CHRIST for order sake preferred
to all the rest. And no further did the Bishop of Rome claim for three hundred
years after CHRIST: Subject they were to the general Councels, and even but
of late did the Council of Constance depose three Popes, and set up the
fourth. And until Phocas days (that murdered his master) were they subject to
Emperors. But how they are now come to be Christ's Vicars, nay Gods on earth,
triple-Crowned, Kings of heaven, earth and hell, Judges of all the world, and
none to judge them, Heads of the faith, Absolute deciders of all Controversies
by the infallibility of their spirit, having all power both Spiritual and
Temporal in their hands, the high Bishops, Monarchs of the whole earth,
Superiors to all Emperors and Kings; yea, Supreme Vice-gods, who whether they
will or not cannot err: how they are now come (I say) to this top of
greatness, I know not: but sure I am, We that are KINGS have greatest need
to look unto it. As for me, Paul and Peter I know, but these men I know not:
And yet to doubt of this, is to deny the Catholic faith; Nay, the world it
self must be turned vpside down, and the order of Nature inuerted (making the
left hand to have the place before the Right, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap
17.
and the last named to be the first in honor) that this primacie may be
maintained.

Thus have I now made a free Confession of my Faith: And (I hope) I have fully
cleared my self from being an Apostate; and as far from being an Heretic, as
one may be that believes the Scriptures, and the three Creedes, and
acknowledges the four first general Councels. If I be loath to believe too
much, especially of Novelties, men of greater knowledge may well pity my
weakness; but I am sure none will condemn me for an Heretic, save such as
make the Pope their God; and think him such a speaking Scripture, as they can
define Heresy no otherwise, but to be whatsoever Opinion is maintained
against the Popes definition of faith. And I will sincerely promise, that when
ever any point of the Religion I profess, shall be proved to be new, and not
Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic (I mean for matter of Faith) I will as
soon renounce it; closing up this head with the Maxim of Vincentius
Lirinensis, Libello aduersus haereses.
that I will never refuse to embrace any opinion in Divinity necessary to
salvation, which the whole Catholic Church with an vnanime consent, have
constantly taught and believed even from the Apostles days, for the space of
many ages thereafter without interruption. But in the Cardinals opinion, I have
showed my self an Heretic (I am sure) in playing with the name of Babylon,
and the Town upon seven hills; as if I would infinuate Rome at this present to
be spiritually Babylon. And yet that Rome is called Babylon, 1. Pet. 5.13.
both in S. Peter's Epistle and in the Apocalypse, our Answerer freely
confesses. As for the definition of the Antichrist, I will not urge so obscure
a point, as a matter of Faith to be necessarily believed of al Christians; but
what I think herein, I will simply declare.

That there must be an ANTICHRIST, and in his time a general Defection; we all
agree. But the Time, Seat, and Person of this Antichrist, are the chief
Questions whereupon we differ: and for that, we must search the Scriptures for
our resolution. 2. These. 2.
As for my opinion; I think S. Paul in the 2. to the Thessalonians does utter
more clearly that which S. ^ohn speaks more mystically of the Antichrist.

First that in that place he means the Antichrist, it is plain, since he
says there must be first a Defection; Verse 3.
and that in the Antichrists time only that eclipse of Defection must fall
upon the Church, all the Romish Catholics are strong enough: otherwise their
Church must be daily subject to err, which is clean contrary to their maine
doctrine. Then d^scribing him (he says) that The man of Sin, Verse 3, 4.
Filius perditionis, shall exalt himself above all that is called God. Psalm.
82.6.
But who these be whom of the Psalmist says Dixi, vos Dijestis, Bellarmine can
tell. In old Divinity it was wont to be Kings: Bellarmine will add Churchmen;
Let it be both. It is well enough known, who now exalts himself above both
the swords.

And after that S. Paul has thus described the Person, he next describes the
Seat; and tells that He shall sit in the Temple of GOD, 2. These. 2.4.
that is, the bosom of the Church; yea, in the very heart thereof. Now where
this Apostolic Seat is, I leave it to be guessed: And likewise who it is that
sitting there, shows himself to be God; pardoning sins, redeeming Souls,
and defining Faith, controuling and judging all men, and to be judged of none.

Anent the Time, S. Paul is plainest of all. For he calls the Thessalonians
to memo^y, Verse 5.
That when he was with them he told them these things: and therefore they know
(says he) what the impediment was, Verse 6.
and who did withhold that the man of sin was not revealed, although the
mystery of iniquity was already working. Verse 7.
That the Roman Emperors in S. Paul's time needed no revealing to the
Christians to be men of Sin or sinful men, no child doubts: but the
revelation he speaks of was a mystery, a secret; It should therefore seem
that he durst not publish in his Epistle what that impediment was. It may be
he meant by the translating of the Seat of the Roman Empire, and that the
translation there of should leave a room for the man of Sin to sit down in.
And that he meant not that man of Sin of these Ethnicke Emperors in his
time, his introduction to this discourse makes it more then manifest. For he
says (fearing they should be deceived, thinking the day of the Lords second
coming to be at hand) he has therefore thought good to forewarne them that
this general Defection must first come. Whereby it well appears that he
could not mean by the present time but by a future, and that a good long time.
otherwise he proved ill his argument, that the Lords coming was not at hand.
Neither can the form of the Destruction of this man of Sin agree with that
manner of spoil, that the Goths and Vandals made of For so does Tortus call
Rome when it was spoiled by them, though it was Christian many years before.
Ethnic Rome. For our Apostle says, Verse 8.
That this wicked man shall be consumed by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, and
abolished by his coming. Now I would think that the word of God and the
Preaching thereof, should be meant by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, which
should piece and piece consume and diminish the power of that man of Sin,
till the brightness of the Lords second coming, should utterly abolish him.
And by his expressing the means of his working, he does likewise (in my
opinion) explane his meaning very much. For he says, Verse. 8.9.
It shall be by a strong delusion, by lying wonders, etc. Well, what Church it
is that vanteth them of their innumerable miracles, and yet most of them
contrary to their own doctrine: Bellarmine can best tell you with his hungry
Mare, Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 8.
that turned her tail to her prouender and kneeled to the Sacrament; And yet
(I am sure) he will be ashamed to say, that the holy Sacrament is ordained to be
worshipped by Oues and Boues, and caetera pecora campi.

Thus have I proved out of S. Paul now, that the time of the Antichrists
coming, and the general Defection was not to be till long after the time
that he wrote in; That his Seat was to be in the Temple and Church of God; and,
That his Action (which can best point at his Person) should be to exalt
himself above all that were called Gods. S. John indeed does more amply,
though mystically describe this Antichrist, which under the figure of a
monstrous Beast, with seven heads and ten horns, he sets forth in the xiij.
chap. and then interprets in the xvij. where he calls her a Whore sitting upon
many waters, Revel. 17.51.
and riding upon the said monstrous Beast; Verse. 3.
concluding that Chapter with calling that Woman, Verse. 18.
that great city which reigns over the Kings of the earth. Verse 5.
And both in that Chapter, and in the beginning of the next, he calls that
great City, Cap. 18.52.
Babylon.

So as to continue herein my formerly proposed Method, of the Time, Seat, and
Person of Antichrist; this place does clearly and undeniably declare that Rome
is, or shall be the Seat of that Antichrist. For first, no Papist now denies
that by Babylon here Rome is directly meant; and that this Woman is the
Antichrist, does clearly appear by the time of his working (described by 42.
months in the xiij. Chap. Verse. 5.
) which does justly agree with that three years and a halfes time, which all
the Papists give to the Reign of Antichrist. Besides that, the Beast it self
with seven heads and ten horns, having one of her heads wounded and healed
again, is described just alike in the xiij. and xvij. chap. being in the
former proved to be the Antichrist by the time of her reign; and in the
latter Rome by the name of Babylon, by the confession of all the Papists: so as
one point is now clear, that Rome is the Seat of the Antichrist.

Neither will that place in the xj. Chap. serve to shift off this point, and
prove the Antichrists Seat to be in Jerusalem, where it is said; That the
Corpses of the Witnesses shall lie in the great City, Chap. 11.8.
spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified. For the word
spiritually is applied both to Sodom, Egypt, and Jerusalem in that place; And
when he has named Sodom and Egypt, he does not subioyne Jerusalem with a
single vbi; but with an vbi and, as if he would say; and this Antichrists
abomination shall be so great, as his Seat shall be as full of Spiritual
whoredoms and Idolatries, as Sodom and Egypt was; nay, and so bloody in the
persecution of the Saints, as our Lord shall be crucified again in his
members. And who has so meanly read the Scriptures (if he have ever read them
at all) that knows it not to be a common phrase in them, to call CHRIST
persecuted and slain, when his Saints are so used? So did CHRIST say, Matt.
25.40.
speaking of the latter day; and in the same style did he speak to S. Paul at
his conversion. Acts 9.4.
And that Babylon, or Rome (since Bellarmine is contented it be so called) is
that great City, where our Lord was crucified, the last verse of the xviij.
Chap. does also clearly prove it. For there it is said, Revel. 18.24.
That in that City was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and
of all that were slain upon the earth; and I hope CHRIST was one of them that
were slain upon the earth. And besides that, it may well be said that he
was slain in that great City Babylon, since by the Roman authority he was
put to death, under a Roman Judge, and for a Roman quarrel: for he could not
be a friend to Caesar, that was not his enemy.

This point now being cleared of the Antichrists Seat, as I have already said;
we are next to find out the Time when the Antichrist shall reign, if it be
not already come. In the xiij. Chap. S. John says, that this Beast with the
seven heads and ten horns, Cap. 13.3.
had one of his heads wounded and healed again; and interpreting that in the
xvij. he says, that these seven heads are also seven Kings, Cap. 17, 10.
whereof five are fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come, and when he
comes he shall continue a short space. And the beast that was and is not, is
the eight, Verse 11.
and yet one of the seven. By which Beast he means the Antichrist, who was
not then come, I mean in the Apostles days, but was to come after. So as
between the time of the Apostles and the end of the world, must the Time of
the Antichrists coming be; and with this the Papists do also agree. Whereby
it appears that Babylon, which is Rome, shall be the Seat of the
Antichrist; but not that Ethnicke Rome which was in the Apostles days (for
John himself professes that he is to write of nothing, Revel. 1.1. and cap.
41.
but that which is to come after his time.) Nor yet that turning Christian Rome
while she was in the converting, which immediately followed the Apostles time,
glorious by the Martyrdom of so many godly Bishops: But that Antichristian
Rome, when as the Antichrist shall set down his seat there; after that by the
working of that Mystery of iniquity, Christian Rome shall become to be
corrupted; and so that deadly wound, which the Goths and Vandales gave Rome,
shall be cured in that Head or King, the Antichrist, who thereafter shall arise
and reign for a long space.

But here it may be objected, that the Antichrist cannot reign a long space;
since S. John says in two or three sundry places, that the Antichrist shall
work but the space of three years and a half. Surely who will but a little
acquaint himself with the phrases and Style of S. John in his Apocalypse, cap.
7.
shall find that he does ordinarily set down numerum certum pro incerto.
cap. 9.16.18.
So does he in his twelve thousand of every tribe that will be safe; so does
he in his Army of two hundred thousand, that were sent to kill the third part
of the men, and so does he in diverse other places. And therefore who will but
remember that in all his Visions in the said Book, he directly imitates the
fashions of the Prophet Ezekiels, Daniels, and Zacharies Visions (borowing
their phrases that prophesied before CHRIST, to utter his Prophecies in, that
was to speak of the last days) shall find it very probable that in these
three days and a half he imitated Daniels Weeks, accounting for his Week
the time between CHRIST'S first and second coming, and making Antichrist to
triumph the half of that time or spiritual Week. For as to that literal
interpretation (as all the Papists make it) of three years and a half, and
that time to fall out directly the very last days, save five and forty,
before CHRIST his second coming, it is directly repugnant to the whole New
Testament. For CHRIST says, That in the latter days men shall be feasting,
marrying, and at all such worldly finesse, when the last hour shall come in a
clappe upon them; One shall be at the Mill. Matthew. 24.41.
One upon the top of the house, and so forth. Matthew. 25.
CHRIST tells a Parable of the five foolish Virgins to show the unlooked for
coming of this hour; Nay, he says the Son of man, nor the Angels in heaven
know not this time. S. Peter bids us WATCH AND PRAY, ever awaiting upon that
hour. And S. John in this same Apocalypse does Revel. 3.3. and 16.15.
twice tell us, that CHRIST will come as a thief in the night; And so does
CHRIST say in the Matthew. 24.44
Euangel. Whereas if the Antichrist shall reign three years and a half
before the latter day, and that there shall be but just 45. days of time after
his destruction; then shall not the just day and hour of the latter day, be
unknown to them that shall be alive in the world at the time of Antichrists
destruction. For first according to the Papists doctrine, all the world shall
know him to be the Antichist, both by the two Witnesses doctrine, and his
sudden destruction; And consequently they cannot be ignorant, that the latter
day shall come just 45. days after: and so CHRIST shall not come as a thief,
nor the world be taken at unawares; contrary to all the Scriptures before
alleged, and many more. And thus have we proved Rome to be the Seat of the
Antichrist, and the second half of that spiritual Week between the first and
second coming of CHRIST, to be the time of his Reign. For in the first half
thereof the mystery of iniquity began to work; but the man of sin was not
yet revealed.

But who these witnesses should be is a great question. The general conceit of
the Papists is, that it must be Enoch and Elias: And herein is Bellarmine so
strong, as he thinks him in a great error (if not an Heretic) that doubts
of it. But the vanity of this Jewish fable I will in few words discover.

The Cardinal, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 6.
in his book of Controversies brings sowerplaces of Scripture for probation
of this idle dream: two in the Old Testament, Malachie and Ecclesiasticus,
and two in the New, CHRIST in Matthew (he might have added Mark too) and John
in the xi. of the Apocalypse. First, for the general of all those places, I
dare boldly affirm, That there is not a word in them, nor in all the rest of
the Scriptures that says, that either Enoch or Elias shall return to fight
against Antichrist, and shall be slain by him, nor any such like matter. Next
as to every place in particular, to begin with Malachie, I know not who can
better interpret him then CHRIST, who twice in Matthew, chap. xi. and xvij.
and once in Mark tells both the multitude, Mat. 11.14. and 17.12. Mar. 9.13.
and his own Disciples, that John Baptist was that promised Elias. And herein
does Bellarmine deal most unfaithfully with CHRIST: for his demonstration that
Antichrist is not yet come, because E^och and Elias are not yet returned; he,
for his probation thereof, cites these words of Christ in the xvij of
Matthew, Elias shall indeed come and restore all things; but omits his very
next words interpreting the same, That he is already come in the person of
John Baptist. Nay, whereby he takes upon him to answer Biblianders objection,
that CHRIST did by John the Baptist, understand the prophecy of Elias coming
to be accomplished, he picketh out the words, Qui habet aures, audiat, in the
xi. of Matthew, immediately following that purpose of Elias, making of them a
great mystery: and never takes knowledge, that in the xvij. by him self
before alleged, CHRIST does interpret Malachy in the same manner without any
subioyning of these words, Qui habet aures, audiat; adjoining shamelesly
hereunto a foul Paraphrase of his own, telling us what CHRIST would have
said; nay, in my conscience, he meant what CHRIST should and ought to have
said, if he had been a good Catholic, setting down there a gloss of
Orleance that destroys the Text. Thus ye see, how shamefully he abuses
CHRIST'S words, who in three sundry places (as I have said) interprets the
second coming of Elias to be meant by John the Baptist. He likewise cauils
most dishonestly upon that word Venturus. For CHRIST uses that word but in the
repeating their opinion: but interpreting it, that he was already come in the
person of John Baptist. Matt. 17.11.
As if he had said, The prophecy is indeed true that Elias shall come; but I
say unto you that Elias iam venit, meaning of John Baptist: and so he first
repeates the words of the Prophecy in the future time, as the Prophet spoke
them and next shows them to be now accomplished in the Person of John, in the
present time. Malac. 4.5. Matthew 27.
Neither can these words of Malachie [Dies magnus and horribilis] falsify
CHRIST'S Commentary upon him. For if that day whereupon the Savior of the
world suffered, when the This obscuring of the Sun was so extraordinary and
fearful, that Dionysius, only led by the light of nature and humane learning,
cried out at the sight thereof, Aut Deuspatitur, aut vices patientis dolet.
Sun was totally obscured from the sixth hour to the ninth; the veil of the
Temple rent asunder from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, the
stones were cloven, the graves did open themselves and the dead arose^ If that
day (I say) was not a great and horrible day, I know not what to call a horrible
day. Which day no doubt had destroyed the whole nation of the Jews without
exception by a just Anatheme, Mala. 4.6.
if the said John the fore runner had not first converted many, by the doctrine
of Repentance and by Baptism. But why should I presume any more to interpret
Malachy, since it is sufficient that CHRIST himself has interpreted him so?
And since Ipse dixit; nay, ter dixit, per quem facta sunt omnia, what mortal
man dare interpret him otherwise; nay, directly contrary?

Eccle. 48 9.
Now for that place of Ecclesiasticus; as the son of Syrach only borrows it
from Malachie (as appears by these words of his, Mala. 4.6.
of converting the sons hearts to their Fathers, which are Malachies own
words) so does CHRIST'S Comentary serve as well to interpret the one as the
other: it being no shame for that mortal Jesus to be commented and
interpreted by the immortal and true JESUS, though to the shame and confusion
of the Jesuits heresies herein.

But Enoch must be joined to Elias in this errand, only to bear up the
couples, as I think. For no place of Scripture speaks of his returning
again, only it is said in Ecclesiasticus the xliiij, that Enoch pleased GOD,
and was translated to Paradise, Eccles. 44 16
vt daret Gentibus sapientiam, or poenitentiam; since they will have it so. And
what is this to say? marry that Enoch shall return again to this world, and
fight against the Antichrist. A pretty large Comment indeed, but no right
Commentary upon that Text. When Bellarmine was talking of Elias; he insisted,
That Elias must come to convert the Jews principally, restituere tribus Jacob.
But when he speaks here of Enoch, he must dare Gentibus poenitentiam, and not
a word of Jews. Belike they shall come for sundry errands, and not both for
one: Or like Paul and Peter, the one shall be Apostle for the Jews, and the
other for the Gentiles. What need such wild racked Commentaries for such three
words? Will not the sense stand well and clearly enough, that Enoch pleased
GOD and was translated to Paradise; that by the example of his reward, the
Nations might repent and imitate his holy footsteps? For what could more
mightily persuade the Nations to repent; then by letting them see that holy Man
carried quick up to Heaven, for reward of his uprightness; whereas all the
rest of the people died and went to corruption? And where Scripture fails,
the Cardinal must help himself with the Fathers, to prove both that Enoch
and Elias are yet alive, and that they shall hereafter die; but with the like
felicity, as in his alleging of Scriptures; to use his own words of me in
his P. 27.
pamphlet. For which purpose he cites five Fathers; Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Epiphanius, Hierome and Agustine. Upon this they all agree in deed, that Enoch
and Elias are still alive both, which no Christian (I hope) will deny. For
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are all still alive, Mat. 22 32.
as Christ tells us; for God is Deus viuentium, non mortuorum. Much more then
are Enoch and Elias alive, who never tasted of death after the manner of other
men. But as to the next point, that they should die hereafter, his first two
witnesses, Irenaeus and Tertullian say the direct contrary. Lib. 5.
For Irenaeus says, that they shall remain in Paradise till the consummation,
conspica^tes in corruptionem. Now to remain there till the consummation, and to
see incorruption, is directly contrary to their returning to the world again
and suffering of death. Lib. cont. Iadaeos. cap. 2.
Tertullian likewise agreeing hereunto says most clearly, That Enoch has
never tasted of death, vt aeternitatis candidatus: now he is ill privileged
with eternity, if he must die again; As for his places cited out of the other
three Fathers, they all confirm that first point, That they are still alive:
but that they must die again, they make no mention.

But here speaking of the Ancient Fathers, let me take this occasion to
forewarne you concerning them: That though they mistake and understand not
rightly many mysteries in the Apocalypse, it is no wonder. For the book
thereof, was still sealed in their days. And though the Mystery of iniquity
was already working, 2. These. 2.
yet was not the man of Sin yet revealed. And it is a certain rule in all
dark prophesies; That they are never clearly understood, till they be
accomplished.

And thus having answered his two places, in the Old Testament, by his third
in the New Testament, containing Christ's own words: which being, luce
clariora, I need speak no more of them. I am now to speak of the fourth
place of Scripture, which is in the xj. of the Apocalypse. For the two witnesses
(forsooth) there mentioned, must be Enoch and Elias. Reuelat. 11.
But how this can stand with any point of Divinity or likelihood of Reason that
these two glorified Bodies shall come down out of heaven or Paradise (make it
what you will) preach, and fight against the Antichrist, be slain by him
after many thousand years exemption from the natural course of death, rise
again the third day in imitation of Christ; and then (having wrought many
woonders) to go up again to Heaven; making an ordinary Post betwixt Heaven
and Earth: how this (I say) can agree either with Divinity or good Reason, I
confess it passes my capacity. And especially that they must be clad in
Sackcloth, whose bodies (I hope) have been so long agone so free from sin,
as I think they should need no more such mac^ration for sin. For they must
be now either in Heaven or Paradise. If in Heaven (as doubtless they are)
their bodies must be glorified: for no corruptible thing can enter there;
Revel. 21.27.
and consequently they can no more be subject to the sensible things of this
world, especially to death. But if they be in earthly Paradise, we must first
know where it is.

Lib de Gra. ^rimi homini:
Bellarmine indeed in his Controversies is much troubled to find out the place
where Paradise is, and whether it be in the earth, or in the air. But these
are all vanities. The Scriptures tell us, Gene. 2.
that Paradise and the garden of Eden therein, was a certain place upon the
earth, which God chose out to set Adam into, and having thereafter for his
sin banished him from the same, it is a blasphemy to think that any of Adams
posterity came ever there again. For in Adam were all his posterity
accursed, and banished from the earthly Paradise: like as all the earth in
general, and Paradise in special were accursed in him; the second Adam having
by grace, called a certain number of them to be Coheritors with him of the
heavenly Paradise and Jerusalem. And doubtlesly, the earthly Paradise was
d^faced at the Flood, if not before: and so lost all that exquisite fertility
and pleasantnes, wherein it once surpassed all the rest of the earth. And that
it should be lifted up in the air, is like one of the dreams of the Alcoran.
Surely no such miracle is mentioned in the Scriptures, and has no ground but
from the curious fancies of some boiling brains, who cannot be content, Romans
12.3.
Sapere ad sobrietatem.

In heaven then for certain are Enoch and Elias: Gene. 5.24.
for Enoch (says the text) walked with GOD and was taken up, 2. King. 2.11, 10.
and Elias was seen carried up to heaven in a fiery chariot. And that they who
have been the In-dwellers of Heaven these many thousand years, and are freed
from the Laws of mortality; that these glorious and incorruptible bodies (I
say) shall come into the world again, preach and work miracles, and fighting
against the Antichrist be slain by him, whom natural death could not before
take hold of: as it is a fabulous invention, so is it quite contrary to the
nature of such sanctified creatures. Especially I wonder, why Enoch should be
thought to be one of these two witnesses for CHRIST. For it was Moses and
Elias that were with Christ at the transfiguration, signifying the Law and the
Prophets: which would be the fittest witnesses for conuincing of Antichrist.
But why they have exempted Moses, and put Enochs head in the yoke, I cannot
conceive. But I have too much labored in the refuting of this foolish, and
indeed childish fable, which I am so far from believing in any sort, as I
protest in GODS presence, I cannot hold any learned Divine (in our age now) to
be a Christian, that will believe it; but worthy to be ranked with the Scribes
and Pharisees, that raued and dreamed upon the coming again of Elias, though
CHRIST told them the contrary. As for some of the Ancients that mistook this
matter, I do not censure them so hardly; for the reason that I have already
alleged concerning them.

And having now refuted that idle fable; that those two Witnesses were Enoch
and Elias: it falls me next to guess, what in my opinion should be meant by
them. I confess, it is far easier to refu^e such a groundless fable as this
is, contrary to all grounds of Divinity and Reason, then to set down a true
interpretation of so high and dark a mystery. And therefore as I will not
presume to bind any other man to my opinion herein, if his own reason leads
him not thereunto, so shall I propone such probable conjectures, as (I hope)
shall be free from Heresy, or unlawful curiosity.

In two diverse fashions may the mystery of these Witnesses be lawfully and
probably interpreted, in my opinion. Whereof the one is, that by these two
Witnesses should be meant the Old and New Testaments. For as the Antichrist
cannot choose but be an adversary to the word of GOD, above all things; so will
he omit no endeavor to disgrace, corrupt, suppress and destroy the same. And
now whether this Book of the two Testaments, or two Witnesses of Christ, have
suffered any violence by the Babylonian Monarchy or not, I need say nothing;
Res ipsa loquitur. I will not weary you with recounting those Common Places
used for disgracing it: as calling it a Nose of wax, a dead Letter, a leaden
Rule, and a hundred such like Phrases of reproach. But how far the Traditions of
men, and Authority of the Church are preferred to these witnesses, does
sufficiently appear in the Babylonian doctrine. And if there were no more but
that little book with that pretty Inscription, Del' Insuffisance del'
Escriture Saint, Cardinal Peron.
it is enough to prove it. And as to the corrupting thereof; Luke 15.8.
the corruptions of the old Latin translation must not be corrected, though it
bid euertere domum in stead of euerrere, for seeking of a penny; John 21.22, 23.
And though it say of John, Sic eum volo manner donec veniam, in place of Si,
though it be known a plain lie, and that the very next words of the Text
disprooue the same. Nay, so far must we be from correcting it, as that the
vulgar Translation must be preferred by Catholics, to the Bible in the own
Original tongue. And is it a small corrupting of Scriptures to make all, or
the most part of the Apocrypha of equal faith with the Canonical Scriptures,
contrary to the Fathers opinions and Decrees of ancient Councels? And what
blasphemous corrupting of Scripture is it, to turn Dominus into Domina
throughout the whole Psalms? Made by Bonauentura Doctor Seraphicus.
And thus our Ladies Psalter was lately reprinted in Paris. Is not this to
confound CHRIST'S person with hers? And as for suppressing of the Scriptures how
many hundredth years were the people kept in such blindness, as these
witnesses were almost unknown? for the Layicks durst not, being forbidden, and
the most part of the Clergy, either would or could not meddle with them.

Thus were these two witnesses of Christ (whom of himself says, John 5.39.
Scrutamini Scripturas, illae enim testimonium perhibent de me) These Reave.
11.4.
two Olives bringing peace to all the believers, even peace of Conscience:
These Ibid.
two Candlesticks standing in the sight of GOD, and giving light to the
Nations; represented by Candlestickes even in the very Order of the Roman
Mass: See Expositio M^ssae, annexed to Ordo Romanus, set forth by G. Cassander.
Thus were these two Witnesses (I say) disgraced, corrupted and suppressed
(nay, so suppressed and silenced, as he was brent for an Heretic that durst
presume to look upon them) kept close in a strange tongue that they might not
be understood, Legends and lying woonders supplying their place in the Pulpits.
Verse 8.
And so did their Bodies lie in the Streets of the great City, spiritually
Sodom, for spiritual fornication which is idolatry; spiritually Egypt,
Colos. 2.20.
for bringing the Saints of God in bondage of humane Traditions [ Quare
oneramini ritibus? Verse 8.
] So did their bodies (I say) lie 3. days and a half; that is, the half of
that spiritual Week between Christ his first and second coming; and as dead
carkases indeed did the Scriptures then lie without a monument, being laid
open to all contempt, cared for almost by none, understood by as few; nay, no
man durst call for them for fear of punishment, as I have already said. And
thus lying dead, as it were, without life or vigor (as the Law of God did till
it was revived in Josias time) 2 Chro 34.14.
The Inhabitants of the earth, that is, worldly men, Verse 10.
rejoiced and sent gifts to other, for joy that their fleshly liberty was now
no more awed, nor curbed by that two edged sword: for they were now sure, that
to do what they would, their purse would procure them pardons from Babylon.
Omnia vaenalia Romae; so as men needed no more to look up to heaven, but down
in their purses to find Pardons. Nay, what needed any more suing to heaven, or
taking it by violence and feruencie of zeal; when the Pardons came and offered
themselves at every man's doors? And diverse spiritual men vaunted themselves,
that they neither understood Old Testament nor new.

Thus were these two Witnesses used in the second half of this spiritual
Week; who in the first half thereof were clad in sackecloth; Verse 3.
that is, preached repentance to all Nations, for the space of five or six
hundredth years after Christ: GOD making his Word or Witness so triumph,
Revel. 6.2.
riding upon the white Horse in the time of the Primitive Church, as that they
overcame all that opposed themselves unto it, beating down every high thing,
2. Cor. 10.4.
as Paul says; excluding from heaven all that believe not therein: as strongly
with the spiritual fire thereof, conuincing the stiffenecked pride of
unbelievers, as ever Moses or Elias did, by the plagues of Egypt and famine,
convince the rebellious Egyptians and stiff-necked Israelites.

Neither shall it be enough to disgrace, corrupt and suppress them; Revel.
11.7.
but KILLED must they be at the last. To which purpose comes forth Printed at
Venice Anno 1562.
Censura generalis, vt mucrone censorio iugulare eas possit; and cutteth their
throats indeed. For the Author ordains all Translations, but their own, to
be burnt, which is yet commonly practiced: nay he professes, he comes not to
correct but to destroy them, controlling and calling every place of Scripture
Heretical, that disagreeth front their Traditions (with almost as many foul
words and railing epithetes, as the Cardinal bestows on my Apology) not
ruling, nor interpreting Scripture by scripture, but making their Traditions to
be such a touchstone for it, as he condemns of Heresy not only those places
of Scripture that he cites, but lays the same general condemnation upon all
other the like places wheresoever they be writin the Scriptures. And yet
(praised be GOD) we begin now with our eyes, as our predecessors have done
in some ages before, to see these Witnesses rise again, and shine in their
former glory: GOD, as it were, Verse 11.
setting them up again upon their feet, 12.
and raising them to the heavens in a triumphall cloud of glory, like Elias his
fiery chariot. Which exalting of the Gospel again, 13.
has bred such an earthquake and alteration amongst many Nations; as a tenth
part, or a good portion of these that were in subjection to that great City,
to wit, Babylon, are fallen from her; seven thousand, that is, many thousands
having been killed upon the occasion of that great alteration; and many others
converted to the fear of GOD, and giving glory to the GOD of heaven. This now
is one of the ways, by which (I think) this place of Scripture may be
lawfully and probably interpreted.

The other is more common, and seems more literally to agree with the Text.
And this is to interpret, not the word of GOD, but the Preachers thereof to be
meant by these Witnesses. Few they were that first began to reveal the man
of Sin, and discover his corruptions; and therefore well described by the
number of two Witnesses: Deuteronomy. 19.15.
Nam in ore duorum aut trium testiu^ stabit omne verbum. And in no greater
number were they that begun this work, then the greatness of the errand did
necessarily require, Revel. 11.3.
They prophesied in sackcloth, for they preached Repentance. That diverse of
them were put to cruel deaths, is notorious to the world^ And likewise that
(in the persons of their Successors in doctrine) Sauguis Martyrum est semen
Eccles.
they rose again; and that in such power and efficacy, as is more then
miraculous. Verse 11.
For where it is accounted in the Scriptures a miraculous work of GOD wrought
by his holy Spirit, Acts 2.41.
when the Apostle S. Peter converted about three thousand in one day; these
Witnesses I speak of, by the force of the same Spirit, converted many mighty
Nations in few years: who still continue praising GOD, that he has delivered
us from the tyranny of Antichrist that reigns over that great City; and with
a full cry proclaiming, Go out of her my people, Revel. 18.4.
lest ye be partaker of her sins and of her plagues. Let therefore these
Miracle-mongers that surfeit the world, and raise the prise of paper daily, with
setting forth old, though new gilded Miracles and Legends of lies; (...) such
(I say) consider of this great and wonderful miracle indeed, and to their
shame compare it with their paultry wares. Thus having in two fashions
delivered my conjecture, what I take to be meant by these two Witnesses in the
xj of the Apocalypse, there being no great difference between them: In the one,
taking it to be the word of God it self; In the other, the word of God too,
but in the mouths of his Preachers: It rests now that I come to the third
point of the description of Antichrist, which is anent his Person.

That by the Whore of Babylon that rides upon the Beast, is meant a Seat of
an Empire, and a successiue number of men sitting thereupon, and not any one
man; does well appear by the form of the description of the Antichrist
throughout all the said Book. For in the last verse of the xvij. Cap. 17.
Chapter the Woman is expounded to be, That great City that reigns over the
Kings of the earth; Verse 18.
which cannot signify the only person of one man, but a successiue number of
men (as I have already said) whose seat that great City must be: like as in
the same Chapter, Verse 9.
The seven heads of the Beast are two ways expounded. First, they are called
seven Hills, which is plain; And next they are called seven Kings, which cannot
be meant by the Kings that shall give their power to the Beast, Verse 13.
and be subject unto her, which is immediately after expressed by the ten
horns: Verse 12.
But rather appears to be those seven forms of government of that Seat: five
of which had already been and fallen; As Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemuiri,
and Tribuni militum. The sixth was in the time of S. John his writing of this
book, which was the Government of the Emperors. The seventh which was not yet
come, and was to last but for a short space, was the From the time of
Constantine the great his removing of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople,
t^ the time of Boniface the third, to w^t, about 276. years
Ecclesiastical Government by Bishops, which was to come upon the translation
of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople; though their government was in a
manner substitute to the Emperors. For though that form of Government lasted
about the space of 276. years; yet was it but short in comparison of the long
time of the reign of the Antichrist (not yet expired) which succeeded
immediately thereunto. And the eighth, which is the Beast that was and is not,
and is to go to perdition, Verse 11.
is the Antichrist: the eighth form of Government indeed by his
absoluteness, and yet the seventh, because he seems but to succeed to the
Bishops in an Ecclesiastical form of government, though by his greatness he
shall make Babylons Empire in glory, like to that Magnificence wherein that
great City triumphed, when it most flourished: which in S. John's time was much
decayed, by the factions of the great men, the mutinies of the armies, and the
unworthiness of the Emperors. And so that flourishing state of that great
City or Beast, which it was in before S. John's time, and Being much Not in
respect of the extent, and limits of the Empire: but in regard of the
government thereof, and glory of the city. Revel. xviij. Verse 9. and 11.
Verse 10.16.19.
decayed was but in a manner in his time, should be restored unto it again by
Antichrist: who as he ascendteh out of the botomlesse pit, so must he go to
Destruction. And likewise by that great lamentation that is made for the
destruction of Babylon in the xvij. Chapter, both by the Kings and by the
Merchants of the earth; where it is thrice repeated for aggravating the pity
of her desolation, that That great City fell in an hour: By that great
lamentation (I say) it well appears, That the reign of Antichrist must
continue longer then three years and a half, or any one man's time. For the
Kings that had committed fornification with her, Verse 9.
and in delicijs vixerant; behooved to have had a longer time for contracting of
that great acquaintance: Verse 12.
And the Merchants of the earth set her forth and describe her at great
length, as the very staple of all their riches; which could not be so soon
gathered as in one man's time. And to conclude now this description of the
Antichrist; I will set down unto you all that is spoken of him in the
Apocalypse in a short method, for the further explaining of these three points
that I have already handled.

The Antichrist is four times (in my opinion) described by John in the
Apocalypse, in four sundry visions; and a short Compendium of him repeated
again in the xx. Chapter. 1. Description of Antichrist
He is first described by a pale Horse in the vision of the Seals in the sixth
Chapter. Revel. cap. vj
Verse 2.
For after that CHRIST had triumphed upon a white Horse in the first Seal, by
the propagation of the Gospel; Verse 4.
and that the red Horse in the second Seal, is as busy in persecution, as
CHRIST is in ouercomming by the constancy of his Martyrs; and that famine and
other plagues signified by the black Horse in the third Seal, Verse 5.
have succeeded to these former persecutions: Verse 8.
Then comes forth the Antichrist upon a pale Horse in the fourth Seal,
having Death for his rider, and Hell for his conuoy; which rider fitted well
his color of palenesse: and he had power given Or them, after other
Translations, whereby is jointly understood the said pale horse, together with
his rider and co^uoy, Death and Hell.
him over the fourth part of the earth (which is Europe) to kill with the sword
and use great persecution; as Ethnic Rome did, figured by the red Horse: and
to kill with spiritual hunger or famine of the true word of GOD; as the
black Horse did by corporal famine and with death, whereby spiritual death
is meant. For the Antichrist, signified by this pale Horse, shall afflict the
Church both by persecution and temporal death; as also by alluring the Nations
to idolatry, and so to spiritual death: and by the beasts of the earth shall
he procure their spiritual death; for he shall send out the Locusts (over
whom he is King) mentioned in the ninth Chapter of this book; and the three
Frogs, mentioned in the xvj. of the same; for intising of all Kings and
Nations to drink of the cup of her abominations. That that decription now of
Antichrist ends there, Verse 9.
it is more then plain: for at the opening of the first Seal, Verse 10.
the souls and blood of the murdered Saints cry for vengeance and hasting of
judgment; Verse 12.
which in the sixth Seal is granted unto them by CHRIST'S coming at the latter
day; signified by heavens departing away, like a scrol when it is rolled: with
a number of other sentences to the same purpose.

The second description.
But because this might seem a short and obscure description of the Antichrist;
he describes him much more largely and specifikely, especially in the vision
of the Trumpets in the ninth Chapter. Verse 1.
For there he says, at the blowing of the fifth Trumpet, Heresies being first
spread abroad in three of the four former blasts; to wit, in the first, third,
and fourth blast (for I take temporal perecution to be only signified by the
second blast) he then saw a star fall from Heaven, Verse 2.
to whom was given the key of the bottomless pit; which being opened by him,
Verse 3.
with the smoke thereof came forth a number of Locusts, whom he largely
describes, both by their craft and their strength; and then tells the name
of this their King, who brought them out of the bottomless pit, which is,
Destroyer: By this Star fallen from heaven, being signified, as I take it,
Verse 11.
some Person of great dignity in the Church, whose duty being to give light
to the world (as CHRIST says) does contrary thereunto fall away like Lucifer,
and set up a Kingdom, Matthew. 5.14.
by the sending forth of that noisome pack of crafty cruel vermin,
described by Locusts: and so is the Seat of the Antichrist begun to be
erected, whose doctrine is at length declared in the second vvoe, after the
blast of the sixth Trumpet; where it is said, Verse. 13.
Verse 20.
That the remnant of men which were not killed by the plagues, repented not of
the works of their hands, that they should not worship Devils, and idols of
gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood, which neither
can see, hear, nor go. (As for worshipping of Devils; Lib. de Cultu
Adoration. lib. 3. disp. 1. cap. 5.
look your great Iesuited Doctor, Vasques: and as for all the rest, it is the
maine doctrine of the Roman Church.) And then it is subioyned in this text,
that they repented not of their murder, Verse 21.
their sorcerie, their fornications, nor their theft.

By their murder, their persecution is meant, and bloody massacres. For their
Sorcery consider of their Agnus Dei, that will sloken fire; of the hallowed
shirts, and diverse sorts of Relics; and also of Prayers that will preserve
men from the violence of shot, of fire, of sword, of thunder, and such like
dangers; And judge, if this be not very like to Sorcerie and incantation of
charms.

By their Fornication is meant both their spiritual fornication of Idolatry,
and also their corporal fornication; which does the more abound amongst them,
as well by reason of the restraint of their Churchmen from marriage, as also
because of the many Orders of idle Monastike lives amongst them, as well for
men as women: And continual experience proves, that idleness is ever the
greatest spur to lechery. And they are guilty of Theft, in stealing from
GOD the titles and greatness of power due to him, and bestowing it upon their
head, the Antichrist: As also by heaping up their treasure with their iuggling
wares and merchandise of the souls of men, by Iubiles, Pardons, Relics and
such like strong delusions.

That he ends this description of Antichrist in the same ninth Chapter may
likewise well appear, Cap. 10. ver. 6
by the Oath that that Mighty Angel swears in the sixth verse of the tenth
Chapter: And after the blast of the sixth Trumpet, that time shall be no more,
Verse 7.
and that when the seventh Angel shall blow his Trumpet, the mystery of GOD
shall be finished, as he had declared it to his servants the Prophets. Cap. xj.
Only in the eleventh Chapter he describes the means whereby the Antichrist
was overcome, whose reign he had before described in the ix. Chapter; and
tells us that the two witnesses, Verse 3.
after that they have been persecuted by the Antichrist shall in the end
procure his destruction. And in case any should think, that the Antichrist is
only spoken of in the xj. Chapter, and that the Beast spoken of in the xiij.
and xvij. Chapters does only signify Ethnicke Rome; there needs no other
refutation of that conceit, then to remember them, that the Antichrist is never
named in all that xi. Chapter, Cap. xj.
but where he is called in the seventh verse thereof the Beast that comes
forth of the bottomless pit: Verse 7.
which by the description of the place he comes out of proves it to be the
same Beast which has the same original in the xvij. Chapter, and in the very
same words* so as it is ever but the same Antichrist repeated, and diversely
described in diverse visions.

The third description.
Now in the xij. and xiij. Chapters and so forth till the xvij. he makes a
more large and ample prophetical description of the state of the Church, and
reign of the Antichrist. For in the xij. Cap. xij. Verse 6.
Chap. he figureth the Church by a Woman flying from the Dragon (the Devil) to
the wilderness; And when the Dragon sees he cannot otherwise ouer-reach her,
Verse 15.
he speweth forth waters like floods to carry her away; which signifies many
Nations, that were let loose to persecute and vex the Church. And in the xiij.
Chapter, Cap. xiij.
out of that Sea of Nations that persecuted her arises that great City
(Queen of all the Nations, and head of that persecution) figured by a Beast
with seven heads and ten horns, Verse 1.
like a Leopard; Verse 2.
as well for the color because it was full of spots, that is, defiled with
corruptions; as also using a bastard form of government, in show spiritual,
but in deed temporal over the Kings of the earth; like the Leopard that is a
bastard beast betwixt a Lion and a Parde: having ^eete like a Bear, to
signify his great strength; and the mouth of a Lion, to show his ravenous and
cruel disposition.

This Beast who had his power from the Dragon, and had gotten a deadly wound in
Verse 3.
one of his heads, or forms of government (by the Goths and Vandals) and yet
was healed again; opened his mouth to blasphemies, Verse 6.
and made war against the Saints: nay, Verse 7.
all the world must worship him; which worship Ethnicke Rome never craved of
any, being contented to call their neighbor Kings Amici and socij populi
Romani. And whether worship or adoration, even with that same title, he used
to Popes at their creation, our Cardinal can best tell you.

But then comes another beast up out of the earth, Verse 11.
having indeed a more firm and settled original: for she does visibly and
outwardly succeed to the true Church, and therefore she has two horns like
the Lamb, in outward show representing the spouse of CHRIST, and pretending
CHRIST to be her defense: But she speaks like the Dragon, teaching damnable
and deuilish doctrine. And this Apostatike (I should say Apostolic) Church,
after that she has made her great power manifest to the world, Verse 12.
by doing all that the first Beast could do, In conspectu eius; that is, by
showing the greatness of her power, to be nothing inferior to the greatness
of the former Ethnicke Empire: she then is moved with so great a desire to
advance this Beast, now become Antichrist, as she causes the earth and all
that dwell therein, to worship this former Beast or Roman Monarch; transferring
so, as it were, her own power in his person. Yea, even Emperors and Kings
shall be feign to kiss his feet. And for this purpose shall she work great
Miracles, wherein she greatly prides her self, deceiving men with lying wonders
and efficacy of lies, 2. These. 2.9
as S. Paul says. And amongst the rest of her wonders, Verse 13.
she must bring Fire out of heaven, Fulmen excommunicationis, which can
dethrone Princes. Verse 15.
So that all that will not worship the image of the Beast, that is, his
unlimited Supremacy, must be killed and burnt as Heretics. Yea, so peremptory
will this Beast or false Prophet be (so called in the xvj. Chapter of this
book) for the advancement of the other Beast, or Antichrist; Verse 17
as all sorts and ranks of people must receive the mark or name of that Beast
in their right hand, or in their forehead; without the which it should be
lawful to none to buy, or sell: Verse 16.
By the Mark in the forehead, signifying their outward profession and
acknowledgement of their subjection unto her; And by the Mark in their right
hand, signifying their actual implicit obedidience unto her, who they think
cannot err, though she should command them to rebel against their natural
Princes; like that Coeca obediencia whereunto all the Jesuits are sworn: and
like those Romish priests in this Country, that have renounced and forsworn
again that Oath of Alleagiance; grounded upon their natural oath; which
thought at their taking it, they confessed they did it out of conscience, and
as obliged thereunto by their natural duty; yet now must they forswear it
again, for obedience to the Popes command; to whose will their conscience and
reason must be blindly captiuated. And who ever denied this absolute power,
might neither buy nor sell; for no man was bound to keep any faith, or observe
any civil contracts with Heretics: yea, to aequiuocate and commit perjury
toward them, is a lawful thing in a Catholic.

Now as to the Mystery anent the Number of his name, whether it shall be
understood by the number composed of the Letters in that Greek word LATEINOS,
Verse 15.
which word well suits with the Romish Church, Irenaeus aduersus Haeres. lib. 5.
Romish Faith, and Latin Service. Or whether, in respect that in the Text, it
is called the number of the man, ye will take it for the number or date of the
year of GOD, wherein that first Man lived, that first took the title of the
Antichrist upon him, I leave it to the Readers choice. By that first Man, I
mean Bonifacius tertius, who first called himself Universal Bishop, which S.
Gregory that lived till within three years of his time, Epistol. lib. 6. cap.
30.
foretold would be the style of the Antichrist, or his Praecursor: for though
he died threescore years before the 666. of CHRIST, yet was that Title but
fully settled upon his Successors, sixty years after his time. Or if ye list
to count it from Pompey his spoiling of the Temple, to this same Man's time; it
will go very near to make just up the said number 666.

Now the reign of the Antichrist being thus prophetically described in the
xiij. Chapter; Cap. xiiij. Verse 3.
his fall is prophesied in the xiiij. First by the joyful and triumphall New
song of the Saints in heaven: And next by the proclamation of three Angels;
Verse 6.
whereof the first having an everlasting Gospel in his hand to preach to all
Nations (the true armor indeed wherewith the Witnesses fought against the
Antichrist;) This first Angel, I say, Verse 7.
proclaimed Fear and glory to GOD, since the hour of his Judgment was come.
Verse 8.
And the second proclaimed the fall of Babylon, Verse 9.
which is the destruction of the Antichrist. And the third prohibited under
great pains, even the pain of eternal damnation, that none should worship
the Beast, or receive his Mark. But though that in the rest of this Chapter
the latter day be again prophesied, as a thing that shall come shortly after
the revealing of the man of Sin; yet in the xv. Chap. he tells of seven
plagues, Cap. xv. Verse 1.
under the name of Vials, that shall first fall upon the Antichrist and his
kingdom: which, being particularly set down in the xvj. Chap. xvj.
Chapter, hereckoneth amongst the rest. In the fifth Vial, the plague of
darkness; Verse 10.
yea, such darkness as the kingdom of Antichrist shall be obscured: whereby
at the pouring forth of the sixth Vial, the way of the Kings of the East shall be
prepared; Verse 12.
the man of Sin being begun to be revealed, and so all impediments removed
that might let the invasion of that Monarchy: even as that great river
Euphrates that runs by the literal Babylon. guarded it from the Kings of
the East, the Medes and Persians, the time of the Babylonian Monarchy, til by
the drying thereof, or unexpected passage made through it by Cyrus, Dan. 5.3.
Babylon was won, and Baltasar destroyed, and his Monarchy overthrown: even
while he was sitting in that literal Babylon, corporally drunken and quaffing
in the vessels ordained for GODS Service; and so sitting as it were in the
Temple of GOD, and abusing the holy Mysteries thereof.

For remedy whereof, at the pouring forth of the sixth Vial, Verse 13.
three unclean Spirits, like frogs, shall then come forth out of the mouth of
the Dragon, that Beast, and of the false Prophet; which I take to be as much to
say, as that how soon as the kingdom of Antichrist shalb^ so obscured, with
such a gross and a palpable ignorance, as learning shall be almost lost out of
the world, and that few of the very Priests themselves shall be able to read
Latin, much less to understand it; and so a plain way made for the
Destruction of Babylon: Then shall a new sect of Spirits arise for the defense
of that falling Throne, called three in number, by reason of their three-folde
direction; being raised and inspired by the Dragon Satan, authorized and
maintained by the Beast the Antichrist, and instructed by the false Prophet the
Apostatike Church, that has the horns like the Lamb, but speaks like the
Dragon. These Spirits indeed, thus sent forth by this three-folde authority
for the defense of their Triple crowned Monarch, are well likened to Frogs; for
they are Amphibions, and can live in either Element earth or water: for though
they be Churchmen by profession, yet can they use the trade of politic
Statesmen; Verse 14.
going to the Kings of the earth, to gather them to the battle of that great
day of GOD Almighty. What Massacres have by their persuasions been wrought
through many parts of Christendom, and how evil* Kings have sped that have
been counseled by them, all the impartial Histories of our time do bear
record. And whatsoever King or State will not receive them, and follow their
advise, rooted out must that King or State be, even with Gunpowder ere it
fail. And these Frogs had reason indeed to labor to become learned, thereby to
dissipate that gross mist of ignorance, wherewith the reign of Antichrist was
plagued before their coming forth. Verse. 17.
Then does this Chapter conclude with the last plague that is poured out of
the seventh Vial upon the Antichrist, which is the day of Judgment: Verse. 19.
for then Babylon (says he) came in remembrance before God.

The fourth description.
But in the xvij Chapter is the former Vision interpreted and expounded; and
there is the Antichrist represented by a Woman, sitting upon that many-headed
Beast; Cap. xvij. Verse 3.
because as CHRIST his true Spouse and Church is represented by a Woman in the
xij. Chap. so here is the Head of his adulterous Spouse or false Church
represented also by a woman, but having a cup full of abominations in her hand;
Verse 4.
as her self is called a whore for her spiritual adultery, Verse 1.
having seduced the Kings of the earth to be partakers of her Spiritual
fornication: Verse 2.
And yet wonderful gorgious and glorious was she in outward show; but drunken
with the blood of the Saints, by a violent persecution of them. Verse 6.
And that she may the better be known, he writes her name upon her forehead
agreeable to her qualities: A Mystery, that great Babylon, that mother of
whoredoms and abominations of the earth. A Mystery is a name that belongs
unto her two manner of ways: One, Verse 5.
as she takes it to her self; another, as she deserves it indeed. To her
self she takes it, in calling herself the visible Head of the Mystical body
of CHRIST, in professing her self to be the dispenser of the Mysteries of
GOD, and by her only must they be expounded: This great God in earth and Head
of the faith, being a Mystes by his profession; that is, a Priest. And if the
observation of one be true, that he had of old the word Mystery written on
his Myter; then is this prophecy very plainly accomplished. Now that indeed
she deserves that name the rest of her Title does bear witness, Verse 5.
that shows her to be the Mother of all the whoredoms and abominations of
the earth: and so is she under the pretext of holiness, a Mystery indeed of
all iniquity and abominations; under the mark of pretended feeding of Souls,
devouring Kingdoms, and making Christendom swim in blood.

Now after that this scarlet or bloody Beast and her Rider are described, by
their shape, garments, name and qualities: the Angel does next interpret this
vision unto John, expounding unto him what is signified both by the Beast and
her Rider; telling him, the seven heads of the Beast are seven Hills, Verrse. 9.
meaning by the situation of that City or seat of Empire; and that they are
also seven Kings or forms of government in the said City, whereof I have
told my conceit already. Verse 12.
As for the ten Horns, which he shows to be ten Kings, that shall at
one hour receive their power and Kingdom with the Beast, I take that number
of ten to be Numerus certus pro incerto, even as the number of seven heads and
ten horns upon the Dragon the Devil, cannot but be an uncertain number. And
that he also imitates in those ten horns, the ten horns of the seven headed
Beast in the seventh of Daniel: and therefore I take these ten Kings to
signify, all the Christian Kings, and free Princes and States in general,
even you whom to I consecrate these my Labors, and that of us all he
prophecieth, that although our first becoming absolute and free Princes should
be in one hour with the Beast (for great Christian kingdoms and Monarchs
did but rise, and receive their liberty by the ruins of the Ethnicke Roman
Empire, and at the destruction thereof) and at the very time of the beginning
of the planting of the Antichrist there; and that we should for a long time
continue to worship the Beast, Verse 13.
having one Catholic or common consenting mind in obeying her, yelding our
power and authority unto her, and kissing her feet, drinking with her in her
cup of Idolatry, and fighting with the Lamb, Verse 14
in the persecution of his Saints, at her command that governs so many
Nations and people: yet notwithstanding of all this, Verse 16.
we shall in the time appointed by GOD, having thus fought with the Lamb, but
being overcome by him, that is, converted by his word; we shall then (I say)
hate the Whore, and make her desolate, and make her naked, by discovering her
hypocrisy and false pretense of zeal; and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire. And thus shall the way of the Kings of the East be prepared, Revel.
16.12.
as ye heard in the xvj. Chapter. And then does he subioyne the reason of
this strange change in us: Verse 17
for (says he) GOD has put it in their hearts to fulfill his will, and with
one consent to give their Kingdoms to the Beast, till the words of GOD be
fulfilled, according to that sentence of Solomon; Prou. 21.1.
That the hearts of Kings are in the hands of GOD, to be turned at his
pleasure. And having thus interpreted the Beast or Empire; he in a word
expounds, that by the Woman that rode upon her, or Monarch that governed her,
Verse 18
was meant that great City that reigned over the Kings of the earth: by the
Seat of the Empire pointing out the quality of the persons that should sit
and domine there.

Chap. xviij.
Then is the greatness of her fall, and the great lamentation that both the
Kings and merchants of the earth shall make for the same, proclaimed by an
other Angel in the xviij. Chapter. Verse 9.10.
The Kings lamenting her fall, because they lived in pleasure with her; which
no Kings could do with Ethnicke Rome, who conquered them by her sword: for
she honored them with Titles, and dispensed with their lusts and unlawful
marriages. And the Merchants of the earth, Verse 11, 15, 16, 17, 18.
and all Shipmasters, and traffikers upon the Sea shall lament the fall of that
great city, which never had a fellow, for the loss of their riches and
traffic which they inioyed by her means. Verse 12, 13.
And there he describes all sorts of rich wares, whereof that great City was
the Staple: for indeed she has a necessary use for all such rich and
glorious wares, as well for ornaments to her Churches and princely Prelates, as
for garments and ornaments to her wooden Saints; for the blessed Virgin must
be daily clothed and decked in the newest and most curious fashion, though it
should resemble the habit of a Curtizane. And of all those rich wares, the most
precious is last named, which is the Souls of men: Verse 13.
for so much bestowed upon Masses, and so much doted to this or that Cloister
of Monks or Friars, but most of all now to that irregular and incomprehensible
order of Jesuits; shall both redeem his own Soul, and all his Parents to
the hundredth generation, from broyling in the fire of Purgatory. And (I hope)
it is no small merchandise of Souls, when men are so highly deluded by the
hopes and promise of Salvation, as to make a Friar murder his Henry 3. K. of
France.
Sovereign; a young knave attempt the murder of his next Henry 4.
Successor; many one to conspire and attempt the like against the late Queen;
and in my time, to attempt the destruction of a whole Kingdom and State by a
blast of Powder: and hereby to play bankerupt with both the souls mentioned
in the Scriptures, Animus and Anima.

But notwithstanding of this their great Lamentation, they are commanded by a
voice from heaven to do two things: Verse 4.
One, to flee from Babylon, least they be partakers of her sins, and
consequently of her punishment. Which warning I pray God that ye all, my
Beloved Brethren and Cosins, would take heed unto in time, humbly beseeching
him to open your eyes for this purpose. The other command is, to reward her as
she has rewarded you; Verse 6
yea, even to the double. For as she did fly but with your feathers, borrowing
as well her Titles of greatness and forms of honoring her from you; as also
enjoying all her temporal living by your liberalities; so if every man do but
take his own again, she will stand up Cornicula Aesopica.
naked; and the reason is given, because of her pride. For she glorifieth her
self living in pleasure, Verse 7
and in her heart says, she sits as a Queen (outward prosperity being one
of their notes of a true Church) and is no Widow; for her Spouse CHRIST is
bound to her by an inviolable knot (for he has sworn never to forsake her)
and she shall see no mourning: for she cannot err, nor the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against her.

But though the earth and worldly men lament thus for the fall of Babylon in
this eighteenth Chapter, Cap. xix. Verse 1.
yet in the nineteenth Heaven and all the Angels and Saints therein do sing a
triumphall Cantique for joy of her fall; praising God for the fall of that
great Whore: Verse 2.
Great indeed, for our Bellar. in Resad Gerson. consid. 11.
Cardinal confesses, that it is hard to describe what the Pope is, such is
his greatness. And in the end of that Chapter is the obstinacy of that
Whore described, Verse 19
who even fought to the uttermost against him that sat on the white Horse,
Verse 20.
and his army, till the Beast or Antichrist was taken, and the false Prophet,
or false Church with him, who by Miracles, and lying Wonders deceived them that
received the mark of the Beast; and both were casten quick into the burning
lake of fire and brimstone; Vnde null redemptio. Like as in the end of the
former Chapter, to describe the fullness of the Antichrists fall (not like to
that reparable wound that Ethnicke Rome gate) it is first compared to a
Millstone cast in the sea, Cap. 18.21
that can never rise and fleet again: Ibidem. Verse 22, 23
And next it is expressed by a number of joyful things that shall never be
heard there again, where nothing shall inhabit but desolation. But that the
patience and constancy of Saints on earth, and God his Elected may the better
be strengthened and confirmed; their persecution in the latter days, is
shortly prophesied and repeated again, Cap. xx. Verse 2
after that Satan has been bound, or his fury restrained, by the worlds
inioying of peace for a thousand years, or a great indefinite time; their
persecutors being named Gog and Magog, Verse 8
the secret and revealed enemies of CHRIST. Whether this be meant of the Pope
and the Turk, or not; (who both began to rise to their greatness about one
time) I leave to be guessed; Verse 9.
always their utter confusion is there assuredly promised: and it is said;
that the Dragon, the Beast, Verse 10.
and the false Prophet, shall all three be cast in that lake of fire and
brimstone, to be tormented for ever. And thereafter is the latter day described
again (which must be hastened for the elects sake) and then for the further
comfort of the Elect, Verse 11, 12, 13 Matthew. 24 22
and that they may the more constantly and patiently endure these temporal and
finite troubles, limited but to a short space; Chap. xxj.xxij
in the last two Chapters are the joys of the eternal Jerusalem largely
described.

Thus has the Cardinals shameless wresting of those two places of Scripture,
Pasce oues meas, and Tibi dabo claues, for proouing of the Popes supreme
temporal Authority over Princes; animated me to prove the Pope to be THE
ANTICHRIST, out of this foresaid book of Scripture; so to pay him in his own
money again. And this opinion no Pope can ever make me to recant; except they
first renounce any further meddling with Princes, in any thing belonging to
their temporal Jurisdiction. And my only wish shall be, that if any man shall
have a fancy to refute this my conjecture of the Antichrist; that he answer
me orderly to every point of my discourse: not contenting him to disprove my
opinion, except he set down some other method after his form for
interpretation of that book of the Apocalypse, which may not contradict no part
of the Text, nor contain no absurdities. Otherwise, it is an easy thing for
Momus to pick quarrels in another man's tale, and tell it worse himself; it
being a more easy practice to find faults, then to amend them.

Having now made this digression anent the Antichrist, which I am sure I can
better fasten upon the Pope, then Bellarmine can do his pretended temporal
Superiority over Kings: I will return again to speak of this Answerer; who
(as I have already told you) so fitteth his matter with his manner of
answering, that as his Style is nothing but a Satyr and heap full of
injurious and reproachful speeches, as well against my Person, as my Book; so
is his matter as full of lies and falsities indeed, as he unjustly lays to my
charge. For three lies he makes against the Oath of Allegiance, contained and
maintained in my Book: besides that ordinary repeated lie against my Book; of
his omitting to answer my lies, trattles, injurious speeches and blasphemies.
One gross lie he makes even of the Popes first Breue. One lie of the
Puritanes, whom he would gladly have to be of his party. And one also of the
Powder-Traitors, anent the occasion that moved them to undertake that
treasonable practice. Three lies he makes of that Act of Parliament wherein
this Oath of Allegiance is contained. He also makes one notable lie against
his own Catholic Writers. And two, of the causes for which two Jesuits have
been put to death in England. And he either falsifies, denies or wrests five
sundry Histories and a printed Pamphlet: besides that impudent lie that he
makes of my Person; that I was a Puritan in Scotland, which I have already
refuted. And for the better filling up of his book with such good stuff; he
has also five so strange and new principles of Divinity therein, as they are
either new, or at least allowed by very few of his own Religion. All which
lies, with diverse others, and five strange, and (as I think) erroneous points
of Doctrine, with s^n dry falsifications of Hystories; are set down in a Table
by themselves in the end of this my Epistle, having their Refutation annexed to
every one of them.

But as for the particular answering of his book; it is both unnecessary and
uncomely for me to make a Reply. Unnecessary, because (as I have already told
you) my Book is never yet answered so far as belongs to the maine question
anent the Oath of Allegiance: the picking of advantage upon the wrong placing
of the figures in the citations, or such errors in the Print by casual
addition, or omission of words that make nothing to the Argument; being the
greatest weapons wherewith he assaults my Book. And uncomely it must needs be
(in my opinion) for a King to fall in altercation with a Cardinal, at least
with one no more nobly descend^d then he is: That Ecclesiastical dignity,
though by the sloth of Princes (as I said before) it be now come to that
height of usurped honor, yet being in the true original and foundation
thereof nothing else, but the title of the Priests and Deacons of the parish
Churches in the town of Rome; at the first, the style of Cardinals being
generally given to all Priests and Deacons of any Cathedral Church, though
the multitude of such Cardinal Priests and Deacons resorting to Rome, was the
cause that after bred the restraining of that title of Cardinal Priests and
Deacons, only to the Parish priests and Deacons of Rome. And since that it is
S. Gregory, who in his Epistles six hundredth years after CHRIST, makes the
first mention of Cardinals (and so these now Electours of the Apostolic Sea,
being long and many hundredth years unknown or unheard of, after the
Apostol^ke age; and yet does he speak of them but in this sense, as I have now
described) I hope the Cardinal, who calls him the Apostle of England, cannot
blame me that am King thereof, to acknowledge the Cardinal in no other degree
of honor, then our said Apostle did. But how they should now become to be so
strangely exalted above their first original institution, that from
Parish Priests and Deacons (Priests inferiors) they should now come to be
Princes and Peers to Kings: and from a degree under Bishops (as both Lib. de
Clericis, cap. 16.
Bellarmine and Lib. de Episcopatibus, Titulis and Diaconijs Cardinalium.
Onuphrius confess (to be now the Popes sole Electors, su^plying with him the
place of a General Counsel; whereby the conuening of general Councels is now
utterly antiquated and abolished; nay, out of their number only, the Pope to
be elected; who claims the absolute Superiority over all Kings: how this
their strange usurped exaltation (I say) should thus creep in and be suffered,
it belongs all them in our place and calling to look unto it; who being GOD
his Lieute^a^ts in earth, have good reason to be jealous of such vpstart
Princes, mean in their original, come to that height by their own creation,
and now accounting themselves Kings fellows. But the special harm they do
us, is by their defrauding us of our common and Christian interest in general
Councels; they having (as I said) utterly abolished the same, by rolling it up
and making as it were a Monopoly thereof, in their Conclaue with the Pope.
Whereas, if ever there were a possibility to be expected of reducing all
Christians to an uniformity of Religion, it must come by the means of a
general Council: the place of their meeting being chosen so indifferent, as
all Christian Princes, either in their own Persons, or their Deputy
Commissioners, and all Church men of Christian profession that believe and
profess all the ancient grounds of the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic
Faith, might have tutum accessum thereunto; All the incendiaries and Nouelist
firebrarnds on either side being debarred from the same, as well Jesuits as
Puritanes.

And therefore having resolved not to pain my self with making a Reply for
these reasons here specified, grounded as well upon the consideration of the
matter, as of the person of the Answerer; I have thought good to content my
self with the reprinting of my Apology: having in a manner corrected nothing
but the Copiers or Printers faults therein, and prefixed this my Epistle of
Dedication and Warning thereunto; that I may yet see, if any thing will be
justly said against it: Not doubting but enough of my Subjects will reply upon
these Libellers, and answer them sufficiently; wishing YOU deeply to
consider, and weigh your common interest in this Cause. For neither in all my
Apology, nor in his pretended Refutation thereof, is there any question made
anent the Popes power over me in particular, for the excommunicating or
deposing of me. For in my particular; the Cardinal does me that grace, that
he says, The Pope thought it not expedient at this time to excommunicate me by
name; our question being only general, Whether the Pope may lawefully
pretend any temporal power over Kings, or no?

That no Church men can by his rule be subject to any temporal Prince, I have
already showed you; And what obedience any of you may look for of any of them
de facto, he plainly forewarneth you of, by the example of Gregory the Great
his obedience to the Emperor Mauritius: not being ashamed to slander that
great Personages Christian humility and obedience to the Emperor, with the
title of a constrained and forced obedience, because he might, or durst do no
otherwise. Whereby he not only wrongs the said Gregory in particular, but
even does by that means lay on an heavy slander and reproach upon the
Christian humility and patience of the whole Primitive Church, especially in
the time of persecution: if the whole glory of their Martyrdom and Christian
patience shall be thus blotted with that vile gloss of their coacted and
constrained suffering, because they could or durst do no otherwise; like the
patience and obedience of the Jews or Turkish slaves in our time clean
contrary to S. Paul and S. Pe^^rs doctrine of obedience for conscience sake;
Romans 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and as contrary to Tertullians Apology for Christians, and all the
protestations of the ancient Fathers in that case. But it was good luck for
the ancient Christians in the days of Ethnicke Emperors, that this profane
and new conceit was yet unknown among them: otherwise they would have bin
utterly destroyed and rooted out in that time, and no man to have pitied them,
as most dangerous members in a Commonwealth, who would no longer be obedient,
then till they were furnished with sufficient ability and power to resist and
rebel.

Thus may ye see, how upon the one part our Cardinal will have all Kings and
Monarchs to be the Popes Vassals; and yet will not on the other side, allow the
meanest of the Pope his vassals, to be subject to any Christian Prince. But he
not thinking it enough to make the Pope our Superior, has in a late Treatise
of his (called the Recognition of his books of Controversies) made the people
and Subjects of every one of us, our Superiors. For having taken occasion to
reuisite again his books of Controversies and to correct or explain what he
finds amiss or mistaketh in them; in imitation of S. Augustine his
retractions (for so he says in his Preface) he does in place of retracting
any of his former errors, or any matter of substance; not retract, but recant
indeed, I mean sing over again, and obstinatly confirm a number of the
grossest of them. Among the which, the exempting of all Churchmen from
subjection to any Temporal Prince, and the setting up not only of the Pope,
but even of the People above their natural King; are two of his maine points.

As for the exemption of the Clerickes; he is so greedy there to prove that
point, Acts 25.10.
as he denies Caesar to have been Paul's lawful Judge: contrary to the
express Text, and Paul's plain Appellation, and acknowledging him his Judge;
besides his many times claiming to the Roman privileges, Acts 22.28.
and auowing himself a Roman by freedom; and therefore of necessity a
Subject to the Roman Emperor. But it is a wonder that these Roman Catholics,
who vaunt themselves of the ancientie both of their doctrine and Church, and
reproach us so bitterly of our Novelties, should not be ashamed to make such a
new inept gloss as this upon S. Paul's Text; which as it is directly contrary
to the Apostles words, so is it without any warrant, either of any ancient
Council, or of so much as any one particular Father that ever interpre^s that
place in this sort: Neither was it ever doubted by any Christian in the
Primitive Church, that the Apostles, or any other degree of Christians, were
subject to the Emperor.

And as for the setting up of the People above their own natural King, he
brings in that principle of Sedition, that he may thereby prove, that Kings
have not their power and authority immediately from God, as the Pope has his:
For every King (says he) is made and chosen by his people; nay, they do but so
transfer their power in the Kings person, as they do notwithstanding retain
their habitual power in their own hands, which upon certain ocasions they
may actually take to themselves again. This, I am sure, is an excellent ground
in Diuini^^e for all R^bels and rebellious people, who are hereby allowed to
rebel against their Princes; and assume liberty unto themselves, when in
their discretions they shall think it convenient.

And amongst his other Testimonies for probation, that all Kings are made and
created by the People; he alleges the Creation of three Kings in the
Scripture, Saul, David and Jeroboam; and though he be compelled by the express
words of the Text, to confess, that God by his Prophet Samuel anointed both 1.
Sam. 10.1
Saul and 1. Sam. 16.12.13.
David; yet will he, by the post-consent of the people, prove that those Kings
were not immediately made by God, but mediatly by the people; though he repeat
thrice that word of Lot, by the casting whereof he confesses that Saul was
chosen. And if the Election by Lot be not an immediate Election from God;
Acts 1.
then was not Matthias, who was so chosen and made an Apostle, immediately
chosen by God: and consequently, he that sits in the Apostolic Sea cannot
for shame claim to be immediately chosen by God, if Matthias (that was one of
the twelve Apostles, supplying Judas his place) was not so chosen. But as it
were a blasphemous impiety, to doubt that Matthias was immediately chosen by
God, and yet was he chosen by the casting of Lots, as Saul was: so is it well
enough known to some of you (my loving Brethren) by what holy Spirit or
casting of Lots the Popes use to be elected; the College of Cardinals, his
electors, having been divided in two mighty factions ever since long before my
time; and in place of casting of Lotts, great fat pensions being cast into
some of their greedy mouths for the election of the Pope, according to the
partial humors of Princes. But I do most of all wonder at the weakness of
his memory: for in this place he makes the post consent of the people to be
the thing that made both these Kings, notwithstanding of their preceding
inauguration and anoyntment by the Prophet at GODS commandment; forgetting
that in the beginning of this same little book of his, answering one that
alleges a sentence of S. Cyprian, to prove that the Bishops were judged by
the people in Cyprians time, he there confesses, that by these words, the
consent of the people to the Bishops election must be only understood. Nor
will he there any ways be moved to grant, that the peoples power, in
consenting to or refusing the Election of a Bishop; should be so understood, as
that thereby they have power to elect Bishops: And yet do these words of Cyprian
seem to be far stronger for granting the peoples power to elect Churchmen,
then any words that he alleges out of the Scripture are for the peoples
power in electing a King. For the very words of Cyprian by himself there cited
are, Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
That the very people have principally the power, either to choose such Priests
as are worthy, or to refuse such as are unworthy: And, I hope, he can never
prove by the Scripture, that it had been lawful to the people of Israel, or
that it was left in their choice, to have admitted or refused Saul or David at
their pleasure, after that the Prophet had anointed them, and presented them
unto them.

Thus ye see how little he cares (even in so little a volume) to contradict
himself, so it may make for his purpose; making the consent of the people to
signify their power of Election in the making of Kings, though in the making
of Bishops, by the peoples consent, their approbauen of a deed done by others
must only be understood. And as for his example of Ieroboams election to be
king, 1. King. 12.20
he knows well enough, that Jeroboam was made King in a popular mutinous
tumult and rebellion; only permitted by God, and that in his wrath, both
against these two Kings and their people. But if he will needs help himself
against all rules of Divinity, with such an extraordinary example for proof of
a general Rule; why is it not as lawful for us Kings to oppose hereunto the
example of Iehu his Inauguration to the Kingdom; 2. King 9.2, ^.
who upon the Prophets private anointment of him, and that in most secret manner,
took presently the Kings office upon him, without ever craving any sort of
approbation from the people?

And thus may ye now clearly see, how deep the claim of the Babylonian
Monarch touches us in all our common interest: for (as I have already told)
the Pope, nor any of his Vassals, I mean Churchmen, must be subject to no
Kings nor Princes: and yet all Kings and their Vassals must not only be
subject to the Pope, but even to their own people. And now, what a large
liberty is by this doctrine left to Churchmen, to hatch or foster any
treasonable attempts against Princes, I leave it to your considerations, since
do what they will, they are accountable to none of us: nay, all their
treasonable practices must be accounted works of piety, and they (being
justly punished for the same) must be presently enrolled in the list of Martyrs
and Saints; like as our new printed Martyrologie has put Garnet and Ouldcorne
in the Register of English Martyrs abroad, that were hanged at home for Treason
against the Crown and whole State of England: so as I may justly with Isaiah,
Isai 5.20.
pronounce a Woe to them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; Verse 23.
which put light for darkness, and darkness for light; which justify the
wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him.
For even as in the time of the greatest blindness in Popery, though a man
should find his wife or his daughter lying a bed in her Confessors arms; yet
was it not lawful for him so much as to suspect that the Friar ahadny errand
there, but to Confess and instruct her: Even so, though Jesuits practicing in
Treason be sufficiently verified, and that themselves cannot but confess it;
yet must they be accounted to suffer Martyrdom for the Faith, and their blood
work miracles, and frame a stramineum argumentum upon strawes; when their heads
are standing aloft, withered by the Sun and the wind, a public spectacle
for the eternal commemoration of their treachery. Yea, one of the reasons,
that is given in the Printers Epistle of the Colonian edition of the Cardinal
or his Chaplains pamphlet, why he does the more willingly print it, is; because
that the innocence of that most holy and constant man Henry Garnet, is
declared and set forth in that book; against whom, some ( he knew not who) had
scattered a false rumor of his guiltiness of the English treason.

But, Lord, what an impudency or wilful ignorance is this, that he, who was
so publicly and solemnly convicted and executed, upon his own so clear,
unforced and often repeated confession, of his knowledge and concealing of that
horrible Treason, should now be said to have a certain rumor spread upon him of
his guiltiness, by I know not who? with so many attributes of godliness,
constancy and innocence bestowed upon him, as if public Sentences and
Executions of Justice, were rumors of I know not who. Indeed, I must confess,
the book it self shows a great affection to perform, what is thus promised
in the Preface thereof: for in two or three places therein, is there most
honorable lying mention made of that straw Saint; wherein, though he confess
that Garnet was upon the foreknowledge of the Powder Treason, yet in regard it
was (as he says) only under the Seal of Confession, he sticks not to praise
him for his concealing thereof, and would gladly give him the crown of glory
for the same: not being ashamed to proclaim it as a principal head of
Catholic doctrine; That the secret of Sacramental con^ession ought not to be
revealed, not for the eschewing of whatsoever evil. But how damnable this
doctrine is, and how dangerously pre^udiciall to all Princes and States; I
leave it to you to judge, whom all it most highly concerns. For although it
he true, that when the Schoolmen came to be Doctors in the Church, and to
mar the old grounds in Divinity by sowing in amongst them their
Philosophical distinctions: though they (I say) do maintain, That wha^soeeuer
thing is told a Confessor under the veil of confession, how dangerous soever
the matter be, yet he is bound to conceal the parties name: yet do none of
them, I mean of the old Schoolmen, deny, that if a matter be revealed unto
them, the concealing whereof may breed a great or public danger; but that in
that case the Confessor may disclose the matter, though not the person, and by
some indirect means make it come to light, that the danger thereof may be
prevented. But that no treason nor devilish plot, though it should tend to the
ruin or exterminion of a whole Kingdom, must be revealed, if it be told
under Confession; no not the matter so far indirectly disclosed, as may give
occasion for preventing the danger thereof: though it agree with the conceit of
some three or four new Iesuited Doctors, it is such a new and dangerous head
of doctrine, as no King nor State can live in security where that Position is
maintained.

And now, that I may as well prove him a liar in facto, in his narration of
this particular Hystory; as I have showed him to be in iure, by this his
damnable and false ground in Divinity: I will truly inform you of Garnets case,
which is far otherwise then this Answerer alleges. For first, it can never
be accounted a thing under Confession, which he that reueals it does not
discover with a remorse, accounting it a sin whereof he repents him; but by
the contrary, discouers it as a good motion, and is therein not dissuaded by
his Confessor, nor any penance enjoined him for the same: and in this form was
this Treason revealed to Garnet, as himself confessed. And next, though he
stood long upon it, that it was revealed unto him under the veil of
Confession, in respect it was done in that time, while as the party was making
his Confession unto him; Yet at the last he did freely confess, that the party
revealed it unto him as they were walking, and not in the time of Confession:
But (he said) he delivered it unto him under the greatest Seal that might
be, and so he took that he meant by the Seal of Confession; And it had (as he
thought) a relation to Confession, in regard that he was that parties
Confessor, and had taken his Confession sometimes before, and was to take it
again within few days thereafter. He also said, that he pretended to the
party, that he would not conceal it from his Superior. And further it is to
be noted, that he confessed, that two diverse persons conferred with him anent
this Treason; and that when the one of them, which was Catesby, conferred with
him thereupon, it was in the other parties presence and hearing: and what a
Confession can this be in the hearing of a third person? And how far his last
words (whereof our Answerer so much vaunts him) did disprove it to have been
under Confession, the Earl of Northamptons Book does bear witness.

Now as to the other parties name, that revealed the Powder Treason unto him,
it was Greenwell the Jesuit, and so a Jesuit revealed to a Jesuit this
treasonable plot, the Jesuit reuealer not showing any remorse, and the Jesuit
whom to it was revealed not so much as inioyning him any penance for the same.
And that ye may know that more Jesuits were also upon the party, Owldcorne
the other Powder-Martyr, after the misgiuing and discovery of that Treason,
preached consolatorie doctrine to his Catholic auditory; exhorting them not to
faint for the misgiuing of this enterprise, nor to think the worse thereof
that it succeeded not; alleging diverse Presidents of such godly enterprises
that misgaue in like manner: especially, one of Saint Lewis King of France, who
in his second journey to the Holy land, died by the way, the greatest part of
his army being destroyed by the plague; his first journey having likewise
misgiuen him by the Soldans taking of him: exhorting them thereupon not to give
over, but still to hope that God would bless their enterprise at some other
time, though this did fail.

Thus see ye now with what boldness and impudency he has belied the publicly
known verity in this errand, both in auowing generally that no Jesuit was
any ways guilty of that treason, for so he affirms in his Book; and also
that Garnet knew nothing thereof, but under the Seal of Confession. But if
this were the first lie of the affairs of this State, which my fugitive
Priests and Jesuits have coined and spread abroad, I could charm them of it,
as the proverb is. But as well the walls of diverse Monasteries and Jesuits
Colleges abroad, are filled with the painting of such lying Histories, as also
the books of our said fugitives are farced with such sort of shameless
stuff; such are the innumerable sorts of torments and cruel deaths, that
they record their Martyrs to have suffered here; some torn at four Horses;
some sowed in Bears skins, and then killed with Dogs: nay, women have not
been spared (they say) and a thousand other strange fictions, the vanities of
all which I will in two words discover unto you.

First as for the cause of their punishment, I do constantly maintain that
which I have said in my Apology: That no man, either in my time, or in the late
Queens, ever died here for his conscience. For let him be never so devout a
Papist, nay, though he profess the same never so constantly, his life is in
no danger by the Law, if he break not out into some outward act expressly
against the words of the Law, or plot not some unlawful or dangerous practice
or attempt; Priests and Popish Churchmen only excepted, that receive orders
beyond the seas; who for the manifold treasonable practices that they have
kindled and plotted in this country, are discharged to come home again under
pain of treason, after their receiving of the said Orders abroad; and yet,
without some other guilt in them then their bare home-comming, have none of
the^ bin ever put to death. And next, for the cruel torments and strange sorts
of death that they say so many of them have bin put unto; if there were no more
but the Law and continually observed custom of England, these many hundred
years, in all criminal matters, it will sufficiently serve to refute all
these monstrous lies: for no tortures are ever used here, but the Manicles or
the Rack, and these never but in cases of high Treason; and all sorts of
Traitors die but one manner of death here, whether they be Papist or
Protestant traitors; Queen Mary's time only excepted. For then indeed no
sorts of cruel deaths were spared unexecuted upon men, women and children
professing our Religion: yea, even against the laws of God and Nature, women
with child were put to cruel death for their profession; and a living child
falling out of the mothers belly, was thrown in the same fire again that
consumed the mother. But these tyrannous persecutions were done by the Bishops
of that time, under the warrant of the Popes authority, and therefore were not
subject to that constant order and forms of execution, which as they are here
established by our Laws and customs, so are they accordingly observed in the
punishment of all criminals. For all Priests and Popish Traitors here receive
their Judgment in the temporal Courts, and so do never exceed those forms
of execution which are prescribed by the Law, or approved by continual
custom. One thing is also to be marked in this case; that strangers are never
called in question here for their Religion, which is far otherwise (I hope) in
any place where the Inquisition domines.

But having now too much wearied you with this long discourse, whereby I have
made you plainly see, that the wrong done unto me in particular; first by the
Popes Breues, and then by these Libellers, does as deeply interest you all in
general, that are Kings, free Princes, or States, as it does me in
particular: I will now conclude, with my humble prayers to God, that he will
waken us up all out of that Lethargike slumber of Security, wherein our
Predecessors and we have lien so long; and that we may first gravely consider,
what we are bound in conscience to do for the planting and spreading of the
true worship of God, according to his revealed will, in all our Dominions;
therein hearing the voice of our only Pastor (for his Sheep will know his
voice, John 10.27.
as himself says) and not following the vain, corrupt and changeable
traditions of men. And next that we may prouidently look to the security of
our own States, and not suffer this incroching Babylonian Monarch to win
still ground upon us. And if God has so mercifully dealt with us, that are his
Lieutenants upon earth, as that he has joined his cause with our interest, the
spiritual liberty of the Gospel with our temporal freedom: with what zeal
and courage may we then embrace this work: for our labors herein being
assured, to receive at the last the eternal and inestimable reward of
felicity in the kingdom of Heaven; and in the mean time to procure unto our
selves a temporal security, in our temporal Kingdoms in this world.

As for so many of you as are already persuaded of that Truth which I profess,
though differing among your selves in some particular points; I think little
persuasion should move you to this holy and wise Resolution: Our Greatness, nor
our number, praised be God, being not so contemptible, but that we may show
good example to our neighbors; since almost the half of all Christian people
and of all sorts and degrees, are of our profession; I mean, all gone out of
Babylon, even from Kings and free Princes, to the meanest sort of people. But
above all (my loving Brethren and Cosins) keep fast the unity of Faith amongst
your selves; Reject 1. Tim. 1.4.
questions of Genealogies and Ibid. c. 4.7.
Aniles fabulas, as Paul says; Let not the foolish heat of your Preachers for
idle Controversies or indifferent things, tear asunder that mystical Body,
whereof ye are a part, since the very coat of him whose members we are was
without a seame: And let not our division breed a slander of our faith, and be
a word of reproach in the mouths of our adversaries, who make Unity to be one
of the special notes of the true Church.

And as for you (my loving Brethren and Cosins) whom it has not yet pleased
GOD to illuminate with the light of truth; I can but humbly pray with Elizeus,
that it would please GOD to open your eyes, that ye might see what innumerable
and invincible armies of Angels are ever prepared and ready to defend the truth
of GOD: Acts 26.29.
and with S. Paul I wish, that ye were as I am in this case; especially that
ye would search the Scriptures, and ground your Faith upon your own certain
knowledge, and not upon the report of others; since every Man must be saf^ by
his own faith. Abac. 2 4.
But, leaving this to GOD his merciful providence in his due time, I have good
reason to remember you, to maintain the ancient liberties of your Crowns and
Commonwealths, not suffering any under GOD to set himself up above you; and
therein to imitate your own noble predecessors, who (even in the days of
greatest blindness) did diverse times courageously oppose themselves to the
incroaching ambition of Popes. Yea, some of your Kingdoms have in all ages
maintained, and without any interruption enjoyed your liberty, against the
most ambitious Popes. And some have of very late had an evident proof of the
Popes ambitious aspiring over your temporal power; wherein ye have constantly
maintained and defended your lawful freedom, to your immortal honor. And
therefore I heartily wish you all, to do in this case the office of godly and
just Kings and earthly Judges: which consists not only in not wronging or
inuading the liberties of any other person (for to that will I never press to
persuade you) but also in defending and maintaining these lawful liberties
wherewith GOD has endued you. For ye, whom GOD has ordained to protect your
people from injuries, should be ashamed to suffer your selves to be wronged
by any. And thus, assuring my self, that ye will with a settled judgment free
of prejudice, weigh the reasons of this my Discourse, and accept my plainness
in good part, gracing this my Apology with your favors, and yet no longer
then till it shall be justly and worthily refuted; I end, with my earnest
prayers to the Almighty for your prosperities, and that after your happy
temporal Reigns in earth, ye may live and reign in Heaven with him for ever.

A CATALOGVE OF the Lies of Tortus, together with a brief Confutation of them.
Tortus. Edit. Politan. page 9.
1 IN the oath of Allegiance the Popes power to excommunicate even Heretical
Kings, is expressly denied.

Confutation.
The point touching the Popes power in excommunicating Kings, is neither
treated of, nor defined in the Oath of Allegiance, but was purposely declined.
See the words of the Oath, and the Praemonition. page 9.

Tortus. p. 10.
2 For all Catholic writers do collect from the words of Christ, Whatsoever
thou shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven, that there
appertains to the Popes authority, not only a power to absolve from sins,
but also from penalties, censures, laws, vows and oaths.

Confutation.
That all Roman-catholike writers do not concur with this Libeller, in thus
collecting from Christ's words, Mat. 16. To omit other reasons, it may appear
by this that many of them do write. That what Christ promised there, that he
did actually exhibit to his disciples John 20. when he said, whose sins ye
remit, they shall be remitted, thereby restraining this power of loosing
formerly promised, unto loosing from sins, not mentioning any absolution from
laws, vows and oaths in this place. So do Theophylact, Anselme, Hugo
Cardin. and Ferus in Mat. 16. So do the principal Schoolmen. Alexand. Hales
in Summa. part 4. q. 79. memb. 5. and 6. art. 3. Thom. in 4. did. 24. q. 3.
art. 2. Scotus in 4. did. 19. art. 1. Pope Hadrian. 6. in 4. did. q. 2. de
clauib. page 302. edit. Parsien. an. 1530. who also alleges for this
interpretation, Augustine and the interlinear Gloss.

Tortus. p. 18.
3 I abhor all Parricide, I detest all conspiracies: yet it cannot be denied
but occasions of despair were given [to the Powder-plotters.]

Confutation.
That it was not any just occasion of despair given to the powder-Traitours,
as this Libeller would bear us in hand, but the instructions which they had
from the Jesuits, that caused them to attempt this bloody design: See the
Praemonition, page 127. and the book entitled, The proceedings against the
late Traitors.

Tortus. p. 26.
4 For not only the Catholics, but also the Caluinist-puritanes detest the
taking of this Oath.

Confutation.
The Puritanes do not decline the Oath of Supremacy, but daily do take it,
neither ever refused it. And the same Supremacy is defended by Calvin
himself, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20.

Tortus. p. 28.
5 First of all the Pope writes not, that he was grieved at the calamities
which the Catholics did suffer for the keeping of the Orthodox faith in the
time of the late Queen, or in the beginning of King James his reign in
England, but for the calamities which they suffer at this present time.

Confutation.
The only recital of the words of the Breue will sufficiently confute this
lie. For thus writes the Pope. The tribulations and calamities which ye have
continually sustained for the keeping of the Catholic faith, have always
afflicted us with great grief of mind. But forasmuch as we understand, that
at this time all things are more grievous, our affliction hereby is wonderfully
increased.

Tortus. p. 28.
6 In the first article [of the Statute] the Laws of Queen Elizabeth are
confirmed.

Confutation.
There is no mention at all made of confirming the Laws of Q. Elizabeth, in
the first article of that Statute.

Tortus. p. 29.
7 In the 10. article [of the said Statute] it is added, that if the
[Catholikes] refuse the third time to take the Oath being tendered unto them,
they shall incur the danger of loosing their lives.

Confutation.
There is no mention in this whole Statute either of offering the oath the third
time, or any endangering of their lives.

Tortus. p. 30.
8 In the 12. article, it is enacted, that whosoever goes out of the land to
serve in the wars under foreign Princes, they shall first of all take this
Oath, or else be accounted for Traitors.

Confutation.
It is no where said in that Statute, that they which shall thus serve in the
wars under foreign Princes, before they have taken this Oath, shall be
accounted for Traitors, but only for felons.

Tortus. p. 35.
9 We have already declared, that the [ Popes] Apostolic power in binding and
loosing is denied in that Oath [of Allegiance.]

Confutation.
There is no assertory sentence in that Oath, nor any word but only
conditional, touching the power of the Pope in binding and loosing.

Tortus. p. 37.
10 The Popes themselves, even will they, nill they, were constrained to subject
themselves to Nero and Diocletian.

Confutation.
That Christians without exception, not upon constraint but willingly and for
conscience sake, did subject themselves to the Ethnicke Emperors, it may
appear by our Apology, p. 23, 24. and the Apologetickes of the ancient
Fathers.

Tortus. p. 47.
11 In which words [of the Breues of Clement the 8.] not only James King of
Scotland, was not excluded, but included rather.

Confutation.
If the Breues [of Clement] did not exclude me from the Kingdom, but rather
did include me, why did Garnet burn them? why would he not reserve them that I
might have seen them, that so he might have obtained more favor at mine
hands, for him and his Catholics?

Tortus. p. 60.
12 Of those 14. articles [contained in the Oath of Allegeance] eleven of them
concern the Primacie of the Pope in matters spiritual.

Confutation.
No one article of that Oath does meddle with the Primacie of the Pope in
matters spiritual: for to what end should that have been, since we have an
express Oath els-where against the Popes Primacie in matters spiritual?

Tortus. p. 64.
13 Amongst other calumnies this is mentioned, that Bellarmine was privy to
sundry conspiracies against Q Elizabeth, if not the author.

Confutation.
It is no where said [in the Apologie] that Bellarmine was either the Author,
or privy to any conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth but that he was their
principal instructor and teacher, who corrupted their judgment with such
dangerous positions and principles, that it was an easy matter to reduce the
generals into particulars, and to apply the dictates which he gave out of his
Chair, as opportunity served, to their several designs.

Tortus. p. 64.
14 For he [ Bellarmine] knows, that Campian only conspired against
Heretical impiety.

Confutation.
That the true and proper cause of Campians execution, was not for his
conspiring against heretical impiety, but for conspiring against Queen
Elizabeth, and the State of this Kingdom, it was most evident by the judicial
proceedings against him.

Tortus. p. 65.
15 Why was H. Garnet, a man incomparable for learning in all kinds, and
holiness of life, put to death, but because he would not reveal that which
he could not do with a safe conscience?

Confutation.
That Garnet came to the knowledge of this horrible plot not only in
confession, as this Libeller would have it, but by other means, neither by the
relation of one alone, but by diverse, so as he might with safe conscience have
disclosed it; See the Premonition, p. 125, 126, etc. and the Earl of
Northamptons Book.

Tortus. p. 71.
16 Pope Sixtus 5. neither commanded the French King to be murdered, neither
approved that fact, as it was done by a private person.

Confutation.
The falsehood of this does easily appear by the Oration of Sixtus. 5.

Tortus. p. 91.
17 That which is added concerning Stanley his Treason, is neither faithfully
nor truly related: for the Apologer (as his manner is) does miserably deprave
it, by adding many lies.

Confutation.
That which the Apology relates concerning Stanley his Treason, is word for
word recited out of Cardinal Allens Apology for Stanley^s treason, as it is
to be seen there.

Tortus. p. 93.
18 It is very certain that H. Garnet at his arraignment, did always
constantly avouch, that neither he nor any Jesuit either were authors, or
compartners, or aduisers, or consenting any way [to the Powder Treason.] And a
little after. The same thing he protested at his death in a large speech, in
the presence of innumerable people.

Confutation.
The book of the proceedings against the late Traitors, and our Premonition,
page 125, 126, etc. do clearly prove the contrary of this to be true.

Tortus. p. 97.
19 King James since he is no Catholic, neither is he a Christian.

Confutation.
Contrary: I am a true Catholic, a professor of the truly ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic faith: and therefore am a true Christian. See the
confession of my faith in the Premonition. page 35, 36, etc.

Tortus. p. 98.
20 And if the reports of them, which knew him most inwardly, be true, When he
was in Scotland, he was a Puritan, and an Enemy to Protestants: Now in
England he professes himself a Protestant, and an Enemy to the Puritans.

Confutation.
Contrary; and what a Puritan I was in Scotland: See my (...): and this my
Premonition. p. 44, 45.

His falsifications in his alleging of Histories, together with a brief
declaration of their falsehood.
The words of Tortus. p. 70.
1 IT was certain that he [ Hnery 4. the Emperour] died a natural death.

Confutation.
It was not certain: since sundry Historians write otherwise, that he dyed
upon his imprisonment by his son Henry 5. either with the noisomeness and
loathsomenesse of the prison, or being pined to death by hunger. Read
Fasciculus temporum at the year 1094. Laziardus epitom. universal. Histor. c.
198. Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizensi at the year 1105. and Iacobus
Wimphelingus epitome Rerum Germanic. c. 28.

Tortus. p. 83.
2 Henry 4. the Emperor feared indeed, but not any corporal death, but the
censure of Excommunication, from the which that he might procure absolution, of
his own accord, he did thus demissely humble himself [before Gregory 7.]

Confutation.
That Henry 4. thus dejected himself before the Pope, it was neither of his
own accord, neither upon any fear of the Popes Excommunication, which [in
this particular] he esteemed of no force: but upon fear of the loss of his
kingdom and life, as the records of antiquity do evidently testify. See
Lambertus Schafnaburg. at the year 1077. Abbas Vispergen at the year 1075.
The author of the life of Henry 4. Bruno in his History of the Saxon war.
Laziard. in epitom. universal. Histor. c. 193. Cuspian. in Henric. 4. Sigonius
de Regno Italiae lib. 9.

Tortus. p. 83.
3 The truth of the History [of Alexander 3. treading upon the neck of
Frederick Barbarossa with his foote] may be justly doubted of.

Confutation.
But no Historian doubts of it; and many do avouch it, as Hieronym. Bard. in
victor. Naual. ex Bessarion. Chronico apud Baro. ad ann. 1177. number. 5. Gerson
de potestate Ecclesiae consid. 11. Jacob Bergom. in supplem. Chron. ad an.
1160. Nauclerus Gener. 40. Petrus Justinian li. 2. Rerum Venetar. Papirius
Masson. lib. 5. de Episcop. vrbis, who also alleges for this Gennadius
Patriarch of Constantinople. Besides Alphonsus Ciacconius de vit. Pontif. in
Alexand. 3. and Azorius the Jesuit. Instit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 5. c. 43.

Tortus. p. 83.
4 What other thing feared Frederick Barbarossa but Excommuniticaon?

Confutation.
That Frederick feared only Pope Alexander his Excommunication, no ancient
Historian does testify. But many do write, that this submission of his was
principally for fear of loosing his Empire and Dominions. See for this,
Martin. Polon. ad an. 1166. Platina in vita Alexand. 3. Laziard. in epitom.
Historiae universal. c. 212. Naucler. generat. 40. Iacobus Wimphelingus in
epitom. Rerum Germanic. c. 32.

Tortus. p. 88.
5 Add heereunto, that Cuspinian. [in relating the history of the Turks
brother who was poisoned by Alexander 6.] has not the consent of other Writers
to witness the truth of this History.

Confutation.
The same History which is reported by Cuspinian, is recorded also by sundry
other famous Historians. See Francis Guicciardin. lib. 2. Histor. Ital. Paulus
Iouius lib. 2. Hist. sui temporis. Sabellic. Ennead. 10. lib. 9. Continuator.
Palmerij, at the year 1494.

The novel Doctrines, with a brief declaration of their Novelty.
Novel doctrine, p. 9.
1 IT is agreed upon amongst all, that the Pope may lawfully depose Heretical
Princes, and free their Subjects from yielding obedience unto them.

Confutation.
Nay, all are so far from consenting in this point, that it may much more
truly be avouched, that none entertained that conceit before Hildebrand: since
he was the first broacher of this new doctrine never before heard of, as many
learned men of that age, and the age next following (to omit others of
succeeding ages) have expressly testified. See for this point, the Epistle of
the whole Clergy of Liege to Pope Paschal the 2. See the judgment of many
Bishops of those times, recorded by Auentine in his history, lib. 5. fol. 579.
Also the speech uttered by Conrade Bishop of Vtrecht, in the said 5. book of
Auentine, fol. 582. And another by Eberhardus, Archbishop of Saltzburge. Ibid.
lib. 7. p. 684. Also the judgment of the Archbishop of Triers, in constitut.
Imperialib. a M. Haimensfeldio editis. page 47. The Epistle of Walthram Bishop
of Megburgh, which is extant in Dodechine his Appendix to the Chronicle of
Marianus Scotus, at the year 1090. Benno in the life of Hildebrand. The author
of the book De vnitate Ecclesiae, or the Apology for Henry the 4. Sigebert in
his Chronicle, at the year 1088. Godfrey of Viterbio in his History entitled
Pantheon, part. 17. Otho Frisingensis, lib. 6. c. 35. and praefat. in lib. 7.
Frederick Barbarossa. lib. 6. Gunther. Ligurin. de gestis Frederici, and lib.
1. c. 10. of Raduicus, de gestis eiusdem Frederici. Vincentius in speculo
historiali lib. 15. c. 84. with sundry others.

Novel Doctrine. p. 51.
2 In our supernatural birth in Baptism we are to conceive of a secret and
implied oath, which we take at our new birth to yield obedience to the
spiritual Prince, which is Christ's Vicar.

Confutation.
It is to be wondered at whence this fellow had this strange new divinity,
which surely was first framed in his own fantastical brain. Else let him make
us a Catalogue of his Authors, that hold and teach, that all Christians,
whether infants or of age, are by virtue of an oath taken in their Baptism,
bound to yield absolute obedience to Christ's Vicar the Pope, or baptized in any
but in Christ.

Novel Doctrine. p. 94.
2 But since that Catholic doctrine does not permit, for the auoidance of any
mischief whatsoever, to discover the secret of Sacramental confession, he [
Garnet] rather chose to suffer most bitter death, then to violate the seal of
so great a Sacrament.

Confutation.
That the secret of Sacramental confession is by no means to be disclosed,
no not indirectly, or in general, so the person confessing be concealed, for
auoydance and prevention of no mischief, how great soever: Besides that it is
a position most dangerous to all Princes and Common wealths, as I show in my
Premonition, page 122, 123. it is also a Novel Assertion, not heard of till of
late days in the Christian world: Since the common opinion even of the
Schoolmen and Canonistes both old and new, is unto the contrary, Witness
these Authors following: Alexand. Hales part. 4. qu. 78. mem. 2. art. 2. Thom.
4. did. 21. q. 3. art. 1. ad. 1. Scotus in 4. did. 21. q. 2. Hadrian. 6. in
4. did. vbi de Sacram. Confess. edit. Paris. 1530. page 289. Dominic. Sot. in
4. did. 18. q. 4. art. 5. Francis. de victor. sum. de Sacram. n. 189. Nauar.
in Enchirid. c. 8. Joseph. Angles in Florib. part 1. page 247. edit. Antuerp.
Petrus Soto lect. 11. de confess. The Jesuits also accord hereunto, Suarez.
Tom. 4. disp. in 3. part. Thom. disp. 33.. 3. Gregor. de Valentia. Tom. 4.
disp. 7. q. 13. punct. 3. who says the common opinion of the Schoolmen is so.

Novel Doctrine. p. 102.
4 I dare boldly auow, that the Catholics have better reason to refuse the
Oath [of Alleageance] then Eleazar had to refuse the eating of swines flesh.

Confutation.
This assertion implies a strange doctrine in deed, that the Popes Breues are
to be preferred before Moses Law: And that Papists are more bound to obey the
Popes decree, then the Jews were to obey the Law of God pronounced by Moses.

Novel Doctrine. p. 135.
5 Churchmen are exempted from the Jurisdiction of secular Princes, and
therefore are no subjects to Kings: yet ought they to observe their Laws
concerning matters temporal, not by virtue of any Law, but by enforcement of
reason, that is to say, not for that they are their Subjects, but because
reason will give it, that such Laws are to be kept for the public good, and
quiet of the Commonwealth.

Confutation.
How true friends the Cardinal and his Chaplen are to Kings, that would have
so many Subjects exempted from their power: See my Premonition, p. 20, 21. Also
p. 114, 115. etc. But as for this and the like new Aphorisms, I would have
these cunning Merchants to cease to vent such stuff for ancient and Catholic
wares in the Christian world, till they have disproued their own Venetians,
who charge them with Novelty, and forgery in this point,

Triplici nodo, triplex cuneus. OR AN APOLOGY FOR THE OATH of Allegiance.
Against the two Breues of Pope PAVLVS QVINTVS, and the late Letter of Cardinal
BELLARMINE to G. BLACKVVEL the Archpriest.

Tunc omnes populi clamauerunt and dixerunt,
Magna est Veritas, and praeualet. ESDR. 3.
Authoritate Regia.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1609.



AN APOLOGY FOR THE OATH of Allegiance.
WHat a monstrous, rare, nay never heard of Treacherous Attempt, was plotted
within these few years here in England, for the destruction of Me, my
Bedfellow, and our Posterity, the whole house of Parliament, and a great
number of good Subjects of all sorts and degrees: is so famous already through
the whole world by the infamy thereof, as it is needless to be repeated or
published any more; the horror of the sin it self does so lowdly proclaim
it. For if those Gen 4.10.
crying Sins (whereof mention is made in the Scripture) have that epithete
given them for their public infamy, and for procuring as it were with a loud
cry from heaven a just vengeance and recompense; and yet those sins are both
old and too common, neither the world nor any one Country being ever at any
time clean void of them: If those sins (I say) are said in the Scripture to
cry so loud; What then must this sin do, plotted without cause, infinite in
cruelty, and singular from all examples? What proceeded hereupon is likewise
notorious to the whole world; our Justice only taking hold upon the
Offenders, and that in as honorable and public a form of Trial, as ever was
used in this Kingdom.

2. For although the only reason they gave for plotting so heinous an Attempt,
was the zeal they carried to the Romish Religion; yet were never any other of
that profession the worse used for that cause, as by our gracious Proclamation
immediately after the discovery of the said fact does plainly appear: only
at the next sitting down again of the Parliament, there were Laws made,
setting down some such orders as were thought fit for preventing the like
mischief intime to come. Amongst which a form of OATH was framed to be taken
by my Subjects, whereby they should make a clear profession of their
resolution, faithfully to persist in their obedience unto me, according to
their natural allegiance; To the end that I might hereby make a separation,
not only between all my good Subjects in general, and unfaithful Traitors,
that intended to withdraw themselves from my obedience; But specially to make a
separation between so many of my Subjects, who although they were otherwise
popishly affected, yet retained in their hearts the print of their natural
duty to their Sovereign; and those who being carried away with the like
fanaticall zeal that the Powder-Traitors were, could not contain themselves
within the bounds of their natural Allegiance, but thought diversity of
religion a safe pretext for all kind of treasons, and rebellions against their
Sovereign. Which godly and wise intent God did bless with success
accordingly: For very many of my Subjects that were popishly affected, as well
priests, as layicks, did freely take the same Oath: whereby they both gave me
occasion to think the better of their fidelity, and likewise freed themselves
of that heavy slander, that although they were fellow professors of one
Religion with the powder Traitors, yet were they not joined with them in
treasonable courses against their Sovereign; whereby all quietly minded
Papists were put out of despair, and I gave a good proof that I intended no
persecution against them for conscience cause, but only desired to be secured
of them for civil obedience, which for conscience cause they were bound to
perform.

3. But the devil could not have devised a more malicious trick for
interrupting this so calm and clement a course, then fell out by the sending
hither, and publishing a Breue of the Popes, countermaunding all them of his
profession to take this Oath; Thereby sowing new seeds of jealousy between me
and my Popish Subjects, by stirring them up to disobey that lawful
commandment of their Sovereign, which was ordained to be taken of them as a
pledge of their fidelity; And so by their re^usall of so just a charge, to give
me so great and just a ground for punishment of them, without touching any
matter of cons^: throwing themselves needlesl^ (...) of these desperate
straites: (...) loss of their lives and (...) their Allegiance to the^^ (...);
or else to procure the condemnation of their Souls by renouncing the Catholic
faith, as he alleges.

4. And on the other part, although disparity of Religion (the Pope being head
of the contrary part) can permit no intelligence nor intercourse of messengers
betwerne me and the Pope: yet there being no denounced war between us, he
has by this action broken the rules of common ciuility and justice between
Christian Princes, in thus condemning me unheard, both by accounting me a
persecutor, which can not be but employed by exhorting the Papists to endure
Martyrdom; as likewise by so straightly commanding all those of his Profession
in England, to refuse the taking of this Oath; thereby refusing to profess
their natural obedience to me their Sovereign. For if he think himself my
lawful Judge, wherefore has he condemned me unheard? And, if he have nothing
to do with me and my government (as indeed he has not) why does he mittere
falcem in alienam messem, to meddle between me and my Subjects, especially in
matters that merely and only concern civil obedience? And yet could Pius
Quintus in his greatest fury and auowed quarrel against the late Queen, do
no more injury unto her; then he has in this cause offered unto me, without so
much as a pretended or an alleged cause. For what difference there is,
between the commanding Subjects to rebel, and loosing them from their Oath
of Allegiance as Pius Quintus did; and the commanding of Subjects not to obey
in making profession of their Oath of their dutiful Allegiance, as this Pope
has now done: no man can easily discern.

5. But to draw near unto his Breue, wherein certainly he has taken more
pains then he needed, by setting down in the said Breue the whole body of the
Oath at length; whereas the only naming of the Title thereof might as well have
served, for any answer he has made thereunto (making Vna litura, that is, the
flat and general condemnation of the whole Oath to serve for all his
refutation) Therein having as well in this respect as in the former, dealt both
indiscreetly with me, and injuriously with his own Catholics. With me; in not
refuting particularly what special words he quarrelled in that Oath; which
if he had done, it might have been that for the fatherly care I have not to put
any of my Subjects to a needless extremity, I might have been contented in
some sort to have reformed or interpreted those words. With his own
Catholics: for either if I had so done, they had been thereby fully eased in
that business; or at least if I would not have condescended to have altered
any thing in the said Oath, yet would thereby some appearance or shadow of
excuse have been left unto them for refusing the same: not as seeming thereby
to swerve from their Obedience and Allegiance unto me, but only being stayed
from taking the same upon the scrupulous tenderness of their consciences, in
regard of those particular words which the Pope had noted and condemned
therein.

And now let us hear the words of his thunder.

POPE PAVLVS the fifth, to the English Catholics.
Well-beloved Sons, Salutation and Apostolical Benediction. The Pope his first
Breue.
The tribulations and calamities, which ye have continually sustained for the
keeping of the Catholic Faith, have always afflicted us with great grief of
mind: But for as much as we understand that at this time all things are more
grievous, our affliction hereby is wonderfully increased. For we have heard how
you are compelled, by most grievous punishments set before you, to go to the
Churches of Heretics, to frequent their assemblies, to be present at their
Sermons. Truly we do undoubtedly believe, that they which with so great
constancy and fortitude, have hitherto endured most cruel persecutions and
almost infinite miseries, that they may walk without spot in the Law of the
Lord; will never suffer themselves to be defiled with the communion of those
that have forsaken the divine Law. Yet notwithstanding, being compelled by the
zeal of our Pastoral Office, and by our Fatherly care which we do
continually take sor the salvation of your souls, we are enforced to admonish
and desire you; that by no means you come unto the Churches of the Heretics,
or hear their Sermons, or communicate with them in their Rites, lest you
incur the wrath of God. For these things may ye not do without indamaging
the worship of God, and your own salvation. As likewise you cannot without
most evident and grievous wronging of Gods Honor, bind your selves by the
Oath, which in like manner we have heard with very great grief of our heart is
administered unto you, of the tenor under written. viz.

The Oath.
I A.B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my conscience before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, is
lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Countries: And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the
Church or Sea o^ Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any power or
authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms
or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince, to invade or annoy him or
his Countries, or to discarge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave to any of them, to bear
Arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his
Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that, notwithstanding any
declaration or sentence of Excommunication, or deprivation made or granted, or
to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority
derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his Sea, against the said King,
his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said subjects from their
Obedience; I will bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power,
against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his
or their Persons, their Crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence, or declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him or any of them. And I do further swear, That I do from my heart
abhor, detest and abjure as impious and Heretical, this damnable doctrine
and Position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may
be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person
whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof; which I
acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and
do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all these
things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these
express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and
understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or mental evasion,
or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgement heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a
Christian. So help my GOD.

Which things since they are thus; it must evidently appear unto you by the
words themselves, That such an Oath cannot be taken without hurting of the
Catholic Faith, and the Salvation of your Souls; seeing it conteines many
things, which are flat contrary to Faith and Salvation. Wherefore we do
admonish you, that you do utterly abstain from taking this and the like
Oaths: which thing we do the more earnestly require of you, because we have
experience of the Constancy of your Faith, which is tried like Gold in the
fire of perpetual Tribulation. We do well know, that you will cheerfully
undergo all kind of cruel Torments whatsoever, yea and constantly endure
death it self, rather then you will in any thing offend the Majesty of God.
And this our Confidence is confirmed by those things, which are daily reported
unto us, of the singular virtue, valor and fortitude which in these last times
does no less shine in your Martyrs, then it did in the first beginnings of
the Church. Stand therefore, your Loins being girt about with Verity, and
having on the Breast Plate of righteousness, taking the Shield of Faith, be
ye strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; And let nothing hinder
you. He which will crown you, and does in Heaven behold your Conflicts,
will finish the good work which he has begun in you. You know how he has
promised his Disciples, that he will never leave them Orphans: for he is
faithful which has promised. Hold fast therefore his correction, that is,
being rooted and grounded in Charity, whatsoever ye do, whatsoever ye
endeavor, do it with one accord, in simplicity of Heart, in meekness of
Spirit, without murmuring or doubting. For by this do all men know that we
are the Disciples of Christ, if we have Love one to another. Which Charity, as
it is very greatly to be desired of all faithful Christians; So certainly is
it altogether necessary for you, most blessed Sons. For by this your
Charity, the power of the Devil is weakened, who does so much assail you,
since that Power of his is especially up held by the Contentions and
Disagreement of our Sons. We exhort you therefore by the bowels of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whose Love we are taken out of the Jaws of eternal Death;
That above all things, you would have mutual Charity among you. Surely Pope
Clement the eight of happy memory, has given you most profitable Precepts of
practicing brotherly Charity one to another, in his Letters in form of a
Breue, to our well-beloved Son M. George Archpriest of the Kingdom of
England, dated the 5. day of the month of October, 1602. Put them therefore
diligently in practice, and be not hindered by any difficulty or
doubtfulnesse. We command you that ye do exactly observe the words of those
Letters, and that ye take and understand them simply as they sound, and as
they lie; all power to interpret them otherwise, being taken away. In the mean
while, we will never cease to pray to the Father of Mercies, that he would
with pity behold your afflictions and your pains; And that he would keep
and defend you with his continual Protection: whom we do gently greet with
our Apostolical Benediction. Dated at Rome at S. Mark, under the Signet of
the Fisherman, the tenth of the Calends of October, 1606. the second year of
our Popedom.

THE ANSWER to the first Breue.
FIrst, the Pope expresses herein his sorrow, for that persecution which the
Catholics sustain for the faiths sake. Wherein, besides the maine untruth
whereby I am so injuriously used, I must ever auow and maintain, as the truth
is according to mine own knowledge, that the late Queen of famous memory,
never punished any Papist for religion, but that their own punishment was ever
extorted out of her hands against her will, by their own misbehauiour, which
both the time and circumstances of her actions will manifestly make proof of.
For before Pius Quintus his excommunication giving her over for a preye, and
setting her Subjects at liberty to rebel, it is well known she never meddled
with the blood or hard punishment of any Catholic, nor made any rigorous
laws against them. And since that time, who list to compare with an
indifferent eye, the manifold intended Invasions against her whole Kingdom,
the foreign practices, the internal public rebellilions, the private plots
and machinations, poysonings, murders, and all sorts of devises, et quid non?
daily set abroach; and all these wares continually fostered and fomented from
Rome; together with the continual corrupting of her Subjects, as well by
temporal bribes, as by fair and specious promises of eternal felicity; and
nothing but book upon book publicly set forth by her fugitives, for
approbation of so holy designs: who list, I say, with an indifferent eye, to
look on the one part, upon those infinite and intolerable temptations, and on
the other part upon the just, yet moderate punishment of a part of these
heinous offenders; shall easily see that that blessed defunct Lady was as free
from persecution, as they shall free these hellish Instruments from the honor
of martyrdom.

5. But now having sacrificed (if I may so say) to the Manes of my late
predecessor, I may next with S. Paul justly vindicate my own fame, from
those innumerable calumnies spread against me, in testifying the truth of my
behavior tovvard the Papists: vvherin I may truly affirm, that whatsoever
was her just and merciful Government over the Papists in her time, my
Government over them since has so far exceeded hers, in mercy and
clemency, as not only the Papists themselves grevve to that height of pride,
in confidence of my mildness, as they did directly expect, and assuredly
promise to themselves liberty of conscience and equality with other of my
Subjects in all things; but even a number of the best and faithfullest of my
said subjects, were cast in great fear and amazement of my course and
proceedings, ever prognosticating and justly suspecting that sour fruit to
come of it, which shevved it self clearly in the Powder Treason. How many did
I honor with knighthood, of known and open Recusants? How indifferently did I
give audience, and access to both sides, bestowing equally all favors and
honors on both professions? How free and continual access, had all ranks and
degrees of Papists in my Court and company? And above alll, how frankly and
freely did I free Recusants of their ordinary payments? Besides, it is evident
what strait order was given out of my own mouth to the Judges, to spare the
execution of all Priests, (notwithstanding their conviction,) joining thereunto
a gracious Proclamation, whereby all Priests, that were at liberty, and not
taken, might go out of the country by such a day: my general Pardon having
bin extended to all convicted Priests in prison: whereupon they were set at
liberty as good Subjects: and all Priests that were taken after, sent over and
set at liberty there. But time and paper will fail me to make enumeration of
all the benefits and favors that I bestowed in general and particular upon
Papists: in recounting whereof every scrape of my pen would serve but for a
blot of the Popes ingratitude and Injustice, in meating me with so hard a
measure for the same. So as I think I have sufficiently, or at least with good
reason wiped the Magno cum animi moerore, etc.
tears from the Popes eyes, for complaining upon such persecution, who if he
had been but politikely wise, although he had had no respect to Justice and
Verity, would have in this complaint of his, made a difference between my
present time, and the time of the late Queen, And so by his commending of my
moderation, in regard of former times, might have had hope to have moved me to
have continued in the same clement course. For it is a true saying, that
alleged kindness upon noble minds, does ever work much. And for the maine
untruth of any persecution in my time, it can never be proved, that any were,
or are put to death since I came to the Crown for cause of Conscience: except
that now this discharge given by the Pope to all Catholics to take their oath
of Allegiance to me, be the cause of the due punishment of many: which if it
fall out to be, let the blood lig^t upon the Popes head, who is the only cause
thereof.

As for the next point contained in his Breue concerning his discharge of all
Papists to come to our Church, or frequent our rites and ceremonies, The
intendement of this discourse.
I am not to meddle at this time with that matter, because my errand now only
is to publish to the world the Injury and Injustice done unto me in
discharging my subjects to make profession o^ their obedience unto me. Now as
to the point where the oath is quarrelled, it is se^ down in few, but very
weighty words; to wit, That it ought to be clear unto all Catholics, that
this oath cannot be taken with safety of the Catholic Faith, and of their
souls health, since it contains many things that are plainly and directly
contrary to their faith and salvation. To this, the old saying fathered upon
the Philosopher may very fi^ly be applied, Mul ta dicit sed pauca probat: nay
indeed, Nihil omnino probat. For how the profession of the natural Allegiance
of Subjects to their Prince can be directly opposite to the faith and salvation
of souls, is so far beyond my simple reading in Divinity, as I must think
it a strange and new Assertion, to proceed out of the mouth of that pretended
general Pastor of all Christian souls. I read indeed, and not in one, or
two, or three places of Scripture, that Subjects are bound to obey their
Princes for conscience sake, whether they were good or wicked Princes. So said
the people to Josh. 1.17.
Joshua, As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee. So the Iere.
27.12.
Prophet commanded the people to obey the King of Babel, saying, Put your
necks under the yoke of the King of Babel, and serve him and his people, that
ye may live. So were the children of Israel, unto Exodus 5.1.
Pharaoh, desiring him to let them go: so to Ezra. 1.3.
Cyrus, obtaining leave of him to return to build the Temple: and in a word,
the Rom 13.5.
Apostle willed all men to be subject to the higher powers for conscience sake.
Agreeable to the Scriptures did the Fathers teach. Augusi^in Psalm. 124.
Augustine speaking of Julian, says, Julian was an unbelieving Emperor: was
he not an Apostata, an Oppressor, and an Idolater? Christian Soldiers served
that unbelieving Emperor: when they came to the cause of CHRIST, they would
acknowledge no Lord, but him that is in heaven: When he would have them to
worship Idols and to sacrifice, they preferred GOD before him: But when he
said, go forth to fight, invade such a nation, they presently obeyed. They
distinguished their eternal Lord from their temporal, and yet were they
subject even unto their temporal lord, for his sake that was their eternal
Lord and Master. Tertul^ad Scap.
Tertullian says, A Christian is enemy to no man, much less to the Prince,
whom he knows to be appointed of God: and so of necessity must love,
reverence and honor him, and wish him safe with the whole Roman Empire, so
long as the world shall last: for so long shall it endure. We honor therefore
the Emperor in such sort, as is lawful for us, and expedient for him, as a
man, the next unto God, and obtaining from God whatsoever he has, and only
inferior unto God. This the Emperor himself would: for so is he greater then
all, while he is inferior only to the true God. Just. Martyr Apol. 2. ad
Ant. Imperat.
Iustine Martyr; We only adore God, and in all other things cherefully
perform service to you, professing that you are Emperors and Princes of men.
Amb. in orat cont. Auxent^u^ de basilicis traden. habetur lib. 5. Epist. Amb.
Ambrose; I may lament, weep and sigh: My tears are my weapons against their
arms, soldiers, and the Goths also: such are the weapons of a Priest:
Otherwise neither ought I, neither can I resist. Optat. contra Parmen. lib. 3.
Optatus; Over the Emperor, there is none but only God, that made the
Emperor. And Greg. Mag. Epist. lib. 2. indict. 11. Epist. 61.
Gregory writing to Mauritius about a certain Law, that a soldier should not
be received into a Monastery, nondu^ expleta militia, The Almighty God, says
he, holds him guilty, that is not upright to the most excellent Emperor in
all things that he does or speaks. And then calling himself the unworthy
servant of his Godliness, goes on in the whole Epistle to show the injustice
of that Law, as he pretends: and in the end concludes his Epistle with these
words, I being subject to your command, have caused the same Law to be sent
through diverse parts of your Dominions: and because the Law it self does not
agree to the Law of the Almighty God, I have signified the same by my letters
to your most excellent Lordship: so that on both parts I have paid what I
ought: because I have yielded obedience to the Emperor, and have not holden my
peace, in what I thought for God. Now how great a contrariety there is betwixt
this ancient Popes action in obeying an Emperor by the publication of his
Decree, which in his own conscience he thought unlawful, and this present
Popes prohibition to a Kings Subjects from obedience unto him in things most
lawful and mere temporal; I remit it to the Readers indifferency. And
answerably to the Fathers spoke the Councels in their decrees. As the Council
of Council. Arelatense sub Carolo Mag. Can. 26^
Arles, submitting the whole Council to the Emperor in these words: These
things we have decreed to be presented to our lord the Emperor, beseeching his
clemency, that if we have done less then we ought, it may be supplied by his
wisdom: if any thing otherwise then reason requires, it may be corrected by
his judgment: if any thing be found fault with by us with reason, it may be
perfected by his aid with Gods favorable assistance.

But why should I speak of Charles the Great, to whom not one Council, but
six several Councels, Frankford, Arles, Tours, Chalons, Ments and Rhemes did
wholly submit themselves? and not rather speak of all the general Councels,
that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and the four other commonly
so reputed, which did submit themselves to the Emperors wisdom, and piety in
all things? Insomuch as that of Ephesus repeated it four several times, That
they were summoned by the Emperors Oracle, beck, charge, and command, and
betook themselves to his Godliness, Vide epistolam generalis Conc. Ephesians. ad
August.
beseeching him, that the decrees made against Nestorius and his followers,
might by his power have their full force and validity, as appears manifestly
in the Epistle of the general Council of Ephesus written ad Augustos. I also
read that Christ said, his John 18.36.
kingdom was not of this world, bidding, Give to Mat. 22.21.
Caesar what was Caesar's, and to God what was Gods. And I ever held it for an
infallible maxim in Divinity, That temporal obedience to a temporal
Magistrate did nothing repugne to matters of faith or salvation of souls. But
that ever temporal obedience was against faith and salvation of souls, as in
this Breue is alleged, was never before heard nor read of in the Christian
Church. And therefore I would have wished the Pope, before he had set down
this commandment to all Papists here, That since in him is the power, by the
infalibility of his spirit, to make new articles of faith when ever it shall
please him; that he had first set it down for an article of faith, before he
had commanded all Catholics to believe and obey it. I will then conclude the
answer to this point in a Dilemma.

Either it is lawful to obey the Sovereign in temporal things, or not.
Question.


If it be lawful, (as I never heard nor read

If it be unlawful, why has he neither expressed

And as for the vehement exhortation unto Answer to the Popes exhortation.
them to persevere in constancy, and to suffer martyrdom, and all tribulation
for this cause; it requires no other answer then only this, That if the
ground be good whereupon he has commanded them to stand, then exhortation to
constancy is necessary: but if the ground be unjust, and naught (as indeed it
is, and I have in part already proved) then this Exhortation of his can work no
other effect, then to make him guilty of the blood of so many of his sheep,
whom he does thus wilfully cast away, not only to the needless loss of
their lives, and ruin of their families, but even to the laying on of a
perpetual flaunder upon all Papists; as if no zealous Papist could be a true
subject to his Prince; and that the profession of that Religion, and the
temporal obedience to the Civil Magistrate, were two things repugnant and
incompatible in themselves. But evil information, and untrue reports (which
being carried so far as between this and Rome, Fama vires acquirit eundo.
cannot but increase by the way) might have abused the Pope, and made him
dispatch this Breue so rashly. For that great City, Queen of the World, and as
themselves confess, Eusebius, Occumemus and Leo hold, that by Babylon in 1.
Pet. 5.13 Rome is meant, as the Rhemists themselves confess.
mystically Babylon, cannot but be so full of all sorts of intelligencies.
Besides, all complainers (as the Catholics here are) be naturally given to
exaggerate their own griefs, and multiply thereupon. So that it is no wonder,
that even a Judge sitting there, should upon wrong information, give an
unrighteous sentence; as some of their own party do not stick to confess,
that Pius Quintus was too rashly carried upon wrong information, to pronounce
his thunder of Excommunication upon the late Queen. And it may be, the like
excuse shall hereafter be made for the two Breues, which See the Relation of the
whole proceedings against the Traitors, Garnet and his confederates.
Clemens octauus sent to England immediately before her death, for debarring me
of the Crown, or any other that either would profess, or any ways tolerate
the professors of our Religion; contrary to his manifold vows and
protestations, simul and eodem tempore, and as it were, delivered vno and eodem
spiritu, to diverse of my ministers abroad, professing such kindness, and
showing such forwardness to advance me to this Crown. Nay, the most part of
Catholics here, finding this Breue when it came to their hands, to be so
far against divinity, The Catholics opinion of the Breue
policy, or natural sense, were firmly persuaded, that it was but a
counterfeit Libel, devised in hatred of the Pope; or at the farthest, a thing
hastily done upon wrong information, as was before said. Of which opinion were
not only the simpler sort of Papists, but even some amongst them of best
account, both for learning and experience; whereof the Archpriest himself was
one. But for soluing of this objection, the Pope himself has taken new pains
by sending forth a second Breue, only for giving faith and confirmation to
the former: That whereas before, his sin might have been thought to have
proceeded from rashness, and misinformation, he will now wilfully and
willingly double the same: whereof the Copy follows.

TO OUR Beloved sons the English Catholics, Paulus P.P. Vius.
Beloved Sons, The second Breue.
Salutation and Apostolical benediction. It is reported unto us, that there
are found certain amongst you, who when as we have sufficiently declared by
our Letters, dated the last year on the tenth of the Calends of October in the
form of a Breue, that ye cannot with safe Conscience take the Oath, which was
then required of you; and when as we have further straightly commanded you,
that by no means ye should take it; yet there are some, I say, among you,
which dare now affirm, that such Letters concerning the forbidding of the
Oath, were not written of our own accord, or of our own proper will, but
rather for the respect and at the instigation of other men. And for that cause,
the same men do go about to persuade you, that our commands in the said
letters are not to be regarded. Surely this news did trouble us; and that so
much the more, because having had experience of your obedience (most dearly
beloved sons) who to the end ye might obey this holy Sea, have godlily, and
valiantly contemned your riches, wealth, honor, liberty, yea and life it
self; we should never have suspected, that the truth of our Apostolic
letters could once be called into question among you, that by this pretense ye
might exempt your selves from our commandments. But we do herein perceive the
subtlety and craft of the enemy of man's salvation; and we do attribute this
your backwardness rather to him, then to your own will. And for this cause,
we have thought good to write the second time unto you, and to signify unto
you again, that our Apostolic letters dated the last year on the tenth of
the Calends of October concerning the prohibition of the Oath, were written not
only upon our proper motion, and of our certain knowledge, but also after
long and weighty deliberation used concerning all those things, which are
contained in them; and for that cause that ye are bound fully to observe them,
rejecting all interpretation persuading to the contrary. And this is our mere,
pure, and perfect will, being always careful of your salvation, and always
minding those things which are most profitable unto you. And we do pray
without ceasing, that he that has appointed our lowlines to the keeping of the
flock of Christ, would inlighten our thoughts and our counsels: whom we do
also continually desire, that he would increase in you (our beloved Sons)
faith, constancy, and mutual charity and peace one to another. All whom, we
do most lovingly bless with all charitable affection.

Dated at Rome at Saint Marks under the Signet of the Fisherman, the x. of the
Calends of September, 1607. the third year of our Popedom.
THE ANSWER to the second Breue.
NOw for this Breue, I may justly reflect his own phrase upon him, in tearming
it to be The craft of the Devil. For if the Devil had studied a thousand
years, for to find out a mischief for our Catholics here, he has found it
in this: that now when many Catholics have taken their Oath, and some Priests
also; yea, the Archpriest himself, without compunction or sticking, they
shall not now only be bound to refuse the profession of their natural
Allegiance to their Sovereign, which might yet have been some way colored
upon diverse scruples conceived upon the words of the Oath; but they must now
renounce and fors^eare their profession of obedience already sworn, A double
Oath of every Subject.
and so must as it were at the third instance forswear their former two Oaths,
first closely sworn, by their birth in the natural Allegiance; and next,
clearly confirmed by this Oath, which does nothing but express the same: so
as no man can now hold the faith, or procure the salvation of his sold in
England, that must not abjure and renounce his borne and sworn Allegiance to
his natural Sovereign.

And yet it is not sufficient to ratify the last years Breue, by a new one
come forth this year; but (that not only every year, but every month may
produce a new monster) the great and famous Writer of the Controversies, the
late vn-Iesuited Cardinal Bellarmine, must add his talent to this good work,
by blowing the bellows of sedition, and sharpening the spur to rebellion, by
sending such a Letter of his to the Archpriest here, as it is wonder how
passion and an ambitious desire of maintaining that Monarchy, should charm
the wits of so famously learned a man.

The Copy where of here follows.

TO THE VERY Reverend Mr. George Blackwel, Archpriest of the English: Robert
Bellarmine Cardinal of the holy Church of Rome, greeting.
Reverend Sir, and Brother in CHRIST, It is almost forty years since we did
see one the other: but yet I have never bin unmindful of our ancient
acquaintance, neither have I ceased, seeing I could do you no other good, to
commend your laboring most painfully in the Lords vineyard, in my prayers to
GOD. And I doubt not, but that I have lived all this while in your memory, and
have had some place in your prayers at the Lords Altar. So therefore even unto
this time we have abidden, as S. John speaks, in the mutual love one of the
other, not by word or letter, but in deed and truth. But a late message which
was brought unto us within these few days, of your bonds and imprisonment,
has enforced me to break off this silence; which message, although it seemed
heavy in regard of the loss which that Church has received, by their being
thus deprived of the comfort of your pastoral function among them, yet withal
it seemed joyous, because you drew near unto the glory of Martyrdom, then
the which gift of God there is none more happy; That you, who have fed your
flock so many years with the word and doctrine, should now feed it more
gloriously by the example of your patience. But another heavy tidings did not a
little disquiet and almost take away this joy, which immediately followed, of the
adversaries assault, and peradventure of the slip and fall of your Constancy in
refusing an unlawful Oath. Neither truly (most dear Brother) could that Oath
therefore be lawful, because it was offered in sort tempered and modified: for
you know that those kind of modifications are nothing else, but sleights and
subtilties of Satan, that the Catholic faith touching the Primacie of the
Sea Apostolic, might either secretly or openly be shot at, for the which
faith so many worthy Martyrs even in that very England it self, have resisted
unto blood. For most certain it is, that in whatsoever words the Oath is
conceived by the adversaries of the faith in that Kingdom, it tends to this
end, that the authority of the head of the Church in England, may be
transferred from the successor of S. Peter, to the Successor of K. Henry the
eight. For that which is pretended of the danger of the Kings life, if the high
Priest should have the same power in England, which he has in all other
Christian Kingdoms, it is altogether idle, as all that have any understanding,
may easily perceive. For it was never heard of from the Churches infancy until
this day, that ever any Pope did command that any Prince, though an Heretic,
though an Ethnike, though a Persecutor, should be murdered; or did approve of
the fact when it was done by any other. And why, I pray you, does only the
King of England fear that, which none of all other the Princes in Christendom
either does fear, or ever did fear?

But, as I said, these vain pretexts are but the trappes and stratagemes of
Satan: Of which kind I could produce not a f^we out of Ancient Stories, if I
went about to write a book^ and not an Epistle. One only for example sake I
will call to your memory S. Gregorius Nazianzenus in his first Oration against
Julian the Emperor, reports, That he, the more easily to beguile the simple
Christians, did insert the Images of the false gods into the pictures of the
Emperor, which the Romans did use to bow dawne unto with a civil kind of
reverence: so that no man could do reverence to the Emperors picture, but
withal he must adore the Images of the false gods; whereupon it came to pass
that many were deceived. And if there were any that found out the Emperors
craft, and refused to worship his picture, those were most grievously punished,
as men that had contemned the Emperor in his Image. Some such like thing, me
thinks, I see in the Oath that is offered to you, which is to so craftily
composed, that no man can detest Treason against the King and make profession
of his Civil subjection, but he must be constrained perfidiously to deny the
Primacie of the Apostolic Sea. But the servants of Christ, and especially the
chief Priests of the Lord ought to be so far from taking an unlawful Oath,
where they may indamage the Faith, that they ought to beware that they give not
the least suspicion of dissimulation that they have taken it, least they might
seem to have left any example of preuarication to faithful people. Which
thing that worthy Eleazar did most notably perform, who would neither eat
swines flesh, nor so much as feign to have eaten it, although he saw the great
torments that did hang over his head; least, as himself speaks in the second
book of the Machabees, many young men might be brought through that similation,
to preuaricate with the Law. Neither did Basil the great by his example, which
is more fit for our purpose, carry himself less worthily toward Valens the
Emperor. For as Theodoret writes in his History, when the Deputy of that
heretical Emperor did persuade Saint Basil, that he would not resist the
Emperor for a little subtlety of a few points of doctrine; that most holy and
prudent man made answer, That it was not to be endured, that the least
syllable of Gods word should be corrupted, but rather all kind of torment was
to be embraced, for the maintenance of the Truth thereof. Now I suppose, that
there wants not amongst you, who say that they are but subtilties of Opinions
that are contained in the Oath that is offered to the Catholics, and that you
are not to strive against the Kings Authority for such a little matter. But
there are not wanting also amongst you holy men like unto Basil the Great,
which will openly auow, that the very least syllable of Gods divine truth is
not to be corrupted, though many torments were to be endured, and death it
self set before you. Amongst whom it is meet, that you should be one, or
rather the Standerd-bearer, and General to the rest. And whatsoever has been
the cause, that your Constancy has quailed, whether it be the suddenness of
your apprehension, or the bitterness of your persecution, or the imbecillitie
of your old age: yet we trust in the goodness of God, and in your own long
continued virtue, that it will come to pass, that as you seem in some part to
have imitated the fall of Peter, and Marcellinus, so you shall happily imitate
their valor in recovering your strength, and maintaining the truth. For if you
will diligently weigh the whole matter with your self, truly you shall see,
it is no small matter that is called in question by this Oath, but one of the
principal heads of our faith and foundations of Catholic Religion. For hear
what your Apostle S. Gregory the Great has written, in his 24. Epistle of his
11. book. Let not the reverence due to the Apostolic Sea, be troubled by
any man's presumption: for then the estate of the members does remain entire,
when the head of the faith is not bruised by any injury. Therefore by S.
Gregory's testimony, when they are busy about disturbing or diminishing, or
taking away of the Primacie of the Apostolic Sea: then are they busy about
cutting off the very head of the faith, and dissoluing of the state of the
whole body, and of all the members. Which self same thing S. Leo does confirm
in his third Sermon of his Assumption to the Popedom, when he says, Our Lord
had a special care of Peter, and prayed properly for Peter's faith, as though
the state of others were more stable, when their Princes mind was not to be
over come. Whereupon himself in his Epistle to the Bishops of the province of
Vienna, does not doubt to affirm, that he is not partaker of the divine
Mystery, that dare depart from the solidity of Peter, who also says, That who
thinks the Primacy to be denied to that Sea, he can in no sort lessen the
authority of it: but by being puffed up with the spirit of his own pride, does
cast himself headlong into hell. These and many other of this kind, I am very
sure are most familiar to you: who besides many other books, have diligently
read over the visible Monarchy of your own Saunders, a most diligent writer,
and one who has worthily deserved of the Church of England. Neither can you be
ignorant, that these most holy and learned men John Bishop of Rochester, and
Tho. Moore, within our memory, for this one most weighty head of doctrine,
led the way to Martyrdom to many others, to the exceeding glory of the English
nation. But I would put you in remembrance that you should take heart, and
considering the weightines of the cause, not to trust too much to your own
judgment, neither be wise above that is meet to be wise: and if peradventure
your fall have proceeded not upon want of consideration, but through humane
infirmity, and for fear of punishment and imprisonment, yet do not prefer a
temporal liberty to the liberty of the glory of the Sons of God: neither
for escaping a light and momentanie tribulation, lose an eternal weight of
glory, which tribulation it self does work in you. You have fought a good
fight a long time, you have well near finished your course; so many years have
you kept the faith: do not therefore lose the reward of such labors; do not
deprive your self of that crown of righteousness which so long agone is
prepared for you, Do not make the faces of so many yours both brethren and
children ashamed. Upon you at this time are fixed the eyes of all the Church:
yea also, you are made a spectacle to the world, to Angels, to men; Do not so
carry your self in this your last act, that you leave nothing but laments to
your friends, and joy to your enemies. But rather on the contrary, which we
assuredly hope, and for which we continually power forth prayers to God,
display gloriously the banner of faith, and make to rejoice the Church which
you have made heavy; so shall you not only merit pardon at Gods hands, but a
crown. Farewell. Quite you like a man, and let your heart be strengthened.
From Rome. the 28. day of September, 1607.

Your very Reuerendships brother and servant in Christ, Robert Bellarmine
Cardinal.

THE ANSWER to the Cardinals Letter.
AND now that I am to enter into the field against him by refuting his Letter,
I must first use this protestation; That no desire of vain glory by matching
with so learned a man, makes me to undertake this task; but only the care
and conscience I have, that such smooth Circes charms and gilded pills, as
full of exterior eloquence, as of in ward untruths, may not have that public
passage through the world without an answer: whereby my reputation might
unjustly be darkened, by such cloudy and foggy mists of untruths and false
imputations, the hearts of unstayed and simple men be misled, and the truth
itself smothered.

But before I come to the particular answer of this Letter, I must here desire
the world to wonder with me, A great mistaking of the state of the Question and
case in hand.
at the committing of so gross an error by so learned a man: as that he
should have pained himself to have set down so elaborate a letter, for the
refutation of a quite mistaken question. For it appears, that our English
Fugitives, of whose inward society with him he so greatly vaunteth, have so
fast hammered in his head the Oath of Supremacy, which has ever bin so great
a scarre unto them, as he thinking by his letter to have refuted the last Oath,
has in place thereof only paid the Oath of Supremacy, which was most in his
head: as a man that being earnestly carried in his thoughts upon another matter,
then he is presently in doing, will often name the matter or person he is
thinking of, in place of the other thing he has at that time in hand.

The difference between the Oath of Supremacy, and this of Allegiance.
For, as the Oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a difference between
Papists, and them of our profession: so was this Oath, which he would seem to
impugn, ordained for making a difference between the ciuilly obedient Papists,
and the perverse disciples of the Powder Treason. Yet does all his letter run
upon an Inuectiue against the Compulsion of Catholics to deny the authority
of Saint Peter's Successors; and in place thereof to acknowledge the Successors
of King Henry the eight. For, in King Henry the eights time was the Oath of
Supremacy first made: by him were Thomas Moore and Roffensis put to death,
partly for refusing of it. From his time til now have all the Princes of this
land professing this Religion, successively in effect maintained the same and
in that Oath only is contained the Kings absolute power, to be judge over all
persons, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; excluding al foreign powers and
Potentates to be judges within his Dominions: vvheras this last made Oath
contains no such matter, only meddling with the civil obedience of subjects
to their Sovereign, in mere temporal causes.

And that it may the better appear, that whereas by name he seems to
condemn the last Oath; yet indeed his whole Letter runs upon nothing, but
upon the condemnation of the Oath of Supremacy: I have here thought good to
set down the said Oath, leaving it then to the discretion of every
indifferent reader to judge, whether he does not in substance only answer
to the Oath of Supremacy, but that he gives the child a wrong name.

I A B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other his
Highness Dominions and Counties, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within
this Realm. And therefore, I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and authorities; and do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors: and to my power shall assist and defend all
jurisdictions, Privileges, Pre^minences and Authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to
the Imperial Crown of the Realm: So help me God: and by the Contents of
this book. And that the injustice, as well as the error of his gross
mistaking in this point, may yet be more clearly discovered; I have also
thought good to insert here immediately after the Oath of Supremacy, the
contrary Conclusions to all the points and Articles, whereof this other late
Oath does consist: whereby it may appear, what unreasonable and rebellious
points he would drive my Subjects unto, by refusing the whole body of that
Oath, as it is conceived. For he that shall refuse to take this Oath, must of
necessity hold all, or some of these propositions following.

That I, King JAMES, am not the lawful

That the Pope by his own authority Rome. If not by some other authority of
the Church and Sea of Rome, yet by other means with others help, he may
depose me.

Pope may dispose of my Kingdoms and Dominions.

Pope may give authority to some foreign Prince to invade my Dominions.

Pope may discharge my Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to me.

Pope may give license to one, or more of my Subjects to bear arms against me.

Pope may give leave to my Subjects to offer violence to my Person, or to my
Government, or to some of my Subjects.

Pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose me, my Subjects are not to
bear Faith and Allegiance to me.

Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose me, my Subjects are not bound
to defend with all their power my Person and Crown.

Pope shall give out any Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation against me,
my Subjects by reason of that sentence are not bound to reveal all
Conspiracies and Treasons against me, which shall come to their hearing and
knowledge.

That it is not heretical and detestable to Pope, may be either deposed or
killed by their Subjects, or any other.

That the Pope has power to absolve my

That this Oath is not administered to my

That this Oath is to be taken with Equivocation,

These are the true and natural branches of the body of this Oath. The
affirmative of all which negatiues, do neither concern in any case the Popes
Supremacy in spiritual causes: nor yet were ever concluded, Touching the
pretended Council of Lateran. See Plat. In vita Innocen. III.
and defined by any complete general Council to belong to the Popes
authority; and their own school Doctors are at irreconciliable odds and
iarres about them.

And that the world may yet farther see ours and the whole States setting down
of this Oath, did not proceed from any new invention of our own, The Oath of
Allegiance confirmed by the authority of ancient Councels.
but as it is warranted by the word of GOD: so does it take the example from
an Oath of Allegiance decreed a thousand years agone, which a famous Council
then, together with diverse other Councels, were so far from condemning (as
the Pope now has done this Oath) as I have thought good to set down their
own words here in that purpose: whereby it may appear that I crave nothing
now of my Subjects in this Oath, which was not expressly and carefully commanded
then, by the Councels to be obeyed without exception of persons. Nay, not in
the very particular point of equivocation, which I in this Oath was so careful
to have eschewed: but you shall here see the said Councels in their Decrees,
The ancient Councels provided for Equivocation
as careful to provide for the eschewing of the same; so as almost every point
of that Action, and this of ours shall be found to have relation and agreeance
one with the other, save only in this, that those old Councels were careful
and strait in commanding the taking of the same: The difference between the
ancient Councels, and the Pope counselling of the Catholics.
whereas by the contrary, he that now vanteth himself to be head of all
Councels, is as careful and strait in the prohibition of all men from the
taking of this Oath of Allegiance.

The words of the Council be these. Hear our Sentence.

Whosoever of us, Council. Toletan. 4 can 47. Ann. 633.
or of all the people thorowout all Spain, shall go about by any means of
conspiracy or practice, to violate the Oath of his fidelity, which he has
taken for the preservation of his Country, or of the Kings life; or who shall
attempt to put violent hands upon the King; or to deprive him of his kingly
power; or that by tyrannical presumption would usurp the Sovereignty of the
Kingdom: let him be accursed in the sight of God the Father, and of his
Angels; and let him be made and declared a stranger from the Catholic Church,
which he has profaned by his perjury, and an aliant from the company of all
Christian people; together with all the accomplices of his impiety: because it
behooves all those that be guilty of the like offense, to vnder-lie the like
punishment. Which sentence is three several times together, and almost in the
same words, repeated in the same Canon. After this, the Synod desired, That
this Sentence of theirs now this third time rehearsed, might be confirmed by
the voice and consent of all that were present. Then the whole Clergy and
people answered, Whosoever shall carry himself presumptuously against this your
definitive sentence, let them be Anathema maranatha, that is, let them be
utterly destroyed at the Lords coming, and let them and their accomplices have
their portion with Judas Iscarioth. Amen.

And in the fifth Council. Toletan. 5. Can. 7. anno. 636.
Council, there it is decreed, That this Act touching the Oath of Allegiance,
shall be repeated in every Council of the Bishops of Spain. The Decree is in
these words: In consideration that the minds of men are easily inclined to
evil and forgetfulness, therefore this most holy Synod has ordained; and
does enact, That in every Council of the Bishops of Spain, the Decree of the
general Synod. Toletan 4. vniuersalis, and magna Synodus dicta, Syn. T^l 5.
ca. 2.
Council which was made for the safety of our Princes, shall be with an
audible voice proclaimed and pronounced, after the conclusion of all other
things in the Synod: that so it being often sounded in their ears, at least
by continual remembrance, the minds of wicked men being terrified might be
reformed, which by oblivion and facility [to euill] are brought to preuaricate.

And in the sixth Council. Tolet. 6. Can. 18 Anno 638.
Council, We do protest before God, and all the orders of Angels, in the
presence of the Prophets and Apostles, and all the company of Martyrs, and
before all the Catholic Church, and assemblies of the Christians; That no man
shall go about to seek the destruction of the King: No man shall touch the
life of the Prince; No man shall deprive him of the Kingdom; No man by any
tyrannical presumption shall usurp to himself the sovereignty of the
Kingdom; No man by any Machination shall in his adversity associate to
himself any pack of conspirators against him; And that if any of us shall be
presumptuous by rashness in any of these cases, let him be stricke^ with the
anatheme of God, and reputed as condemned in eternal judgment without any
hope of recovery.

And in the tenth Council. Tolet. 10 Can. 2. Era. 694.
Council (to omit diverse others held also at Toledo) it is said; That if any
religious man, even from the Bishop to the lowest Order of the Churchmen or
Monks, shall be found to have violated the general Oaths made for the
preservation of the Kings person, or of the nation and Country with a profane
mind; forthwith let him be deprived of all dignity, and excluded from all
place and honor. The occasion of the Decrees made for this Oath, was, That the
Christians were suspected for want of fidelity to their Kings; and did either
equivocate in taking their Oath, or make no conscience to keep it, when they
had given it: as may appear by sundry speeches in the Council. Toletan. 4. cap.
74.
Council, saying, There is a general report, that there is that perfidiousnes
in the minds of many poeple of diverse Nations, that they make no conscience
to keep the Oath and fidelity that they have sworn unto their Kings: but do
dissemble a profession of fidelity in their mouths, when they hold an impious
perfidiousnes in their minds. And Council. Tolet 4. cap 74.
again, They swear to their Kings, and yet do they preuaricate in the
fidelity which they have promised: Neither do they fear the volume of Gods
judgment, by the which the curse of God is brought upon them, with great
threatening of punishments, which do swear lyingly in the Name of God. To the
like effect spoke they in the Council of Council. A. quisgran sub Ludou. Pio,
and Greg. 4. Can. 12. anno 836.
Aquisgran: If any of the Bishops, or other Churchman of inferior degree,
hereafter through fear or covetousness, or any other persuasion, shall make
defection from our Lord the Orthodoxe Emperor Lodowicke, or shall violate the
Oath of fidelity made unto him, or shall with their perverse intention adhere
to his enemies; let him by this Canonical and Synodall sentence be deprived of
whatsoever place he is possessed of.

And now to come to a particular answer of his letter. First as concerning the
sweet memory he has of his old acquaintance with the Archpriest; it may
indeed be pleasing for him to recount: but sure I am, his acquaintance with him
and the rest of his society, our Fugitives (whereof he also vanteth himself
in his preface to the Reader in his book of Controversies) has proved sour
to us and our State. For some of such Priests and Jesuits, as were the greatest
Traitors and fomenters of the greatest conspiracies against the late Queen,
gave up father Robert Bellarmine for one of their greatest authorities and
oracles. Campian and Heart. See the conference in the Tower.
And therefore I do not envy the great honor he can win, by his vaunt of his
inward familiarity with an other Princes traitors and fugitives: whom unto if
he teach no better manners then hitherto he has done, I think his fellowship
are little beholding unto him.

And for desiring him to remember him in his prayers at the altar of the Lord:
if the Arch-priests prayers prove no more profitable to his soul, then
Bellarmines counsel is like to prove profitable, both to the soul and body of
Blackwel (if he would follow it) the author of this letter might very well be
without his prayers.

Now the first messenger that I can find, which brought joyful news of the
Archpriest to Bellarmine, was he that brought the news of the Arch-priests
taking, and first appearance of Martyrdom. A great sign surely of the
Cardinals mortification, that he was so rejoiced to hear of the apprehension,
imprisonment and appearance of putting to death of so old and dear a friend of
his. But yet apparently he should first have been sure, that he was only to be
punished for cause of Religion, before he had so triumphed upon the
expectation of his Martyrdom. For first, The Cardinals charity.
by what rule of charity was it lawful for him to judge me a persecutour,
before proof had been made of it by the said Arch-priestes condemnation and
death? What could he know, that the said Archpriest was not taken upon
suspicion of his guiltiness in the Powder Treason? What certain information
had he then received upon the particulars, whereupon he was to be accused? And
last of all, by what inspiration could he foretell whereupon he was to be
accused? For at that time there was yet nothing laid to his charge. And if
charity should not be suspicious, what warrant had he absolutely to condemn
me of using persecution and tyranny, which could not be but emplied upon me,
if Blackwel was to be a Martyr? but surely it may justly be said of Bellarmine
in this case, that our Savior CHRIST says of all worldly and carnal men, who
think it enough to love their Mat. 5.43.
friends and hate their enemies; the limits of the Cardinals charity extending
no farther, then to them of his own profession. For what ever he added in
superfluous charity to Blackwel, in rejoicing in the speculation of his future
Martyrdom; he detracted as much unjustly and uncharitably from me, in
accounting of me thereby as of a bloody Persecutour. And whereas this joy of
his was interrupted by the next messenger, that brought the news of the said
Archpriest his failing in his constancy, by taking of this Oath; he needed
never to have been troubled, either with his former joy or his second sorrow,
both being alike falsely grounded. For as it was never my intention to lay any
thing unto the said Arch-priests charge, as I have never done to any for cause
of conscience; so was Blackwels constancy never brangled by taking of this
Oath; It being a thing which he ever thought lawful before his apprehension,
and whereunto he persuaded all Catholics to give obedience; like as after his
apprehension, he never made doubt or stop in it; but at the first offering it
unto him, did freely take it, as a thing most lawful; neither means of
threatening or flattery being ever used unto him, as himself can yet bear
witness.

And as for the temperature and modification of this Oath; except that a
reasonable and lawful matter is there set down in reasonable and temperate
words, agreeing thereunto: I know not what he can mean, by quarelling it for
that fault. For no temperatnes nor modifications in words therein, can justly
be called the Devils craft, when the thing it self is so plain, and so
plainly interpreted to all them that take it; as the only troublesome thing
in it all, be the words used in the end thereof, for eschewing aequiuocation
and mental reservation. Which new Catholic doctrine, may far iustlier be
called the Devils craft, then any plain and temperate words, in so plain and
clear a matter. But what shall we say of these strange country clownes, whom
of with the Satyr we may justly complain, that they blovv both hot and cold
out of one mouth? For Luther and our bold and free speaking Writers are
mightily railed upon by them, as hot brained fellows, and speakers by the
Devils instinct: and now if we speak moderately and temperately of them, it
must be termed the Devils craft. And therefore we may justly complain with
CHRIST, that when we Matthew. 11.17
mourn, they will not lament: and when we pipe, they will not dance. But
neither John Baptist his severity, nor CHRIST his meekness and lenity can
please them, who build but to their own Monarchy upon the ground of their
own Traditions; and not to CHRIST upon the ground of his Word and infallible
truth.

But what can be meant by alleging, that the craft of the Devil herein, is
only used for subversion of the Catholic faith, and euersion of S. Peter's
Primacie; had need be commented anew by Bellarmine himself. For in all this
Letter of his, never one word is used, to prove that by any part of this Oath
the primacy of S. Peter is any way meddled with, except Master Bellarmine his
bare alleging; which without proving it by more clear demonstration, can
never satisfy the conscience of any reasonable man. For (for ought that I
know) heaven and earth are no farther asunder, then the professon of a
temporal obedience to a temporal King, is different from any thing belonging
to the Catholic faith, or Supremacy of S. Peter. For as for the Catholic
faith; No decision of any point of Religion in the Oath of Allegiance.
can there be one word found in all that Oath, tending or sounding to matter
of Religion? Does he that takes it, promise there to believe, or not to
believe any article of Religion? Or does he so much as name a true or a false
Church there? And as for S. Peter's Primacie; I know no Apostles name that is
therein named, except the name of JAMES, it being my Christen name: though it
please him not to deigne to name me in all the Letter, albeit, the contents
thereof concern me in the highest degree. Neither is there any mention at all
made therein, either disertis verbis, or by any other indirect means, either
of the Hierarchy of the Church, of S. Peter's succession, of the Sea
Apostolic, or of any such matter: but that the Author of our Letter does
bravely make mention of S. Peter's succession, bringing it in comparison with
the succession of Henry the eight. Of which unapt and unmannerly similitude, I
wonder he should not be much ashamed. For as to King Henry's successor
(which he means by me) as I, I say, never did, nor will presume to create
any article of faith, or to be Judge thereof; but to submit my exemplary
obedience unto them, in as great humility as the meanest of the land: so if
the Pope could be as well able to prove his either Person all or Doctrinall
Succession from S. Peter, as I am able to prove my lineall descent from the
Kings of England and Scotland; there had never been so long ado, nor so much
stir kept about this question in Christendom; neither had Bellar. de Romans
Pont. lib. 4. cap. 6. Ibid. lib. 2. ca 12
M. Bellarmine himself needed to have bestowed so many sheets of paper De
summo Pontifice, in his great books of Controversies: and when all is done, to
conclude with a moral certitude, and a pie crede^dum: bringing in the Idem.
ibidem lib. 2. cap. 14.
Popes, that are parties in this cause, to be his witnesses: and yet their
historical narration must be no article of faith. And I am without vantrie
sure, that I do far more nearly imitate the worthy actions of my
Predecessors, then the Popes in our age can be well proved to be similes Petro,
especially in cursing of Kings, and setting free their Subjects from their
Allegiance unto them.

But now we come to his strongest argument; which is, That he would allege
upon me a Panick terror, as if I were possessed with a needless fear. For,
The Cardinals weighiest Argument.
says the Cardinal, from the beginning of the Churches first infancy, even
to this day, where was it ever heard, that ever a Pope either commanded to be
killed, or allowed the slaughter of any Prince whatsoever, whether he were an
Heretic, an Ethnike or Persecutor? But first, wherefore does he here
wilfully, and of purpose omit the rest of the points mentioned in that Oath,
for deposing, degrading, stirring up of arms or rebelling against them, which
are as well mentioned in tha^ Oath, as the killing of them? as being all of
one consequence against a King, no Subject being so scrupulous, as that he
will attempt the one, and leave the other unperformed if he can. And yet surely
I cannot blame him for passing it over, since he could not otherwise have
eschewed the direct belying of himself in terms, which he now does but in
substance and effect. For Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 8. and lib. 3.
cap. 16.
as for the Popes deposing and degrading of Kings, he makes so brave vaunts
and bragges of it in his former books, as he could never with civil honesty
have denied it here.

But to return to the Popes allowing of killing of Kings, I know not with what
face he can sent so stout a denial upon it against his own knowledge. How
many Emperors did the Pope raise war against in their own bowels? Who as
they were overcome in battle, were subject to have been killed therein; which
I hope the Pope could not but have allowed, when he was so far enraged at
Gotfrid. Vite^b. Helmod. Cuspinian.
Henry the fifth for giving burial to his fathers dead corpse, after the Pascal.
2.
Pope had stirred him up to rebel against his father, and procured his ruin.
But leaving these old Histories to Bellarmines own books that do most
authentically cite them, as I have already said; let us turn our eyes upon our
own time, and therein remember what a Panegyrik See the Oration of Sixtus
Quintus, made in the Consistory upon the death of Henry the 3.
oration was made by the Pope, in praise and approbation of the Friar and his
fact, that murdered king Henry the third of France who was so far from
either being Heretic, Ethnike or Persecutor in their account, that the said
Popes own words in that oration are, That a true Friar has killed a
counterfeit Friar. And besides that vehement oration and congratulation for
that fact; how near it escaped, that the said Friar was not canonized for that
glorious act, is better known to Bellarmine and his followers, then to us
here.

But sure I am, if some Cardinals had not been more wise and circumspect in
that errand, then the Pope himself was, the Popes own Calendar of his Saints
would have sufficiently proved Bellarmine a liar in this case. And to draw yet
nerer unto our selves; how many practices and attempts were made against the
late Queens life, which were directly enjoined to those Traitors by their
Confessors, and plainly authorized by the Popes allowance? For verification
whereof there needs no more proof, then that never Pope either then or since,
called any Churchman in question for meddling in those treasonable
conspiracies; nay, the Cardinals own S. Sanderus mentioned in his letter could
well verify this truth, if he were alive; and who will look his books, will
find them filled with no other doctrine then this. And what difference there is
between the killing or allowing the slaughter of Kings, and the stirring up
and approbation of practices to kill them; I remit to Bellarmines own
judgment. It may then very clearly appear, how strangely this Authors
passion has made him forget himself, by implicating himself in so strong a
contradiction against his own knowledge and conscience, against the witness
of his former books, and against the practice of our own times. But who can
wonder at this contradiction of himself in this point, when his own great
Volumes are so filled with contradictions? which when either he, or any other
shall ever be able to reconcile, I will then believe that he may easily
reconcile this impudent strong denial of his in his letter, of any Popes
meddling against Kings, with his own former books, as I have already said.

And that I may not seem to imitate him in affirming boldly that which I no
ways prove; I will therefore send the Reader to look for witnesses of his
contradictions, in such places here mentioned in his own book. In his book,
of Bellar de Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Justification, there he affirms, That for the uncertainty of our own
proper righteousness, and for avoiding of vain glory, it is most sure and safe,
to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy and goodness of God; Contrary
to all his five books de Iustificatione.
Which proposition of his, is directly contrary to the discourse, and current
of all his five books de Iustificatione, wherein the same is contained.

God does not incline a man to evil, neither Bellar. de amiss. gra. and s^at.
pecca. lib. 2. cap. 13.
naturally or morally.

Presently after he affirms the contrary, That God does not incline to evil
naturally, but Ibidem paulo post.
morally.

All the Fathers teach constantly, That Bellar. de cleicis, lib. 1. cap. ^4.
Bishops do succeed the Apostles, and Priests the seventy disciples.

Elsewhere he affirms the contrary, That Bellar. de P^nt. lib. 4 cap. ^5.
Bishops do not properly succeed the Apostles.

That Bellar. de ^ont. lib. 1. cap. ^2.
Judas did not believe

Contrary, That B^llar. de ^ustif. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Judas was just and certainly good.

The keeping of the Bellar. de gra and lib. arbit. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Law according to the substance of the work, does require that the
Commandment be so kept, that sin be not committed, and the man be not
guilty for having not kept the Commandment.

Contrary, Eodem lib. ^ap. 9.
It is to be known, that it is not all one, to do a good moral work, and
to keep the Commandment according to the substance of the work. For the
Commandment may be kept according to the substance of the work, even with
sin; as if one should restore to his friend the thing committed to him of
trust, to the end that thieves might afterward take it from him.

Bell. de Pont. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Peter did not loose that faith, whereby the heart believes unto justification.

Contrary, Bell. de Just. ^ib. 3. cap. 14.
Peter's sin was deadly.

Bell. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. ^ap. 14.
Antichrist shall be a Magician, and after the manner of other Magicians shall
secretly worship the Devil.

Ibid. ex sen^ent. Hypol. and ^yril. and cap. 12. eiusdem ^ibri.
Contrary, He shall not admit of idolatry: he shall hate idols, and reedifie
the Temple.

By the words of Bellar. lib. 1. ^e missa. cap. 27
Consecration the true and solemn oblation is made.

Contrary, The sacrifice does not consist in the words: but in the Bellar. de
^ss lib. 2. cap. 2.
oblation of the thing it self.

Bellar. de inim. Christ. ^^b. 4. cap. 5.
That the end of the world cannot be known.

Bellarm. de Pont. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Contrary, After the death of Antichrist, there shall be but five and forty
days till the end of the world.

Bellarm. de ^on. lib 3. cap. 3.
That the ten Kings shall burn the scarlet Whore, that is Rome.

Bellarm. ibid.
Contrary, Antichrist shall hate Rome, and fight against it, and burn it.

Bellarm. de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 31.
The name of universal Bishop may be understood two ways; one way, that he
which is said to be universal Bishop, may be thought to be the only Bishop of
all Christian cities; so that all others are not indeed Bishops, but only
Vicars to him, who is called universal Bishop: in which sense, the Pope is not
universal Bishop.

Contrary, All ordinary Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 2 cap. 24.
jurisdiction of Bishops does descend immediately from the Pope; and is in him,
and from him is derived to others. Which few places I have only selected
amongst many the like, that the discret and judicious Reader may discern ex
vngue Leonem. For when ever he is pressed with a weighty objection, he never
cares, nor remembers how his solution and answer to that, may make him
gainesay his own doctrine in some other places, so it serve him for a shift to
put off the present storm withal.

But now to return to our matter again: Since Popes, says he, have never at
any time meddled against Kings, wherefore, I pray you, should only the King of
England be afraid of that, whereof never Christian King is, or was afraid? Was
never Chistian Emperor or King afraid of the Popes? How then were these
miserable Emperors tossed and turmoiled, and in the end utterly ruined by the
Popes: for proof whereof I have already cited Bellarmines own books? Was not
the Henry 4.
Emperor afraid, who Abbas Vrspergen. Lamb. Scaffin. Anno 1077. Plat. in vit.
Greg. 7.
waited barefooted in the frost and snow three days at the Popes gate, before
he could get entry? Was not the Frederick Babarossa.
Emperor also afraid, Naucler. gener 4^. Jacob. Bergom. in Supplem chron.
Alsons. Ciacon. in vit. Alex. 3.
who was driven to lie agroofe on his belly, and suffer another Pope to tread
upon his neck? And was not another Henry. 6.
Emperor afraid, R H^ueden in Rich. 1. Ranulph in Polychronico. lib. 7.
who was constrained in like manner to endure a third Pope to beat off from his
head the Imperial Crown with his foot? Was not Abbaes Vrsper. ad Ann. 1191.
Nauc. genesis 40. Cuspin. in Philippo.
Philip afraid, being made Emperor against Pope Innocentius the thirds good
liking, when he brake out into these words, Either the Pope shall take the
Crown from Philip, or Philip shall take the Miter from the Pope? whereupon the
Pope stirred up Ottho against him, who caused him to be slain; and presently
went to Rome, and was crowned Emperor by the Pope, though afterward the Pope
Abbas Vrsper
deposed him too. Was not the Emperor Matthew Paris in Henr. 3. Petrus de Vineis
Epist. lib. 1. and 2. and Cuspin. in Freder. 2.
Frederick afraid, when Innocentius the fourth excommunicated him, deprived
him of his crown, absolved Princes of their Oath of fidelity to him, and in
Apulia corrupted one to give him poison? whereof the Emperor recovering, he
hired his bastard Son Manfredus to poison him; whereof he died. What did Vita
^rederici Germaince conscriptae.
Alexander the third write to the Sultan? That if he would live quietly, he
should by some slight murder the Frederick Barbarossa.
Emperor; and to that end sent him the Emperors picture. And did not Paul
Iouius Histor. lib. 2. Cuspinian. in Bajazet. 11. Guicciard. lib. 2.
Alexander the sixth take of the Turk Baiazetes two hundred thousand crowns to
kill his brother Gemen; or as some call him, Si^imus, whom he held captive at
Rome? Did he not accept of the conditions to poison the man, and had his pay?
Was not our Houeden page 308. Matthew. Parls. in Henric. II. Walsinga. in
Hypodig. Neustriae Joan. Capgraue.
Henry the second afraid after the slaughter of Thomas Becket; that besides
his going barefooted in Pilgrimage, was whipped up and down the Chapter House
like a schooleboy, and glad to escape so too? Had not this French King his
great Grandfather King John reason to be afraid, when the Gometius de rebus
gest. Fran. Ximenij Archiepis. Tolet lib. 5.
Pope gave away his kingdom of Navarre to the King of Spain, whereof he yet
possesses the best half? Had not this King, his Successor reason to be
afraid, when he was forced to beg so submissiuely the relaxation of his
Excommunication, as he was content likewise to suffer his Ambassador to be
whipped at Rome for penance? And had not the late Queen reason to look to
herself, when she was excommunicated by Pius Quintus, her Subjects loosed from
their fidelity and allegiance toward her, her Kingdom of Ireland given to the
King of Spain, and that famous fugitive divine, honored with the like degree
of a red hat as Bellarmine is, was not ashamed to publish in print an Card.
Allens Answer to Stan. let. Anno. 1587.
Apology for Stanlies Treason, maintaining, that by reason of her
excommunication and heresy, it was not only lawful for any of her Subjects,
but even they were bound in conscience to deprive her of any strength, which
lay in their power to do? And whether it were armies, towns, or fortresses of
hers which they had in their hands they were obliged to put them in the King of
Spain her enemies hands, she no more being the right owner of any thing? But
albeit it be true, that wise men are moved by the examples of others dangers
to use providence and caution, according to the old proverb, Tum tua res
agitur, paries cum proximus ardet: yet was I much neerlie summoned to use this
caution, by the practice of it in mine own person.

First, by the sending forth of these Bulls, whereof I made mention already,
for debarring me from entry unto this Crown, and Kingdom. And next after my
entry, and full possession thereof, by the horrible Powder Treason, which
should have bereft both me and mine, both of crown and lif^. And howsoever the
Pope will seem to clear himself of any allowance of the said Powder Treason;
yet can it not be denied, that his principal ministers here, and his chief
Mancipia the Jesuits, were the plain practisers thereof: for which the
principal of them has died confessing it, and other have fled the Country
for the crime; yea, some of them gone into Italy: and yet neither these that
fled out of this country for it, nor yet Baldwine, who though he then remained
in the Lowe-countreyes, was of counsel in it, were ever called to account for
it by the Pope: much less punished for meddling in so scandalous and enormous
business. And now what needs so great wonder and exclamation, that the only
King of England fears: And what other Christian King does, or ever did
fear, but he? As if by the force of his rhetoric he could make me and my
good Subjects to mistrust our senses, deny the Sun to shine at midday, and
not with the serpent to stop our ears to his charming, but to the plain and
visible verity it self. And yet for all this wonder, he can never prove me
to be troubled with such a Panick terror. Have I ever importuned the Pope with
any request for my security? Or have I either troubled other Christian Princes
my friends and allies, to entreat for me at the Popes hand? Or yet have I
begged from them any aid or assistance for my farther security? No. All this
wondred-at fear of mine, stretches no further, then wisely to make
distinction between the sheep and goats in my own pasture. For since, what
ever the Popes part has been in the Powder Treason; yet certain it is, that
all these caitife monsters did to their death maintain, that only zeal of
Religion moved them to that horrible attempt: yea, some of them at their
death, would not crave pardon at GOD or King for their offense: exhorting other
of their followers to the like constancy. Had not we then, and our Parliament
great reason, by this Oath to set a mark of distinction between good Subjects
and bad? Yea, between Papists, though peradventure zealous in their Religion,
yet otherwise ciuilly honest and good subjects, and such terrible firebrands of
hell, as would maintain the like maxims, which these powder-men did? Nay,
could there be a more gracious part in a King, suppose I say it, toward
subjects of a contrary Religion, then by making them to take this Oath, to
publish their honest fidelity in temporal things to me their Sovereign, and
thereby to wipe off that imputation and great slander which was laid upon the
whole professors of that Religion, by the furious enterprise of these
Powder-men?

And whereas for illustration of this strong argument of his, he has brought
in for a similitude the history of Nazianzenus in Julian. inuectiua prima.
Julian the Apostata his dealing with the Christians, when as he straited them,
either to commit idolatry, or to come within the compass of treason: I would
wish the author to remember, that although a similitude may be permitted
claudicare vno pede; The disproportion of the Cardinals similitude.
yet this was a very ill chosen similitude, which is lame both of feet and
hands, and every member of the body. For I shall in few words prove, that it
agrees in no one point, save one, with our purpose, which is, that Julian was
an Emperor, and I a King. First, Julian was an Apostata, one that had
renounced the whole Christian faith, which he had once professed, and became
an Ethnike again, or rather an Atheist: whereas I am a Christian, who never
changed that Religion, that I drank in with my milk: nor ever, I thank God,
was ashamed of my profession. Julian dealt against Christians only for the
profession of Christ's cause: I deal in this cause with my Subjects, only to
make a distinction between true Subjects, and false hearted traitors. Iulians
end was the overthrow of the Christians: my only end is, to maintain
Christianity in a peaceable government. Iulians drift was to make them commit
idolatry: my purpose is to make my Subjects to make open profession of their
natural Alleagiance, and civil obedience. Iulians means whereby he went
about it, was by craft, and insnaring them before they were aware: my course in
this is plain, clear, and void of all obscurity: never refusing leave to any
that are required to take this Oath, to study it at leisure, and giving them
all the interpretation of it they can crave. But the greatest dissimilitude of
all, is in this: that Julian pressed them to commit idolatry to idols and
images: but as well I, as all the Subjects of my profession are so far from
guilt in this point, as we are counted heretics by you, because we will not
commit idolatry. So as, in the maine point of all, is the greatest
contrariety. For, Julian persecuted the Christians because they would not
commit idolatry; and ye count me a persecutour, because I will not admit
idolatry. So as to conclude this point, this old sentence may well be applied
to Bellarmine, in using so unapt a similitude, Perdere quos vult Jupiter, hos
dementat.


And therefore his uncharitable conclusion does not rightly follow: That it
seems unto him, that some such thing should be subtly or fraudulently
included in this Oath; as if no man can detest treason against the King, or
profess civil subjection, except he renounce the Primacie of the Apostolic
Sea. But how he has sucked this apprehension out at his fingers ends, I cannot
imagine: for sure I am, as I have often said, he never goes about to prove it:
and to answer an improbable imagination, is to fight against a vanishing
shadow. It cannot be denied indeed, that many servants of CHRIST, as well
Priests, as others, have endured constantly all sorts of torments, and death,
for the profession of CHRIST: and therefore to all such his examples, as he
brings in for verifying the same, I need not to give him any other answer,
save only to remember him, that he plays the part of a sophister in all
these his examples of the constancy of Martyrs: ever taking Controuersum pro
confesso, as if this our case were of the same nature.

But yet that the Reader may the better discover, not only how unaptly his
similitudes are applied, but likewise how dishonestly he uses himself in all
his citations: I have thought good to set down the very places themselves
cited by him, together with a short deduction of the true state of those
particular cases: whereby, how little these examples can touch our case; nay,
by the contrary, how rightly their true sense may be used, as our own weapons
to be thrown back upon him that alleges them, shall easily appear. And
first, for 2. Macchabees cap. 6. vers^ 18.
Eleazar: If the Archpriest his ground of refusing the Oath, were as good as
Eleazars was, to forbear to eat the swines flesh, it might not unfitly be
applied by the Cardinal to his purpose. An answer to the Cardinal^ example of
Eleazar.
For as Eleazar was a principal Scribe, so is he a principal Priest: As
Eleazars example had a great force in it, to animate the younger Scribes to
keep the Law, or in his colorable eating it, to have taught them to
dissemble: so has the Arch-priests, either to make the inferior Priests to
take the Oath, or to refuse it: but the ground failing, the building cannot
stand. For what exampl^ is there in all the Scripture, in which disobedi^nce to
the Oath of the King, or want of allegiance is allowed? If the Cardinal would
remember, that when the Church makes a law (suppose to forbid flesh on
certain days) he that refuses to obey it, incurreth the just censure of the
Church: If a man then ought to die rather then to break the least of Gods
Ceremonial Laws, and to pine and starve his body, rather then to violate the
Church his positive Law: will he not give leave to a man to redeem his soul
from sin, and to keep his body from punishment, by keeping a Kings politic
law, and by giving good example in his person, raise up a good opinion in me of
like Allegiance in the inferiors of his Order? This application, as I take it,
would have better fitted this example.

But let me remember the Cardinal of another 1. Sam. 14.15.
Oath enjoined by a King to his people, whereby he indaungered his own life,
and hazarded the safety of the whole army, when he made the people swear in
the morning not to taste of any meat until night: which Oath he exacted so
strictly, that his eldest son, and heiere appa^ant Jonathan for breaking of
it, by tasting a little honey of the top of his rod, though he heard not when
the King gave that Oath, had well nigh died for it. And shall an Oath given upon
so urgent an occasion as this was, for the apparent safety of me and my
posterity, forbidding my people to drink so deeply in the bitter cup of
Antichristian fornications, but that they may keep so much honey in their
hearts, as may argue them still espoused to me their Sovereign in the maine
knot of true allegiance; shall this law, I say, by him be condemned to hell for
a stratagem of Satan? I say no more, but GODS lot in the Oath of Saul's, and
Bellarmines verdict upon this Oath of ours, seem not to be cast out of one lap.

Now to his example of Theodorit. lib. 4 cap. 19. An answer to the Card.
example of S. Basil
Basil, which is (as he says) so fit for his purpose. First, I must observe,
that if the Cardinal would leave a common and ordinary trick of his in all
his Citations, which is, to take what makes for him, and leave out what makes
against him; and cite the Authors sense, as well as his Sentence, we should
not be so much troubled with answering the ancients which he alleges. To
instance it in this very place: if he had continued his allegation one line
further, he should have found this place out of Theodoret, of more force to
have moved Blackwel to take the Oath, then to have dissuaded him from it. For
in the very next words it follows, Imperatoris quidem amicitiam magni se
pendere, cum pietate; qua remota, perniciosam esse dicere. But that it may
appear, whether of us have greatest right to this place, I will in few words
show the Authors drift.

The Emperor Valens being an Arrian, at the persuasion of his wife, when he
had deprived all the Churches of their Pastors, came to Caesarea, where
Theodorit. lib 4. cap. 19.
S. Basil was then Bishop, who, as the History reports, was accounted the
Light of the world. Before he came, he sent his Modestus as Nazianzen upon the
death of Basil calls him in his oration.
deputy to work it, that S. Basil should hold fellowship with Eudoxius (which
Look cap. 12. eiusdem libr.
Eudoxius was Bishop of Constantinople, and the principal of the Arrian
faction) or if he would not, that he should put him to banishment. Now when the
Emperors Deputy came to Cesarea, he sent for Basil, entreated him
honorably, spoke pleasingly unto him, desired he would give way to the time,
neither that he would hazard the good of so many Churches tenui exquisitione
dogmatis: promised him the Emperors favor, and himself to be mediator for
his good. But S. Basil answered, These intising speeches were fit to be used
to children, that use to gape after such things: but for them that were
thoroughly instructed in Gods word, they could never suffer any syllable thereof
to be corrupted. Nay, if need required, they would for the maintenance thereof,
refuse no kind of death. Indeed the love of the Emperor ought to be greatly
esteemed with piety; but piety taken away, it was pernicious.

This is the truth of the history. Now compare the case of Basil with the
Arch-priests: Basil was solicited to become an Arrian: the Archpriest not
once touched for any article of faith. Basil would have obeyed the Emperor,
but that the word of GOD for bade him: this man is willed to obey, because the
word of GOD commands him. Basil highly esteemed the Emperors favor, if it
might have stood with piety: the Archpriest is exhorted to reject it, though
it stand with true godliness in deed, to embrace it. The Cardi. assimilating
of the Arch pr. case to S. Peter's, and Marcellinus, considered^
But that he may lay load upon the Archpriest, it is not sufficient to exhort
him to courage and constancy by Eleazars and Basils examples; but he must be
vtterty cast down with the comparing his fall to S. Peter's, and Marcellinus:
which two men's cases were the most fearful, considering their persons and
places, that are to be found, or read of either in all the books of divine
Scripture, or the volumes of Ecclesiastical histories; the one denying the
only true God, the other our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST: the one
sacrificing to idols, with the profane heathen: the other forswearing his Lord
and Master, with the hard-hearted Jews. Unless the Cardinal would drive the
Archpriest to some horror of conscience, and pit of despair, I know not what
he can mean by this comparison. For sure I am, all that are not intoxicated
with their cup, cannot but wonder to hear of an Oath of Allegiance to a
natural Sovereign, to be likened to an Apostats denying of God, and
forswearing of his Savior.

But to let pass the Disdiapason of the cases (as his ill-fauoured coupling S.
Peter the head of their Church, with an apostate Pope) I marvel he would
remember this example of Look Platina in vita Marcellini.
Marcellinus, since his brother Cardinal Baronius, and the late edition of the
Councels by Council. Tom. 1. page 222. Look Baronius. Ann. 302. number. 96.
Binnius seem to call the credit of the whole history into question, saying,
That it might plainly be refuted, and that it is probably to be showed, that
the story is but obreptitious, but that he would not swerve from the common
received opinion.

And if a man might have leave to conjecture; so would his Cardinalship too, if
it were not for one or two sentences in that Council of Sinuessa, See Tom. 1.
Council. in Act. Council. Sinues. san.
which served for his purpose: namely that, Prima seeds a nemine iudicatur:
And, Iudica causam tuam: nostra sententia non condemnaberis. But to what
purpose a great Council (as he terms it) of three hundred Bishops and others,
should meet together, who before they met, knew they could do nothing; when
they were there, did nothing, but like Cuckowes, sing over and over the same
song: that Prima seeds a nemine iudicatur: and so after three days sitting (a
long time indeed for a great and grave Council) brake so bluntly up: and yet,
that there should be seventy two witnesses brought against him, and that they
should subscribe his excommunication, and that at his own mouth he took the
Anathema maranatha: how these untoward contradictions shall be made to agree, I
must send the Cardinal to Venice, to Padre Paulo, who in his Apol. Pat. Paul
aduersus opposite. Card. Bellar.
Apology against the Cardinals oppositions, has handled them very learnedly.

But from one Pope, let us pass to another: An answer to the place alleged
out of S. Gregory.
(for, what a principal article of faith and religion this Oath is, I have
already sufficiently proved.) Why he called S. Greg. lib. 11. cap. 42.
Gregory our Apostle, I know not, unless perhaps it be, for that he sent Beda
Ecclesi. Hist. genesis Ang. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Augustine the Monk, and others with him into England, to convert us to the
faith of Christ, wherein I wish the Popes his successors would follow his
pattern. For albeit he sent them by divine revelation (as he said) into
England unto King Ethelbert; yet when they came, they exercised no part of
their function, but by the Kings leave and permission. So did King Beda
Ecclesiast. Hist. genesis Ang. iib. 1. cap. 4
Lucius send to Eleutherius his predecessor, and he sent him diverse Bishops,
who were all placed by the Kings authority. These converted men to the faith,
and taught them to obey the King. And if the Popes in these days would but
insist in these steps of their forefathers, then would they not intertaine
Princes fugitives abroad, nor send them home, not only without my leave, but
directly against the laws, with plots of treason and doctrine of rebellion, to
draw Subjects from their obedience to me their natural King: nor be so
cruel to their own Mancipia, as returning them with these wares, put either a
State in jealousy of them; or them in hazard of their own lives. Now to our
Apostle (since the Cardinal will have him so called) I persuade my self I
should do a good service to the Church in this my labor, if I could but reap
this one fruit of it, to move the Cardinal to deal faithfully with the
Fathers, and never to allege their opinions against their own purpose. For,
this letter of Gregorius was written to John Bishop of Greg. lib. 11. cap. 42.
Palermo in Sicily, to whom he granted vsum pallij, to be worn in such times,
and in such order as the Priests in the I Will of Sicily, and his predecessors
were wont to use: and withal gives him a caveat: that the reverence to the
Apostolic Sea, be not disturbed by the presumption of any: for then the state
of the members does remain sound, when the head of the Faith is not bruised by
any injury, and the authority of the Canons always remain safe and sound.

Now let us examine the words. The epistle was written to a Bishop, especially
to grant him the use of the Pall; a ceremony and matter indifferent. As it
appears, the Bishop- of Rome took it well at his hands, that he would not
presume to take it upon him without leave from the Apostolic Sea, giving him
that admonition which follows in the words alleged out of him: which doctrine
we are so far from impugning, that we altogether approve and allow of the same,
that whatsoever ceremony for order is thought meet by the Christian Magistrate,
and the Church, the same ought inuiolably to be kept: and where the head and
governor in matters of that nature are not obeyed, the members of that Church
must needs run to hellish confusion. But that Gregory by that term, caput
fidei, held himself the head of our faith, and the head of all Religion,
cannot stand with the course of his doctrine and writings. For first, when an
John of Constantinople. See Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32.
other would have had this style to be called Vniuersalis Episcopus, he said,
Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
I do confidently avouch, that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be
called Universal Bishop, in this advancing of himself, is the forerunner of
the Antichrist. Which notwithstanding was a style far inferior to that of
Caput fidei. And when it was offered to himself, the words of S. Gregory be
these, refusing that title: Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32. and 36.
None of my predecessors [Bishops of Rome,] ever consented to use this profane
name [of universal Bishop.] None of my predecessors ever took upon him this
name of singularity, neither consented to use it, We the Bishops of Rome, do
not seek, nor yet accept this glorious title, being offered unto us. And now, I
pray you, would he that refused to be called universal Bishop, be styled Caput
fidei, unless it were in that sense, as I have expressed? which sense if he will
not admit, give me leave to say that of Gregory, which himself says of
Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Lyra, Minus caute locutus est: or which he elsewhere says of Chrysostom,
Idem. lib. 2. de Missa cap. 10.
Locutus est per excessum. To redeem therefore our Apostle out of his hands,
and to let him remain ours, and not his in this case; it is very true that he
says in that sense he spoke it. When ye go about to disturb, diminish, or
take away the authority or Supremacy of the Church, which rests on the head
of the King, within his dominions, ye cut off the head and chief governor
thereof, and disturb the state and members of the whole body. And for a
conclusion of this point, I pray him to think, that we are so well persuaded of
the good mind of our Apostle S. Gregory to us, that we desire no other thing
to be suggested to the Pope and his Cardinals, then our Apostle S. Gregory
desired Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 1.
Sabinian to suggest unto the Emperor and the State in his time. His words be
these: One thing there is, of which I would have you shortly to suggest to your
most noble Lord and Master: That if I his servant would have had my hand in
slaying of the Lombards, at this day the nation of the Lombards had neither had
king, nor dukes, nor earls, and had bin divided asunder in utter confusion:
but because I fear God, I dread to have my hand in the blood of any man.

An answer to the authority out of Leo.
And thus having answered to S. Gregory, I come to another Pope, his Apostle, S.
Leo. And that he may see, I have not in the former citations, quarelled him
like a Sophister for contention sake, but for finding out of the truth, I do
grant, that the authorities out of Leo trimus in die ass^m^. su^e ad Pontif.
s^rmone 3. Leo Epist 89. ad Epist. Vien. Idem ibid. cap. 2
Leo, are rightly alleged all three, the words truly set down, together
with his true intent and purpose: but withal, let me tell him, and I appeal
unto his own conscience whether I speak not truly, that what Tullie said to
Cicero in Hor.
Hortensius, when he did immoderately praise eloquence, that he would have
lift her up to Heaven, that himself might have gone up with her; So his S. Leo
lift up S. Peter with praises to the sky, that he being his For so he calls
himself in sermon. 1. in die assum.
heir, might have gone up with him. For his S. Leo was a great Orator, who by
the power of his eloquence redeemed Rome from fire, when both Ex^reuiario
Romano.
Attilas and Gensericus would have burnt it.

Some fruits of this rhetoric he bestowed upon S. Peter, saying, The Lord
Epist. 89.
did take Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity: which words
being coupled to the sentence alleged by the Cardinal (That he has no part
in the divine Mystery, that dare depart from the soliditie of Peter) should
have given him, I think, such a scarre, as he should never have dared to have
taken any advantage by the words immediately preceding, for the benefit of the
Church of Rome, and the head thereof; since those which immediately follow, are so
much derogatory to the divine Majesty. And again, My Epist. 52.
writings be strengthened by the authority and merit of my Lord most blessed
S. Peter. We Epist. 89.
beseech you to keep the things decreed by us through the inspiration of God,
and the Apostle most blessed S. Peter. If In sermon. 2. in die anniuer. assum.
suae.
any thing be well done, or decreed by us; If any thing be obtained of Gods
mercy by daily prayers, it is to be ascribed to S. Peter's works and merits,
whose power does live, and authority excel in his own Sea. He Ser. 3. in die
anni. assump. suae.
was so plentifully watered of the very fountain of all graces, that whereas
he received many things alone, yet nothing passes over to any other, but he
was partaker of it. And in a word, he was so desirous to extol S. Peter, That
a messenger from him was an Epist. 24.
embassage from S. Peter: Epist. 4.
any thing done in his presence, was in S. Peter's presence. Neither did he use
all this Rhetoric without purpose: for at that time the Patriarch of
Constantinople co^tended with him for Primacie. And in the Council of Council.
Ch^lced. Act. 16. and c^n. 28.
Chalcedon, the Bishops six hundred and more, gave equal authority to the
Patriarch of that Sea, and would not admit any privilege to the Sea of Rome
above him; but went against him. And yet he that gave so much to Peter, took
nothing from Caesar; but gave him both his Titles and due, giving the power of
calling a Council to the Emperor; as it may appear by these one or two
places following of many. If it may please your Epist. 9. Theodosio.
godliness to vouchsafe at our supplication to condescend, that you will
command a Council of Bishops to be holden within Italy. and writing unto the
Bishop of Constantinople. Because the most clement Epist. 16. Flauiano.
Emperor, careful of the peace of the Church, will have a Council to be
holden; albeit it evidently appear, the matter to be handled does in no case
stand in need of a Council. And again, Albeit Epist. 17. Theodosio.
my occasions will not permit me to be present upon the day of the Council of
Bishops, which your godliness has appointed. So as by this it may well
appear, that he that gave so much to Peter, gave also to Caesar his due and
prerogative. But yet he plays not fair play in this, that even in all these
his wrong applied arguments and examples, he produces no other witnesses, but
the parties themselves; bringing ever the Popes sentences for approbation of
their own authority.

Now indeed for one word of his in the midst of his examples, I cannot but
greatly commend him; that is, that Martyrs ought to endure all sorts of
tortures and death, before they suffer one syllable to be corrupted of the Law
of God. Which lesson, if he and all the rest of his own profession would
apply to themselves, then would not the Sacrament be administered sub vna
specie, directly contrary to Christ's institution, the practice of the Apostles
and of the whole Primitive Church for many hundred years: then would not the
private Masses be in place of the Lords Supper: then would not the words of
the Bellar. de sacra Eucharist. lib 4. cap. 14.
Canon of the Mass be opposed to the words of S. Paul and S. Luke, as our
Adversary himself confesses, and cannot reconcile them: nor then would not so
many hundreths other traditions of men be set up in their Church, not only as
equal, but even preferred to the word of God. But sure in this point I fear I
have mistaken him: for I think he does not mean by his Diuina Dogmata, the
word of the God of heaven, but only the Canons and Laws of his Dominus Deus
Papa: otherwise all his Primacie of the Apostolic Sea would not be so much
sticken upon, having so slender ground in the word of God.

And for the great fear he has, that the suddennes of the apprehension, the
bitterness of the persecution, the weakness of his age, and other such
infirmities might have been the cause of the Arch-priests fall; in this, I have
already sufficiently answered him; having declared, as the truth is, and as
the said Blackwel himself will yet testify, that he took this Oath freely of
himself, without any inducement thereunto, either Precebus or Minis. Some of
Sanders his worthy sayings remembered.


But amongst all his citations, he must not forget holy Sanderus and his
Vi^ibilis Monarchia, whose person and actions I did already a little touch. And
surely who will with impartial eyes read his books, they may well think,
that he has deserved well of his English Roman-Church; but they can never
think, but that he deserved very ill of his English Sovereign and State.
Witness his own books; whereout I have made choice to set down here these
few sentences following, as flowers picked out of so worthy a garland. Sand. de
visib. monar. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Elisabeth Queen of England, does exercise the Priestly act of teaching and
preaching the Gospel in England, with no less authority then Christ himself,
or Moses ever did. The supremacy of a Sand. de clau. David lib. 6. cap. 1.
woman in Church matters, is from no other, then from the Devil. And of all
things in general, thus he speaks, The Sand. de visib. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 4.
King that will not inthrall himself to the Popes authority, he ought not to be
tolerated; but his Subjects ought to give all diligence, that another may be
chosen in his place as soon as may be. A King that is an Ibidem.
Heretic, ought to be removed from the kingdom that he holds over
Christians; and the Bishops ought to endeavor to set up another, as soon as
possibly they can. We do constantly Ibidem.
affirm, that all Christian Kings are so far under Bishops and Priests in all
matters appertaining to faith, that if they shall continue in a falt against
Christian Religion after one or two admonitions, obstinately, for that cause
they may and ought to be deposed by the Bishops from their temporal authority
they hold over Christians. Ibid^m.
Bishops are set over temporal kingdoms, if those kingdoms do submit
themselves to the faith of Christ. We do justly Sand. de clau. David. lib. 5.
cap. 2.
affirm, that all Secular power, whether Regal, or any other is, of Men. The
Ibidem.
anointing which is powered upon the head of the King by the Priest, does
declare that he is inferior to the Priest. It is altogether against the will
of Sand. de c^a. David lib. 5. cap. 4.
CHRIST, that Christian Kings should have supremacy in the Church.

And whereas for the crown and conclusion of all his examples, The Cardinals
paice of Martyrs weighed.
he reckons his two English martyrs, Moore and Roffensis, who died for that
one most weighty head of doctrine, as he alleges, refusing the Oath of
Supremacy; I must tell him, that he has not been well informed in some
material points, which do very nearly concern his two said martyrs. For it
is clear and apparently to be proved by diverse Records, that they were both
of them committed to the Tower about a year before either of them was called
in question upon their lives, for the Popes Supremacy; And that partly for
their backwardness in the point of the establishment of the Kings succession,
whereunto the whole Realm had subscribed, and partly for that one of them, to
wit, Fisher, had had his hand in the matter of the holy Called Elizabeth
Barton. See the Act of Parliament.
maid of Kent, he being for his concealment of that false prophets abuse,
found guilty of misprision of treason. And as these were the principal causes
of their imprisonment (the King resting secure of his Supremacy, as the Realm
stood then affected, but especially troubled for settling the crown upon the
issue of his second marriage) so was it easily to be conceived, that being
thereupon discontented, their humors were thereby made apt to draw them by
degrees, to further opposition against the King and his authority, as indeed
it fell out. For in the time of their being in prison, the Kings lawful
authority in cases Ecclesiastical being published and promulged, as well by a
general decree of the Clergy in their Synod, as by an Act of Parliament made
thereupon; they behaved themselves so peeuishly therein, as the old coals of
the Kings anger being thereby raked up of new, they were again brought in
question; as well for this one most weighty head of doctrine of the Pope his
supremacy, as for the matter of the Kings marriage and succession, as by the
confession of one of themselves, even Thomas Moore, Histor. aliquot Mar^num
nostri seculi, Ann. 1550.
is evident. For being condemned, he used these words at the bar before the
Lords, Non ignoro cur me morti adiudicaueritis; videlicet ob id, quod nunquam
voluerim assentiri in negotio matrimonij Regis. That is, I am not ignorant why
you have adjudged me to death: to wit, for that I would never consent in the
business of the new marriage of the King. By which his own confession it is
plain, that this great martyr himself took the cause of his own death, to
be only for his being refractary to the King in this said matter of Marriage
and succession; which is but a very fleshly cause of martyrdom, as I conceive.

And as for Roffensis his fellow Martyr (who could have been content to have
taken the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, with a certain modification, which
Moore refused) as his imprisonment was neither only, nor principally for the
cause of Supremacy, so died he but a halting and a singular Martyr or witness
for that most weighty head of doctrine; the whole Church of England going at
that time, in one current and stream as it were against him in that argument,
diverse of them being of far greater reputation for learning and sound
judgment, then ever he was. So as in this point we may well arm our selves
with the Cardinals own reason, where he gives amongst other notes of the true
Church, Universality for one, we having the general and Catholic conclusion
of the whole Church of England, on our side in this case, as appears by their
book set out by the whole Convocation of England, called, The institution of a
Christian man; the same matter being likewise very learnedly handled by diverse
particular learned men of our Church, as by Steven Gardener in his book de
vera obedientia, with a preface of Bishop Boners adjoined to it, De summo and
absoluto Regis Imperio, published by M Bekinsaw, De vera differentia Regiae
Potestatis and Ecclesiasticae, Bishop Tonstals Sermon, Bishop Longlands Sermon,
the letter of Tonstall to Cardinal Poole, and diverse other both in English and
Latin. And if the bitterness of Fishers coffeehouse had not been fed with
his daily ambitious expectation of the Cardinals hat, which came so near as
Calis before he lost his head to fill it with, I have great reason to doubt, if
he would have constantly perseuered in enduring his martyrdom for that one
most weighty head of doctrine.

And surely these two captains and ringleaders to martyrdom were but ill
followed by the rest of their countrymen: for I can never read of any after
them, being of any great account, and that not many, that ever sealed that
weighty head of doctrine with their blood in England. So as the true causes of
their first falling in trouble (whereof I have already made mention) being
rightly considered upon the one part; and upon the other the scant number of
witnesses, that with their blood sealed it; (a point so greatly accounted of by
our Cardinal) there can but small glory redound thereby to our English nation,
these only two, Enoch and Elias, serving for witnesses against our
Antichristian doctrine.

And I am sure the Supremacy of Kings may, The Supremacy of Kings sufficiently
warranted by the Scriptures.
and will ever be better maintained by the word of God (which must ever be the
true rule to discern al weighty heads of doctrine by) to be the true and
proper office of Christian Kings in their own dominions, then he will be ever
able to maintain his annihilating Kings, and their authorities, together with
his base and irreverent speeches of them wherewith both his former great
Volumes, and his late Books against Venice are filled. In the old Testament,
Kings were directly 2. Chron. 19.4.
Governors over the Church within their Dominions; 2. Sam. 5.6.
purged their corruptions; reformed their abuses, brought the 1. Chron. 13.12.
Arc to her resting place, the King 2. Sam. 6.16.
dancing before it; 1. Chron. 28.6
built the Temple; 2. Chron. 6.
dedicated the same, assisting in their own persons to the sanctification
thereof; 2. King. 22.11.
made the book of the Law new-sound, to be read to the people; Nehe. 9.38.
David. Solomon.
renewed the covenant between God and his people; 2. King. 18.4.
bruised the brazen Serpent in pieces, which was set up by the express
commandment of God, and was a figure of Christ; destroyed 1^ Kings 15.12.
all Idols, and false gods; made 2. Chron. ^7.8.
a public reformation, by a Commission of Secular men and Priests mixed for
that purpose; deposed 1 Kings 2.27.
the hie Priest, and set up another in his place: and generally, ordered every
thing belonging to the Church-gouerment, their Titles and Prerogatives given
them by God, agreeing to these their actions. They are called the 2. Sam. 7.14.
Sons of the most High, nay, Gods Psalm. 82.6. and Exodus 22.8.
themselves; The 1. Sam. 24.1^
Lords anointed; Sitting 2. Chro. 9.8
in Gods throne; His 2. Chron. 6.15.
servants; The Angels 2. Sam. 14.20
of God; According to his 1. Sam. 13.14
hearts desire; The light 2. Sam. 21.17
of Israel; The Isa. 49.23.
nursing fathers of the Church, with innumerable such styles of honor, wherewith
the old Testament is filled; whereof our adversary can pretend no ignorance. And
as to the new Testament, Every soul is commanded to be subject unto them,
even for Romans 13.5.
conscience sake. All men 1. Tim. 2.2.
must be prayed for; but especially Kings, and those that are in Authority,
that under them we may lead a godly, peaceable and an honest life.

The Romans 13.4
Magistrate is the minister of God to do vengeance on him that does evil, and
reward him that does well. Ye must obey all higher powers, but 1. Pet. 2.13.
especially Princes, and those that are supereminent. Give every man his due,
fear Romans 13.7.
to whom fear belongs, and honor to whom honor. Give Matthew. 22.21.
unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is Gods. John 18.36.
Regnum meum non est huius mundi. Luke 12 14
Quis me constituit Iudicem super vos? Luke 22.25.
Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic. If these examples,
sentences, titles, and prerogatives, and innumerable other in the old and new
Testament, do not warrant Christian Kings, within their own dominions, to
govern the Church, as well as the rest of their people, in being Custod es
vtriusque Tabulae, not by making new articles of faith, (which is the Popes
office, as I said before) but by commanding obedience to be given to the word
of God, by reforming the religion according to his prescribed will, by
assisting the spiritual power with the temporal sword, by reforming of
corruptions, by procuring due obedience to the Church, by judging and cutting
off all frivolous questions and Schisms, as Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constaetini.
Constantine did; and finally, by making decorum to be observed in every
thing, and establishing orders to be observed in all indifferent things for that
purpose, which is the only intent of our Oath of Supremacy: If this Office of a
King, I say, do not agree with the power given him by Gods word, let any
indifferent man void of passion, judge. But how these honorable offices,
styles, and prerogatives given by God to Kings in the old and new Testament, as
I have now cited, can agree with the brave styles and titles that Bellarmine
gives the^, I can hardly conceive.

1. That Kings are rather slaves then Lords. 1. De la^cis. cap. 7.


2. That they are not only subjects to Popes, 2. De Pont. lib. 1. cap. 7.
to Bishops, to Priests, but even to Deacons.

3. 3. Ibidem.
That an Emperor must content himself to drink, not only after a Bishop,
but after a Bishops Chaplen.

4. 4. Ibidem, and de cler. cap. 28.
That Kings have not their authority nor office immediately from God, nor his
Law, but only from the Law of Nations.

5. 5. De P. nt. lib 3. cap. 16.
That Popes have degraded many Emperors, but never Emperor degraded the Pope;
nay, even De Romans Pont lib 5. cap. 8.
Bishops, that are but the Popes vassals, may depose Kings, and abrogate their
laws.

6. 6. De laicis. cap 8.
That Churchmen are so far above Kings, as the soul is above the body.

7. 7. De Pont. lib 5. cap. 18.
That Kings may be deposed by their people, for diverse respects.

8. But Popes can by no means be deposed: 8. De Pont. lib. 2. cap. 26.
for no flesh has power to judge of them.

9. That obedience due to the Pope, 9. De Pont. lib. 4 cap. 15.
is for conscience sake.

10. But the obedience due to Kings, 10 De Clericis cap. 28.
is only for certain respects of order and policy.

11. 11. Ibidem.
That these very Churchmen that are borne, and inhabit in Sovereign Princes
countries, are notwithstanding not their Subjects, and cannot be judged by
them, although they may judge them.

12. Ibidem.
12. And, that the obedience that Churchmen give to Princes, even in the meanest
and mere temporal things, is not by way of any necessary subjection, but
only out of discretion, and for observation of good order and custom.

These contrarieties between the book of God, and Bellarmines books, have I
here set in opposition each to other, Vt ex contrarijs iuxta se positis,
veritas magis elucescere possit. And thus far I dare boldly affirm, that
whosoever will indifferently weigh these irreconciliable contradictions here
set down, will easily confess, that CHRIST is no more contrary to Beliall,
light to darkness, and heaven to hell, then Bellarmines estimation of Kings,
is to Gods.

Now as to the conclusion of his letter, which is only filled with strong and
pithy exhortations, to persuade and confirm Blackwell to the patient and
constant enduring of Martyrdom, I have nothing to answer, save by way of
regrate; that so many good sentences drawn out of the Scripture, so well and
so handsomely packed up together should be so ill and untruly applied. But an
evil cause is never the better for so good a cloak; and an ill matter never
amended by good words: And therefore I may justly turn over that craft of the
devil upon himself, in using so holy-like an exhortation to so evil a
purpose. Only I could have wished him, that he had a little better observed
his decorum herein, in not letting slip two or three profane words amongst so
many godly mortified Scripture sentences. For in all the Scripture, especially
in the new Testament, I never read of Pontifex Maximus. And the Pope must be
content in that style to succeed according to the Law and institution of Numa
Pompilius, and not to S. Peter, who never heard nor dreamed of such an office.

And for his Caput fidei, which I remembered before, the Apostles (I am sure)
never gave that style to any, but to CHRIST. So as these styles, whereof some
were never found in Scripture, and some were never applied but to CHRIST in
that sense, as he applies it, had been better to have been left out of so
holy and mortified a letter.

To conclude then this present discourse, I heartily wish all indifferent
readers of the Breues and Letter, not to judge by the speciousnes of the words,
but by the weight of the matter; not looking to that which is strongly
alleged, but iudiciously to consider what is justly proved; And for all my
own good and natural Subjects, that their hearts may remain established in
the truth; that these foreign inticements may not seduce them from their
natall and natural duty; and that all, as well strangers, as natural
Subjects, to whose eyes this discourse shall come, may wisely and impartially
judge of the Verity, as it is nakedly here set down, for clearing these mists
and clouds of calumnies, which were iniustly heaped upon me; for which end
only I heartily pray the courteous Reader to be persuaded, that I took
occasion to publish this discourse.


