A CHRISTIAN AND MODEST OFFER OF A MOST INDIFFERENT CONFERENCE, OR DISPVTATION,
ABOUT the maine and principal Controversies betwixt the Prelates, and the late
silenced and deprived Ministers in England: TENDERED BY SOME OF THE SAID
MINISTERS TO THE Archbishops, and Bishops, and all their adherents.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Try all things, and keep that which is good.

Ioh. 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance; but judge righteous judgment.

Ioh. 18.23. If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: but if I have
well spoken, why smitest thou me?

Imprinted. 1606.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD; KING of great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith etc.
MOst High and mighty Sovereign, As it is the office of every Christian to
endeavor, by all good and lawful means, to procure the peace and prosperity
of Sion; so is it principally required of the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, not only that they be Gods Reme^brancers, giving him no rest, until
he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world, but also that they be humble
suitors unto those that, under him, be in supreme and sovereign Authority,
that, according to their places, they will become nursing Fathers, and nursing
Mothers to the Churches of God within their Dominions. And as this is a duty
that lies both upon Minister and people at all times (for the neglect whereof
they shall be accountable to that great and mighty God, whose servants they are)
so are they then especially to be careful of it, when they see the truth of
God, and the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, the sole King and Prophet of his
Church, to be opposed and oppugned, and the sincere Professors of the Gospel
maligned and traduced, yea oppressed, and in a sort trodden under foot, by men
who seek nothing but themselves, and who, for the maintayning of their own
Pomp, and for the feeding of their idle bellies, stick not to wrest the
Scepter out of the hands of Christ, and to thrust him out of his chair of
Estate. The consideration hereof (most dear and dread Sovereign) has
imboldened us, Gods most unworthy servants, your Majesty's loving and loyal
Subjects, at this time to cast down our selves at your royal feet, and to
crave your Princely favor.

Your Majesty knows right well what Controversies there have been amongst us
in this la^d, about the Prelacy, Ceremonies, and Subscriptio^, ever since the
bright shini^g beams of the glorious Gospel of Christ first dispelled and
chased away the foggie mistes, and black darkness of Popery from out of our
coasts. You know likewise how hotely and egarly the Approbatio^ of these things
has been urged by the Prelates; who, being wise in their generation, have left
no stone vnrolled for the upholding of their ruinous and tottering kingdom;
they having from time to time not only reviled and disgraced, both in Pulpit
and in Print, those whom they call their brethren, and fellow servants of Jesus
Christ (who out of a fervent Zeal of the glory of God, and a perfect
detestation of Popery, have witnessed against these Corruptions) but having
also suspended, deprived, degraded, and imprisoned them, yea caused them to be
turned out of house and home, denied them all benefit of law, and used them
with such contempt and contumely, as if they were not worthy to live upon the
face of the earth. Shall these Controversies be kept a-foote for ever? Shall
they not once be finally decided and determined? Will it not be misery in the
latter end, if the Prelates be not restrained in time? It is true that books
have been, and are daily written, on both sides: and yet the differences are as
great, and greater now, then they were at the first; and so are like still to
be, unles (by special order from your Majesty) the matter may once come to
some such direct, and just Trial as is here offered.

Wherein that your Majesty may be the more willing and ready to harken unto
us, we beseech you to consider, and that seriously, that the Cause, which here
we present unto you, is not our own, but that it is the Cause of Christ Jesus,
who is become a Suitor unto you, and desires that he may have Audience: for
whom whatsoever you shall do, it shall be remembered unto you, and abunda^tly
recompensed at that great and last day of account, when you shall come to stand
before his Tribunal, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who is not
unrighteous that he should forget any thing that is done for him, or for any
cause of his. And howsoever the Prelates, and their followers, do bear your
Majesty in hand, that the Church Government desired is an enemy to your Crown
and dignity; believe them not, we humbly beseech you, neither harken to their
Siren songs: It is (as we are ready to prove) a holy Ordinance of God, which
will stand when all such as oppose it, and blaspheme it in the ears of your
Royal Majesty, shall melt away as snow before the Sun. And if by such an
indifferent Conference as is here tendered, we shall not make it as clear
unto your Majesty as the Sun at Noonday, that the Government of the
Churches of Christ by Pastors, Teachers, and Elders is much more agreeable to
the State of a Monarchy, then is the present Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, Commissaries, and the rest of that Romish Hierarchy, let
us then find no favor in your Majesty's eyes.

Your Majesty professed before you came to the Crown, that you did equally
love and honor the learned and grave men of either of these opinions: Basil.
dor. Epist. page 11.
and it is no small heartes-griefe unto us, that, since your coming into this
land, your Affections are so alienated and estranged from us, who have done you
no hurt in the world, but have wished you all the good that your own soul
desires; nay, who, before we saw your face, labored by all good means (not
without some danger) to promote your Majesty's just Title to this Crown, and
have ever since carried our selves duetifully toward your Majesty, and
peaceably in the service of God, and of his Churches. We are not ignorant what
the Prelates do pretend, and what they suggest continually in your Princely
ears; they cry out against us with open mouth, that we are stubberne and
refractarie persons, and enemies to your Sovereign Authority: wherein they
do both highly abuse your Majesty, and wrong us exceedingly. For it is well
known, and the Lord bears us witness, that we do, in the singlenes and
synceritie of our hearts, ascribe much more unto your Majesty and the Civil
authority under you, then any Prelate in the land either does, or is willing
to do. And for the matters in question, we profess here in the presence of
that great God, before whom we shall one day appear to answer it, if we speak
not the truth, that we stand not against them out of any wilfulnes, or
peevishnes, but out of the tenderness of our Consciences, as being persuaded in
our very souls, that we cannot yield unto them, without sinning against Christ
Jesus, whose Ministers and Messengers we are. And if, upon such a due Trial of
our cause as is desired, the truth of the ensuing Propositions (which are the
special grounds on which we stand) shall be infringed by the Prelates; nay, if
we shall not be able to make them so clear and manifest by the infallible and
undeniable evidence of the holy word of God, that who so does not wilfully
hoodwinke himself may plainly see and discern the truth of them; we do
here promise, and bind our selves in the word of Christians, that we will
presently change our minds, and become wholly Conformable to the present State.

Wherefore we, being herein privy to our own uprightnes both to God and to our
Sovereign, cannot but conceive some hope, notwithstanding all the contrary
plottes and practices of the Prelates, that your Majesty (who are even as an
Angel of God to discern between good and evil) will be pleased now at last
both to take a more exact knowledge of our cause, and (out of the tender
bowels of your compassion) to think upon and pity the distressed estate not
only of us the Lords poor servants, who are without any just cause cast out
from serving at his Altar, but also of the Churches of Christ in this land,
which do mourn and groan under the burden of humane Traditions. Oh that this
should be told at Gath, or published in the streets of Ashkelon, amongst the
daughters of the uncircumcised, that, under the Government of so worthily
renowned and famous a Prince, the Churches of God have been thus miserably
wasted, and such a woeful havoc made in them by usurping and time-serving
Prelates, as the like has never been heard of in this land, under the Gospel.
Oh that this should be either said, or written in succeeding ages, that in the
reign of Noble King James (whose name shall live amongst men, when he, having
finished his course, shall sleep with his Fathers) so many painful Preachers
of the Gospel (even three hundred, or there-aboutes) have in one year and a
little more, been turned out of Christ's service, only for refusing such
Ceremonies, as have their life, breath, and being from Popery, and such a
Subscription, as the like, for ought we know, has never been urged upon any
Church of Christ, in any age, under a Christian Magistrate: there being in the
mean time whole swarms of idle, Idol, scandalous, Popish, and Non-resident
Ministers tolerated every where amongst us.

The Prelates have left no means of rigor and extremity unassayed, for the
suppressing of this cause, and for the discouraging and daunting of all those
that either speak or write for it; and yet the glorious evidence of the truth
is such, that it wants no witnesses; there being at this day many hundreds of
the most painful and profitable Preachers in this Kingdom (besides those
already turned out) which are ready to lose both their Ministry and their
Maintenance, and to expose themselves and theirs to all manner of misery,
rather then they will renounce this Cause, and conform themselves to the
Corruptions of the times. If therefore there be in the Prelates any love of the
truth, or any spark of desire of the peace and prosperity of our Churches
(which is the thing that they so much pretend unto your Majesty) it will now
appear and show it self, and you shall easily discern it, by their endeavor
to procure the admittance of this Offer, which is the likeliest and the
readiest way, that hitherto has been thought upon, both to find out the
truth, and to put a perpetual end to all these long-continued Controversies.
Some other things there be, which we would willingly have brought to this, or
the like Trial, as namely, the Oath ex officio, which is a cruel a racking of
the mind, as the most exquisite Torture can be of the body; and sundry of the
late Canons. But because they be of another nature, and we take them to be not
only contrary to the word of God, but also directly against the laws of the
land, we mention them not in our Propositions, in which we have endeavored to
set down only the grounds of all the maine differences betwixt us and the
Prelates: which if they be once thoroughly debated, and soundly agreed upon, your
Majesty shall see such a blessed unity and uniformity in all the Churches
within your Dominions, as your own heart desires.

May it therefore please your most excellent Majesty to read, and examine this
Offer, and to weigh in all the parts thereof the equity and justice of it, and
the most certain advantage that the truth (on which side soever it is) shall
receive by the acceptance of it: may it please you likewise to urge the
Prelates, whom it deeply concerns, to admit of it; and to secure by Royal
protection those that shall be Actors in it: who, howsoever they are forced to
conceal their names (in regard of the rigor and severitie of the Prelates)
will notwithstanding be most willing and ready to show themselves, if your
Majesty shall vouchsafe, to signify your gracious pleasure touching the
admittance of this Conference. If therefore we have found favor in your
Majesty's eyes, and if this great cause of Christ's be regarded; Our humble
suite unto your Highness is, that you would make it known by some public Act,
that the Offer shall be accepted, and they protected by your Royal Authority,
that have, or shall have to do in it. So shall we have occasion, every day
more and more, to entreat the Lord, as we have done and will do for ever, that
he will continue upon your Majesty, with a happy increase, all his graces both
bodily and spiritual, even until, and in the day of Christ.

The Lord Jesus bless your Majesty, and your Royal posterity, and grant
unto you a long and a happy reign over us: the Lord multiply all his mercyes
upon you both for this and a better life, and cover with shame the faces of all
such as wish you the least evil. Amen.

Your Majesty's obedient Subjects, most ready to do your will in all things,
wherein they shall not disobey the will of God: Some of the late silenced and
deprived Ministers.

A CHRISTIAN AND MODEST OFFER OF A MOST INDIFFERENT CONFERENCE or disputation,
about the maine and principal Controversies betwixt the Prelates, and the late
s^^nced and deprived Ministers in England: TENDERED BY SOME OF THE SAID
MINISTERS TO THE Archbishops, and Bishops, and all their adherents.
Wherein are set down, 1. The Propositions which the Ministers offer to
maintain against the Prelates. 2. The Conditions, form, and manner of the
Conference or Disputation. 3. Just Considerations moving the Ministers to make
this Offer. 4. An Answer to such opposisions, as may be made by the Prelates
against yeeiding to the said Offer.


1. THE PROPOSITIONS WHICH THE MINISTERS OFfer to maintain against the
Prelates.
1.ALL matters merely Ecclesiastical, which are lawfully imposed upon any
Church, are such as may be concluded necessarily from the writ ten word of God.

2. All Humane Ordinances used only or specially in Gods worship, whereunto they
are not necessary of them selves, are simply unlawful.

3. Every true visible Church of Christ is such a spiritual Body politic, as
is specially instituted by Christ or his Apostles in the New Testament.

4. There is no True Visible Church of Christ but a particular ordinary
Congregation only.

5. Every true visible Church of Christ, or ordinary Assembly of the
faithful, has by Christ's ordinance power in it self, immediately under
Christ, to elect and ordain, deprive and depose their Ministers, and to
execute all other Ecclesiastical Censures.

6. The Pastor of a particular Congregation is the highest ordinary
ecclesiastical Officer in any true constituted visible Church of Christ.

7. It is the Office of every true Pastor to teach and to govern spiritually
only one Church or Congregation immediately under Christ.

8. The Pastor alone ought not to exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over
his Church, but others ought to be joined in Commission with him by the
assignement of the same Church; neither ought he and they to perform any maine
and material Ecclesiastical act, without the free consent of the Congregation.

9. The Presbytery which is desired is not Lay, as they call it; And the
Churchwardens and Sidemen here in England, being joined as Assistants to the
Ministers in the oversight of the several Parishes, are a resemblance of those
governing Elders which are desired.

10. The Office and Calling of Provincial and Diocesan Prelates is contrary to
the word of God.

11. It is simply unlawful for any Pastor under the New Testament to be also a
Civil Magistrate.

12. The Civil Magistrates ought to be the Overseers of Provinces, and
Dioceses, and of the several Churches therein: And it is their Office and duty
enjoined them by God, to take knowledge of, to punish, and redress all
misgoverning or ill teaching of any Church, or Church officer.

13. The Church government desired is more agreeable to the state of a
Monarchy, and to the Kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, and more
easy, and sat both for Church and Common wealth, then is the present
government by Prelates.

14. No man has authoririe to bring into the service of God any Ceremony
merely Ecclesiastical, of mystical signification.

15. The Ceremonies in controversy are not indifferent, but contrary to the
word of God.

16. The Ministers refusing the Conformity and Subscription required, are
therein neither Schismatiks, Seditious persons, enemies to the Kings
Supremacy, nor any way undutifull to King, or State.

2. The Conditions, form, and manner of the Conference or disputation.
THat there may be a free choice made by the Ministers from amongst themselves
of some 6. or 8. persons, unto whom the maintenance of these points may be
committed; and as many chosen by the Prelates from among them selves, or their
Conformed Clergy, to impugn the same.

2. That it my be lawful for those on either side so chosen, in any particular
occurrent difficulty, to take counsel and advise of any other their Brethren;
and that then the special acts of the said chosen parties may be reputed the
Acts of all those that chose them.

3. That when one side has opposed to the uttermost that they can, or shall
see meet, then the other side shall oppose in like manner to the contrary: And
that the Prelates may (if they will) make choice which side shall oppose in the
first place.

4. That the Opponents frame their Arguments in strict form of Syllogism
only: And that the Answerers (without any excursions, or personal speeches
whatsoever) answer directly to the premises, either by denying or
distinguishing; and that all be done in writing.

5. That if at any time the Answerer denying a Proposition shall withal give a
reason of his denial, he do it in few words: and that then the Opponent
shall briefly by way of discourse take away the reason, and after that
presently conclude the denied Proposition; that so the Argument may come to the
intended issue.

6. That if either in the Question, Argument, or Answer there be any terms
which shall seem doubtful, there be no proceeding in the Conference until
the same be explaned, and the explanations delivered in writing, if they which
make doubt shall require it.

7. That neither side be urged to conclude those clauses, which in the maine
Questions, or in the premises of any Syllogism are without controversy and
granted: but that by consent they may be omitted, and that it may be only
specified briefly that such or such a clause in such or such a Proposition is
yielded unto: And if there be many clauses in one and the same proposition
which are doubtful, that then it be lawful and free to prove one of them
after another.

8. That the Arguments, Answers, and Replies be sub scribed by every person of
that side from which they com, and so delivered to the other side.

9. That there be no passing to the second proposition, until the first be
fully debated, nor to the third until the second etc. As also, no passing to a
second or third argument, until the first be followed to the uttermost.

10. That reasonable time may be allowed for returning Replies, and Answers:
and when any argument is prosecuted to the uttermost, that all the Syllogismes,
Answers, and Replies be written together, and subscribed by all parties of each
side in the conference, as their joint act: and that after they are so
subscribed, there shall be no liberty to alter or change any thing therein; But
that before such subscription it may be lawful and free for each side upon
better considerations to alter, change, or revoke any particular Reply, or
Answer.

11. That when these controversies have been debated to the uttermost, in manner
and form aforesaid, two of each side be chosen to digest the whole into a
book; and that it may be published in English and Latin.

12. That all by controversies and contentions whatsoever, which shall fall out
between the parties employed in this conference, may be heard, judged,
determined, and sentenced by some civil Magistrate assigned by his Majesty for
that purpose.

13. That the said Ministers undertaking this conference may have public
warrant and protection from his Majesty for the performance of the same, in
such manner as is here set down.

14. That if it plainly appear by this indifferent trial (or by the Prelates
refusing to accept it) that the Ministers in these Propositions have the truth
on their side, and that the Prelates are in so great error; Then the said
Ministers and as many else as shall see the truth which they stand for, may be
exempted from the jurisdiction of the Prelates, the Ministers restored again to
their Ministry from which they have been unjustly deprived, freed from the
Conformity and subscription required, and may (with their particular
Elderships and Churches) be subject only to the authority and jurisdiction of
the Civil Magistrate; to whom at all times they are willing and ready to
yield an account of all their actions, and to humble themselves under their
censures for any thing they shall be found to offend in; Conforming themselves
unto their wills in all things, always, so far as they may with a good
conscience; and where they cannot so do, submitting themselves to all such
punishment, as it shall please them to impose upon them.

15. That if it seem not good to his Majesty and the state (for reasons best
known unto themselves) to admit of so indifferent, honest, and reasonable a
Conference, yet it would please them to require the Prelates, to publish a
direct and full answer to such books as have (upon occasion of the late
storms) been published: viz. The Abridgement set forth by the Ministers of
Lincoln Diocese; The Demands, and Considerations; Reasons proving a necessity
of reforming our Churches in England; The old Protestant and New formalist; The
Treatise of Divine worship; The 12 Arguments; The English Puritanisme; and the
Protestation etc: And that it may be lawful for the Ministers modestly and
directly to reply unto the said Answers, as also to any of the books which are
lately, or have been heertofore written against them and their cause; and to
publish the same in print with leave of authority, which they under take and
bind themselves with all convenient speed faithfully and honestly to perform;
they protesting here before Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, and the
just revenger of all hypocrisy, that (to their knowledge) there has as yet no
material thing been written against them in these foresaid Propositions, or any
other Controversy betwixt them and the Prelates, but they are able to give a
reasonable and just reply unto the same: and that by those books, which have
been published against them, they have been rather confirmed and strengthened
in the said opinions which they hold against the Prelates, then any way
satisfied or answered, as shall appear to all the world (by Gods gracious
assistance) if they may have permitted unto them that liber tie, to publish
their writings to the world, which the Pre lats take unto themselves.

16. That if this most reasonable and just course of composing these
controversies be denied them, yet at least they may have free leave to publish
and to offer to the censure of the whole world nakedly and plainly, all those
several Arguments, and Reasons, which they have thought upon for the
confirmation of the former Propositions; as also their direct Answers to all
such Arguments on the contrary side, as they shall find publ^shed in the
writings of the Prelates and their adherents. In all which they promise to keep
themselves closely and directly to the points in controversy, in so strict a
form, that it shall be most easy for the Prelates to give an answer unto them, if
so be they be in error in holding the said Propositions.

3. Just Considerations moving the Ministers to make this offer.
MAny of the Ministers having by reason of their Deposition from the public
Ministry more cause, occasion, and leisure to study these controversies then
before, do find that the more they wade into them, the more they are confirmed
in that truth for which they suffer. So that howsoever the intendment of the
Prelates has been by their rigorous extremity of affliction to make them to
force their consciences, against conscience to yield, that so they might
rejoice in their flesh; and though the Lord has surrered their rod (to the
further hardening of their hearts) to ly so heavy upon some of his servants
that they have put forth their hand to injquitie, yet othersome by this means
are so far from shrinking from the profession of that truth which by their
sufferings they have honored, that the more they have sustained for it, the
more (by the mercy of God) they see the glorious evidence of it. And therefore
in honor unto that heavenly truth they can do no less, then in the fear of
God make this offer unto the greatest enemies thereof.

2. This cause, which the ministers profess and witness unto by their constant
sufferings, being (as they are persuaded in their very souls and consciences)
a divine and sacred truth; and being notoriously reviled and blasphemed as a
hellish error by the mouths of the prelates and their favorers (one saying
that he damned the discipline to Hell from whence it came; Vaghan his Con^orie
in uses. Powel de diap. pref.
others publishing in print that Christ is not the Lawgiver of his Churh; all
generally calling our doctrine and opinion in this cause, Schism and Haeresie,
yea Treason and Rebellion; they having received this grace from God not only to
see the truth herein, but to seal and confirm it by their sufferings, think
it a most bounden duty that they owe unto their Lord and master Jesus Christ,
whose Ministers and Servants they are, by all good means to justify the same;
yea though they neither had suffered nor should suffer for it. Much more now,
when as by the providence of God, they have in themselves, their wives, and
children, sustained and endured so heavy things for it: And a more honest,
moderat, Christian, and religious defense or Apology they cannot yield unto it,
the^ by making such an offer as this is, to the avowed enemies thereof.

3. It is notorious unto all the world, what indignities, sianders, false
accusations, and calumniations, over and besides the other Legal proceedings
(as they are pretended to be) the Prelates and their adherents in their private
speeches, public sermons, and writings, lay upon those Ministers that hold
and maintain this cause, proclaiming the^ to be Obstinat and Refractarie
persons, Enemies to the King and State, Notorious and manifest Schismatikes,
Turbulent spirits, Chaplin well in (...) Considetions.
Contemptuous and disdayning the Authority of their lawful Governors,
presumptuous and wilful Contenders with the Magistrate, Impugning his authority
in things indifferent, and Sovereignty in Ecclesiastical cause, False
Prophets, Members rent and cut of from the Church of God, Runawayes from their
Ministry, some standing upon these points of difference not for conscience but
for carnal respects, some because otherwise they know not how to be maintained
but by depending on that faction, some to gratify their benefactors and patrons
and to please their friends, some for coffeehouse and want of preferment, some
for giddines of innovation, some for pride of heart and selfeloue, some for hatred
of order, and restraint of their liberty, some for ignorance, yet wilful,
because they will not know the state of the question, some to retain the
opinion of constancy, etc. Now it being the duty of every Christian even for
Christ's sake and the Gospells which he does profess, to clear his innocence
against such false and impious slanders; much more is it fit for the Ministers
of the Gospel, being thus wickedly traduced, so to do. And therefore they
think themselves bound in conscience to make this free and voluntary offer
unto their Calumniators; the very propounding whereof is sufficient to all
honest and just minds, that do not wilfully shut their eyes against the
truth, to clear and free them from all the aforesaid slanderous imputations.

4. The Christian and merciful disposition and inclination of the Lower house
of Parliament, and of sundry of the Nobles of the Higher house (who in a holy
Commiseration of the Ministers distressed estates, and in a certain knowledge
both of their honest lives and conversations, and of the good they have done in
their Ministeries, and of their peaceable and duetifull behavior to all in
authority, have been earnest and zealous suppliants for them) has been
shamefully traduced by the Prelates; as though only through the encouragements
and hopes reposed in them, and for this cause specially, that they might not be
discredited and disgraced in their endeavors and intendments for Reformation,
the Ministers did stand forth: Whereas by these presents all the world shall
know and understand, that the cause for which the Ministers do suffer is such,
as (all due thankfullnes and service reserved to the Honorable and Christian
endeavor of the Parliament) though God should (which we hope he will never
permit) so far forsake that High and Honorable Court, as in steed of being
suppliants for the poor Ministers, they should join with the Prelates in
making the most rigorous laws against them that might be (even to blood) yet
the Ministers, by Gods good grace, stand resolved to hold and maintain their
said profession. In witness whereof they publish to the view of all men, this
offer as a testimony of their confident resolution in the said cause for which
they suffer.

5. There is such indifferency in this offer, and it stands upon so just and
equal grounds, that it ought not to be refused of any Christians, no though
made by Jews, Turks, Arrians, Papists, or any other Heretics whatsoever: Much
less when it is made by Ministers constantly professing and showing themselves
willing and ready to submit themselves in all things to the written word of
God; and who in all matters (except in these Controversies of Religion, wherein
yet they agree with most of the Churches that have made a separation from Rome)
are as obedient to the present State, and as unblameable in life and
conversation as any other of his Majesty's subjects.

6. Diverse of the aforesaid Propositions are such, as that if the Ministers
should not constantly hold and maintain the same against all men, they cannot
see how possibly (by the rules of Divinity) the seperatio^ of our Churches
from the Church of Rome, and from the Pope, the supreme head thereof, can be
justified. And therefore for as much as in these controversies the Papists and
the Prelates go hand in hand, the said Ministers do in like form and manner
make the like Offer to the Priests and Jesuits, promising their reconcilement
unto that Sea, if they can either by Arguments pull them from the foresaid
Propositions, or can answer such Arguments as they shall propound in the
defense of them, in manner and form before specified in the Offer. And
therefore it both stands the Ministers upon to make the aforesaid Offer, and
the Prelates (except they will have all the world to judge them to be friends in
heart to Popery) to accept of the same.

7. The Doctors of Oxford in their answer to the Petition of the 1000.
Ministers, and G. Powell in his last book undertake the answer of whatsoever
can be objected in these causes: ^ook. pref. ^g 25.26.
and M. Hooker in his Preface before his first book of Politiks, propounds
unto the Ministers that seek Reformation the very like Offer and form of
disputation: Which books were published with the special approbation of the
Prelates. Wherefore the Ministers having been in such a manner challenged, they
can do no less then make this offer; which cannot be refused of the Prelates,
but they will be judged of all the world to offer that which they will not
perform.

8. The Bishop of Rochester with the consent, and by the direction (no doubt)
of some of the chiefest Prelates, has now lately published his Sermon preached
in September last before the King at Hampton Court; the maine drift whereof is
to prove that the office and calling of Dioce san Bishops, in present
controversy, is a Divine and Apostoli call Ordinance: Besides, in his epistle
to the Ministers of Scotland, prefixed before the said Sermon, he professes
that if there shall an answer be made thereunto with modesty and learning,
nothing shall be more welcome, And that to avouch and make it good that the
said Episcopal calling is unlawful, were a labor worthy the travel, and of
the Prelates much desired. Wherefore seeing the Prelates themselves do offer to
bring this cause to a public trial (and it concerns us in England also no
less then our brethren in Scotland) and seeing by this course and order here
laid down, this question amongst the rest will come to be far more exactly
tried, then by any other way hitherto thought on, the Ministers have just cause
to tender this Conference; nothing doubting but that the Prelates will willingly
accept it, especially seeing they seem so much to desire it, and in all reason
it is like to put an end to all these controversies, which have so long
troubled the peace and quiet of our Churches.

9. Since the Ministers late troubles, there have been many books published in
Print against them, containing many shameful untruthes and abuses, wherein
great violence and wrong has been offered to Gods truth; many gross and
Popish errors have been divulged, and many impostures used, only to deceive
the simple, and to blind their eyes, that they may not see the truth of the
Ministers cause; which the Ministers take themselves bound in conscience to
answer. But being not able partly by reason of their poverty, partly by want
of means of Printing, partly for other difficulties, to publish, so soon as
is requisite, so many answers (except they might have leave from authority)
unto so many great books as many of them are: They have judged it meet (in the
mean time) to make this Offer, wherein if they prevail and gain the cause,
they make no question but they shall have all other particularities yielded,
and shall save that other labor.

10. They have warrant thus far from his Majesty, both in his book called
Basilicon doron; where he wills them to press by patience and well grounded
reasons to persuade other men to like of their judgments; and by the
Proclamation of July 16. 1604: In which the Prelates are required to do their
uttermost endeavor by persuasions, Conference, Arguments, and all other ways
of gentleness and love to reclaim the Ministers; which being as yet not done by
them, can not be performed by a more direct and indifferent course, then by
accepting such an Offer as this is.

11. By direction from the chief of the Prelates, Consid. p^
G. Powell has published, That his excellent Majesty, as he loved these
Ministers dearliest of all others, so he sought the more earnestly to reclayme
them by some correction. So that either the Prelates herein have offered his
Majesty open wrong in proclaiming his special favor to the said Ministers, or
else they are not to doubt, but in the abundance thereof he will vouchsafe to
those poor distressed and chastised favorites of his so much grace, as to
command that this Offer may be accepted, and by his Royal assent to confirm
the same.

12. The Apologeticall books which the Ministers have been constrained from
time to time to publish in defense of their Persons and Cause, can not come to
the hands and scanning of those powers, that next under God are most able to
relieve them. And therefore for the clearing of their innocence and the
justifiyng of their cause (which is indeed the cause of God) they are
constrained to make this public and solemn Offer, by means whereof it may
come to pass that all men may take notice of the goodness of the cause, and of
the gross wrongs they have sustained and endured for maintayning the same.

13. His Majesty signified to the Committies of the Lower house (Supplicating
on the behalf of the Ministers) that before mercy there must go a submission,
and that if they look for mercy at his hands, they must acknowledge a fault.
This is that which they desire; If it can be proved that they have offended his
Majesty in the least thing, they desire no mercy till they acknowledge a
fault, and submit them selves for the same. But it is (no doubt) far from the
heart of so Royal a Prince to require either Confession, or Submission,
wherther is no transgressio^. For their own parts they are persuaded and
resolved, that that truth for the professing whereof the Prelates proceed so
severely against them, is most behoofull for his Majesty, his Crown, and
dignity, and the whole State: And that in yielding heerin in unto the Prelates,
they should make a breach in that duty, which by Gods law every true hearted
and loyal subject in this kingdom owes both to the King and State. And yet
if they be in an error, there can be no more direct and likely course used to
bring them unto a submission for the same, then to have these points freely
debated by the acceptance of this Offer.

14. When the Ministers consider the daily increase of Papists, their
treacheries and conspiracies, their insolent bouldnes, the continual broaching
of gross and Popish errors, what little molestation the Papists have by the
government of the Prelates, yea what favor they find secretly and under hand,
what resistance was made to the Laws intended to have been made against them,
especially by some and those not the meanest of the Prelates, what light matters
are made of their horrible Treasons and damnable opinions, what little execution
there is of the laws against them; they have reason to fear, that before they
are aware and as it were in a dream, (if the raynes be in this manner left in
the Prelates hands for matters of religion) the neck both of his Royal
Majesty and of the whole State shall be brought under the yoke of the Pope that
Antichrist of Rome, and his divelish jdolatrie. And therefore in a serious
mediatation of the best means to prevent this great and imminent evil, which
lies working in a mystery, they cannot think of a more direct course then
this open and professed Opposition unto the Prelates in the foresaid
Propositions; wherein if they shall prevail, they shall not only give a
deadly wound to the Prelacie it self, but to the accursed Religion of Rome,
from which (at least, if it be held to be Iure divino) it receaveth both breath
and life. For who was so simple that saw not, that at his Majesty's first
coming to the Crown when the Prelates hanged down their heads in suspense and
fear, the Papists hearts were as dead as stones; and that the very first
Proclamation against the Ministers in behalf of the Prelates, revived the
Papists again: And that ever since with the increase of the grace, favor, and
authority of the Prelates, the hopes, bouldnes, and nombers of Papists have
increased. And therefore howsoever the Prelates may mock children and fools in
imputing the Ministers; yet any that wishes the confusion of that Antichrist
may with half an eye see, where the true cause is. And therefore they seeing
this (except they should be wilful traitors to God, their King, and Country)
cannot but make opposition unto the Prelates in approving the Propositions above
specified: wherein if they be in an error, and the Prelates on the contrary have
the truth; they protest to all the world that the Pope and the Church of Rome
(and in them God and Christ Jesus himself) have had great wrong and indignity
offered unto them, in that they are rejected; and that all the Protestant
Churches are Schismatic in forsaking Unity and Communion with them.

15. The former Propositions are such, that there will not be found (as we are
verily persuaded in our consciences) any one Conformable Minister in this
kingdom, except he be a masked Papist, that will refuse to Subscribe to any
one of the^, if so be it would please the King and State by Law to urge them
thereunto under such penalties as the Ministers are urged to subscribe unto the
Articles devised by the Prelates. Yea, we are out of all doubt, that the Prelates
themselves (if it were pressed upon them by the King and state under pain of
deprivatio^ from their Bishoprics) would not stick to avouch upon their oaths,
that the Ceremonies and Subscription, for which the Ministers stand suspended
and deprived, are wicked and ungodly, and such as no good Christian ought to
yield unto. Nay, if the case stood but upon the saving of their Temporaltyes
thereby (which else they should loose) we doubt not but they would with heart
and hand subscribe to any one of the aforesaid Propositions. Since therefore it
is more then clear, that they have Offered plain violence unto the
Consciences of all most all the conforming and subscribing Ministers; and that
even contrary to their own consciences they have proceeded against their
poor brethren, because they will not by conformity and subscr^ption renounce
the truth contained in these propositie^s; can any blame the said Ministers, if
having not only the said truth on their side, but in likelihood the Consciences
of the Prelates also, they make such an Offer as this is?

15. It is agreeable to common sense and reason (and the Bishop of Chichester
has some such thing in his Lectures upon the Commandments) that doubtful
actions should all-wayes give place unto those that are out of all doubt and
question. Seeing therefore no good Protestant ever doubted, but that it is
lawful enough in it self to administer the word and sacraments in common and
ordinary civil attire, to administer Baptism without the sign of the Cross
or any such like mystical rite, and to undertake a Ministry (being called
thereunto of the Church) without the authority of a Diocesan Prelate, and
without any such subscription as is required: and seeing the consormity and
subscription required (against which the Ministers do witness) has been ever
called into question since the first appearance of the Gospel out of Popery,
and concluded and determined against, both in the profession and practis of the
greatest lights of this age, and of so many Reformed Churches; have not the
Ministers just cause (they desiring nothing which is of it self unlawful, and
suffering for nothing but for the refusal of those things which have ever been
in Controversy, whether they be lawful or not) have not the Ministers (we say)
just cause to make this Offer, and to cleave constantly unto that which all men
grant to be lawful, until by some such indifferent means as this is, the
contrary matters, bejng so doubtful, shall be proved to be lawful.

16. It is notorious unto all the world what damnable and impious imputations
the Prelates and their defendors have laid upon Calvin, BeZa, and all reformed
Churches, raking up calumniations against them out of the writings of Allen,
Parsons, and other traitorous Papists, notwithstanding Bishop Jewel and Bishop
Bilson have most clearly in their writings against the Papists detected the
falsehood thereof. And seeing that the Papists have gone about, since the
discovery of that late detestable plot by gunpowder, to justify their
abominable Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Periuries, and Equivocations by
the doctrine of the worthyest Protestants, taking just advantage thereof by the
slanderous writings of the Prelates against those of our own religion; And
further seeing that the intent of the Prelates therein was to make all the
Ministers, that consent in judgment with those persons and Churches which they
have thus traduced, odious and vile in the eyes of all men, as persons in
clined to perilous conspiracies, Treasons, and Rebellions; there being no other
ground, nor any color of all this, but because together with other Churches
they hold the foresaid propositions; howsoever in a late Reply unto the
Papists the matter be pitifully shifted of: yet seeing these heavy proceedings
against the said Ministers are a kind of confirmation of the aforesaid
imputations, it stands them upon by this Offer to clear themselves, and to
detect the unchristian and ungodly wrongs which the Prelates have don to so many
worthy persons and Churches.

17. Upon a serious consideration how the hand of God has been upon many of
those, who, having formerly embraced this cause, have shrunk from tree truth
maintained in these propositions; how some of them have evidently lost the
grace and power of their gifts, some grown to be idle, neglecting both private
and public duties, yea profane and scandalous in their lives and
conversations, some ashamed to show their faces in the presence of any who truly
fearing God have known their former carriage, some languishing and pining away
till they have died, and that within few days after their yielding, some
possessed (as it were) with a continual fury incessantly vexing and tormenting
them, FR. MAR
and thrusting them into continual storming and raging in the pulpit aginst
those that do not as they do, all of them falling to the maintenance of most
gross and Popish errors, and none of them respected almost by any, but
contemned and scorned even of the Prelates themselves, as those which were
either hypocrites before, or hypocrites now; The Ministers having received this
grace from God, not only to see and acknowledge this truth, but to confirm it
with their sufferings, have thought it more then needful to make this
Christian Offer, for the staying and strengthening of such of their brethren,
as are otherwise in danger to fall after the same manner.

18. In as much as all the professed and notorious Atheists, Papists,
Blasphemers, Adulterers, Drunckards, and infamous persons in this Kingdom, are
together with the prelates professed enemies unto the Ministers in this cause,
and have been from time to time the special instruments of all the troubles
which have befallen them for the same; can any man lay any just blame upon the
Ministers for making this Offer, now, when as the Prelates have by their late
proceedings given such cause to all the wicked and profane of the land to
clappe their hands in Triumph over them?

19. It is well known in those Countries where the said Ministers have lived,
especially to the Towns where they have exercised their Ministry, that,
according to the proportion of their Livings and maintenance, they have kept as
good hospitality, given as liberal intertainment unto others, and as much
relieved (to their power) those in want, as any other Ministers whosoever;
whereas now a great part of them, with their wives and children, are forced to
live upon the benevolence and devotions of others. Which lamentable and
miserable astate of theirs, the Prelates and their Adherents are so far from
pitying, that they take occasion the more to scorn and deride the^, yea and to
insult over them for the same: they being not ashamed both in the Pulpit and in
Print falsely to affirm, that by this means not only the outward estate of
the Ministers is bettered, but that they have voluntarily and of set purpose
left their Ministry, that they might live in this manner upon the sweat of
other men's brows, and by Contributions enrich themselves. Though therefore the
many and great means, which the Ministers have used both to prevent these
proceedings, and to be restored to their places again, are sufficient to lay
open the shame of these malicious and spitfull calumniations; Yet they have
thought it meet by this Offer to make it known unto all the world, that they
are so far from affecting such a course of life, that they ever have been, and
are still, most willing to do any thing (but that, the doing whereof may
procure damnation unto their souls) for the keeping or recovering of their
former places, from which they have been thrust; to the end that they might
ease their Christian friends of those great burdens, wherewith since these late
troubles they have been pressed, in yielding relief unto their extremities.

21. The Prelates are now come to this height of Popish injquitie, G. Powel
Adiaph. c. 2. sect. 7.8.9.10:
that they are not ashamed to hold and maintain, that they being the Church,
are in their Canons and Constitutions always directed in external things by
the spirit of God; and that therefore whatsoever they decree is more then
Humane, yea even Divine; and that the true Church always depends upon the
word, so as it cannot possibly swerve from the same; and therefore all her
Traditions are holy and divine. And this Church of Prelates (professing
themselves to be assembled in a sacred Synod in the name of Christ, and
directed by the spirit of God, Canon 13
and Excommunicating all them that shall say the contrary) have in their said
late Synod decreed, that all who shall affirm, that either the Ceremonies in
Controversy are superstitious and unlawful, Can: 6, and
or that the Government by Archbishops and Bishops is not Apostolical and
lawful, are to be excommunicated ipso facto. Now seeing that not only the
Ministers suspended and deprived, but many thousand others in this Kingdom, do
affirm and maintain these things, they stand all by virtue of those Canons
Excommunicat, and standing in that estate (if justly) are by consequence in the
case of damnation, yea so as (dying resolutly in these points) they must needs
be damned everlastingly. Either therefore the Prelates shall show themselves to
be Antichristian, and that in a high degree, in sending without any mercy or
compassion so many thousand souls, with the dash of a pen, to Hell, it being
in their power to keep them out; or exceedingly presumptuous, in denouncing
such a sentence against those who^ they cannot but know and oftentimes do
confess, to be the true servants of God; or at the least it stands them upon
diligently to use all good means for the recovery of so many souls out of
Hell, especially then, when, by such an Offer as this is, they hold up their
hands out of the pit, desiring to be pulled out.

22 Last of all, the Propositions being so plainly and distinctly laid down,
and so directly opposite to the profession of the Prelates; they having also so
often disgraced the Ministers for their paucitie, and poverty of gifts and
learning, and so often vaunted of the multitudes of great learned men on their
side, and by that means having far greater choice of sufficient and able men
then the Ministers have; and being better able to furnish them with all
needful helps to such a work, and the points in Controversy so nearly
touching their Jurisdiction, state, and dignity, which is so dear and
precious unto them; also the Offer that is made unto them being so equal,
just, and Christian, if they shall refuse to yield unto the same, and in steed
thereof afflict the persons which humbly make this Offer unto them, they shall
therein proclaim to all the world, that in these their proceedings they have
sinned and do sin with a high hand and malicious heart, (contrary to
knowledge and conscience) against God and his Divine truth: and therefore are
to be judged to be at the next door of committing that unpardonable sin,
which the Prelates, in the time of our Savior Christ's being upon the earth, in
the like cases committed. From which if it be the good will of God
(notwithstanding all the evil which they have done against these poor
servants of Christ, and the Churches of God committed to their charge) they
pray carnestly that they may quit themselves, and that, upon their repentance
in this life, they may attain unto such a crown of glory, as they in their
consciences are persuaded is laid up for some of those, whom they use now
living in the world as Heathens and Infidels.

4. AN ANSWER TO SVCH OPPOSITIONS, AS MAY BE MADE BY THE Prelates, against
yielding to the aforesaid Offer.
1. OPPOSITION.
The reverend Fathers of the Church, before they proceeded to suspension and
deprivation of the Ministers, used godly admonitions, exhortations, and
arguments to persuade them to conformity, answering whatsoever they could then
object, why they should not conform. Therefore what need they now to enter
into that trouble again?

ANSWER.

This is not true. I. They never used any one Argument 2. Their Admonitions
were mere formal; wherein also the Ministers were exceedingly wronged: diverse
of them (who were very poor men, and some of their livings not above 40. some
30. some 20. pounds by the year, and their charge of wife, children, and
family very great) being forced to come in the depth of winter 9. or 10. times,
yea some oftener, unto their Palaces, some of them 30. some 40. some 50. miles
and more to receive their Admonitions, and at length their deprivations for
their labor. 3. We desire 4. This is a most certain truth, and will be justified
to the faces of them all, that many of the Ministers demanded of them Reasons
and Arguments, according to the form of the Kings Proclamation, and they
refused to give any: yea diverse of them sundry times offered their
Propositions, and Reasons to the Prelates, promising, upon their reasonable
answer, with out any further question to Conform; and to this day they never
gave them any. 5. This may the more incite 6. The only Argument to purpose


2. OPPOSITION.
The Ministers can say noe more then they have said and written already, and
which we have answered often. And why then should we try these things any
further?

ANSWER.

1. This is more then the Prelates know. Some of the Ministers 2. The prelates,
by their corrupt answers in 3. This they are
3. OPPOSITION.
It is dangerous that matters established by Law should be thus called into
question, and disputed of as matters doubtful.

ANSWER.

1. These matters are not now newly called into question, into question, but to
call a matter already in question, to a direct and final determination. 2. It
cannot but be rather 3. These matters were never yet so 4. It is ordinary
4. OPPOSITION.
If Schismatics and factious persons may have this favor, why then may not
Brownists, Anabaptists, and Papists exspect the same?

ANSWER

1. They Ministers deny themselves to be Schismatiks, and 2. The thing they
desire is no favor, but that which in justice is to be yielded unto the^:
Neither shall they get 3. It were a shame for a state professing the true
Religion publikly, to deny to the free subjects thereof, desiring it, such an
indifferent hearing of their opinions, as this is, be advantage to the truth.
5. OPPOSITION.
This Offer argues only a wilful obstinacy of persons that will never be
satisfied, and content with reason. For was not (according to their own
seeking) their cause handled and heard in the Conference at Hampton Court, his
Majesty him self moderating the action, and answering whatsoever, in these
points their own Agents could object? what would they more?

ANSWER.

Non Ens: None of them knowing what it was, nor any other faue a few that were
present, whose reports thereof are also so diverse, that one spoils the credit
of another. And that which is set forth as the true report of it, being
published only by the Prelates (who are partial) without the knowledge,
advise, or consent of the other side, deserves no credit; the rather
considering that D. Morton has been allowed to call some part of it into
question, even some speeches fathered upon his Majesty, which he was feign to
confute as unsound and contrary to divinity. Wherein since the Kings own
speeches be, as it seems, grossly abused by the author, it is much more
likly that speeches of other men are abused. Besides, none but Prelates, and
such as were partial, being present at the first days Conference, there can
be no credit at all given to the report thereof: for it is more then apparent,
that they have fraudulently cut of, and concealed all the speeches (which were
many) that his Majesty uttered against the corruptions of our Church, and
practice of the Prelates: as appears by that testimony of the Deane of the
Chapel, which he gave thereof, saying, That his Majesty did that day
wonderfully play the Puritan. But if he played that part no otherwise then is
specified in the Prelates report, he acted it very poorly, or rather never a
whitt. If therefore they would have had the Ministers to stand to the
determination of that Conference, they should have used more indifferency and
honesty in the Relation of it, then they have don; they should at least have
made it appear by mutual testimony of all sides, that it was a true act. For
they have no reason to believe such enemies, as the Prelates have showed
themselves to be unto them, any further then they see them. 2. Such a
conference as 3. Most of the persons, appointed to speak for the Ministers,
were not therefore could not so do. Being then requested, to let his Majesty
understand that some of their brethren were further persuaded touching the
unlawfulnes of these things, then themselves were; they refused that also.
Lastly being entreated either to give them in writing their reasons to prove
these things indifferent, or to give them an answer in writing to such
reasons as they would give them in writing, to prove them simply evil; they
would do neither the one nor the other; so that there neither was, nor could
be any hope of good by that conference. 5. The Prelates took unto them selves
liberty to interrupt, at their pleasure, those of the other side; insomuch that
they were checked 6. The Ministers (if his Majesty will give them leave) will
at any time, in one weeks space, deliver to his Majesty in writing a full
answer to any Argument, or Assertion, propounded in that Conference against
them by any Prelate: and they do here plainly profess that all and every one
of them are most vain and frivolous.
6. OPPOSITION.
These Ministers, by oppugning the Prelates, do openly disgrace the Government
of his Majesty, and the whole State: and therefore noe such favor is to be
yielded to them.

ANSWER.

such as will be justified by the written word of God, the^ the Ministers (who
herein seek nothing but the bare defense of that truth contained in them,
which is of so great importance) cannot be truly charged with any undutiful
behavior toward King or State: if they be not true, this trial will make it
manifest to all men, and that to the greater shame of these Ministers. 2. They
doubt 3. The Ministers are herein so far from seeking
7. OPPOSITION.
It is not meet that the Governors of the Church should in this manner debase
themselves unto such mean and private persons.

ANSWER.

2. Some of the principal of the Prelates have already more disgraced
themselves in this kind, the^ they should by yielding to such a Conference as
this is. The Bishop of Winchester (as is well known) undertook the Answer of
M. Jacobs last book. The Bishop of London professed openly in his Co^sistory,
that he would shake out of the rags that book, which the Ministers of
Lincoln Dioces delivered to his Majesty, the Abridgment whereof is published
in print. Doctor Felton also at the request of the Archbishop undertook to
answer the Treatise of Divine worship: which books maintain and defend in
substance the aforesaid propositions. And though two years are now almost
past, yet noe Answer to any of them appears. 3. The Prelates may chose whether
themselves
8. OPPOSITION.
This very Offer is enough to justify the former proceeding; of the Reverend
Fathers against the Ministers, and to manifest how intolerable they are in this
state. They pretended, in their first Petition to his Majesty no desire of
innovation of the Government, but only the remouall of a few Ceremonies, and
some other supposed corruptions. Now they have manifested their hypocrisy to
all the world; which the Bishops foreseeing thought it needful to take this
course against them. For nothing will satisfy these fellows, but either the
overthrowe of Bishops, or at least wise their freedom from them. And therefore
can any blame the Bishops, if they give them the same measure, that they, if
they had the power in their hands, would mete unto them?

ANSWER.

1. If the Ministers do now cut deeper at the root of 2. It is now made
manifest Canons and their other proceedings. And therefore howsoever some
reverend Ministers nourish still many hopes, that the Prelates will at length
show mercy, and be content to let them in joy the liberty of their
consciences, and suffer them to exercise a Ministry under them; yet they that
make this Offer seeing no likelihood nor possibility of any such matter, but
of the clean contrary (the Prelates having in so high a degree blasphemed and
persecuted this truth of God) they think themselves now bound in conscience by
all honest and good means to seek to be freed from that estate, which cannot
(as it appears now to all the world) uphold it self, G. Powel Adiaph. ^ef.
but by the ruin of the Gospel, and exaltation of Antichristianisme. For they
that plead for their Government and Traditions are driven to hold these impious
and irreligious Absurdities; D. Covil, ^ainst the ^ea of the ^n: pa. 19.
*That Christ is not the Lawgiver of his Church:! That it is a virtuous
obedience, to rest as well in that which the Church commands unto us, as in
that which God commands to his Church: Hutton, (...) the Cross, ^^g 3.4
"That the Church is ruled by the spirit of Christ, who is the truth; and
therefore her Traditions are true and holy: Hooker, ^ef. page 28.
(...) That God allows men to do that which in their private judgment it
seems; yea and perhaps truly seems, B. Roch. ^ermon at ^ampton ^ourt, p.
31.
that the Law does disallow. That vnwrit ten Ordinances, as well as written, are
Divine and Apostolic in the constitution of the chiefest Office, and
Ministry of the Church. 3. They do no further desire 4. They leave their
overthowe to God and the 5. If the Barlow avoucheth in his late Sermon) then
the yielding unto this Offer will be a notable means to establish the same, and
can no ways be derogatory unto it: for no Divine ordinance will fly or fear
any such Trial. But if it be unlawful (as it will be supposed of all men to
be, even in the consciences of the Prelates, if they shall refuse this Offer)
the^ indeed this Trial can be no means to justify the Prelates, who ought in
such a case either to give over their places, or at least to suffer those, that
have their consciences persuaded of the unlawfulness of their Callinges, to be
free, even as Christ has made them free both from them and their Government.
9. OPPOSITION.
This Offer proceeds from them who will be satisfied with nothing. If they should
have the Discipline granted them, and all that they desire, they would not stay
there; that would not content them. At the first they stood upon a few
Ceremonies only; after this they cried down with Bishops; and when they have
their de sire in this, then let the King look to himself.

ANSWER.

1. This is but a malicious surmise of that whereof there 2. The practice of
all other Reformed 3. Though some Ministers though some of them at the first did
not sufficiently consider how unlawful and unwarrantable it is: and this is no
more prejudicial either to them or to the cause, then it was to the Apostle
Paul for teaching that doctrine afterward, which at first he understood not: or
to those now professing the Gospel, who in times past have been ignorant 4.
The Ministers desire not that either the Discipline, or any thing else should be
yielded unto them, or that they should have their wills satisfied in any
thing, further then they are able to prove the thing (for want whereof they are
unsatisfied) to be due unto them by the word of God. And so far forth they
think it lawful for them, or any else, to show themselves unsatisfied: it
being a grievous Sin for any, in matters of Religion and means of Salvation,
to content themselves with less, then God will have them to be content
withal. The Ordinances of God will content them sufficiently; and nothing will
discontent them but to be deprived of any of the same, they all being ordinary
means of Salvation. And is it not an Antichristian spirit, that would bind
men to any other Content? If in their discontent they desire any thing that God
does not require them to desire, there may be as many means 5. Their advising
the King to look to himself, when Ceremonies and Diocesan Bishops are down,
is a Scarcrow, fitter to fright Dawes away, then to hinder so wise a Majesty
from yielding his furtherance to so Christian an Offer. The Ministers therefore
do here again profess to all the world, that they no further desire the
overthrowe of the Prelates, then they shall prove that their standing is
derogatory both to Christ and to the King; and that they take nothing from the
Prelates, but what they give to Christ, his Church, the King, and the Civil
Magistrates under him: the Prelates unjustly keeping that from them, which by the
word of God is their due, and which the said Ministers are ready to yield unto
them, before they desire to see the overthrow of the Prelates: who (we doubt
not) will appear to be enemies (though in a mystery) to God, to the King, and
to his people, even in their very Callings and Offices.
10. OPPOSITION.
Shall we hearken to the Offer of such as are not yet agreed amongst themselves
what they would have? There are not two of them of one mind: and therefore it
is to no purpose to hearken unto them. Let them first agree amongst themselves,
and tell us what they would have, and then they shall be heard.

ANSWER.

1 They are all agreed already upon these points: that in the things wherein
they all are already agreed, and they will not trouble them with any
disagreements: Yea, they shall find, that in their differences they will agree
better 2. If they disagree so among themselves, as the Prelates would bear men
in hand, they have the less cause to fear them, and may with more hope of
prevailing enter into this Trial with them. But the truth is, that their
differences are neither half so many, nor half so great, as those that be
among the Prelates.
11. OPPOSITION.
Either their Propositions are false, and sufficiently confuted by their own
practice; or if they be true, then why do they joint to our Church, which is
governed by the Prelates? why do they desire to execute a public Ministry
under them? why do they not wholly with the Brownists separate, and get them
to Amsterdam to their holy brethren there.

ANSWER.

1. The practice of the Ministers herein is no way contrary to their
Propositio^s: and this is a most desperate shift in the 2. They protest (to the
sha^e of the Prelates, and to the testifying of their charitable love to those
of the Ministry, which are otherwise minded the^ themselves) that they are
persuaded, that many of the Conforming Ministers are (notwithstanding the great
defects, and corruptions in their calling and standing) true Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and endued with gifts from heaven for that holy function; And that the
Churches which they teach (howsoever in their Constitution very defective and
unperfect) are true Churches; whose willing subjecting themselves unto their
Ministry makes the very outward calling it self of the said Ministers to be
such as it is. And therefore so long as (their consciences being in the mean
time vnconvinced of these their errors wherein they stand) God takes not away
their Ministerial gifts from them, and so long as their Churches cleave unto
them (though in their entrance and continuance they were, and are guilty of
much sin, in approving by Conformity and Subscription the Jurisdiction of
Prelates) they think it not just wholly to separate from them and their
Ministry, but are content, though with some grief and sorrow, so far forth
to join with them in the worship of God, as they can without their personal
Communion with them in those corruptions, which in their weakness they yield
unto. 3. If the Prelates shall still hold the things they are bold to make their
humble Suite to his Majesty, that they may be freed from the Prelates
usurpation over them, and may be under the guidance and Censure of the Civil
Magistrates; unles by such an indifferent Trial as is here Offered, the
Prelates shall justify their Callings and Courses to be of God.
12. OPPOSITION.
A vain thing it is to yield to any such Offer. For who must judge on which
side the truth is. They name none; And when they have been heard to oppose and
Answer what they can, they will not stand to any man's definitive sentence, but
will continue obstinate still.

ANSWER.

2. They do not think weigh the^, and so far forth to judge thereof, as (if
their reasons do not satisfy them) to give them leave to condemn them of
error: which will be a Judgment heavy enough to them, if notwithstanding they
shall still persist in their former opinions. 3. It may please God, that by the
evidence and force of those Arguments or Answers that shall 4. It is needles to
name Judges: his Majesty, the Civil Magistrates under him, and the High Court
of Parliament (though the Ministers should appeal from them) would in this
case judge the^, and their Cause, yea and are bound so to do. Whose Judgment
if it go against the Ministers, and it appear to be righteous; the more they
shall neglect the same, and refuse to submit themselves unto it, the more
gross and refractary they shall show themselves to be: and with the more honor
and credit may the State join with the Prelates, in making and executing Laws
for the suppressing of them, and their Errors; which is as much advantage as
any Christian can desire over any Enemies of the truth. And what would the
Prelates have more?
Prove. 19.21. Many devises are in a man's heart; but the Counsel of the Lord
shall stand.

Math: 22:21. Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and give unto God
those things which are Gods.



