Triplici nodo, triplex cuneus.

OR AN APOLOGY FOR THE OATH of Allegiance, Against the two Breues of Pope
PAVLVS QVINTVS, and the late Letter of Cardinal BELLARMINE to G. BLACKVVEL the
Archpriest.

Tunc omnes populi clamauerunt and dixerunt,
Magna est Veritas, and praeualet.
ESDR. 3. Authoritate Regia.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO 1607.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE OATH of Allegiance.
WHat a monstrous, rare, nay never heard of treacherous attempt, was plotted
within these few years here in England, for the destruction of his Majesty,
the Queen, their Posterity, the whole house of Parliament, and a great number
of good Subjects of all sorts, and degrees, is so famous already through the
whole World by the infamy thereof, as it is needless to be repeated or
published any more, the horror of the sin it self does so lowdly proclaim
it. For if those Genesis 4 10.
crying sins, (whereof mention is made in the Scripture) have that Epithet
given them for their public infamy, and for procuring as it were with a loud
cry from Heaven, a just vengeance, and recompense; and yet those sins are
both old and too common, neither the world nor any one Country being ever at
any time clean void of them: If those Sins, I say, are said in the Scripture
to cry so loud; What must then this Sin do, plotted without cause, infinite
in cruelty, and singular from all examples? What proceeded hereupon, is
likewise notorious to the whole world, His Majesty's Justice only taking hold
upon the Offenders, and that in as Honorable and public a form of trial,
as ever was used in this Kingdom.

2. For although the only reason they gave for plotting so heinous an attempt,
was the zeal they carried to the Romish Religion; yet were never any other of
that profession the worse used for that cause, as by his Majesty's gracious
Proclamation immediately after the discovery of the said Fact does plainly
appear; Only at the next sitting down again of the Parliament, were there
Laws made, setting down some such orders as was thought fit for preventing
the like mischief in time to come. Amongst which, a form of Oath was framed
to be taken by all his Majesty's Subjects, whereby they should make clear
profession of their Resolution, faithfully to persist in his Majesty's
obedience according to their natural Allegiance; To the end that hereby his
Majesty might make a separation, not only between all his good Subjects in
general, and unfaithful Traitors, that intended to with draw themselves from
his Majesty's Obedience; But specially to make a separation between so many of
his Majesty's Subjects, who although they were otherwise Popishly affected, yet
retained in their hearts the print of their natural duty to their
Sovereign; and those who being carried away with the like Fanaticall zeal that
the Powder Traitors were, could not contain themselves within the bounds of
their natural Allegiance, but thought diversity of Religion a safe pretext
for all kind of Treasons, and rebellions against their Sovereign. Which godly
and wise intent God did bless with success accordingly: For very many of his
Majesty's Subjects that were Popishly affected, as well Priests, as Layicks, did
freely take the same Oath: whereby they both gave his Majesty occasion to
think the better of their fidelity, and likewise freed themselves of that
heavy slander, That although they were fellow professors of one Religion with
the powder Traitors, yet were they not joined with them in Treasonable courses
against their Sovereign; whereby all quietly minded Papists were put out of
despair, and his Majesty gave good proof that he intended no persecution
against them for conscience cause, but only desired to be secured of them for
Civil obedience, which for Conscience cause they were bound to perform.

3. But the devil could not have devised a more malicious trick for
interrupting this so calm and clement a course, then fell out by the sending
hither, and publishing a Breue of the Popes, countermaunding all them of his
profession to take this Oath; Thereby sowing new seeds of jealousy between
his Majesty and his Popish Subjects, by stirring them up to disobey that
lawful commandment of their Sovereign, which was ordained to be taken of
them as a pledge of their fidelity; And so by their refusal of so just a
charge, to give his Majesty so great and just a ground for punishment of them,
without touching any matter of Conscience, throwing them needlessly into one of
these desperate straights, Either with the loss of their lives and goods, to
renounce their Allegiance to their natural Sovereign; Or else to procure the
condemnation of their souls, by renouncing the Catholic faith, as he
alleges.

4. And on the other part, although disparitie of Religion can permit no
intelligence, nor intercourse of Messengers between his Majesty and the Pope;
yet there being no denounced war between them, he has by this Action broken
the rules of common civility, and Justice between Christian Princes, in thus
condemning him unheard, both by accounting him a Persecutor, which cannot be
but employed by exhorting the Papists to endure Martyrdom; As likewise by so
straightly commanding all those of his profession in England, to refuse the
taking of this Oath, Thereby refusing to profess their natural obedience to
their Sovereign. For if he think himself his Majesty's Judge, wherefore has
he condemned him unheard? And, if he have nothing to do with the King and his
government, (as indeed he has not) why does he mittere falcem in alienam
messem? to meddle between his Majesty and his Subjects, especially in matters
that merely and only concern Civil obedience? And yet could Pius Quintus in
his greatest fury, and auowed quarrel against the late Queen, do no more
injury unto her, then he has in this case offered unto his Majesty, without
so much as a pretended or an alleged cause. For what difference there is,
between the commanding Subjects to rebel, and loosing them from their oath of
Allegiance as Pius Quintus did, and the commanding of Subjects not to obey in
making profession of their Oath of their duetifull Allegiance, as this Pope
has now done; No man can easily discern.

5. But to draw near unto his Breue. Wherein certainly he has taken more
pains then he needed, by setting down in the said Breue the whole body of the
Oath at length, whereas the only naming of the Title thereof might as well
have served for any answer he has made thereunto, making Vna litura, that is,
the flat and general condemnation of the whole Oath, to ferue for all his
refutation. Wherein he has as well in this respect as in the former, dealt
both indiscreetly with his Majesty, and injuriously with his own Catholics.
With his Majesty, in not refuting particularly what special words he
quarrelled in that Oath; which if he had done, it might have been that his
Majesty for the fatherly care he has, not to put any of his Subjects to a
needless extremity, might have been contented in some sort to have reformed
or interpreted those words: With his own Catholics, Either if his Majesty
had so done, they had been thereby fully eased in that business; Or at least,
if his Majesty would not have condescended to have altered any thing in the
said Oath, yet would thereby some appearance or shadow of excuse have been left
unto them for refusing the same, not as seeming thereby to swerve from their
Obedience and Allegiance unto his Majesty, but only being stayed from taking
the same upon the scrupulous tenderness of their Consciences, in regard of
those particular words which the Pope had noted and condemned therein.

And now let us hear the words of his Thunder.

POPE PAVLVS the fifth, to the English Catholics.
Well-beloved sons, Salutation The Pope his first Breue.
and Apostolical Benediction. The tribulations and calamities, which ye have
continually sustained for the keeping of the Catholic Faith, have always
afflicted us with great grief of mind: But for as much as we understand, that
at this time all things are more grievous, our affliction hereby is wonderfully
increased. For we have heard how you are compelled by most grievous punishments
set before you, to go to the Churches of Heretics, to frequent their
Assemblies, to be present at their Sermons. Truly we do undoubtedly believe,
that they which with so great constancy and fortitude, have hither to endured
almost infinite and most cruel persecutions, that they may walk without spot
in the Law of the Lord, will never suffer themselves to be defiled with the
communion of those that have forsaken the divine Law. Yet notwithstanding,
being compelled by the zeal of our Pastoral Office, and by our Fatherly care
which we do continually take for the salvation of your souls, we are enforced
to admonish, and desire you, that by no means you come unto the Churches of
the Heretics, or hear their Sermons, or communicate with them in their Rites,
lest you incur the wrath of God. For these things may ye not do without
indamaging the worship of God, and your own salvation. As likewise you cannot
without most evident and grievous wronging of Gods Honor, bind your selves by
the Oath, which in like manner we have heard with very great grief of our heart
is administered unto you, of the tenor under written. viz.

I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, The Oath.
profess, testify, and declare in my conscience before God and the world,
That our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, is lawful King of this Realm, and of all
other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries; And that the Pope neither of
himself, nor by any authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other
means with any other, has any power or authority to depose the King, or to
dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms, or Dominions, or to authorize any
foreign Prince, to invade or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any
of his Subjects of their Allegiance, and obedience to his Majesty, or to give
License or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise tumults, or to offer any
violence, or hurt to his Majesty's Royal person, State or Government, or to
any of his Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear
from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or sentence of
Excommunication, or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted, by
the Pope or his successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be
derived from him, or his Sea, against the said King, his Heirs, or Successors,
or any Absolution of the said subjects from their Obedience, I will bear faith
and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and
them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and
Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their
Crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence, or declaration,
or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and traitorous
Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them.
And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure,
as impious and Heretical, this damnable doctrine and Position, That Princes
which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered
by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in
conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, has
power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by
good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all
pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly
and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me
spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the
same words, without any Aequiuocation, or mental evasion, or secret
reservation whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgement
heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me
GOD.

Which things since they are thus; it must evidently appear unto you by the
words themselves, That such an Oath cannot be taken without hurting of the
Catholic Faith, and the Salvation of your Souls, seeing it conteines many
things, which are flat contrary to Faith and Salvation. Wherefore we do
admonish you, that you do utterly abstain from taking this and the like
Oaths: which thing we do the more earnestly require of you because we have
experience of the Constancy of your Faith, which is tried like Gold in the
fire of perpetual Tribulation. We do well know, that you will cheerfully
undergo all kind of cruel Torments whatsoever, yea, and constantly endure
death it self, rather then you will any thing offend the Majesty of God. And
this our Confidence is confirmed by those things, which are daily reported unto
us, of the singular virtue, valor and fortitude, which in these last times,
does no less shine in your Martyrs, then it did in the first beginnings of
the Church. Stand therefore, your Loins being girt about with Verity, and
having on the Brestplate of Righteousness, taking the Shield of Faith, be ye
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; And let nothing hinder you.
He which will crown you, and does in Heaven behold your Conflicts, will
finish the good work, which he has begun in you. You know how he has
promised his Disciples, that he will never leave them Orphans: for he is
faithful which has promised. Hold fast therefore his correction, that is,
being rooted and grounded in Charity, Whatsoever ye do, whatsoever ye
endeavor, do it with one accord, in simplicity of Heart, in meekness of
Spirit, without murmuring or doubting. For by this do all men know, that we
are the Disciples of Christ, if we have Love one to another. Which Charity, as
it is very greatly to be desired of all faithful Christians: So certainly is
it altogether necessary for you, most blessed Sons. For by this your
Charity, the Power of the Devil is weakened, who does so much assail you,
since that Power of his is especially vpheld by the Contentions, and
Disagreement of our Sons. We exhort you therefore by the Bowels of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whose Love we are taken out of the Jaws of eternal Death;
That above all things, you would have mutual Charity among you. Surely Pope
Clement the eight of happy memory, has given you most profitable Precepts of
practicing brotherly Charity one to another, in his Letters, in form of a
Breue, to our well-beloved Son M. George Arch priest of the Kingdom of
England, dated the 5. day of the month of October, 1602. Put them therefore
diligently in practice, and be not hindered by any difficulty or
doubtfulnesse. We require you, that ye do exactly observe the words of those
Letters, and that ye take and understand them simply as they sound, and as
they lie, all Power to interpret them otherwise, being taken away. In the mean
while, we will never cease to pray to the Father of Mercies, that he would
with pity behold your afflictions, and your pains, And that he would keep
and defend you with his continual Protection: whom we do gently greet with
our Apostolical Benediction. Dated at Rome at S. Mark, under the Signet of
the Fisherman, the tenth of the Calends of October, 1606. the second year of
our Pope-dome.

THE ANSWER TO the first Breue.
FIrst the Pope expresses herein his Sorrow for that Persecution, which the
Catholics sustain for the faiths sake. Wherein, besides the maine untruth,
whereby the King our Master is so injuriously used, I must ever auowe and
maintain, as the truth is, according to mine own knowledge, that Her
Majesty never punished any Papist for Religion, but that their own punishment
was ever extorted out of her hands against her will, by their own
misbehauiour, which both the time and circumstances of her Actions will
manifestly make proof of. For before Pius Quintus his Excommunication giving
her over for a Pray, and setting her Subjects at liberty to rebel, It is well
known she never meddled with the blood or hard punishment of any Catholic,
nor made any rigorous Laws against them. And since that Time, who list to
compare with an indifferent eye, the manifold intended Invasions against her
whole Kingdom, The foreign Practices, The internal public Rebellions, The
private Plots and Machinations, poysonings, murders, and all sorts of devises,
Et quid non? daily set abroach; and all these Wares continually fostered and
fomented from Rome; Together with the continual corrupting of her Subjects, as
well by temporal Bribes, as by fair and specious promises of eternal
felicity; And nothing but book upon book publicly set forth by all her
Fugitives, for approbation of so Holy designs: Who list, I say, with an
indifferent eye, to look on the one part, upon those infinite and intolerable
Temptations, And on the other part upon the just, yet moderate punishment of a
part of these heinous Offenders; shall easily see that gracious Prince as free
from persecution, as they shall free these hellish Instruments from the Honor
of Martyrdom.

5. But now having sacrificed (if I may so say) to the Manes of my defunct
Sovereign, as well for the discharge of my particular duty, as for love of
Verity; I must next perform my duty to his Majesty present, in testifying
likewise the truth of his Actions in this matter. Wherein I must for the love
of Verity confess, That whatsoever was her just and merciful Government
over the Papists in her Time, his Majesty's Government over them since has so
far exceeded hers, in Mercy and Clemency, as not only the Papists
themselves grew to that height of Pride, in confidence of his mildness, as
they did directly expect, and assuredly promise to themselves liberty of
Conscience and Equality with us in all things; But even we, I must truly
confess, his Majesty's best and faithfullest Subjects, were cast in great
fear and amazement of his Majesty's Course and proceedings, Ever
prognosticating and justly suspecting that sour fruit to come of it, which
showed it self clearly in the Powder Treason. How many did his Majesty
honor with Knighthood, His Majesty's Benefits and Favors bestowed upon the
Catholics.
of known and open Recusants? How indifferently did his Majesty give
audience, and access to both sides, bestowing equally all Favors and Honors
on both Professions? How free and continual access, had all Ranks and
Degrees of Papists in his Court and Company? And above all, how frankely and
freely did his Majesty free Recusants of their ordinary payments? Besides, it
is evident what strait order was given out of his Majesty's own mouth to his
Judges, to spare the Execution of all Priests, (notwithstanding their
Conviction,) Joining thereunto a Gracious Proclamation, whereby all Priests,
that were at liberty, and not taken, might go out of the Country by such a
day: his Majesty's General Pardon having been extended to all convicted
Priests in prison, whereupon they were set at liberty as good Subjects, And
all Priests that were taken after, sent over and set at Liberty there. But
time and paper will rail me to make enumeration of all the Benefits and
Gracious favors that his Majesty has bestowed in general and particular
upon Papists: In recounting whereof, every scrape of my pen would serve but
for a blot of the Popes ingratitude and Injustice, in meating him with so hard
a measure for the same. So as I think I have sufficiently, or at least with
good reason wiped the Magno cum animi moerore. etc.
Tears from the Popes eyes, for complaining upon such persecution, who if he
had bin but politikely wise, although he had had no respect to Justice and
Verity, would have in this Complaint of his, made a difference between the
times of the late Queen, and his Majesty now present; And in his commending
of our Sovereigns Moderation, in regard of former times, might have had hope
to have moved his Majesty to have continued in the same clement course. For it
is a true saying, That alleged kindness upon noble minds does ever work
much. And for the maine untruth of his Majesty's persecution, it can never be
proved, that any were, or are put to death in his Majesty's time for cause of
Conscience, except that now this discharge given by the Pope to all Catholics
to take their Oath of Allegiance to his Majesty be the cause of the due
punishment of many: which if it fall out to be, let the blood light upon the
Popes head, who is the only cause thereof.

As for the next point contained in his Breue concerning his discharge of all
Papists to come to our Church, or frequent our Rites and Ceremonies, I am not
to meddle The intendement of this Discourse.
at this time with that matter, because my Errand now only is to publish to
the World the Injury and Injustice done unto his Majesty in discharging his
own Subjects to make profession of their Obedience to him. Now as to the point
wherein the Oath is quarrelled, it is set down in few, but very weighty
words; To wit, that it ought to be clear unto all Catholics, That this Oath
cannot be taken with safety of the Catholic Faith, and of their Souls
health, since it contains many things that are plainly and directly contrary
to their faith and salvation. To this, the old saying fathered upon the
Philosopher may very fitly be applied, Multa dicit, sed pauca probat: Nay
indeed, Nihil omnino probat. For how the profession of the natural Allegiance
of Subjects to their Prince, can be directly opposite to the faith and
salvation of souls, is so far beyond my simple reading in Divinity, as I
must think it a strange and new Assertion, to proceed out of the mouth of
that pretended general Pastor of all Christian souls. I read in deed, and
not in one, or two, or three places of Scripture, that Subjects are bound to
obey their Princes for conscience sake, whether they were good or wicked
Princes. So said the people to Josh. 1. 17.
Joshua, As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee. So the Iere.
27. 12.
Prophet commanded the people to obey the King of Babel, saying, Put your
necks under the yoke of the King of Babel, and serve him and his people, that
ye may live. So were the children of Israel unto Exodus 5. 1.
Pharaoh, desiring him to let them go. So to Ezra. 1. 3.
Cyrus, obtaining leave of him to return to build the Temple. And in a word,
the Romans 13. 5.
Apostle willed all men to be subject for Conscience sake. Agreeably to the
Scriptures did the Fathers teach. August in Psalm. 124.
Augustine speaking of Julian, says, Julian was an unbelieving Emperor, was
he not an Apostata, an Oppressor, and an Idolater? Christian Soldiers served
that unbelieving Emperor: when they came to the cause of CHRIST, they would
acknowledge no Lord, but him that is in Heaven. When he would have them to
worship Idols and to sacrifice, they preferred GOD before him: But when he
said, Go forth to fight, Invade such a nation, they presently obeyed. They
distinguished their Eternal Lord from their temporal, and yet were they
subject even unto their temporal lord for his sake that was their eternal
Lord and Master. Tertul. ad Scap.
Tertullian says, A Christian is enemy to no man, much less to the Prince,
whom he knows to be appointed of God, and so of necessity must love,
reverence and honor him, and wish him safe with the whole Roman Empire, so
long as the world shall last: for so long shall it endure. We honor therefore
the Emperor in such sort, as is lawful for us, and expedient for him, as a
man, the next unto God, and obtaining from God whatsoever he has, and only
inferior unto God. This the Emperor himself would: for so is be greater then
all, while he is inferior only to the true God. Just Martyr Apol. 2. ad Ant.
Imperat.
Iustine Martyr; We only adore God, and in all other things cheerfully
perform service to you, professing that you are Emperors and Princes of men.
Amb. in orat. con. Auxentium de basilicis traden. habetur. lib. 5. Epist. Amb.
Ambrose; I may lament, weep, and sigh: My tears are my weapons against their
Arms, Soldiers, and the Goths also, such are the weapons of a Priest:
Otherwise neither ought I, neither can I resist. Optat. contra Parme. lib. 3.
Optatus; Over the Emperor, there is none but only God, that made the
Emperor. And Greg. Mag. Epist. lib. 2. indict. 11. Epist. 61.
Gregory writing to Mauritius about a certain Law, that a Soldier should not
be received into a Monastery, Nondum expleta militia; The Almighty God, says
he, holds him guilty, that is not upright to the most excellent Emperors in
all things that he does or speaks. And then calling himself the unworthy
servant of his Godliness, goes on in the whole Epistle to show the Injustice
of that Law, as he pretends: And in the end concludes his Epistle with these
words; I being subject to your command have caused the same law to be sent
through diverse parts of your Dominions: and because the law it self does not
agree to the Law of the Almighty God, I have signified the same by my Letters
to your most excellent Lordship: so that on both parts I have paid what I
ought, because I have yielded Obedience to the Emperor, and have not holden my
peace, in what I thought for God. Now how great a contrariety there is betwixt
this ancient Popes action in obeying an Emperor by the publication of his
Decree, which in his own Conscience he thought unlawful, and this present
Popes prohibition to a Kings Subjects from Obedience unto him in things most
lawful and mere Temporal; I remit it to the Readers indifferency. And
answerably to the Fathers spoke the Councels in their decrees. As the Council
of Council. Arelatense sub Carolo Can. 26.
Arles, submitting the whole Council to the Emperor in these words: These
things we have decreed to be presented to the Emperor, beseeching his
Clemency, that if we have done less then we ought, it may be supplied by his
wisdom: if any thing otherwise then reason require, it may be corrected by
his judgment: if any thing be well set down of us, it may be perfected by
his aid and assistance.

But why should I speak of Charles the Great, To whom not one Council, but
six several Councels, Franckford, Arles, Towers, Shallons, Mentz, and Rhemes
did wholly submit themselves? And not rather speak of all the general
Councels, that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon, and the four other
commonly so reputed, which did submit themselves to the Emperors wisdom, and
Piety in all things? Insomuch as that of Ephesus repeated it four several
times, That they were summoned by the Emperors Oracle, beck, charge and
command, and betook themselves to his godliness, Vide epistolam generalis
Con: ^d August.
beseeching him, that the decrees made against Nestorius and his followers,
might by his power have their full force and validity, as appears manifestly
in the Epistle of the general Council of Ephesus written ad Augustos. I also
read that Christ said, his John 18. 36
kingdom was not of this world, bidding, Give to Mat. 22. 21
Caesar what was Caesar's, and to God what was Gods. And I ever held it for an
infallible Maxim in Divinity, That temporal Obedience to a Temporal
Magistrate did nothing repugne to matters of Faith or salvation of souls. But
that ever temporal Obedience was against Faith and salvation of souls, as in
this Breue is alleged, was never before heard nor read of in the Christian
Church; and therefore I would have wished the Pope, before he had set down
this Commandment to all Papists here, That since in him is the Power, by the
infallibility of his spirit, to make new Articles of Faith when ever it shall
please him; That he had first set it down for an article of faith, before he
had commanded all Catholics to believe and obey it. I will then conclude the
Answer to this point in a Dilemma.

Either it is lawful to obey the Sovereign Question.
in Temporal things, or not.

If it be lawful, (as I never heard nor read

If it be unlawful, Why has he neither expressed or any other, that either
would profess, or any ways tolerate the professors of our Religion; contrary
to his manifold vows and protestations, simul and eodem tempore, and as it
were delivered vno and eodem spiritu, to diverse of his Majesty's ministers
abroad, professing such kindness, and showing such forwardness to advance him
to this Crown. Nay, the most part of Catholics here, finding this Breue when
it came to their hands, to be so far against Divinity, Policy, or natural
sense, were firmly persuaded, that it was but a counterfeit Libel devised in
hatred The Catholics opinion of the Breue.
of the Pope; Or at the farthest, a thing hastily done upon wrong Information,
as was before said. Of which opinion were not only the simpler sort of
Papists, but even some amongst them of best account, both for learning and
experience; whereof the Archpriest himself was one. But for soluing of this
objection, the Pope himself has taken new pains, by sending forth a second
Breue, only for giving faith and confirmation to the former: That whereas
before, his sin might have been thought to have proceeded from rashness and
misinformation, he will now wilfully and willingly double the same: whereof
the Copy follows.

TO OUR Beloved sons the English Catholics, Paulus P. P. Vtus.
Beloved Sons, Salutation and The second Breue.
Apostolical Benediction. It is reported unto us, that there are found
certain men amongst you, who when as we have sufficiently declared by our
Letters, dated the last year on the tenth of the Calends of October in the
form of a Breue, that ye cannot with safe Conscience take the Oath, which was
then required of you; And when as we have further straightly required you,
that by no means ye should take it; yet there are some, I say, among you,
which dare now affirm, That such Letters (...)

THE ANSWER TO the second Breue.
NOw for this Breue, I may justly reflect his own phrase upon him, in tearming
it to be the craft of the Devil. For if the devil had studied a thousand
years for to find out a mischief for our Catholics, here he has found it
in this, That now when many Catholics have taken their Oath, and some Priests
also; yea, the Archpriest himself, without compunction or sticking, they
shall not now only be bound to refuse the profession of their natural
Allegiance to their Sovereign, which might yet have bin some way colored upon
diverse scruples conceived upon the words of the Oath; but they must now
renounce and forswear their profession of obedience already sworn, and so
must, as it were at the third Instance, forswear A double Oath of every
Subject.
their two former Oaths, first closely sworn by their birth in their natural
Allegiance; and next, clearly confirmed by this Oath, which does nothing but
express the same; So as no man can now hold the faith, or procure the
Salvation of his soul in England, that must not abjure and renounce his borne
and sworn Allegiance to his natural Sovereign.

And yet it is not sufficient to ratify the last years Breue by a new one
come forth this year; But (that not only every year, but every month may
produce a new Monster) The great and famous writer of the Controversies, The
late Vn-Iesuited Cardinal Bellarmine must add his talent to this good work,
by blowing the Bellows of Sedition, and sharpening the Spur to Rebellion, by
sending such a Letter of his to the Archpriest here, as it is a wonder how
Passion, and an Ambitious desire of mainteining that Monarchy, should charm
the wits of so famously learned a man.

The Copy whereof here follows.

TO THE MOST Reverend Master GEORGE BLACKVVEL Archpriest of the English:
Robert of the holy Church of Rome Cardinal BELLARMIN, sends greeting.
MOst reverend Sir, and Brother in Christ, It is almost forty years since we
did see one the other: But yet I have never been unmindful of our ancient
acquaintance, neither have I ceased, seeing I could do you no other good, to
commend your laboring most painefully in the Lords vineyard, in my prayers to
God. And I doubt not, but that I have lived all this while in your memory, and
have had some place in your prayers at the Lords Altar. So therefore even unto
this time we have abidden, as S. John speaks, in the mutual love one of the
other, not by word or letter, but by labor and truth. But a late message
which was brought unto us within a few days, of your bonds and imprisonment,
has enforced me to break off this silence; which message, although it seemed
heavy in regard of the loss of your pastoral function which you have
exercised in that Church, yet withal it seemed joyous, because you drew near
unto the glory of Martyrdom, then the which thing there is no gift of God more
happy; That you, who have fed your Flock so many years with the word and
doctrine, should now feed it more gloriously by the example of your patience.
But another heavy tidings did not a little disquiet and almost take away this
joy, which immediately followed, of the adversaries assault, and peradventure of
the slip and fall of your Constancy, in refusing an unlawful Oath. Neither
truly (most dear brother) could that oath therefore be lawful, because it
was offered in sort tempered and modified: for you know that those kind of
modifications are nothing else, but sleights and subtilties of Satan, that the
Catholic faith touching the Primacie of the Sea Apostolic, might either
secretly or openly be shot at, for the which faith so many worthy Martyrs even
in that very England it self, have resi sted unto blood. For most certain it
is, that in whatsoever words the Oath is conceived by the adversaries of the
faith in that Kingdom, it tends to this end, that the Authority of the head
of the Church in England, may be transferred from the successor of S. Peter,
to the Successor of K. Henry the eight. For that which is pretended of the
danger of the Kings life, if the high Priest should have the same power in
England, which he has in all other Christian Kingdoms, it is altogether idle,
as all that have any understanding, may easily perceive. For it was never heard
of from the Churches infancy until this day, that ever any Pope did command,
that any Prince, though an Heretic, though an Ethnike, though a Persecuter,
should be murdered, or did approve of the fact, when it was done by any other.
And why, I pray you, does only the King of England fear that, which none of
all other the Princes in Christendom either does fear, or ever did fear?

But, as I said, these vain pretexts are but the Trappes and Stratagemes of
Satan: Of which kind, I could produce not a few out of ancient Stories, if I
went about to write a book, and not an Epistle. One only for example sake, I
will call to your memory. S. Gregorius Nazianzenus in his first Oration against
Julian the Emperor, reports, That he, the more easily to beguile the simple
Christians, did insert the Images of the false gods into the pictures of the
Emperor, which the Romans did use to bow down unto with a civil kind of
reverence; so that no man could do reverence to the Emperors picture, but
withal he must adore the Images of the false gods: Whereupon it came to pass,
that many were deceived. And if there were any that found out the Emperors
craft, and refused to worship his picture, those were most grievously punished,
as men that had contemned the Emperor in his Image. Some such like thing, me
thinks, I see in the Oath that is offered to you, which is so craftily
composed, that no man can detest Treason against the King, and make profession
of his Civil subjection, but he must be constrained perfidiously to deny the
Primacie of the Apostolic Sea. But the servants of Christ, and especially the
chief Priests of the Lord ought to be so far from taking an unlawful Oath,
where they may indamage their Faith, that they ought to beware that (...) ry
the Great has written, in his 42. Epistle of his 11. book. Let not the
Reverence due to the Apostolic Sea, be troubled by any man's presumption: for
then the state of the members does remain entire, when the head of the faith
is not bruised by any injury. Therefore, by S. Gregory's testimony, when they
are busy about disturbing or diminishing, or taking away of the Primacie of
the Apostolic Sea, then are they busy about cutting off the very head of the
faith, and dissoluing of the state of the whole body, and of all the members.
Which self same thing S. Leo does confirm in his third Sermon of his
Assumption to the Pope-dome, when he says, Our Lord had a special care of
Peter, and prayed properly for Peter's faith, as though the state of others were
more stable, when their Princes mind was not to be overcome. Whereupon
himself in his Epistle to the Bishop of Vienna, does not doubt to affirm,
That he is not partaker of the Divine Mystery, that dare depart from the
soliditie of Peter: who also says, That he who thinks the Primacie to be
denied to that Sea, he can in no sort lessen the Authority of it, but by
being puffed up with the spirit of pride, does cast himself headlong into hell.
These and many other of this kind, I am very sure are most familiar to you:
who besides many other books, have diligently read over the visible Monarchy
of your own Saunders, a most diligent writer, and one who has worthily
deserved of the Church of England. Neither can you be ignorant, that most holy
and learned men, John Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas More within our memory,
for this one most weighty head of doctrine, led the way to Martyrdom to
many others, to the exceeding glory of the English Nation. But I would put you
in remembrance that you should take heart, and considering the weightinesse of
the cause, not to trust too much to your own judgment, neither be wise above
that is meet to be wise: And if peradventure your fall have proceeded not
upon want of consideration, but through humane infirmity, and for fear of
punishment, and imprisonment; yet do not prefer a temporal liberty to the
liberty of the glory of the Sons of God, neither for escaping a light and
momentanie tribulation, loose an eternal weight (...) world to wonder with me,
at the committing of so gross an Error by so learned a man, as that he
should have pained himself to have set down so elaborate a Letter, for the
refutation of a quite mistaken Question. For it appears, that our English
Fugitives, of whose inward society with him he so greatly vaunteth, have so
fast hammered in his head the Oath of Supremacy, which has ever been so great
a Scarre unto them, as he thinking by his Letter to have refuted the last
Oath, has in place thereof only paid the Oath of Supremacy, which was most
in his head; As a man that being earnestly carried in his thoughts upon another
matter then he is presently in doing, will often name the matter, or person
he is thinking of, in place of the other thing he has at that time in hand.

For, as the Oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a difference between
Papists, and them of our profession: So was this Oath, which he would seem to
impugn, The difference between the Oath of Supremacy, and this of Allegiance.
ordained for making a difference between the Ciuilly obedient Papists, and
the perverse Disciples of the Powder Treason. Yet does all his Letter run
upon an Inuectiue against the compulsion of Catholics to deny the authority
of Saint Peter's successors, and in place thereof to acknowledge the successors
of King Henry the eight. For, in King Henry the eights time was the Oath of
Supremacy first made: By him were Thomas Moore and Roffensis put to death,
partly for refusing of it. From his time till now have all our Princes
professing this Religion, successively in effect maintained the same: And in
that Oath only is contained the Kings absolute power to be Judge over all
persons as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, excluding all foreign Powers and
Potentates to be Judges within his Dominions; Whereas this last made Oath
contains no such matter, only meddling with the Civil Obedience of Subjects
to their Sovereign, in mere Temporal causes.

And that it may the better appear, that whereas by name he seems to
condemn the last Oath; yet indeed his whole letter runs upon nothing, but
upon the (...) some other authority of the Church and Sea of Rome, yet by other
means with others help he may depose our King.

That the Pope may dispose of his Majesty's

That the Pope may give authority to

That the Pope may discharge his Subjects

That the Pope may give License to one

That the Pope may give leave to the

That if the Pope shall by Sentence Excommunicate

If the Pope shall by Sentence Excommunicate or depose his Majesty, his
Subjects are his Majesty's Person and Crown.

If the Pope shall give out any Sentence

That it is not Heretical and detestable to

That the Pope has power to absolve his

That this oath is not administered to his

That this oath is to be taken with Equivocation,

These are the true and natural branches of the body of this Oath. The
affirmative of all which Negatiues do neither concern in any case the Popes
Supremacy in spiritual causes, nor yet were ever concluded, and defined by
any complete general Council to Touching the pretended council of Later: See
Plat. In vita innocen. 3.
belong to the Popes Authority: and their own school Doctors are at
irreconcilable odds and iarres about them.

And that the world may yet farther see, his Majesty's and whole States setting
down of this oath, did not proceed from any new invention of theirs, but as it
is warranted by the word of God: so does it take the example The oath of
Allegiance confirmed by the authority of Councels.
from an oath of Allegiance decreed a thousand years agone, which a famous
Council then, together with diverse other Councels, were so far from
condemning, (as the Pope now has done this oath) as I have thought good to set
down their own words here in that purpose, whereby it may appear that his
Majesty craves nothing now of his Subjects in this Oath, which was not
expressly and carefully commanded then by the Councels to be obeyed without
exception of persons. Nay not in the very particular point of Equivocation,
which his Majesty in this oath is so careful to have eschewed: but you shall
here see the said Councels in their The ancient Councels provided for
Equivocation.
decrees, as careful to provide for the eschewing of the same, so as almost
every point of that Action, and this of ours, shall be found to have relation
and agreeance one with the other, save only in this, that those old Councels
were careful and strait in commanding The difference between the ancient
Councels and the Popes counselling of the Catholics.
the taking of the same: whereas by the contrary, he that now vaunteth himself
to be head of all Councels, is as careful and strait in the prohibition of all
men from the taking of this Oath of Allegiance.

The words of the Council be these. Hear our Sentence.

Whosoever of us, or of all the people thorowout Council. Toletan. 4. can. 74.
all Spain, shall violate the Oath of his fidelity, which he has given for
the preservation of his Country, or of the Kings Person, or shall go about by
any Conspiracy or endeavor to touch the life of the King, or shall usurp by
any power or Tyrannical presumption the Sovereignty of the Kingdom, let him
be accursed in the sight of God the Father, and of his Angels, and be holden an
Alien from the Catholic Church, which he has profaned by his perjury;
together with all (...) Fidelity in their mouths; when they hold an impious
perfidiousnesse in their minds. And Council. Tolc. 4. Cap. 75.
again, They swear to their Kings, that thereupon they may preuaricate in the
fidelity which they have promised. Neither do they fear the volume of Gods
Judgment, in the which the curse of God is threatened upon them, which do
swear in the Name of God deceitfully. To the like effect spoke they in the
Council of Council. Aquisgran. sub Ludou. Pio and Greg. 4. can. 12. anno 836.
Aquisgran, That whosoever, from the highest to the lowest of the Clergy,
shall make defection from the Orthodoxe Emperor Lodowicke, or shall violate
the Oath of Fidelity made unto him, or shall adhere to his Enemies; let him
be deprived of all Honor and Dignity.

And now to come to a particular answer of his Letter. First as concerning the
sweet memory he has of his old acquaintance with the Archpriest; it may
indeed be pleasing for him to recount: But sure I am, his acquaintance with
him, and the rest of his society our Fugitives, (whereof he also vanteth
himself in his preface to the reader, in his book of Controversies) has
proved sour to us and our State. For some of such Priests and Jesuits as
were the greatest Traitors and Fomenters of the greatest Conspiracies against
her late Majesty, gave up Father Robert Campion and Heart. See the conference
in the Tower.
Bellarmine for one of their greatest authorities and oracles. And therefore, I
do not envy the great honor he can win by his vaunt of his inward
familiarity with an other Princes Traitors, and Fugitives: whom unto, if he
teach no better manners, then hitherto he has done, I think his Fellowship are
little beholding unto him.

And for desiring him to remember him in his prayers at the altar of the Lord:
If the Arch priests prayers prove no more profitable to his soul, then
Bellarmines counsel is like to prove profitable both to the soul and body of
Blackwell (if he would follow it;) the author of this letter might very well
be without his prayers.

Now the first messenger that I can find, which brought joyful news of the
Archpriest to Bellarmine, was he that brought the news of the Arch-priestes
taking, and first appearance of Martyrdom. A great sign surely of the
Cardinals mortification, that he was so rejoiced to hear of the apprehension,
imprisonment, and appearance of putting to death, of so old and dear a friend
of his. But yet apparently he should first have been sure, that he was only to
be punished for cause of Religion, before he had so triumphed upon the
expectation of his Martyrdom. For first, by what rule of Charity was The
Cardinals charity.
it lawful for him to judge the King our Sovereign a Persecutour, before
proof had been made of it, by the said Arch-priestes condemnation and death?
What could he know, That the said Archpriest was not taken upon suspicion of
his guiltiness in the Powder Treason? What certain information had he then
received upon the particulars, whereupon he was to be accused? And last of all,
by what inspiration could he foretell whereupon he was to be accused? For at
that time there was yet nothing laid to his charge. And if Charity should not
be suspicious, what warrant had he absolutely to condemn our Sovereign of
using persecution and tyranny, which could not but be implied upon his
Majesty, if Blackwell was to be a Martyr? But surely it may justly be said of
Bellarmine in this case, that our Savior CHRIST says of all worldly and
carnal men, who think it enough to love their Matthew. 5. 43.
friends, and hate their enemies; the limits of the Cardinals charity
extending no farther, then to them of his own profession. For what ever he
added in superfluous charity to Blackwell in rejoicing in the speculation of
his future Martyrdom, he detracted as much unjustly and uncharitably from his
Majesty our Sovereign, in accounting of him thereby as of a bloody
persecutour. And whereas this joy of his was interrupted by the next messenger,
that brought the news of the said Archpriest his failing in his Constancy by
taking of this Oath; he needed never to have been troubled, either with his
former joy, or his second sorrow, both being alike falsely grounded. For as it
was never his Majesty's intention to lay any thing unto the said Arch-priests
charge, as he has never done to any, for cause of Conscience; So was Blackwels
constancy never brangled by taking of this Oath; It being a thing, which he
ever thought lawful before his apprehension, and whereunto he persuaded all
Catholics to give obedience; like as after his apprehension, he never made
doubt, nor stop in it, but at the first offering it unto him, did freely take
it, as a thing most lawful; Neither means of threatening, or flattery, being
ever used unto him, as himself can yet bear witness.

And as for the temperature and modification of this Oath, Except that a
reasonable and lawful matter is there set down in reasonable and temperate
words agreeing thereunto; I know not what he can mean, by quarrelling it for
that fault. For no temperatnesse nor modifications in words therein, can justly
be called the devils craft, when the thing it self is so plain, and so
plainly interpreted to all them that take it, as the only troublesome thing in
it all, be the words used in the end thereof, for eschewing Equivocation and
mental reservation; which new Catholic doctrine may far iustlier be
called the devils craft, then any plain and temperate words, in so plain and
clear a matter. But what shall we say of these strange Agrestes, whom of
with the Satyr we may justly complain, that they blow both hot and cold out
of one mouth? For Luther and all our bold and free speaking writers, are
mightily railed upon by them, as hot brained fellows, and speakers by the
devils instinct: And now if we speak moderately and temperately of them, it
must be termed the devils craft. And therefore we may justly complain with
CHRIST, that when we Matt. 11. 17.
mourn, they will not lament, and when we pipe, they will not dance. But
neither John Baptist his severity, nor CHRIST his meekness and lenity can
please them, who build but to their own Monarchy, upon the ground of their
own traditions, and not to CHRIST, upon the ground of his Word and infallible
Truth.

But what can be meant by alleging, That the craft of the devil herein is
only used for subversion of the Catholic Faith, and euersion of S. Peter's
Primacy, had need be commented anew by Bellarmine himself. For in all this
Letter of his, never one word is used to prove, that by any part of this Oath
the primacie of Saint Peter is any way meddled with, except Master Bellarmine
his bare alleging; which without proving it by more clear demonstration, can
never satisfy the conscience of any reasonable man. For, for ought that I
know, Heaven and Earth are no farther asunder, then the profession of a
Temporal obedience to a Temporal King, is different from any thing belonging
to the Catholic Faith, or Supremacy of Saint Peter. For, as for the Catholic
No decision of any point of Religion in the Oath of Allegiance.
Faith, can there be one word found in all that Oath, tending or sounding to
matter of Religion? Does he that takes it, promise there to believe, or not
to believe any Article of Religion? Or does he so much as name a true or a
false Church there? And as for Saint Peter's Primacy, I know no Apostles name
that is therein named, but the name of our Sovereign James, though it please
him not to deigne to name him in all the Letter, albeit the contents thereof
concern him in the highest degree. Neither is there any mention at all made
therein, either conceptis verbis, or by any other indirect means, either of
the Hierarchy of the Church, of Saint Peter's succession, of the Sea Apostolic,
or of any such matter: But that the Author of our Letter does bravely make
mention of Saint Peter's succession, bringing it in comparison with the
succession of Henry the eight. Of which unapt and unmannerly Similitude, I
wonder he should not be much ashamed. For, as our King Henry's successor,
whom by he means, never did, nor will presume to create any Article of Faith,
or to be Judge thereof, but to submit his exemplary obedience unto them, in as
great humility, as the meanest of the land; So if the Pope could be as well
able Far more easy to prove his Majesty's succession from his Aucestors,
then the Pope from S. Peter.
to prove his, either Personal, or Doctrinall succession from S. Peter, as
he is able to prove his lineall descent from the Kings of England and
Scotland, there had never been so long ado, nor so much stir kept about this
Question in Christendom; Neither had Bella^ de Rom Po^t. lib. 4 cap (...)
B^llar de Rom Pontif. lib. 2 cap. 12.
M. Bellarmine himself needed to have bestowed so many sheets of paper, De
summo Pontifice in his great Books of Controversies: And when all is done, to
conclude with a moral certitude, and a pie credendum, bringing in the Bellar
de Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Popes, that are parties in this cause, to be his witnesses: And yet their
Historical Narration must be no Article of Faith. And sure we are, that his
Majesty our Sovereign, does virtuously imitate the worthy Actions of his
predecessors; In whom their Virtues do more brightly shine, then can be well
proved the Popes in our age to be similes Petro, especially in cursing of
Kings, and setting free their Subjects from their Allegiance unto them.

But now we come to his strongest Argument; which is, That he would allege
upon our Sovereign a Panick terror, as if he were possessed with a needelesse
fear. For, says the Cardinal, from the beginning of the The Cardinals
waightiest Argument.
Church his first Infancy, even to this day, where was it ever heard, that
ever a Pope either commanded to be killed, or allowed the slaughter of any
Prince whatsoever, whether he were an Heretic, an Ethnike, or Persecutor? But
first, wherefore does he here wilfully, and of purpose omit the rest of the
points mentioned in that Oath, for deposing, degrading, stirring up of Arms,
or Rebelling against them, which are as well mentioned in that Oath, as the
killing of them? As being all of one consequence against a King, no Subject
being so scrupulous, as that he will attempt the one, and leave the other
unperformed if he can. And yet surely I cannot blame him for passing it over,
since he could not otherwise have eschewed the direct belying of himself in
terms, which he now does but in substance and effect. For Bellar. de Romans
Pontif lib. 5. cap. 8. and lib. 3 cap. 16.
as for the Popes deposing and degrading of Kings, he makes so brave vaunts
and bragges of it in his former Books, as he could never with civil honesty
have denied it here.

But to return to the Popes allowing of killing of Kings, I know not with what
face he can set so stout a denial upon it against his own knowledge. How many
Emperors did the Pope raise war against in their own bowels? Who as they
were overcome in battle, were subject to have been killed therein; which I
hope the Pope could not but have allowed, when he was so far enraged at
Platina and Cusp^^nus in vita Henrici 4.
Henry the fifth for giving burial to his fathers dead corpse, after the Pope
had stirred him up to rebel against his father, and procured his ruin. But
leaving these old Histories to Bellarmines own books, that do most
authentically cite them, as I have already said, let us turn our eyes upon our
own time, and therein remember what a Panegyrik See the Oration of Sixtus
Quintus made in the Consistory upon the death of Henry the 3.
oration was made by the Pope, in praise and approbation of the Friar and his
fact, that murdered King Henry the third of France, who was so far from
either being Heretic, Ethnike, or Persecutor in their account, that the said
Popes own words in that Oration are, That a true Friar had killed a
counterfeit Friar. And besides that vehement Oration, and congratulation for
that fact, how near it escaped, that the said Friar was not Canonized for that
glorious Act, is better known to Bellarmine and his followers, then to us
here.

But sure I am, if some Cardinals had not been more wise and circumspect in
that errand, then the Pope himself was, the Popes own Calender of his Saints
would have sufficiently proved Bellarmine a liar in this case. And to draw yet
nearer unto our selves; How many Practices and Attempts were made against the
late Queen our Sovereigns life, which were directly enjoined to those
Traitors by their Confessors, and plainly authorized by the Popes allowance?
For verification whereof, there needs no more proof, then that never Pope
either then or since, called any Churchman in question for meddling in those
Treasonable conspiracies; Nay, the Cardinals own S. Sanderus mentioned in his
Letter, could well verify this truth, if he were alive; and who will look
his books, will find them filled with no other Doctrine then this. And what
difference there is between the killing or allowing the slaughter of Kings,
and the stirring up and approbation of practices to kill them, I remit to
Bellarmines own judgment. It may then very clearly appear, how strangely
this Authors passion has made him forget himself, by implicating himself in
so strong a Contradiction against his own knowledge and conscience, against
the (...) the end that thieves might afterward take it from him.

Ecllar. de Pont. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Peter did not loose that righteousness that was in his heart.

Contrary, Bellar. de Just lib 2 cap 14.
Peter's sin was deadly.

Bellar. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Antichrist shall be a Magitian, and after the manner of other Magitians shall
secretly worship the devil.

Ibid ex senten. H^pol. and Cyrilli and cap. 12 eiusd^m libri.
Contrary, He shall not admit of idolatry: he shall hate idols, and reedifie
the Temple.

By the words of Bellar. lib. 1. de missa cap. 27.
Consecration the true and solemn Oblation is made.

Contrary, The Bellar. de miss lib. 2 cap. 11.
Oblation is not made by the words, but does consist in the offering of the
thing it self.

Bellar de anim. Christ. lib. 4 cap 5
That the end of the world cannot be known.

Bellar. de Pont. lib. 3 cap. 17.
Contrary, After the death of Antichrist, there shall be but five and forty
days till the end of the world.

Bellar. de Pont. lib. 3 cap. 14.
That the ten Kings shall burn the scarlet whore, that is, Rome.

Bellar. ibidem.
Contrary, Antichrist shall hate Rome, and fight against it, and burn it.

Bellar de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 31.
The name of universal Bishop may be understood two ways; One way, that he
which is said to be universal Bishop, may be thought to be the only Bishop;
so that all other Bishops are but only his Vicars.

Contrary, All ordinary Bellar. de Pon. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Jurisdiction of Bishops does descend immediately from the Pope. Which few
places I have only selected amongst many the like, that the discreet and
judicious Reader may discern Ex vngue Leonem. For when ever he is pressed
with a weighty Objection, he never cares, nor remembers how his Solution and
Answer to that, may make him gainesay his own Doctrine in some other places,
so it serve him for a shift to put off the present storm withal.

But now to return to our matter again. Since Popes, says he, have never at
any time meddled against Kings, Wherefore, I pray you, should only the King of
England be afraid of that, whereof never Christian King is, or was afraid? Was
never Christian Emperor or King afraid of the Popes? How then were these
miserable Emperors tossed and turmoiled, and in the end utterly ruined by the
Popes, for proof whereof I have already cited Bellarmines own books? Was not
the Abbas Vspergen. Lam. Scafen. Anno 1077. Plat. in vit. Greg. 7.
Emperor afraid, who waited barefooted in the frost and snow three days at
the Popes gate, before he could get entry? Was not the Alfons. Ciacou. in vit.
Alex. 3. Geneb. Chronol.
Emperor also afraid, who was driven to lie agroofe on his belly, and suffer
another Pope to tread upon his neck? And was not another Ranulph. in
Polychronicon. lib. 7.
Emperor afraid, who was constrained in like manner to endure a third Pope to
beat off from his head the Imperial Crown with his foot? Was not Abbas
Vsperg.
Philip afraid, being made Emperor against Pope Innocentius the thirds good
liking, when he brake out into these words, Either the Pope shall take the
Crown from Philip, or Philip shall take the Miter from the Pope? Whereupon the
Pope stirred up Otho against him, who slew him, and presently went to Rome, and
was crowned Emperor by the Pope, though afterward the Pope deposed him too.
Was not the Emperor Petrus de vineis Epist. 2. lib. 2. and Cuspian in vit.
Frederici. 2.
Frederike asraid, when Innocentius the fourth excommunicated him, deprived him
of his Crown, absolved Princes of their Oath of Fidelity to him, and in Apulia
corrupted one to give him poison? Whereof the Emperor recovering, he hired one
Manfredus to poison him; whereof he died. What did Paulus Ionius Hist. lib. 2.
Alexander the third write to the Sultan, That if he would live quietly, he
should by some slight murder the Emperor? And to that end sent him the
Emperors picture. And not Cuspianus.
Alexander the sixth take of the Turk Baiazetes two hundred thousand Crowns to
kill his brother Gemen, or as some call him, Sisimus, whom he held Captive at
Rome? Did he not accept of the conditions to poison the man, and had his pay?
Was not our Honenden page 539.
Henry the second afraid after the slaughter of S. Becket, That besides his
going barefooted in Pilgrimage, was whipped up and down the Chapter House
like a schoole-boy, and glad to escape so too? Had not the King of France his
father reason to be afraid, when the Gomecius de ^ebus gestis Fran. Ximenij
Arch^e^is. Tolet. lib. 5.
Pope gave away his Kingdom of Navarre to the King of Spain, whereof he yet
possesses the best half? Had not the King his son reason to be afraid, when
he was forced to beg so submissiuely the relaxation of his Excommunication,
as he was content likewise to suffer his Ambassador to be whipped at Rome for
penance? And had not our late Sovereign reason to look to her self, when
she was Excommunicated by Pius Quintus, her Subjects loosed from their
Fidelity and Allegiance toward her, her Kingdom of Ireland given to the King
of Spain, and that famous fugitive Divine, honored with the like degree of a
red Hat as Bellarmine is, is not ashamed to publish in print an Card. Allens
answer to Stan. Let. Anno 1587
Apology for Stanlies Treason, maintaining, That by reason of her
Excommunication and Heresy, it was not only lawful for any of her Subjects,
but even they were bound in Conscience to deprive her of any Strength, which
lay in their power to do? And whether it were Armies, Towns, or Fortresses of
hers which they had in their hands, they were obliged to put them in the King
of Spain her enemies hands, She no more being the right owner of any thing?
But albeit it be true, That wise men are moved by the examples of others
dangers to use Providence and caution, according to the old proverb, Tum tua
res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet: yet his Majesty our Sovereign was
neerelier summoned to use this caution, by the practice of it in his own
Person.

First, by the sending forth of these Bulls, whereof I made mention already, for
debarring him from Entry unto this Crown, and Kingdom. And next after his
Entry and full possession thereof, by the horrible Powder Treason, which
should have bereft both him and his, both of Crown and Life. And howsoever the
Pope will seem to clear himself of any allowance of the said Powder Treason;
yet can it not be denied, that his principal Ministers here, and his chief
Mancipia the Jesuits, were the plain practisers thereof: For which the
principal of them has died confessing it, and others have fled the Country
for the Crime; yea, some of them gone into Italy: And yet neither these that
fled out of this Country for it, nor yet Baldwine, who though he then remained
in the Low-countryes, was of counsel in it, were ever called to account for it
by (...)

And whereas for illustration of this strong Argument of his, he has brought
in for a similitude the history of Nazianzenus in ^uliar. inu^ct^ua prima.
Julian the Apostata his dealing with the Christians, when as he straited them,
either to commit idolatry, or to come within the compass of treason: I would
wish the Author to remember, that although a similitude may be permitted
claudicare vno pede; yet this was a very ill chosen similitude, which is lame
both of The disproportion of the Cardinals similitude.
feet and hands, and every member of the body. For I shall in few words
prove, that it agrees in no one point, save one, with our purpose, which is,
that Julian was an Emperor, and our Sovereign is a King. First, Julian was an
Apostata, one that had renounced the whole Christian faith, which he had once
professed, and became an Ethnike again, or rather an Atheist: Our Sovereign
is a Christian, who never changed that Religion, that he drank in with his
milk, nor ever was ashamed of his profession. Julian dealt against Christians
only for the profession of Christ's cause: His Majesty in this case deals
with his Subjects, only to make a distinction between true Subjects and false
hearted Traitors. Iulians end was the overthrow of the Christians: His
Majesty's end is, to maintain Christianity in a peaceable government.
Iulians drift was to make them commit idolatry: His Majesty's drift is, to
make his Subjects to make open profession of their natural Allegiance, and
civil Obedience. Iulians means whereby he went about it, was by craft, and
insnaring them before they were aware: His Majesty's course in this is plain,
clear, and void of all obscurity, never refusing leave to any that are
required to take this Oath, to study it at leisure, and giving them all the
interpretation of it they can crave. But the greatest dissimilitude of all is
in this: That Julian pressed them to commit idolatry to idols and images: But
his Majesty and all his Subjects of his profession are so far from guilt in
this point, as we are counted Heretics by you, because we will not commit
idolatry. So as, in the maine point of all, is the greatest contrariety: For,
Julian persecuted the Christians because they would not commit idolatry; and
ye count his Majesty a persecutour, because he will not admit idolatry. So
as to conclude this point, this old Poets sentence may well be applied to
Bellarmine, in using so unapt a similitude, Perdere quos vult Jupiter, hos
dementat.

And therefore his uncharitable conclusion does not rightly follow, That it
seems unto him, that some such thing should be subtly or fraudulently
included in this Oath; As if no man can detest Treason against the King, or
profess Civil subjection, except he renounce the Primacie of the Apostolic
Sea. But how he has sucked this apprehension out at his fingers ends, I cannot
imagine: for sure I am, as I have often said, he never goes about to prove it:
And to answer an improbable imagination, is to fight against a vanishing
shadow. It cannot be denied in deed, that many servants of CHRIST, as well
Priests as others, have endured constantly all sorts of Torments, and Death
for the profession of CHRIST: And therefore to all such his examples, as he
brings in for verifying the same, I need not to give him any other answer,
save only to remember him, that he plays the part of a Sophister in all
these his Examples of the constancy of Martyrs, ever taking Controuer sum pro
confesso, as if this our case were of the same nature.

But yet that the Reader may the better discover, not only how unaptly his
Similitudes are applied, but likewise how dishonestly he uses himself in all
his citations; I have thought good to set down the very places themselves
cited by him, together with a short deduction of the true state of those
particular Cases: whereby, how little these Examples can touch our Case; nay by
the contrary, how rightly their true sense may be used, as our own weapons to
be thrown back upon him that alleges them, shall easily appear. And
first, for 2. Macchabees cap. 6. verse. 18.
Eleazar. If the Archpriest his ground of refusing his Majesty's Oath, were as
good as Eleazars was, to forbear to eat the Swines An answer to the
Cardinals example of Eleazar.
flesh, it might not unfitly be applied by the Cardinal to this purpose. For
as Eleazar was a principal Scribe, so is he a principal Priest: As Eleazars
example had a great force in it, to animate the younger Scribes to keep the
Law, or in his colorable eating it, to have taught them to dissemble; So has
the Arch-priests, either to make the inferior Priests to take the Oath, or to
refuse it: but the ground failing, the building cannot stand. For what example
is there in all the Scripture, in which disobedience to the Oath of the King,
or want of allegiance is allowed? If the Cardinal would remember, that when
the Church makes a law (suppose to forbid flesh on certain days) he that
refuses to obey it, in curreth the just censure of the Church: If a man then
ought to dye rather then to break the least of Gods Ceremonial Laws, and to
pine and starve his body, rather then to violate the Church his positive law:
Will he not give leave to a man to redeem his soul from sin, and to keep
his body from punishment, by keeping the Kings politic law, and by giving
good example in his person, raise up a good opinion in his Majesty of like
Allegiance in the inferiors of his order? This application, as I take it,
would have better fitted this example.

But let me remember the Cardinal of another 1. Sam. 14. 24.
Oath enjoined by a King to his people, whereby he endangered his own life, and
hazarded the safety of the whole army, when he made the people swear in the
morning, not to taste of any meat until night: which oath he exacted so
strictly, That his eldest son and heir apparent Jonathan for breaking of it,
by taking a little honey, though he heard not when the King gave it, had well
nigh died for it. And shall an oath given upon so urgent an occasion as this
was, for the apparent safety of the King and his posterity, forbidding his
people to drink so deeply in the bitter cup of Antichristian fornications,
but that they may keep so much honey in their hearts, as may argue them still
espoused to their Sovereign in the maine knot of true allegiance; Shall this
law, I say, by him be condemned to hell for a stratageme of Satan? I say no
more, but Gods lot in that oath of Saul's, and his verdict upon this Oath of our
Kings, seem not to be cast out of one lap.

Now to his example of Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 19.
Basil, which is (as he says) so fit for his purpose. First, I must observe,
that if the Cardinal would An answer to the Card. example of S. Basil.
leave a common and ordinary trick of his in all his citations, which is, to
take what makes for him, and leave out what makes against him; and cite the
authors sense, as well as his sentence; we should not be so much troubled
with answering the Ancients which he alleges. To instance it in this very
place. If he had continued his allegation one line further, he should have
found this place out of Theodoret, of more force to have moved Blackwell to
take the Oath, then to have dissuaded him from it. For in the very next words
it follows, Imperatoris quidem amicitiam magni se pendere cum pietate; qua
remota, perniciosum esse dicere. But that it may appear, whether of us have
greatest right to this place, I will in few words show the authors drift.

The Emperor Valens being an Arrian, at the persuasion of his wife, when he
had deprived all the Churches of their Pastors, came to Caesarea, where Saint
Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 19.
Basil was then Bishop; who, as the Story reports, was accounted the Light
of the world. Before he came, he sent his Modestus, as Nazian. upon the death
of Basil, calls him in his Orat.
Deputy to work it, that Saint Basil should hold fellowship with Eudoxius,
(which Look cap. 12. ciusdem libri.
Eudoxius was Bishop of Constantinople, and the principal of the Arrian
Faction) or if he would not, that he should put him to banishment. Now when
the Emperors Deputy came to Caesarea, he sent for Basil, entreated him
honorably, spoke pleasingly unto him, desired he would give way to the time,
neither that he would hazard the good of so many Churches tenui exquisitione
Dogmatis, promised him the Emperors favor, and himself to be Mediator for
his good. But Saint Basil answered, These intising speeches were fit to be
used to children, that use to gape after such things: But for them that were
thoroughly instructed in Gods word, they could never suffer any syllable thereof
to be corrupted. Nay, if need required, they would for the maintenance
thereof, refuse no kind of death. Indeed the love of the Emperor ought to be
greatly esteemed with Piety; But Piety taken away, it was pernicious.

This is the truth of the Story. Now compare the case of Basil with the
Arch-priests. For otherwise so Orthodoxe a King ought not to be compared with
so Arrian an Heretic. Basil was solicited to become an Arrian: The
Archpriest not once touched for any Article of Faith. Basil would have obeyed
the Emperor, but that the word of GOD forbade him: This man is willed to obey,
because the word of GOD commands him. Basil highly esteemed the Emperors
favor, if it might have stood with piety: The Archpriest is exhorted to
reject it, though it stand with true godliness in deed to embrace it. But
that he may The Card. assimilating of the Archpr. case to S. Peter's, and
Marcellinus, considered.
lay load upon the Archpriest, it is not sufficient to exhort him to Courage
and Constancy by Eleazars and Basils examples, but he must be utterly cast
down with the comparing his fall to S. Peter's and Marcellinus: which two men's
cases were the most fearful, considering their persons and places, that are
to be found, or read of either in all the Books of Divine Scripture, or the
volumes of Ecclesiastical Stories; the one denying the only true God, the
other our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; the one sacrificing to Idols with the
profane Heathen, the other forswearing his Lord and Master, with the
hard-hearted Jews. Unless the Cardinal would drive the Archpriest to some
horror of conscience, and pit of despair, I know not what he can mean by this
comparison. For sure I am, all that are not intoxicated with their cup, cannot
but wonder to hear of an oath of Allegiance to a natural Sovereign, to be
likened to an Apostats denying of God, and forswearing of his Savior.

But to let pass the Disdiapason of the Cases (as his ill favored coupling
Saint Peter the head of their Church, with an Apostate Pope.) I marvel he
would remember this example of Look Platina in vita Marcellini.
Marcellinus, since his brother Cardinal Baronius, and the late Edition of the
Councels by Council. Tom. 1. page 222. Look Baronius Anno 302 ^^m. 96.
Binnius seem to call the credit of the whole Story into question, saying,
That it might plainly be refuted, and that it is probably to be showed, that
the story is but obreptitious, but that he would not swerve from the common
received opinion.

And (...) Subjects from their obedience to their natural King, nor be so
cruel to their own Mancipia, as returning them with these wares, put either a
State in jealousy of them, or them in hazard of their own lives. Now to our
Apostle (since the Cardinal will have him so called) I persuade my self I
should do a good service to the Church in this my labor, if I could but reap
this one fruit of it, to move the Cardinal to deal faithfully with the
Fathers, and never to allege their opinions against their own purpose. For,
this letter of Gregorius was written to John Bishop of Greg. lib. 11. cap. 42.
Palermo in Sicily, to whom he granted vsum pallij to be worn in such times,
and in such order, as the Priests in the I Will of Sicily, and his Predecessors
were wont to use: and withal gives him a Caveat, that the reverence to the
Apostolic Sea be not disturbed by the presumption of any* For then the State
of the members does remain sound, when the head of the faith is not broken by
any injury, and the authority of the Canons remain safe and sound.

Now let us examine the words. The Epistle was written to a Bishop,
especially to grant him the use of the Pall; a ceremony and matter
indifferent. As it appears, the Bishop of Rome took it well at his hands,
that he would not presume to take it upon him without leave from the
Apostolic Sea, and giving him that admonition which follows in the words
alleged out of him: which doctrine we are so far from impugning, that we
altogether approve and allow of the same, That whatsoever Ceremony for order
is thought meet by the Christian Magistrate, and the Church, the same ought
inuiolably to be kept: And where the Head and governors in matters of that
nature are not obeyed, the members of that Church must needs run to Hellish
confusion. But that Gregory by that term, Caput fidei, held himself the head
of our Faith, and the head of all Religion, cannot stand with the course of his
doctrine and vvritings. For first, when an Johan. Constan. Greg. lib. 4.
Epist. 32.
other would have had this style to be called Vniuersalis Episcopus, he said,
Whosoever would give himself that Title, was the Forerunner of Antichrist:
Which notvvithstanding was a Style far inferior to that of Caput fidei. And
when it was offered to himself, the words of Saint Gregory be these,
refusing that Title, Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32. and 36.
That none of my Predecessors Bishops of Rome, ever consented to use this
ungodly name of Universal Bishop. None of the Bishops of Rome ever took upon
us this name of Singularity. We the Bishops of Rome will not receive this
Honor being offered unto us. And now, I pray you, would he that refused to
be called Universal Bishop, be styled Caput fidei, unless it were in that
sense, as I have expressed? Which sense if you will not admit, give me leave
to say that once of one, which himself says often of many of the Fathers,
Bellar. de Romans Pontif lib. 2. cap. ^0. and lib. 2 de Christo cap. 2.
Minus caute locutus est. To redeem therefore our Apostle out of his hands,
and to let him remain ours, and not his in this case; It is very true that he
says, in that sense he spoke it. When ye go about to disturb, diminish, or
take away the Authority or Supremacy of the Church, which rests on the head
of the King within his Majesty's Dominions, ye cut off the head and chief
Governor thereof, and disturb the State and members of the whole Body. And
for a Conclusion of this point, I pray him to think, that we are so well
persuaded of the good mind of our Apostle Saint Gregory to us, that we desire
no other thing to be suggested to the Pope and his Cardinals, then our Apostle
Saint Gregory desired the Deputy of the Emperor Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 1.
Sabinian to suggest unto the Emperor and the State in his time. His words be
these: One thing there is of which I would desire you would suggest it to your
noble Lord and Master, That if I his servant would have had my hand in staying
of the Lombards, at this day the Nation of the Lombards had neither had Kings,
nor Dukes, nor Earls, and had been divided asunder in utter confusion: but
because I fear God, I dread to have my hand in the blood of any man.

And thus having answered to S. Gregory, An answer to the authority out of
Leo.
I come to another Pope, his Apostle, S. Leo. And that he may see I have not
in the former Citations quareled him like a Sophister for contention sake, but
for finding out of the Truth; I do grant, that the Authorities out of Leo
primus in di^ ^s^ump. suae ^d Pontificat. (...) moan 3. Leo epist. 89 ad ^pisc.
V. en. Idem ibid. cap. 2.
Leo are rightly alleged all three, the words truly set down, together with
his true intent and purpose. But withal, let me tell him, and I appeal unto
his own conscience whether I speak not truly, that what Tully said to Cicero
in Hort.
Hortensius, when he did immoderatly praise Eloquence, that he would have lift
her up to heaven, that himself might have gone up with her; So his Saint Leo
lift up Saint Peter with praises to the Sky, that he being his For so he
calls himself in sermo. 1. in die ^ssum.
heir, might have gone up with him. For his Saint Leo was a great Orator, who
by the power of his Eloquence redeemed Rome from fire, when both Exbreniario
Romano.
Attilas and Gensericus would have burnt it.

Some fruits of this Rhetoric he bestowed upon Saint Peter, saying, The Lord
Epist. 89.
did take Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity: which words
being coupled to the sentence alleged by the Cardinal (That he has no part
in the divine Mystery that dare depart from the solidity of Peter) should have
given him, I think, such a Sare, as he should never have dared to have taken
any advantage by the words immediately preceding, for the benefit of the church
of Rome, and the head thereof, since those which immediately follow, are so much
derogatory to the divine Majesty. And again, My Epist. 52.
writings be strengthened by the merit, and Authority of my Lord most blessed
Saint Peter. We Epist. 89.
beseech you to keep the things decreed by us thorough the inspiration of God,
and the Apostle most blessed Saint Peter. If In ser. 2. in die an^^^er. as^um.
suae.
any thing be well done, or decreed of us; If any thing be obtained of Gods
mercy by daily prayers, it is to be ascribed to Saint Peter's works, and merits,
whose power does live, and Authority excel in his own Sea. He Ser. 3. in die
ann^. assump su^
was so plentifully watered of the fountain of all Graces, that whereas he
received many things alone, yet nothing passes over to any man but by him. And
in a word, he was so desirous to extol Saint Peter, That a message from him
was an Epist. 24.
Embassage from S. Peter: Any thing done in his presence, was in Saint Peter's
Epist. 4.
presence. Neither did he use all this Rhetoric without purpose: for at that
time the Patriarch of Constantinople contended with him for Primacy. And in the
Council of Council. Calc^d Act. 16. c. ^. 28
Calcedon, the Bishops six hundred and more gave equal Authority to the
Patriark of that Sea, and would not admit any privilege to the Sea of Rome
above him, but went against him. And yet he that gave so much to Peter, took
nothing from Caesar, but gave him both his Titles and due, giving the power of
calling a Council to the Emperor, as it may appear by these one or two
places following of many. If it may please your Epi. 9. Theodo sio.
Godliness, to vouchsafe at our Supplication to condescend, that you will
command a Council to be holden within Italy. And writing unto the Bishop of
Constantinople: Because the most Clement Epist. 16. Flauiano.
Emperor, careful of the peace of the Church, will have a Council to be
holden; Albeit it evidently appear, the matter to be handled does in no case
stand in need of a general Council. Albeit Epist. 17. Theodosio.
my occasions will not permit me to be present upon the day of the Council,
which your Godliness has appointed. So as by this it may well appear, that
he that gave so much to Peter, gave also to Caesar his due and prerogative. But
yet he plays not fair play in this, that even in all these his wrong applied
Arguments, and Examples, he produces no other witnesses, but the parties
themselves, bringing ever the Popes Sentences for approbation of their own
Authority.

Now indeed for one word of his in the midst of his Examples, I cannot but
greatly commend him, that is, that Martyrs ought to endure all sorts of
tortures, and death, before they suffer one syllable to be corrupted of the Law
of God. Which lesson, if he and all the rest of his own profession would
apply to themselves, then would not the Sacrament be administered sub vna
specie, directly contrary to Christ's Institution, the practice of the Apostles,
and of the whole Primative Church for many hundred years: then would not the
private Masses be in place of the Lords Supper: then would not the words of
the Bellar. de sacra. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Canon of the Mass be opposed to the words of Saint Paul, and Saint Luke, as
our Adversary himself confesses, and cannot reconcile them: nor then would
not so many hundreths other Traditions of men be set up in their Church, not
only as equal, but even preferred to the word of God. But sure in this point I
fear I have mistaken him: for I think he does not mean by his Diuina
dogmata, the word of the God of heaven, but only the Canons and Laws of his
Dominus Deus Papa: otherwise all his Primacy of the Apostolic Sea would not
be so much sticken upon, having so slender ground in the word of God.

And for the great fear he has, that the suddainty of the Apprehension, the
bitterness of the Persecution, the weakness of his Age, and other such
infirmities might have been the cause of the Arch-priests fall; in this, I have
already sufficiently answered him, having declared, as the truth is, and as
the said Blackwell himself will yet testify, That he took this Oath freely
of himself without any inducement thereunto, either Precibus or Minis.

But amongst all his citations, he must not Some of Sanders his worthy sayings
remembered.
forget holy Sanderus, and his Visibilis Monarchia, whose person and actions I
did already a little touch. And surely, who will with impartial eyes read his
Books, they may well think, that he has deserved well of his English
Roman-Church: But they can never think, but that he deserved very ill of his
English Sovereign and State. Witness his own books: whereout I have made
choice to set down here these few Sentences following, as flowers picked out
of so worthy a Garland. Sand. de visib. monar. lib. 6. cap. 4.
ELIZABETH Queen of England does exercise the Priestly act of teaching and
preaching the Gospel in England, with no less authority then CHRIST himself,
or MOSES ever did. The Supremacy of a Sand de cla. David. lib. 6. cap. 1.
woman in Church matters, is from no other, then from the Devil. And of all
Kings in general, thus he speaks, The Sand. de visib. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 4.
King that will not inthrall himself to the Popes authority, he ought not to
be tolerated, but his Subjects ought to give all diligence, that another may
be chosen in his place as soon as may be. A King that is an Ibidem.
Heretic, ought to be removed from the Kingdom that he holds amongst
Christians, and the Bishops ought to endeavor to set up another, as soon as
possibly they can. We do constantly Ibidem.
affirm, that all Christian Kings are so far under Bishops and Priests in
all matters appertaining to Faith and Religion, that if they shall continue in
a fault against Christian Religion after one or two admonitions, obstinately,
for that cause they may, and ought to be deposed by the Bishops from all the
Authority they hold amongst Christians. Ibidem.
Bishops are set over Imperial Kingdoms, if those Kingdoms do submit
themselves to the Faith of CHRIST. We do constantly Sand. de clau. David. lib.
5. cap. 2.
affirm, That all Secular power, whether Regal, or any other, is of Men. The
Ibidem.
Anointing which is powered upon the head of the King by the Priest, does
declare that he is inferior to the Priest. It is altogether against the will
of Sand. de clau David lib. 5. cap. 4.
CHRIST, that Christian Kings should have Supremacy in the Church.

And whereas for the Crown, and conclusion of all his examples, he reckons
his The Card. pair of Martyrs weighed.
two English Martyrs, Moore and Roffensis, who died for that one most weighty
head of Doctrine, as he alleges, refusing the Oath of Supremacy; I must
tell him, that he has not been well informed in some material points, which
do very nearly concern his two said Martyrs. For it is clear, and
apparently to be proved by diverse Records, That they were both of them
committed to the Tower about a year before either of them was called in
question upon their lives for the Popes Supremacy; And that partly for their
backwardness in the point of the establishment of the Kings Succession,
whereunto the whole Realm had subscribed, and partly for that one of them, to
wit, Fisher, had had his hand in the matter of the holy Called Anna Burton, See
the Act of Parliament.
maid of Kent, he being for his concealment of that false Prophets abuse,
found guilty of Misprision of Treason. And as these were the principal causes
of their Imprisonment, (the King resting secure of his Supremacy as the Realm
stood then affected, but especially troubled for settling the Crown upon the
Issue of his second Marriage) So was it easily to be conceived, that being
thereupon discontented, their humors were thereby made apt to draw them by
degrees to further opposition against the King and his Authority, as indeed it
fell out. For in the time of their being in prison, the Kings lawful
Authority in cases Ecclesiastical being published and promulged, as well by a
general Decree of the Clergy in their Synod, as by an Act of Parliament
made thereupon; they behaved themselves so peeuishly therein; as the old coals
of the Kings anger being thereby raked up of new, they were again brought in
question, as well for this one most weighty head of Doctrine of the Pope his
Supremacy, as for the matter of the Kings marriage and Succession, as by the
confession of one of themselves, even Thomas Moore, is evident. For being
condemned, he used these words at the Bar before the Lords, Non ignoro cur
me morti adiudicaueritis, videlicet ob id, quod nunquam voluerim assentire in
Hist. aliquot Martyrum nostri seculi, Anno 1550.
negotio Matrimonij Regis. That is, I am not ignorant why you have adjudged me
to death: to wit, for that I would never consent in the business of the new
marriage of the King. By which his own confession it is plain, that this
great Martyr himself took the cause of his own death, to be only for his
being refractary to the King in this said matter of Marriage and Succession;
which is but a very fleshly cause of Martyrdom, as I conceive.

And as for Roffensis his fellow Martyr, (who could have been content to have
taken the oath of the Kings Supremacy, with a certain modification, which
Moore refused) as his imprisonment was neither only, nor principally for the
cause of Supremacy; so dyed he but a halting and a singular Martyr, or witness
for that most weighty head of doctrine, the whole Church of England going at
that time in one current and stream as it were against him in that Argument,
diverse of them being of far greater reputation for learning and sound
judgment then ever he was. So as in this point we may well arm our selves
with the Cardinals own reason, where he gives amongst other notes of the true
Church, Universality for one, we having the general and Catholic conclusion
of the whole Church of England on our side in this case, as appears by their
book set out by the whole Convocation of England, called, The Institution of a
Christian man; the same matter being likewise very learnedly handled by diverse
particular learned men of our Church, as by Steven Gardener in his book De
vera Obedientia, with a Preface of Bishop Boners adjoined to it, De summo and
absoluto Regis imperio, published by Master Bekinsaw, De vera differentia
Regiae Potestatis and Ecclesiae, Bishop Tonstals Sermon, Bishop Longlands
Sermon, the letter of Tonstall to Cardinal Poole, and diverse other both in
English and Latin. And if the bitterness of Fishers coffeehouse had not
bin fed with his daily ambitious expectation of the Cardinals hat, which came
so near as Calis before he lost his head to fill it with, I have great reason
to doubt, if he would have constantly perseuered in enduring his Martyrdom
for that one most weighty head of doctrine.

And surely these two Captains and ringleaders to Martyrdom were but ill
followed by the rest of their countrymen: for I can never read of any after
them, being of any great account, and that not many, that ever sealed that
weighty head of doctrine with their blood in England. So as the true causes of
their first falling in trouble (whereof I have already made mention) being
rightly considered upon the one part; and upon the other the scant number of
witnesses, that with their blood sealed; (a point so greatly accounted of by
our Cardinal) there can but small glory redound thereby to our English Nation,
these only two, Enoch, and Elias, serving for witnesses against our
Antichristian doctrine.

And I am sure the Supremacy of Kings The supremacy of Kings sufficiently
warranted by the Scriptures.
may and will ever be better maintained by the word of God (which must ever be
the true rule to discern all weighty heads of doctrine by) to be the true and
proper office of Christian Kings in their own Dominions, then he will be ever
able to maintain his annihilating Kings, and their Authorities, together with
his base and irreverent speeches of them, wherewith both his former great
Volumes, and his late Books against Venice are filled. In the old Testament,
Kings were directly 2. Chron. 19. 4.
Governors over the Church within their Dominions, 2. Sam. 5. 6.
purged their corruptions, reformed their abuses, brought the 1. Chron. 13. 12.
Arc to her resting place: the King 2. Sam. 6. 16
dancing before it, 1. Chro. 28. 6.
built the Temple, 2. Chron. 6.
dedicated the same, assisting in their own persons to the sanctification
thereof, 2. King. 22 1
made the book of the Law newfound, to be read to the people; Nehe. 9. 38
David. Solomon. 2. Kings 8. 4.
renewed the covenant between God, and his people; bruised the brazen Serpent in
pieces, which was set up by the express commandment of God, and was a figure
of Christ; destroyed 1. Kings 15. 12. 2 kings 13. 4.
all Idols, and false gods; made 2. Chron. 7. 8.
a public reformation, by a Commission of Priests and Secular men mixed for
that purpose; deposed 1. Kings ^. 27.
the High Priest, and set up another in his place: and generally, ordered every
thing belonging to the Church-gouernment, their Titles and Prerogatives given
them by God, agreeing to these their actions. They are called the 2. Sam. 7 4
Sons of the Most High, nay Gods Psalm. 82. 6 and Exodus 23. 8
themselves; The 1. Chron. 14. 8.
Lords anointed; Sitting 2. Sam. 3. 1^ 2. Chron. 6. 15
in Gods Throne; His r servants: The Angels 2 Samuel 14 ^0.
of God: According to his 1. Sam. 13. 4
hearts desire; The light 2. Sam. 21 7
of Israel; The Isa. 49. 23
nursing fathers of the Church, with innumerable such styles of honor,
wherewith the old Testament is filled, whereof our Adversary can pretend no
ignorance. And as to the New Testament, Every soul is commanded to be subject
unto them, even for Romans 13 5
conscience sake: All men 1. Tim. 2. 2
must be prayed for; but especially Kings, and those that are in Authority;
that under them we may lead a godly, peaceable, and an honest life.

The Romans 13. 4
Magistrate is the minister of God to do vengeance on him that does evil, and
reward him that does well. Ye must obey all higher Powers, but 1. Pet. 2. 13
especially Princes, and those that are Supereminent. Give every man his due,
fear Romans 13. 7
to whom fear belongs, and love to whom love belongs. Give Matthew. 22 ^1.
unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is Gods. Ioh. 18. 36
Regnum meum non est huius mundi. Luke 12. 14
Quis me constituit Iudicem super vos? Luke 22. 25.
Reges gentium dominantur eorum; vos autem non sic. If these Sentences, Titles,
and Prerogatives, and innumerable other in the old and new Testament, do not
warrant Christian Kings within their own Dominions, to govern their Church,
as well as the rest of their people, in being Custodes vtriusque tabulae, not
by making new Articles of faith, which is the Popes office, as I said before,
but by commanding obedience to be given to the word of God, by reforming the
Religion according to his prescribed will, by assisting the Spiritual power
with the Temporal Sword, by reforming of corruptions, by procuring due
obedience to the Church, by judging, and cutting off all frivolous Questions
and Schisms, as Constantine did; And finally, by making Decorum to be observed
in every thing, and establishing orders to be observed in all indifferent
things for that purpose, which is the only intent of our Oath of Supremacy: If
this Office of a King, I say, do not agree with the power given him by Gods
word, let any indifferent man void of passion judge. But how these honorable
Offices, Styles, and Prerogatives given by God to Kings in the old and new
Testament, as I have now cited, can agree with the brave Styles and Titles that
Bellarmine gives them, I can hardly conceive. De laicis ca. 7.
That Kings are rather slaves then Lords. De Pont. lib. 1. cap. 7.
That they are not only Subjects to Popes, to Bishops, to Priests, but even to
Deacons. Ibidem.
That an Emperor must content himself to drink, not only after a Bishop, but
after a Bishops Chaplen. Ibidem, and de cler. cap 26.
That Kings have not their Authority, nor Office from God, nor his Law, but
only from the Law of Nations. De Pont. lib. 3 cap. 16.
That Popes have degraded many Emperors, but never Emperor degraded a Pope;
nay, even Bishops, that are but the Popes vassals, may depose Kings, and
abrogate their Laws. De laicis cap. 18.
That Churchmen are as far above Kings, as the Soul above the Body. De
Pont. lib. 5. cap 8.
That Kings may be deposed by their people for diverse respects. De Pout. lib.
2. cap. 26.
But Popes cannot be deposed: for no flesh has power to judge of them. De
Pont. lib. ^. cap. 15.
That obedience due to the Pope, is for Conscience sake. De clericis cap. ^8.
But the obedience due to Kings, is only for certain respects of Order and
Policy. I^idem.
That these very Church men that are borne and inhabit in Sovereign Princes
Countries, are notwithstanding not their Subjects, and cannot be judged by
them, although they may judge them; Ibidem.
And, that the obedience that Church men give to Princes, even in the meanest,
and mere Temporal things, is not by way of necessary subjection, but only
out of discretion for observation of good Order.

These contrarieties between the Book of God, and Bellarmines books, have I
here set in opposition to other, Vt ex contrarijs iuxta se positis, veritas
magis elucescere possit. And thus far I dare boldly affirm, That whosoever
will indifferently weigh these inreconcileable Contradictions here set down,
will easily confess, that GOD is no more contrary to Belial, Light to
Darkness, and Heaven to Hell, then Bellarmines estimation of Kings is to Gods.

Now as to the conclusion of his Letter, which is only filled with strong and
pithy Exhortations, to persuade and confirm Blackwell to the patient and
constant enduring of Martyrdom, I have nothing to answer, save by way of
regrate; That so many good sentences drawn out of the Scripture, so well and
so handsomely packed up together, should be so ill and untruly applied. But an
evil Cause is never the better for so good a Cloak; And an ill matter never
amended by good words: And therefore I may justly turn over that craft of the
Devil upon himself, in using so Holy-like an exhortation to so evil a
purpose. Only I could have wished him, that he had a little better observed his
Decorum herein, in not letting slip two or three profane words amongst so
many godly mortified Scripture sentences. For in all the Scripture, especially
in the New Testament, I never read of Pontifex Maximus. And the Pope must be
content in that style to succeed to Numa Pompilius, and not to Saint Peter,
who never heard nor dreamed of such an office.

And for his Caput fidei, which I remembered before, the Apostles, I am sure,
never gave that style to any but to CHRIST. So as these styles, whereof some
were never found in Scripture, and some were never applied but to CHRIST in
that sense, as he applies it, had been better to have been left out of so
holy and mortified a Letter.

To conclude then this present Discourse, I heartily wish all indifferent
readers of the Breues and Letter, not to judge by the speciousnesse of the
words, but by the weight of the matter; Not looking to that which is strongly
alleged, but iudiciously to consider what is justly proved; And for all our
Sovereigns good Subjects, that their hearts may remain established in the
Truth; That these foreign inticements may not seduce them from their natural
duty; And that all, as well Strangers as Natural Subjects, to whose eyes this
Discourse shall come, may wisely and impartially judge of the Verity, as it is
nakedly here set down, for clearing these mistes and clouds of Calumnies,
which were iniustly heaped upon our Sovereign: For which end only I heartily
pray the courteous Reader to be persuaded, that this discourse was published.


