Anno Domini 1616.

A CONFESSION AND PROTESTATION OF THE FAITH OF CERTAIN CHRISTIANS in England,
holding it necessary to observe, and keep all Christ's true substantial
Ordinances for his Church visible and Political (that is, endued with power of
outward spiritual Government) under the Gospel; though the same do differ
from the common order of the Land.

Published for the clearing of the said Christians from the slander of
Schism, and Noveltie, and also of Separation, and undutifullnes to the
Magistrate, which their rash Adversaries do falsely cast upon them.

Also an humble Petition to the K. Majesty for Toleration therein.

Coloss. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.

Psalm. 116.9.10. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. I
believed, therefore have I spoken: for I was sore troubled.

Vide, and Fide. Fide, sed Vide. A CONFESSION AND PROtestation of the faith of
certain Christians in England, holding it necessary to observe and keep all
Christ's true substantial Ordinances, for his Church visible and political
(that is endued with power of outward spiritual Government) under the Gospel;
though the same do differ from the common orders of the Land.
Published for the clearing of the said Christians from the slander of Schism
and Noveltie, and also of Separation, and undutifulness to the Magistrate, which
their rash Adversaries do falsely cast upon them.
We, who do believe and profess it to be necessary both for the glory of
Christ, and for the assurance of our own souls, to observe and keep Christ's
substantial Ordinances for his visible political Church (which are wanting
publicly among us, and yet are both his clear commandments, and also special
means of salvation, and of Gods worship for us under the Gospel) do judge it
most fit and reasonable to publish and testify to

1. Touching the first of these, we protest before God and men that we
unfaynedly and heartily agree to all the civil authority, Magistracy, and
Government as it is received and stands by law established in the Land,
holding it a most high offense against Almighty God, if any of us should not
with all readiness and conscience at all times submit in all things (either
actively, or passively) thereunto.

Moreover we do likewise protest, that we refuse not on occasion to
communicate with the public ordinary Congregations assembled for the exercise
of religion in England: viz. where neither our assent, nor silent presence is
given to any mere humane tradition. And we agree willingly to all the articles
of faith and religion publicly received and mainteyned among us: only
excepting those points which hereafter follow mentioned, and are distinctly set
down in the particular Articles of this our present Confession and Protestation.

2. Then touching the second thing above mentioned, that is, our difference and
disagrement from the doctrine received publicly in this land, thus we declare
and testify in the presence of God and men, that merely being constrained by
the clear and unresistable evidence of Christ's gospel, (which says Act. 5.29.
we ought rather to obey God then men) and not moved by any other conceit, or
vain fancy, we differ and disagree from the said public doctrine, in Eight
and Twenty several Articles, 28. Articles.
all of them being of very great importance, yea most of them both substantial
matters in Religion, and also special means of salvation under the Gospel.

The Articles, wherein only we dissent from the public Ecclesiastical
order, and doctrine in England.
1. Of Christ's offices; namely his Prophetical and Kingly offices. 2. Of the
alsufficiencie of the Scripture. 3. Of Christ's true visible Church generally.
4. Of Christ's true visible political church in more special manner. 5. Of
Synods and Counsels. 6. Of a Catholic or Universal Church politic, that is
endued with power of outward spiritual government. 7. Of a Provincial Church
independent. 8. How true visible politic churches are in England. 9. Of L.
Archbishops, and L. Bishops Diocesan and Provincial. 10. Of the making of
Ministers. 11. Of our Communicating with the Parish Ministers and Parishes in
England. 12. Touching Plurality Pastors, and Non residents. 13. Touching
Discipline and Censures. 14. Touching the number of Pastors in each Church: and
of the Pastors ordinary power and authority in managing the Churches spiritual
affairs and government. 15. Touching the profane and scandalous Mixtures of
people in the Congregation. 16. Of humane Traditions. 17. Of traditions
Apostolic. 18. Of Prophecy. 19. Of reading of Homilies in the Church. 20. Of
Christ's descending into Hell. 21. Of Prayer. 22. Of Holy days so called. 23.
Of Marriage and Burying, and churching, as it is called. 24. Of Ministers made
also Magistrates by the State. 25. Of the gifts and Offerings of the faithful.
26. Of Tithes and the Pastors fittest and due, and necessary maintenance. 27.
Of the civil Magistrates duty and charge supreamly to oversee and order his
Churches spiritual matters, yet but civilly. 28 Touching the necessity that
lies upon us (notwithstanding) to obey Christ rather then man, (when they
differ) in our using the true, and refusing the contrary ecclesiastical
ordinances above specified.
Of Christ's Offices; namely his Prophetical and Kingly Offices.
1. We believe Christ's Prophetical, and Kingly Offices even in outward
spiritual (or religious) matters to be absolute and perfect. Where note that
we understand outward spiritual matters (or religious) to be outward matters
used in the exercise of Religion, not for any natural reason, nor for any
civil use, but mere voluntarily; that is, such things therein, as are of the
authors mere voluntary appointing. And though some persons opposing against
us, do account these any thing rather, the^ Spiritual matters; yet surely we
hold them to be spiritual and religious seeing they are voluntary
institutions used only in and for the exercise of religion, and are
appropriated thereunto. Also these outward matters (we believe) are spiritual
and religious unlawfully and falsely, which are of men's institution: they are
lawfully, justly, and truly such, which are of the institution, and appointing
of Jesus Christ. Again where these men do say, They neither intend, nor teach
these things to be spiritual or religious. We answer, that makes not the
matter. They are such in the very nature of the things, notwithstanding. For
men's words or intents make not the nature of these things, neither can they
alter the same. Men indeed make these things in the exercise of religion false,
and unlawful, in as much as they come merely from men. But spiritual and
religious they are of themselves, viz. being simply voluntary ordinances
appropriated to the affairs of Religion, as they are. In the appointing
therefore of these outward spiritual matters (and religious) we believe (as is
said) those offices of Christ to be most absolute, and perfect. Indeed so
perfect in every such particular now, so alsufficient, and so necessary to be
submitted unto of all Christians, as the said offices of Christ were under the
Law. We believe that Christ in these things (no less then in matters inward
concerning religion) is the foundation to the whole building even of his
visible and political Church now under the Gospel, as well and as thoroughly
as he was under the Law, appointed by God over all things (yea all these
things) as the head to his said Church which is the fullness of him that
fills all in all things. And so we believe Christ our Mediator (in the
kind, and nature of his offices) to be not changed (much less diminished) but
altogether the same unto us now, as he was heretofore to his people the Jews;
as it is written. Heb. 13.8. Act. 3.23. Luc. 19.14.27. Mat. 21.43.
Jesus Christ the son yesterday, today, and forever. Yea we are persuaded, if
we should believe otherwise, we should rob Christ of his honor and give his
glory to others; which is a part of the highest sacrilege that can be. And
therefore where in this Article we are co^tradicted by some, who say plainly
that Christ in the Gospel though he be the Prophet, King and Priest to his
Church, yet he is not the only, or absolute Teacher, Institutor, King, and The
Approvers of Gabriel Powell de Adiaph. etc.
Lawgiver, of his outward Church, nor of the visible administration thereof,
and namely not in the forerehearsed outward things: And likewise that
Christians now have liberty and free choice for the said outward things in
the exercise of Religion, till man's Authority do determine them; and that then
such outward things are necessary to be observed, but not otherwise. This we
cannot consent unto: but we renounce it, as highly derogating from the true,
and due offices, and honor of Christ, as is above showed.

Of the Allsufficiency of the Scripture.
2. We believe the holy Scriptures Allsufficiencie even in the said outward
matters spiritual, now likewise, as well as it was believed and professed by
all the faithful under the Law. And for that reason we hold this sense (which
indeed was and is the only true sense) of the 2. commandment, viz. that
(touching the general matter thereof, or generally) it contains only in the
exercise of Religion free and voluntary Ordinances (that is) having no cause
for their said use neither in civility, nor in natural Reason; but the mere
will of the Author of them. Yea we believe, that such ordinances both outward,
and inward, private and public do wholly make the 2. commandment, both in
the affirmitive and Negative part. They against us abroad in the land hold not
this sense of the 2. commandment, but deny it. As likewise (with like
dishonor to Christ, which we noted before, and with no less disgrace to his
word) Doct. Whig. in pref. against T. C. says, it is a rotten principle.
they deny the Allsufficiency of holy Scripture in the said outward points (as
we believe) of faith and Christian Religion, and most material and weighty
under the Gospel. They call them circumstances and Accidents to Gods worship.
But most unjustly. The Scripture indeed serves not to specify circumstances,
or Accidents. We willingly agree to this. Neither did it so at any time. As
namely not under the Law. But we deny this constantly (being therein well
assured) our matters in controversy are not circumstances, nor Accidents in
Gods worship: And therefore also not indifferent. A circumstance is, A
circumstance.
which of it self and by the very nature of it has sometime, and to some
persons a helpful, a profitable, and needful use of Gods worship, yet is not
any part of Gods worship, nor perpetually fit, nor merely voluntary, nor used
only therein. An accident is, An Accident.
which being no way a part of Gods worship is sometime in it sometime not. A
matter substantial in the worship of God (and that which is a part of it) is
of 3. sorts. Either a thing not Civil, but properly pertaining to Gods
worship, and yet a mere voluntary ordinance therein. Or a thing having
absolute necessity in nature and natural reason to be a part of Gods worship.
Or otherwise which by the Scripture is plainly commanded or forbidden in Gods
worship. Our matters in controversy are all substantial, of one of these 3.
later sorters, and namely of the first. And therefore what soever of them is
lawful must be commended to us in the Scripture. Else they are all unlawful,
sinful, and wicked. The several points we shall here presently note in
particular (at least) namely these which follow.

Of Christ's true visible Church generally.
3. We believe that (for more clear understanding) Christ's true Church is to
be noted, and considered 4. ways. First Christ has a true Church Ephesians. 3.15.
Heb. 12.23.
Invisible, which is the Universal number of his elect. Secondly, He has a
Church Militant considered merely as it is Gal. 1.13. Philip. 3.6.
professing, and suffering; that is, as the several members do profess the
true faith, and do endure the opposition of enemies for the same. Thirdly, the
church is taken for a Christian family so well nurtured and ordered in
Religion, that they are 1 Cor. 16.19. Bez. Annotat. ibid.
like unto a little Church. So a Church is figuratively, and metaphorically
taken. But none of all these is to our purpose. Fourthly, The Church is taken
as the same Math. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.12.13. Act 1.26.
is political, or endued with power of outward spiritual policy, and
administration of Gods holy ordinances, the means of salvation for men's
souls. Now this Church under the Gospel (and with this consideration) is that
which only we do here treat of, seek, and desire. And we believe that the
special form of this, that is, Christ's visible political Church under the
Gospel, and the particular kind of Government thereof must be of divine
Institution, they are matters ordinarily necessary to Salvation, and they are
matters of faith, matters of the 2. commandment, no less then they were under
the Law. We believe that these things are no circumstances, nor Accidents, nor
Indifferent, nor at all changeable by the discretion of men. But we believe
that these are matters of Substance in Religion: and that by these things one
visible political Church differs essentially or substantially from another;
to wit, in the nature, and kind of the outward spiritual Administration
thereof. As namely the Jews visible political Church under the Law, did
substantially differ from the Christian visible political Churches under the
Gospel. And rather the proper Diocesan, and Provincial and Catholic Churches
since Christ do so differ from the churches which are but ordinary
Congregations independent. Moreover Laying on of hands (Heb. 6.2.) set for the
form of making Ministers under the Gospel, is counted one of the six
fou^dations and principles of faith there rehearsed. Which then requires that
also the whole outward spiritual administration, and government of Christ's
Church now must be such; yea and the form it self of the visible political
Church must then be a foundation of Religion, a principle of christian faith,
ordinarily necessary, and forever unchangeable by men. We do not here think
that all who of simplicity do err in this foundation and principle of faith
are of necessity damned. We are not of so rigid, and severe an opinion. But we
therefore hold it as a foundation and principle of faith, because it is
ordinarily necessary to salvation, and forever unchangeable by men. Thus
stands our faith in these points: so that they which hold contrarily, to
wit, that these things are but circumstances in Religion, and accidents,
ordayneable, and changeable by men, even from one form to another, do (as we
believe) err greatly from the truth.

Of Christ's true visible political Church in more special manner.
4. We believe that the nature and essence of Christ's true visible (that is,
political) Church under the Gospel is a free congregation of Christians for
the service of God, or a true spiritual body politic co^teyning no more
ordinary Co^gregations but one, and that independent. Wherein chiefly 2.
points are to be noted. Math. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 5.4.12.13. and 1 Cor.
11.18.20. and 1 Cor. 14.23. Again Act. 1.15. Act. 2.1.44. Act. 6.2.3.5.6. and
Act. 15.22.25. Also Act. 14.27. and Act. 15.30. Moreover Act. 20.28. and Act.
14.23. Gal. 1.2.21. and 2 Cor. 8.1. and Romans 16.1. etc. Christ, always in the
best order they can. Which these places do prove. Mat. 18.17.19. and 1 Cor.
5.12.13. and 10.15. and 7.23. and 2 Cor. 2.8. and 2 These. 3.6.14. Act. 6.3.5.6.
and Act. 14.23. Act. 1.23.26. Act. 15.22.25. and 1 These. 5.21. and 1 Ioh. 4.1.
Romans 16.17. Coll. 4.17.2. and 3 Io. 10. Gal. 1.9. Gal. 5.1. Gal. 4.26.

Of Synods, and Counsels.
5. Howbeit we acknowledge with all, that there may be, and that on occasion
there ought to be on earth a consociatio^ of Congregations or Churches, namely
by way of Synods: but not a subordination, or surely not a subjection of the
congregations under any higher spiritual authority absolute, save only
Christ's, and the holy Scriptures. They who deny this, mainteyning a Diocesan
and Provincial (and neither we nor they themselves know what universal)
visible political Church both proper and representative, do herein vary far
from the rule of the Gospel.

Of a Catholic, or Universal Church politic, that is, endued with power of
outward spiritual Government.
6. It is demanded, do we deny an Universal visible Church under the
Gospel? We answer, yea. Under the Gospel Christ never instituted, nor had
any one Universal visible Church (that is Political) either proper, or
representative; which ordinarily was to exercise spiritual outward government,
over all persons through the world professing Christianity. No such Church (say
we) is found in all the new Testament. Therefore we now cannot acknowledge any
such.

Of a Provincial Church independent.
7. It is marveyled, why we likewise deny, that under the Gospel there is any
true visible political Church, Provincial or Diocesan; seeing so we shall deny
a true visible political Church to be now in England, because the English
Church (as commonly it is holden) is properly a Diocesan and Provincial, or a
National visible political Church. We answer, For our parts we acknowledge
there are many true visible, yea political Churches in England in some degree,
and in some respect: yet indeed we deny also a National, a Provincial, and
Diocesan Church under the Gospel, to be a true visible political Church
(whether we mean the whole body, or the representative part of such Churches)
though the public practice among us, does hold them for true political
Churches. The reason why we deny these also, is, Because neither any such is
found any where set down in Gods word of the new Testament, even like as there
is no Universal Church visible political there set down. But only a free
Congregation, or ordinary Assembly is found in the new Testament, as a little
before is showed.

How true visible politic Churches are in England.
8. And touching the true visible political Churches which we acknowledge are
in England, we profess and declare in this manner. Namely that each company
of true visible Christians associated together in one place (viz. a Parish) and
professing to serve God according to his will, in faith and order so far as
they know (such as there are many in England) the same is a true visible
political Church in some respect; that is, Though not in respect of the order
of the state (unless indirectly and by accident to it) after which they walk,
and under which they stand in spiritual bondage: yet in Christ directly they
are free, And so directly and essentially they are a true political Church, as
they are a company of true visible Christians united by their own consent to
serve God, as a little before is noted. And thus they have free power of
spiritual outward government among themselves, though they professedly
practice it not. But (esteeming them by Gods word in their direct practice and
state according to the public proceedings, they are not a true political
Church, nor free (directly) as they stand under and joined to the L. Bishops
spiritual dominion over them. Which bondage and want of spiritual freedom in
themselves our godly people generally see not: nor this, That (in right from
Christ) they have this freedom to be exempted from the unlawful domination of
the L. Bishops aforesaid. Neither think they so upon this matter as they ought,
and as the peril of their souls requires. Howbeit, yet all this (as Prove. 25
18. and 17.15.
we judge) does not simply disanull that peoples being true visible Christians
with us (so long as herein they err but of ignorance) nor the assemblies from
being true visible political Churches in some respect and degree, as before is
showed. And therefore we communicate also with them on occasion, as before
likewise is signified; viz. while in such communicating we countenance out no
evil thing in them, which in many places, and many times we need not do.
Whereof we shall presently see further in Art. 11. following.

Of L. Archbishops, and L. Bishops Diocesan, and Provincial.
9. We believe, that the spiritual office, calling, and power, and
administration of L. Archbishops, and L. Bishops, Diocesan and Provincial,
with their inferior Hierarchy, is contrary to the Ecclesiastical order, and
ordinance of Christ established in the new Testament, and not to be
communicated with. The proofs whereof do stand on the grounds of the 4.
Article before, and on those in the 10. Article next following after.

Of the making of Ministers.
10. We believe, that the essence of Ministers calling under the Gospel, is
the 1 These. 5.21. Romans 16.17. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Act. 14.23. Act. 6.3.5. Act. 1.23.26.
2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Cor. 7.23. 1. Cor. 3.22. Math. 18.17.19. and 28.20.
Congregations consent. We speak of the ordinary Ministry, especially of
Pastors. And it is proved thus. Whatsoever is essential in making of a
Minister, at some time, and in some place, the same is essential ever. But the
Congregations consent is essential at sometime, and in some place. This is
without question; viz. in some places it was, when Christians came first out of
the Antichristian tyranny and bondage of Rome; Also as it may happen it is now,
and may be hereafter in like cases. And also in the first conversion of the
Indies, and other infidel Countries. Which even our Adversaries (as they must
needs) do confess. Therefore the Congregations consent is essential ever,
and every where in the making of a Minister. Many there are by whom this
conclusion is denied; They hold the authority and consent of a former Minister,
to be essential to the making of a Minister: And so they derive and hold the
Ministry of the Church of Christ with us, to come (as touching the essence
thereof) succeedingly from Antichrist the Pope of Rome. Indeed there are but
only these 2. ways (neither can be) to make Ministers to us essentially: And
therefore in truth we conclude a Ministers calling is essentially always from
the Congregations consent. For any lawful authority herein from the Pope, we
acknowledge 2 Cor. 6.15.16
none. And with all upon this ground, We (for our parts) cannot but believe
it to be simply unlawful, and sinful to fetch, receive, yea or to use a
Ministry formerly received from the Prelates: seeing that hereby (and
especially by the express opinion that the Ministry of England descends
from the Pope) beside the mainteyning of Romes pride, the foreshewed order of
God, and the As before in the beginning of this Artic.
Churches true right spiritual is most plainly violated and defaced, yea and
(as we doubt) our persons most deeply endangered of our lives by the Eliz. 27.2.
Laws verdicte in the rigor thereof. Because the Sovereign absolutenes and
independency of our Land and Country in spiritual things is greatly impaired,
abased, and diminished thereby, to say no more of it. Finally upon this ground
we also believe, that a Minister (so reputed) without any particular flock, is
indeed T.C. ^epl..1.^1.
no Minister.

Of our communicating with the Parish Ministers and Parishes in England.
11. First, we believe that to think we do, or can receive a Ministry
essentially from a former Hebr. 7.7.
Minister or Prelate (in these days) is an error, and the thing received is a
nullitie in that respect.

Secondly, this receipt in a Parish minister with us makes not a nullitie of
the Ministry in him in every respect besides; that is, it makes not void all
truenes of Ministry in him, as a believing Congregation (howsoever) consents
to have him, and uses him, for their Minister. This consent of the godly there
(howsoever it be mingled otherwise with error) is not wholly void.

Thirdly, concerning us, when on some weighty occasion we join only to that
which is true in the said Ministry, and testify in the best manner we can that
so we do, also ordinarily leaving the parish congregation and Ministry for
that their error, and other such like; and with all professing, publishing,
and practicing freely and constantly the simple truth therein with our selves,
this quitteth us (as we firmly believe) and sufficiently makes us clear from
all evil, and appearance of evil in this matter.

Lastly, It being no evil nor any appearance of evil justly in us, to join
to the Parish Congregation and Ministry in such respect, and so far forth
only, as is aforesaid; we ought (as we believe) sometime on weighty occasion
so to join, and Luke 17.37. Heb. 10.25. 1 Cor. 10.32.
we sin if we do not.

Touching Plurality Pastors, and Nonresidents.
12. We believe Plurality-Pastors, and Nonresidents to be directly contrary to
the order of God in the Gospel; And therefore that now they are simply
unlawful; and likewise deputed, and substituted Pastors by private authority,
such as our Curates are. And mere Lecturers are little better.

Touching Discipline and Censures.
13. We believe the true administering of the holy Censures to be by the
Congregations consent also. And therefore not to be lawfully done by an
absolute Diocesan or Provincial authority; that is, if it be without any
necessary concurrence of consent of that Congregation, which it chiefly
concerns.

Touching the number of Pastors in each Church; and of the Pastors ordinary
power and authority in managing the Churches spiritual affairs and
Government.
14. We believe each Church ought to have one Pastor at least: and that they
may have more then one, if the number of the Church, and their means be fit
for it, and such plenty of choice may be had. Howbeit we judge that it is best,
and most agreeable to the last Apostolic practice, that even where many are,
yet that one have (during life) a precedencie and prioritie in order and place
(not in power) before the rest. Revel. 2.1. etc. Touching their power and
authority in Church government, we believe (whether they be in each Church
single, or more then one) they have all that they have, and nothing more, then
what the Congregation does commit unto them, and which they may (when need
requires) again take away from them; Yea to their utter deposing, and also
rejection out of the Church it self, if such necessity be. Howbeit otherwise
while they are approved and stand in their place, we judge each proper Pastor
may and ought to be trusted by the Congregation with the managing of all points
of their Ecclesiastical affairs and government so far, that he with his
assistants (when he has any) do execute and administer the same: yet so, that
in matters of weight the whole Congregation do first understand thereof before
any thing be finished, and the final act be done in the presence of the whole
Congregation, and also that they (the said Congregation) do not manifestly
dissent there from.

Touching the profane and scandalous mixtures of people in the Congregation.
15. We believe concerning mixtures of the open profane with some manifest
godly Christians, in a visible Church, though at once it does not destroy
essentially, nor make void the holiness of that whole Assembly, yet truly it
puts that whole Assembly into a most dangerous and desperate estate by such
their confusion, and by such extreme peril of further infection, especially
if they do long tolerate the same among them. Insomuch that what soul soever
in such a Church state desires to be in safety, ought with all diligence to
leave that spiritual society wherein he stands thus, and join to a better:
Seeing under the Gospel there are more free societies of Christians, mo visible
Churches politic, then one in a Country, and some more sincere then some: And
all true Christians are commanded of God to keep their own souls sound and
clear from contagion, which is unpossible to be done ordinarily for any long
time, where the visible Churches constitution is so commingled of bad and good,
of open profane and godly together: for who can carry fire in his bosom, and
his clothes not be burnt? And who can touch pitch, and not be defiled
therewith? And who can escape, but (in a while) a little Leaven, will leaven the
whole lump; much more will it so come to pass, where there is a great
quantity of Leave^ for a little Dowe, as now with us it is, wherefore in such
an inevitable present danger of our souls, doubtless we ought to leave the
worse society, and to enjoy one that is and may be sincere. For by no means
may we dare to be of Ephesians. 2.12.
no visible Ministerial Church; if but 2. or 3. where we live, can be gotten
to consent and join togeither in the name of Christ, and in the freedom of
Gods word.

Of Traditions humane.
16. We believe all Ecclesiastical unwritten Traditions and Ordinances of men
(being no circumstances nor accidents) are (now under the Gospel, even like as
they were under the Law) untruthes, and false positions, and errors in the
worship of God. And that simply we ought not to be present in the practicing of
them, unless we might conveniently reprove the same. We much mislike
therefore those who hold (at least) some such to be now in these times both
tolerable and profitable in Gods worship. Nay; we believe all Ordinances freely
and voluntarily instituted in the exercise of religion to be indeed (and so to
be rightly named) Gods worship either true or false, being (as they are) the
proper matter, contents, and parts of the second commandment in the decalogue;
which also before is signified in the second Article. This doctrine they who
admit not, do err not a little even in the very nature and definition it
self of the said worship of God, and in the kinds and parts thereof; we mean
of Gods instituted worship. Some particulars of these unwritten Traditions are,
a Catholic Church politic, a Provincial politic church independent: the
proper Offices of their government, and the Form and parts thereof. Beside,
these also are: The Cope, and Surplice, the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling in the
Communion; and the like. All which being in Gods worship, and pertinent to it
in special wise, and merely of men's voluntary institution, we therefore
renounce and do utterly condemn as men's inventions spiritual, and will
worship.

Of Traditions Apostolic.
17. We believe that every ordinance or institution Apostolic (and that must
unto us out of holy Seripture be proved to be so) is divine; that is to say, of
divine Authority, instituted of God, simply unchangeable by men, and such, that
of right it ought to be used perpetually, and universally among Christians,
unless God himself (by his own work) do let it, and make it void. They
therefore do err much who hold, that it is rightfully in the Churches power
to alter and take away some thing (which has been of spiritual and
ecclesiastical use) appointed by the very Apostles, and that mentioned in the
holy Scripture: And they also err no less, who say that something truly
Apostolic may be proved so to be by Traditions only, without Scripture.

Of Prophecy, as the Apostle calls it.
18. We believe that the sober, discreet, orderly, and well governed exercise
of expounding and applying the Scriptures in the Congregation, by the Apostle
called Prophesying, and allowed expressly by him to any understanding member of
the Church (but 1 Cor. 14.34. and v. 1.39. and verse. 31.
women) is lawful now, convenient, profitable, yea sometime very necessary
also in diverse respects; The Churches order and allowance therein for each
particular person so employed, being first had. For it being lawful privately
by 1 These. 5.11. 1 Pet. 4.10.
private motion: it must needs be more lawful in pub-like, when it is seen
needful by the Church, and is performed under the Churches order, direction,
and judgment.

Of the reading of Homilies in the Church.
19. We believe that with us the reading of Homilies in divine service is not
lawful, but very unmeete for the congregation of the faithful: namely where
it is held for competent without the employment of a preaching Pastor; where as
a Pastors diligent, discreet, and judicious preaching, and applying of Gods
word, is the power of God unto salvation ordinarily. Neither does every of the
allowed Homilies in every point conteyne godly doctrine.

Of Christ's descending into Hell.
20. After the usual and common sense of this English word Hell, we believe
that in the Creed this point is not rightly translated, where it is said,
Christ (being dead) descended into Hell. For the Scripture says only (and so
likewise do the original words in the Creed signify*) that he was then under
the power of death. And was in the place, where all other the godly deceased
were; And that is all.

Of Prayer.
21. We believe concerning prayer: that though every 2 Chro^. 29. 30. Psalm.
102. and 92. Mat. 26.30.
form of prayer prescribed by men be not absolutely nor simply a sin,
neither (as we judge) an Idol, nor an invention of man, nor a transgression of
the 2. commandment; yet we constantly avouch and profess a prescribed
Leiturgy, or a book of common prayer by commandment enforced upon a whole
Church rightly constituted, to be used still in the very same words whenever
they assemble (in comparison of other praying) is not so profitable but rather
hurtful in many users of it, as making holy zeal, true piety, sincere
godlynes, and other gifts of Gods Spirit in many of them to languish, namely
where it is made necessary, and in perpetual use, and when it is so long, as
that the reading of it over, takes up the whole time fit for one usual
meeting to divine service. And therefore we cannot think it any way co^venient
for our selves, nor meet to be imposed; or to be so received in any well
constituted Churches: much less, to be imposed on a whole nation, least of
all, upon all Churches of the world. The new Testament teaches no such matter,
neither troubles it self with endeavoring an uniformity in this point, but
leaves all Churches herein to their godly liberty, wisdom, understanding,
and diligent consideration of themselves. Besides such prescribed Leiturges
were never used (in any manner) among Christians, till late after Christ. The
soonest was after 300. years. And to be short, by experience we see too often,
most evidently they breed both an idle Pastor, and an ignorant, and secure
people. Therefore to follow herein the Christian liberty, and discretion of the
Churches, in the Apostles times, we hold it to be far the best.

Of Holy days, so called.
22. We believe that under the Gospel there is not any holy day, (besides the
Lords day) nor any fasting day, or days constant, ordinary, and on certain
seasons, or times of the year continually to be observed. All such observing
of days we believe is against Gods word, not only as being religious
ordinances Math. 15.9.13
instituted by men (neverthought on by Christ nor his Apostles in all their
time, who yet had the Holy Ghost leading them into Joh 4.25. and 14 26. and
6.13.
all truth meet for Christian people, and had more reason to institute them
then we) but also as being directly forbidden in the 4. Commandment where God
saying to man, Exodus 20.9.
Six days thou shall labor, and do all that thou have to do, he says there
also, but rest the Seventh, for so did God himself after the 6. days
creation; whose example herein do thou follow. Now this Divine appointment of a
Seventh day only to be kept holy, we plainly see to be (for the equity, and
proportion, which is the substance thereof) avery Commandment of God unto us
still: and therefore of all men to be perpetually observed. Howbeit if God or
the Apostles had ordained (beside a 7. day) any other holy days particularly
in the Gospel, as God and his Prophets else where in the Law did ordeyne some
besides the Sabbath, then (notwithstanding this Commandment) we would never
refuse such holy days now, over and besides the Lords day. But that in the
Gospel was not done; the Gospel no where shows any such matter. Therefore
we believe it not, we cannot now but refuse it. And yet again, Days of
thanksgiving, or fasting, which by men are appointed upon some special
occasion, and are to be used accordingly; that is, for the said special, and
particular occasions sake, and only for a season convenient and fitting
thereunto (but in no wise constantly, and continuingly, as is before noted) such
days, I say, we approve and allow, as having warrant from the Spirit of God
both in the Law and in the Gospel. But other then these, we neither believe,
nor allow any.

Of Marriage, and Burying, and Churching, as it is called.
23. Concerning making of marriage, and burying the dead, we believe that they
are no actions of a Church Minister (because they are no actions spiritual)
but civil. Neither are Ministers called to any such business: Neither is there
so much as one example of any such practice in the whole book of God either
under the Law, or under the Gospel, without which warrant we believe it to be
unlawful whatsoever any Minister does attempt at any time, or in any place,
especially as a part of his ministerial office, and function. Wherefore we
profess and protest, that we earnestly desire that the Solemnization of holy
Marriage might be performed by some Civil Magistrate assigned by highest
authority thereunto. And when Ministers do in the Congregations solemnize
Marriage, we testify that we believe that they do nothing therein, neither can,
but bless this ordinance of God; as likewise they do some time the initiation
of a Magistrate; they do not essentially constitute either of them. And for
Churching of women, likewise we know no ground for it in Scripture, nor good
reason at all, specially to make it a necessary part of the Ministers office in
the public divine service.

Of Ministers made also Magistrates by the State.
24. We believe that the joining of Pastoral ministry, and Magistracy
together in one person under the Gospel is simply unlawful, and contrary to
the Text of the new Testament, which says, It shall not be so among you, Ma.
20.25. Luke 22.26. And. Let him that teaches wait on teaching, and abide
therein, Ro^. 12.17.

Of the gifts, and offerings of the faithful.
25. We believe that there is a holy Communion of the whole Church in
communicating of their substance together by gifts, and offerings.

These gifts and offerings are given Numb. 28.2.18.8. Malach. 3.8.9.
to God; they are Gods properly and specially belonging to God; he takes them
for his: also they are given to that particular Church of God; for which the
givers do intend them.

They are not mere alms, but (first) evident signs of true love to God:
then, they are necessary means and duties required by God for the
supportation, maintenance, and upholding of the said Church, and of the sincere
worship of God therein.

These gifts and offering are merely free and voluntary, yea every time the
giver comes to God with them.

These gifts and offerings are Prove. 3.9. 2 Samuel 24.24. 1 Chro^. 16.29.
real sacrifices to God, and parts of his holy worship and service. Also,
after they are given and received they are holy and consecrated things, not
goods for Levit. 27.26.29. Exodus 13.13. Deuteronomy. 15.19.
common secular use.

These gifts are some ordinary, and some extraordinary.

The time of offering these ordinary gifts is every Lords day. The most fit,
and comely season and place for it is in the holy Assembly, then when the
Churches use is to perform it.

Nevertheless they who are on just occasion any such day absent, ought
always to lay aside for God and for his service their portion, or rather Gods
part, and portion: and in due time to bring, or send it. Which is no less
sanctified to the foresaid holy use, and acceptable to God, then if the givers
then had been present.

These gifts though they be free and voluntary in the givers touching the
particular quantity; yet that they do thus give and offer every Lords day
somewhat (either more, or less) is 1 Cor. 16.2. 1 Cor. 9.14.
a very commandment of God, and a fruit of necessary obedience in man.

The quantity is thus far pointed at in the Scripture, viz. According as the
Lord has prospered every one. And some are in high grace with God, who give to
God out of their penury.

The persons, who are to give these holy gifts, are all and every member of
the Church, except only those that receive maintenance therefrom at the hand
of the Church. So that all the Churches members are givers, or receivers.

They that receive are the Poor, and the Ministers of the Church.

Extraordinary offerings and gifts (which some out of special Zeal to Gods
glory do offer besides the ordinary) are for the place, time, kind, and
quantity such as each giver sees God may be the more honored thereby.

The ordinary offerings in the assembly are to be received by the Deacons,
committed into the hands of the Act. 11.30. Numb. 18.8.14.
Elders, and with their direction to be disposed of by the Deacons.

The Commandment of the Apostle to the Church of Corinth. 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
Concerning the gathering for the Saints, as he ordained in the Churches of
Galatia also, viz. Every first day of the week let every one put aside by
himself, and lay up as God has prospered him. This showing what the Apostle
then required of the^ for an occasional relief of other brethren far off
from them, does show more that he requires them thus to do for their own
constant, ordinary, and necessary supportation, and maintenance.

Of Tithes, and the Pastors fittest, and due, and necessary maintenance.
26. We believe that Tithes for the Pastors maintenance under the Gospel are
not the just and due means thereof. Howbeit yet we do not think these Tithes
absolutely unlawful, if they remain voluntary: but when they are made
necessary, we think them not so lawful. The same do we judge also of
whatsoever other set maintenance for ministers of the Gospel established by
temporal Laws. We grant, for the Ministers security such established
maintenance is best: but for preserving due freedom in the Congregation,
sincerity in Religion, and sanctity in the whole flock, the Congregations
voluntary and conscionable contribution for their Pastors sustenance, and
maintenance is doubtless the safest, and most approved, nay it seems, the
only way: wherewith the Apostles caused their times to be content: neither did
they take care for other order herein: which certainly they would, and should
have done, if other order had been better. Only they are careful (and that
very religiously) commanding all Churches of conscience and duty to God to
give (not sparingly, but liberally, and not as alms, but as duty) for the
upholding, advancing, and countenancing of the holy worship, and service of
God, which is either much strengthened, or weakened, much honored, or abased
amongst men, according as the Pastors maintenance is. To this end tends that
which is written: 1 Cor. 9.7.9.11.14.
Who goes a warfare at any time on his own cost? Thou shall not muzzel the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing, is we reap your carnal things? God
has ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: or
else a people (herein negligent) Mal. 3.8.9.
robs and spoileth their God, will a man spoil his God? Wherefore Prove. 3.9.
honor the Lord with your substance, and with the first fruits of all your
increase; and Gal. 6.6.
let him that is taught in the word, make him, that taught him, partaker of all
his goods. Also every one as he sows, v. 7.
so he shall reap; And Deuteronomy. 16.16.
none may appear before the Lord empty. By all which it is manifest, that
Almighty God commands the people to mainteyn with their goods their
ministers. And (in the Gospel) their maintenance to be free;yet honest,
liberal, and plentiful: that 2 Chro^. 31.4.
they may be encouraged in the way of the Lord.

Of the civil Magistrates duty, and charge to oversee and order his Churches
in spiritual matters.
27. We believe that we, and all true visible Churches ought to be overseene,
and kept in good order, and peace, and ought to be governed (under Christ) both
supreamely, and also subordinately by the Civil Magistrate: yea in causes of
religion when need is. By which rightful power of his, he ought to cherish and
prefer the godly, and religious; and to punish (as truth, and right shall
require) the untractable, and unreasonable. Howbeit yet always but Civilly.
And therefore we from our heart most humbly do desire that our gracious
sovereign King would (himself so far as he sees good, and further by some
fubstituted Supplicat. for Tolerat. p. 8.12.
civil Magistrate under him) in clemency take this special oversight, and
government of us, to whose ordering and protection we most humbly commit our
selves, acknowledging that because we want the use of this divine ordinance,
That therefore most great, and infinite evils both to us, and even to the
whole kingdom does ensue, and also because of the spiritual Lords their
government over us. And notwithstanding the spiritual Lords Ibid. page 12.
do think it injury and wrong to themselves not small, if the King should
substitute civil Magistrates to this business, yet (as it is said) that is Gods
own ordinance; and to do otherwise, namely to commit either spiritual or
civil government (viz.Diocesan, or provincial) to Ministers of the word, is
evil; and (as we believe) a direct transgression of the text of the Gospel
above rehearsed, in Artic. 4.10.24.

Touching the necessity, that lies upon us to obey Christ rather then man in
our using of the true, and in refusing the contrary ecclesiastical ordinances
above specified.
28. We believe that by the word of God all Christians are bound (each one for
his own part) to keep and observe actually, and perpetually the Affirmative
ecclesiastical Commandments, and ordinances in the Gospel, as well as the
Negative: That is, so far as one person suffices to perform the same,
singly and by himself he ought so to do; and where some number are required
(and are ready) for the observing of any such Commandment, there each
christian (which can be present with other) stands bound to give his consent,
and to make one with them therein. Always after the bestorder they can, and
namely that maine order which is in the Gospel: notwithstanding whatsoever
man's forbidding, or whatsoever affliction in the world should follow upon it.

But that, touching the use of Christ's visible political Church under the
Gospel, viz. A free independe^t c^ogregatio^ (prescribed in Mat. 18.17.) is
such an Affirmative Co^mandme^t and Ordinance; Mat. 18.17.
and it agrees to that order before named, as we see in the Scriptures
alleged for the 2. point in the 4. Article.

Therefore every Christian is bound by Gods word to keep and observe the same
perpetually, so as is before declared. And namely this all are commanded
(occasion requiring) viz. to tell such a Church, and to hear such a Church.
Therefore all are commanded and stand bound by Gods word (so as before is
declared) perpetually to have such a Church, and to be members of it first.

Further all simply are commanded Mat. 28.20.
to do whatsoever Christ commanded the Apostles, and to 1 These. 5.21.
try all things, and to hold fast that which is good. And to 1 John 4.1.
try the spirits whether they be of God. And, Romans 16.17.
brethren mark them diligently which cause dessentions and offenses besides
the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. These duties we may very
well do according to that true order above noted if we enjoy such a visible
Church (a free Congregation) as is before described: But wanting such a Church,
it is not possible for us to do them which any good order, as is showed.
Therefore we all are simply commanded to enjoy and use an independent Church
exercising spiritual government (a free Congregation) according as is before
described; that we may obey God and keep his Commandment given us in these
places of Scripture. Which we ought to do.

Likewise Gal. 5.1.
all are commanded to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and not to be entangled in the yoke of bondage. Out of such a visible
Church (a free Congregation) we cannot possibly observe and keep this general
Commandment orderly and ordinarily); but in it we may. Therefore here we are
commanded also to be actually in such a visible Church, a free Congregation,
and to use the same.

Again all are commanded 2 These. 3.15.
to stand fast, and to keep the Apostles Traditions and Ordinances. But this
form of a visible Church is one maine, and substantial Apostolic Ordinance.
Therefore we are all commanded to observe and keep it, namely so as before is
declared.

Again all are commanded to Heb. 13 17 7 1 These. 5.12.
obey their Pastors, to follow their faith, to make much of such, to Math. 6.33.
seek first the Kingdom of God; to 2 Fet. 1.10.
make our calling, and election sure, (viz.) by walking in the true outward
way; To observe the 2. Commandment in all the parts of it; a maine part
whereof under the Gospel is this form of a visible Church, and government.

Lastly this ordinance of Christ we ought to hold and keep most firmly,
whosoever gainsay it, because in this estate of a Church, the Psalm. 33.3. and
134.^. Ephesians. ^.12.
promises of God are given and received; and no where else directly and
ordinarily. And there is no promise to any indirect and accidental
constitution of a Church. Wherefore this direct and ordinary means of hope,
and faith of grace and salvation we ought to prefer before our life.
Remembering also that Luke 9.27.
willingly to refuse and omit the same, is no less then damnation to any man.

Thus then in all these so weighty points we are clearly comanded to obey God
rather the^ man. And God commanding us to fear, and to love, and to serve him,
he commands us the necessary means, and way of doing so, even that Church,
in and by which ordinarily we must do so, that we may be accepted. Which
(under the Gospel) is such a free Congregation, as is In Artic. 4.
before made clear. Where we see that this only is now Christ's true visible
Church, and no other form of a visible Church is. Wherefore we are all bound
with all care to hearken to the express precept o the Holy Ghost concerning
even this point, saying, Isa. 30. 21.
This is the way walk ye in it. Which also the Harmony of Confessions
teaches, viz. Harm. of Conf. French Artic. 26. Dutch. Artic. 28. Helvet. chapter
11.
That this we ought to do notwithstanding men of power and might shall say nay.

These (with the branches depending on them) are our differences, even all the
matters wherein we dissent from the usual and common opinion among us in this
Land.

3. Now therefore (to come to the 3. and last point of this our Protestation)
we demand and do earnestly crave of every in different christian to answer
us: what false things have we here affirmed? What on our part is evil? What
is wicked in all this? If nothing, as wear firmly persuaded in our souls that
there is nothing; Then we pray, and earnestly entreat (in the bowels of mercy
in Jesus Christ) every one to pardon our Consciences, in that thus doing we
stand to give actual obedience to our Heavenly Lord and Savior in his own
Commandments), and Ordinances: which also we do, that we may thereby (as by
the only true complete means) get 1 Ioh. 3.18.19.
assurance of salvation to our souls, which otherwise we for our parts cannot
find. And otherwise (whise we omit thus to do, and keep not Christ's said
Commandments) any with reproach may say unto us, show us your faith by your
works; through works is faith made perfect: But faith without works is dead.
And Christ says, If ye love me, then keep my Commandments. And, Not he,
that says, Lord, Lord, But he that does the will of the Father is justified.
Whence verily we see it plain, and we know well, that not the talkers, nor
disputers of Christ's will, but the doers shall be saved, (yea though men
afflicte them for it,) and they that will have Christ to reign over them; not
L 19.
they, that will not.

Wherefore we humbly pray every upright-harted servant of God to consider, that
it is not possible for us (knowing that which we know) to give this
forerehearsed due obedience unto Christ, but by walking in this way, which we
do. Which also cannot be but first by eschewing the evil, and then by doing
the good. That is; first by renouncing to be ordinary and constant members of
any Diocesan, or Provincial Church visible political. (Because the form of
these is wholly without Gods word in the Gospel, yea contrary to it.) And then
also of the Parishes (as natural parts) depending on them, and on their Lord
Bishops; seeing these likewise do both want Gods word, and add to it, and
stand in bondage in those the above noted substantial points, and means most
important to salvation, which before have been declared. Wherefore thus far
forth only we leave our said parishes also: but no further. That is, to be in
them no ordinary and constant members: but members in them occasionally we
refuse not to be, seeing in them we find (in many places) very many true
visible christians, with whom we cannot (as we believe) deny public communion
absolutely, and therefore on occasion we offer to communicate with our said
public congregations (or parishes) as before we have professed; taking God to
witness that this we do (not through any pride, or singularity, but) merely
out of necessity of our duty to obey Christ in his word, (as we believe that
herein we do) and to submitt unto his word, and ordained means, and to keep
his commandments, and to avoid abiding in sin; which otherwise possibly we
cannot see how we can avoid. Yea again, and again we testify that being
forced merely by conscience, thus we do, not knowing otherwise in our souls,
how to answer it at the last day. Where we know no Magistrate, nor Prince
shall be able to answer for us, if after the Light manifested we be found
standing in a wrong way contrary to Christ's sacred Ordinance, as we believe
this Diocesan political Church is.

Secondly hence it is, that we do join (each person only himself) humbly,
and obediently to the evident way of the Gospel, the most certain true
Church* estate set down in the New Testament by Christ, and his Apostles,
namely, to a free Congregation. Which truths before (specially in the 4th.
Article) we have sufficiently showed; binding our selves to proceed simply,
and only by this sure rule, and therein to persevere until death: or else
(when we swerve) we acknowledge our selves justly worthy of the fearful
Censure of Excommunication from that holy society of Christians, wherein to by
Gods mercy we are now entered, where withal we acknowledge our selves also
worthily excluded from the spiritual Communion of Gods people wholly, and
every where, till we return by Repentance.

We say the fear of God constrayneth us hereunto: seeing we cannot otherwise
find in our hearts clearly the safety of our souls; a matter above all
things in this world, which we, and all people ought to have greatest regard
of.

All glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, and goodwill toward man. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all. Amen.
Ier. 32.39. One way and one heart.

Cypr. de Unit. Eccles. Credere se in Christum quomodo dicet, qui non facit,
quod Christus facere praecepit.

How can one say, he believes in Christ, who does not that which Christ
commands.

Calvin. Instit. 4.3.2. Ecclesiae dissipationem, velruinam potius, and exitium
molitur, quisquis ordinem hunc, de quo disputamus, and HOC GENVS regiminis vel
abotere studet, vel quasi minus necessarium eleuat.

He labors the ruin, and destruction of the Church whosoever he be, that
endeavoreth to abolish this order, and THIS KIND of Government whereof we
treat, or makes light of it as less necessary.

AN HVMBLE PETITION TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, BY THE Christians
notified in the fore-rehearsed Confession and Protestation, (his Majesty's ever
faithful Subjects) that of his good and merciful disposition it would please
him to give them Toleration and peace under him in their serving of God
acording to their said Confession and Protestation.
GIve thy judgments to the King, o God, and thy righteousness to the Kings
Son. Psalm. 72.1.
MOst gracious Sovereign, your loyal and dutiful Subjects notified in the
forerehearsed Confession and Protestation of their faith, being well assured
and firmly beleiving that this intent of theirs is honest, righteous, godly,
charitable, and of necessary importance to their souls health, yet being also
in most grievous dangers, and heavy perplexities, ready every hour to be
drawn into most miserable distresses and calamities, for this their conscience
and obedience to Gods word, have their recourse to your Sacred Majesty their
only hope in earth, and to you (as they ought to do) they make their suit in
most humble manner on their bended knees. Beseeching you (as in effect they
Anno. 1609. An Humble Supplication.
formerly did, so now again) to give unto them this favor, that peaceably and
quietly they may worship God and serve him in your Highness dominions where they
dwell, after the tenor of their Confession and Protestation here before
expressed. Their enemies are rigorous and sharp in laying affliction on them
(only for this their conscience toward God) both in their goods and liberty,
if your Majesty will give way to them; wherein they pretend your Majesty's
service, and that they do but your will. So that it is your good Grace only
that under God can help us, and give us security from such (we trust)
undeserved evils. Many things induce us to presume thus into your Majesty's
presence, and to be in all humble submissio^ suitors to your Majesty for this
singular grace from you. Yea, many reasons, and strong inforcements (as it
were) do move us hereunto, which we beseech your Majesty graciously to hear.
First, seeing this is the essential order in the Gospel of the visible
churches of Christ, which we follow: if he have set any order of spiritual
government at all in the Gospel, which we verily believe he has. And then we
beseech your Majesty graciously to consider, how can it be possible but that
(for Christ's glory and honor, and out of necessary obedience and duty to
him) we ought to walk in it, and humbly sue to your Highness for peace
therei^n, as here at this present in all submission and lowliness we do.
Secondly, Because this we perceive that the peril of our souls lies hereon.
How can we there fore choose but with all diligence and dutiful affection
seek at your Majesty's gracious hands this bounty toward us, which surpasses
all other benefits which in this world you can yield us. Thirdly. Forasmuch as
the contrary way unto us, the way of the L. Bishops and their followers, is
such as gives great, and most apparent advantage to the papacy and Church of
Rome, and which leads many in this land directly thither back again; partly
for that there is in the New Testament much more show and color for a
universal Church visible endued with government, then for a National or
Provincial Church independent, as this in England now is: partly also because
they openly profess that all the ministeries in England are by succession Fr.
Mason of the Consecration of Bb. Anno 1614.
derived and received essentially from the Pope, which indeed in their estate
they cannot will, nor choose but so acknowledge. Therefore considering this,
what heart can sustain the due grief, sorrow and shame of this slander, of
this dishonor to God, of triumph and laughing to Antichrist, of reproach to our
land, wherein we for our parts can bring no other remedy, but our prayers
to God for the general good, and most humble requests to your Highness for
mercy herein toward our selves. Fourthly, for as much as if we should deny
this our faith, and violate our conscience, and turn back with them to the
way of deriving the ministry succeedingly from Rome, we are terrified with
the very cogitation hereof: not only in that this would argue in us breach of
faith toward God, and damnable levitie in our conscience, but also we behold a
fearful sentence in the Eliz. 27.2.
law of our land against all which so say and affirm. Avoiding therefore this
perplexity and danger, we have no way to serve God truly in, but this which
here we profess. And therefore cannot but seek your gracious favor in
permitting us with quietness to enjoye the same. Fifthly, the integrity of our
hearts, and loyalty of our minds toward your Highness Sovereign power
under Christ, does animate us to look toward your Clemency in this our need;
whom God has ordained to be a noursing father, and defender to all the
religious professors of the Gospel among your subjects. And therefore we crave
of your Highness herein to be good unto us. In what particular? That you would
afford us, and assign to us some Civil Magistrate or Magistrates qualifyed
with wisdom, learning, and virtue to be (under your Highness) our everseers for
our more peaceable, orderly, and dutiful carriage of our selves, both in our
worshipping God, ad in all other our affairs, at your pleasure; To whom with
all readiness and subjection we are willing to be accomptable and answerable
always. We have none under Jesus Christ in our wants and distresses to have
recourse unto, but to your protection and goodness at all times. Yea whether we
obtain mercy at your Majesty's hands, or no: Nevertheless still to you do we
apply; your grace we do and will attend. And so together we offer with all
willingness to receive the oath of your Supremacy, and that of Alleagiance
likewise. Sixthly, Your Majesty heretofore discovered on occasion your tender
pity and commiseration toward the consciences of your subjects, and those
being such as more resist your royal dignity, then we (through Gods grace)
ever have, shall, or can do by the tenor of our open profession; which also
your Majesty's wisdom it self Tortus Lies. 4.
does well discern. Yet toward those your subjectes (the Catholics) in your
Kingly affection and Clemency you have signified that Apol. p. 4.
you intend no persecution against them for conscience cause, and that p. 60.
you never laid any thing to the charge of any for cause of conscience. This
gives us to have great hope and confidence, and to comfort our selves upon the
same your royal word. And therefore also we adventure, to be suitors to your
Highness in this our need, as now we are, for the due and sweet effect hereof
toward us. Some perhaps will object, that we will not be content with our
conscience to our selves, but also we use meeting in private for the exetcise
of our religion: Weanswer, our religion has no manner of evil in it any
manner of ways, as by our fore rehearsed Confession is made manifest before,
thanks be to God. And for meeting in private, it is not that we desire or
delight in, the Lord knows. The public places with peace and protection
under your Highness, would be in this world the greatest blessing and benefit,
which our heart desires, or which could come unto us. But we dare not expect,
neither do we ask so great favor at your Majesty's hands; only that in
private peaceably we might serve God with clear and quiet consciences
according to the effect of our fore remembered Confession, we in all lowliness
crave but your Toleration. For meetings of a Congregation to the joint and
common exercise of Gods worship are necessary parts of religion, and duties in
conscience, as being Christ's very ordinance and commandment. Your Majesty's
wisdom understands perfectly that without such meetings, common prayers, and
other acts of religion in a Congregation, God neither is nor can be served, as
he ought to be. Wherefore this duty we cannot in any safety of conscience
relinquish, or neglect, neither can our meeting thus (only in a competent
Congregation) any way in the least measure be prejudicial or suspicious to
your Highness peace or dignity. But by Gods grace you (yielding us this favor)
shall every way succeed to the advancing of Gods true glory, and your
Majesty's flourishing government here, and hereafter to your more sure attaying
of immortal honor, and souls health. etc. These causes therefore (o Gracious
and Magnificent King) constrain us, and bind us to implore this your favor
and succor at this time, in this behalf. And so being not ignorant of your
gentle and gracious clemency many times showed to sundry persons on sundry
occasions of no such importance as this is to our poor souls, and (as we
judge) to the cleerer demonstration of your eternal happiness to come; we lay
down our cause at your Highness feet, and thus commend our most humble suite
to your gracious and merciful consideration. Beseeching the Almighty to
bless and to honor your excellent Majesty, and your royal posterity, with
all the ornaments of Grace in this life, and of everlasting salvation hereafter
through Jesus Christ Amen.


