THE WORKS OF THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES

BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER of
the FAITH, etc.

PVBLISHED BY JAMES, BISHOP of Winton, and Deane of his MAJESTY'S CHAPEL
ROYAL.

1. REG. 3. VERSE. 12. Lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON PRINTED BY ROBERT BARKER AND JOHN BILL, PRINTERS TO THE KINGS most
Excellent MAJESTY. ANNO 1616.

Cum Priuilegio.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

ILLUSTRISS ET POTEN PR. CAROLUS MAGNAE BRITAN ET HYB PR EB ET AL DUx.
portrait of Prince Charles
TO THE THRICE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST EXCELLENT PRINCE, CHARLES, THE ONLY SON
OF OUR SOVEREIGN LORD THE KING.
SIR:
I Have humbly sought leave of his most Excellent MAJESTY, to present your
Highness with this Volume of his MAJESTY'S WORKS. I durst not but make the
Suite; and his MAJESTY could not well deny it. I will not say, that it had
been a piece of Injustice in the KING to have denied you this right: But I
dare say, it had been a point of Sacrilege in a Churchman to have stolen from
you such a portion of your Inheritance, which consists as much in the WORKS of
his Royal Virtues, as in the wealth of his mighty Kingdoms. Basilius wrote de
Jnstitutione Principis to his Son Leo; Constantinus to his Son Romanus;
Manuell to his Son Johannes; and Charles the fifth, to his Son Philip: The
works of the three former are extant both in Greek and Latin. His Majesty,
after the Example of those Emperors, and sundry other Kings, wrote his
ASILIKON-DOPON to Prince Henry, your Highness most worthy Brother: His part,
by GOD his Providence, is fallen to your Lot; and who may justly detain from
you the rest? The rule in Scripture is; that if the first fruits be holy, so is
the whole lump; and to whom the first was given, to him all the rest was due:
To your Highness therefore are these offered, as to the true Heir and Inheritor
of them. And that I may make you the better account of them; May it please your
Highness to understand, that of these Works, some were out before; some other
of them never saw light before; and others were almost lost and gone, or at
least abused by false copies, to their own disgrace and his Majesty's great
dishonor. Now it being the duty of all Deanes in their Churches, Dispersa
colligere; I thought it might sort well with the nature of my place in the
Chapel, wherein I have had the Honor so many years to serve his Majesty, to
gather these things that were scattered, and to bring to light those that too
long had lien in darkness, and to preserve in one body, what might easily have
bin lost in parts. In this Presentment, I must humbly crave of your Highness,
not to be mistaken in the true meaning and manner of it: For these Works come
not to you, as usually Books do to men of great Dignity, for Patronage and
Protection; for Protection is properly from injury; and that the Royal Author
of them is best able to right: But to you they come partly for preservation,
and for that the Disposition of Nature has made you more apt, and more
principally for a Pattern, and that not unfitly; since the Samplar is ever
more ancient then the Exemplification: And as in the preservation, the Son
has his advantage by succeeding; so in the Pattern, the Father by preceding
has his Prerogative. Let these Works therefore, most Gracious Prince, lie
before you as a Pattern; you cannot have a better: Neither does the Honor of
a good Son consist in any thing more, then in immitating the good Presidents
of a good Father; as we may very well perceive by the Scripture phrase, where
the usual Encomium of good Kings is, that they walked in the ways of their
Fathers. Al men see, how like the Pattern GOD and Nature have framed the
outward Lineaments: and who knows your Highness well, knows also, that the
inward Abilliments hold in the like proportion. The Philosophers say, that
Imitation proceeds from Inclination; And trewly, if your future Imitation be
answerable to your forward Inclination, in Religion, Learning and Virtue; your
Highness cannot come far short of your Pattern, nor yet of any of your
Predecessors that ever went before you: Which GOD grant together with the
length of many good and happy Days.

Your HIGHNESS Most humbly IA. WINTON.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AMongst the infinite number of great Volumes wherewith the world seems, as it
were, to be wayed down, there be few of them that were written at once, or
were at first published together. Writings as they consist of sundry natures;
so they will bear a diverse manner of Edition. To set forth an Art by pieces,
is to show you a body dismembered; the one is no more uncomely, then the other
is improper. To publish a History before it be at an end, is to turn the
Hower-glasse before it be run out; neither of both will give you a true
taste of the time. But writings of other Natures, Common places and
Controversies, Meditations and Commentaries, as they are for the most part,
accidentally taken up, so they are as occasionally set out: They crave no other
birth into the world, then they had conceptions in our brains, singly by us
conceived, and singly by themselves set out.

The different manner of GOD his setting forth of his own Works, may instruct
us in this point. His divine Wisdom held one course in his Natural Works,
an other in his Ceremonialls, Politicalls and Moralls. Jn his Naturalls he made
a mass at once, which speedily he diuersified into diverse forms. He gave a
kind of potentiall delineation of all things in that universal matter, which
presently he distinguished into diverse Species in perfection: But in his
Ceremonialls, he takes another course, he brings not them out of a Mass, but
into a Mass: He does not out of a Totum produce the parts, but out of the
parts make up the whole. For example; Jn the Ceremonialls, first he begins
with Sacrifice, long after he follows with Circumcision, then he fills a
Tabernacle with them; at last makes them full up in a Temple. Jn his
Politicalls, he begins with a paternall Government in a family, proceeds to
an Election of a Captain in an Army, as in Iosuah and the Judges, perfects it
by way of Succession in a settled Kingdom, as in Solomon and his Successors. Jn
his Moralls, he begins with the word out of his own mouth, proceeds with
the Tables written by his own fingers, follows on with the five Books penned
by Moses, till he make up the Canon perfect by a number of succeeding Prophets.

What we have from GOD in a president, it may well beseem us to practice; and
since his Books came out so far asunder, it is no reproach to any man,
though his Works come not forth together: for there is a reason for it in us
answerable in some proportion to that of the Works of GOD, for works of
Nature have their root from within us, and bring with them a radical kind of
virtue, that never suffers them to rest, till they have produced their fruit
to perfect form and perfection: Works of deliberation and Art, have their
foundation from without us, and give us occasion to work upon them, as our
fantasies think fittest for the present time: Hence proceeds it, that the
works of Nature have so few errors in them, those of Art so many; They of
Nature so constant, they of Art so variable; they of Nature so permanent, they
of Art so soon perish; they of Nature so well accepted and approved of all,
they of Art accepted or rejected, as it pleases the several apprehensions of
men to conceive of them.

Now, albeit the works of men be of Errors so full, of nature so different,
subject to so many Jnterpretations, published at so diverse times; Yet has it
been ever esteemed a matter commendable to collect them together, and
incorporate them into one Body, that we may behold at once, what diverse
Offsprings have proceeded from one brain, and how various Conceptions the wit
of man is able to afford the world. To instance in a few of them beginning a
little higher then the writings of ordinary Men. The servants of Hezekiah are
commended in Scripture for collecting together the Sentences of Solomon. Jesus
the son of Sirach is praised for searching out the Copies of his Grandfathers
works: But principally Ezra is had in great honor for setting in order the
whole Books of the Old Testament, and dividing them into Chapters and Verses,
which before were carried along in a scroule, by a continual Series, without
any distinction at all. S. John is reported to have searched out the Copies of
the three former Evangelists, and to have added his own for the fourth in that
order, as now they are extant. And the Primitive Church was curious to gather
together the Epistles of the Holy Apostles; which, they being not able by
reason of persecution perfectly to perform in every place, gave occasion to
aftertimes, to call the authority of so many of them into question.

But to descend; How are we bound to those, who have labored in setting out
the Counsels, and Works of the Fathers together? Jnsomuch, that we think our
selves as much bound to Eusebius and Hierom, and of later times to Peter Crab
and Erasmus and diverse others, who have labored in that kind, as we do
almost to the Authors themselves. Traian commended Plutark for gathering the
Apothegmes of wise men together. Constantinus the son of Leo, collected out
of all Histories, both in the East and West, one Corpus Historicum, which they
counted an inestimable Treasure. Justinian by the help of Tribonianus did the
like in the Laws. Gratian compiled the Decrees out of the Epistles of Popes,
Counsels and Fathers. Damascen collected into one body of Divinity, the
Sentences of the Greek Fathers; And Peter Lumbard 400. years after him by his
example did the like in the Latin Fathers. And how do we labor to recover
Books that are lost? The Books of Origin that amounted to six thousand, as
Epiphanius witnesses, were much labored for by Eusebius and others. The
Books of Cicero de Repub. were much sought for by Cardinal Poole; and great
sums of money have been spent to recover the lost Decades of Liuie. Wherefore
since it has been heretofore the practice of all aages, to collect the works
of Men of worth, and preserve them from perishing; to labor much in recovering
those that have been lost; to give to every child the own Father; to every
Book the true Author: (for there never had been half so many birds to have
flowen about the world with false feathers, if every Author had set out his
own works together in his own time,) J hope then it shall not be now a
matter of reproof in a Servant, to travail in the setting forth of the Works
of his Master; and for giving you that together, which before ye could hardly
get asunder; and for preserving that in a Mass from perishing, that might
easily be lost in a Mite.

But while I am collecting works one way, I hear others scattering words as
fast an other way, affirming, it had been better his Majesty had never
written any Books at all; and being written, better they had perished with the
present, like Proclamations, then have remained to Posterity: For say these
Men, Little it befitts the Majesty of a King to turn Clerk, and to make a
war with the pen, that were fitter to be fought with the Pike; to spend the
powers of his so exquisite an understanding upon paper, which had they been
spent on powder, could not but have prevailed ere this, for the Conquest of a
Kingdom. For a King, say they, to enter a Controversy with a Scholar, is, as
if he should fight a Combat with a Kerne; he does no more descend from his
Honor in the one, then he bringes upon himself Disgrace by the other. And
since that Booke-writing is grown into a Trade; It is as dishonorable for a
King to write books; as it is for him to be a Practitioner in a Profession. Jf
a King will needs write; Let him write like a King, every Line a Law, every
Word a Precept, every Letter a Mandate. Jn good truth, I have had my ears so
often dung through with these Objections and the like, as I know not whether I
conceived amiss of my self or no, thinking I had more ability to answer
these Calumnyes, then I had patience to hear them: And therefore having so fit
opportunity, J shall not let to deliver my opinion; Whether it may sort with
the Majesty of a King, to be a writer of Books, or no. First I could never
read, that there was any Law against it; and where we have no Law, the best is
to follow good Examples: And many Divines are of opinion, that examples that
are not contrary to any Precept, do bind us in practice, at least so far;
that though they do not enforce us to the doing, yet they warrant the deed
when it is done; And if Examples will serve the turn, we have Examples enough.

First to begin with the King of Kings God himself, who as he does all
things for our good; So does he many things for our Jmitation. It pleased his
Divine wisdom to be the first in this Rank, that we read of, that did ever
write. He wrote, and the writing was the writing, says Moses, of God; the
manner was after the manner of engrauing; the matter was in Stone cut into two
Tables, and the Tables were the work of God written on both sides. Divines
hold, that the Heart is the principal Seat of the Soul; which Soul of ours
is the immediate work of God, as these Tables were the immediate work of his
own fingers. The Stone, the express represent of the hardness of our heart;
the engrauing the work of God so deeply impressed, that it can never be
blotted out; the writing, the writing of the Law in our hearts; In two Tables,
for our double duty to God and Man; on both sides to take up our heart so
wholly, that nothing contrary to those Precepts should ever have any place in
our Souls. And certainly from this little Library, that God has erected
within us, is the foundation of all our Learning laid; So that people
Ciuillized do account themselves deprived of one of the best abilities of
nature, if they be not somewhat enabled by writing, to express their minds:
And there is no Nation so brutish or Barbarous, that have not invented one
kind of Character or other, whereby to convey to others their inward
Conceptions. From these Tables of God, we may come to the writing of our
Blessed Savior, which we may put in the next place, though not for order yet
for Honor. His Divine Majesty left behind him no Monument of writing,
written by his own hand in any external Book; for he was to induce and bring
in an other manner of the writing of the Law of Love; not in Tables of stone;
written not with incke and paper, but in the Tables of our fleshly hearts
written by the Spirit of the Living God: Yet did he once with his own finger,
write on the Pauement of the Temple of Jerusalem. What he writ, J will not now
discuss. S. Ambrose says he wrote this Sentence: Festucam in oculo fratris
cernis, trabem in tuo non vides. Beda thinks, he wrote that Sentence that he
spoke: He that is without sin, let him cast the first stone at her. Haymo
has a pretty Conceit: He thinks, he wrote certain Characters in the
Pauement, which the Accusers beholding might see, as in a glass, their own
wickedness; and so blushing at it went their ways. What ever it was, sure we
are, our Savior would have false accusations written in dust, to be trodden
under foot of them that pass by. But howsoever, I say, our Blessed Savior
did leave behind him no writing of his own hand; Yet we may not deny, but that
God in the old Testament and our Savior in the New, have left us many books
of their own inditements: For all the Books of holy Scripture were written by
inspiration; and the Prophets and Apostles were but their Amanuenses, and writ
only as they were led and actuated by the Spirit of God: So that we may not
make the Author of any of those Books any other then God Himself.

The old world before the flood will afford us no writings, neither did that
aage require them; for the lives of Men of that aage were living Libraries, and
lasted longer then the labors of Men do in this aage: Yet S. Jude does
insinuate somewhat of the writings of Enoch, who though he were not in Style a
King, Yet there is no reason to contend with him for that Title; for his
Dominion would bear it, standing Heire-Apparent to the greater part of the
world. Origin, Tertullian and Augustine report many things out of the
supposititous writings that went under his name: And Josephus and that Berosus,
that we have, tell us, that he erected two pillars, the one of Stone, the
other of Brick, wherein he wrote of the twofold destructions of the world,
the one by Water, the other by Fire: But howsoever that be true, it is very
probable, he wrote something of that matter, which though it perished with that
world; yet doubtless the memory thereof was preserved by Tradition unto the
days of the Apostles.

J will not here insist upon the writings of Moses, who was not only a Priest,
and a Prophet, but was, as himself records, amongst the people a King, and was
the first that ever received authority from GOD to write in Divinity: Neither
will J insist upon the Example of King David, in whose Psalms and Himnes, are
resounded out the praises of GOD in all the Churches; for that J find nothing
that these men writ, but what they writ as the Scribes of GOD, acted, as I said
even now, by GOD his Spirit, and not guided by their own. Yet I suppose we
may safely collect thus much from them, that if GOD had thought it a matter
derogatory to the Majesty of a King to be a Writer, he would not have made
choice of those, as his chief Instruments in this kind, who were principalls
in that other Order. J would easily believe, that such men as have had the
honor to be GOD his Penmen, should never vouchsafe to write any thing of
their own: for as we hold in a pious opinion, that the blessed Virgin, having
once conceived by the holy Ghost, would never after conceive by man; So surely
men, that had delivered nothing but the conceptions of that Spirit, should
hardly be drawn ever to set out any of their own labors. But we see the flat
contrary both in Samuel and Solomon, the one the greatest Judge, the other the
most glorious King, that ever that Kingdom had. Samuel, who writ by GODS
appointment, the greatest part of those two Books, that bear his name, writ
also by his own accord, a Book containing the Law of a King, or Institution
of a Prince, whereby he labored to keep the King as well from declining to
Tyranny, as the people from running into Liberty. Solomon, besides the Books
of Scripture, which remain, writ many likewise of his own accord, which are
lost: For to say nothing of his 3000. Parables, his 5000. Songs, that ingens
opus, as the Hebrews call it, of the nature of all things, Birds and Beasts,
Fowls and fishes, Trees and plants, from the Hysop to the Cedar: All these
were rather works to manifest humane wisdom, then Divine knowledge; written
rather for the recreation of his own spirit, then for the edification of the
Church: For I cannot conceive, but those Books would rather have taught us the
learning of Nature; (for which GOD has left us to the writings of men) then
edified us in the gifts of Grace; for which he has given us his own Book.
Neither let any man suggest, that these writings, that are lost, and, as they
say, were destroyed in the destruction of the Temple by the Babylonians, were
of the same authority, as those that do remain: for J can hardly be induced
to believe, that the writings, that were indicted by the Spirit of GOD, laid up
in the Arc, received into the Canon, read publicly in the Church, are utterly
perished. It is a desperate thing to call, either the providence of GOD, or the
fidelity of the Church in question in this point: For if those, that have been,
are perished; then, why may not these that remain as well be lost? which is
contrary to our Saviors assertion, that one Iota shall not perish till all be
fulfilled: Therefore J rather incline to think; that what ever was Scripture,
still is, then that any is lost: Neither is this opinion so curious to hold, as
the other is dangerous to believe; Better it is ever, to argue our selves of
ignorance, then to accuse GOD of improuidence: But if so much Scripture be
lost, as is alleged, farewell GOD his providence, farewell the fidelity of
the Church, to whose care was concredited the Oracles of GOD. Let us come to
the writings of Kings, where we shall not incur any danger of this
controversy; that were so far from being acted by GOD his Spirit; that they
were more like those Disciples of John, that had not heard whether there were
an Holy Ghost, or no; that knew nothing of GOD, though they felt never so much
of his Goodness; that never believed his Omnipotency, though they had never
so much experience of his Power.

To begin with the Assyrians, whose first Monarch was Nimrod, and his chief
City Babel: from his time to Sardanapalus the last of that Monarchy, there
was no King amongst them, that gave himself to Letters: for as their Kingdom
was founded in Tyranny, so they labored to keep it in Barbaritie; neither
must we ever look to see Learning flourish, where Tyranny bears the
Standerd; for Learning has no more a faculty to bring the mind to
understanding, then it has with it a power, that works the will to liberty;
neither of which, can ever consist with Tyranny: And therefore it is no
wonder, that this aage affoorded no learned Kings: for in that State, which
continued thirteen or fourteen hundred years, ye can scarce read of a
learned man: Therefore let either Histories or Poets paint that out for a
Golden aage, as they please, there was never any aage, that has left so little
memory of the Golden tincture of their Wits.

After the time of Sardanapalus, in the days of Phull, Tiglath-Philasar and
Salmanasar, of whom mention is made in Scripture, and to whom, as it is
thought, Jonas preached, and with whom some of the Prophets were conversant,
when as these Kings came into the land of Israel, as they did in the days of
Menahem, who gave to Phul-Belochus a thousand Talents of Silver for a Tribute;
And in the days of Hezechiah came Salmanasar and besieged Samaria three
years, and carried away a great part of the people of the Kingdom of Israel:
From that time forward, their Kings gave themselves to Letters; insomuch as in
the days of Nabucodonolor, who set up the Monarchy of the Babylonians, within
one hundred years of Salmanasar King of the Assyrians, learning was in great
estimation, and the Kings Court was a School for the best wits of the
Kingdom to be bred in, that they might be able to stand before the King
furnished with all learning and understanding. And if Stories do not
intollerably deceive us; Daniel and his companions instructed five great
Monarchs, as in the true knowledge of GOD, so in the understanding of all
excellent Arts and Sciences; Namely Nabuchodonosor, Euilmerodack, Baltazar,
Darius of the Medes, and Cyrus of the Persians: And it were no hard matter to
prove the truth of this out of Daniel himself.

Come to the Persians, who conuersed more with the Prophets, as with Ezra,
Nehemiah, Zachary, Malachy and the people that were in captivity; we shall
find them given much to Letters. Cyrus the first Monarch is recorded to have
written large Commentaries of all his diurnall Actions: amongst those Books are
found, says Esdras, the Edicts of reducing of the Jews to their Country: He
wrote diverse Letters for the same purpose to all the chief Cities of Asia;
some whereof, we have in the 11. of Josephus, Chap. the first. Many things
likewise are reported to have been written of Artaxerxes, Darius, and some
others of those Monarchs, as we may partly conceive by the Canonical Books
of Ezra and Nehemiah, and more by the Apocriphal- Esdras, who reports it to
have been a custom of those Kings, so much to delight in learning, and in the
sayings of wise men, that they used for an exercise in their greatest
Solemnities, to have solemn Orations made in the presence of the King and
State, of sundry purposes, which, whosoever performed to the liking of the King,
was rewarded with the highest Preferments, that so mighty a Monarch could
advance them unto.

Come we to the Graecians; and there we shall find Learning in the Tropicke of
Cancer at such a height, as it never was before, nor ever, that we read of,
since. And surely it is worth the observing, that when that extarordinary
Divine Light went out, humane Learning came in; and the end of the Prophets
was the beginning of the Poets: The last of the divinity of the one, the first
of the Philosophy of the other: for from the end of the Captivity till the
Coming of our Savior Christ, the space of four hundredth years and more, in
which there was no Prophet, that ever J read of, there were so many Orators,
Poets and Philosophers of such singular gifts in all kinds; as we are only
their Scholars since, and can never attain to the Excellency of our Master.
Jn this time Alexander the Great was as famous for his Learning and writings,
as he was for his Victories: He wrote to Antipater of all his own Actions in
Asia and in India, as Plutark reports in his Life. S. Ciprian in his Tractate
of the vanity of Jdoles, says, that Alexander the Great wrote Insigne Volumen
to his Mother; wherein he signifies unto her, how it was told him by a
certain Egyptian-Priest, that all the Gods of the Gentiles had been but men.
And S. Augustine also in his twelft Book De ciuitate Dei makes mention of
other of the writings of Alexander to Olimpias his Mother about the Succession
of the Monarchies.

Amongst the Kings of Syria, Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, writ many Books,
and sent them into Judea, about changing the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jews
into the Religion of the Grecians; The principal heads of his Books may be
found in the Books of Machabes and in Josephus. Amongst the Romans, which of
their Emperors did not advance his fame by Letters? Julius Caesar, besides
many other things, writ his Commentaries after the example of Cyrus. Octauius,
as Suetonius reports, writ many Volumes, The history of his own life,
Exhortations to Philosophy, Heroic Verses, Epigrams, Tragedies and diverse
other things; of whom I will only relate two Stories not impertinent to my
purpose. He is reported to have been a very diligent searcher out of all such
Books, as appertayned to the Roman-Ethnick-Religion. All the Books
Fatidicorum, of Fortune Tellers, that proceeded not from approved Authors both
of Greek and Latin, he cast in the fire, to the number of two thousand: Only
he reserved the writings of the Sibills, but with that choice, as he burnt all
such of them as he thought to be counterfeit. J relate this Story the rather,
for that J think it were a good President for our Augustus to follow, to make
a diligent search of all good and profitable Authors; As for all Heretical
Pamphlets, slanderous Libells and impertinent writings, to commit them to
Vulcane: for one of the maine means of corrupting this people in point of
Religion, proceeds from the free use of reading of all kind of writings
without any restraint.

The other Story of Augustus is that famous Inscription of his, which he made
to be set up in the Altar of the Capitol to our Savior Christ; of which
Nicephorus makes mention; as also Suidas in the word Augustus. Caesar Augustus
being proclaimed the first Emperor of Rome, having done many great things and
achiued great Glory and felicity; came to the Oracle of Apollo, and offering up
a Heccatomb, which is of all other the greatest Sacrifice; demanded of the
Oracle, who should rule the Empire after his decease; receiving no answer at
all, offered up an other Sacrifice, and asked with all, how it came to pass,
that the Oracle that was wont to use so many words, was now become so silent?
The Oracle after a long pause, made this answer: Me puer Hebraeus, Diuos, Deus
ipse gubernans
Cedere sede iubet, tristemque redire sub Orcum:
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abscedito nostris.


The Emperor receiving this answer, returned to Rome, erected in the Capitol
the greatest Altar that was there, with this Inscription: Ara primogeniti Dei.
Surely, our Augustus, in whose days our Blessed Savior Christ Jesus is come
to a full and perfect aage: As he was borne in the days of the other,
studying nothing at all to know, who shall rule the Scepter after him (for God
be praised, he is much more happy then was Augustus in a Blessed Posterity of
his own) but indeauoring, that CHRIST his Kingdom, may ever Reign in his
Kingdom, has consulted all the Oracles of GOD, and has found in them, that
there is but one only Altar to be erected to the only Son of GOD, who is
Blessed for ever; and therefore has set himself and bestowed much pains to
bid that Man of Sin, cedere sede, and redire sub Orcum, that has erected so
many Altars Athenian-like, to unknown Gods, making more prayers and
Supplications to supposed Saints, then ever the other did to Gods they knew
not. But to return, Claudius Caesar, that had so much wickedness in him, had
this good in him, that he writ many good Books. Suetonius reports, he writ
so many Books in Greek, as that he erected a School of purpose in
Alexandria, called after his own name, and caused his Books to be read
yearly in it: He writ in Latin likewise 43. Books, containing a History
from the murder of Caesar to his own time. There would be no end of the
reporting of the writings of the Heathen Emperors. That one example of
Constantine amongst the Christian Emperors shall suffice: Eusebius has written
curiously his Life, and is not sparing to report of his Learning; How many
Orations and discourses he made, exhorting his Subjects and servants to a good
and godly life; How many nights he passed without sleep in Meditations of
Divinity; His Speeches in the beginning and end of the Council of Nice; That
fomous Oration, Ad Sanctorum coetum, pronounced in Latin by him Self, after
translated into Greek by diverse, do show, how much Glory he gained by
Letters.

From these great Monarchs abroad, give me leave a little, to descend to our
own Kings at home. Alphredus King of the West Saxons, translated Paulus
Orosius, S. Gregory De pastorali cura, and his Dialogues into the English
tongue: He translated likewise Beda of the Acts of the English, and Boethius de
consolatione Philosophiae, David's Psalms, and many other things: He writ
besides a Book of Laws and Institutions against wicked Judges: He writ the
sayings of Wisemen, and a singular Book of the fortune of Kings, a collection
of Chronicles, and a Manuel of Meditations.

Ethelstanus (or Adelstan, as our Stories call him) Rex Anglorum, as Baleus
calls him, caused to be translated the Bible out of Hebrew into Saxon, and writ
himself a Book of Astrology, the Constitutions of the Clergy, corrected
many old Laws, and made many new.

King Edgar writ to the Clergy of England certain Constitutions and Laws,
and other things.

Henry the first, the youngest Son of the Conqueror, was brought up in the
University of Cambridge; and excelled so in the knowledge of all Liberal Arts
and Sciences, that to this day he does retain the name of Beau-Clerke.

Achaius King of the Scots, writ of the Acts of all his Predecessors. And
Kenethus King of the Scots, writ a huge Volume of all the Scottish Laws, and
like an other Justinian, reduced them into a Compendium.

James the first writ diverse Books both in English and Latin Verse: He writ
also, as Baleus says, De vxore futura.

Henry the eight writ of the Institution of a Christian man, and of the
Institution of youth: He writ also a defense of the 7. Sacraments against
Martin Luther; for which he was much magnified of the Pope, and all that
party; Jnsomuch as he was styled with the Title of Defensor fidei for that
work: And trewly it fell out well for the King, that he writ a Book on the
Popes side; for otherwise, he should have them rail on him for his writings as
freely, as they revile him for his Actions. For he writ two Books after that;
the one De auctoritate Regia contra Papam; the other Sententia de Concilio
Mantuano, as well written for the Style and Argument, as the other is: But
because they seem to breath an other breath, there is no Trumpet sounded in
their praise.

Edward the sixth, though his days were so short, as he could not give full
proof of those singular parts that were in him; yet he wrote diverse Epistles
and Orations both in Greek and Latin: He wrote a Treatise De fide to the Duke
of Somerset: He wrote a History of his own time, which are all yet extant
under his own hand, in the Kings Library; as Mr. Patrick Young, his Majesty's
learned and Industrious Bibliothecarius, has showed me; And which is not to
be forgotten, so diligent a hearer of Sermons was that sweet Prince, that the
notes of the most of the Sermons he heard, are yet to be seen under his own
hand with the Preachers name, the time, and the place, and all other
circumstances.

Queen Elizabeth our late Sovereign of blessed memory, translated the prayers
of Queen Katherine into Latin, French, and Italian: She wrote also a Century
of Sentences, and dedicated them to her Father. J have heard of her Translation
of Salustius; but I never saw it: And there are yet fresh in our memories the
Orations she made in both the Universities in Latin; her entertayning of
Ambassadors in diverse Languages; her excellent Speeches in the Parliament,
whereof diverse are extant at this day in Print. And to come a little nearer his
Majesty; The Kings Father translated Valerius Maximus into English; And the
Queen his Majesty's Mother, wrote a Book of Verses in French of the
Institution of a Prince, all with her own hand, wrought the Cover of it with
her needle, and is now of his Majesty esteemed as a most precious Jewel.

Therefore since we are compassed about with such a Clowd of Witnesses (albeit
these are but a little handful in comparison of the infinite multitude, that
might be produced,) Since we have the examples of all the Mightie-men of the
World, even from the beginning thereof unto this day; who have striuen as much
to get a Name for their writings, as fame for their doings; have affected as
much to be counted Learned as Victorious; and to be reputed of, as much for
their wise Sayings, as for their worthy Deeds; Why should it be thought a
thing strange in this time, that his Majesty, whom GOD has adorned with as
many rare perfections of Nature and Art, as ever he did any that we read of,
(I except such as were Divinely inspired) should lend the world a few leaves
out of the large Volumes of his Learning? J commend the wisdom of our
Adversaries, who having assayed all means, the wit of man is able to invent,
to incline his Majesty to like of their party; and finding by all their
Tricks, they have got no ground, would at last put his Majesty to silence, and
gain thus much of him, at least; that since he will do nothing for them; yet
that he would say nothing against them. Therefore they cry out against his
Majesty's writing, and upbraid him more for that he does write, then they do
for any thing that he has written: It is enough to wonder at, that Rex
scribit. These people are wise in their generation, and have learned by long
experience; that as the Kingdom of CHRIST is the Gospel of peace, so it has
been from the beginning spread more by the Pens of the Apostles, then by the
power of Princes; more propagated by the sweet writings of the ancient Fathers,
then it could be suppressed by the severe Edicts of Emperors; and of late,
their Kingdom has been more shaken by a poor Monk, then it has been able
to recover by the help of Mighty Monarchs. Therefore since the writings of
poor Scholars have so raised the Kingdom of CHRIST, and so discovered the
Mystery of Jniquitie; they do well to fear what may follow upon the Writings
of so great a King.

They live securely from bleeding by his Majesty's Sword; but they are not safe
from being blasted by the breath of his Majesty's Books. Jf they could bring
it about therefore, to calm and quiet his Majesty's Spirit from working upon
them that way; as they see his Majesty's sweetness to be far from drawing
of their bloods the other way, they would deem it a greater Conquest, then all
the conuersions of the Kings of the East and West Indies they tell us so many
tales of: For they look upon his Majesty's Books, as men look upon
Blasing-Starres, with amazement, fearing they portend some strange thing, and
bring with them a certain Influence to work great change and alteration in
the world: Neither is their expectation herein deceived; for we have seen with
our eyes, the Operation of his Majesty's Works in the Consciences of their men
so far, as from their highest Conclaue to their lowest Cells, there have
been, that have been converted by them; and that in such number, as we want
rather means to maintain them, then they minds to come to us. But to conclude
this point, that Kings may write; Give me leave to offer you this Meditation.

How many are the ways that men do invent to perpetuate their Memory!
Insomuch, that mortall-men have made themselves Gods, when they were dead, that
they might be adored, as if they were alive. Wherein, is the Impetus of Nature
so strong, as in the affection that propogates to Posterity? Wherefore serve
Pictures, but to continue our features? Why do men bestow so much cost in
sumptuous Buildings, but to leave a Monument of their Magnificence? To what end
do we erect Holy-houses and Hospitalls, but to possess men's minds with the
Devotion of our Souls? And shall we bless a King, when we behold him in his
Posterity! Shall we admire his features, when we contemplate them in his
Pictures! Shall we wonder at his Magnificence, when we gaze upon it in his
stately Edifices! and may we not as well be ravished, when we see his sharp
Wit, his profound Judgment, his infinite Memory, his Excellent affections in
his admirable Writings? Certainly it is a perverseness to esteem a man least,
for that whereby he lives the longest; to value him more for the outward work
of his hand, then for the inward operation of his mind; to esteem him more
for that which instructs but little, then for that which shall edify for ever.
What now remains of Caesar so famous as his Commentaries? What of Cicero, as
his Orations? How comes Aristotle to be of more authority then Alexander?
Seneca, then Nero? The Triumphs and Victories of the one are vanished; the
Virtues of the other remain in their perfect vigor: And though all other
Monuments by time consume and come to nothing; yet these by time, gain
strength and get authority; and ever the more ancient, the more Excellent.

Having now delivered my opinion, that J think it neither unlawful nor
inconvenient for a King to write, but that he has the Liberty that other men
have, if he can get the leisure; to show his abilities for the present, to
perpetuate his Memory to Posterity; to advance his praise before his own
People, and gain Glory from others; but especially to give Glory unto GOD.

J will crave leave to descend to an other Consideration: for it may be, there
will not be so much fault found with a King for writing, as for the matter or
Subject whereof he treates: For Personages of their eminent Degree and State,
must not spend their pains on poor purposes; nor write so much to try their
wits on triuiall things, as to win themselves Honor by the Excellency of
their subject. Jndeed, if I were worthy to advise a King, he should meddle
very sparingly, and but upon important Causes, with Polemicalls: He should not
often fight but in the field; for put the case a King writ never so modestly,
that there be not in a whole Book one word ad hominem, nor any touch of his
Adversary in any personal infirmity; yet J know not how it comes to pass,
that in all Controversies, a solid answer to an argument, is a very
sufficient occasion to make an Adversary wonderful angry. And so long as
there are diversity of Opinions, there will never want matter for Confutations.
And in these Replications the person of a King is more exposed and lies more
open, then the person of a poor Scholar can do; for as he is a far greater
mark, so he may far more easily be hit: And though they miss him and can
hit upon nothing justly to be reprehended in him; yet they do think it
Operaepretium, to make a Scarre in the face of a King; Whereas on the contrary,
if a King do write of Piety or Devotion, compile a History, give Precepts of
Policy, handle Moralls, or treat of some rare Experiences of Nature; we do
in these things commend his Judgment, admire his parts without any evil
cogitation against his Person. There can hardly be given a more viue Example in
this case, then is to be found in the Writings of his Majesty. When the King
had published his Basilicon-Doron, a Book so singularly penned; that a
Pomegranat is not so full of kernells, as that is of Excellent Counsels: What
applause had it in the world? How did it inflame men's minds to a love and
admiration of his Majesty beyond measure; Insomuch that coming out just at
the time his Majesty came in, it made the hearts of all his people as one Man,
as much to Honor him for Religion and Learning, as to obey him for Title and
Authority; and gave us then a taste, or rather the first fruits, of that we
have since reaped a plentiful Harvest of, by his Majesty's most prudent and
Gracious Government over us. The like I may say of his Majesty's Demonologie; a
rare piece for many Precepts and Experiments, both in Divinity and Natural
Philosophy. Jn these, there was nothing heard of, but Sunshine and
faire-weather; every countenance sweet and smiling upon them: But as soon as
his Majesty dealt against the Pope, took the Cardinal in hand, made the
world see the usurped power of the one, and Sophistry of the other; Good Lord,
what a stir we had; what roaring of the wild Bulls of Basan, what a
commotion in every Country; Jnsomuch, that I think, there is scarce a People,
Language or Nation in Christendom, out of which his Majesty has not received
some answer or other; either by way of resuting, or at least by railing: So
that, had not the King contemned and made himself sport and recreation by such
kind of Reuelling, rather then been moved to passion; It could not have been
but a marvelous perturbation to a Prince of so exquisite sense and
understanding. But what of all this? Shall we wish his Majesty had not fought
with beasts at Ephesus, stopped the roaring of the Bull, nor encountered the
Cardinal? Trewly when J think upon the wonderful abuses, and Hyperbolicall
indignities his Majesty has received from these men; I am somewhat of that
mind: But when on the other side, J consider his Majesty's zeal for to
maintain the cause of GOD and Right of Kings; his singular dexterity to do
it; the blessing of GOD that has followed upon his so doing of it; I cannot
but change my opinion, and be of another mind. And the better to induce you
to be of my mind; I will make unto you a true Relation of his Majesty's
entering into this business, and then leave it to your consideration; whether
there were not a Divine hand, that led his into it, or no. It is the Speech of
our Blessed Savior, that there is nothing hid, that shall not be known; and
what is spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the Light: This his Majesty as
himself confesses, found true in the coming forth of one of his Books; and
I think it may be found as true in the coming forth of some other of them.
For after the Pope had put forth his Breues, and the Cardinal had sent his
Letters to the Archpriest; the one to enjoin the People not to take the Oath
of Allegiance, affirming they could not take it with safety of their Salvation;
the other to reprove the Archpriest for that he had taken it, and to draw him
to a penitencie for so foul a Lapse: His Majesty like as became a Prudent and
a Religious Prince, thought it not meet, that these things should pass for
current, but that it was expedient his People should know, that the taking of
this Oath was so far from endangering their Souls, as that it intended
nothing but civil Obedience, and without touching any point of their
conscience, made the State secure of their Allegiance. To perform this work,
his Majesty thought the Bishop of Winchester that then was, a very fit man,
both for his singular Learning, as for that he had long labored in an Argument
not much of a diverse nature from this: Whereupon his Majesty calling for pen
and incke, to give my L. of Winchester directions, how and in what manner to
proceed in this Argument, I know not how it came to pass; but it fell out
true, that the Poet says, -- Amphora coepit
Institui, currente rota, post vrceus exit.
For the Kings Pen ran so fast, that in the compass of six days, his
Majesty had accomplished that, which he now calls his Apology; which when
my Lord of Canterbury that then was, and my Lord of Elie had perused, being
indeed delivered by his Majesty but as brief Notes, and in the nature of a
Minute to be explicated by the Bishop in a larger Volume; yet they thought it
so sufficient an Answer both to the Pope and Cardinal, as there needed no
other: Whereupon his Majesty was persuaded, to give way to the coming of it
forth, but was pleased to conceal his Name: And so have we the Apology
beyond his Majesty's own purpose or determination.

After that the Apology was out, his Majesty diverse times would be pleased
to utter a Resolution of his; that if the Pope and Cardinal would not rest in
his answer, and sit down by it; take the Oath as it was intended for a point
of Allegiance and Civil Obedience; He would publish the Apology in his own
name with a Preface to all the Princes in Christendom; wherein he would
publish such a Confession of his Faith, persuade the Princes so to vindicate
their own Power, discover so much of the Mystery of Jniquitie unto them; as
the Popes Bulls should pull in their horns, and himself wish he had never
meddled with this matter. The Cardinal contending against the Apology, his
Majesty confirmed his Resolution, and with the like Celerity, in the compass
of one week, wrote his Monitory-Preface: for as Hirtius said of Caesar's
Comentaries, Qua foelicitate they were done, let others judge; but Qua
celeritate, J can tell: And being so written, published it and the Apology in
his own Name; and made good his word, sent it to the Emperor and all the
Kings and free Princes in Christendom.

Now having made this Relation, wherein J have delivered nothing but truth;
Let me offer unto you some few things worthy Consideration.

First, that upon the coming forth of that Book, there were no States, that
disauowed the Doctrine of it in that point of the Kings power; And the
Venetians mainetained it in their writings, and put it in Execution; The
Sorbons maintained it likewise in France.

Secondly, their own writers, that opposed it, so ouerlashed, as they were
corrected and castigated of men of their own Religion; Becanus his Book
corrected by the Cardinals of Rome; Bellarmines Book burnt in Paris; Suarez
his Answer burnt also in France. As for the Raylers, I leave them to God his
Judgment, whose hand has been upon the most of them.

Thirdly, his Majesty's Confession of faith, has been so generally approved,
as it has converted many of their party: And had it not been (as J have been
informed by diverse) for the Treatise of Antichrist, many more would easily
have been induced, to subscribe to all in that Preface.

Fourthly, Kings and Princes have by his Majesty's Premonition, had a more
clear insight, and a more perfect discovery into the Injury offered them by
the Pope in the point of their temporal Power, then ever they had; Jnsomuch,
as that point was never so thoroughly disputed in Christendom, as it has been
by the occasion of his Majesty's Book.

Fifthly and lastly, for the point of Antichrist; I have heard many confess,
that they never saw so much light given to that Mystery, never descerned so
much truth by the uniform consent of the Text, and strength of Interpretation
of places, as they have done by his Majesty's Book. So that, though
Controversies be fitter subjects for Scholars ordinarily, then for Kings; Yet
when there was such a necessity in undertaking, and such a success being
performed; I leave it to the world to judge, whether there were not a special
hand of GOD in it, or no. Now since I have begun with this point of
Antichrist, J will make bold to proceed a little with his Majesty's Paraphrase
upon the Revelation, wherein that Treatise of Antichrist is principally
grounded.

His Majesty's singular understanding in all points of good Learning is not
unknown: But yet above all other things, GOD has given him an understanding
Heart in the Interpretation of that Book, beyond the measure of other men: For
this Paraphrase, that leads the way to all the rest of his Majesty's Works,
was written by his Majesty before he was twenty years of aage; and therefore
justly in this Volume has the first place, the rest following in order
according to the time of their first penning. Anciently Kings drempt dreams,
and saw visions; and Prophets expounded them: So with King Pharaoh and Joseph
in Egypt; So with Nabuchodonosor and Daniel in Babylon. Jn this aage, Prophets
have written Visions, and Kings have expounded them. GOD raised up Prophets to
deliver his People from a temporal captivity in Egypt and Babylon, by the
Jnterpretation of the one; And GOD has in this aage stirred up Kings to
deliver his People from a Spiritual Egypt and Babylon, by the Interpretation
of the other. It is an obseruable thing, that GOD never made his People any
great promise, but he added unto his promise a famous Prophecy. Three great
promises we read of, that run through all the Scriptures. The first of the
Messiah; the second of the land of Canaan; the third of the Kingdom of Heaven:
To these three promises, are reduced all the Prophecies. Of the promise of the
Messiah, prophesied all the Prophets from the fall of the first Adam, to the
coming of the second: Of the promise of the Land of Canaan, prophesied Jacob
and Joseph, and the rest, from the promise made to Abraham, to the possessing
of it by Iosuah and the children of Israel: Of the promise of the Kingdom of
Heaven, made by our Savior CHRIST', prophesied the Apostles; principally S.
Paul, and S. John in the Revelation. Now though all were to lay hold on the
promises; yet few were able to understand the Prophecies. And surely, though
all the people of GOD are to lay hold on the promises of that Glorious Kingdom
described in that Book; yet few are able to understand the Prophecies therein
contained, comprehending in them a perfect History and State of the Church,
even from the destruction of Jerusalem, till the consummation of the whole
world. Yet this I think, I may safely say; That Kings have a kind of interest
in that Book beyond any other: for as the execution of the most part of the
Prophecies of that Book is committed unto them; So it may be, that the
Interpretation of it, may more happily be made by them: And since they are the
principal Instruments, that GOD has described in that Book to destroy the
Kingdom of Antichrist, to consume his State and City; I see not, but it may
stand with the Wisdom of GOD, to inspire their heart to expound it; into
whose hands he has put it to excute, until the LORD shall consume both him
and it with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish it with the brightness
of his coming: For from the day that S. John writ the Book to this present
hour; I do not think that ever any King took such pains, or was so perfect
in the Revelation, as his Majesty is; which will easily appear by this
Paraphrase, by his Majesty's Meditation on the 20. Chap. and his Monitorie
Preface. It was my purpose to have past through all his Majesty's Books; to
have expressed the Argument and the occasion of their writing; But I find by
that J have already said, I should be over tedious unto you. This therefore in
general; They are all worthy of a King, and to be kept to Posterity: For if
Ovid could imagine, that no time should eat out the memory of his
Metamorphoseis, which were but fictions; J hope no time shall see an end of
these Books, that carry in them so much divine truth and light. And as in this
first work of the Paraphrase, his Majesty has showed his Piety; So in this
last Pearl (I mean his Majesty's Speech in the Starr-Chamber) his Majesty
has showed his Policy: The first shows, he understands the Kingdom of GOD;
this last, that he as well apprehends the State of his Kingdoms in this
World: The first shows him to have a large Portion in that of Heaven; and
this last shows him to have a great Power and experience in these Kingdoms
he has on earth. Therefore, let these men, that delight so much in Detraction
and to vilify him, whom GOD has exalted; and to shed his blood, whose Soul
GOD has bound up in the Bundle of life; Let them, J say, write what ever the
Subtilty of the old Serpent can put into their heads, or the Malice of Satan
infuse into their hearts; Let them speak, what the poison of Aspes is able to
put into their lips; they are not all able to make his Majesty to appear
less then he is, nor to show, that ever they had of theirs a King so
accomplished. It is true, that we have not had many Kings in this Kingdom of
our Profession: But for those we have had, this Island of ours never saw the
like, either for parts of Nature, gifts of Learning or Graces of Piety.

The little time of life, that God lent to King Edward, must needs lessen his
praises; But never did there appear beginnings of more rare perfection, then
in him.

The length of Queen Elizabeth's days, together with the felicity of her time,
was not only a Glory to her own People, but a wonderment to the World, even
our Adversaries, as Moses said, being Judges. And praised be GOD, the present
time passes a long with the like felicity and much more Security: for let me
recount a little, for the Glory of GOD and encouragement of his Majesty, to
go on in his happy Course begun, the Blessings of GOD we receive by him;
And then let our Adversaries tell us, whether we be a miserable People or no,
as some of late have gone about to persuade us. Neither do J stand in fear of
any man's reprehension; for J will speak nothing but truth, and I have my
President from GOD his own Book; wherein the good Acts of every good King
are to their eternal praises trewly recounted.

First to begin with Religion, as the General to the Army: Of all Gods
Blessings we have it without any alteration or change continued unto us. His
Majesty's first Care was for the Confirmation of the Gospel: for at his
Majesty's first coming in; who knows not the endeauours of men, to have made
a change, either to the Papists, or to the Puritanes? His Majesty therefore,
to quiet the State and Peace of the Church, called a Conference at
Hampton Court; where passing over the one, as being never in his heart to give
the least way unto; He so tempered the other, as the Harmony has been the
better ever since.

The Religion thus ratified; His Majesty's next Care was for the Translation of
the Bible, it being the ground of our Religion: His Majesty was desirous his
People should have it in as much perfection, as the Jndustrie and Labors of the
best Learned were able to afford it them.

Having done what was necessary for the Spiritual part of the Church, his
Majesty took into consideration the Temporal State thereof: No sooner came
the Parliament, but finding what spoil had been made of the Lands thereof in
the time of his Predecessors, by a liberty they had to take the Lands of the
Church for a longer Term then others could do; Cut himself off from that
liberty, and equalled himself to a common person in the taking of any State
in the Churches Lands.

When his Majesty had done this in England, he looked back into Scotland, and
reforming the State of the Church there, as far as in his Princely-Wisedome
he thought convenient for the time; restored the Bishops there, as to their
Spiritual Keys; so to their temporal Estates, though it were to the great
loss and damage of his own Reuennue and Crown.

From Scotland his Majesty came to Ireland, that forlorn Kingdom both for
Temporal and Spiritual estate, till be looked into it: There his Majesty has
reduced the Bishoppricks, not only to their old Rents; but added unto them many
new Reuennues; so that many places there are answerable to the best Livings
here: Neither has his Care been only on these high places of the Church, but
has descended to the lowest in the same, having both protected the Benefices
from being raised to any higher Tax, and hindered all courses, that might give
his Clergy molestation or trouble.

His Majesty's Bounty has not been wanting to Colleges and Hospitalls,
having parted with his own Tenures, to give them power of larger Indowments;
whereby there has been works of more sumptuousnes and cost done in his
Majesty's time, then there has been in any one aage before.

J may not forget one thing, that since his Majesty's coming to this Crown,
he has never put into his Coffers the mean proffitts of any Ecclesiastical
living, but has been a Fidus-Depositarius, and ever given them to the next
Jncumbent.

Let me descend a little from these works of Piety to Peace. Never has there
been so universal a Peace in Christendom since the time of our Savior
Christ, as in these his Days: And I dare say, as much, if not more, by the
procurement of his Majesty, then by any other earthly means in this world. A
Peace (to let foreign parts pass) so entertained at home; that in his
Majesty's three Kingdoms, apt enough by constitution, and not unaccustomed by
practice to be at variance, there has been no Civil dissension at all. With
Peace GOD has given us Plenty: So that, if Peace and Plenty have not made us
too too wanton, I know not what we want. Neither is there any crying out for
lack of Justice in our Courts; for never was there Justice administered with
more liberty from the King, nor more vprightnes from the Judges; And yet in the
free dispensation of Justice, Mercy did never more triumph. If this be to be
miserable, J know not what on earth they call Happiness: GOD continue these
still unto us; and then, let them call Happiness, what they please.

But I know wherefore all is miserable; because there is no more Mercy showed
to their Catholics.

J will put it as a Crown upon all his Majesty's Mercies: There was never
King, that had so great a cause given him, that ever took so little blood,
extending his Mercy to all, that were not personal workers in that
Powder Plot: And before that you had hatched that Monster, neither was the
person or purse of any your reputed Catholics touched. And since that time,
you may do well to complain of your Miseries; but the Church and Comonwealth
both, do travail and groan under the burden of your disobedience: But the
worst J wish you, is, that at length by his Majesty's long Patience, you may
be drawn to Repentance; for as we are come out from you, lest we should be
partakers of your plagues; so we pray for you, that you may come in to us, that
you may be participants of our felicities.

To Conclude this Preface: GOD has given us a Solomon, and GOD above all
things gave Solomon Wisdom; Wisdom brought him peace; Peace brought him
Riches; Riches gave him Glory. His wisdom appeared in his words and Works:
his Peace, he preserved by the power of his Army: His riches he raised, as by
his Reuennue, so by the Trade of his Navy: His Glory did accrue from them all.
Now, as in these, GOD exalted him beyond all the Kings that ever were, or
should be after him; So had he in other things Humiliations not far behind
the proportion of his Exaltations; the fearefullest fall, that the Scripture
affords an Example of; the most unchaste life and immoderate excess of Women,
that we read of; the weakest Posterity for Wisdom and Government, that we
find in all the Line of his Succession. GOD would have it so, that he should
no more be set out, as a Type of the Glory of his own Son in the felicity of
his State one way, then he would have him proposed as a pattern of Humane
frailty an other way. Therefore, though we may not approach him in his Typical
State; yet GODS Name be blessed, that has given us to go far beyond him in
his personal Condition: For we have already, blessed be GOD, seen the
Constancy and perseverance of his Majesty in his Holy Profession, without any
Eclipse or Shadow of change, longer then we are well able to deduce the whole
life and reign of Solomon. We have not the Daughter of Pharao an Idolatrous
King; nor fear we strange women to steal away his heart from the Service of
GOD: But a Queen, as of a Royal, so of a Religious Stock, professing the
Gospel of Christ with him; A Mirror of true Modesty, a Queen of Bounty,
both beloved and admired of all his People: A Posterity that we need not fear
for folly in the one Sex, nor for leuitie in the other; Both which made
Solomon speak so much, (as the Jews say) in his Proverbs, of a foolish
son, because his own was not wise, and of wanton Women, because he feared
the vanity of his own Daughters. But GOD has left his Majesty a Son; a
Prince, as in outward Liniaments, so in inward Abiliments, (I need say no more)
an Alter-Idem, a second-Selfe; A Daughter, a Princess of that Piety, singular
virtue and Modesty; as makes her both beloved at home and admired abroad. J
have done: Only I desire the Readers of these Works, to pray to GOD, that as
he has so far advanced us, as to bestow upon us, with the Heavenly
Treasures of his truth, the riches of his earthly Jewels in so Sacred a King,
so admired a Queen, so hopeful a Prince, so virtuous a Princes; He would for
his Mercies sake, for his Sons sake, continue this the Light of his
Countenance upon us in them and their Posterity, till the coming of that
Kingdom, which never shall have end. AMEN.

Thine in the Lord, IA. WINTON.

THE SEVERAL TREATISES ACCORDING TO THE TIME WHEREIN THEY WERE WRITTEN, AND
THEIR PLACE IN THIS Collection, etc.
A PARAPHRASE upon the Revelation. Page 7. Two Meditations; The First upon the
7. 8. 9. and 10. Verses of the 20. Chap. of the Revelation. Page 73 Second upon
the 25. 26. 27. 28. and 29. Verses of the 15. Chapter of the first Book of the
Chronicles. Page 81
Daemonologie, First Book. Page 94 Second Book. Page 108 Third Book. Page
123.
Basilicon-Doron, First Book. Page 148 Second Book. Page 155 Third Book.
Page 180.
The true Law of Free Monarchies AnonymOs. Page 193 A Counter-blast to Tobacco
AnonymOs. Page 214 A Discourse of the Powder Treason AnonymOs. Page 223. An
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, first set out AnonymOs, and afterward
published with the Praemonition under His Majesty's own name. Page 247 A
Praemonition to all Christian Monarchs, Free Princes and States, written both
in English and Latin by his Majesty. Page 289 A Declaration against Vorstius,
written by His Majesty first in French, after translated into English by His
Majesty's leave. Page 349 A Defense of the Right of KINGS, against Cardinal
Perron, written by His Majesty in French, and thereafter translated into
English by His Majesty's leave. Page 392 Five Speeches; THE First in
Parliament, ANNO 1603. Page 485. Second in Parliament, ANNO 1605. Page 499.
Third at White Hall, ANNO 1607. Page 509. Fourth at White Hall, ANNO 1609. Page
527. Fifth in the StarreChamber. ANNO 1616. Page 549.

THE EPISTLE TO THE WHOLE CHVRCH MILITANT, in whatsoever part of the Earth.
TO whom could I have so fitly directed (Christian Readers) this Paraphrase of
mine upon the Revelation, as unto you, who are the very and true posterity of
those Churches, to whom the Book it self was dedicated, and for whose
instruction and comfort the said Epistle was endited by the Holy Spirit, and
written by that great Theologue JOHN the Apostle, whom our Master beloved
dearly? J doubt not but it will seem strange to many, that any of my aage,
calling, and literature, should have meddled with so obscure, Theological, and
high a subject: But let my earnest desire (by manifesting the Truth,) as well
to teach my self as others, serve for excuse; considering also that where
diverse others in our aage, have meddled with the interpretation of this Book,
pressing with preoccupied opinions, only to wrest and conform the meaning
thereof to their particular and private passions; J by the contrary protest,
that all my travails tend to square and conform my opinions to the true and
sincere meaning thereof: Which causes moved me to undertake this work; not
thereby to despise infinite others, who to the glory of God, and great comfort
of his Church, has given it a great light already, but rather that by often
perusing and dew considering thereof, whereto this work has led me, J might
be the better acquainted with the meaning of this Book, which J esteem a
special cannon against the Heretical wall of our common adversaries the
Papists: whom I would wish to know, that in this my Paraphrase upon it, J have
used nothing of my own conjecture, or of the authority of others, but only
have interpreted it, in that sense which may best agree with the method of the
Epistle, and not be contradictorie to it self: The meaning whereof I expound,
partly by it self, and partly by other parts of the Scriptures, as the work
it self will bear witness: And therefore this one thing J must crave of our
Adversaries, that they will not refute any part of my Interpretation, till they
find out a more probable themselves, agreeing with the whole context, and cum
serie temporum; and where their consciences bear them witness that J speak
the Truth, that they will yield unto it, and glorify God therein, and this is
all the reward I crave for my pains. But of one thing I must forewarne you
(Christian Readers) to wit, that ye may understand, that it is for the making
of the Discourse more short and facile, that I have made JOHN to be the Speaker
in all this Paraphrase; and not that I am so presumptuously foolish, as to have
meant thereby, that my Paraphrase is the only true and certain exposition of
this Epistle, rejecting all others: For although through speaking in his
person, I am only bounded and limited to use one, and not diverse
interpretations, of every several place; yet I condemn not others, but rather
allow them to interpret it diversely, so being, it agree with the analogy of
faith, with the method of the Text, and cum serie temporum, as I said before:
for those three being observed, it may fall out that diverse, diversely expound
one place, and yet all be according to the truth, and very meaning of the
Spirit of God, as may easily be proved by the Text it self: For in the 17.
Chapter the Angel expounding to John, the seven heads of the beasts that came
out of the Sea, he says the seven heads which thou saw upon the beast are
the seven Hills, and they are also seven Kings: Here ye see one thing is
expounded in two very far different fashions, and yet both true; And
therefore let wise men take their choice in these things, observing always
these rules I have spoken of; as specially for example; This Hebrew word Arma
geddon in the 16. Chapter and sixth Phiale, although I expound it to signify
destruction by deceit, as composed of (...) Gnarma and Geddon which may very
well agree with the History, because it is the name of the place, says John,
where the wicked being assembled together by the alluring and deceit of Satan,
and his three spirits of Devils to make war with the faithful, were all
destroyed by God, and so their destruction came, and was procured by deceit;
Yet others interpret it to signify destruction by waters, as composed of (...)
Harma and Geddon, which also may very well agree with the History. For waters
indeed in this Book signify often many people and Nations, as appears by the
very Text in the 17. Chapter; And others take it to be an allusion to the
destruction that Joshua made of Gods enemies upon the hill of Mageddon, and
therefore to be composed of (...) Harr, which is called a Hill and Mageddon,
which may also very well agree with the History.

And as J speak of this, so J speak the like of Gog and Magog in the 20.
Chapter, and of all other ambiguous places in this Book.

It rests then that what ye find amiss in this Paraphrase, ye impute it to
my lack of years and learning; and what ye find worthy to be allowed in it,
that ye attribute the full praise thereof to GOD, to whom only all praise
appertains.

Farewell.
THE ARGUMENT OF THIS WHOLE EPISTLE.
THIS Book or Epistle of Revelation, was called in doubt, as well for the
incertaintie of the Author, as also for the canonicalnesse of the Book it
self, by sundry of the ancients, and specially by Eusebe; For soluing whereof
I need not to insist, since it is both received now of all Christians, and also
diverse of the Neoteriques, in special Beza in his Preface upon it, has
handled that matter sufficiently already; So that this doubt only rests now in
men, that this Book is so obscure and allegorique, that it is in a manner
unprofitable to be taught or interpreted; Whereunto I will shortly make
answer, and then go forward to set down the method of the same: And
therefore to make a deduction from the beginning, let us understand in what
several or principal parts the whole Scriptures may be divided in; and then
which of them this Book is. How soon Adam being made perfect in his Creation,
and having the choice of Life and Death, Good and Evil, did by his horrible
defection make choice of Death, and cast off Life, and by that means infected
his whole posterity with double sin, to wit, Original and Actual, God
notwithstanding had such a Love to mankind, as being his most Noble
workmanship, and Creature, made to his own Likeness and Image, that he
selected a Church amongst them, whom first because of their weakness and
incredulity, he with his own mouth taught, and next instructed and raised up
notable men amongst them to be their Rulers, whom he endued with such excellent
gifts, as not only their example in life preached, but also by Miracles they
strengthened and confirmed their Faith: But lest this ministry of men should
make them to depend only upon their mouths, forgetting Him, and making Gods
of them, he at length out of his own mouth gave them his Law, which he caused
them to put in Writ, and retain still amongst them; And then lest they should
forget and neglect the same, he raised up godly Rulers, as well Temporal, as
Spiritual, who by their holy lives and working of Miracles, revived and
strengthened the Law in their hearts. But seeing, that notwithstanding all
this, they cast themselves headlong in the gulf of vices (such is the
unthankful and repining Nature of Man,) he raised up Prophets, as especially
Jeremy and Daniel, to accuse them of their sins, and by Visions to forewarne
them of the times to come, whereby the godly might turn and arm themselves,
and the wicked might be made inexcusable. And thus much for the Old Testament.
But then God seeing that notwithstanding this, there crept in such a general
corruption amongst them, that scarce one might be found that bowed not his knee
to Baal; He then by his unsearchable Wisdom incarnated his Eternal Son
and Word THE LORD JESUS, who by his death and Passion accomplished the faith of
the Fathers; whose Salvation was by the believing in him to come, as also made
an open and patent way of Grace to all the world thereafter: And then as upon a
new world, and a new Church, Gods Fatherly care to Mankind was renewed, but in a
more favorable form, because he looked upon the Merits of his dear Son:
Then, first Christ with his own mouth did instruct men, and confirmed his
Doctrine by Miracles, and secondly raised up the Apostles to give the Law of
Faith, confirming it by their lives and Miracles: And last, that
notwithstanding this Defection was beginning to creep in again, he inspired
one of them, to wit, JOHN to write this Book, that he might thereby, even as
Jeremy and Daniel did in the old Law, as well rebuke them of their sins, as
by forewarning them, to arm them against the great tentations that were to
come after. Then of it self it proves, how profitable this Book is for this
aage, seeing it is the last Revelation of Gods will and Prophecy, that ever
was, or shall be in the World: For we shall have no more Prophesies nor
Miracles hereafter, but must content our selves with the Law and Prophecies
already given, as Christ in his Parable of Lazarus and the rich man teaches.
Now as to the Method, this holy Epistle is directed to the seven Churches of
Asia Minor, whom he names and writes to particularly in the first three
Chapters of the same, and under their Names to all their true Successors, the
whole Church Militant in the World. The whole matter may be divided in six
parts, to wit, The praise or dispraise of every one of these Churches,
according to their merits wherein they merit good or evil, what way they ought
to reform themselves, and this is contained in the three first Chapters: And
to make them inexcusable, in case they slide again, he shows the estate of
the whole Church Militant in their time; he tells them what it shall be until
the end of the World, and what it shall be when it is Triumphant and immortal
after the dissolution: These three last parts are declared by Visions in the
rest of the Epistle, first the present estate of the Church then, and what it
should be thereafter unto the later day, is summarily declared by the first
six of the seven Seals: in the sixth and seventh Chapters, and afterward more
at large by the seven Trumpets that came out of the seventh Seal in the 8. 9.
10. 11. Chapters: And because through Tirannie and abuse of the Popedom,
Popery is the greatest temptation since Christ's first coming, or that shall be
unto his last; therefore he specially insists more at large and clearly, in the
declaration and painting forth of the same, by Vision of the woman in the
wilderness, and of the Beasts that rose out of the sea and the earth in the
12. 13. and 14. Chapters: And then to comfort men that might otherwise
despair, Chap. 15.16.
because of the greatness of that temptation, he declares by the next
following Vision of the Phials, what plagues shall light upon the Pope and his
followers: Next, he describes him again, Chap. 17.18.19. Chap. 20.
far clearer then any time before, and likewise his ruin, together with the
sorrow of the Earth, and joy of Heaven therefore: And then to inculcate and
ingraue the better the foresaid Visions in the hearts and memories of Men, he
in a Vision makes a short sum and recapitulation of them, to wit, of the
present estate of the Church then, and what it should be thereafter, unto the
Day of Judgment, together with a short description of the said Day: And last
he describes by a Vision, the glorious reward of them, who constantly persist
in the Truth, resisting all the temptations which he has forespoken, To wit,
he describes the blessed estate of the holy and Eternal Jerusalem, and Church
Triumphant, and so with a short and pithie Conclusion makes an end.

A PARAPHRASE UPON THE REVELATION OF THE APOSTLE S. JOHN.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
The Book, the Writer, and the Inditer; the end and use thereof: The
dedication of this Epistle to the Churches and Pastors, under the vision of the
seven Candlesticks and seven Stars.

GOD THE FATHER has directed his Son and Word, JESUS CHRIST, to send down
an Angel or Minister, to me John his servant, and by him to reveal unto me
certain things which are shortly to come to pass, to the effect in time the
chosen may be forewarned by me; 2 Who have borne witness that the word of God is
true, and that JESUS CHRIST is, and was a faithful witness, and have made
true report of all I saw. 3 Happy are they that read and understand this
Prophecy, and conform themselves thereunto in time, for in very short space
it will be fulfilled: 4 I am directed to declare the same, specially to you the
seven Churches of Asia, with whom be grace and peace from the Eternal, the
Father, and from the Holy Spirit: 5 And JESUS CHRIST, that faithful witness,
the first borne of the dead, the Mighty King of the world, and head of his
Church; Who for the love he bare us, has made us innocent by his blood in the
work of Redemption: 6 To him then we, whom he has made Spiritual Kings and
Priests, in Honor and Holiness, and ordained to serve and praise his Father,
give all glory and power for ever: so be it. 7 Assure your selves of his
coming again from Heaven in all glory, and all eyes shall see him; Yea the
wicked shall be compelled to acknowledge that it is even very he, whom so they
did persecute: Christ crucified.
And the whole world shall have a feeling before him of their unthankfulness.
So be it. 8 I am Eternal, says the Lord, before whom, all things (which is or
was) are present, and I am only the worker of all, I who ever Was, and still
am, shall surely come again according to my promise: 1. Cor. 2.
And as I am Eternal and true, so I am Almighty, preordinating all things
before all beginnings. 9 I John, your brother in the flesh, John banished to
Pathmos for the truth, writes the Revelation.
and companion with you, as well in the service of Christ, as in the patient
suffering of the Cross, being for that word of God and witnessing of Christ,
whereof I spoke, so persecuted, that for safety of my life I was constrained to
fly all alone to the solitary I Will of Pathmos. 10 Then was I bereft in spirit
upon the Sunday, which is hallowed to the Lord: Then heard I behind me, turn
about and take heed, the mighty voice of the Lord as a Trumpet, because he was
to declare the estate of the battle of the Church Militant unto me; 11 Saying
these words, I am A and O, to wit, the first and the last, write thou in a
Book what thou see, and send it to the Seven Churches in Asia, the names of
which are these, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatyra, Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea: 12 And when I turned me to see the voice, Verse. 10.
I did see seven Candlesticks representing these seven Churches: 13 And in the
midst of them the figure of the Son of man representing him, clothed with a
side garment for gravity, and girded about the paps with a girdle of Gold for
glory: 14 His head and hair were white as white Wool, Psalm. 51. Esaias. 4.
Matthew. 3. Ierem. 1.15. Esaias 17.
or Snow for innocence; and his eyes were bright like flames of fire, to
signify his all-seeing knowledge: 15 His feet were of brass, brightly flaming
as in a furnace, to declare his standing in Eternity: And his voice like the
sounding of many waters, representing his Majesty in commanding: 16 And he
had in his Right hand, the side that the Elect are on, Hebr. 1.10. Verse. 10.
seven Stars for you the seven Angels, that is, Pastors of the seven
Churches: Ephesians. 6. Esaias. 60. Matthew. 7.
And from his mouth came a two-edged sword, to wit, the Sword of the word,
which comes only from him; and his face was as the Sun shining bright, for
from his Face comes all light to illuminate blind Man. 17 And when I thus did
see him, I fell dead at his feet for astonishment, Psalm. 63. Psalm. 139.
but he lifted me up again with his right and favorable hand, and
comfortably said unto me, Fear not, be not astonished, for I am the first and
the last. Christ is risen from death to life. Timoth. 1. Hebr. 2.
18 Who, as verily as now I live, was once dead, as thou thy self bears
witness, and yet now do live for ever and ever, and by my death only I have
overcome Hell and Death; and I only and no other, keep the Keys that have
the power of them both. 19 And now I came to charge thee to write these things
which thou have now seen, because they are afterward to come to pass.

CHAP. II.
ARGUMENT.
Admonition and exhortation to the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos and
Thyatira.

WRite then this to the Angel, or Pastor of the Church of Ephesus: He that
has the seven Stars, Chap. 1. v. 10.
or seven Pastors in his Right hand, or favorable power, or protection, and
who walks among the seven Golden Candlesticks, or watches over the seven
Churches, even he, I say, Chap. 1.
says thus unto thee: 2 I know thy works, thy travail and patience, and that
thou suffrest not the wicked to walk with thee, but have learned them out,
False apostles in the Church of Ephesus.
that call themselves Apostles in the Church of Ephesus, and are not, and have
tried them to be liars: 3 Thou art also loaded with a great burden, and yet
willingly sustainest it, and for the love of my Name have thou travailed much,
and yet weariest not: 4 But in this I must find fault with thee, that thy
former charity is waxed cold: Destruction to the Church of Ephesus, except
they repent. Chap. 1. Ioh. 12. v. 35. Nicolates. Pouerbs 15.
5 Remember then from whence thou have fallen, and repent, turning thy self to
thy first works, otherwise I will turn against thee soon, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of the place it is in, to wit, the light of the Gospel, from
thy Church, if thou repent not in time: 6 But this again, thou do well to
hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans which also I hate. Matthew. 23.
7 Let all who have ears, or are willing to be followers of me, hear and take
example by this which the Spirit of God says to the seven Churches, or their
seven Pastors in the name of them: 1. John 2. 1. John 5. Prou. 3.5.18.22.
And to him who is Victor in the battle against Satan and the flesh, I shall
give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of
God, to wit, I shall make him live eternally in Heaven. 8 To the Angel or
Pastor of the Church of Smyrna write thou, This says the first and the last,
Ephesians. 1.3.
who was dead but now lives: 9 I know thy works, thy trouble and poverty, but
thou art rich, to wit, in graces; I know also what blasphemies are used against
thee, by them who call themselves Jews, but are not, but by the contrary are
of the Synagogue of Satan. The Church of Smyrna afflicted and troubled, yet
does continue. Psalm. 91.
10 Fear not when ye shall be troubled by the devil, for he will persecute
and trouble some of you in the flesh, that your constancy may be tried, and ye
shall have great affliction for the space of ten days, to wit, for a
certain space, but be ye faithful unto the death, and for your continuance I
shall give you the Crown of life immortal. 11 He that has an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches; and he that overcomes shall not
be hurt by the second death, which is Hell. Pergame the principal City in
Attalia.
12 And to the Angel or Pastor of the Church of Pergame, write thou, Thus
says he that has the two edged sword: 13 I know thy works and where thou
dwell, even where the throne of Satan is, to wit, among a great number of
wicked; Yet have thou not denied thy Faith in me, no not in straightest times,
Antipas Martyr.
when Antipas my faithful Martyr and witness, was slain among you, where
Satan, to wit, many wicked remain: 14 Yet have I some few things to lay to
your charge, to wit, That ye permit them to remain amongst you, who retain
the doctrine of Balaam, 1. Cor. 10.14.
who persuade men to eat of things immolate to Idols, and to commit
fornication, and filthiness in the flesh: For the very same did Ba laam to
Balac, to cause the Israelites stumble. 15 Thou offendest also in suffering
some to be amongst you, who retain the doctrine of the Nicolaitans which I
hate. 16 Repent therefore in time, otherwise I will come against thee soon,
and I will fight and overcome them who are amongst you, with the sword of my
mouth, to wit, by the force of my word. 17 He that has an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit says to the Churches: And to the Victour shall I give to eat
of that secret and hidden Manna, to wit, of Me the spiritual food of the
faithful, of whom that Manna which was hid in the Arc was a figure: And I
will also give him a White stone, or a Mark of his election and righteousness
through imputation, and in it a New name written, to wit, his name shall be
written up in the Book of life, which no man knows but he who receives it;
for no other may know the certainty of ones Election, but only he who is
elected. 18 And to the Angel or Pastor of the Church of Thyatire, write, This
says the Son of God, whose eyes are like flames of fire, and whose feet are
like to glistering brass: 19 I know thy works, thy charity, thy alms, and
careful helping of the weak, thy faith, thy patience, and shortly all thy
works; but in special I praise thy great constancy and firm continuance,
even so, as thy last works are better then the first: 20 Yet some few things
have I to lay to thy charge, to wit, that thou suffer a woman, like to
Iezebel in wickedness and Idolatry, who calls her self a Prophetess, to
teach and seduce my servants, to commit fornication and filthiness of the
flesh, and to eat of things immolate unto Idols: 21 Yet gave I her a time to
repent from her filthiness, but she would not. 22 Therefore lo I shall cast
her into a bed, to wit, I shall destroy her in the puddle of her sins, and I
shall trouble with great affliction all them who commit adultery, to wit,
spiritual adultery with her, if they repent not of their evil works in
time. 23 And I will kill and destroy her sons, to wit, all the followers of
her doctrine, that all the Churches and faithful may know me to be the
searcher out of the secrets of all hearts, and the just renderer and
recompencer of every man according to his works. 24 But I say unto the rest of
you who are at Thyatire, who have not received that false doctrine, nor know
not the depth nor secrets of Satan or wickedness, whereof the other falsely
did purge themselves, I will not lay any other burden upon you, then that
which already constantly ye bear: 25 But that which ye have, hold it out
valiantly until my coming again. 26 For unto him who is victour, and bears
out to the end that burden which I lay upon him, I will give power over
Nations, to wit, he shall triumph over the world: 27 And he shall rule them
with an iron rod, and they shall be broken like vessels of earth, according as
I have received the power from my Father: 28 And I shall give unto him the
Morning star; for as the morning star shines brighter then the rest, so
shall he shine brighter in glory then his fellows. 29 He that has an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT.
Admonition and exhortation to the Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea.

ANd to the Angel or Pastor of the Church of Sardis write thou, Thus says he
who has the seven Spirits of God, Sardis.
to wit, he with whom the holy Spirit is unseparably joined, and who has the
bestowing of all the graces of Gods Spirit on the Elect, and has the seven
Stars, to wit, who is the head of you the seven Pastors, I know thy works,
for ye say ye live, and yet are dead, for your faith is fruitless. 2 Be
watchful then, and sleep no longer in negligence and careless security, but
strengthen again that which is dying in you, to wit, revive your zeal and
feruencie which is waxed cold, and almost quenched; for surely I have not found
your works so holy, and pure, as they are able to abide a trial before the
face of God. 3 Remember then what thou have once received and heard, that thou
may observe the same and repent; but if thou watch not as I have said, I will
come as a thief, for the day of trial shall come when ye look least for it,
if ye be not always, and at all times prepared: 4 Yet have ye some few heads
and notable persons in Sardis, who have not defiled their garments, to wit,
corrupted their works as the rest have done, and therefore they shall go with
me being made white, to wit, being made innocent by my merit, for they are
worthy thereof: 5 And the Victour shall be clothed with a white garment of
innocence by imputation, neither shall I wipe his name out of the Book of
life, but shall auow him to be one of mine before my Father and his Angels. 6
He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: 7
But to the Angelor Pastor of the Church of Philadelphia write thou, This says
he who is only holy and true, Philadelphia.
and who has the key of David, who opens and no man shuts, who shuts and
no man opens, as says Esaias; Chap. 22.
for as David was both King and Prophet, and was the figure of me, so I, as the
verity and end of that figure, am only he, who has the keys of absolute
condemning, or absoluting spiritually and eternally. 8 I know thy works, and
lo, I have set an open door before thee, to wit, I have made the way of grace
patent unto thee, which door no man can shut, because I have reserved the
secret power of election and reprobation only to my self; and this favor
will I show you, because ye retain some good and virtuous things amongst you,
and have kept my Word, and have not been ashamed of my Name, nor denied the
same; 9 Lo therefore I will make subject unto thee, these who are the
Synagogue of Satan, to wit, those who call themselves Jews, and are not, but
lie: I shall make them (I say) come and adore before your feet, and they shall
be compelled to know that I have loved thee: 10 And this shall I do unto thee,
because thou have faithfully retained the tidings of my troubles and
sufferings, and therefore shall I deliver thee also to try the indwellers of
the Earth. 11 Lo, I come shortly, therefore retain surely to the end, that
good which is in thee, lest another do receive thy Crown and reward: 12 For I
will make the Victor a pillar in the Temple of my God, to wit, a special and
steadfast instrument in the Church, out of the which he shall never again be
cast forth: for he who once is elected, is never cast off; and I shall write
on him, the Name of God, to wit, he shall bear the Mark and Seal of an Elect,
and the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, to wit, the holy
and blessed number of Saints and Angels which comes down from heaven from my
God, to wit, is shortly and certainly to come down, by the general compeiring
at the latter day: And I shall also write on him mine own Name, for I shall
apply my general redemption of mankind to him, in special, and so I shall
write my new Name upon him, to wit, of Redeemer and Savior, which name I have
lately acquired through my passion, death, and rising again. 13 He that has
an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. 14 And to the
Angel or Pastor of the Church of Laodicea, Laodicea.
write thou, Thus says the Amen, to wit, he that is wholly and perfect holy,
and true in all his promises, that saithfull Witness, who is the beginning of
the workmanship of God, as well because he is that Word which did create all,
and so is their beginning, for that they all received their beginning and being
from him, as because the uniting of the Manhood with the Godhead in his person
is the most excellent, and so the beginning, that is, the chief, or first in
preeminence of all the works of God. 15 I know thy works, says he, to wit,
that thou art neither hot nor cold, would to God thou were either hot or
cold, to wit, either fervent and pure in the truth, or altogether cold and
ignorant, that is, seeing and confessing thine ignorance and slacknesse, that
thou might be instructed in the same: Judgment against Laodicea.
16 But thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, and so inexcusable; and
therefore as lukewarm liquor prouokes vomit, so will I spew thee out of my
mouth: 17 For thou say and think thy self to be wealthy, and greatly
enriched, and lack nothing; but thou know not thy self to be spiritually
in misery and wretchedness, poor, blind, and naked of the grace and favor
of God: 18 I would wish thee to buy of me gold purged by the fire, that thou
may thereby be made truly rich; I mean, I would wish thee to conquer by
true repentance and earnest prayer, the Word and truth of God; (which because
it can receive no filth or spot, and is able to abide the trial, David
properly in his Psalms compares to gold purged by the fire) which will make
thee rich in all spiritual graces: I would also wish thee to clothe thy self
with a white garment, to wit, with innocence and righteousness, that the shame
of thy nakedness and uncleanness appear not, and to anoint thine eyes with
an eye-salue, that thou may clearly see from whence thou have fallen: 19 But
despair thou not for these my sharp words, for those whom I love, I reprove
and fatherly chasten: Take up therefore again zealously the right way to
salvation, and repent thee earnestly of thy former iniquities. 20 Lo I stand
at the door, and knock; for I offer my self unto you by my Ambassadors, and
my word in their mouth, whosoever hears my voice and opens the door, to
wit, whosoever hears my voice, and yields thereunto due obedience, to him
will I come in, to wit, my holy Spirit shall enter into him, and I will sup and
be familiar with him, as he shall do with me, and reverence me with love: 21
And I will make the Victour to sit with me in my Throne, to wit, he shall be
partaker of my Glory, even as I sit with my Father in his Throne, and am in my
manhood, in which I overcame, exalted to sit in glory at his right hand, equal
in power, eternity and glory with him. 22 He that has an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit says to the Churches.

CHAP. IIII.
ARGUMENT.
The rauishing of the Writer: The description of the Majesty of God in Heaven,
compassed about with Angels and Saints, under the figure of Saints and Elders.

ANd when this speech of JESUS was ended, I looked up, Ezech. 1.
and lo, I did see a door opened in Heaven, to the effect that I might see
and hear therein, the figurative representing of those things that were to
come after: And that first voice which spoke unto me before, loud as a trumpet,
and was the voice of JESUS CHRIST, spoke unto me, and said, Mount up thither,
for I am to show thee those things that are to be done hereafter. 2 Then was I
immediately bereft in spirit; for the eyes of my earthly and gross body, could
not have seen and comprehended those heavenly and spiritual mysteries: And
lo, I did see a Throne set in heaven, and did see one sit thereon, to wit, GOD
the Father in all Glory and Majesty: 3 And he that sat thereon, was like in
color to the Jasper and Sardine stones; green as the Jasper, to represent his
everlasting flourishing without decay; and fiery red as the Sardine, to
signify his great brightness and consuming power, who is the trier and
separater of the Elect from the reprobate: and the Rainebow, colored like the
Emerauld, did compass him round about, to testify thereby, that as after the
deluge he made the Rainebow a Sacrament of the promises made to Noah, so this
Rainebow which now I did see compassing his Throne, should serve for a sure
Sacrament, that he will never suffer his Elect to perish, but will always,
and at all times be compassed, with a great care and watchfulnes over them:
Green it was as the Emerauld, to signify the continuance without ceasing of
his care; as the Emerauld comfort the sight, so is this Sacrament an
unspeakable comfort unto the Elect in their troublesome days. 4 And about his
Throne were four and twenty other seats, and I saw four and twenty Elders
or Ecclesiastical Rulers sitting thereupon, clothed with white garments, and
having Crowns of Gold upon their heads: These are the twelve Patriarchs, and
then the twelve Apostles, [who for that they have been the special teachers
both of the old and new Law, to the salvation, as well of Jews as of Gentiles,
are set in seats about his Throne for glory, and clothed with white garments
for their innocence and brightnesse] and crowned with crowns of gold in
token of their victory over Satan and the flesh, and of their glorious reward
therefore. 5 And from his Throne went forth thunder, lightening, and terrible
voices, to represent the great severity and terriblenes of his Judgments,
denounced by the old Law, and executed on the wicked: And there were seven
lamps of burning fire before his Throne, which is the infinite, mighty, and
flaming bright holy Spirit, resembling the love and light of the new Law of the
Gospel of Christ. 6 And there was a sea of glass like unto Crystal before
his Throne, for that as in a glass he clearly sees even all the secretest
actions and cogitations of all in the world, described here by the Sea, which
is ever before his face; for nothing can be hid from his presence and
prescience: And though in luster and glaunce the world be like the lively
fountains of waters, which are the faithful, daily springing and flowing with
good works by fruitful faith, yet is it indeed without motion or liquor,
dead and like glass, whenever the Lord JEHOVAH does thunder his Judgments
upon it: And in the midst of the Throne, and about the same, were four
beasts; their four hinder parts were in the midst of it, their shoulders
bearing it up, and their head and wings without and about the same; and these
beasts were full of eyes behind and before: These are the holy Cherubims, the
highest degree of Angels, Ezech. 10.12.
four in number, as well because of their four qualities to execute his will,
(as ye shall hear hereafter) as for that the Lord directs them when it
pleases him, to all the four corners of the world, and are as it were his
four winds to blow, that is, to execute either favor or Justice, in
whatsoever place he appoints them; they are about his Throne, and as it were
sustain the same; testifying thereby, that they are most excellent of all
others, and per (...), the pillars or footstooles of his glory: Their number of
eyes before and behind, signify their certain knowledge of things past, as to
come, committed to their charge, together with their continual vigilancie to
execute GODS commandments: 7 And the first beast was like a Lion, the second
like a Calfe, the third was faced like a man, and the fourth was like a flying
Eagle; hereby representing their excellent qualities in the execution of the
Lords decrees, to wit, great power, courage, patience, and strength to travel,
how often and how much they should be commanded; great wisdom and a wonderful
swiftness in the execution thereof. 8 And every one of these beasts had six
wings in circuit, (These are the six wings Esaias speaks of:) Esaias 6.8.
two at their arms, to signify their great celeritie in accomplishing Gods
commandments; two to cover their faces with, to testify that the glory of God
is so bright, and his Majesty so great, as the very Angels, his most excellent
creatures, are not able to behold the same; and two at their feet, as well to
wipe the filth of the earth off them, after they have been here below,
(teaching us thereby, that although they be often in the world, by the direction
of their Creator, yet cannot the world infect them with her sinnefulnesse and
corruptions) as also to let us know, that they are so far in glory above all
men living in the earth, as it is impossible to us with corporal eyes, to
behold the least part of their glorious brightness without a veil, even as it
is to them to behold the glory of the Almighty: And within they were all full
of eyes, to represent their incessant looking on God, which comes from that
inward and inestimable love they bear unto him; which also they expressed in
their continual singing of these words, Holy, Holy, Holy, is that threefold
Lord God Almighty, who ever was, now is, and shall come again, replenished
with all fullness of glory and power: 9 And when these Beasts were giving all
glory, honor, and thanks to him that sat on the Throne, to him (I say) who
lives eternally; 10 The four and twenty Elders, as next in rank, fell down
upon their faces before him that sat on the Throne, and adored Him who lives
for ever, and cast down their Crowns of gold at his feet, in token that
they received them only of him, saying, 11 Thou art only worthy, O Lord, to
be accounted glorious, honorable, and powerful, for that thou have created
all things, and for thy will and pleasure have they had their being, and were
created. This glance did I see of the glory that is in heaven, at the receiving
of my Commission, contained in the following Visions which I did see of the
things present and to come, in the general Church militant.

CHAP. V.
ARGUMENT.
The description of the Book, wherein was contained all the Mysteries which
were revealed to this Writer: Christ's opening of them under the figure of a
Lion, and of a Lamb: The praises given him by the Saints and Angels therefore,
who offer without any Intercessour, every one his own thanksgiving, and
praises to the Mediator.

THen first I did see in the Right hand of him that sat on the Throne, Dan.
12.4.
a Book, the Book wherein these mysteries are contained; Esaias 24 11.
and all the Book was written upon, as well on the back as within; on the
back was written these Visions that I did see, Ezekiel. 2.10.
and am presently to declare unto you; within was written the plain
exposition, and the very proper names of all things which these Visions did
represent, which are enclosed there, to signify that the Lord has not
permitted me to manifest the same to the world, for the time thereof is not
come yet; which Book was sealed with seven Seals, as well to keep every part
thereof unrevealed to any, as also to give the greater certainty, that these
things shall come to pass, which are prophesied therein. 2 And I saw a strong
Angel proclayming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open this Book, and to
loose the Seals thereof? 3 But there could none be found worthy to do it,
neither in heaven nor in earth, nor beneath the earth, no not to look on it,
much less to open it: for neither Angel nor devil either knows or dare meddle
with the high mysteries of God, and things future, except so far as pleases
him to commit and reveal unto them: 4 Then wept I very sore that none could be
found worthy to open and read that Book, no not to look upon the same: for I
was very sorrowful that I could not have it revealed unto me: 5 At last one of
the Elders said unto me, Weep not, Lo the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has
prevailed, to wit, he who is come of Judah, and has admirable force in his
flesh, derived from the Tribe of Judah, by which he overcame Sin, Death, and
Hell, and is the root of David, (for David was his figure and fore-beer in the
flesh) is worthy and only worthy to open the Book, and loose the Seals
thereof. 6 And then I took heed, and behold, I did see in the midst of the
Throne, and the four beasts, a second person of the Trinity sitting with God,
and in the midst of the Elders, as a man and our brother, a Lamb standing
like as he had been slain, to signify that once indeed he was slain, but
had risen again, and had seven Horns and seven Eyes, representing the
innumerable times, mighty and holy Spirit of God, which after his Resurrection
he sent out through the whole earth to direct, instruct, and rule the same by
his providence and power: 7 This Lamb then came and took the Book out of the
Right hand of him that did sit on the Throne: 8 And so soon as he had taken
the Book in his hand, these four beasts, and these four and twenty Elders
fell upon their faces before the Lamb, and adored him, and every one of them
had in his hand Harpes, and golden Phials, full of sweet odours; these are the
prayers of the Saints, which the four beasts, comprehending all the degrees of
Angels, and the four and twenty Elders comprehending the whole Church, as
well Militant as Triumphant, perceiving that CHRIST is to reveal all the
tentations which are to fall upon the earth and Church, before the latter
days; do power forth, as well on the Church triumphants part, thanksgiving,
that by the revealing or opening of the Book, he armeth the Militant Church to
resist all the tentations contained therein, as also on the Church Militants
part, to pray him to hasten the end and dissolution; for the hastening whereof
all creatures sigh and groan to their Creator. Every one of these beasts and
Elders, presents their own prayers unto him who sits on the Throne, to teach
us, as he is Mediator, and therefore our prayers must be offered unto him
only, that so there is no Intercessour between him and us, but every one of
us must present our own prayers before him, after the example of the beasts
and Elders: These prayers were enclosed in harpes, to signify the sweet and
pleasing sound, that faithful prayers make in the ears of God; they were
enclosed in golden Phials, to teach us that acceptable prayers must come from
an undefiled heart, and pure as gold; and they themselves are called incense,
because their smell is pleasant and sweet like incense in the nostrils of God.
Exodus 30.7.
This did the incense at the sacrifice in the old Law signify and figurate;
and of this incense speaks David in his Psalms. Psalm. 141.2.
9 And they, to wit the four and twenty Elders did sing a new Canticle, for
the matter of their Canticle, to wit, the accomplishment of the Mystery of
redemption is new, Psalm. 144.
and ever ought to be new and fresh in the hearts of all them that would be
accounted thankful: Their song then was this; Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive the Book, and open the Seals thereof, for thou have been slain,
though innocent; and by thy precious Blood have redeemed us to God thy Father,
and have chosen us out of all Tribes, tongues, people and nations, as well Jews
as Gentiles: 10 And thou have made us Kings and Priests spiritually to our God:
And we shall reign over the earth at the last and general Judgment, and as
Kings, shall be participant of the glory of the holy and new City Jerusalem.
11 Then I beheld and heard round about the Throne, the beasts, and the Elders,
the voices of many Angels, to the number of many thousand thousands, Dan. 7.10.
to wit, innumerable Legions of them, 12 Who said all with a loud voice, The
Lamb who was slain, is worthy to have all power, riches, wisdom strength,
honor, glory and blessing for ever. 13 I also heard all creatures in Heaven,
in earth, and beneath the earth, and in the seas, even all that are in them, I
heard saying in one voice unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb be Blessing, Glory, Honor and Power for ever, and ever. And the four
beasts said, Amen, and the four and twenty Elders fell on their faces, and
adored him that lives for ever, and ever.

CHAP. VI.
ARGUMENT.
The opening of the first six Seals: The spreading of the Euangel, signified
by the white horse, in the first seal: The great Persecution by the red horse,
in the second: The number of diverse heresies by the black, in the third: The
Popedom and Tyranny thereof by the pale, in the fourth: The complaint of the
Saints, and their deliverance promised: Their blessed estate in the mean time,
in the fifth: The day of Judgment, and the terriblenesse thereof, in the sixth.

AFter this I looked to see when the Lamb opened the first Seal, and lo, I
heard one of the four beasts, for they were appointed to assist me in the time
of these Visions, as the most excellent creatures of God; and his voice was
like a thunder, making me awake, with terror to take heed to these great and
terrible Prophesies, which God was to declare unto me, and he said, Come and
see. 2 Then I looked and did see a white horse, and he that sat on him had a
bow in his hand, Zach. 1.8. Zach. 6.2, 3.
and a Crown given unto him, and he came forth a Victour to win and
overcome: This man coming on the white horse, was the coming and incarnation
of our Bright and Innocent Savior, armed with a bow; for ever since his
coming till now, and a space hereafter, the dart and arrow of God, to wit, the
holy Spirit by the preaching of the Gospel does subdue, and bring the world
under his subjection, and takes vengeance of his enemies: His crown is given
to him by his Father, in token of his victory over the second death, and as
King of the Catholic Church to crown the faithful, Conversion of the
Gentiles.
and so he comes forth a Victour over Satan, and to overcome by once,
converting a great part of the world to the true knowledge of God: This
mystery is already begun, but is not yet accomplished. 3 And when he opened
the second Seal, 4 Lo, there came forth a red horse, and there was power
given to him that sat on him, to take away peace from the earth, that every
one might slay one another; and there was given him for that purpose a great
sword; for with the spreading of the Euangel and rooting of the truth in the
hearts of the nations, Persecution of the body by the Civil sword, in the
second Seal. Continuation of true pastors after the Martyrs.
shall a bloody persecution of Tyrants by the civil sword, be joined; which is
meant by the rider on the red horse: but notwithstanding the Euangel shall
spread and flourish, for such is the power of God, resisting the pride of man,
that under the Cross, the purity of the truth most flourishes in the
Church. 5 And when he opened the third Seal, the third Beast said unto me,
Come and see: and lo, I did see a black horse, and he that sat upon him had
balances in his hand: 6 And I heard a voice from among the four Beasts,
saying, A measure of Wheat for one penny, and three measures of Barley for one
penny, but wine and oil harm thou not: for after that this first mystery
shall be accomplished, not only dearth and famine shall ensue the contempt of
the truth, but God shall permit Satan to tempt and vex his Church with a
cloud of diverse and dangerous heresies, which may be meant by the rider on the
black horse, for the blackenesse and darkness of them, Heresies meant in the
third Seal.
shall obscure the light of the Gospel; but yet God, to assure us that he will
never forget his own, speaks from his Throne, comforting us thereby, that
although (as the balances and measure signifies) good men shall bescant, who
are the fine wheat and barley of his harvest, Luke 3.
yet some shall there be that shall not bow their knee to Baal, no not in
straighter times that shall come after; and always gives us assurance, that
the word and truth of God, which is an eternal Oil and comfortable Vine,
shall never be destroyed, nor any ways corrupted, in spite of all the malice
of Satan in his instruments. 7 And when he opened the fourth Seal, the fourth
Beast said unto me, Come and see. 8 Then I beheld, and lo, I did see a pale
horse, and the name of him that sat upon him was Death: This is the greatest
and heauiest plague; for after that the persecutions and heresies shall take an
end, and that infirmity and coldness have cropen into the Church, The
Popedom is meant by the pale horse in the fourth Seal, of heresy and civil
tyranny.
then shall God redouble his former plagues, by permitting Satan to erect a
tyranny composed of both these former plagues; for it shall be full of heresy
like the one, and full of civil and temporal tyranny like the other: and
therefore because it brings with it al manner of death, both of body and soul,
the rider is justly called Death, as the fountain of all the sorts of the
same: and the palenesse of the horse is correspondent in all points to the
quality of the rider; for as the rider is called Death, so the color of
palenesse represents the same: and as the riders qualities are composed of
heresies and tyranny, so the color of pale is composed chiefly of black and
red: And hell followed after him to the utter damnation of him and his
followers: And power was given him over the fourth part of the earth, to wit,
the rest who are not overcome by the other three riders; for all they who were
not marked by the white horse, nor killed in body by the red, nor killed in
soul by the black, are killed both in body and soul by this last: And as he
has power of destroying thus, given him over the fourth part of the earth, so
by four plagues specially does he execute the same, to wit, by Sword, Hunger,
Death, and the Beasts of the earth: These plagues allude to the plagues,
mentioned in the Canticle of Moses; for this tyranny shall begin with
persecution, Scarcity of true Pastors and worshipping. The cruelty of the
Popes tyranny.
this persecution shall cause a hunger, and great scarcity of the true worship
of God, this hunger shall breed a second and eternal death, and this tyranny
shall then end with a crueller and bloodier persecution of the bodies then ever
was before; which shall be so barbarous, that it is compared in this Vision to
the execution, used by wild beasts upon offenders, and shall spare no degree,
sex nor aage, no more then beasts do. 9 But when he opened the fifth Seal, I
did see under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain for the word of
God, and for his Testimony which they maintained: 10 And they cried with a
loud voice, saying, How long will thou delay (O Lord) since thou art holy and
true, to revenge and judge our blood upon them that dwell on the earth; for this
last persecution did enter so fiercely into the world, and did make so great a
number of Martyrs, that their souls lying under the Altar, to wit, in the
safeguard of JESUS CHRIST (who is the only Altar, Hose. 14.3.
whereupon, and by whom it is only lawful to us, Hebr. 13.15.
to offer the sacrifice of our hearts and lips, to wit, our humble prayers to
God the Father) did pray, and their blood did cry to heaven, and crave at the
hands of their Father a just revenge of their torments upon the wicked, and
therewith a hastening of the general dissolution, for the delivery of their
brethren who did remain yet alive. 11 Then white robes were given to every one
of them, and it was said unto them, and they were willed to rest and have
patience for a short space, unto the time the number of their fellow servants
to God, and brethren companions in the Cross, were fulfilled, who were also to
be slain as they were already: This surely ought to be a wonderful and
inestimable comfort to all the Church militant, since by this Seal we are
assured, that both the souls of the Martyrs, so soon as their bodies are
killed, shall immediately be rewarded with perpetual and bright glory in
heaven, not going into any other place by the way, which is signified by the
White robes; as also that so soon as their number shall be complete, which
shall be within a short space, God shall then crave a full account at their
persecutors hands; and then as the one number shall receive a full and eternal
glory in body and soul, the other shall receive a full torment in soul and
body, to the clear shining of his Justice in the one, and his mercy in the
other. 12 Then I took heed when he opened the sixth, and lo, there was a great
earthquake, Matthew. 24.29.
and the Sunne-beame black like sackecloth made of hair, and the Moon became
all bloody: 13 And the Stars fell from the heavens upon the earth, even as
the figgetree lets her unripe figs fall, being beaten by a mighty wind: 14
And the heaven went away like a scrole that is rolled together, and all the
hills and Isles were removed from their places: 15 And the Kings of the Earth,
the Nobles, the rich men, the Tribunes or commanders of the people, the mighty
men, and all the slaves, as well as freemen, did hide themselves in cauerns and
under rocks of hills: Luke 23.30.
16 And they said to the hills and the rocks, Fall upon us, and hide us from
the sight of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: 17
For that great day of his wrath is come, and who then may stand? This is the
accomplishment of that dissolution, craved and promised in the fifth Seal.
These terrible things, mentioned in the sixth Seal, are the alterations and
signs in the last time: the very same did our Master Christ prophecy, when he
was walking on this Earth.

CHAP. VII.
ARGUMENT.
A proper and comfortable digression, interiected of Gods care over the Elect,
in the times of greatest temptations, signified by the Visions of the four
Angels, the Election and happy estate of the elected.

But lest I, or any other, should doubt of the safeguard and salvation of the
Elect, thinking that these terrible plagues should have lighted upon both good
and bad indifferently, he represented unto my sight four Angels, standing on
the four corners of the earth, and retayning the four winds in their hands,
and stopping them, either to blow upon the earth, the sea, or any tree: 2 And I
did see one Angel going up from the rising of the Sun, having the Seal of
the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels that had
power given them to harm the earth, and the sea, 3 Saying; Harm not the earth
nor the sea, nor the trees, until we have marked the servants of God on the
forehead; These Angels, four in number, because they sit upon the four
corners of the earth, ready to execute Gods judgments upon every part of the
World, although they already had stayed the winds to blow, to wit, the
progress of the Euangel upon the earth, which is the world, upon the Sea,
which is the numbers of people, upon the Trees, which are the Magistrates,
Civil or Ecclesiastical; Yet one Angel came from the rising of the Sun, to
wit, 2. Peter 1. Luke 1.7. Malach. 4.
directed by CHRIST, who is comfortable like the Sunne-rising to his Elect, and
is that Orient dayspring, and Sun of Righteousness, rising over all the
faithful, which is mentioned in the Scriptures; Who cries and forbids these
four Angels to do any further temporal harm, while first the chosen be
sealed on the forehead, by that Seal which he bears with him for that effect,
that these Angels might know them, being marked in so eminent a place, in the
general destruction, and so spare them, assuring us thereby, that he has such
a care over his Elect, as he has provided for them before hand, even as he did
for Noah and Loath, and their families, in the time of the deluge and
destruction of Sodom. 4 And I heard the number of them that were sealed in
Israel, reckoned to be one hundred forty and four Thousand; for twelve
thousand were sealed of every one of the Tribes, which makes justly that
number. Out of every one of the Tribes was a certain number chosen, to assure
us, that a number of every one of them shall be saved: 9 And that I might be
assured that a number, as well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews, shall be saved,
Lo, he showed me a number so great, as I could not reckon the same, and it was
composed of certain out of every Nation, Tribe, people and tongue: And they
stood before the Throne, and in presence of the Lamb, clothed with white
robes, having palms in their hands, in token of the victory they obtained of
their longsome battle. 10 And they cried all with one voice, saying, Our
health and our salvation comes from our God that sits on the Throne, and from
his Lamb, to wit, their health came from God the Father, by the Mediation of
his Son. 11 Then all the Angels stood round about the Throne, the Elders, and
the four beasts, and bowed themselves down upon their faces, and adored God
with thanksgiving, for his mercy to the chosen, both of Jew and Gentile, and
his Justice upon all the rest, 12 Saying, Amen, in allowance of the things
done, with full confession, that Blessing, Glory, Wisdom, Thanksgiving,
Honor, Virtue, and Power, belongs only and most justly to GOD, for ever and
ever. 13 Then one of the Elders spoke unto me, and said, What are these, and
from whence are they come, who are clothed with white robes? 14 And I answered
and said, Thou know, my Lord. Then he said unto me, These are they who are
preserved, and come from that great affliction, which was represented to thee
in some of the Seals, and they have washed their garments, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb: for they, by virtue of his death, are made righteous
by imputation, whose blood is the only and full purgation of us, from our
sins: 15 And therefore they are before the Throne of GOD, and serve him day
and night in his Temple, to wit, they, without any intermission, contemplate
his Glory, and ever serve him by continual thanksgiving, and praising his
Name in Heaven, which is his eternal and celestial Temple: and he that sits
on the Throne shall dwell with them; for they shall never be separated from his
presence. 16 And they shall be no more an hungry, or thirsty, nor the Sun,
or any heat shall trouble them: 17 For the Lamb who is in the midst of the
Throne, to wit, coequall in power with his Father, he shall feed them and guide
them to the lively fountains of waters, to wit, they shall feed of that
Spiritual and lively bread, and drink of that Spiritual and lively water,
even himself; John 4.14.
which Water he promised to the Samaritane woman, at the well: And GOD shall
wipe all tears from their eyes; for he shall both by the greatness of their
present joys, put quite out of their memories, all the sorrow of their former
troubles; and shall also give them eternal joy, which shall never be mixed
with any kind of trouble or fear: so shall they not be molested with the
vehemency of the Sun, or any other heat, which signifies great troubles,
and sorrow.

CHAP. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
The opening of the seventh Seal: The seven Trumpets coming out of it: The
effect of the prayers of the faithful, signified by the vision of the fire of
the Altar: Some persecution, and some heresies, signified by hail mixed with
blood and fire, in the first trumpet: The great persecution by the hill of
fire, in the second: The number of heresies, by the stars, falling into the
fountains of water, in the third: The universal infirmity in the Church, in
some things by the Sun, Moon, and stars darkened, in the fourth.

ANd when he opened the seventh Seal, there was silence in heaven almost
half an hour, as well to let me know that he had once already summarily
declared the whole things which was to come after, as by silence a while to
give me occasion to meditate upon that vision which I had seen, to the effect
that afterward I might the better understand the more particular rehearsal
thereof, which now under another vision and form, was to be declared unto me
by the opening of the seventh Seal. 2 And I saw seven Angels standing before
God, to execute whatsoever thing it should please him to command them; and by
his direction there were seven Trumpets given unto them, that by these Trumpets
they might with one Majesty denounce to the world such plagues, as they were
by the command of God to power forth upon it. 3 Then another Angel came and
stood before the Altar, having a golden censer in his hand, and there was much
incense given unto him, that he might offer up the prayers of the Saints upon
the golden Altar, that is before the Throne: 4 And the smoke of the incense,
which is the prayers of the Saints, mounted up from the hand of the Angel to
the sight of God: 5 Then the Angel took this new emptied censer, and filled it
again with the fire of the Altar, and did cast it down on the earth, and
there were thundrings, voices, lightenings and earthquakes: By this Angel and
his proceedings, we are assured and made certain, that Christ shall ever be
vigilant over his own, and that specially in straightest times he will hear
their prayers, and ever renew them with some light of the Gospel, by the
working of his holy Spirit: And to assure us hereof, the vision of this Angel
was shown unto me immediately before, that by the seven Trumpets he is to
dilate these visions, showen me in the former Seals: This Angel was Christ, he
stood before the Altar: this Altar is likewise himself, as I declared before:
his standing before it, means, that by his office of Mediator, he was to
do as follows: He had a golden censer in his hand, for he keeps the censer
wherein are contained the incense which the Saints give him, to wit, their
prayers, to be offered up to God by his mediation, who is that golden and pure
Altar, which is ever in the presence of God, and whose requests are no time
refused, and therefore that incense and the smoke thereof, mounts up to the
sight of God, to assure us that our prayers, being offered in that form, are
ever acceptable: The effect whereof does appear, by the Angels filling again
the censer with the fire of the Altar, and casting it on the earth; wherewith
is joined the noise ye heard of; for these prayers procure, that their
Mediator shall out of his golden box, to wit, out of his treasure of power,
send down the fire of the Altar, to wit, the holy Spirit which remains with
him, to make thunders, voices, lightnings and earthquakes, to wit, to give
again the Law, by renewing the efficacy of the Gospel, in the hearts of the
faithful, alluding to the giving of the old Law, whereof these fearful
noises were the forerunners: This surely is the care and effect that our
Master in all troublesome times renewes to strengthen our weakness with. 6
And then the seven Angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to
blow; for although they were before directed, yet were they not permitted to
execute their office, no more then the four Angels, who stayed the four
winds while Christ had strengthened and armed his own, as is said, to assure
us, that ever before any great temptation, he will make the backs of the
elect ready, and able to bear such burdens as he is to lay upon them. 1.
Cor. 10.13.
7 Then the first Angel blew, and there was a great hail, and fire mixed with
blood, and this storm was cast down upon the earth; whereupon followed, that
the third part of the trees was withered and burnt up, and all green grass
was withered and burnt up, for the first plague which has already begun to
work, shall be mixed partly of hail, which is heresy, for as hail showers
by the harm they do to the corn, makes them to become dear, so heresy
makes the true harvest of the Lord to become scant: This hail or heresy, and
spiritual persecution, is joined with the sword and persecution of the flesh,
which is signified by the fire, and the blood: This fiery and two edged trial
shall make the third part, to wit, a part, but not the greatest number of
trees, to wit, of renowned men; and all green grass, to wit, all them that
are not well founded and strong in the truth, (this green grass is that sort
of professors, Mark 4. verse. 5, 6, 7.
of whom Christ spoke in the parable of the seed sown in sandy, and thornie
ground;) it shall make them (I say) to fall from the truth, and so become
withered and unprofitable. 8 Then the second Angel blew, and there fell as it
had been a great hill, all burning in fire; and this hill was cast into the
sea, and the third part of the sea became blood: 9 And the third part of the
living creatures in the sea was slain, and the third part of the ships therein
did perish; for after that this former plague shall have an end, and yet the
world not turn themselves from their iniquities, then the second shall follow,
which is the corporal plague of persecution, signified by the red horse in the
second Seal, more amply dilated here: This great heap of fiery persecution,
like a mountain of fire, shall make the third part, or a certain number of
people and nations, which is signified by the seas or many waters, to ouerflow
in blood; for as it is said of the same in the second Scale, they shall slay
one another, for even among themselves, to wit, among the wicked shall be great
bloodshed and wars; for the third, or a certain number of all sorts of
living things shall die, to wit, no sort of men shall be exempted from this
trouble: But especially a number, and not the greatest part of the faithful
shall be persecuted, which is signified by the ships; for even as ships on a
stormy Sea seek a haven, so the faithful among the wicked of the world,
tossed here and there resisting every wave, strive in despite of many
contrarious winds, to attain to that haven, where at last casting their
Anchor, they are freed from all worldly tempests, and dwell there eternally in
a perpetual calmness. 10 Then the third Angel blew, and there fell from
heaven a great Star burning like a torch, and it fell upon the third part of
rivers and fountains of waters, and the name of the star was Wormwood: and
the third part of the rivers and fountains were turned into wormwood, and
many men died, for the bitterness of the waters: This is that same plague
which is signified by the black horse and his rider, to wit, a cloud of
defections, and Apostatical heresies, here signified by a great star burning
like a torch: for it shall have a great light, but like the light of a torch;
for as the torch and candlelight is false to the eye and makes the colors to
appear otherwise then they are, and is made dim by the brightness of the
Sun, so shall this light of false doctrine mask iniquity for a space, and
make it seem to be the truth, unto the time the true light of God obfuscat
and blind it: These heresies shall be stronger in deceit, then those before:
for they shall seduce the very pastors and spiritual Magistrates, which is
signified by the Stars falling in a part of the fountains of waters: for
these men are the worldly fountains, whereout the rest of the faithful, by
the buckets of their ears, draw that spring of heavenly liquor. 11 This star
is called Wormwood, for as wormwood is a bitter herb, what greater
bitterness can be to the soul of man, then to procure the wrath of the
Almighty, through such an horrible fall? and as it turned a part of the
pastors, and made them to become of bitter quality like it self, so their
bitterness did slay with the second death, a great number of men; to wit,
their disciples and followers. 12 Then the fourth Angel blew, and the third
part of the Sun, the third part of the Moon, and third part of the Stars
was stricken, so that the third part of them, to wit, of their light was
obscured, and the third part of the day, and the third part of the night was
obscured, to wit, the third part of their light was darkened: For after that
one part of the pastors shall make horrible defection, it shall fall out that
the whole Church visible, shall be blinded with some errors, but not yet make a
full defection, which is signified by the obscuring of a part of the light of
the Sun, Moon, and stars, to wit, of all degrees of spiritual
Magistrates; so that by their general weakness in some points, a part of the
meaning of the Gospel shall be falsely interpreted, which is meant by the light
of the day, and of the night: for as the cloud by day, and the pillar of fire
by night did guide the people of Israel through the desert, to the land of
Promise, so will this light shining, both day and night in our souls, conduct
us out through the wilderness of this world, to that spiritual land of
promise, where we with our God shall gloriously reign in all Eternity: This
fourth blast is also a part of the third Seal. 13 And I saw and heard an other
Angel flying through the midst of heaven, and saying with a loud voice, Woe,
woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, for the harm that shall be done unto
them by the last three blasts of the Angels Trumpets: for the last three
plagues shall be exceeding great, which, that I might the better note and take
greater heed unto, God wakens me up and makes me see an Angel flying through
the midst of heaven with celeritie, as well to forewarne the holy Angels and
Saints of these three plagues, so far in greatness above the rest, as to
signify by his swift flying, that they are hastily and within short space to
be put in execution: And the number of Woes, to wit, which he cries, are
answerable to the number of plagues which are hereafter to be declared.

CHAP. IX.
ARGUMENT.
In the fifth Trumpet, the heresies cause a great blindness and ignorance,
whereof comes the Ecclesiastical Papisticall orders, signified by the
grasshoppers breeding out of the smoke, and their power and qualities: Their
King and head the Pope and his style: In the next Trumpet the beginning of his
decay, signified by the loosing of the four Angels at Euphrates: The remedy he
uses for the same by hounding out the Jesuits, signified by the horse in the
Vision: Their qualities signified by their breast-plates: The Popes and Turks
his gathering to destroy the Church, signified by a great army of horse: The
Pope is the plague for breaking of the first Table: and the Turk for breaking
of the second.

THen the fifth Angel blew, and I saw the star that fell out of heaven upon
earth (for it is to be noted, that all these plagues did fall out of heaven
upon the earth, to teach us, Quod nullum malum est in ciuitate, quod non faciat
Dominus, by his Justice permitting, Amos 3.6. Esaias 45.7.
directing, ordering, and restrayning it) I did see it get the key of the
bottomless pit which was given unto it; for this cloud of heresies spoken of
in the third Trumpet and third Seal, by process of time did breed this
bastard tyranny, whereof I spoke in the fourth Seal, and so it brought from
hell by the opening of the bottomless pit, whereof it gate the keys, to wit,
by the assistance, and device of Satan, it bred such plagues as follow. 2
First, by opening of the pit, came forth a great smoke like the smoke of a
furnace, to wit, it did breed such a darkness and ignorance in the minds of
men, as the Sun and the Air were obscured, ( to wit, the light of the trweth
represented by the darkening of the Sun) and so in place of living under, and
by the true and clear air of the truth, the world shall live under, and by
the bastard and dark air of false doctrine. 3 And out of this smoke came
Grasshoppers upon the earth: For this great blindness shall breed a multitude
of diverse Orders of Ecclesiastical persons, as well Monks and Friars, as
others, but all agreeing in one heretical Religion: These are grasshoppers,
because they breed of that filthy smoke of heresies, even as Grasshoppers breed
of corrupted air; they are ever teaching false doctrine with their mouth,
which carries with it as great destruction to the souls of men, as the mouths
of Grasshoppers do to the green grass and herbs, and the earth shall be
ouerloaden with multitudes of them, even as Grasshoppers sometimes come in great
heaps, and ouercharge the face of a whole country: And like power was given
to them, as has the earthly Scorpions: for as the Scorpions sting is not felt
sore at first, and is long in working, and impossible to be healed, but by the
oil of a dead scorpion, so the poisoning of the soul cannot be perceived by
the receiver at the first, but is long in operation, for by piece and piece
they infect the world with heresies, and open not all their pack at first; and
the world shall never be freed from their heresies, unto the utter destruction
of these false teachers themselves: 4 And it was said unto them, or they were
forbidden to harm the grass, or any green thing, or any tree, but only
these men that have not the mark of God in their foreheads: for though earthly
Grasshoppers when they swarm in heaps, do destroy all green grass or trees,
yet God shall so bridle the rage of these spiritual Grasshoppers, that they
shall have no power to pervert the Elect of whatsoever degree, or sort,
compared to green grass and fruitful trees; but their power shall extend
only upon them that bear not the mark or Seal of God upon their forehead,
and as withered and unfruitful sticks are ready for the fire: 5 But they shall
have no power to slay them, to wit, they shall not discover to the world their
greatest blasphemies at the first, as I said before, but they shall torment
them for the space of five months, and their torment shall be like the torment
that a man suffers, being stinged by a scorpion, to wit, they shall by piece and
piece infect them with spiritual poison; and as I have said already, they
shall not feel the smart thereof, while the second death make them to feel
the same: This torment shall endure five months, that is the time limited
them by God, which alludes to the five months in Summer when Grasshoppers are;
This form of speech does declare the continuing of the Metaphore. 6 And in
these days men shall seek death, and shall not find the same, and men shall
desire to die, but death shall fly from them, for then begins the
troublesome times of the later days, the misery whereof I heard our Master,
while he was yet on the earth, declare in these words that I have now repeated.
7 And the figure of these locusts, was like unto the horse prepared for the
war, to signify that their form of practice and policy, shall be so worldly
wise, that they shall lack nothing perteyning to the setting forth of their
intents, more then a horse of service which is curiously barded, feated and
prepared, for going forth to the battle. And they had crowns like crowns of
gold upon their heads; for they shall pretend to be holy like the Elders, who
for their reward gate Crowns of pure gold set upon their heads, as you heard
before, and so shall outwardly glance in an hypocritical holiness; And their
faces were like the faces of men, and the faces of men signify reason, as man
is a reasonable creature: the likeness then of their faces unto men, signifies
that they shall, by curious arguments, pretend reason to maintain their false
doctrine, but it shall be but a counterfeit resembling of reason indeed, even
as their crowns are like unto gold, but are not gold indeed. 8 And they have
hair like the hair of women: for as the hair of women is a special part of
their alluring beauty, so they have such alluring heresies whereby they make
the way of heaven so easy by their help to whomsoever, how wicked soever they
be, that will use the same, as they allure them to commit spiritual adultery
with them. And they have teeth like Lions teeth: for as the Lion is stronger in
the mouth, and so may do greater harm with his teeth then any other beast, so
all these that will not be persuaded with their shows prepared like horses for
the war, with their crowns like crowns of gold, with their faces like the
faces of men, nor with their hair like the hair of women, they shall be
persecuted by the power of their mouth, to wit, by their threatenings and
thundering curses. 9 And they had breast plates like breastplates of iron, for
they shall have to back this their authority, the assistance of Princes,
whose maintayning of them shall appear unto the world strong as iron. And the
sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots running with many horses
unto the war: for as the grassehoppers make in the hot time of the year and
the day, a great sound with their wings, so these shall be made so strong and
fearful by their brestplates like iron, as what they, being in the height of
their day shall decree, it shall have such a majesty and fearefulnes, as the
terrible noise of many horses and chariots hurling to battle: 10 But they had
tails like the tails of Scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: for
at their first dealing with any, they appear not harmeful to them that hear
them, and believe them, but the effect and end of their practice is poison to
the soul, and thereafter their tails are like unto the tails of Scorpions,
wherein is their sting: And they had power to trouble and harm men the space
of five months: for as I showed you before, that they should torment men the
space of five months, to wit, a certain space appointed them; so now I assure
you to your comfort, that as grassehoppers last but five months that are
hottest, so these shall be like unto grassehoppers in that as well as in the
rest; for they shall remain but for a certain space prescribed, and then
shall be destroyed by the blast of Christ's breath. 11 They have also a King,
but to rule over them, who is the Angel of the bottomless pit, and his name in
Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, for these by the permission of Gods
justice, and working of Satan, shall have at the last a Monarch to be their
head, who shall be like unto themselves, the angel or messenger coming, to
wit, instructed and inspired by Satan to be his ambassador, and to teach his
false doctrine to the counterfeit church, as well as the true Pastors are the
Ambassadors of God to the true Church: He is called Abaddon or Apollyon,
because as he is both a spiritual and civil Monarch, so he destroys and
killes both body and soul, as I told you in the fourth seal, where he is
called Death, for the same cause that he is called here Destroyer. 12 One woe
is past, and lo two come after, for this which by the fifth Trumpet is
declared, is the first of the three last and greatest plagues, whereunto I
wished you to take special heed; and therefore take good heed to the other two
blasts of the trumpets that follow. 13 Then the sixth Angel blewe, and I heard a
voice coming from among the four horns of the golden Altar that stands ever
before the eyes of God, saying these words to the next Angel that had a
Trumpet, Loose these four Angels bound at the great water Euphrates. 14 Now
the summons and warning being given by the sixth blast of the trumpet of the
sixth and fearful plague that was to come; this command of Christ (which is
the voice here mentioned) comes to the sixth Angel, commanding him to do as ye
now have heard: For although the trumpet was already blown, yet the execution
follows not, while Christ command and permit it; for these four Angels
mentioned here, are the same who were standing before upon the four airths of
the earth, ready to destroy the same, who were then, as you heard, stayed by
Christ, while first he had sealed his own; who now being all sealed, because
this is the last plague that is to come upon the world, except that of the
consummation; Christ therefore commands them to be loosed, for they were before
stayed, as it were bound, to the effect they might now put in execution these
things which they were ready to do: When they were stayed, it is said they
were bound at the great river Euphrates; alluding hereby to the history of
Balthazar in Daniel, for as Euphrates divided Babylon from the Persians and the
Assyrians, which they crossed when they slew Balthazar, so this command of
stay, given to these Angels by Christ, was that great river Euphrates, beyond
the which they were bound, for they had no power to cross it, and to plague
the world, while first all his chosen were sealed, and that he had loosed and
permitted them, as by this command here is done: 15 And so these four Angels
were loosed, who were ready at the hour, the day, the month, and the year,
to slay the third part of men, to wit, they were ready at the very moment
prescribed to them by God, to destroy all men, except such as were sealed, over
whom they had no power; and such as were reserved to the destruction of the
last plague, to wit, the consummation; and so the third part was left to them
to destroy. Now follows the plague of the sixth trumpet. 16 And first I saw an
army of horsemen, the number whereof were two hundred thousand thousand; for I
heard the number reckoned: this double great number signifies, that there shall
be raised up at one time, two great Monarchies and seats of Tyrants; one ruling
in the East, and another in the West, who shall cruelly persecute the Church. 17
And in this vision likewise I saw horses, whose riders had brestplates of fire,
of Hyacinth and brimstone, and the heads of the horses were like the heads of
Lions, and from their mouths came fire, smoke, and brimstone; noting, that
with fiery rage, smokie pride, and pretenses, and loathsome and wicked courses,
these two Monarchs, the one secular, the other Ecclesiastical, shall conquer
and possess the greatest part of the world: These horses are a part, yet not
the least part of the forces of one of these Monarchs, in whose description it
is most insisted, because he is the Destroyer, of whom it is spoken in the fifth
Trumpet, where he is named Abaddon: These horses and their riders are the last
order and sect of his Ecclesiastical swarm: Their brestplates, to wit, their
worldly defense is composed of fire, that is, persecution of the body, for they
shall have greater credit at the hands of Princes, then all these grasshoppers,
spoken of in the fifth Seal, and so shall use their forces to defend themselves
therewith: They are composed of the Hyacinth, for as this herb is dark, and
of a smoking color and bitter to the taste, so shall they be defended and
maintained by the craft of their dark and bitter heresies, (which in the third
Trumpet are called Wormwood, as here they are called Hyacynth;) and they are
composed of brimstone, which signifies the loathsomeness and stench of sin,
and the flame and force of hell fire, to wit, Satan the author of the one, and
ruler of the other, shall by all manner of craft defend them as his special
instruments, and the last vermin bred and come up from the smoke of the
bottomless pit: And they shall not only have power to defend themselves by
these three means, but they shall also pursue and persecute the faithful;
which is meant by their horses heads like to the heads of Lions, that is, able
to devour: The means whereby they devour, are the same whereby they defend
themselves, to wit, by the power of Princes, to persecute the bodies by false
and heretical bragges and sleights, which are here called Smoke, and by the
drifts and frauds of Satan in diverse fashions to deceive and inflame the soul,
which craft of Satan is here resembled to brimstone. 18 By these three plagues,
are slain the third part of men, to wit, by fire, smoke, and brimstone, which
came out of their mouths, to wit, their malice and strength shall be so great,
as they shall use all means wherewith the third part of men shall be destroyed,
although these means shall not be used by them only to work this great
destruction with. 19 For their strength is not in their mouths only, (as ye
have presently heard) but it is also in their tails; for their tails are like
the tails of serpents, having stings whereby they do harm: In this they
shall be like unto the grasshoppers. 20 But not the less, the wicked shall be
so hard hearted, as the rest of them who were not destroyed by the plagues of
this trumpet, shall not repent nor desist from the workmanship of their hands,
to wit, from Idolatry, and adoring of devils, and of images, of gold, of
silver, of brass, of stone, and of wood, who neither can see, hear, nor go,
(whereof this heretical Monarch is the punishment.) 21 Nor yet will they
repent them nor desist from breaking the second Table, by slaughters,
sorceries, fornications and thefts, whereof that other Monarch, who only
persecutes the body, is the revenge, scourge, and plague.

CHAP. X.
ARGUMENT.
John hears the explication of these mysteries, which was written upon the
back of the Book: It is not lawful to him to manifest it: By foreknowing
things to come, which is signified by swallowing the book, he is moved to a
great joy in the instant time, but it turns in great bitterness to him
thereafter.

THen I saw another strong Angel coming down from heaven; he was clothed
with a cloud, and at his head was the rainbow, and his face was like the
Sun, and his feet like the pillars of fire: This strong Angel was Christ,
clothed with a cloud; for in a cloud he ascended, and in the clouds shall he
come again at the latter day: Which cloud was a guide to the people of Israel
by day, while they travailed through the wilderness; and out of that cloud he
powers the rain and dew of his graces in abundance upon his chosen: His head
was clothed with the rainebow, which signifies his covenant he made with his
Elect, as ye heard before: His face was like the Sun, and his feet like
pillars of fire: ye heard these two described in the beginning of my Epistle.
2 And he had in his hand an open Book; this was the Book of the Euangel, or
glad tidings: And he set his right foot or strongest on the Sea, to make
stable that liquid Element so unstable of nature; and his left upon the earth,
which is sooner made firm, by this to show the power he has over all things
contained in them, who has no power to pass the bounds and order which he
has prescribed unto them; and therefore the earth is called his footstool, by
David in his Psalms. 3 And he cried with a mighty voice like a roaring Lion,
for they were terrible things and great which he was to denounce: 4 And when
he had cried, the seven thunders spoke their voices; These were the seven
Spirits of God, who by his direction did speak, and I was to have written what
they did speak, of purpose to have set it down with the rest: But I heard a
voice from heaven, saying, Seal what the seven thunders have spoken, but write
them not: For the holy Spirit having declared unto me by them, the exposition
of the six trumpets, the voice of God commands me not to manifest that unto
the world with the rest, but by sealing of it, to keep it close unto the due
time. 5 And the Angel, to wit, Christ, whom I saw standing on the sea, and on
the earth, lifted up his hand toward heaven, 6 And swore by him that created
heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, that the time should be no
longer: 7 But in the days of the seventh Angels voice, when he begins to blow,
the mystery of God should be consummate, according as he told to his servants
the Prophets: This oath he made to assure me, that the world should end
immediately after the accomplishing of these things, mentioned in the six
Trumpets, and that the seventh declares the things which are to be done at the
consummation; the form whereof will be as he has declared to his Prophets. 8
Then that voice which I heard, spoke to me from heaven, to wit, the voice of
God the Father, spoke again unto me, and said, Go and take that open book
which is in the hand of the Angel, who stands on the sea and the earth: 9 And
so I went unto the Angel, and desired him to give me the book: and he
answered, Take and swallow it, and it shall bring a bitterness unto thy belly,
but in thy mouth it shall be as sweet as honey. 10 Then I took the book, and
found that which he said to me of it, to be true; for indeed I thought it
delightful unto me, to know the mysteries of God, by swallowing the book, and
so it was sweet in my mouth; but so soon as by the digestion hereof I must
preach it to the world, and for that cause become to be hated, contemned, and
persecuted by the wicked, and see but a small increase of my great labors,
then surely it will be bitter to my belly, as it was to Jonas, and shall be to
all the true preachers thereof thereafter. 11 Then he said unto me, Thou must
prophecy again before people, nations, tongues, and many kings for my
children in Christ, to wit, my successors in doctrine, who shall be in the
time of these plagues, shall have the same commission to teach over again the
same Euangel, to the salvation of all the believers: these shall have such
boldness given unto them, as they shall constantly declare their commission,
not only before the people, but even before many kings, and shall not be afraid
of their faces.

CHAP. XI.
ARGUMENT.
Babylon the Popes Empire, is the outward part of the Temple: The true Church
is in Sancto Sanctorum; but under the persecution of these hypocrites for a
certain space: Faithful Pastors are sent from time to time to witness the
truth: They are persecuted, condemned, and slain by Antichrist: God raises
up at the last stronger preachers, who shall describe the Popedom, and
foretell the destruction thereof: In the seventh Trumpet is the day of
Judgment described.

ANd then was a long reed like a rod given unto me, and the Angel who gave me
the book stood before me, and said, Arise, and measure the Temple of God, and
the Altar, and all them that adore in it, with that reed that is given thee: 2
But the court that is without the Temple, exclude thou, and measure it not, for
it is given unto the Gentiles, who shall tread down the holy City for the
space of two and forty months. Now lest I should despair of any profit
which my successors could have made in doctrine in their time, because as it
appears by the sixth Trumpet, the whole world should be subdued to these two
Monarchies; Christ, as well to assure me some should still remain pure and
unspotted, as also to show me, and by me to forewarne the Church, that this
most dangerous Monarch, called Apollyon, should corporally succeed in the
Church, and should sit in the Temple of God, gives me a reed for that cause,
and commands me to measure the Temple, for he will save all them that are of
the true Church, for they are the inward parts of the Temple; and the rest by
reason of their hypocrisy, shall be accounted of as Gentiles; and this division
shall be made by my successors in doctrine, (of whom I spoke already) for they
by the measure and trial of the word, signified by the reed, shall separate
that holy Sanctum Sanctorum from the rest of the outward Temple of God, to wit,
the hypocritical and Antichristian Church, which shall tread down and
persecute the true Church, for the space of two and forty months, or three
years and an half, for it is both one number. This space prescribed by
Christ, alludeth to Daniels prophecy of two times, a time, and half a time;
for as Daniel meant thereby the half of his prophetical week, so Christ
means by this, that the persecution of this Destroyer, shall last the half,
to wit, it shall reign about the midst of the last aage of this whole week,
which begins at his incarnation and first coming, and ends at his last coming
again; which because it is the last period, it is here compared to a week: 3
But I shall give that holy town to two witnesses of mine, who clothed with
sackecloth, shall prophecy the space of one thousand two hundred and
threescore days; for these my successors he shall raise up as witnesses, to
wit, a sufficient number of them, (for out of the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word is confirmed) to witness that their doctrine is false,
who persecute the Church which he shall give unto them, for he shall make them
their patrons, to defend and feed them by the power of the true word, and they
shall preach repentance to that counterfeit Church; and therefore they are said
to be clothed in sackecloth. And to assure us to our great comfort, that in all
the time of blindness, God shall ever be raising up some of these two
witnesses against the hypocritical Destroyer, and to comfort and confirm his
true Church, it is said, They shall prophecy the number of days that ye have
heard, which is correspondent justly to the months before mentioned, to wit,
they shall not leave off to witness, all the time of the Antichristian
kingdom. 4 These witnesnesses, are two green Olives, who anoint the Elect
with that holy oil; and two Candlestickes (as Christ said, to enlighten the
world with their brightness) who are set down, and do their office, in the
presence of him, who is Lord and ruler of the earth. 5 And if any shall press
to harm them, fire shall come out of their mouths, and devour their enemies;
for whosoever will do them any hurt, himself must be slain so, to wit, the
holy Spirit, who is the fire in their mouth, shall accuse and cause to be
destroyed with the second death, all them that either persecute them, or will
not hear, or obey their doctrine: 6 These witnesses have power to shut heaven,
that it rain not in the days of their prophecy; and they have power over the
waters, to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every kind of
plague, so often as they please; for he shall authorize them and their
message, with as sure testimonies, as the shutting of the heaven, and stay of
the rain was unto Elias, so long as he forespake it should be so; and as unto
Moses, the turning of the waters into blood, and the striking of the earth of
the land of Egypt, with diverse and sundry plagues: 7 But these shall be
witnesses, by their death as well as by their life: For how soon any of them
shall have run that course in the earth, which God has appointed them, they
shall be persecuted, overcome, and slain by that beast, the Angel of that
bottomless pit, and king of the locusts, and that great town and seat of the
Monarchy shall publicly put them down, as malefactors: 8 So as their dead
bodies or carkeises shall lie in the streets thereof: And this town is
spiritually called Sodom, because of the spiritual adultery, to wit, Idolatry
that it shall commit and maintain; and spiritually Egypt, because it shall
oppress and intollerably burden the souls of the chosen, even as Egypt
captiuated the bodies, and burdened the backs of the people of Israel, and in
that town also was our Lord crucified; for where Christ's members are put to
death for their Masters cause, (as this town and Kings thereof shall do) there
is Christ himself crucified in effect, and his crucifying shall be as well
imputed to them, as to Judas who betrayed him: 9 And men of all tribes,
peoples, tongues, and nations, shall see their carkeises the space of three
days and a half, and they shall not be suffered to be buried in sepulchers:
10 And the inhabitants of the earth shall be glad and rejoice for their
slaughters, and shall send gifts one to another, in token of joy, because they
are made quit of these two prophets, who tormented the indwellers of the earth;
for the whole world, who are not in Sancto Sanctorum, shall not only suffer,
but allow that these witnesses be not only slain, but also be so cruelly used
an contemned, as not to be suffered to be buried amongst others: And the whole
earth shall rejoice at their death; because that even as Achab blamed Elias for
troubling of Israel, so shall the world think these witnesses troublesome unto
them, because they discover unto them their shamefulnesse, and call them to the
repentance thereof. 11 And thus shall they be contemned for the space of three
days and a half, to wit, of three years and a half; which signifies, that
during the space of the Antichrists reign, they shall be thus used; but after
the space of three days and an half, the Spirit of life coming from God,
shall enter into them, and they shall be set upon their feet, and a great
fear shall fall upon them that did see them before: 12 And they heard a great
voice from the heaven, saying unto them, Come up bither, then they ascended up
into heaven, and their enemies saw them do so; for although that during the
flourishing of this heretical and bypocriticall Monarchy, the true Pastors
no sooner appeared, then they were put to death, yet at the last this Monarchy
shall begin to decay, when the three years, or the three days and an half
thereof shall be expired: and then shall the Spirit of life from God, to wit,
the holy Spirit sent from God, work mightier in the latter Pastors of these
days, so as in them shall the bypast Martyrs be revived, and their doctrine
shall take root in the hearts of many, and their reasons shall be so pithie, as
the Antichristian sect, and the rest of the world shall know as perfectly that
they shall prevail, as if they heard God call them to heaven, to reward them
there for their victory: Neither shall they have power of their lives, for God
shall move the hearts of many to defend them in such glory and safety, as if
they were mounting up to heaven in a cloud, and they not able to hinder them.
13 And then at that time shall be a great earthquake, to wit, great tumults
among nations, and the tenth part of the city shall fall: This city is
divided in ten parts, to show it is the same Monarchy that shall afterward
be described by a beast with ten heads: And by the falling of the tenth part
thereof, is meant, that diverse nations shall shake off the yoke of that
Monarchy, and so a part of the strength of that city shall decay; and there
was slain in that earthquake, seven thousand men, to wit, a great number of
men shall be slain in these tumults, and the rest were afraid, and gave glory
unto the God of Heaven, for these tumults and judgments of God, shall by their
terrors reduce some to the knowledge of the truth. 14 The second woe is past,
for these are the plagues of the sixth Trumpet, and lo, the third woe comes
soon; for next follows the declaration of these days, wherein the
consummation shall be, first of that Antichristian kingdom, and next of the
whole earth; take therefore good heed unto the third woe, for it is the last.
15 Then the seventh Angel blew, and there were great voices in heaven, saying,
The kingdoms of the world are made the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, who shall reign for ever and ever. This joyful cry was in heaven,
because the days were come wherein the day of Judgment should be, and so the
power was to be taken from the kings of the earth, who were enemies to the
Saints, and Christ was hereafter to be the great, sole, and immediate King over
all. 16 Then the four and twenty Elders, who sat upon seats in the sight and
presence of God, for joy that the salvation of their brethren was at hand, did
fall upon their faces, and adored God, saying, 17 We thank thee Lord God
Almighty, who is, and who was, and who art presently to come again, because
now thou art to make thy great power manifest, and art to begin thy glorious
Kingdom. 18 And the Gentiles waxed wrathful, for all the wicked now perceive,
that neither their force nor craft can avail; for thy wrath is now come which
none may resist, and the time of the dead is come, for now all the dead are to
be judged, and thou art to reward thy servants the Prophets, and all the
Saints, and all that fear thy Name, small or great, and thou art to destroy
them that destroy the earth, by the persecuting of thy Saints, and defiling it
with every sort of vice. 19 Then the Temple of God was open in heaven, that the
Arc of his covenant might be seen, which was within it: God now did show the
Arc of his covenant, to assure all the Saints that he would now have mind of
his promise, and according thereto would presently send down Christ to Judge
the earth, as was done then in all terror; which is signified by lightning,
voices, thunder, and earthquakes, which then were made; and a great hail,
which signifies the destruction of the earth, as showers of hail of all
others, are the most harmefull and destroying.

CHAP. XII.
ARGUMENT.
A new vision: The devils malice against Christ and his Church: The Church by
Gods providence escapes his fury: She is secret, and lies hid for a space:
The devil raises up heresies and persecutions to destroy her; but all that
cannot prevail; whereupon he goes to raise up her great enemy the Pope.

NOw as this seventh Seal, wherein these seven Trumpets were (which ye have
presently heard declared) was no other thing, but the more ample dilating of
the six former Seals, (as I did show before) so this vision which I am next
to declare unto you, is nothing else but a cleerer setting forth, and
fore-warning of these times, which are most perilous for the Church of all
them which are to come after, especially of the three last woes. 1 And there
was a great sign, and a wonderful vision seen in heaven, to wit, a woman
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and she had a crown
of twelve stars upon her head, 2 And she was great with child, and she was
so near her childbirth, as she was already crying, and was sore pained with
the travel to be delivered of her child: 3 And there was also another sign,
and wonder seen in heaven; A great red dragon having seven heads, and ten
horns, and upon his head seven diamonds: 4 And his tail drew the third part
of the stars of heaven with him, and did cast them down to the earth: This
dragon stood before the woman, awaiting to devour her birth so soon as she
was delivered of it: 5 But she brought forth a manchilde, who was to rule all
nations with a rod of iron, and her son was caught up to God, and his Throne:
6 But the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by
God, that she might be fed there the space of one thousand two hundred
threescore days. 7 And there was a great battle stricken in heaven, for
Michael and his Angels fought against the dragon and his angels: 8 And the
dragon and his angels could not obtain the victory, but by the contrary their
place was no more found in heaven: 9 And so that great dragon, to wit, that
old serpent who is called the devil and Satan, who seduceth the whole face of
the earth, was cast down to the earth, and all his angels were cast down with
him. 10 And I heard a voice in heaven, saying, Now is wrought the health, the
virtue, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, who day and night accused them in the
sight of our God: 11 For they that fought with him, have overcome him, for the
love they bear unto the Lamb and his blood, and to the word of his
Testimony, and have prodigally given their lives even unto death for that
cause: 12 Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell therein; but woe to
the inhabitants of the earth, and the sea, for the devil is come down to you,
and he is full of great wrath, because he has but a short space to reign. 13
And when the dragon saw himself cast down upon the earth, he pursued the woman
who had borne the manchild: 14 But there was given to the woman two great Eagle
wings, that she might flee from the sight of the serpent into the wilderness,
to the place that was there appointed for her to be nourished for a time and
times, and half a time. 15 Then the serpent did cast out of his mouth after
the woman to overtake her, a water like a great flood, to carry her away
perforce: 16 But the earth helped the woman, and opened her mouth, and
swallowed up by the way the great flood which the dragon had cast out of his
mouth: This part of the Vision was to declare unto me, that howsoever the
Church, which is signified here by a woman, (for she is the spouse of CHRIST,
who is her head, her husband, and her glory, obeying him with a reverent love,
and yet weak and infirm like to a woman) how soon, I say, the Church shining
in all brightness and innocence, which is represented by her garment of the
Sun, and treading under feet, and contemning the world and the vanities
thereof, here signified by the Moon, being under her feet; a Planet that has
no proper, but a borrowed light, and subject to all mutabilitie, like the
world, and being crowned with the shining glory of the twelve Patriarchs and
Prophets, and the twelve holy Apostles, succeeding them in the unity of
doctrine, and therefore are called here a Crown of twelve stars upon her
head; How soon, I say, that she thus arrayed did bring forth CHRIST in the
flesh, who is that man-child, who rules the Gentiles with an Iron rod, as David
says in his Psalms: That great red and ancient Dragon, for in our first
forefather he uttered his malice, to wit, the devil, who is ruler of infinite
numbers of men, which is signified by his seven heads, and seven diadems, or
Crowns upon them, and who has innumerable means and instruments to be
executors of his malicious will, which is signified by the ten horns,
alluding to Daniel; and who is so mighty in deceit, that he does not only
allure the infidels to follow him, but even a part of the Pastors, and the
visible Church to their destruction, which is signified by his drawing after
him with his tail as followers of his intisements, the third part of the
Stars of heaven, and casting them to the earth: This dragon having waited to
destroy her birth, and for earnestness gaping for it before it was borne, and
not able to prevail, but by the contrary seeing CHRITS rising from the dead,
and then his ascending into heaven, which is signified by the Child's pulling up
to GOD and his Throne, and seeing the Church to flourish, though under
persecution, which is signified by her flying to a place in the wilderness,
which God had prepared for her, where thereafter she must lurk for the space
of the days ye heard reckoned, to wit, the Church shall be unknown, and as it
were unregarded, and no man shall know how it shall be sustained; for GOD shall
nourish it the space of the Antichrists kingdom, which is the number of days
ye heard counted before: The Dragon, I say, having found this, that both CHRIST
and his Church did escape his hands, and not only that, but that himself also
by the virtue of CHRIST'S renewing of us, was no moreable to accuse the Saints
of God, as he did in time of the old Law, since now we are made righteous,
which is signified by the battle in heaven, where GOD, to declare that none is
like unto him, made CHRIST, here called Michael, (whose name imports, Who is
like GOD) with his Angels, to fight and overcome the devil and his angels, and
to cast them on the earth; Satan, I say, finding himself thus debarred from
further accusing of the Saints, having found that he should never have place to
do that in any time thereafter; as on the one part it rejoiced all the Angels
and Saints in heaven, for their bretherens cause on the earth, as is witnessed
by the song that the voice did sing in Heaven, praising God therefore, and
extolling the deed of Michael and his Angels, who fought so earnestly for the
Saints on earth, as if they had been mortal, they would not have spared their
lives in that cause for their sakes, whom CHRIST had redeemed with his blood,
and of whose clection he had borne witness to his Father; so on the other part
it enraged the Dragon, so that he became the crueller tempter of men upon the
earth, as well for that his place of accusing in heaven was taken away, by the
mystery of the redemption which is signified by this fight, as for that he
knew within short space he was by CHRIST'S second coming, to be cast down from
the earth into hell, there to be chained in eternal captivity and misery,
even as by the first coming he was cast from the heaven, which is signified by
the last part of the Song, so as he pursues the Church with heresy and civil
powers, which both are signified by the floods of waters which he spewed out of
his mouth, after that the Eagle wings were given the woman to fly to that
place appointed for her in the wilderness, where she must remain the number of
days ye have heard, to wit, after that God had given his Church a sufficient
swiftness to eschew the rage of Satan, and to lurk the space of Antichrists
reign, which lasts three times or three years and a half, that is, a time
prefixed by GOD, and unknown to men, as ye have sundry times heard already.
But seeing that all this vanishes, as if the earth had swallowed and dried up
that flood suddenly. 17 The Dragon therefore or the devil, became more
wrathful and enraged then before against the woman, or the Church, and went
about by some other way, to make war against the rest of the woman's seed, who
kept the Commandments of GOD, and had the testimonies of CHRIST to GOD the
Father, that they were chosen and called, for these are only the true
posterity of the Church, to wit, the successors in grace, faith, and truth.
18 And I stood upon the Sea shore, I mean, it seemed to me that I stood upon
the Sea shore, because I did wait to see come out of it, which represented all
peoples and nations, such powers, as Satan would employ to fight against the
Church; for the declaring whereof this Vision was shown unto me, and whereof
these two last great wonders were but the introduction, that by these things
past, as the root, I might the better understand the branches, which are to
bud forth thereof as follows.

CHAP. XIII.
ARGUMENT.
The Popes arising: His description: His rising caused by the ruin of the
fourth Monarchy the Roman Empire: The rising of the false and Papisticall
Church; her description; her conformity with her Monarch the Pope: The great
reverence borne to the Pope by many nations, and not only to him, but to his
Legates: A general defection so great, as there shall not be an other visible
Church, but the Popedom: Of the first Pope who did take to himself all their
blasphemous and arrogant styles.

ANd then I saw a beast rising out of the Sea, to wit, from among the number of
Nations and peoples; I saw a Monarchy chosen and erected up by this Dragon the
devil, and it had seven heads and ten horns, and ten diadems upon the
ten horns: the signification of these heads and horns, was declared unto me
by an Angel, as ye shall hear in the place convenient hereafter, Chap. 17.
and upon these heads was the name of blasphemy: for they by the persecution
of the Saints, and adoring false gods, shall both by word and deed blaspheme
the name of the Eternal. 2 This beast or Monarchy, Daniel 7.
is the fourth King or Monarchy whereof Daniel prophesied, to wit, even that
Monarchy which presently reigns, and has the power of the other three
revived in it, for it is far greater then they: And therefore as that
Monarchy of the Leopard, gat that name because of the swiftnes of the
conquest: and that of the Lion, because of the mightines and cruelty thereof:
and that of the Bear, because of the strength and long standing thereof; so
this is called like the Leopard, to wit, in shape, whereof comes her
agilitie: headed like a Lion, because his strength is in the head, as ye heard
already: and legged like a bear, because in the Bears legs consists his
greatest strength, and durablenesse; this proportion signifies, that this
Monarchy is far greater then all the rest, and all their powers are revived
in it, as I said before. 3 And I perceived that one of the heads of the beast,
had been deadly wounded, but the wound thereof was healed, and the whole earth
followed this beast with a great wondering; this was to signify unto me, that
it was not of this beast that I was ordained to forewarne you, for the worst of
this beast is almost past already, and this Monarchy shall be within short
space destroyed, but this beast or Monarchy is shown unto me, because out of
the ruins thereof shall rise in that same Seat where it was, that heretical
Monarchy whereof I am to forewarne you, which is signified by the deadly wound
it gat on the head which was healed again: for as the Phaenix reuiues of her
own ashes (as profane stories make mention) so out of the ashes of this
Empire shall rise and be revived an other, which shall grow so mighty, that the
whole earth that is without Sanctum Sanctorum, shall with amasement reverence,
obey and follow it, as ye heard presently declared. 4 And they adored the
Dragon who gave power to the Beast, for they shall give themselves over to the
works of darkness, which is to serve, and adore the devil, who raised up this
beast to make war against the seed of the woman, Chap. 12.
as ye heard before. And they also adored the devil in his instrument, by
reuerencing that Beast and Monarchy erected by him: and they said, Who is like
unto the Beast, or who may fight with him? for this Monarchy shall be so
strong in worldly power, as the world shall think it so far in strength
above all other powers, that it is impossible to overcome it, especially, that
the little stone which was cut without hands out of the mountain mentioned by
Daniel, Daniel 2.
shall ever destroy it, which notwithstanding at the last shall bruise it in
pieces. 5 And there was a mouth given unto it to speak great things and
blasphemies; It is said in Daniel, Daniel 7.11.
that his mouth shall speak in magnificencie, and utter words against the
Sovereign, to wit, this Monarchy and King thereof, shall extol himself
far above all living creatures, and shall usurp far higher Styles then ever
were heard of before, by the which, and by his false doctrine together, he
shall so derogate from the honor of GOD, and usurp so all power only proper
unto him, as it shall be great words against him, and blasphemy of his Name.
And there was power given him to do, to wit, GOD shall permit his Tyranny to
increase, and persecute the Saints the space of two and forty months: This
space was mentioned unto me, to let me know thereby, that this Monarchy risen
out of the ruins of the other, Chap. 11.
is the same which is meant by that City, whereof ye heard already in the
sixth Trumpet, which persecuted the two Witnesses; for the same space is
assigned to her there, and consequently it is that same seat and Monarchy
which is meant by the angel of the bottomless pit, Chap. 9.
called Apollyon in the fifth Trumpet: by the Rider on the pale horse, Chap. 6.
called Death, in the fourth Seal, and also obscurely meant in the sixth
Trumpet by the half of that great host of horsemen, Chap. 9.
of the which half the armed horse which I saw in the vision, was a part of
the power, whose head and Monarchy was the plague for idolatry, as ye heard;
which Monarchy, together with the other (of whom ye also heard obscurely in
that place, as the plague of the sins against the second Table) to wit, this
great beast here mentioned, and the other revealed, a vowed and open enemy of
Christ's Church, shall both gather their forces to fight against it in that
battle of the great day of the Lord, Chap. 16.
whereof ye shall hear in the own place: Then this beast, according to the
power which was given him, opened his mouth in blasphemies against God, and
spoke injurious words against his Name, his Tabernacle, to wit, his Sanctum
Sanctorum, which is the Church militant, and them that dwell in heaven; for his
reign shall be so great, that he shall not only blaspheme the Name of God,
in such sort as ye heard already, and persecute the members of Christ that
shall be on the earth in his days, but likewise vpbraid with calumnies the
souls of the Saints departed: 7 And for that effect he was permitted by God to
make war against the Saints; and he gave him power to overcome them
corporally, and to rule over all tribes, tongues, and nations; so great shall
his Monarchy and power be: 8 And so all the in-dwellers of the earth shall
adore him, to wit, a great part of them shall reverence him, whose names are
not written in the book of life, which is the Lambs that was slain, which
book was written before the foundation of the world was laid; for these are
always excepted from bowing their knees to Baal, who were predestinate by
Christ to salvation before all beginnings. 9 He who has an ear, let him hear
and take heed unto this sentence that follows, to wit, 10 If any man lead
in captivity, in captivity shall he be led again: if any man slay with the
sword, with the sword shall he be slain again: then since ye are assured,
that God in his good time shall justly mete to their tyranny, the same measure
that they shall mete to his Church, let not your hearts in your affliction,
through despair of Gods revenge, (because of his long suffering) swerve from
the bold and plain professing of his truth; for in this shall the patience
and constant faith of the Saints or the chosen, be tried. 11 And then I saw
another beast rise up upon the earth, and it had two horns like unto the
Lamb, but it spoke like the dragon, for lest this Monarchy should be taken to
be a ruler only over the body, and that I might understand the contrary, to
wit, that he was specially a spiritual tyrant over the souls and consciences
of men, this other beast was shown unto me, which represents the heretical
kingdom of the grasshoppers, whereof Apollyon was made King in the fifth
Trumpet; Chap. 9.
and it uses the colored authority of Christ, by pretending two swords, or
two keys, as received from Christ, which is signified by the two horns like
the Lambs, but the end whereof it uses that authority, is to get obedience
to that false doctrine which it teaches, signified by speaking like the dragon
or devil. 12 It is this false and hypocritical Church then, which does
exercise all the power of the former beast, to wit, teaches the Kings of this
Monarchy and seat, by what means they shall allure and compel the people to
obey their commands; and this Church shall also entise the earth and the
inhabitants of the same, to wit, all nations which believe the false doctrine
that it teaches, to adore this other beast, whose deadly wound was healed; for
it shall persuade them that this heretical Monarchy ought for conscience sake
to be obeyed by all persons, in whatsoever it commands, as if it could not
err: 13 And to persuade men thereof, it makes great signs or wonders, yea
even causes fire to fall out of heaven upon earth in the sight of men; upon
whom, because they shall swerve from the love of the truth to believe lies,
God shall justly by the means of this false Church, as his instrument of
revenge, send a strong illusion and deceit, with great efficacy of miracles
and woonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Kings 1.
yea as mighty and strong as that of Elias was, calling for fire from heaven,
which here is repeated. 14 And all these miracles it did in the presence of the
beast, to make the beast to be adored therefore, by the inhabitants of the
earth, and it persuades them to make an image of the beast, which was wounded
by the sword, and revived again; for not only shall this heretical Monarchy
have power in his own person to command absolutely many nations, but even the
nations shall consent, by the persuasion of this false Church, to obey the
absolute command of his Lieutenants, Legates and Ambassadors in every country,
so as they shall not only be exempted from the laws of every country,
wherein they live, but shall even be fellows and companions in all honors and
privileges to the princes or kings thereof: And this willing consent of
nations unto this, by the persuasion of this false Church, is signified here,
by the making of this image at the Churches persuasion. 15 And power was given
unto it, to wit, unto this false Church, to quicken this image, and to make it
speak, and to cause that all those who will not adore this image, should be
slain corporally; for as the consent unto this authority of the image must be
given by the nations, and so they to be the makers thereof, so the authority,
which is meant by the quickening of it, and making it speak, must be given it
by the working of this false Church, whose rage shall be so great, as it shall
persecute any who will not think the commands whatsoever of this Monarchs
ambassadors and images, to be an infallible Law, as well as his own. 16 And
so this false Church makes that all, small or great, rich or poor, bond or
free, in short, all men of whatsoever degree, shall take the Character or seal
of this Monarchy into their right hand, or into their forehead, to wit,
publicly profess obedience thereto, and assist the maintenance thereof, and
downe-throwing of all resisters: 17 And that none may buy and sell except they
have the Character or the name of the beast, or the number of his name; for
this defection shall be so universal, and so received by all degrees of men,
as it shall not be possible to any, neither shall that hypocritical church
permit any to be partakers of their civil society, which is meant here by
buying and selling, except they be known to be of his fellowship in religion,
which is meant by the character, and his name, and the number thereof. Then
since you see that this defection shall be so general, beware of every one
that shall say, Lord, Lord, thereby to deceive you, for you see by this, that
false prophets shall for a time so triumph, as they shall vaunt themselves to
be the true Church, because there shall be no other Church visible at that
time, although there shall ever besome that shall not bow their knee to Baal;
for the woman shall not be devoured by the dragon, 1. Kings. 19. Chap. 12.
but hid and nourished in the wilderness out of sight for a space, as ye heard
before. Retain well in memory these words, for the time shall come in the
latter days, that this doctrine shall be thorns in the eyes of many. 18 Now,
as to the number of the beast here is wisdom, let him that is endued with
knowledge number it, for the number of the beast or Monarchy, is the number of
the man, to wit, of the first Monarch of this seat, who shall first usurp all
these styles of blasphemy, and who in the fourth Monarchy shall revive a
spiritual supremacy and tyranny; and his number, to wit, the date of years
that he shall begin to reign, in reckoning from the time of this Revelation,
is six hundred sixty and six. Benedictus the 2. Platine.


CHAP. XIIII.
ARGUMENT.
The happy estate of the faithful in the mean time of the Popes Tyranny:
His destruction: The faithful only are all saved.

NOw so soon as the tyrannical government of these two beasts, to wit, the
false church and their king had been declared by this last Vision unto me, even
as before, after the denouncing of the fearefullest plagues, the happy estate
of Christ and his Church was declared to comfort me, as ye heard before; so now
the plagues that are to be wrought by this spiritual Tyranny being declared,
the estate of Christ and his followers in the mean time is next set forth as
follows. Then I did look, and lo I saw the Lamb standing upon Mount Sion,
and with him a hundred forty and four thousand, having the Name of his
Father written upon their foreheads: for in the mean time that this Tyranny
was raging on the earth, this Lamb Christ was standing upon Mount Sion, to
wit, upon his holy place, out of which he promised salvation to the faithful,
as David says, and is accompanied with this great number of faithful, which
number was composed of twelve thousand of every Tribe, as ye heard before; but
this number comprehends in this place all the faithful, as well of Gentiles as
of Jews, although it seem to be understood of the Jews only, which is done
for continuing of the Metaphore, because as Sanctum Sanctorum, which was a part
of the material Temple of Jerusalem, did signify before all the faithful, as
ye have heard, so now this number of Jews here, signifies the faithful, both
of Gentiles and Jews, as I have said, who now are described here making
public profession of Christ, by bearing his mark on their forehead, an
eminent part, even as the wicked bear on their forehead the Character of their
king, the angel of the bottomless pit: These faithful followers of Christ did
bear now his Mark, to testify thereby, that they were preserved by it, even
in the very time that this Tyranny was raging all the fastest. 2 And I heard a
voice from heaven like the sound of many waters in greatness, and like the
roaring of the thunder in terriblenesse; And I also heard the voice of many
harpers playing on their harpes, 3 And singing as it were a New-song, before
the Throne, and before the four Beasts, and the Elders, and none could learn
that Song, except these hundred four and forty thousand, to wit, these who
are bought from the earth: for they who were bought and redeemed by the
precious Blood of Christ, from among the rest of the world, and so were no more
of their number, were only able to learn and understand these voices, for
unto them only it apperteineth: Where first God promised, that he should
shortly destroy that Tyranny, (which voice of God is here described by
resembling it to the sound of many waters, as David does, and to the roaring
of the thunder;) And where next the thanks thereof is given by the Saints and
Angels in singing the praises of God, as earnestly, and cheerfully, as if it
were but a New-song, and to represent the harmony thereof, they sing to the
concords of the harpes and instruments in the presence of God sitting in his
Majesty, and compassed about with the four Beasts, and four and twenty
Elders, of whom ye heard mention made before. 4 These attendants on the Lamb,
are these who are not defiled with women, to wit, not guilty of spiritual
adultery, for they are Virgins, as Christ called them in the parable of the
Lamps: these follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes, for they go not astray
from his footsteps, neither to the right, nor the left hand, and those are they
who are bought from among men, and are the acceptable first fruits unto their
Father, and his Lamb. 5 And in their mouths was found no guile, for they are
inculpable before the Throne of God, because the Lamb has fully paid their
debts for them. 6 Then I did see another Angel flying through the midst of
heaven, having the Eternal Euangel in his hand, that he might preach the same
to all the inhabitants of the earth, even to all nations, tribes, tongues, and
peoples: for even as ye heard before in the sixth Trumpet, of the reviving
again of the two Witnesses, who were slain by this tyrannical and heretical
Monarchy, so now the same was declared unto me by this Angel, who when this
Tyranny is in the greatest pride, as ye have heard, flies through the midst
of heaven to be publicly heard and seen by all, having with him these
eternal glad tidings to preach them to all the earth, to wit, God shall in the
end of this Tyranny, while it is yet triumphing, raise up and send his Angels
or messengers, who shall publicly teach the truth, and refute the errors of
this tyranny before the eyes of the Sun and the Moon, to the salvation of a
part of every country, and to double condemnation of the rest through making
them inexcusable, who will not turn in time. 7 And their exhortation shall be
this, which then I heard the Angel say with a loud voice; Fear God, and render
him all glory, for the day of his judgment comes at hand, adore him therefore
who made heaven and earth, and seas, and fountains of water, to wit, all
things, good and evil: and the particular applications that these Witnesses
shall make of this general doctrine, to the times of corruption that they
shall be in, shall be this that I heard two Angels following declare, of whom
the first said; 8 It is fallen, It is fallen, Babylon that great City, because
she gave to al nations to drink of the Vine of wrath, of her fornication or
spiritual adultery, to wit, that great Monarchy called Babylon, because it
leads and keeps the souls of men in spiritual thraldom, even as the
Monarchy of Babylon led, and kept the people of Israel in a corporal
captivity, that Monarchy, I say, shall be suddenly destroyed: for it is to be
noted, that as there is no distinction of times in the presence of God, but all
things are present unto him, so he and his Angels calls oftentimes that thing
done, that is shortly and certainly to be done thereafter, which form of
speech ye will sundry times hear thus used hereafter; That Monarchy, I say
then, shall shortly be destroyed, and that justly, because she has abused a
great part of the earth, by intising them to be senseless (as if they were
drunken,) and to embrace her errors and idolatries or spiritual whoredom:
For as men are entised by whores to leave their own spouse, and enter in to
them, so shall they persuade the nations to leave their society with their
spouse JESUS CHRIST, and only settle their salvation upon her, and for the
committing of this spiritual whoredom, this Monarchy is here called She,
Chap. 17.
and afterward the great Whore, and the reason that they shall give why they
make this warning, shall be in these words, which I heard the third Angel
proclaim, to wit, 9 For whosoever shall adore this Beast any longer, or his
image, or take his character on his forehead, or his hand, as ye heard before,
10 He shall for his just reward and punishment, drink of the Wine of the wrath
of God, yea of the pure and immixed wine thereof, powered out in the cup of his
wrath: And he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, to wit, he shall be
cast into hell, the torments whereof they do signify, and that in the
presence of the holy Angels, for they shall bear witness against him in the
sight of the Lamb: for the Lamb shall judge and condemn him: 11 And the
smoke of his torments shall mount up in all worlds to come, to wit, he shall be
incessantly tormented for ever: For all these that adore the Beast and his
image, and has the character of his name, shall not have rest day nor night,
to wit, they shall be perpetually tormented without any release or relief. 12
And in these days when the Witnesses shall be making this exhortation, in these
things shall the constancy of the Saints or faithful be tried, and by this
trial shall they be known and discerned, that observe and retain the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus the Savior. 13 Then I heard a
voice from heaven, saying to me, Write, Blessed are the dead that die for the
Lords cause hereafter, so says the Spirit, for they rest from their trauails,
and their works follow them: This voice from heaven did by these words
declare unto me, that these Witnesses who should make this exhortation that ye
have heard, should be persecuted therefore by that spiritual Babylon; but that
these should be happiest, who lost their lives for so good a cause, for the
confirmation whereof the holy Spirit says, Yea, and subioynes the reason, to
wit, because both they rest from these continual labors and troubles, that
they were always subject unto in the earth, and in recompense thereof their
works follow them: for as faith is the only leader of men to heaven, and so
goes before them; so according to the greatness and honor of their calling in
earth, if they discharge it well, they are rewarded in heaven with a measure of
glory conformed thereunto; and so their works follow them, to obtain that
measure in that place whereof they were already assured by the means of faith
in Christ only. For although the Sun, and the Moon, and the stars be all
bright lamps and lights of the heaven, yet are they not all alike bright, but
the brightness of every one of them is different from the other; Always let
us assure our selves, that although our measures shall be unequal, yet from
the greatest to the least, all the vessels of mercy shall enjoy in all
fullness, as much glory as they shall be able to contain, and the inequality of
the measure shall be, because they are notable every one of them to contain
alike in quantity; and the like shall be done with the measures of pains to the
reprobate in hell. 14 Then I beheld, and lo I saw a white cloud, and upon the
cloud sat one like a man, having on his head a crown of gold, and in his hand
a sharp sickle: 15 And an other Angel came out of the temple, and cried with a
loud voice to him that sat upon the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle to reap, for
the hour of thy reaping is come, and the harvest of the earth is withered for
ripeness, and readiness to be cut: He who was like the Sun of man, and was
sitting on a white cloud, was Christ in a bright cloud of glory, crowned with a
Crown of victory; all that was spoken of him here, was to declare to me, that
the last days wherein his coming again shall be, shall be next following, to
the revealing of Babylon, by the reviving of the witnesses, as ye heard in the
end of the sixth Trumpet; 16 At what time Christ shall gather his harvest of the
elect together, as I heard himself say while he was yet on earth among us. 17
Then another Angel came forth of the Temple that is in heaven, and he had an
other sharp sickle in his hand: 18 And an other Angel came from the Altar, who
had power over the fire, and he cried with a loud voice to him that had the
other sharp sickle, saying, Put down thy sharp sickle, and gather the
clusters of the Vine-trees, for the grapes are ripe. 19 Then the Angel put
down his sickle on the earth, and gathered the Vines of the earth, and cast
them in the winepresse of the wrath of God: For so soon as Christ has
gathered his harvest together, then the reprobate are fully to be destroyed, as
is declared here by the Anges command, who came from the Altar, to wit, as
directed by Christ. Thi^ Angel had power over the fire, to wit, he had
direction to destroy, as he commanded, the messenger of Gods plagues, who had
the sickle to do it, who at his command cut the Vines and cast them in the
great Winepresse of Gods wrath, to wit, destroyed the reprobate in the
abundance of the writh of God: 20 And the Winepresse was trodden without the
City, and the blood came out of the Winepresse, even to the horse bridles, and
spread to the bounds of one thousand and six hundred furlongs. This is surely a
great comfort to all the chosen, that notwithstanding all the rest of the
world, except such as are Christ's harvest, whom he has gathered together in
the holy City, the rest, I say, shall be destroyed in such a great number, as
their blood shall of deepenesse come to the horse bridles, and ouerflow the
whole land of Canaan, whereof the number of furlongs, or eight parts of miles,
ye heard, is the length; Yet though it ouerflow the whole earth, which is
signified by Canaan, it shall be without the holy City which is in the midst
of the land, to wit, although the true Church shall be in the midst of the
world, as Jerusalem was in Canaan, yet that destruction shall not make a hair
of one of their heads to fall, but it shall be without them, and they fully
exempted from it, as the land of Goshen was from the plagues of Egypt.

CHAP. XV.
ARGUMENT.
The faithful praises God for the Popes destruction, and their deliverance:
The plagues which are to light on him and his followers, is to be declared by
the pouring forth of the seven Phials.

THen I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful, to wit, seven Angels
having the seven last plagues, for by them is fulfilled the wrath of God; for
the Spirit of God, having already declared unto me the general destruction of
the whole world, which is without the holy city, he next declared unto me,
unto my greater comfort, the particular plagues that are to light upon
spiritual Babylon, as a just recompense of her sins, and of the plagues that
she is to load the earth withal; and these are the seven hinmost which are
in the hands of the seven Angels, of whom there is here mention made. 2 And I
saw as it had been a glassie Sea mixed with fire, and they that had won the
victory over the beast, and over his image, or ambassadors, and his character
and the number of his name, to wit, from that time that the last beast rose out
of the ruins of the other, I saw these victours (I say) standing above, or
upon this sea of glass, and they had the harpes of God: For now having
declared on the one part how unhappy the state of Babylon shall be by the
seven last plagues, which shall fall upon it; so on the other part, by these
who stand on the sea of glass mixed with fire, he declared unto me what should
be the blessed estate of the chosen at that time that these plagues shall fall
upon Babylon, to wit, of these victours; for they shall reveal the Antichrist
and deface him, they shall hen behold the rest of the world, which is here
signified by the sea of glase, and they shall have the harpes of God, to wit,
the praises of God in their mouths, because he has mixed this glassie sea
with fire, to wit, has destroyed and made his judgments to fall upon this
wicked world, as their sorg which follows will declare: 3 And they sung the
song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb: It was called the
song of Moses, as well because they did sing the praises of Gods justice upon
this glassie Sea, to the revenge of the blood of his chosen, as Moses says in
the very last words of his Canticle; as because Moses praised God for the
deliverance of his people, from the corporal thraldom of Egypt; and the song
of the Lamb, because they praised him for doing the like, by relieuing the
Church from the thraldom of the spiritual Egypt in the times of the Euangel:
and their song was this; Great and wonderful are thy works, O Lord God
Almighty, just in punishment, and true, for the performance of thy promises
are thy ways, O King, and defender of all thy Saints and true followers: 4 Who
will notfeare, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, since thou art only perfectly
holy, for all nations shall come at the latter day, and adore before thee,
since thy judgments are now made manifest, and lighted upon the earth. 5 And
next after this, I saw these particular plagues every one, (for the which the
Saints did thus praise God, as follows) for I did look, and I saw the Temple
of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven opened; the like of this ye heard
was done in the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, and for the same cause it was
also done here, to wit, to show the Arc of the covenant which was therein, for
thereby God did witness, that he was now mindful of his promise by the
sending out of these seven Angels, and seven plagues, which were now to be
executed. 6 And out of this Temple came seven Angels, for from the remembrance
of his Arc and Covenant proceeded their direction, and they were clothed with
pure and white linen, for innocence and purity, and girded about their
breasts with gold, for honor and glory. 7 And one of the four beasts gave
these Angels seven Phials of gold, full of the wrath of God that lives
eternally, and for all worlds to come: These Angels are thus arrayed, and these
golden and precious Phials of the wrath of God, are given them by one of the
four beasts, the most excellent creatures of God, all to teach us, that as
these plagues shall be most bitter to Babylon and her followers, so shall they
be most sweet to all the chosen for their deliverance; for they are to light
upon the wicked, and no ways to harm any of the holy City. 8 And the Temple
in heaven was filled with the smoke coming from the Majesty of God, and from
his virtue and power: And there could none go in into the Temple while the
seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled, to teach us that no flesh,
how guiltless soever it be, can compeare before God, when in his wrathful
face he is clothed with justice, but only when with a cheerful countenance,
clothed with mercy, he stretches forth his hands unto us.

CHAP. XVI.
ARGUMENT.
By the first Phyale the Popes followers are plagued with sundry new and
unknown diseases: By the second Phiale all kind of plagues, Juch as sword,
famine, and pestilence light upon the nations that acknowledge him: By the
third, are diverse Popes raised up at one time, who striving for the seats,
fight among themselves, and so they are justly recompensed for shedding the
blood of the Saints: By the fourth, the reverence of him begins to wax cold
in the hearts of men: By the fifth, his abuses begin to be discovered: By the
fixed, his forces decay, which he perceiving, houndeth out the Jesuits, to
gather all his forces to destroy the faithful, with whom God fights to his
destruction: By the seventh, the latter day is described, and the Popedom rent
asunder.

THen I heard a voice out of the Temple, saying to these seven Angels, Go
power forth in great abundance upon the earth, the seven Phials of the wrath
of God; for now they were to be shown, and to be described unto me. 2 Then the
first Angel went to work, and powered forth his Phiale on the earth, and there
fell a great and grievous sore upon all them that had the character of the
beast, or adored his image: These plagues which were showed to me, were only
ordained to light on Babylon, (as I said before) and therefore they mete unto
her with the measure that she shall measure others with, to wit, they shall
plague her and her followers with the like plagues that she shall plague others
with, corresponding as well in number as in quality: they also have allusion to
the plagues of Egypt, because she is called spiritually Egypt, (as ye heard in
the sixth Trumpet) and so by this first plague is signified, that as she
persecuted the faithful, and killed them, (as is declared in the sixth Trumpet)
and as Moses made a scabbe to come upon all the Egyptians for Pharaohs sake, so
shall there fall a pestilent and pernicious sore upon all his followers, to
wit, they shall be troubled with diverse new and horrible diseases. 3 Then the
second Angel powered forth his Phiale upon the sea, and the sea was made by it
like the blood of a dead body, and every living thing in thesea died; for as
that beast should first so trouble thesea, to wit, the peoples and nations,
with persecuting all them who will not adore her, and by her abuse cause the
world to become dead to all good works and fruitful faith, as is declared by
the vision where I saw her rise out of the sea; and as Moses turned the red
sea into a corrupted blood, with drowning the Egyptians, (which is here called
the blood of a carrion) by the which all the fishes therein were poisoned, so
shall the nations and the peoples, which are the followers and partakers of
Babylon, be troubled with wars within and without, and with all kind of
plagues, such as pestilence, and famine, and such others. 4 Then the third
Angel powered forth his phiale upon the Rivers and fountains of water, and
they became blood; for as this false Church and grasshoppers did corporally
succeed to the fountains of waters, to wit, the true Pastors, (as ye heard in
the third Trumpet) and did assist their King Apollyon, to persecute bloodily
the lively fountains of waters, or true Pastors, who yet remained
uncorrupted, as ye heard in the sixth Trumpet; and as Moses made all the rivers
and fountains of waters in Egypt to become blood, so shall the teachers and
heads of this false Church, be divided among themselves, yea there shall be in
three or four diverse places, three or four diverse persons, and every one of
them shall claim to be king of the locusts; which question shall be decided by
the cruel and bloody edge of the sword: And therefore to show me how justly
that great persecutor of the Saints, is now made to be the persecutor of
himself, divided in diverse persons, 5 I heard the Angel of the waters, to wit,
the third Angel, who powered these plagues upon the waters, use these words;
Just art thou, O Lord, who is, who was, and holy for that thou have judged
these things; 6 Because even as they, to wit, these corrupt, filthy, and false
fountains of waters, have shed the blood of thy Saints and Prophets; so have
thou now given them of blood to drink, for they are worthy of such a reward. 7
Then I heard the voice of one from the Sanctuary, for confirmation hereof,
saying; Certainly, O Lord God, true and just are thy Judgments, for thou have
performed thy promise, and have justly recompensed them. 8 Then the fourth
Angel powered forth his phiale upon the Sun, and power was given unto him to
afflict men with fire; for even as the Sun was darkened in the fourth
Trumpet, to wit, the special teachers did begin to fall from the sincerity of
the truth, enticed thereunto, though not by Apollyon himself, (for he was
not yet risen) yet by the qualities whereof he is composed, and therefore is
he here punished for the same: And as Moses troubled by the hot Eastern wind
the land of Egypt by the breeding of grasshoppers, so shall the fiery spirit of
God in the mouths of his witnesses, so trouble Babylon with the burning sun
of Gods truth, as men shall be troubled with a great heat, to wit, she and her
followers shall be tormented and vexed therewith. 9 But they blasphemed the
name of God who had power over these plagues, and repented not, that they might
give him glory; for such is the nature of the wicked, and so hardened are their
hearts, that the same scourges and afflictions which make the godly turn
themselves to God, and so are the savor of life unto them to their eternal
salvation, they by the contrary make the wicked to run from evil unto worse,
and so are the savor of death unto them to their just and eternal
condemnation. 10 Then the fifth Angel powered forth his phiale even upon the
very throne of the beast, and his kingdom was made dark, and they, to wit, he
and his followers gnawed their tongues for dolor: for as this beast did breed
and was nourished by the smoke and darkness that came forth of the
bottomless pit, whereof he is the Angel and messenger, as was declared in the
fifth Trumpet: And as Moses made a great darkness to come upon the land of
Egypt, so now after the witnesses revealing him, which ye heard signified by
the heat in the fourth phiale, shall follow, that this kingdom shall become
obscure by the light of the truth, and shall come to be despised by many,
whereby he and his followers shall be moved to a great rage, which I meant by
gnawing their tongues for dolor. 11 And they blasphemed the God of heaven for
their dolours and griefs, and repented them not of their works: for as I said
before, neither corporal punishments, signified by sores, nor spiritual,
signified by dolours, can move them to repent, but to a greater obstinacy and
rage, as ye shall see by their actions, immediately after the pouring forth of
the sixth phiale upon the great water Euphrates, 12 Then the sixth Angel powered
forth his phiale upon the great river of Euphrates, and the waters thereof
were dried up, that the passage of the Kings, coming from the East might be
prepared, so as that beast by the means of many people (signified by waters)
did tyrannize over the Church of God; and as Moses by Aarons rod made a dry and
safe passage through the Red Sea to the people of Israel, Exodus 14.
so God by this plague dries up that great water Euphrates, which compasses
Babylon, during his will, to wit, he makes now the power of this Monarchy to
decay, and lays it open to invasion and destruction, as ye shall hear: This
water was dried to make passage for the Kings coming from the Sun rising,
alluding to Daniel, as I showed in the sixth Trumpet: for even as the Persians
and Medes came from the East, Chap. 9.
crossed Euphrates, overcame Babylon and slew Balthazar King thereof, so
immediately after that the Witnesses have begun to reveal spiritual Babylon,
as is declared in the fourth phiale, and that thereupon has followed, that the
kingdom thereof is become dark, as is declared in the fifth phiale; then shall
follow, that God shall prepare the destruction thereof, by drying Euphrates',
whereupon shall ensue, that such instruments as God shall appoint, directed by
that Sun rising, to wit, Christ (as ye heard in the sixth Seal) shall destroy
that King, and sack that great City, to the perpetual confusion of all her
followers, as ye will hear more clearly declared hereafter. 13 And then I saw
from the mouth of the dragon, and from the mouth of the beast, and from the
mouth of the false prophet, three vncleanespirits come forth like to froggs;
for this is all the repentance that these three phials shall work in the heart
of Babylon, as I said before, to wit, for the last remedy, the devil or dragon
shall invent him a fresh order of Ecclesiastical factours and Agents, as the
devils last brood: These are the same that I called horse, in the vision in the
sixth Trumpet, three in number to correspond to their threefold armor, as ye
heard in the said Trumpet, because there came out of their mouths three sorts
of persecutions and destructions; And themselves came out of three mouths, out
of the dragons, because the devil is the inuenter of them, out of the beasts,
because the beast or King of Locusts commands over them, directs and employes
them for the standing of his kingdom, as the last refuge when now he sees the
decay thereof evidently coming on, out of his false prophets or false
Churches, because it authorizes them for the aforesaid effects: These unclean
spirits and teachers of false and heretical doctrines and wicked policies,
resembling frogs, as well for that they are bred of an old, filthy, and
corrupted false doctrine, which for a long space have blinded the world before
their coming, as frogs breed of rotten and slimie corruption; as also for
that they go craftily about to undermine and condemn all Ecclesiastical
orders preceding them, as imperfect and unprofitable, because their kingdom is
darkness; But howsoever they thus craftily insinuate themselves in the
favors of the people, surely their doctrine is nothing else, but the very same
filthy puddle of unclean and wicked heresies and impieties, taught by the
grasshoppers before, even as the young frogs grow like the former. 14 For they
are spirits of devils, to wit, wicked and crafty like them, doing miracles of
deceit, for they shall wonderfully deceive men; and they go to all the Kings
of the earth, and to the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of
that day of God Almighty; for they shall have such credit of a great part of
the Princes of the earth, as I also showed you in the sixth Trumpet, as they
shall gather great forces together, as the last brood of the devil, as I told
you before, to fight against his Church, who notwithstanding shall overcome
them, as will after more clearly be declared. 15 Happy are they then that
swerve not, nor despair in the mean time, but awake and keep their garments
clean and undefiled from the general corruption, lest otherwise they walk
naked, not clothed with the garment of righteousness, and so their shameful
parts, or natural inclination to evil be discovered: For lo I come as a
thief, for no man shall know the hour, no time of my coming. 16 And the
place whereunto these unclean spirits gathered the Kings to this battle
against Gods Church, in Hebrew is called Armageddon: for by deceit they
assembled the Kings and nations to their own destruction. 17 Then the seventh
Angel powered out his phiale in the air, and there came forth a great voice
from the Temple in heaven, even from the Throne, saying, It is done. 18 Then
was heard great sounds, and lightnings and thunders, and there was a great
earthquake, and such in greatness was never seen since men were upon the face
of the earth; for even as the air was troubled and obscured by smoke of hell,
out of the which the king of Locustes, bred in the first Seal, and as Moses
made hail in great abundance to fall on Egypt, which Meteore does breed in
the air; so God having stricken the battle against Babylon, and her
followers, and having overcome them, as ye heard in the sixth Seal; now
follows immediately the last plague of the consummation by the air; for in
the air shall that great noise be heard, which is the forerunner of that
Great day, most comfortable to the true Church, but most terrible to all the
rest of the world, which day is proclaimed by the voice of God from his Temple,
wherein was his Covenant, declaring the consummation in these words ye heard;
and as the great noise signifies the same, so in special does the great
earthquake, as Christ himself prophesying thereof, does declare. 19 And that
City was rent in sunder in three parts, and that justly, because she destroyed
the third part of the earth, as ye heard in the sixth Trumpet: and the Cities of
the nations fell, because they drank the cup of her abominations: And great
Babylon and her sins, came then in memory before God; for then he was to
make her drink the cup full of his wrath, to her utter destruction. 20 And all
the Isles fled, and the mountains were no more found, for no deepenes of Seas,
nor inaccessiblenes of mountains shall have power to save the wicked, from the
fearful and terrible judgments of that great and last day: This does also
signify the latter day, as ye heard before. 21 And a great hail to the
greatness of talents fell upon men, but they blasphemed God for the plague of
hail, for it was exceeding great; This great hail signifies also a great
destruction at the latter day, as ye heard in the seventh Trumpet, but yet the
wicked shall be so stiffenecked, as even at their last breath, their malice and
obstinacy shall rather increase then diminish, as is declared here by men's
blaspheming of God for the plague of the hail.

CHAP. XVII.
ARGUMENT.
The Angel expounded to John this vision of the Pope, describes him at large,
and clearly declares the authors, and manner of his destruction.

But because that these plagues, and Babylon whereupon they lighted, did seem
obscure unto me, therefore one of the seven Angels who powered forth their
phials full of plagues, did say unto me, Here then, I will show unto thee more
plainly the condemnation of this great Whore, and what she is that sits
upon many waters; 2 With whom the Kings of the earth have committed spiritual
adultery, and with the wine of whose whoredom the inhabitants of the earth,
to wit, a great number of nations, who are not of the Elect, are made drunk,
as you heard before. 3 Then he bereft me in Spirit, as I told you in the
beginning of this Epistle, to the wilderness, which signifies the Gentelisme, as
says Esaias; for she and her followers are Gentiles in effect, as ye heard in
the sixth Trumpet: And as our Master says, All these that gather not with us,
they scatter; for no more is there a midst betwixt God and the devil, nor
betwixt the rewards thereof, heaven and hell; and as one of these two Masters
we must of necessity follow, so of the same necessity to one of these two
places must we go. And then I saw in the wilderness a woman, even Babylon that
whore, sitting on a scarlet colored and bloody beast, even as she was sitting
before in the likeness of a man upon a pale horse, in the fourth Seal: And
this beast was full of blasphemy, and had seven heads and ten horns, as ye
heard before. 4 And the woman was clothed with purple and scarlet and precious
stones and pearls, and had in her hand a golden Cup; for this Monarchy and
the Monarch thereof, shall as well be corporally clothed with these colors, and
decked with precious stones; as also, these colors which are finest of all
others, and these precious stones signify, that this Monarchy and the seat
thereof, shall be most glorious and glauncing to the eyes of the world, as I said
before, which shall not only be the true Church by appearance of outward
glory, but even retain many of the general points of religion, which is
signified by her golden Cup; but this Cup was full of abominations, and of the
uncleanness of her spiritual whoredoms: For albeit in many points she shall
retain the truth, which shall abuse men, and allure them to her, yet shall
she mix and poison this truth with her own abominable and heretical
inventions, and traditions, and with the uncleanness of her spiritual
adultery, whereof ye have heard before. 5 And on her forehead was written a
mystery, Babylon the great, to wit, spiritual Babylon, as ye heard before,
the mother of the whoredoms and the abominations of the earth; for from her
shall proceed the greatest, and in a manner, the only chief abuses and
heresies, colored and clothed with the show and title of Christiantie, with
the which these, who shall outwardly say, Lord, Lord, shall ever be infected
with, until the consummation, and as a mother, she shall not only breed, but
shall be the chief nourisher and maintainer of them; And this is called a
mystery, because although this abuse shall be public, as is signified by
being written on her forehead, yet none shall consider the abuse thereof, but
only such, whose eyes it shall please God to illuminate for that effect. 6 And
I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs, and
witnesses of Jesus the Savior, to wit, she shall greedily and cruelly shed
their blood without all measure, reason or pity, as ye have often heard
before: And when I thus saw her, I wondered at her marueilously, and I could
not conjecture the meaning of the seven heads and ten horns that the beast
had, on whom she sat. 7 And the Angel who had now shown her unto me, as ye
now have heard, seeing me thus wonder, says unto me, Marvel not, for I will
reveal unto thee the mystery of this woman, and of the beast she rides
upon, which has seven heads and ten horns: 8 This beast that thou have seen
(or Monarchy) was, (for it is the fourth Monarchy, which is very great and
flourishing) and is not, for it is now so far decayed, that in a manner it is
not, and it is to rise again out of the bottomless pit, as ye heard in the
fifth Trumpet, how foone the wound of the head shall be healed, whereof ye heard
before, and it shall go to perdition, as ye often have heard already, and the
in-dwellers of the earth shall wonder, whose names are not written in the book
of life, before the foundation of the world was laid; of this wondering ye
heard before; they shall wonder (I say) at this beast, which was, to wit, in
great power, and is not, to wit, in a manner, as ye presently heard, and yet is,
I mean does stand, though far decayed from the former greatness: 9 Take
good heed unto this that I declare unto thee, for herein shall the true
wisdom of men be tried, to wit, in knowing by this my description, what
particular Empire and Tyranny I speak of: And the seven heads of this beast
signify, as well seven material hills, whereupon the seat of this Monarchy
is situated, as also seven kings, or diverse forms of Magistrates that this
Empire has had, and is to have hereafter; 10 Five of them have been already,
one is presently, and makes the sixth, another shall follow it, and make the
seventh, but it is not yet come; and when it comes, it shall remain but a very
short space. 11 And this beast which was, to wit, so great, and is not, for now
it is decaying, as thou presently have heard it, is the eight, and yet one of
the seven; for this beast which rose out of the ruins of the fourth Monarchy,
as ye heard before, in respect it uses an heretical Tyranny over the
consciences of men, by that new form of Empire, is different from any of the
rest, and so is the eight, and yet because this form of government shall have
the same seat which the rest had, and use as great Tyranny, and greater upon
the world, and shall use the same form in civil government, which one of the
seven used, therefore because it is so like them, I call it one of the seven.
12 And the ten horns which thou saw, signify ten Kings, to wit, the
great number of subalterne Magistrates in all the Provinces under that
Monarchy, who have not yet received their kingdom; for under all the diverse
sorts of governments that shall be in it, except the last and heretical sort,
these subalterne powers shall be but in the rank of subjects, but they shall
take their kingly power with the beast, to wit, at the very time that this
Apollyon shall rise out of the ashes of the fourth beast or Monarchy, the
kings of the earth shall become his slaves and subalterne Magistrates, whereas
the subjects were only the power of that Monarchy before: so as the horns or
powers of this beast, were but of subjects before it was wounded, but after the
healing of it, the worldly kings and rulers shall become the powers and horns
of it. 13 These shall have one counsel, and shall give their strength and
power to the beast, to wit, these kings shall all willingly yield obedience to
Babylon, and shall employ their whole forces for the maintenance of that
Monarchy, and the persecution of the Saints: 14 For they shall fight with the
Lamb in his members, albeit all in vain, for in the end the Lamb shall
overcome them, because he is Lord of lords, and King of all kings, and these
that are with him and follows him, are called Chosen and Faithful. 15 He
also said unto me, The waters that thou saw this Whore sit upon, are the
peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues that have subjected themselves to her
Empire: 16 But as touching these ten horns thou saw, thus far I foretell
unto thee, although that for a time these kings shall be slaves and servants to
Babylon, and shall be her instruments to persecute the Saints, the time shall
come before the consummation, that they shall hate the Whore, who abused them
so strongly and long, and shall make her to be alone, for they shall withdraw
from her their Subjects, the nations that were her strength, and shall make her
naked, for they shall discover the mystery of her abominations, and shall eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire, to wit, they shall spoil her of her
riches, power and glory, and so destroy her. 17 But do not thou wonder at
this, for God gave them in their hearts, to wit, permitted them to be abused by
her for a space, that they might do what pleased her, and consent to all her
unlawful policies and pretenses, and give their kingdoms unto this beast,
until the words of God might be accomplished, to wit, they shall submit their
very Crowns, and take the right thereof from her, unto the fullness of times
here prophesied: At what time God shall raise them up, as ye heard, to destroy
Babylon; for the hearts of the greatest kings, as well as of the smallest
subjects, are in the hands of the Lord, to be his instruments, and to turn
them as it shall please him to employ them. 18 And this woman, or Whore which
thou saw, is that great city and seat of this Beast or Monarchy, which
bears rule over the kings of the earth, as thou have heard already: But
although it be one seat, yet diverse and a great number of kings or heads
thereof, shall succeed into it, one to another, all upholding an heretical
religion, and false worship of God, and one form of government, as the fourth
Monarchy did, out of the which this did spring, as ye have heard.

CHAP. XVIII.
ARGUMENT.
The sorrow of the earth for the destruction of the Popedom: The profit that
worldly men had by his standing: The great riches and wealth of that Church:
The Pope by his Pardons makes merchandise of the souls of men: Heaven and the
Saints rejoice at his destruction, albeit the earth and the worldlings lament
for the same.

ANd then I saw another Angel coming down from heaven, having great power, so
that the earth shined with his glory, for so soon as God, by one of the seven
Angels who had the phials, had more plainly described unto me this woman
sitting on the beast, then he did before, he now appoints this other Angel,
who is Christ, to declare unto me, and proclaim to the world (as is signified
by his coming down to the earth for that cause) the just condemnation of
Babylon according to her sins. 2 And he cried out with a loud voice,
saying, It is fallen, It is fallen, Babylon that great City, and it is made
the dwelling place of unclean spirits, and the habitation of all unclean and
hateful fowls, to wit, it shall be destroyed, and that great City, the seat
of that Monarchy, shall be desolate for ever, even as it was prophesied of
Jerusalem; 3 Because all nations have drunk of the Vine of her whoredom, and
the kings of the earth have committed whoredom with her, and the Merchants of
the earth are become rich by the great wealth of her delights, in so great a
worldly glory and pomp did that Monarchy shine. 4 And I heard another voice
from heaven, to wit, the voice of the holy Spirit, saying, Go forth from her
my people, to wit, all the chosen, lest ye be participants of her sins, and
of the plagues which are to fall upon her for them: For if but outwardly ye
haunt with her, and seem to bear with her abominations, ye shall be
accounted guilty of her sins; for if ye will have Christ to profess you
publicly at the latter day, before his Father and his Angels, and reward both
your body and soul with eternal felicity, ye must not be ashamed to serve
him both in body and soul before men: And this warning I give you beforehand
to make you inexcusable, who will otherwise do: 5 For her sins are come to
such a height, as they have touched the heaven, and God is mindful of them;
then not only haunt not with her, as I have said, (for it is not enough not to
do evil) but, 6 Raise your selves up against her, and render the like that she
has done to you, yea pay her with the double of her own works, and in the
cup which she propined unto others, render her the double, to wit, trouble, and
destroy her by all means, and in all things, even as she troubled and
destroyed others before; and according to her pride and wantonness, recompense
her with torment, woe, and wailing: 7 For she says in her mind, I fit a
Queen, or am a stabled Monarch, neither am I a widow, or shall ever be
desolate, nor shall ever see dolor, or taste destruction. 8 And therefore
because she thus builds her felicity upon her worldly strength, by worldly
instruments shall she be plagued, with death, with dolor, with hunger, and
burnt with fire, to wit, after suffering all sorts of torments, she shall in
the end be utterly destroyed, for strong is the Lord God, who shall condemn
her. 9 And then shall the kings of the earth, who were her horns, and had
committed whoredom and riotousnesse with her before, weep and lament for
pity, when they see the smoke of her burning; for although some of
themselves shall be the destroyers, as ye heard before, yet shall her
destruction be so great, as their hearts shall pity the work of their hands,
when they shall see the great smoke of her destruction. 10 And they shall
stand far off from her torment, to wit, her torment shall put them in memory
of their guiltiness of her sins, which shall afray them wonderfully, and
shall say in great admiration, Alas, Alas, for that great City Babylon, that
strong City, whose judgment and destruction is all come in one hour, and at
once. 11 And the Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn for her, because
their merchandise will no more be bought, for her pomp shall make the
Merchants rich, by getting ready sale of all fine wares, 12 Such as gold,
silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple, silk, and scarlet for
her garments, and all kind of vessels to do her idolatrous service, of Iuorie,
costly wood, brass, iron, or marble stone; 13 Cynamome, and all kind of odours
for her Church, with ointments, and incense for the same purpose, and the fine
flower of wheat, and all kind of victuals and cattle, and sheep for her
sumptuous banquets, and horse, and Chariots, and slaves for her triumphs, and
processions, and souls of men; for she shall have many that shall be
Merchants unto her of the souls of men, by selling for money, Pardons given by
that Monarch, which shall be thought to have power to save, redeem and free
men's souls: but ye shall hear more shortly of this hereafter. 14 And the
fruits of the desire of thy soul, O Babylon, shall go from thee, to wit, thy
joys and delights shall all turn to sorrow, and all fat and fair things are
gone from thee, to wit, thou shall leave all profit and pleasure, neither shall
thou ever find them any more, for thou shall be destroyed for ever. 15 And so
the Merchants of these stuffes, being made rich by the buying and selling of
them, they shall stand afar off from thy torments, and weep, and wail, 16
saying, Alas, Alas; for that great City that was clothed with fine linen,
purple, and scarlet, and was of so glistering a pomp, as was gilded with gold,
and decked with precious stones and pearls: 17 For lo now how in one hour
all her riches and pomp is evanished, and all the governors and owners of
ships, and all the multitudes of men in the ships, and all the mariners in
them, and all these who gain their living upon the sea, shall stand afar off
for fear, 18 And cry, seeing the smoke of her burning, saying with a great
admiration, Who was like in power or shining glory to this City? 19 And for
pity of her decay, and sorrow for wanting by that means, the carrying to her
from all other countries all sorts of merchandise, they shall cast dust and
ashes upon their heads, and say, Alas, Alas for that great City, wherein was
made rich all these that had ships upon the sea, by the prices and trade she
made us have, and now she is made desolate in one hour: 20 But although the
earthly men be sorrowful for her fall, as ye have heard, because they want
their earthly commodities and pleasures thereby, which she whose religion was
earthly, to wit, founded upon men's traditions and inventions, and maintained by
earthly pomp and power, did make them enjoy; yet rejoice ye heavens for her
fall, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets be glad thereof; for God, in punishing
her has revenged your cause. 21 Then for confirmation of this Prophecy of her
destruction, I saw a strong Angel take a great stone like a millstone, and cast
it in the sea, saying, Even with such a force shall Babylon that great City be
casten down, and the very place thereof shall no more be found, as Jeremy
prophesied of corporal Babylon. 22 And the sound of harpers, and musicians,
and players on pipes and trumpets shall no more be heard in thee; for no joy
nor mirth shall any more be in that Monarchy, or the seat thereof, nor no
craftes-man of any craft shall be found in thee, neither shall the grinding of
the mill be heard any more in thee; for that City, or seat and Monarchy
shall no more be inhabited: 23 And the light of a candle shall be no more found
in thee, and the voice of the husband and the wife shall no more be heard in
thee; for as it shall not be inhabited any more by the wicked, so neither shall
the godly dwell therein; so accursed shall it be, so as the lamps of the five
virgins shall not burn there, neither shall Christ and his spouse, the true
Church any more be there, although that during the standing of that Monarchy,
some chosen, though few and secret, were, and at all times shall be, even
within that City, the seat thereof, whose merchants were the great men of the
earth, and with whose witchcrafts all nations wereseduced. 24 And the blood of
the Prophets, and of the Saints was found in her, and of all them that were
slain upon the earth, to wit, this plague of destruction shall justly fall
upon her, as well for that she made her messengers or ambassadors, who are
great in power, (as ye heard before) to be the sellers of her Pardons,
Prayers, Sacraments, Merits, and even of the sins, and souls of men, as ye
have presently heard; and so by that means and the like, bewitched, as it
were, and abused many nations; as also for that she had cruelly persecuted and
murdered the Saints, so as the blood of all the Saints since Abel, who
willingly sacrificed their lives for the love of Gods truth, and for the
testimony of his Son, shall be laid upon her head, and imputed unto her, in
following, fulfilling, and exceeding the rage of former Tyrants, oppressing and
persecuting the Church of God.

CHAP. XIX.
ARGUMENT.
The Saints praise God for joy that the Pope is destroyed: The glorious form
of Christ's second coming set down at large: The Pope and his Church is
condemned for ever.

THen according to the voices speaking to the heaven, and Prophets and Apostles
there, to wit, that they should rejoice as much for the fall of Babylon, as the
unregenerate men did lament therefore, as ye have heard; according, I say, to
this exhortation, I heard the voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying,
Hallelu-iah, which is if ye interpret it, Praise God with a loud voice,
Salvation, honor, glory, and power is only with our Lord God: 2 For true and
just are his Judgments, and he has condemned that great Whore, who has
defiled the earth with her whoredom, and he with his hand has revenged upon
her the blood of his servants: 3 Then for the second time they said,
Hallelu-iah; for the smoke of her destruction goes up in all worlds to come,
for she shall never rise again, but shall be burned with a perpetual fire. 4
And likewise for thanksgiving for the same, the four and twenty Elders fell
down upon their faces before God, and adored him, and the four Beasts also
adored God sitting upon his Throne, and all the beasts and Elders said with one
voice, Amen, Hallelu-iah. 5 And I heard a voice come from the Throne, to wit,
from one of the four beasts that supported it, saying, Praise our God all ye
his Servants, and all ye that fear him, small and great. 6 And then conformely
to that direction I heard, as it had been the sound or voice of a great
multitude, and as it had been the sound of many waters, and as the sound of
great thunders, to wit, the voice of all the Creatures in heaven, whose sound
in greatness might be compared to the noise of many waters, or to the roaring of
the thunder, and they said all in one Voice, Hallelu-iah, because our Lord God
Almighty has now reigned by destroying Babylon, and her followers. 7 Let us
therefore rejoice and be glad, and render him all glory: for the Marriage of
the Lamb is come, to wit, the latter Day is at hand, and his wife has made
herself ready for him, to wit, his Church is now purified from among the
wicked. 8 And it was given unto her to clothe herself with pure and bright
linen, which is the justification of the Saints; for as fine linen is a pure
bright, white, and precious stuff, so are the Saints clothed with that
precious undefiled, and glorious garment of righteousness through imputation;
And this our garment of Justification, with the which we shall be clothed at the
latter day, must only come of his righteousness, so (as ye presently heard,)
it must be given us by him; for as of our selves we cannot think a good
thought, so can we merit nothing but eternal death, and when we have done all
the good works we can, we must think our selves but improfitable servants, as
Christ himself said. 9 Then the same voice, to wit, the voice of the Angel
that showed me these things, said to me, Write and leave in record to all
posterities: Happy are they that are called to the Supper of the Lambs
marriage, whereof thou thy self heard him speak parabolically; for those who
are called, shall never again be cast off, but are chosen for ever. And he
said unto me, these words of God are true which I bad thee write, to leave to
posterity, that God himself has given this comfortable promise, which I have
specially willed thee to witness to thy Brethren, because it will come to
pass in the later days, that this whoring and heretical Babylon, shall
diswade all her followers from trusting this promise, and so drive men to an
uncertainty of their Election. 10 And I fell down at this Angels feet to
have adored him (so all flesh is given of it self, to adore some visible thing
which is idolatry, such is the corruption of our flesh, if it be not holden up
by grace from above,) but he did reprove me, and said, Beware thou do it not:
For although I be a more excellent creature of God then thou art, yet am I but
thy fellow servant, and so one of thy brethren, bearing the testimony of JESUS
in heaven, to be his servant and creature, as thou do in earth: Adore
therefore God only, for no creature must either be prayed to, or adored, nor
no mediation can come, but by Christ only, and think me not a God for
prophesying thus unto thee, (for the witnessing of Christ is the Spirit of
prophecy) for that gift is common to others, as well as to me, and it is the
same Spirit of prophecy, albeit not the same gift of it that foretells things
to come, which gives grace to all the Elect, to bear true and constant record
of Christ. 11 Then I saw thereafter the form of the day of Judgment; for I
saw the Heavens open, and lo, a white horse came down from them, (of this
white horse ye heard in the first Seal) and he that sat upon him, to wit,
Christ, was called faithful and true, for by giving Judgment, he was now to
perform his promise; and he was also called, He that justly judges, and
fights, for he was presently to judge the world, and to condemn perpetually
all the reprobate: 12 And his eyes were like the flames of fire, (as ye heard
in the beginning of this Epistle) and on his head were many diademes, for now
he was to reign eternally over all the kingdoms of the earth, as the Elders
did sing in the seventh Trumpet; and he had a Name written upon him, which no
man did know but himself; for the mystery of his Name of Redemptor is so
profound, as no creature is able to comprehend it by wisdom; and therefore I
heard himself say, that no Angel, no not himself in so far as he is man,
did foreknow the day of his last coming, which shall be the fulfilling of that
mystery. 13 And he was clothed with a garment dipped in blood, wherewith the
garments of the souls of Martyrs are washed, as ye heard in the fifth Seal,
and he is named, The word of God, as I did show you in the beginning of my
Euangel. 14 And the hosts of Angels and Saints in heaven, followed him upon
white horses clothed in white, and pure linen, whereof ye heard already: 15
And from his mouth came forth a sharp sword, as ye heard in the beginning of
this Epistle, that he might strike the Gentiles therewith; for he shall rule
them with a rod of iron, as David says, and he treads, to wit, gives
command and power to tread the lake or sea of the vine of the fury and wrath of
God Almighty, as ye heard in the seventh Trumpet: 16 And he has upon his
garment, and upon his thigh, as the strongest part of his body, this name
written, The King of kings, and Lord of lords. 17 And I saw an Angel standing
in the Sun, that there he might be seen publicly of all, and that the Whole
world might take heed to that which he was to proclaim, and he cried with a
loud voice to all the fowls flying through the midst of heaven, Come and
gather your selves to the supper of the Lord; 18 To eat the flesh of Kings, of
Tribunes, of mighty men, of horses and of their riders: in short, come eat
the flesh of all freemen and slaves, great and small: This was to declare,
that the day of Judgment was come, wherein should that destruction ensue,
signified by fowls eating their flesh, (because fowls use to eat the flesh
of dead men unburied) which should ouerwhelme all sorts of men, excepting
always these that were marked, who were sundry times excepted before, as ye
heard. 19 Then I saw that beast, to wit, Babylon, together with the kings of
the earth who took her part, and their armies gathered together, to make war
with him that sat upon the white horse, and with his army: 20 But the Beast
was taken, together with the false prophet, or false Church, which by her false
miracles seduced the nations that did bear the Character of the Beast, and
adored his image, as ye heard before, and they were both cast quick in the
lake of fire burning with brimstone: 21 And the rest were slain by the sword
which came out of his mouth, that sat upon the horse, and the fowls were
filled with their flesh; for how soon Christ shall come to Judgment, then
shall all the enemies of God be destroyed, and so full victory obtained of this
battle, whereof ye heard in the sixth Trumpet, and sixth phiale, and shall
hear farther hereafter: And chiefly Babylon, and the false Church shall be
cast into hell, because they merit double punishment for the abusing of men,
although they shall not also want their damnation that follows them, as is
signified by their slaughter with the sword of his mouth, whereof ye heard in
the beginning of this Epistle, and by the fowls eating their flesh, as ye
presently perceive.

CHAP. XX.
ARGUMENT.
The sum and recapitulation of all the former visions, to wit, the first
estate of the Church in all purity after Christ: The heresies, and specially
the Popedom that followed: The destruction thereof, in their greatestrage: The
latter day: The salvation of the Elect, and condemnation of all others.

THe Spirit of God having now shown unto me the estate of the Church militant,
with the special temptations and troubles of the same, from the death of
Christ to the consummation of the world, and their joyful deliverance and
victory at that time, by the first six Seals; and next more amply by the
seventh Seal, wherein were the seven trumpets; and thirdly, her greatest
temptations and troubles, more clearly and at large, by the vision of the
woman, persecuted by the Dragon; and lastly, the clear and ample description,
and damnation of Babylon, that great persecuter, the sorrow of the earth, and
joy of heaven therefore: This vision now that ye shall presently hear, was
next shown unto me, to serve for a sum as it were, and a short
recapitulation of the whole Prophecy, so often reiterated before; which is
here divided in three parts: First, the happy estate of Christ's Church, though
not in the eyes of the world, from his first coming to a long time after, as
was declared by the first Seal: Next, the grievous troubles and temptations,
unto the which she shall be subject thereafter, as was declared by the third
and fourth Seal; and by the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth blastes of the
Trumpets: And thirdly, the destruction of all her enemies, her joyful
deliverance, and the consummation, as was declared by the sixth Seal, the
seventh Trumpet, the seventh phiale, and the coming down of the white horse,
which in my last words before these, ye heard described: But specially in this
vision is declared, the punishment at the latter day of the devil himself,
before the destruction only of his instruments, being mentioned, as ye
formerly heard. The vision then was this; 1 I saw an Angel come down from
heaven, and he had the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his
hand: 2 And he took the dragon, to wit, the ancient serpent, who is the
devil and Satan, to wit, the Tempter, and bound him for the space of a
thousand years: 3 And did cast him in the bottomless pit, and closed him in
there, that it should not be opened, that he might come forth and seduce the
nations, till the space of a thousand years were completed and past, for
thereafter he must be loosed for a short space. 4 Then I saw seats, and persons
sitting upon them, and judgment or power of judging was given unto them: And I
also saw the souls of them who were beheaded, or otherwise put to death, for
the testimony of Christ, and the word of God, and adored not the Beast, nor
took his image, neither his character on their foreheads, nor on their hands:
These shall live and reign with Christ, the space of the thousand years ye
heard: 5 But the rest of the dead shall not revive, till the space of these
years be complete: This is the first resurrection. 6 Blessed and holy is he
that is partaker of the first resurrection; for over such the second death shall
have no power, but they shall be Priests of God and Christ, and shall reign with
him for ever. This is the first part of the division, whereof I presently told
you, to wit, Christ by his passion did bind the devil, who before was raging
in the world, and closed him in hell by the removing of the veil of blindness
from the whole earth, which remained so the space of a thousand years, to wit,
a long space, and all that time the devil remained bound and casten into hell
by Christ, who only has power of it; so as in all that space, the nations were
not seduced: for the efficacy of heresies was not yet cropen in, and the
Saints and Church visible shall so increase, albeit in the midst of persecution
all this time, and so retain the purity of the truth, as by the glory of
their constancy, and patience in the time of their persecution, they shall as
it were reign over the earth, and by their Martyrdom be Judges thereof; for it
is called Christ's reigning and the Saints upon the earth, when his word, and
true professors thereof, shine visibly therein, as I have said: and these were
they who adored not the beast, to wit, they are the elect, who were
predestinate before all beginnings, to be preserved from all infections and
heresies, which is generally represented by this part of them, that the beast
or Babylon shall raise and maintain, as the greatest and most perilous that
ever shall be raised by Satan: And the honorable sitting of the Saints and
souls of Martyrs was showed to me, to assure me, that how soon the soul of
any faithful man is parted from the body, it ascends immediately unto heaven,
there abiding in all glory, the reioyning again of his glorified body at the
latter day, coniunctly to possess all glory in heaven eternally; like as by
the contrary, the reprobate soul, how soon it parts from the body of the
wicked, goes down immediately to hell, there abiding in all torment, the
knitting again with his cursed body at the latter day, there jointly to be
subject to eternal pain; neither is there any resting place by the way for
any of them: and the rest of the dead, to wit, all the wicked, shall not be
revived while this space be complete; for the wicked shall neither during this
space, nor at any time thereafter, taste of the regeneration, which is the
first resurrection, and second birth, as Christ said to Nicodemus: and
therefore, as I said already, Blessed and happy are they who are partakers of
the first resurrection, for the second death, to wit, hell, shall have no power
of them, but they shall be Priests of God and Christ, and reign with him these
thousand years, to wit, they shall eternally in heaven offer up that
Eucharisticall Sacrifice of praise to God, and so be joined in fellowship with
the chosen, which were upon the earth in that aforesaid time. This first part
of this vision is begun already; now follows the next part. 7 And when these
happy days are expired, then shall the devil be loosed out of his prison: 8
And he shall go forth with greater liberty to seduce the nations which are in
the four airths of the earth, to wit, he shall not only, after the spreding of
many heresies, cause a general blindness and defection, but also make a great
persecution upon the faithful Church, by gathering Gog and Magog to battle
against them, whose number is like the sand of the sea, to wit, after
innumerable troubles, at last he shall gather to the great day of the battle
of the Lord (of the which ye heard in the sixth Trumpet, and sixth phiale, and
last immediately before this Vision) Gog and Magog, to wit, two great seats of
Monarchies and Tyrannies over the Church, who both at one time shall rise in
the latter days, and both at another time shall be destroyed by the blast of
Christ's breath, as ye shall hear; whereof the one is the auowed, and
professed enemy of GOD, and his CHRIST, but the other is Babylon, the
hypocritical and most dangerous adversary: Of these two ye heard in the sixth
Trumpet, and so these two, although pride, and envy, shall still keep a
rooted malice betwixt them, yet they shall both with innumerable forces, make
war against the true Church, as Herod and Pilate did band themselves against
Christ, notwithstanding the particular dislikes which were betwixt them: It is
these and their forces that must fight against the Saints at Arma-geddon, as ye
heard in the sixth phiale, and the special drawers on of this battle shall be the
three frogs, who are the last vermin, bred of the smoke of the bottomless
pit, as ye also heard in the said phiale. 9 These great forces then went up
upon the earth; for the devil raised them out of the bottomless pit, and they
spread themselves upon the breadth of the earth, so great was their number, and
compassed the Tents or dwellings of the Saints, and the holy City; for they
were prepared to invade the true Church on all sides, and by all means, but
the fire came down from heaven and devoured them; for God by his Almighty
power, even when their power was greatest, and nothing so like, as an apparent
rooting out of all the faithful, in rebus desperatis, did miraculously
confound all the adversaries of his Church: And now comes in the third and last
part of this Vision, to wit, the description of the Consummation: 10 For I did
see the devil, who seduced these wicked, cast into a lake of fire and
brimstone, to wit, in hell, out of the which he shall never come again, where
also the beast, and the false prophet were, as ye heard before; Here now I saw
the devil punished eternally, to my greater comfort, for troubling the Church,
where before I saw only his instruments punished, as I said in the beginning
of this Vision: and he and his instruments shall be tormented there day and
night, to wit, incessantly for ever and ever. 11 Then I saw a great white
Throne, and one sitting thereupon in all glory and brightness, to wit, JESUS
CHRIST, now coming from heaven, to judge the earth: and from his sight fled
the earth and the heaven, and their place was not found; for the whole earth,
and much of the heaven shall be destroyed and renewed at his last coming. 12
And I saw all the dead, great and small, standing in GOD his sight; for then is
the resurrection of the dead, who at that time must be judged: And the books
were opened, to wit, the counsels, and secrets of all men's hearts; and another
book, to wit, the book of Life was opened, to the effect that all those whose
names were written into it, to wit, predestined and elected for salvation
before all beginnings, might there be selected for eternal Glory: And the dead
were judged out of these things which were written in the books, according to
their works; for as God is a Spirit, so judges he the thoughts of man, and so
by faith only iustifies him, which notwithstanding is done according to his
works, because they, as the fruits of faith, cannot be separated from it, and
bear witness of the same to men in the earth. 13 And the Sea gave up all the
dead she had; for all the dead must then rise, as I have showed already; And
death and hell gave up all they had, for not only the bodies, but even the
souls of the wicked shall be judged there, and every one was judged according to
his works, as I presently did show you. 14 And hell and death were casten in
the Lake of fire, which is the second death, to wit, hell and death shall then
be closed up for ever within themselves, and shall never again come forth to
trouble the Saints; for death, which is the last enemy, shallbe abolished from
holy Jerusalem for ever. 15 And whosoeuers name is not found written in the
book of Life, is casten into the Lake of fire; for not only the public evil
doers, but even whosoever is not predestinate for salvation, shall at that time
be casten into hell, for there is no midway; but whosoever gathers not with
Christ, he scatters, as I show before.

CHAP. XXI.
ARGUMENT.
A large and glorious description of the Church Triumphant in Heaven: and of
all the members of that holy and Eternal Jerusalem.

NOw the Spirit of God having by this last vision made a sum and
recapitulation of all the former, as ye have heard, he, by this following and
last vision, declares, and gloriously describes the reward of all them, who
constantly persevere unto the end, in the true service of God, notwithstanding
all the assaults of Satan, which ye have heard dilated: the reward was then,
to be eternal inheritours of holy Jerusalem, as ye shall presently hear. 1
For I saw a new heaven and a new earth: it is over this new heaven and new
earth that the faithful should reign kings, and priests for ever, as ye
heard before: And the first heaven, and the first earth went away, neither was
the sea any more; for all shall be burnt with fire at the consummation, which
fire shall renew them, and take away their corruption and mutablitie, releeuing
them from the servitude of death, to the liberty of the glory of the sons of
God; who notwithstanding shall not dwell there but in heaven. 2 And even I John
saw the holy new City Jerusalem coming down from heaven, made ready of God
like a bride, that is decked for her bridegroom: For this holy Church
triumphant shall come down in all shining glory to meet Christ her husband,
when he shall have judged the world, (as ye have heard before) to be
incorporated and joined with him for ever. 3 And I heard a mighty voice from
heaven, saying, for confirmation of this happy conjunction; Lo the Tabernacle
of God, and his dwelling place is with men, and he will now dwell with them
for ever, and they shall be his people, and he shall be a God with them, and
their God: 4 And God shall wipe all tears from their eyes; for they shall
feel no more any sorrow, as ye have often heard before, and death shall be no
more, neither shall any sorrow, crying, or dolor ever be in that Church
triumphant; for the first are gone away, and all these things then shall have
an end. 5 And then he that sat upon the Throne, to wit, God the Father, said,
Lo, I make new or renew all things, and he said unto me, Write, and leave in
record what thou have seen: for surely these words are faithful and true, and
shall come certainly to pass. 6 And he also said unto me, It is done, for
when these things shall come to pass, then is the full accomplishment of all
things, I am A and O, to wit, the beginning, and the ending of all things: For
as I made the Creation, so shall I cause the Consummation. And I shall give to
him that thirsts, of the fountain of water of life, freely, or for nothing,
to wit, he will grant salvation to all them who call upon him for it, and that
for nothing; for it comes of his free mercy, and not of any merit in us: How
foolish then are they to be accounted, who contemning that salvation which they
may obtain for the craving, buie with their silver a counterfeit salvation
from Babylon, as ye heard before? 7 And he that overcomes Satan and his own
flesh shall possess all, to wit, he shall be a full inheritour of Gods
kingdom, and I shall be a God to him, and he shall be a son to me: 8 But for
all them who are fearful and unbelieving, not having a sure confidence and
trust in my promises, and for execrable men, and murderers, and fornicators,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, for all these sorts of men, I say,
there is place appointed in that lake, which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death. 9 Then there came unto me one of these seven Angels,
which had the seven phials full of the seven last plagues, and he said unto me,
Come and I will show unto thee the Bride, which is the Wife of the Lamb: for
this Angel was directed to show me the glory of this holy Jerusalem, the
Church triumphant, not to satisfy my curiosity therewith, but that I might
leave in record to all posterities to come, not as a hearer only, but as an
Oculatus testis, what glorious, and eternal reward did abide all the
faithful. 10 And so he took me up in the Spirit to a high and great
Mountain; for it became well, that so glorious a sight should be shown upon
so eminent a place, and there he did show me a great City, to wit, that holy
Jerusalem, coming down from heaven, and from God, as ye heard before. 11 And
it had the glory of God in it, and the light or brightness of it, was like
unto the glittering of a most precious stone, yea even like the green Jasper
in flourishing eternity, and like the clear Cristall in shining brightness;
12 And this City had a great and high wall, to hold out all them who had not
the mark of the Lamb, as ye shall hear after, and to protect the Citizens
from all blastes of troubles, for all tears will then be wipte from their
eyes, as ye heard before; And this City had also twelve gates, and in them
twelve Angels, and their names were written upon them, which were the names of
the twelve Tribes of the sons of Israel. 13 And there were three gates
toward the East, three toward the West, three toward the South, and three
toward the North, to signify that out of all parts and places of the world,
and whatsoever thy vocation be, if thou call to God with an upright heart, thou
shall find that the entrance into the City, is equally distributed about the
same. 14 And the wall of the City had twelve foundations, whereupon were
written the twelve names of the Apostles of the Lamb: These twelve Angels of
the twelve gates, and twelve foundations of the wall, are the four and twenty
Elders, of whom ye heard in the beginning of this my Epistle; the twelve Angels
of the twelve gates, are the twelve Patriarchs, who were the first teachers of
the way, and so the guides to this holy Jerusalem; for by the Law which they
represent, we must first begin to know the truth, and to know our selves:
and the twelve foundations are we, the twelve Apostles, for upon our doctrine
is that wall founded which hedgeth in the Saints in an eternal security, and
debarreth all others. 15 And the Angel who spoke with me, had a golden reed in
his hand, to measure therewith the City, and the gates, and the walls of the
same, thereby to signify the just proportion and symmetrie, that shall be
among all the parts of this holy City. 16 And this City was fouresquare,
because of the gates toward the four parts of the earth, to receive
indifferently the comers out of any of them, as ye heard before; And it was
alike long and broad, to signify the infinite bounds thereof: and he measured
the City with his reed, and it came to twelve thousand furlongs: this number
also expresses the great bounds of this City; for it is here used for a
number of perfection, as sundry times before: And this City was alike in
length, breadth and height, for all the parts of it were alike large. 17 And
the Angel did measure the wall of it, and it was an hundred and four and
forty cubits of height: this number is correspondent to the number of
Saints, who were standing with the Lamb on Mount Sion, as ye heard before; and
the measure wherewith this was measured, was the measure of the man, which is
the measure of the Angel; This City is measured with the measure of CHRIST,
God and man, to teach us that he is only the Architectour of this Spiritual
City, which he measures by his cubits, and not by the cubits of any man. 18
And the fabric of the wall of the City, was composed of Jasper, to signify
that the wall thereof shall stand eternally: and the City it self was of pure
gold, and like to clear glass, whereon no filth will remain. 19 And the
twelve foundations of the City were decked with all kind of precious stones:
the first foundation was of Jasper, the second of Sapphire, the third of
Chalcedonie, the fourth of Emerald, 20 The fifth of a Sardonix, the sixth of a
Sardius, the seventh of a Chrysolite, the eight of a Berill, the ninth of a
Topaze, the tenth of a Chrysophrasus, the eleventh of an Hyacinth, the twelfth
of an Amethist: These twelve sundry stones, one for every one of the
foundations, signify, that we, the twelve Apostles, who are these twelve
foundations (as ye heard) shall every one receive a diverse reward and crown of
glory, according to the greatness and excellency of our labors in the earth:
these twelve precious stones allude also to the twelve precious stones in
Aarons brestplate. 21 And the twelve gates were of twelve pearls, and every
gate of a sundry pearl; (this signifies the like of the Patriarchs) and the
Market place of the City was of pure gold, and like the glistering glass,
signifying thereby, as by an evident token, that seeing the Market place (which
is the commonest place of every town) of this spiritual City, is of so fine
and bright stuff, that no base, and unclean thing shall be in any part
thereof: 22 And I saw no Temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty, even the
Lamb, is the Temple of it, for no other shall be there wherein God must be
praised, but the person of Christ, in whom all the faithful shall be
incorporated, as I said before. 23 And this City shall need no Sun nor
Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God has made it bright, and the Lamb
is the lamp thereof; for as it is no corporal paradise nor dwelling place on
earth, which is here spoken of, so is no part of the glory thereof earthly,
but celestial and spiritual: 24 And the Gentiles which are saved, shall walk
in that light, and the kings of the earth shall bring their glory unto that
city; for all the faithful kings shall resign all their worldly glory in
that city, and receive a new and incorruptible glory from the Lamb, who is
the light thereof: 25 And the gates thereof shall not be shut in the day time;
for there shall never be any suspicion of trouble there, for which cause
worldly cities often shut their gates, and the night shall never be there, but
an eternal brightness through all. 26 And the honor and the glory of the
nations shall be brought into her, for all their worldly glory shall be nothing
in respect of the glory of this City. 27 And there shall nothing enter into
this City that defiles or is defiled, nor no man that commits any
abominable deed, or that speaks lies, but only these shall have entrance into
this holy City, whose names are written in the Lamb his book of Life, as ye
heard before.

CHAP. XXII.
ARGUMENT.
The rest of the same description: Man's pronenesse of his own nature to
idolatry: The Writer tells his name, that no man may doubt who was the writer
of this Book, and who endited the same: The faithful ought to wish the
coming of the latter day: The curse upon them who add or take from this
Book, and use it not aright.

THen to the effect that I might know that the inhabitants of this holy City,
were as well eternal, as the walls and glory of the same, this Angel did show
unto me the clear and pure flood of the water of life, whereof Christ promised
to give the Samaritane to drink, as I said before: and it was clear like
crystal, and it flowed from the Throne of God, and the Lamb: This River
alludeth to that spring of Ezechiel, which came forth from under the Temple
floor; and it also alludeth to the Rivers of earthly Paradise: 2 And in the
midst of the market place, and on either side of this River, did grow the
Tree of Life, having twelve manner of fruits, every month bearing once, and
bearing leaves for the health of the Gentiles: This Tree, and this water of
Life, are the heavenly meat and drink, meant by Christ, when the Capernaites
were scandalized with his doctrine, as ye read in the Euangel written by me;
and of this Tree and water were those of Ezechiel, and in earthly paradise the
figures: the number of the fruits thereof answers to the number of the tribes
of Israel, who through eating the fruits thereof by faith, obtained salvation;
as likewise the variety and plenty of joys to all the faithful there; and
as it bare fruit to the Jews for food, that is, to satisfy them, so it did
bear leaves to the Gentiles, who being healed by these leaves of all spiritual
diseases, were not only preserved, but also prepared and got appetite thereby,
to eat and turn into nutriment, or spiritual strength and contentation, the
fruits thereof: This tree grew on every side of the water of Life, to signify
that they are both but one thing and inseparable, both proceeding from the
mighty and merciful Throne of God, and his Lamb, and they were both in the
midst of the Market place, to signify by their being in so common a place,
that as they are the support, strength and comfort of the Church triumphant, or
holy City, so all the in-dwellers therein have the like free access
thereunto, and are all alike participant thereof: 3 And no accursed thing shall
be any more, for then shall hell and death be confined, and restrained within
themselves for ever, as ye heard in the former vision: for the seat and throne
of God and his Lamb, shall remain in this holy City for ever; and all his
servants shall be there, serving him eternally by thanksgiving and praises: 4
And they shall see his face, and be ever rejoicing at his presence, having his
name written upon their foreheads, as ye have often heard. 5 And no night nor
darkness shall be there at all, neither have they need of lamps, nor of
light of the Sun, nor any material light, for the Lord God makes them
bright, as ye have heard already: and they shall reign there in all glory
for ever and ever. 6 Then the Angel, after all these things had been revealed
unto me, said unto me for the confirmation of them, All the words of this
Prophecy are true and faithful, and the same Lord GOD who inspired from time
to time his holy Prophets to forewarne his Church of things to come, he also
sent his Angel unto me, that by me he might reveal unto his servants these
things that are shortly to come to pass. 7 Lo, I come shortly, says the
Lord, happy is he therefore that observes and obeys the words of the
Prophecy in this Book. 8 And I John am he who have heard and seen these
things: I declare you my name the oftener, lest the authority of the Book
should be called in doubt, through the uncertainty of the Writer: And when I
had heard and seen these things, I fell at the Angels feet that showed me
them, with mind to have adored him: 9 But he said unto me, See thou do it not,
I am thy fellow-seruant, and one of thy Brethren the Prophets, although I be an
Angel, and one of them which keeps and obeys the words of this Book: adore
thou therefore God, to whom all worship only appertains: By this my
reiterated fall and offense, notwithstanding that lately before I had committed
the same, and was reproved for it, and warned to forbear it, as ye heard
before, I am taught, and by my example the whole Church, of the great
infirmity of all mankind, and specially in that so great an offense of the
adoring of creatures, whereof God is so jealous, as he says in his Law: and
upon consideration of man his infirmity in this point, not I, but the Spirit
of God by me, in the very last words of one of my Epistles, says, Dear
children, beware of Idols: and in this I insist so much not without a cause;
For I know that Babylon in the latter days, shall specially poison her
followers with this spiritual adultery or idolatry, as ye have heard mention
made in this Book. 10 And the Angel said unto me, Seal not the words of the
Prophecy of this Book, for the time is at hand. Ye heard before, how I was
commanded to seal that which the seven Thunders spoke, because it was not
lawful for me to reveal the same: but now on the contrary I am commanded to
write, and forbidden to seal these Prophecies, because I am appointed to
reveal the same, in respect that the time of their accomplishment is at hand.
11 And he also said unto me, Despair thou not of the effect of this
Prophecy, although it profit nothing the wicked, but to make them the more
inexcusable: For God has fore-signified, that he who does harm,
notwithstanding this Prophecy shall yet continue his wrongs; and he who is
filthy, shall yet notwithstanding this remain filthy; even as on the other
part, it shall confirm and increase the just man in his justness, and the
holy man in his holiness: for it is not the words of Prophecy spoken, but the
Spirit which is cooperant with it, which makes the seed of faith to take root
in any man's heart. 12 Lo I come speedily, says the Lord JESUS, and bring my
reward with me, to render to every man according to his works, as ye have
heard before. 13 I am A and O, the beginning and the end; the first and the
last, as ye have heard already. 14 Happy are they who obey and keep Christ's
commandments, that they may have right and part in the tree of life; (for by
obeying they shall be made Citizens of that holy City, of the which that is
the food) and that they may enter at the gates to that City: for the gates
shall be ready and open to receive them: 15 But without this City, as
debarred thence, shall be Dogs, to wit, all profane livers, fornicators,
sorcerers, murderers, and idolaters, and all who love, and make lies; and
shortly all, who continue in any kind of known sin without repentance. 16
IIESVS, says the Lord, sent my Angel to reveal these things to John, that
they might be testified to you the seven Churches: I am the root and offspring
of David, and I am the bright morning Star, to wit, the fountain of all your
glory. 17 And the Spirit, and the Bride says, Come, to wit, the Church; for
they for their deliverance wish his second coming to be hastened, and Christ,
for the love he bears them, has granted them their request: and he that
hears it, let him say, Come, for it becomes all the faithful to wish it:
And he that thirsts let him come, to wit, he that would drink of the water
of life, let him crave earnestly the dissolution and latter day: And let any
who will, receive the water of life freely and for nothing, as ye heard before.
18 And I protest unto all that shall hear the words of the Prophecy of this
Book, that if any man add unto it any thing, God shall make all the plagues
in this Book to fall on him. 19 And if any man take away any thing from the
words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take his part away out of the
book of life, and out of the holy City, and out of these blessings that are
written in this Book: For whosoever in coping or translating this Book,
adulterateth any ways the Original, or in interpreting of it, wittingly
strayes from the true meaning of it, and from the analogy of Faith, to follow
the fantastical invention of man, or his own preoccupied opinions; he I say,
that does any of these, shall be accursed as a peruerter of the truth of God
and his Scriptures. 20 And now I will conclude with this comfort unto you, to
wit, He, even Christ, that testifies these things that ye have heard: he I say,
does say, Surely I come shortly. Even so come Lord JESUS to hasten our
deliverance. 21 The Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST be with you all, and all
your successors in true doctrine, by the which both ye and they may be so
strengthened in the truth, that by your resisting all the temptations
contained in this Book, and constantly perseuering to the end, ye may at last
receive that immortal Crown of glory mentioned in the last Vision. AMEN.

A FRVITFVLL MEDITATION, CONTAINING A PLAIN AND EASY EXPOSITION, OR laying
open of the VII. VIII. IX. and X. Verses of the 20. Chapter of the REVELATION,
in form and manner of a Sermon.
THE TEXT. 7 And when the thousand years are expired, or ended, Satan shall be
loosed out of his prison. 8 And shall go out to deceive the people, which are
in the four quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together
to battle, whose number are as the sand of the Sea. 9 And they went up to the
plain of the earth, which compassed the tents of the Saints about, and the
beloved City: but fire came down from God out of the heaven, and devoured
them. 10 And the devil that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire and
brimstone, where that beast and that false prophet are, and shall be tormented
even day and night for evermore.
THE MEDITATION.
AS of all Books the holy Scripture is most necessary for the instruction of a
Christian, and of all the Scriptures, the Book of the REVELATION is most meet
for this our last aage, The necessity of the knowledge of the Revelation.
as a Prophecy of the latter times: so have I selected or chosen out this
place thereof, as most proper for the action we have in hand presently. A sum
of the 20. Chap. of the Revelation.
For after the Apostle JOHN had prophesied of the latter times, in the
nineteenth Chapter afore-going, he now in this twentieth Chapter gathered up a
sum of the whole, wherein are expressed three heads or principal points.

1. First, the happy estate of the Church, from Christ's days, to the days of
the defection or falling away of the Antichrist, in the first six verses of
this 20. Chapter.

2 Next, the defection or falling away it self, in this place that I have in
hand, to wit, the seventh, eight, ninth, and tenth verses.

3 Thirdly, the general punishment of the wicked in the great day of
Judgment, from the tenth verse unto the end of the Chapter.

The Apostle his meaning in this place then is this, The meaning of this
present text.
That after that Satan then had been bound a thousand years, which did appear
by his discourse afore-going, of the Saints triumphing in the earth, he shall
at last break forth again loose, and for a space rage in the earth more then
ever before: but yet shall in the end be overcome and confounded for ever..

It rests now, knowing the sum, that we come to the exposition or meaning
of the Verses; The order observed in handling this text.
and first expound or lay open by way of a Paraphrase the hardness of the
words, next declare the meaning of them, and thirdly note what we should learn
of all.

THE FIRST PART.
AS touching the words in them for order sake, we may note: 1 First Satan his
loosing: 2 next his doing, after he is loosed: 3 and last his unhappy success.

Then for the first, Satan in his instruments is loosed to trouble the Church.
by Satan is meant not only the Dragon, enemy to Christ and his Church, but
also with him all the instruments in whom he rules, and by whom he rules, and
by whom he utters his cruel and crafty intentions, specially the Antichrist
and his Clergy, joined with the Dragon before in the 16. Chap. verse 17. and
called the beast, and the false prophet. For as Christ and his Church are
called after one Name, Christ, by reason of their most strait and near union,
and heavenly effects flowing there from, 1. Cor. 12.12. So Satan and his
sinagogue are here rightly called Satan, The thousand years.
by reason of their union, and cursed effects flowing therefrom. These thousand
years, are but a number certain for an uncertain, which phrase or manner of
speaking, is often used by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, meaning a great
number of years.

Moreover, The prison whereout Satan is loosed.
the prison whereout he is loosed, is the hels, which by the Spirit of God are
called his prison, for two causes: 1 One, because during the time of this
world, at times appointed by God, he is debarred from walking on the earth, 2.
Pet. 2.4. Ind. ver. 6.
and sent thither, greatly to his torment, as was testified or witnessed by the
miracle at Genezareth among the Gadarens, Matthew. 8.28. 2 Next, because that
after the consummation or end of the world, he shall be perpetually or for ever
imprisoned therein, as is written in the same Chapter, ver. 10. Finally, he is
loosed by interruption or hindering, and for the most part, The loosing of
Satan.
to the judgment of men, abolition or overthrow of the sincere preaching of
the Gospel, the true use of the Sacraments, which are seals and pledges of the
promises contained therein, and lawful exercise of Christian discipline,
whereby both Word and Sacraments are maintained in purity, called in the first
verse the great chain, whereby the devil is bound and signified by the white
horse, governed by the Lamb. Chap. 6. verse 2. So the meaning of all this 7.
verse is this: The devil, having been bound, and his power in his instruments
having been restrained for a long space, by the preaching of the Gospel, at the
last he is loosed out of hell by the raising up of so many new errors and
notable evil instruments, especially the Antichrist and his Clergy, who not
only infect the earth a new, but rule also over the whole, through the
decrease of true doctrine, and the number of the faithful following it, and
the daily increase of errors, and nations following them, and believing lies
hating the truth, and taking pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
And thus far for Satan his loosing.

Now to the next, his doing after he is loosed. Satan first deceaueth, then
allures to follow him, and in the end makes all his to take armor against the
Church.
First he goes out to seduce or beguile the nations that are into the four
corners of the earth, and they become his, though in certain degrees his
tyranny and travail appears, and bursteth out in some more then in others:
For as all that do good, are inspired of God thereto, and do utter the same
in certain degrees, according unto the measure of grace granted unto them: so
all that do evil, are inspired by Satan, and do utter the same in diverse
degrees, according as that unclean spirit takes possession in them, and by
diverse objects and means, allureth them to do his will, some by ambition,
some by envy, some by malice, and some by fear, and so forth: and this is the
first work.

Secondly, he gathers Gog and Magog to battle, Gog and Magog.
in number like the sand of the Sea, and so he and his inclined to battle and
bloodshed, have mighty armies, and in number many, inflamed with cruelty. The
special heads and rulers of their armies, or rather ranks of their
confederats, to go to battle and to fight, are twain, here named Gog and
Magog; Gog in Hebrew is called Hid, and Magog Revealed, to signify that in two
sorts of men chiefly Satan shall utter himself, to wit, hypocrites, and auowed
or open enemies to God: It is said then that Satan shall in the latter times
rule a new over the world, who shall stir up the nations under the banners of
these two enemies to God, the hypocritical and open, to spread themselves in
great multitudes upon the earth.

Thirdly, they shall ascend upon the plain of the earth, presumptuously and
proudly, bragging of their number and force, and thinking none shall be able to
resist their rage: They shall compass and besiege the camps of the Saints,
and beloved City, that is, the handful of the faithful beloved of the Lord,
against whom, trusting in their vntellable number, like the sand of the sea,
they shall make a cruel and vncessable war.

The elect are called Saints and beloved, The Elect are the Saints and beloved
City of God.
because they are in the love of God selected and severed out, and by grace
engraffed in Christ, in whom they are counted and found justified, sanctified,
worthy of love and endless glory: Their faithful fellowship is compared to
Tents, and to a City beloved, to signify their continual warfare in the
earth against Satan and sin, with all his instruments: their mutual amity,
and friendly conjunction in love among themselves, and joining together to
maintain the good cause that their God has clad them with: but chiefly to
signify the mighty and all-sufficient protection or defense in prosperity and
adversity, flowing from God for their just aid against all powers that can
pursue, whereby they also become fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun,
terrible as an army with banners, Cant. 1.6, 9. Yea as a defenced City, and
iron pillar and walls of Brass against the whole earth, Ierem. 1.18.

The sum then of Satan his doing after he is loosed, The sum of Satan his
doing after he is loosed.
is this: he shall deceive the nations: he shall gather an infinite number of
hypocrites and open enemies together, inflamed with cruelty, and these shall
in pridefull presumption fiercely bend themselves against the chosen of God,
and his truth professed by them. But what at last shall the success be?
surely most unhappy: for fire shall come down from heaven and devour them,
and the devil that deceived them, and all his instruments, chiefly the Beast
and false Prophet shall be cast in a lake of fire and brimstone, The unhappy
success of Satan.
and shall be tormented day and night incessantly for ever and ever: that is,
how greatly soever their brags be, how near soever they shall appear to be to
obtain their purpose, God from heaven, as the palace and throne, wherefrom
he gives proof of his mercy toward his own, and of his justice toward his
enemies, shall send plagues and destruction, as well ordinary, as
extraordinary upon them: Ordinary, by revealing their wickedness by the
thundering mouths of true pastors, which is often called fire in the Scriptures:
Extraordinary, by all corporal plagues to their utter destruction, and
vntellable torment for ever in the hels. Thus far for the exposition or
paraphrase of the words.

THE SECOND PART.
NOw follows the interpretation of the sentence according to the order used
in the first part. The putitie of the Gospel enduring, stays the Antechrist
his rising.
And first we must know what time these thousand or many years was in, and
when, and how Satan was loosed. This time is to be found in the sixth Chapter,
in the opening of the first three seals of the secret book of God his
providence by the Lamb, to wit, the time when the white, red, and black
horses had their course in the world: And to speak more plainly, the Devil
his power did lurk, which is called his binding, and the Gospel did flourish
in a reasonable purity many hundredth years after Christ, as the
Ecclesiastical histories bear witness: For in great purity the Gospel did
continue long, which is signified by the course of the white horse, albeit the
professors were under the cross signified by the red horse, and troubled
wonderfully by heretics, signified by the black horse, by wormwood that
fell in the Fountains of waters in the third trumpet, and by waters that the
dragon spewed out of his mouth, in the vision of the Dragon and the woman,
chap. 12. This time did endure from Christ a space after Augustine his days,
when the bloody Sword of persecution ceasing, the whole Church began to be
defiled with diverse heresies, which coming unto a mature and ripe heap, did
produce or bring forth the Antechrist, signified by the pale horse in the
fourth seal, by the king of the Locusts in the fifth trumpet, by Babylon in the
11 and 18. Chapter, by the second Beast rising out of the sea in the 13.
Chapter, and by the woman clad with scarlet in the 17. chapter. The arisings of
the heresies, and the Antichrist breeding of their smoke, is in this place
called the loosing of Satan.

Now follows after this his loosing, what he does: The Gospel being hid, the
Antichrist begins to breed and tend to his height.
He deceives the nations universally: he gathers Gog and Magog with
vntellable armies to fight, he climeth upon the plain of the earth, he
compasses the tents of the Saints, and the beloved City about: These are his
doings.

Now because these actions are most lively declared in other places of the same
book, I will shortly allege them to make the matter clear by conference of
places, expounding every one another. It is said in the ninth chapter, that the
Antichrist shall send out his locusts or Ecclesiastical orders, by fair
allurements to entice the world, to yield to his and their abominable heresies,
and shall prevail over the most part. It is said in the 11. chapter, that he
shall persecute the Saints, kill the two witnesses, and shall rejoice with the
kings of the earth, for their killing, as having been the only lets to his
full glory. It is said in the 13. chapter, that he shall blaspheme God in
usurping his power, that by the advice and assistance of the false Prophet, or
false Church, he shall send out his Images or Ambassadors through the world,
persecuting and destroying them that will not obey him and them, and
acknowledge his supremacy; yea, none shall be suffered to buy or sell, or use
civil society, that acknowledges not his supreme power and dignity. It is
said in the 16. chapter, that God plaguing him for these foresaid abuses, he
shall be so far from repentance, as by the contrary he shall find out a new
sort of vermin, that is, a new Ecclesiastical order, which are called their
frogs, who shall move and entice the Princes of the earth to join with him,
and make war against the faithful, pressing utterly to destroy them: and of
that battle, and the end thereof does this place make mention.

Now shortly join all these together, and so obtain the meaning. There shall
arise an Antichrist and enemy to God and his Church: he shall be head of a
false and hypocritical Church: he shall claim a supreme power in earth: he
shall usurp the power of God: he shall deceive men with abusing locusts: he
shall persecute the faithful: none shall be found that dare openly resist
him: In the end, feeling his kingdom decay, and the true Church beginning to
prosper, he shall by a new sort of deceiving spirits, gather together the Kings
of the earth in great multitudes like the sands of the Sea, and by joining or
at least suffering of that other great open enemy, he shall with these numbers
compass the camps of the faithful, besiege the beloved City, make war
against the Saints: but victory shall he not have, and shame and confusion
shall be his, and all his partakers end.

Now whether the Pope bears these marks or not, The Pope is Antichrist, and
Popery the loosing of Satan, from whom proceeds false doctrine and cruelty
to subvert the kingdom of Christ.
let any indifferent man judge; I think surely it expounds it self: Does he
not usurp Christ his office, calling himself universal Bishop and head of
the Church? Plays he not the part of Apollyon, and Abaddon the king of the
Locusts and destroyer, or son of perdition, in chopping and changing of
souls betwixt heaven, hell, and his fantastic or imagined purgatory at his
pleasure? Blasphemeth he not, in denying us to be saved by the imputation of
Christ his righteousness? Moreover, has he not sent forth and abused the
world with innumerable orders of locusts and shauelings? Has he not so fully
ruled over the world these many hundredth years, as to the fire went he,
whosoever he was, that durst deny any part of his usurped supremacy? And has
he not of late days, seeing his kingdom going to decay, The Jesuits
pernicious vermin.
sent out the Jesuits, his last and most pernicious vermin, to stir up the
Princes of the earth his slaves, to gather and league themselves together for
his defense, and rooting out of all them that profess Christ truly? And
whereas the open enemy of God, the Turk was under bloody wars with him ever
before, is there not of late a truce among them, that the faithful may be the
more easily rooted out? And are not the armies presently assembled, yea upon
the very point of their execution in France against the Saints there? In
Flanders for the like; and in Germany, by whom already the Bishop of Collein
is displaced? And what is prepared and come forward against this I Will? Do we
not daily hear, and by all appearance and likelihood shall shortly see? Now
may we judge if this be not the time, whereof this place that I have made
choice does mean, and so the due time for the revealing of this Prophecy.
Thus far for the interpretation of the sentence or meaning.

THE THIRD PART.
NOw I come to the last part, what we may learn of this place, which I will
shortly touch in few points, and so make an end.

And first of the devil his loosing by the rising of Antichrist, for the just
punishment of the unthankful world hating the truth, and delighting in lies,
and manifesting of his own chosen that stuck to the truth; we have two
things to note: One for instruction, Man his sin procures God his justice to
loose Satan.
that the justice of God in respect of man his falling wilfully from the
truth, (as Paul says) justly did send to the world the great abuser with
efficacy of lies; as well to tyrannize spiritually over the conscience by
heresy, as corporally over their bodies by the civil sword. And therefore we
must fear to fall from the truth revealed and professed by us, that we may be
free from the like punishment. The other for our comfort, that this tyranny of
the Antichrist, sifting out the chafe from the corn, as our Master says,
Backe-sl^^ers (...) constant ^hristians shall be crowned. Matthew. 10.22.
shall tend to the double condemnation of the fallers back, and to the double
crown of glory, to the perseuerers or standers out to the end. Blessed
therefore are they that persevere or stand out to the end, for they shall be
saved.

Next, The defection or falling away under Antichrist, shall be universal.
We are taught, that the defection or falling away under the Antichrist, was
general, and so no visible Church was there: whereof two things do follow:
One, the Church may be corrupted and err: another, the Church may lurk, and
be unknown for a certain space.

Thirdly, of that that Satan is not content only to deceive, Satan his
children both deceive, and persecute.
except he also gather to the battle his instruments; we are informed of the
implacable or unappeasable malice, borne by Satan in his instruments against
God in his members, who never cease like a roaring Lion (as Peter says) to
go about assailing to devour. This his malice is notably laid forth in the
12. and 13. Chap. of this Book: For it is said, that when he had spewed out
great rivers of waters, that is, infinite heresies and lies to swallow up the
woman, and notwithstanding she was delivered therefro, yet again he raised
up a beast out of the sea, the bloody Roman Empire by the sword, to devour
her, and her seed; and that being wounded deadly, yet he raises another beast
forth of the earth, which is the Antichrist, by heresy and sword joined
together to ferue his turn: So the devil, seeing that no mist of heresies can
obscure or darken the Gospel in the hearts of the faithful, and that the
cruel sword of persecutors cannot stay the prosperous success of Christ his
kingdom, he raises up the Antichrist with both his swords, to the effect
that as one of them says, That which Peter his keys could not, Paul his sword
should: And so has he done at this time; For seeing the true Church will not
be abused with the absurd heresies, for last refuge, now rooted out must they
be by the civil Sword.

Fourthly, of their great numbers, The wicked in number ever ouerpasse the
godly.
able to compass about the tents of the Saints, and to besiege the holy
Cities, we are informed that the wicked are ever the greatest part of the
world: And therefore our Master says, Many are called, few chosen: And again,
Wide is the way that leads to destruction, and many enter thereat: but narrow
is the way that leads to life, and few enter thereat. Also he calls them
the world, and the Devil the prince of the same.

Fifthly, the agreeance of Gog and Magog, the Turk the open enemy, The wicked
at variance among themselves, can well agree in one against Christ
and the Pope the covered enemy, to this persecution, declares the rooted
hatred of the wicked against the faithful: who though they be otherwise in
enmity among themselves, yet agree in this respect, in odium tertij, as did
Herod and Pilate.

Sixthly, the compassing of the Saints, and besieging of the beloved City, The
false Church ever persecuteth.
declares unto us a certain note of a false Church, to be persecution: for
they come to seek the faithful; the faithful are those that are sought: The
wicked are the besiegers; the faithful the besieged.

Seventhly, Scripture by Scripture should be expounded. 2. King. 1.10, 11.
in the form of language, and phrase or manner of speaking, of fire coming
down from heaven here used, and taken out of the Book of the Kings, where, at
Elias his prayers, with fire from heaven were destroyed Achazias his soldiers:
as the greatest part of all the words, verses, and sentences of this book are
taken and borrowed of other parts of the Scripture, we are taught to use only
Scripture for interpretation of Scripture, if we would be sure, and never
swerve from the analogy of faith in expounding, seeing it repeateth so often the
own phrases, and thereby expounds them.

Eighthly,

To conclude then with exhortation: It is al our duties in this Isle at this
time, to do two things: One, to consider our estate: And other to conform our
actions according thereunto: Our estate is, we are threefold besieged: First,
spiritually by the heresies of the antichrist: Secondly, corporally and
generally, as members of that Church, the which in the whole they persecute:
Thirdly, All men should be lawfully armed spiritually and bodily to fight
against the Antichrist, and his vpholders.
corporally and particularly by this present army. Our actions then conformed
to our estate are these: First, to call for help at God his hands: Next, to
assure us of the same, seeing we have a sufficient warrant, his constant
promise expressed in his word: Thirdly, since with good conscience we may,
being in the tents of the Saints, and beloved City, stand in our defense,
encourage one another to use lawful resistance, and concur or join one with
another as warriors in one Camp, and citizens of one beloved City, for
maintenance of the good cause God has clad us with, and in defense of our
liberties, native country, and lives: For since we see God has promised not
only in the world to come, but also in this world, to give us victory over
them, let us in assurance hereof strongly trust in our God, cease to mistrust
his promise, and fall through incredulity or unbelief: For then are we worthy
of double punishment: For the stronger they wax, and the nearer they come to
their light, the faster approaches their wrack, and the day of our delivery:
For kind, and loving, true, and constant, careful, and watchful, mighty, and
revenging is he that promises it: To whom be praise and glory for ever. AMEN.

A MEDITATION UPON THE xxv. xxvj. xxvij. xxviij. and xxix. verses of the xv.
Chap. of the first Book of the Chronicles of the Kings:
Written by the most Christian King, and sincere Professor of the truth,
JAMES by the grace of God, King of England, France, Scotland, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
THE TEXT. 25 So David and the Elders of Israel and the Captains of thousands
went to bring up the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, from the house of
Obed-Edom with joy. 26 And because that God helped the Levites that bare the
Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, they offered seven Bullockes and seven
Rams. 27 And David had on him a linen garment, as all the Levites that bare
the Arc, and the singers and Chenaniah that had the chief charge of the
singers: and upon David was a linen Ephod. 28 Thus all Israel brought up the
Arc of the Lords Covenant with shouting and sound of Cornet, and with
Trumpets, and with Cymbales, making asound with Violes and with harpes. 29 And
when the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord came into the City of David, Michal
the daughter of Saul looked out at a window, and saw King David dancing and
playing and she despised him in her heart.
THE MEDITATION.
AS of late when greatest appearance of peril was by that foreign and
godless fleet, I took occasion by a Text selected for the purpose, to exhort
you to remain constant, resting assured of a happy deliverance: So now by the
great mercies of God, my speeches having taken an evident effect, I could do
no less of my careful duty, then out of this place cited, teach you what
rests on your part to be done; not of any opinion I have of my ability to
instruct you, but that these meditations of mine, may after my death remain to
the posterity, as a certain testimony of my upright and honest meaning in
this so great and weighty a cause. Now I come to the matter. David that godly
King, you see, has no sooner obtained victory over Gods, and his enemies the
Philistines, but his first action which follows, is with concurrence of his
whole estates, to translate the Arc of the Lords covenant to his house in
great triumph and gladness, accompanied with the sound of musical
instruments: And being so brought to the Kings house, he himself dances and
reioyces before it: which thing Michal the daughter of Saul and his wife
perceiving, she contemned and laughed at her husband in her mind. This is the
sum.

THE METHOD.
FOr better understanding whereof, these heads are to be opened up in order,
and applied. And first what causes moved David to do this work. Secondly,
what persons concurred with David in doing of this work. Thirdly, what was the
action it self, and form of doing used in the same. Fourthly, the person of
Michal. And fifthly, her action.

THE FIRST PART.
AS to the first part; Zeal in David and experience of Gods kindness toward
him, moved David to honor God.
The causes moving David, passing all others, I note two: One internal, the
other, external: the internal was a fervent and zealous mind in David fully
disposed to extol the glory of God that had called him to be King, as he
says himself. The zeal of thy house it eats me up, Psalm. 69.9. But more
largely expressed in the 132. Psalm, composed at the same time while this
work was a doing. The external was a notable victory newly obtained by the
power of God over and against the Philistines, old and pernicious enemies to
the people of God, expressed in the last part of the 14. chapter preceding. By
this victory or cause external, the internal causes and zeal in David is so
doubly inflamed, that all things set aside, in this work only he will be
occupied. These are the two weighty causes moving him. Whereof we may learn,
first that the chief virtue which should be in a christian Prince, and which
the Spirit of God always chiefly praises in him, is a feruencie and constant
zeal to promote the glory of God, that has honored him. Next, that where
this zeal is unfeigned, God leaves never that person, without continual
pouring of his blessings on him, thereby to stir up into him a double measure
of zeal and thankfulness toward God. The Church ever troubled by men, has a
joyful end.
Thirdly, that the Church of God never wanted enemies and notable victories
over them, to assure them at all times of the constant kindness of God toward
them; even, when as by the cross, as a bitter medicine, he cures their
infirmities, saves them from gross sins, and tries their faith: For we
find plainly in the Scriptures, that no sooner God himself choosed Israel to
be his people; but as soon, and ever thereafter as long as they remained his,
the devil so envied their prosperity, as he hounded out his instruments the
nations, at all times to trouble and war against them, yet to the comfort of
his Church afflicted, and wrack of the afflicters in the end. This first was
practiced by Pharao in Egypt: and after their deliverance, first by the
Ammonites, and then by the Philistines continually thereafter, until the
rising of the Monarchies, who every one did exercise themselves in the same
labor. But to note here the rage of all profane Princes and nations which
exercised their cruelty upon the Church of God, were superfluous and tedious,
in respect of that which I have set down in my former meditation: Wherefore I
only go forward then in this. As this was the continual behavior of the
Nations toward Israel; So it was most especially in the time of David, and
among the rest at this time here cited; at what time having newly invaded
Israel, and being driven back, they would yet assemble again in great
multitudes to war against the people of God, and not content to defend their
own countries as the Israelites did, would needs come out of the same to
pursue them, and so spread themselves in the valley: But David by Gods
direction, brings forth the people against them, who fights, and according to
Gods promises, ouercomes them, only by the hand of God, and not by their
power, as the place it self most plainly does show: So the Church of God may
be troubled, but in trouble it cannot perish; and the end of their trouble is
the very wrack and destruction of Gods enemies.

THE SECOND PART.
NOw follows secondly the persons who did concur with David in this action:
Three ranks of persons concur with David in this work.
The Spirit notes three ranks of them. In the first are the Elders of Israel:
In the next, are the captains over thousands: In the third; are the Priests
and Levites, of whom summarily I will speak. These Elders were substituted
under David in the kingdom, and as his hands in all parts of the country
ministering justice and judgment to the Kings subjects: And they were of two
sorts, maiestrates in walled towns, who in the gates of the cities executed
judgment; and chief in Tribes, and fathers of families, who in the country
did judge and minister judgment as the Scripture reports: They were not unlike
to two of the estates of our kingdom, the Baron and the Burgess. The
Captains over thousands were godly and valiant men, who under the King did
rule in time of war, had the custody of the Kings person, and fought his
battles: These were necessary officers for David, who was appointed by God
in his time (as we are taught out of Gods own words, speaking by Nathan to
David) to fight Gods battles, to subdue the enemies of his Church, and to
procure by so doing, a peaceable kingdom for Solomon his son, who should in
peace, as a figure of Christ the Prince of peace, build the Lords Temple. These
are spoken of here, to teach us, first, that their calling is lawful: next,
that in their calling, they should be earnest to honor God: and thirdly, that
these Captains chiefly were lawfully called, and lawfully walked therein, as
we have plain declaration out of David's own mouth, expressed well in the
whole 101. Psalm, seeing none were admitted in his service or household, but
such as unfeignedly feared God. And without all question, godly and zealous
David would never have committed the guard of his person, nor the fighting of
Gods battles to the enemies of God, or men of war, of whose godliness and
virtue he never had proof: See then their names and praise, 1. Chron. 11.26.
The third rank of Priests and Levites are set down in the same chapter, verse.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. So men of all estates were present in this godly
work. This is to be marked well of Princes, and of all those of any high
calling or degree that has to do in Gods cause. David does nothing in matters
appertaining to God without the presence and special concurrence of Gods
Ministers, appointed to be spiritual rulers in his Church: and at the first
meant to convey the same Arc to Jerusalem, finding their absence and want of
their counsel hurtful: now in this chapter, verse. 12, 13. he says to them,
Ye are the chief Fathers of the Levites, sanctify your selves and your
brethren, and bring up the Ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I
have prepared for it. For because ye were not there at the first, the Lord our
God made a breach among us: for we sought him not in due order. And thus far
for the second part concerning persons: Wherein we may learn, first, that a
godly king finds, as his heart wishes, godly estates concurring with him.
Next a godly king of his godly foresight in choosing good vnder-rulers, reapeth
this profit and pleasure, that as he goes before, so they with zealous hearts
do follow.

THE THIRD PART.
THe sum of this joyful conuoy may be digested in three actions, The Arc is
transported with joy to Jerusalem.
which are these: The transporting of the Arc; the harmony of musical
instruments; and David's dancing and rejoicing before it. He built a Tabernacle
for the Arc in mount Sion, and transported it thereunto, to signify his
thankfulness for the many victories God had put in his hands: and this
transporting was the occasion of all this solemnity and rejoicing that
followed thereupon. The signification of the Arc of the Covenant.
As to the Arc it self, we know it was built by Moses at the command of God,
in the wilderness of Sinai. This Arc was made of Shittim wood, which admits no
corruption: It was of most comely shape and form, two cubits and a half in
length, a cubit and a half in height, and a cubit and a half in breadth,
ouerlaid within and without with pure beaten gold, and was not only a figure of
Jesus Christ our perfect Savior, in whom all the promises of God, are yea and
Amen, 2. Corinthians. 1.20. and in whom as a sure Arc, all abundance of Gods
blessings are placed, that out of his fullness we may all receive grace upon
grace, John 1.16. seeing he is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1. Corinthians. 1.30. but also a sure pledge of Gods
continual presence in Christ with his people, to bless them with all manner of
blessings. And to signify this purpose more particularly, within the Arc was
placed the Tables of the Covenant, and Law written by God, (for which cause
also it was called the Arc of the Covenant) Romans 10.4. to teach them in Christ
promised, the perfection of the whole Law to be found, for all that believe in
him. Above the Arc was a cover or lid called The Mercy Seat, and above the
lid the figures of two Cherubins, covering with their wings the Mercy Seat:
betwixt the which two, the living God did lovingly speak to the instruction
and comfort of his people, to assure them that all Gods merciful dealings with
man (either in communicating his knowledge to them: or in sending his Angels
ministering Spirits for their comfort,) Heb. 1.14. Ioh. 1.4, 11.
has the ground and foundation in CHRIST JESUS eternally. This Arc then being
a sure Sacrament of Gods favor toward them, and a Covenant of JESUS CHRIST,
wherein corporally Gods merciful promises did ensue; follows the third part,
the form of doing used therein by these persons. Generally, the action was to
bring up the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, from the house of Obed Edom with
joy, and to be placed in the Tabernacle built for it by the King in Mount Sion.
The form of doing used by every person, is: The Priests offer Bullocks and
Rams, because that God blessed the work; The King clad in a linen garment,
dances and plays before the Arc: Chenaniah the chief of the singers with his
fellows, praises God with Psalms, and all the estates in Israel, bring the
Arc of the Covenant with showting, sound of Cornet, Trumpet, cymbals, violes,
and harpes, and place it in the city of David. Briefly then, David upon his
victories does transport to his house the same, to testify hereby his care to
receive Gods favor toward him and his people: Not thinking it enough to have
once or twice proof thereof; but also to procure a continuance by the presence
of his holy Arc, esteeming this the worthiest trophee or triumph, he could
make or erect for his notable victories: A triumph indeed far surpassing the
Egyptian Piramides, the Grecian trophies, or yet the Roman triumphall
chariots. As to the harmony and musical instruments that accompanied this
holy Arc, I trust no man is ignorant of the custom that was among the Jews,
in praising. God with all kind of instruments, as David's Psalms innumerable
times bear witness. But in case some would demand wherefore the Church of God
should more extraordinarily rejoice at one time, then at another, seeing we are
assured that all Gods actions toward us, are for our weal, either spiritually
or corporally, suppose we cannot at every time comprehend it: I answer, that
although I must confess that sentence to be most orthodoxe, yet must I also
confess, that whenever it shall please God to manifest by outward signs to
the world, as at one time more then another the great love to his Church, by
some notable work for their deliverance; We are then of duty bound in the
highest degree to praise God, as well for confirming of the weak ones amongst
us, as for stopping of the mouths, and dashing of the proud wicked without us,
to make the glory of his Name, as far as in us lies, to resound: The
manifold examples of the Saints of God through the whole Scriptures prove this
more then evidently, besides the examples of the prayers of sundry of the
godly, who for the glory of his Name, more then for their particular weal,
have prayed him to give public testimony of his love toward them: So did
Moses, Joshua, David, Elias, Elizeus, and innumerable others of the Prophets
and servants of God. As to the dancing of David: dancing, playing, and such
like actions we know are of themselves indifferent, and good or evil according
to their use, and the intention of the vser; and therefore being used at this
time with a comely zeal, for the setting forth of Gods glory, are not only
to be borne with and excused, but even most highly to be praised and commended,
although that Michal dispraysed the same. Moreover, it is to be marked that
David in this doing, did nothing without the special motion of the spirit of
God, as an extraordinary work, which so fully possessed his soul at this
present, that forgetful, as it were, of the actions of his body; he gave his
whole person over to be governed as it pleased him, always seeking in all, the
honor and glory of his God, without respect to himself: Christ is the ground
of all true Religion.
And thus far for the third part: Whereof we have to note first in the Arc:
The ground of all true and ancient religion, and the body of the whole service
of God that brings salvation, is to be situate in Jesus Christ only, as is
plainly set down, Act. 4.12. Ioh. 14.6. 1. Cor. 2.11. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Next, that
they which will be saved by this Arc, must bear this Arc in their heart by
faith, in their mouth by open confession, Romans 1. and in their actions
confirming their whole doing in their calling to his will, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.
Thirdly, that they who are sincerely joined with Christ, rejoice in the bearing
of Christ, and count it their highest joy to be occupied continually in his
bearing.

THE FOVRTH PART.
AS to the person of Michal, Michals hypocrisy.
she was Saul's daughter, and David's wife, a woman appearandly evil brought up
by amost wicked father; which the Spirit of God will signify, by calling her
Saul's daughter as she was in hypocrisy his daughter in deed, as well as by
nature: yet she was joined with the body of the Church visible, which is
signified by the style given her, when she was called David's wife: And so she
was outwardly a person joined by marriage in society with the Church, yet in
effect a lurking hypocrite within the bowels of the same. Such kind of folks
(hypocrites I mean) are a malum necessarium inseparably and continually joined
with the true Church, never to be sifted while the Master of the Harvest come
with the fan in his hand.

THE FIFTH PART.
HEr doings are, being quiet in her lodging, Michals doings.
all the time of her husbands great and public rejoicing with the people not
coming out; for not being able, as appears, to counterfeit finely euough a
dissimulate joyful countenance: And therefore looking out at a window, she
spies her husband dancing before the Arc, incontinent interprets she this
indifferent action in malam partem, as not being touched with a true feeling of
the cause of his joy, and so despises she his doing in her mind, as only
proceeding of a lascivious wantonness. A marvelous case; she that before of
natural love to her husband did preserve him, although to her own great
peril, from the hands of her own father Saul, cannot now abide to see him use
aright that indifferent action, which she her self (I doubt not) did often
through licentiousnes abuse. By this we may note the nature of the hypocrites,
and interior enemies of the Church, who although in their particulars not
concerning Religion, there will be none in show more friendly to the godly then
they; yet how soon matters of Religion or concerning the honor of God, comes
in hand, O then are they no longer able to contain or bridle their passions,
even as here Michal defended her husband, even in the particulars betwixt him
and her own father; but his dancing before the Arc to the honor of God she
could no wise abide.

Now thus far being said for the methodicall opening up of the Text; The
application of the purpose to us.
It rests only to examine how pertinently this place does appertain to us
and our present estate: And first as to the persons, the people of God and the
nations their enemies, together with their pridefull pursuit of David, and
Gods most notable deliverance. Is there not now a sincere profession of the
truth amongst us in this Isle, oppugned by the nations about, haters of the
holy word? And do we not also as Israel, profess one only God, and are ruled
by his pure word only? on the other part, are they not as Philistines, adorers
of legions of gods, and ruled by the foolish traditions of men? Have they not
as the Philistines, been continually the pursuers, and we as Israel the
defenders of our native soil and country? next, have they not now at the last
even like the Philistines, come out of their own soiles to pursue us, and
spread themselves to that effect upon the great valley of our seas,
presumptuously threatening the destruction and wrack of us? But thirdly, had
not our victory been far more notable then that of Israel, and has not the
one been as well wrought by the hand of God, as the other? For as God by
shaking the tops of the mulbery trees with his mighty winds, put the
Philistines to flight, has he not even in like manner by brangling with his
mighty winds their timber castles, scattered and shaken them asunder to the
wrack of a great part, and confusion of the whole? Now that we may resemble
Israel as well in the rest of this action, what triumph rests us to make for
the crowning of this blessed comedy? Even to bring amongst us the Arc with all
rejoicing. What is the Arc of Christians under grace, but the Lord Jesus
Christ, whom with joy we bring amongst us, when as receiving with sincerity
and gladness the new Testament in the blood of Christ our Savior, in our
heart we believe his promises, and in word and deed we bear witness thereto
before the whole world, and walk so in the light as it becomes the sons of
the same? this is the worthiest triumph of our victory that we can make. And
although there will doubtless be many Michals amongst us, let us rejoice and
praise God for the discovery of them, assuring our selves they were never of
us, accounting all them to be against us, that either rejoice at the
prosperity of our enemies, or rejoice not with us at our miraculous
deliverance: For all they that gather not with us, they scatter. And let us
also diligently and warily try out these crafty Michals: for it is in that
respect that Christ recommends unto us the wisdom of Serpents, not thereby to
deceive and betray others (no, God forbid) but to arm us against the deceit
and treason of hypocrites that go about to trap us. And lest that these great
benefits which God has bestowed upon us, be turned through our unthankfulness
into a greater curse, in serving for testimonies at the latter day against us,
to the procuring of our double stripes; let us now to conclude, bring in the
Arc amongst us in two respects before mentioned, seeing we have already
received the Gospel; first by constant remaining in the purity of the truth,
which is our most certain covenant of salvation in the only merits of our
Savior: And next, let us so reform our defiled lives, as becomes regenerate
Christians, to the great glory of our God, the utter defacing of our
adversaries the wicked, and our unspeakable comfort both here and also for
ever. AMEN.

His Majesty's own Sonnet.
THe nations banded against the Lord of might
Prepared a force, and set them to the way:
Mars dressed himself in such an awful plight,
The like whereof was neuerseene they say:
They forward came in monstrous array,
Both Sea and land beset us every where:
Bragges threatened us a ruinous decay,
What came of that? the issue did declare.
The winds began to toss them here and there,
The Seas begun in foming waves to swell:
The number that escaped, it fell them fair:
The rest were swallowed up in gulfes of hell:
But how were all these things miraculous done?
God laughed at them out of his heavenly throne.
Idem Latin.
INS ANO tumidae gentes coiere tumultu,
Ausae, insigne nefas, bello vltro ciere tonantem,
Mars sese accinxit, metuenda tot agmina nunquam,
Visa ferunt, properare truces miro ordine turmae,
Nosque mari and terra saeuo clasere duello,
Exitium diraque minantes strage ruinam;
Irrita sed tristi lugent conamina fine:
Nam laceras iecit ventus ludibria puppes,
Et mersit rapidis turgescens montibus aequor.
Foelix communi qui euasit clade superstes,
Dum reliquos misero, deglutit abyssus hiatu.
Qui vis tanta cadit? quis totque stupenda peregit?
Vanos Ioua sacro conatus risit Olympo.
Per Metellanum Cancellarium.

DAEMONOLOGIE, IN FORM OF A DIALOGVE, Divided into three Books,
WRITTEN BY THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES by the Grace of GOD King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe fearful abounding at this time in this Country, of these detestable
slaves of the Devil, the Witches or enchaunters, has moved me (beloved
Reader) to dispatch in post, this following Treatise of mine, not in any wise
(as J protest) to serve for a show of my learning and ingine, but only (moved
of conscience) to preasse thereby, so far as I can, to resolve the doubting
hearts of many; both that such assaults of Satan are most certainly practiced,
and that the instruments thereof, merits most severely to be punished: against
the damnable opinions of two principally in our aage, whereof the one called
Scot, an Englishman, is not ashamed in public Print to deny, that there can be
such a thing as Witchcraft: and so maintains the old error of the Sadduces
in denying of spirits; The other called Wierus, a German Physician, sets out a
public Apology for all these crafts-folkes, whereby, procuring for their
impunitie, he plainly bewrayes himself to have been one of that profession.
And for to make this Treatise the more pleasant and facill, J have put it in
form of a Dialogue, which I have divided into three Books: The first speaking
of Magie in general, and Necromancie in special: The second, of Sorcerie and
Witchcraft: and the third, contains a discourse of all these kinds of
spirits, and Specter that appears and troubles persons, together with a
conclusion of the whole work. My intention in this labor, is only to prove
two things, as I have already said: The one, that such devilish arts have been
and are: The other, what exact trial and severe punishment they merit: and
therefore reason I, What kind of things are possible to be performed in these
Arts, and by what natural causes they may be, not that I touch every
particular thing of the Devils power, for that were infinite: but only to
speak scholastickely, (since this cannot be spoken in our language) J reason
upon genus leaving species, and differentia to be comprehended therein: As for
example, speaking of the power of Magiciens, in the first book and sixth
Chapter, I say, that they can suddenly cause be brought unto them, all kinds of
dainty dishes, by their familiar spirit; since as a thief he delights to
steal, and as a spirit he can subtly and suddenly enough transport the same.
Now under this genus, may be comprehended all particulars, depending thereupon;
such as the bringing Wine out of a wall (as we have heard often to have been
practiced) and such others; which particulars, are sufficiently proved by the
reasons of the general. And such like in the second book of Witchcraft in
special, and fifth Chapter, J say, and prove by diverse Arguments, that Witches
can by the power of their master, cure or cast on diseases: Now by these same
reasons, that proves their power by the Devil of diseases in general, is
as well proved their power in special; as of weakening the nature of some men, to
make them unable for women, and making it to abound in others, more then the
ordinary course of nature would permit: And such like in all other particular
sicknesses. But one thing I will pray thee to observe in all these places,
where I reason upon the devils power, which is the different ends and scopes,
that God as the first cause, and the devil as his instrument and second cause,
shoots at in all these actions of the devil, (as Gods hangman:) For where the
devils intention in them is ever to perish, either the soul, or the body, or
both of them, that he is so permitted to deal with; God by the contrary,
draws ever out of that evil, glory to himself, either by the wrack of the
wicked in his justice, or by the trial of the patient, and amendment of the
faithful, being wakened up with that rod of correction. Having thus declared
unto thee then, my full intention in this Treatise, thou will easily excuse, I
doubt not, as well my pretermitting, to declare the whole particular rites and
secrets of these unlawful arts; as also their infinite and wonderful
practices, as being neither of them pertinent to my purpose: the reason
whereof, is given in the hinder end of the first Chapter of the third book:
and who likes to be curious in these things, he may read, if he will hear of
their practices, Bodinus Daemonomanie, collected with greater diligence, then
written with judgment, together with their confessions, that have been at this
time apprehended. If he would know what has been the opinion of the Ancients,
concerning their power, he shall see it well described by Hyperius and
Hemmingius, two late Germane writers; Besides innumerable other neotericke
Theologues, that write largely upon that subject: And if he would know what are
the particular rites, and curiosities of these black Arts (which is both
unnecessary and perilous) he will find it in the fourth Book of Cornelius
Agrippa, and in Wierus, whom-of J spoke. And so wishing my pains in this
Treatise (beloved Reader) to be effectual, in arming all them that read the
same, against these above mentioned errors, and recommending my good will to
thy friendly acceptance, J bid thee heartily farewell.

JAMES R.x.

DAEMONOLOGIE, IN FORM OF A DIALOGVE.
FIRST BOOK.
ARGUMENT.
The exord of the whole. The description of Magie in special.

CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
Proved by the Scripture, that these unlawful arts in genere, have been and
may be put in practice.

PHILOMATHES and EPISTEMON reason the matter. PHILOMATHES. IAm surely very glad
to have met with you this day: for I am of opinion, that ye can better resolve
me of some thing, whereof I stand in great doubt, nor any other whomwith I
could have met.


EPI. In what I can, that ye like to speir at me, I will willingly and freely
tell my opinion, and if I prove it not sufficiently, I am heartily content that
a better reason carry it away then.


PHI. What think ye of these strange news, which now only furnishes purpose
to all men at their meeting: I mean of these Witches?


EPI. Surely they are wonderful: And I think so clear and plain confessions
in that purpose, have never fallen out in any aage or country.


PHI. No question if they be true, but thereof the Doctors doubts.


EPI. What part of it doubt ye of?


PHI. Even of all, for ought I can yet perceive: and namely, that there is such
a thing as Witchcraft or Witches, and I would pray you to resolve me thereof
if ye may: for I have reasoned with sundry in that matter, and yet could never
be satisfied therein.


EPI. I shall with good will do the best I can: But I think it the
difficiller, since ye deny the thing it self in general: for as it is said in
the Logic schools, Contra negantem principia non est disputandum. Always
for that part, that Witchcraft, and Witches have been, and are, the former
part is clearly proved by the Scriptures, and the last by daily experience
and confessions.


PHI. I know ye will allege me Saul's Pythonisse: but that as appears will not
make much for you.


EPI. Not only that place, but diverse others: But I marvel why that should
not make much for me?


PHI. The reasons are these, first ye may consider, that Saul being troubled
in spirit, and having fasted long before, as the text testifies, and being
come to a woman that was bruted to have such knowledge, and that to enquire so
important news, he having so guilty a conscience for his heinous offenses, and
specially, for that same unlawful curiosity, and horrible defection* and then
the woman crying out upon the sudden in great admiration, for the uncouth
sight that she alleged to have seen, discovering him to be the King, though
disguised, and denied by him before: it was no wonder, I say, that his senses
being thus distracted, he could not perceive her faining of her voice, he
being himself in another chalmer, and seeing nothing. Next, what could be, or
was raised? The spirit of Samuel? profane, and against all Theology: the
devil in his likeness? as vnappeirant, that either God would permit him to
come in the shape of his Saints, (for then could never the Prophets in those
days have been sure, what spirit spoke to them in their visions) or then that
he could foretell what was to come thereafter; for Prophecy proceeds only
of GOD: and the devil has no knowledge of things to come.


EPI. Yet if ye will mark the words of the text, ye will find clearly, that
Saul saw that apparition: for giving you that Saul was in another chalmer, at
the making of the circles and coniurations, needful for that purpose (as none
of that craft will permit any others to behold at that time) yet it is evident
by the text, that how soon that once that unclean spirit was fully risen, she
called in upon Saul: For it is said in the text, that Saul knew him to be
Samuel, which could not have been, by the hearing tell only of an old man
with a mantill, since there was many more old men dead in Israel nor Samuel: And
the common weid of that whole country was mantils. As to the next, that it was
not the spirit of Samuel, I grant: In the proving whereof ye need not to
insist, since all Christians of whatsoever religion agrees upon that: and none
but either mere ignorants, or Necromanciers, or Witches doubts thereof. And
that the devil is permitted at sometimes to put himself in the likeness of
the Saints, it is plain in the Scriptures, 1. Cor. 11.14.
where it is said, that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light.
Neither could that bring any inconvenience with the visions of the Prophets,
since it is most certain, that God will not permit him so to deceive his own:
but only such, as first wilfully deceive themselves, by running unto him,
whom God then suffers to fall in their own snares, and justly permits them to
be illuded with great efficacy of deceit, because they would not believe the
truth (as Paul says.) And as to the devils foretelling of things to come, it
is true that he knows not all things future; but yet that he knows part, the
tragical event of this history declares it, (which the wit of woman could
never have fore-spoken) not that he has any prescience, which is only proper
to God; or yet knows any thing by looking upon God, as in a mirror (as the
good Angels do) he being for ever debarred from the favorable presence and
countenance of his Creator, but only by one of these two means: either, as
being worldly wise, and taught by a continual experience, ever since the
Creation, judges by likelihood of things to come, according to the like that
has passed before, and the natural causes, in respect of the vicissitude of
all things worldly: or else by Gods employing of him in a turn, and so
foreseen thereof, as appears to have been in this, 1. King. 22.
whereof we find the very like in Micheas propheticke discourse to king Achab.
But to prove this my first proposition, that there can be such a thing as
Witchcraft and Witches, there are many more places in the Scriptures then this,
as I said before. As first in the Law of GOD, Exodus 22.
it is plainly prohibited: But certain it is, that the Law of God speaks
nothing in vain, neither does it lay curses, or enjoin punishments upon
shadows, condemning that to be ill, which is not in essence or being, Exodus 7.
and 2.
as we call it. Secondly, it is plain, where wicked Pharaobs Wisemen imitated
a number of Moses miracles, to harden the tyrants heart thereby. Thirdly, said
not Samuel to Saul, that disobedience is as the sin of Witchcraft? 1 Samuel 15.
To compare it to a thing that were not, it were too too absurd. Acts 8. Acts
16.
Fourthly, was not Simon Magus a man of that craft? And fifthly, what was she
that had the spirit of Python? beside innumerable other places that were
irksome to recite.


CHAP. II.
ARGV.
What kind of sin the practisers of these unlawful arts commit. The division
of these arts: And what are the means that allure any to practice them.

PHILOMATHES. But I think it very strange, that God should permit any mankind
(since they bear his own Image) to fall in so gross and filthy a defection.


EPI. Although man in his Creation was made to the image of the Creator, Gene.
1.
yet through his fall having once lost it, it is but restored again in a part
by grace only to the elect: So all the rest falling away from God, are given
over into the hands of the devil that enemy, to bear his image; and being
once so given over, the greatest and the grossest impretie is the pleasantest,
and most delightful unto them.


PHI. But may it not suffice him to have indirectly the rule, and procure the
perdition of so many souls by alluring them to vices, and to the following of
their own appetites, suppose he abuse not so many simple souls, in making
them directly acknowledge him for their master?


EPI. No surely, for he uses every man, whom of he has the rule, according to
their complexion and knowledge: and so, whom he finds most simple, he
plaineliest discouers himself unto them: For he being the enemy of man's
salvation, uses all the means he can to intrappe them so far in his snares,
as it may be unable to them thereafter (suppose they would) to rid themselves
out of the same.


PHI. Then this sin is a sin against the holy Ghost.


EPI. It is in some, but not in all.


PHI. How that? Are not all these that run directly to the devil in one
Categorie?


EPI. God forbid, for the sin against the holy Ghost has two branches: The
one, a falling back from the whole service of God, and a refusal of all his
precepts: The other is the doing of the first with knowledge, knowing that they
do wrong against their own conscience, Hebr. 6.10.
and the testimony of the holy Spirit, having once had a taste of the sweetness
of Gods mercies: Now in the first of these two, all sorts of Necromancers,
Enchanters or Witches, are compre hended, but in the last, none but such as
err with this knowledge that I have spoken of.


PHI. Then it appears that there are more sorts nor one, that are directly
professors of his seruice^ and if so be, I pray you tell me how many and what
are they?


EPI. There are principally two sorts, whereunto all the parts of that unhappy
Art are redacted; whereof the one is called Magie or Necromancie, the other
Sorcerie or Witchcraft.


PHI. What I pray you? and how many are the means, whereby the devil allures
persons in any of these snares?


EPI. Even by these three passions that are within our selves: Curiosity in
great ingines: thirst of revenge, for some tortes deeply apprehended: or
greedy appetite of gear, caused through great poverty. As to the first of
these, Curiosity, it is only the inticement of Magicians or Necromanciers:
and the other two are the allurers of the Sorcerers or Witches, for that old
and crafty serpent being a Spirit, he easily spies our affections, and so
conformes himself thereto, to deceive us to our wrack.


CHAP. III.
ARGV.
The significations and etymologies of the words of Magie and Necromancie. The
difference betwixt Necromancie and Witchcraft: What are the entressis, and
beginnings, that bring any to the knowledge thereof.

PHILOMATHES. I Would gladly first hear, what thing it is that ye call Magie
or Necromancie.


EPI. This word Magi in the Persian tongue, imports as much as to be a
contemplatour or Interpretour of Divine and heavenly sciences, which being
first used among the Chaldees, through their ignorance of the true divinity,
was esteemed and reputed amongst them, as a principal virtue: And therefore,
was named unjustly with an honorable style, which name the Greeks imitated,
generally importing all these kinds of unlawful arts: And this word
Necromancie is a Greek word, compounded of (...), which is to say, the
prophecy by the dead. This last name is given, to this black and unlawful
science, by the figure Synechdoche, because it is a principal part of that
art, to serve themselves with dead carcases in their diuinations.


PHI. What difference is there betwixt this art, and Witchcraft?


EPI. Surely, the difference vulgar put betwixt them, is very merry, and in a
manner true; for they say, that the Witches are servants only, and slaves to
the devil; but the Necromanciers are his Masters and commanders.


PHI. How can that be true, that any men being specially addicted to his
service, can be his commanders?


EPI. Yea they may be; but it is only secundum quid: For it is not by any
power that they can have over him, but ex pacto allanerlie; whereby he obliges
himself in some trifles to them, that he may on the other part obtain the
fruition of their body and soul, which is the only thing he huntes for.


PHI. A very in-aequitable contract forsooth: But I pray you discourse unto me,
what is the effect and secrets of that art.


EPI. That is an over large field ye give me: yet I shall do my goodwill, the
most summarly that I can, to run through the principal points thereof. As
there are two sorts of folks, that may be entised to this art, to wit, learned
or unlearned: so is there two means, which are the first steerers up and
feeders of their curiosity, thereby to make them to give themselves over to
the same: Which two means, I call the devils school, and his rudiments. The
learned have their curiosity wakened up, and fed by that which I call his
schole: this is the Astrology iudiciar, For diverse men having attained to a
great perfection in learning, and yet remaining ouerbare (alas) of the Spirit
of regeneration and fruits thereof, finding all natural things common, as well
to the stupide pedants, as unto them, they assay to vendicate unto them a
greater name, by not only knowing the course of things heavenly, but likewise
to clime to the knowledge of things to come thereby: Which, at the first face
appearing lawful unto them, in respect the ground thereof seems to proceed
of natural causes only, they are so allured thereby, that finding their
practice to prove true in sundry things, they study to know the cause thereof,
and so mounting from degree to degree, upon the slipperie and uncertain scale
of curiosity; they are at last entised, that where lawful arts or sciences
fail, to satisfy their restless minds, even to seek to that black and
unlawful science of Magie: Where, finding at the first, that such diverse
forms of circles and coniurations rightly joined thereunto, will raise such
diverse forms of spirits, to resolve them of their doubts, and attributing the
doing thereof, to the power inseparably tied, or inherent in the circles, and
many words of God, confusedly wrapped in, they blindly glory of themselves, as
if they had by their quickness of ingine, made a conquest of Plutoes dominion,
and were become Emperors over the Stygian habitacles: Where, in the mean time
(miserable wretches) they are become in very deed, bondslaues to their mortal
enemy: and their knowledge, for all that they presume thereof, is nothing
increased, except in knowing evil, and the horrors of hell for punishment
thereof, Gene. 3.
as Adams was by the eating of the forbidden tree.


CHAP. IIII.
ARGV.
The description of the rudiments and School, which are the entresses to the
art of Magie: And in special the differences betwixt Astronomy and
Astrology: Division of Astrology in diverse parts.

PHILOMATHES. But I pray you likewise forget not to tell what are the devils
rudiments.


EPI. His rudiments, I call first in general, all that which is called
vulgarly the virtue of word, herb, and stone, which is used by unlawful
charms, without natural causes; as likewise all kind of practicques,
freites, or other like extraordinary actions, which cannot abide the true touch
of natural reason.


PHI. I would have you to make that plainer, by some particular examples; for
your proposition is very general.


EPI. I mean either by such kind of Charms as commonly daft wives use, for
healing offorspoken goods, for preserving them from evil eyes, by knitting
roun trees, or sundriest kind of herbs, to the hair or tails of the goods:
by curing the worm, by stemming of blood, by healing of Horse-crookes, by
turning of the riddle, or doing of such like innumerable things by words,
without applying any thing, meet to the part offended, as Mediciners do: Or
else by staying married folks, to have naturally ado with other (by knitting
so many knots upon a point at the time of their marriage,) And such like
things, which men use to practice in their merrinesse: For fra unlearned men
(being naturally curious, and lacking the true knowledge of God) find these
practices to prove true, as sundry of them will do, by the power of the
devil for deceiving men, and not by any inherent virtue in these vain words
and freites; and being desirous to win a reputation to themselves in such
like turns, they either (if they be of the shamefaster sort) seek to be
learned by some that are experimented in that Art, (not knowing it to be evil
at the first) or else being of the grosser sort, run directly to the devil
for ambition or desire of gain, and plainly contract with him thereupon.


PHI. But me thinks these means which ye call the School and rudiments of
the devil, are things lawful, and have been approved for such in all times and
aages: as in special, this science of Astrology, which is one of the special
members of the Mathematiques.


EPI. There are two things which the learned have observed from the beginning,
in the science of the heavenly Creatures, the Planets, Stars, and such like:
The one is their course and ordinary motions, which for that cause is called
Astronomia, Which word is a compound of (...), that is to say, the law of the
Stars: And this Art indeed is one of the members of the Mathematiques, and
not only lawful, but most necessary and commendable: The other is called
Astrologia, being compounded of (...) and (...), which is to say, the word and
preaching of the Stars: Which is divided into two parts: The first, by
knowing thereby the powers of simples, and sicknesses, the course of the
seasons and the weather, being ruled by their influence; which part depending
upon the former, although it be not of it self a part of Mathematiques: yet
it is not unlawful, being moderately used, suppose not so necessary and
commendable as the former. The second part is to trust so much to their
influences, as thereby to foretell what commonweals shall flourish or decay:
what persons shall be fortunate or unfortunate: what side shall win in any
battle: what man shall obtain victory at singular combat: what way, and of
what aage shall men die: what horse shall win at match-running: and diverse
such like incredible things, wherein Cardanus, Cornelius Agrippa, and diverse
others have more curiously then profitably written at large. Of this root last
spoken of, springs innumerable branches; such as the knowledge by the
natiuities; the Cheiromancie, Geomancie, Hydromancie, Arithmancie,
Physiognomie, and a thousand others, which were much practiced, and holden in
great reverence by the Gentiles of old: And this last part of Astrology
whereof I have spoken, which is the root of their branches, was called by them
pars fortunae. This part now is utterly unlawful to be trusted in, or
practiced amongst Christians, as leaning to no ground of natural reason: and
it is this part which I called before the Devils school.


PHI. But yet many of the learned are of the contrary opinion.


EPI. I grant, yet I could give my reasons to fortify and maintain my
opinion, if to enter into this disputation it would not draw me quite off the
ground of our discourse, besides the mis-spending of the whole day thereupon:
One word only I will answer to them, and that in the Scriptures (which must
be an infallible ground to all true Christians,) That in the Prophet Jeremy it
is plainly forbidden, to believe or hearken unto them that prophecy and
fore-speake by the course of the Planets and Stars.


CHAP. V.
ARGV.
How far the using of Charms is lawful or unlawful. The description of the
forms of Circles and Coniurations: And what causes the Magicians themselves
to be weary thereof.

PHILOMATHES. WELL, ye have said far enough in that argument. But how prove
ye now that these Charms or unnatural practiques are unlawful: For so many
honest and merry men and women have publicly practiced some of them, that I
think if ye would accuse them all of Witchcraft, ye would affirm more nor ye
will be believed in.


EPI. I see if you had taken good tent (to the nature of that word, whereby I
named it,) ye would not have been in this doubt, nor mistaken me so far as
ye have done: For although, as none can be scholars in a school, and not be
subject to the master thereof: so none can study and put in practice (for
study the alone, and knowledge, is more perilous nor offensive; and it is the
practice only that makes the greatness of the offense;) the Circles and Art
of Magie, without committing an horrible defection from God: And yet as they
that read and learn their rudiments, are not the more subject to any
schoolmasters, if it please not their parents to put them to the school
thereafter: So they who ignorantly prove these practiques, which I call the
Devils rudiments, unknowing them to be baits, cast out by him, for trapping
such as God will permit to fall into his hands, this kind of folks I say, no
doubt, are to be judged the best of, in respect they use no invocation nor
help of him (by their knowledge at least) in these turns, and so have never
entered themselves into Satan's service; Yet to speak trewly for mine own part
(I speak but for my self) I desire not to make so near riding: For in my
opinion our enemy is over crafty, and we over weak (except the greater
grace of God) to assay such hazards, wherein he preases to trap us.


PHI. Ye have reason forsooth: for as the common proverb says; They that sup
keile with the devil, have need of long spoones: But now I pray you go
forward in the describing of this art of Magie.


EPI. Fra they be come once unto this perfection in evil, in having any
knowledge (whether learned or unlearned) of this black art; they then begin
to be weary of the raising of their Master, by coniured circles, being both
so difficile and perilous, and so come plainly to a contract with him,
wherein is specially contained forms and effects.


PHI. But I pray you or ever you go further, discourse me somewhat of their
circles and coniurations; and what should be the cause of their wearying
thereof: For it should seem that that form should be less fearful yet,
then the direct haunting and society, with that foul and unclean Spirit.


EPI. I think ye take me to be a Witch my self, or at the least would feign
swear your self prentise to that craft: Always as I may, I shall shortly
satisfy you, in that kind of coniurations, which are contained in such
books, which I call the Devils School: There are four principal parts: the
persons of the coniurers; the action of the coniuration; the words and rites
used to that effect; and the Spirits that are coniured. Ye must first remember
to lay the ground, that I told you before, which is, that it is no power
inherent in the circles, or in the holiness of the names of God blasphemously
used; nor in whatsoever rites or ceremonies at that time used, that either can
raise any infernal spirit, or yet limitate him perforce within or without
these circles. For it is he only, the father of all lies, who having first of
all prescribed that form of doing, feining himself to be commanded and
restrained thereby, will be loath to pass the bounds of these injunctions; as
well thereby to make them glory in the impiring over him (as I said before:) as
likewise to make himself so to be trusted in these little things, that he may
have the better commodity thereafter, to deceive them in the end with a trick
once for all; I mean the everlasting perdition of their soul and body. Then
laying this ground, as I have said, these coniurations must have few or more in
number of the persons coniurers (always passing the singular number) according
to the quality of the circle, and form of apparition. Two principal things
cannot well in that errand be wanted: holy water (whereby the devil mockes the
Papists) and some present of a living thing unto him. There are likewise
certain seasons, days and hours, that they observe in this purpose: These
things being all ready and prepared, circles are made triangular, quadrangular,
round, double or single, according to the form of apparition that they crave.
But to speak of the diverse forms of the circles, of the innumerable
characters and crosses that are within and without, and out-through the same,
of the diverse forms of apparitions, that that crafty spirit illudes them
with, and of all such particulars in that action, I remit it to ouermany that
have busied their heads in describing of the same; as being but curious, and
altogether unprofitable. And this far only I touch, that when the coniured
Spirit appears, which will not be while after many circumstances, long
prayers, and much muttring and murmuring of the coniurers; like a Papist
Priest, dispatching a hunting Mass: how soon I say, he appears, if they have
missed one jot of all their rites; or if any of their feet once slide over the
circle through terror of his fearful apparition, he pays himself at that
time in his own hand, of that due debt which they ought him; and otherwise
would have delayed longer to have paid him: I mean, he carries them with him
body and soul. If this be not now a just cause to make them weary of these
forms of coniuration, I leave it to you to judge upon, considering the long
somnesse of the labor, the precise keeping of days and hours (as I have
said) the terriblenesse of apparition, and the present peril that they stand
in, in missing the least circumstance or freite, that they ought to observe:
And on the other part, the devil is glad to move them to a plain and square
dealing with him, as I said before.


CHAP. VI.
ARGV.
The Devils contract with the Magicians: The division there of in two parts:
What is the difference betwixt Gods miracles and the Devils.

PHILOMATHES. INdeed there is cause enough, but rather to leave him at all,
then to run more plainly to him, if they were wise he dealt with: But go
forward now, I pray you, to these turns, fra they become once deacons in this
craft.


EPI. From time that they once plainly begin to contract with him: The effect
of their contract consists in two things: in forms and effects, as I began to
tell already, were it not ye interrupted me: (for although the contract be
mutual, I speak first of that part, wherein the devil obliges himself to
them) By forms, I mean in what shape or fashion he shall come unto them, when
they call upon him; And by effects, I understand, in what special sorts or
services he binds himself to be subject unto them. The quality of these
forms and effects, is less or greater, according to the skill and art of the
Magician: For as to the forms, to some of the baser sort of them he obliges
himself to appear at their calling upon him, by such a proper name which he
shows unto them, either in likeness of a Dog, a Cat, an Ape, or suchlike other
beast; or else to answer by a voice only. The effects, are to answer to such
demands, as concern curing of diseases, their own particular menagerie, or
such other base things as they require of him. But to the most curious sort, in
the forms he will oblige himself, to enter into a dead body, and there out
of to give such answers, of the event of battles, of matters concerning the
estate of commonwealths, and such like other great questions: yea, to some he
will be a continual attender, in form of a Page: He will permit himself to
be coniured, for the space of so many years, either in a tablet or a ring, or
such like thing, which they may easily carry about with them: He gives them
power to sell such wares to others, whereof some will be dearer, and some
better cheap, according to the lying or true speaking of the Spirit that is
coniured therein: Not but that in very deed, all devils must be liars; but so
they abuse the simplicity of these wretches, that become their scholars, that
they make them believe, that at the fall of Lucifer, some Spirits fell in the
air, some in the fire, some in the water, some in the land, in which Elements
they still remain. Whereupon they build, that such as fell in the fire, or in
the air, are trewer then they, who fell in the water, or in the land, which
are all but mere trattles, and forged by the author of all deceit. For they
fell not by weight, as a solid substance, to stick in any one part; but the
principal part of their fall, consisting in quality, by the falling from the
grace of God, wherein they were created, they continued still thereafter, and
shall do while the latter day, in wandering through the world, as Gods
hang-men, to execute such turns as he employes them in: And when any of them
are not occupied in that, return they must to their prison in hell (as it is
plain in the miracle that CHRIST wrought at Gennezareth) therein at the latter
day to be all enclosed for ever: Matthew. 8.
and as they deceive their Scholars in this, so do they, in imprinting in
them the opinion, that there are so many Princes, Dukes, and Kings amongst
them, every one commanding fewer or more Legions, and impiring in diverse arts,
and quarters of the earth: For though that I will not deny that there be a
form of order amongst the Angels in Heaven, and consequently, was amongst them
before their fall; yet, either that they bruike the same sensine; or that God
will permit us to know by damned devils, such heavenly mysteries of his, which
he would not reveal to us, neither by Scripture nor Prophets, I think no
Christian will once think it. But by the contrary of all such mysteries, as he
has closed up with his Seal of secrecy; it becomes us to be contented with
an humble ignorance, they being things not necessary for our salvation. But to
return to the purpose, as these forms, wherein Satan obliges himself to the
greatest of the Magicians, are wonderful curious; so are the effects
correspondent unto the same: For he will oblige himself to teach them arts
and sciences, which he may easily do, being so learned a knave as he is, to
carry them news from any part of the world, which the agilitie of a Spirit may
easily perform: to reveal to them the secrets of any persons, so being they
be once spoken, for the thought none knows but GOD; except so far as ye may
guess by their countenance, as one who is doubtlesly learned enough in the
Physiognomie: Yea, he will make his Scholars to creep in credit with
Princes, by foretelling them many great things; part true, part false: For if
all were false, he would tyne credit at all hands; but always doubtsome, as
his Oracles were. And he will also make them to please Princes, by fair
banquets and dainty dishes, carried in short space fra the farthest part of
the world: For no man doubts but he is a thief, and his agilitie (as I spoke
before) makes him to come with such speed. Such like, he will guard his
Scholars with fair armies of horsemen and footmen in appearance, Castles and
forts, Which all are but impressions in the air, easily gathered by a Spirit,
drawing so near to that substance himself: As in like manner he will learn
them many Iuglarie tricks at Cards, dice, and such like, to deceive men's
senses thereby, and such innumerable false practiques, which are proved by
ouer-many in this aage; as they who are acquainted with that Italian called
SCOTO yet living, can report: And yet are all these things but deluding of the
senses, and no ways true in substance; as were the false miracles wrought by
King Pharaos Magicians, for counterfeiting Moses: For that is the difference
betwixt GODS miracles and the devils, GOD is a creator, what he makes appear
in miracle, it is so in effect: As Moses Rod being casten down, was no doubt
turned into a natural Serpent: where as the devil (as Gods Ape) counterfetting
that by his Magicians, made their wandes to appear so, only to men's outward
senses: as kythed in effect by their being devoured by the other; For it is no
wonder, that the devil may delude our senses, since we see by common proof,
that simple Iugglars will make an hundredth things seem both to our eyes and
ears otherwise then they are. Now as to the Magicians part of the contract,
it is in a word that thing which I said before, the devil hunts for in all men.


PHI. Surely ye have said much to me in this art, if all that you have said be
as true as wonderful.


EPI. For the truth in these actions, it will be easily confirmed, to any that
pleases to take pain upon the reading of diverse authenticke histories, and the
enquiring of daily experiences. And as for the truth of their possibility,
that they may be, and in what manner, I trust I have alleged nothing whereunto
I have not joined such probable reasons, as I leave to your discretion, to
weigh and consider: One word only I omitted, concerning the form of making of
this contract, which is either written with the Magicians own blood: or else
being agreed upon (in terms his scholemaster) touches him in some part, though
peradventure no mark remain, as it does with all Witches.


CHAP. VII.
ARG.
The reason why the art of Magie is unlawful: What punishment they merit, And
who may be accounted guilty of that crime.

PHILOMATHES. SVrely, ye have made this art to appear very monstrous and
detestable. But what I pray you shall be said to such as maintain this art to
be lawful, for as evil as you have made it?


EPI. I say, they savor of the pan themselves, or at least little better;
and yet I would be glad to hear their reasons.


PHI. There are two principally, that ever I heard used; beside that which is
founded upon the common Proverb (that the Necromancers command the devil,
which ye have already refuted.) The one is grounded upon a received custom:
The other upon an authority, which some think infallible. Upon custom, we see
that diverse Christian Princes and Magistrates severe punishers of Witches,
will not only ouer-see Magicians to live within their dominions; but even
sometimes delight to see them prove some of their practicques. The other
reason is, that Moses being brought up (as it is expressly said in the
Scriptures) in all the sciences of the Egyptians; whereof no doubt, this was
one of the principals; and he notwithstanding of this art, pleasing God, as he
did, consequently that art professed by so godly a man, could not be unlawful.


EPI. As to the first of your reasons, grounded upon custom: I say, an evil
custom can never be accepted for a good law, for the over great ignorance of
the word in some Princes and Magistrates, and the contempt thereof in others,
mooues them to sin heavily against their office in that point. As to the
other reason, which seems to be of greater weight, if it were formed in a
Syllogism; it behooued to be in many terms, and full of fallacies (to speak
in terms of Logicque:) for first, that that general proposition, affirming
Moses to be taught in all the sciences of the Egyptians, should conclude that
he was taught in Magie, I see no necessity: For we must understand, that the
Spirit of God there, speaking of sciences, understands them that are lawful;
for except they be lawful, they are but abusiue called sciences, and are but
ignorances, indeed: Nam homo pictus, nonest homo. Secondly, giving that he had
been taught in it, there is great difference betwixt knowledge and practicing
of a thing, as I said before: For God knows all things, being always good,
and of our sin and our infirmity proceeds our ignorance. Thirdly, giving
that he had both studied and practiced the same (which is more then monstrous
to be believed by any Christian) yet we know well enough, that before that
ever the Spirit of God began to call Moses, he was fled out of Egypt, being
forty years of aage, for the slaughter of an Egyptian, and in his good
father Iethroes land, first called at the fiery bush, having remained there
other forty years in exile: so that suppose he had been the wickeddest man
in the world before, he then became a changed and regenerate man, and very
little of old Moses remained in him. Abraham was an Idolater in Vr of
Chaldaea, before he was called: And Paul being called Saul, was a most sharp
persecutour of the Saints of God, while that name was changed.


PHI. What punishment then think ye merit these Magicians and Necromancers?


EPI. The like no doubt, that Sorcerers and Witches merit; and rather so much
greater, as their error proceeds of the greater knowledge, and so draws
nearer to the sin against the holy Ghost. And as I say of them, so say I the
like of all such as consult, enquire, entertain, and ouersee them, which is
seen by the miserable ends of many that ask counsel of them: For the devil
has never better tidings to tell to any, then he told to Saul: neither is it
lawful to use so unlawful instruments, were it never for so good a purpose:
Acts 3.
For that axiom in Theology is most certain and infallible, Nunquam
faciendum est malum, vt bonum inde eueniat.


THE SECOND BOOK OF DAEMONOLOGIE.
ARGUMENT.
The description of Sorcerie and Witcheraft in special.

CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
Proved by the Scripture, that such a thing can be: And the reasons refuted of
all such as would call it but an imagination and Melancholicque humor.

PHILOMATHES. NOW, since ye have satisfied me now so fully, concerning Magie
or Necromancie, I will pray you to do the like in Sorcerie or Witchcraft.


EPI. That field is likewise very large, and although in the mouths and pens
of many, yet few know the truth thereof, so well as they believe themselves,
as I shall so shortly as I can, make you (God willing) as easily to perceive.


PHI. But I pray you before ye goefurther, let me interrupt you here with a
short digression, which is, that many can scarcely believe that there is such a
thing as Witchcraft: Whose reasons I will shortly allege unto you, that ye
may satisfy me as well in that, as ye have done in the rest. For first,
whereas the Scripture seems to prove Witchcraft to be, by diverse examples,
and specially by fundrie of the same, which ye have alleged; it is thought by
some, that these places speak of Magicians and Necromancers only, and not of
Witches: As in special, these wise men of Pharaohs, that counterfeited Moses
miracles, were Magicians say they, and not Witches: As likewise that Pythonisse
that Saul consulted with: And so was Simon Magus in the new Testament, as that
very style imports. Secondly, where ye would oppone the daily practicque, and
confession of so many, that is thought likewise to be but very Melancholicque
imaginations of simple rauing creatures. Thirdly, if Witches had such power of
Witching of folks to death, (as they say they have) there had been none left
alive long since in the world but they; at the least, no good or godly person
of whatsoever estate, could have escaped their diuelrie.


EPI. Your three reasons, as I take, are grounded: the first of them negative
upon the Scripture: The second affirmative upon Physic: And the third upon the
certain proof of experience. As to your first, it is most true indeed, that
all these wise men of Pharaoh were Magicians of art: As likewise it appears
well, that the Pythonisse, with whom Saul consulted, was of that same
profession: and so was Simon Magus. But ye omitted to speak of the Law of
God, wherein are all Magicians, Diuiners, Enchanters, Sorcerers, Witches, and
whatsoever of that kind that consult with the devil, plainly prohibited, and
alike threatened against. And besides that, she who had the Spirit of Python, in
the Acts, Acts 16.
whose Spirit was put to silence by the Apostle, could be no other thing but a
very Sorcerer or Witch, if ye admit the vulgar distinction, to be in a manner
true, whereof I spoke in the beginning of our conference: For that spirit
whereby she conquested such gain to her Masters, was not at her raising or
commanding, as she pleased to appoint, but spoke by her tongue, as well
publicly as privately: whereby she seemed to draw nearer to the sort of
Demoniakes or possessed, if that conjunction betwixt them, had not been of her
own consent; as it appeared by her, not being tormented therewith, and by her
conquesting of such gain to her Masters (as I have already said.) As to your
second reason grounded upon Physic, in attributing their confessions or
apprehensions, to a natural melancholique humor, any that please physically
to consider upon the natural humor of melancholy, according to all the
Physicians, that ever writ thereupon, they shall find that that will be
ouershort a cloak to cover their knavery with: For as the humor of
Melancholy in the self is black, heavy and terrene, so are the symptoms
thereof, in any persons that are subject thereunto, leanness, palenesse,
desire of solitude, and if they come to the highest degree thereof, mere folly
and Many: whereas by the contrary, a great number of them that ever have been
convict or confessors of Witchcraft, as may be presently seen by many that
have at this time confessed; they are by the contrary, I say, some of them rich
and worldly wise, some of them fat or corpulent in their bodies, and most part
of them altogether given over to the pleasures of the flesh, continual
haunting of company, and all kind of merrinesse, both lawful and unlawful,
which are things directly contrary to the symptoms of melancholy, whereof I
spoke; and further experience daily proves, how loath they are to confess
without torture, which witnesses their guiltiness; where by the contrary, the
Melancholiques never spare to bewray themselves, by their continual
discourses, feeding thereby their humor in that which they think no crime. As
to your third reason, it scarsely merits an answer: for if the devil their
master were not bridled, as the Scriptures teach us, suppose there were no men
nor women to be his instruments, he could find ways enough without any help
of others to wrack all mankind; whereunto he employes his whole study, and
goes about like a roaring Lion (as Peter says) to that effect, but the limits
of his power were set down before the foundations of the world were laid,
which he has not power in the leastiote to transgress. But beside all this,
there is over great a certainty to prove that they are, by the daily
experience of the harms that they do, both to men, and whatsoever thing men
possess, whom God will permit them to be the instruments, so to trouble or
visit, as in my discourse of that art, ye shall hear clearly proved.


CHAP. II.
ARGV.
The Etymology and signification of that word Sorcerie: The first entresse and
prentiship of them that give themselves to that craft.

PHILOMATHES. COme on then I pray you, and return where ye left.


EPI. This word of Sorcerie is a Latin word, which is taken from casting of
the lot, and therefore he that uses it, is called Sortiarius a sort: As to
the word of Witchcraft, it is nothing but a proper name given in our language:
The cause wherefore they were called Sortiarij, proceeded of their practiques,
seeming to come of lot or chance, such as the turning of the riddle, the
knowing of the form of prayers, or such like tokens, if a person diseased
would live or die: And in general, that name was given them for using of such
charms, and freits, as that Craft teaches them. Many points of their craft
and practicques are common betwixt the Magicians and them: for they serve both
one Master, although in diverse fashions. And as I divided the Necromancers into
two sorts, learned and unlearned; so must I deny them in other two, rich and
of better account; poor and of baser degree. These two degrees now of persons,
that practice this Craft, answer to the passions in them, which (I told you
before) the Devil used as means to entice them to his service: for such of
them as are in great misery and poverty, he allures to follow him, by
promising unto them great riches, and worldly commodity: Such as though rich,
yet burn in a desperate desire of revenge, he allures them by promises, to get
their turn satisfied to their hearts contentment. It is to be noted now, that
that old and crafty enemy of ours, assailes none, though touched with any of
these two extremities, except he first find an entresse ready for him, either
by the great ignorance of the person he deals with, joined with an evil life,
or else by their carelessness and contempt of God: And finding them in an utter
despair, for one of these two former causes that I have spoken of, he prepares
the way by feeding them craftily in their humor, and filling them further and
further with despair, while he find the time proper to discover himself
unto them: At which time, either upon their walking solitary in the fields,
or else lying pansing in their bed, but always without the company of any
other, he either by a voice, or in likeness of a man inquires of them, what
troubles them, and promises them, a sudden and certain way of remedy, upon
condition on the other part, that they follow his advise, and do such things
as he will require of them: Their minds being prepared beforehand, as I have
already spoken, they easily agreed unto that demand of his, and syne sets an
other tryist, where they may meet again: At which time, before he proceed
any further with them, he first persuades them to addict themselves to his
service, which being easily obtained, he then discouers what he is unto them,
makes them to renounce their God and Baptism directly, and gives them his
mark upon some secret place of their body, which remains soar unhealed,
while his next meeting with them, and thereafter ever insensible, howsoever it
be nipped or pricked by any, as is daily proved, to give them a proof
thereby, that as in that doing, he could hurt and heal them; so all their ill
and well doing thereafter, must depend upon him: And besides that, the
intolerable dolor that they feel in that place, where he has marked them,
serves to waken them, and not to let them rest, while their next meeting
again: fearing lest otherways they might either forget him, being as new
Prentises, and not well enough founded yet, in that fiendly folly: or else
remembering of that horrible promise they made him at their last meeting, they
might skunner at the same, and preasse to call it back. At their third
meeting, he makes a show to be careful to perform his promises, either by
teaching them ways how to get themselves revenged, if they be of that sort: or
else by teaching them lessons, how by most vile and unlawful means, they may
obtain gain, and wordly commodity, if they be of the other sort.


CHAP. III.
ARGV.
The Witches actions divided into two parts: The actions proper to their own
persons: Their actions toward others: The form of their conuentions, and
adoring of their Master.

PHILOMATHES. Ye have said now enough of their initiating in that order, It
rests then that ye discourse upon their practices, fra they be passed
Prentises: for I would feign hear what is possible to them to perform in very
deed. Although they serve a common Master with the Necromancers, (as I have
before said) yet serve they him in another form: For as the means are diverse,
which allure them to these unlawful Arts of serving the devil; so by diverse
ways use they their practices, answering to these means, which first the
devil used as instruments in them, though all tending to one end, to wit, the
enlarging of Satan's tyranny, and crossing of the propagation of the Kingdom
of CHRIST, so far as lies in the possibility, either of the one or other
sort, or of the devil their master: For where the Magicians, as allured by
curiosity, in the most part of their practices, seek principally the
satisfying of the same, and to win to themselves a popular honor and
estimation; these Witches on the other part, being enticed, either for the
desire of revenge, or of worldly riches, their whole practices are either to
hurt men and their goods, or what they possess, for satisfying of their cruel
minds in the former, or else by the wrack in whatsoever sort, of any whom God
will permit them to have power of, to satisfy their greedy desire in the last
point.


EPI. In two parts their actions may be divided; the actions of their own
persons, and the actions proceeding from them toward any other: And this
division being well understood, will easily resolve you, what is possible to
them to do: For although all that they confess is no lie upon their part, yet
doubtlesly, in my opinion, a part of it is not indeed, according as they take
it to be: And in this I mean by the actions of their own persons: For as I
said before, speaking of Magie, that the devil illudes the senses of these
scholars of his, in many things, so say I the like of these Witches.


PHI. Then I pray you first to speak of that part of their own persons, and
syne ye may come next to their actions toward others.


EPI. To the effect that they may perform such services of their false Master,
as he employes them in, the devil as Gods Ape, counterfeits in his servants
this service and form of adoration, that God prescribed and made his servants
to practice: For as the servants of God publicly use to conveene for serving
of him, so makes he them in great numbers to conveene (though publicly they
dare not) for his service. As none conveenes to the adoration and worshipping
of God, except they be marked with his Seal, the Sacrament of Baptism: So
none serves Satan, and conveenes to the adoring of him, that are not marked
with that mark, whereof I already spoke. As the Minister sent by God teaches
plainly at the time of their public conuentions, how to serve him in spirit
and truth; so that unclean spirit, in his own person teaches his disciples
at the time of their conueening, how to work all kind of mischief, and craves
coumpt of all their horrible and detestable proceedings passed, for advancement
of his service: Yea that he may the more vinely counterfeit and scorn God, he
often times makes his slaves to conueene in these very places, which are
destinate and ordained for the conveening of the servants of God (I mean by
Churches) But this far, which I have yet said, I not only take it to be true
in their opinions, but even so to be indeed: For the form that he used in
counterfaiting God amongst the Gentiles, makes me so to think: As God spoke by
his Oracles, spoke he not so by his? As God had as well bloody Sacrifices, as
others without blood, had not he the like? As God had Churches sanctified to
his service, with Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, Ceremonies and Prayers; had he
not the like polluted to his service? As God gave responses by Vrim and
Thummim, gave he not his responses by the intralles of beasts, by the singing
of fowls, and by their actions in the air? As God by visions, dreams, and
ecstasies revealed what was to come, and what was his will unto his servants;
used he not the like means to forewarne his slaves of things to come? Yea
even as God loved cleanenesse, hated vice and impuritie, and appointed
punishments therefore; used he not the like (though falsely I grant, and but in
eschewing the less inconvenience, to draw them upon a greater) yet dissimuled
he not, I say, so far as to appoint his priests to keep their bodies clean
and undefiled, before their asking responses of him? And fained he not God, to
be a protector of every virtue, and a just revenger of the contrary? This
reason then mooues me, that as he is that same devil, and as crafty now as he
was then, so will he not spare as pertly in these actions that I have spoken
of, concerning the Witches persons: but further, Witches of times confess, not
only his conueening in the Church with them, but his occupying of the Pulpit;
Yea, their form of adoration, to be the kissing of his hinder parts: Which
though it seem ridiculous, yet may it likewise be true, seeing we read that
in Calicute, he appearing in form of a Goat-bucke, has publicly that
vn-honest homage done unto him, by every one of the people: So ambitious is he,
and greedy of honor (which procured his fall) that he will even imitate God in
that part, where it is said, that Moses could see but the hinder parts of God,
Exodus 33.
for the brightness of his glory: And yet that speech is spoken but (...)


CHAP. IIII.
ARGV.
What are the ways possible, whereby the Witches may transport themselves to
places far distant: And what are impossible and mere illusions of Satan: And
the reasons thereof.

PHILOMATHES. But by what way say they, or think ye it possible they can come
to these unlawful conuentions?


EPI. There is the thing which I esteem their senses to be deluded in, and
though they lie not in confessing of it, because they think it to be true, yet
not to be so in substance or effect: for they say, that by diverse means they
may conueene, either to the adoring of their Master, or to the putting in
practice any service of his, committed unto their charge: one way is natural,
which is natural riding, going, or sailing, at what hour their master comes
and aduertises them: and this way may be easily believed; another way is some
what more strange, and yet it is possible to be true: which is, by being
carried by the force of the spirit which is their conducter, either above the
earth, or above the Sea swiftly, to the place where they are to meet: which I
am persuaded to be likewise possible, in respect that as Habakkuk was carried
by the Angel in that form, to the den where Daniel lay; so think I, the
devil will be ready to imitate God, as well in that as in other things:
Apocrypha of Bell and the Dragon.
which is much more possible to him to do, being a Spirit, then to a mighty
wind, being but a natural Meteore, to transport from one place to another, a
solid body, as is commonly and daily seen in practice: But in this violent
form they cannot be carried, but a short bounds, agreeing with the space that
they may retain their breath: for if it were longer, their breath could not
remain vnextinguished, their body being carried in such a violent and forcible
manner; as by example: If one fall off a small height, his life is but in
peril, according to the hard or soft lighting: but if one fall from an high
and stay rock, his breath will be forcibly banished from the body, before he
can win to the earth, as is often seen by experience: And in this transporting
they say themselves, that they are invisible to any other, except amongst
themselves, which may also be possible in my opinion: For if the devil may
form what kind of impressions he pleases in the air, (as I have said before,
speaking of Magie) why may he not far easilier thicken and obscure so the
air, that is next about them, by contracting it strait together, that the
beams of any other man's eyes cannot pierce through the same, to see them? But
the third way of their coming to their conuentions, is that, wherein I think
them deluded: for some of them say, that being transformed in the likeness of
a little beast or foul, they will come and pierce through whatsoever house or
Church, though all ordinary passages be closed, by whatsoever open the air
may enter in at: And some say, that their bodies lying still, as in an ecstasy,
their spirits will be ravished out of their bodies, and carried to such places;
and for verifying thereof, will give evident tokens, as well by witnesses that
have seen their body lying senseless in the mean time, as by naming persons
whom-with they met, and giving tokens what purpose was amongst them, whom
otherwise they could not have known: for this form of iourneying, they
affirm to use most, when they are transported from one country to another.


PHI. Surely I long to hear your own opinion of this: for they are like old
wives trattles about the fire. The reasons that move me to think that these
are mere illusions, are these: First, for them that are transformed in
likeness of beasts or fowls, can enter through so narrow passages, although I
may easily believe that the devil could by his workmanship upon the air, make
them appear to be in such forms, either to themselves, or to others: yet how
he can contract a solid body within so little room, I think it is directly
contrary to it self; for to be made so little, and yet not diminished; to be
so straightly drawn together, and yet feel no pain, I think it is so contrary
to the quality of a natural body, and so like to the little transubstantiate
god in the Papists Mass, that I can never believe it: So to have a quantity,
is so proper to a solid body, that as all Philosophers conclude, it cannot be
any more without one, then a spirit can have one: Acts 12.
For when Peter came out of the prison, and the doors all locked; it was not
by any co^tracting of his body in so little room, but by the giving place of
the door, though unespied by the Gaylors: And yet is there no comparison, when
this is done, betwixt the power of God, and of the devil. As to their form of
ecstasy and spiritual transporting, it is certain the souls going out of the
body, is the only definition of natural death: and who are once dead, God
forbid we should think that it should lie in the power of all the devils in
hell, to restore them to their life again; although he can put his own spirit
in a dead body, which the Necromancers commonly practice, as ye have heard. For
that is the office properly belonging to God; and besides that, the soul once
parting from the body, cannot wander any longer in the world, but to the own
resting place must it go immediately, abiding the conjunction of the body
again, at the latter day. And what Christ or the Prophets did miraculously in
this case, it can in no Christian man's opinion, be made common with the devil.
As for any tokens that they give for proving of this, it is very possible to
the devils craft, to persuade them to these means: for he being a spirit, may
he not so ravish their thoughts, and dull their senses, that their body lying
as dead, he may object to their spirits, as it were in a dream, and (as the
Poets write of Morpheus) represent such forms of persons, of places, and other
circumstances, as he pleases to illude them with? Yea, that he may deceive them
with the greater efficacy, may he not at that same instant by fellow angels of
his, illude such other persons so in that same fashion, whom-with he makes
them to believe that they met, that all their reports and tokens, though
severally examined, may every one agree with another? And that whatsoever
actions, either in hurting men or beasts, or whatsoever other thing that they
falsely imagine, at that time to have done, may by himself or his marrowes, at
that same time be done indeed; so as if they would give for a token of their
being ravished at the death of such a person within so short space thereafter,
whom they believe to have poisoned, or witched at that instant, might he not at
that same hour, have smitten that same person, by the permission of GOD, to
the farther deceiving of them, and to move others to believe them? And this is
surely the likelyest way, and most according to reason, which my judgment can
find out in this, and whatsoever other unnatural points of their confession:
And by these means shall we sail surely, betwixt Charybdis and Scylla, in
eschewing the not believing of them altogether on the one part, lest that draw
us to the error, that there is no Witches: and on the other part in believing
of it, make us to eschew the falling into innumerable absurdities, both
monstrously against all Theology divine, and Philosophy humane.


CHAP. V.
ARGV.
Witches actions toward others: Why there are more women of that craft then
men: What things are possible to them to effectuate by the power of their
master: The reasons thereof: What is the surest remedy of the harms done by
them.

PHILOMATHES. FOrsooth your opinion in this, seems to carry most reason with
it; and since ye have ended then the actions belonging properly to their own
persons, say forward now to their actions used toward others.


EPI. In their actions used toward others, three things ought to be
considered: First, the manner of their consulting thereupon: Next, their part as
instruments: And last, their masters part, who puts the same in execution. As
to their consultations thereupon, they use them oftest in the Churches, where
they conueene for adoring, at what time their master enquiring at them what
they would be at, every one of them propones unto him, what wicked turn they
would have done, either for obtaining of riches, or for revenging them upon any
whom they have malice at; who granting their demand, as no doubt willingly he
will, since it is to do evil, he teaches them the means whereby they may
do the same: As for little trifling turns that women have ado with, he
causes them to joint dead corpses, and to make powders thereof, mixing such
other things there amongst, as he gives unto them.


PHI. But before ye go further, permit me, I pray you, to interrupt you one
word, which ye have put me in memory of, by speaking of Women; What can be the
cause that there are twenty women given to that craft, where there is one man?


EPI. The reason is easy, for as that sex is frailer then man is, so is it
easier to be intrapped in these gross snares of the devil, as was ouer-well
proved to be true, by the Serpents deceiving of Eua at the beginning, which
makes him the homelier with that sex sensine.


PHI. Return now where ye left.


EPI. To some others at these times he teaches, how to make pictures of wax
or clay, that by the roasting thereof, the persons that they bear the name of,
may be continually melted or dried away by continual sickness: To some he
gives such stones or ponders, as will help to cure or cast on diseases: And to
some he teaches kinds of uncouth poisons, which Mediciners understand not
(for he is far cunninger then man, in the knowledge of all the occult
proprieties of nature) not that any of these means which he teaches them
(except the poisons which are composed of things natural,) can of themselves
help any thing to these turns, that they are employed in, but only being
GODS ape, as well in that, as in all other things; Even as God by his
Sacraments which are earthly of themselves, works a heavenly effect, though no
ways by any cooperation in them: And as Christ by clay and spettle wrought
together, John 9.
opened the eyes of the blind man, suppose there was no virtue in that which
he outwardly applied, so the devil will have his outward means to be shows as
it were of his doing, which has no part or cooperation in his turns with him,
how far that ever the ignorants be abused in the contrary. And as to the
effects of these two former parts; to wit, the consultations and the outward
means, they are so wonderful, as I dare not allege any of them, without
joining a sufficient reason of the possibility thereof; For leaving all the
small trifles among wives, and to speak of the principal points of their
craft, for the common trifles thereof, they can do without converting well
enough by themselves, these principal points, I say, are these; They can make
men or women to love or hate other, which may be very possible to the devil to
effectuate, seeing he being a subtle spirit, knows well enough how to
persuade the corrupted affection of them whom God will permit him so to deal
with: They can lay the sickness of one upon another, which likewise is very
possible unto him: For since by Gods permission, he laid sickness upon Job,
why may he not far easilier lay it upon any other; For as an old practitian,
he knows well enough what humor domines most in any of us, and as a spirit
he can subtillie waken up the same, making it peccant, or to abound, as he
thinks meet for troubling of us, when God will so permit him: And for the
taking off of it, no doubt he will be glad to relieve such of present pain, as
he may think by these means to persuade to be catched in his everlasting
snares and fetters. They can bewitch and take the life of men or women, by
roasting of the Pictures, as I spoke of before, which likewise is very
possible to their master to perform: for although (as I said before) that
instrument of wax have no virtue in that turn doing, yet may he not very
well, even by the same measure, that his coniured slaves melts that wax at the
fire, may he not, I say, at these same times, subtily, as a spirit, so weaken
and scatter the spirits of life of the patient, as may make him on the one
part, for faintness, to sweat out the humor of his body, and on the other
part, for the not concurrence of these spirits, which causes his digestion, so
debilitate his stomach, that this humor radical continually, sweating out on
the one part, and no new good suck being put in the place thereof, for lack
of digestion on the other, he at last shall vanish away, even as his picture
will do at the fire? And that knauish and cunning workman, by troubling him,
only at sometimes, makes a proportion, so near betwixt the working of the one
and the other, that both shall end as it were at one time. They can raise
storms and tempests in the air, either upon Sea or land, though not
universally, but in such a particular place and prescribed bounds, as GOD will
permit them so to trouble: Which likewise is very easy to be discerned from
any other natural tempests that are Meteores, in respect of the sudden and
violent raising thereof, together with the short enduring of the same. And this
is likewise very possible to their master to do, he having such affinity
with the air, as being a spirit, and having such power of the forming and
moving thereof, as ye have heard me already declare: Ephesians. 2.
For in the Scripture, that style of the Prince of the air, is given unto him.
They can make folks to become Phrenticque or Maniacque, which likewise is very
possible to their master to do, since they are but natural sicknesses: and so
he may lay on these kinds, as well as any others. They can make spirits,
either to follow and trouble persons, or haunt certain houses, and affray
oftentimes the inhabitants, as has been known to be done by our Witches at
this time. And likewise they can make some to be possessed with spirits, and
so to become very Daemoniacques: and this last sort is very possible likewise
to the devil their master to do, since he may easily send his own angels to
trouble in what form he pleases, any whom God will permit him so to use.


PHI. But will God permit these wicked instruments by the power of the devil
their master, to trouble by any of these means, any that believe in him?


EPI. No doubt, for there are three kinds of folks whom God will permit so to
be tempted or troubled; the wicked for their horrible sins, to punish them in
the like measure; the godly that are sleeping in any great sins or
infirmities, and weakness in faith, to waken them up the faster by such an
uncouth form: and even some of the best, that their patience may be tried
before the world, as Jobs was: For why may not God use any kind of
extraordinary punishment, when it pleases him; as well as the ordinary rods of
sickness or other adversities?


PHI. Who then may be free from these deuilish practices?


EPI. No man ought to presume so far as to promise any impunitie to himself:
for God has before all beginnings, praeordinated, as well the particular sorts
of plagues, as of benefits for every man, which in the own time he ordaines
them to be visited with, and yet ought we not to be the more afraid for that,
of any thing that the devil and his wicked instruments can do against us: for
we daily fight against the devil in a hundredth other ways: And therefore, as
a valiant captain affraies no more being at the combat, nor stays from his
purpose for the rummishing shot of a Canon, nor the small clacke of a Pistolet,
suppose he be not certain what may light upon him; Even so ought we boldly to
go forward in fighting against the devil without any greater terror, for
these his rarest weapons, nor for the ordinary whereof we have daily the proof.


PHI. Is it not lawful then, by the help of some other Witch, to cure the
disease that is casten on by that craft?


EPI. No ways lawful; for I gave you the reason thereof in that axiom of
Theology, which was the last words I spoke of Magie.


PHI. How then may these diseases be lawful cured?


EPI. Only by earnest prayer unto God, by amendment of their lives, and by
sharp pursuing every one, according to his calling of these instruments of
Satan, whose punishment to the death will be a salutarie sacrifice for the
patient. And this is not only the lawful way, but likewise the most sure: For
by the devils means, can never the devil be casten out, Mark 3.
as Christ says. And when such a cure is used, it may well serve for a short
time, but at the last, it will doubtlesly tend to the utter perdition of the
patient, both in body and soul.


CHAP. VI.
ARGV.
What sort of folks are least or most subject to receive harm by Witchcraft:
What power they have to harm the Magistrate, and upon what respects they have
any power in prison: And to what end may or will the devil appear to them
therein: Upon what respects the devil appears in sundry shapes to sundry of
them at any time.

PHILOMATHES. But who dare take upon him to punish them, if no man can be sure
to be free from their unnatural invasions?


EPI. We ought not the more of that restrain from virtue, that the way whereby
we clime thereunto be straight and perilous: But besides that, as there is no
kind of persons so subject to receive harm of them, as these that are of
infirm and weak faith (which is the best buckler against such invasions:) so
have they so small power over none, as over such as zealously and earnestly
pursue them, without sparing for any wordly respect.


PHI. Then they are like the Pest, which smites these sickarest, that flies it
farthest, and apprehends deepliest the peril thereof.


EPI. It is even so with them: for neither is it able to them to use any false
cure upon a patient, except the patient first believe in their power, and so
hazard the tinsell of his own soul, nor yet can they have less power to hurt
any, nor such as contemn most their doings, so being it comes of faith, and
not of any vain arrogancy in themselves.


PHI. But what is their power against the Magistrate?


EPI. Less or greater, according as he deals with them: for if he be
slothful toward them, God is very able to make them instruments to waken and
punish his sloth: but if he be the contrary, he according to the just Law of
God, and allowable law of all nations, will be diligent in examining and
punishing of them: God will not permit their master to trouble or hinder so
good a work.


PHI. But fra they be once in hands and firmance, have they any further power
in their craft?


EPI. That is according to the form of their detention: If they be but
apprehended and detained by any private person, upon other private respects,
their power no doubt either in escaping, or in doing hurt, is no less nor ever
it was before: But if on the other part, their apprehending and detention be by
the lawful Magistrate, upon the just respects of their guiltiness in that
craft, their power is then no greater then before that ever they meddled with
their master: For where God begins justly to strike by his lawful Lieutenants,
it is not in the devils power to defraud or bereave him of the office, or
effect of his powerful and revenging Scepter.


PHI. But will never their Master come to visit them, fra they be once
apprehended and put in firmance?


EPI. That is according to the estate that these miserable wretches are in: For
if they be obstinate in still denying, he will not spare, when he finds time
to speak with them, either if he find them in any comfort, to fill them more
and more with the vain hope of some manner of relief; or else if he find
them in a deep despair, by all means to augment the same, and to persuade
them by some extraordinary means to put themselves down, which very commonly
they do: But if they be penitent and confess, God will not permit him to
trouble them any more with his presence and allurements.


PHI. It is not good using his counsel I see then: But I would earnestly know
when he appears to them in prison, what forms uses he then to take?


EPI. Diverse forms, even as he uses to do at other times unto them: For as I
told you, speaking of Magie, he appears to that kind of craftes-men ordinarily
in a form, according as they agree upon it among themselves; Or if they be but
prentises, according to the quality of their circles or coniurations: Yet to
these capped creatures, he appears as he pleases, and as he finds meetest
for their humors: For even at their public conuentions, he appears to
diverse of them in diverse forms, as we have found by the difference of their
confessions in that point: For he deluding them with vain impressions in the
air, makes himself to seem more terrible to the grosser sort, that they may
thereby be moved to fear and reverence him the more: and less monstrous and
uncouth like again to the craftier sort, lest otherwise they might stir and
skunner at his ugliness.


PHI. How can he then be felt, as they confess they have done him, if his body
be but of air?


EPI. I hear little of that amongst their confessions, yet may he make
himself palpable, either by assuming any dead body, and using the ministry
thereof, or else by deluding as well their sense of feeling as seeing; which is
not impossible to him to do, since all our senses, as we are so weak, and
even by ordinary sicknesses will be oftentimes deluded.


PHI. But I would speere one word further yet, concerning his appearing to them
in prison, which is this: May any other that chances to be present at that time
in the prison, see him as well as they?


EPI. Sometimes they will, and sometimes not, as it pleases God.


CHAP. VII.
ARG.
Two forms of the devils visible conuersing in the earth, with the reasons
wherefore the one of them was commonest in the time of Papistrie, and the other
sensine. Those that deny the power of the devil, deny the power of God, and
are guilty of the error of the Sadduces.

PHILOMATHES. Has the Devil then power to appear to any other, except to
such as are his sworn disciples; especially since all Oracles, and such like
kinds of illusions were taken away and abolished by the coming of CHRIST?


EPI. Although it be true indeed, that the brightness of the Gospel at his
coming, scaled the clouds of all these gross errors in the Gentilisme; yet
that these abusing spirits, cease not sensine at sometimes to appear, daily
experience teaches us. Indeed this difference is to be marked betwixt the
forms of Satan's conuersing visibly in the world: For of two different forms
thereof, the one of them by the spreading of the Euangel, and conquest of the
white horse, in the sixth Chapter of the Revelation, is much hindered and become
rather there-through: This his appearing to any Christians, troubling of them
outwardly, or possessing of them constrainedly: The other of them is become
commoner and more used sensine, I mean by their unlawful arts, whereupon our
whole purpose has been. This we find by experience in this Isle to be true:
For as we know, more ghosts and spirits were seen, nor tongue can tell, in the
time of blind Papistrie in these countries, where now by the contrary, a man
shall scarcely all his time hear once of such things; and yet were these
unlawful arts far rarer at that time, and never were so much heard of, nor
so rife as they are now.


PHI. What should be the cause of that?


EPI. The diverse nature of our sins procures at the Justice of God, diverse
sorts of punishments answering thereunto: and therefore as in the time of
Papistrie, our fathers erring grossly, and through ignorance, that mist of
errors ouershadowed the Devil to walk the more familiarly amongst them, and
as it were by barnely and affraying terrors, to mock and accuse their barnely
errors; by the contrary, we now being sound of Religion, and in our life
rebelling to our profession, God justly by that sin of rebellion, as Samuel
calls it, accuses our life so wilfully fighting against our profession.


PHI. Since ye are entered now to speak of the appearing of spirits, I would be
glad to hear your opinion in that matter: for many deny that any such spirits
can appear in these days, as I have said.


EPI. Doubtless who denies the power of the Devil, would likewise deny the
power of God, if they could for shame. For since the Devil is the very
contrary opposite to God, there can be no better way to know God, then by the
contrary; as by the ones power (though a creature) to admire the power of the
great Creator: by the falsehood of the one to consider the truth of the other:
by the injustice of the one, to consider the Justice of the other: And by the
cruelty of the one, to consider the mercifulness of the other: And so forth
in all the rest of the essence of God, and qualities of the Devil. But I fear
indeed, there be over many Sadduces in this world, that deny all kinds of
Spirits: For conuicting of whose error, there is cause enough if there were no
more, that God should permit at sometimes Spirits visibly to kyith.


THE THIRD BOOK OF DAEMONOLOGIE.
ARGUMENT.
The description of all these kinds of Spirits that trouble men or women. The
conclusion of the whole Dialogue.

CHAP. I.
ARGV.
The division of Spirits in four principal kinds: The description of the
first kind of them, called Spectra and vmbrae mortuorum: What is the best way
to be free of their trouble.

PHILOMATHES. I Pray you now then go forward in telling what ye think
fabulous, or may be trowed in that case.


EPI. That kind of the devils co^uersing in the earth, may be divided in four
different kinds, whereby he affraieth and troubles the bodies of men: For of
the abusing of the soul, I have spoken already. The first is, where spirits
trouble some houses or solitary places: The second, where Spirits follow upon
certain persons, and at diverse hours trouble them: The third, when they enter
within them, and possess them: The fourth is these kind of Spirits that are
called vulgarly the Fairie: Of the three former kinds, ye heard already, how
they may artificially be made by Witchcraft to trouble folk; now it restes to
speak of their natural coming as it were, and not raised by Witchcraft. But
generally I must forewarne you of one thing before I enter in this purpose:
that is, that although in my discoursing of them, I divide them in diverse
kinds, ye must notwithstanding thereof note my phrase of speaking in that: For
doubtleslie they are in effect, but all one kind of Spirits, who for abusing
the more of mankind, take on these sundry shapes, and use diverse forms of
outward actions, as if some were of nature better then other. Now I return to
my purpose: As to the first kind of these spirits, that were called by the
ancients by diverse names, according as their actions were: For if they were
Spirits that haunted some houses, by appearing in diverse and horrible forms,
and making great dinne, they were called Lemures or Spectra: If they appeared
in likeness of any defunct to some friends of his, they were called
vmbraemortuorum: And so innumerable styles they got, according to their
actions, as I have said already; as we see by experience, how many styles they
have given them in our language in the like manner. Of the appearing of these
Spirits, we are certified by the Scriptures, Esaias 13. Iere. 50.
where the Prophet Esaias 13. and 34. Chap. threatening the destruction of
Jerusalem, declares, that it shall not only be wracked, but shall become so
great a solitude, as it shall be the habitacle of Howlets, and of Zijm and Ijm,
which are the proper Hebrew names for these Spirits. The cause why they haunt
sollitarie places, it is by reason, that they may affray and brangle the more
the faith of such as them alone hauntes such places: For our nature is such, as
in companies we are not so soon moved to any such kind of fear, as being
sollitarie, which the devil knowing well enough, he will not therefore assail
us but when we are weak: And besides that, God will not permit him so to
dishonor the societies and companies of Christians, as in publicque times and
places to walk visiblie amongst them: On the other part, when he troubles
certain houses that are dwelt in, it is a sure token either of gross
ignorance, or of some gross and slanderous sins amongst the inhabitants
thereof, which God by that extraordinary rod punishes.


PHI. But by what way or passage can these Spirits enter into these houses,
seeing they allege that they will enter, door and window being steiked?


EPI. They will choose the passage for their entresse, according to the form
that they are in at that time: For if they have assumed a dead body, whereinto
they lodge themselves, they can easily enough open without dinne any door or
window, and enter in thereat; And if they enter as a Spirit only, any place
where the air may come in at, is large enough an entry for them: For as I
said before, a Spirit can occupy no quantity.


PHI. And will God then permit these wicked Spirits to trouble the rest of a
dead body, before the resurrection thereof? Or if he will so, I think it
should be of the reprobate only.


EPI. What more is the rest troubled of a dead body, when the devil caries it
out of the grave to serve his turn for a space, nor when the Witches take it
up and joints it, or when as Swine wortes up the graves? The rest of them that
the Scripture speaks of, is not meaned by a local remaining continually in
one place, but by their resting from their travails and miseries of this
world, while their latter conjunction again with the soul at that time, to
receive full glory in both: And that the devil may use as well the ministry
of the bodies of the faithful in these cases, as of the unfaithful, there is
no inconvenience; for his haunting with their bodies after they are dead, can
no-waies defile them, in respect of the souls absence: And for any dishonor
it can be unto them, by what reason can it be greater, then the hanging,
heading, or many such shameful deaths, that good men will suffer? For there is
nothing in the bodies of the faithful, more worthy of honor, or freer from
corruption by nature, nor in these of the unfaithful, while time they be
purged and glorified in the latter Day, as is daily seen by the vilde diseases
and corruptions, that the bodies of the faithful are subject unto, as ye will
see clearly proved, when I speak of the possessed and Daemoniacques.


PHI. Yet there are sundry that affirm to have haunted such places, where
these spirits are alleged to be; and could never hear nor see any thing.


EPI. I think well: for that is only reserved to the secret knowledge of God,
whom he will permit to see such things, and whom not.


PHI. But where these spirits haunt and trouble any houses, what is the best
way to banish them?


EPI. By two means may only the remeid of such things be procured: The one is
ardent prayer to God, both of these persons that are troubled with them, and of
that Church whereof they are: The other is the purging of themselves by
amendment of life, from such sins, as have procured that extraordinary
plague.


PHI. And what mean then these kinds of spirits, when they appear in the
shadow of a person newly dead, or to die, to his friends?


EPI. When they appear upon that occasion, they are called Wraithes in our
language: Amongst the Gentiles the devil used that much, to make them believe
that it was some good spirit that appeared to them then, either to forewarne
them of the death of their friend, or else to discover unto them the will of
the defunct, or what was the way of his slaughter, as it is written in the
book of the histories prodigious: and this way he easily deceived the
Gentiles, because they knew not God: and to that same effect is it, that he now
appears in that manner to some ignorant Christians: for he dares not so illude
any that knows that, neither can the spirit of the defunct return to his
friend, or yet an Angel use such forms.


PHI. And are not our war-woolfes one sort of these spirits also, that haunt
and trouble some houses or dwelling places?


EPI. There has indeed been an old opinion of such like things; for by the
Greeks they were called (...), which signifies men-wolfes: But to tell you
simply my opinion in this, if any such thing has been, I take it to have
proceeded but of a natural super-abundance of Melancholy, which as we read,
that it has made some think themselves pitchers, and some horses, and some
one kind of beast or other, so suppose I that it has so viciat the
imagination and memory of some, as per lucida interualla, it has so highly
occupied them, that they have thought themselves very Woolfes indeed at these
times and so have counterfeited their actions in going on their hands and
feet, preassing to devour women and barnes, fighting and snatching with all
the town dogs, and in using such like other brutish actions, and so to
become beasts by a strong apprehension, as Nebuchad-nezzar was seven years:
Daniel 4.
but as to their having and hiding of their hard and schelly sluiches, I take
that to be but eiked, by uncertain report, the author of all lies.


CHAP. II.
ARGV.
The description of the next two kinds of Spirits, whereof the one follows
outwardly, the other possesses inwardly the persons that they trouble: That
since all prophecies and visions are now ceased, all spirits that appear in
these forms are evil.

PHILOMATHES. COme forward now to the rest of these kinds of spirits.


EPI. As to the next two kinds, that is, either these that outwardly trouble
and follow some persons, or else inwardly possess them, I will conioine them in
one, because as well the causes are alike in the persons that they are
permitted to trouble; as also the ways whereby they may be remedied and cured.


PHI. What kind of persons are they that use to be so troubled?


EPI. Two kinds in special; either such as being guilty of grievous
offenses, God punishes by that horrible kind of scourge; or else being persons
of the best nature peradventure, that ye shall find in all the country about
them, God permits them to be troubled in that sort, for the trial of their
patience, and wakening up of their zeal, for admonishing of the beholders, not
to trust overmuch in themselves, since they are made of no better stuff, and
peradventure blotted with no smaller sins (as Christ said, Luke 13.
speaking of them upon whom the Tower of Sylo fell:) And for giving likewise to
the spectators, matter to praise God, that they meriting no better, are yet
spared from being corrected in that fearful form.


PHI. These are good reasons for the part of GOD, which apparently moonues him
so to permit the Devil to trouble such persons: But since the Devil has ever
a contrary respect in all the actions that GOD imployes him in, which is I
pray you the end and mark he shootes at in this turn?


EPI. It is to obtain one of two things thereby, if he may: The one is the
tinsell of their life, by inducing them to such perilous places, at such time
as he either follows or possesses them, which may procure the same, and such
like, so far as GOD will permit him, by tormenting them to weaken their
body, and cast them into incurable diseases: The other thing that he preasses
to obtain by troubling of them, is the tinsell of their soul, by intising
them to mistrust and blaspheme God, either for the intolerablenesse of their
torments, Job 1.
as he assayed to have done with Job; or else for his promising unto them to
leave the troubling of them, in case they would so do, as is known by
experience at this same time by the confession of a young one that was so
troubled.


PHI. Since ye have spoken now of both these kinds of spirits comprehending
them in one, I must now go back again in speering some questions of every
one of these kinds in special. And first for these that follow certain
persons, ye know that there are two sorts of them: One sort that trouble and
torment the persons that they haunt with: Another sort that are serviceable
unto them in all kind of their necessaries, and omit never to forewarne them of
any sudden peril that they are to be in: And so in this case, I would
understand whether both these sorts be but wicked and damned spirits, or if the
last sort be rather Angels, (as should appear by their actions) sent by God to
assist such as he specially favors: For it is written in the Scriptures,
Gene. 32. 1. Kings 6. Psalm. 34.
that God sends legions of Angels to guard and watch over his elect.


EPI. I know well enough where fra that error which ye allege has proceeded;
For it was the ignorant Gentiles that were the fountain thereof, Who for that
they knew not God, they forged in their own imaginations, every man to be still
accompanied with two spirits, whereof they called the one genius bonus, the
other genius malus: the Greeks called them (...) and (...): whereof the former
they said, persuaded him to all the good he did; the other entised him to all
the evil. But praised be GOD, we that are Christians, and walk not amongst
the Cymmerian conjectures of man, know well enough, that it is the good Spirit
of GOD only, who is the fountain of all goodness, that persuades us to the
thinking or doing of any good, and that it is our corrupted flesh and Satan,
that intiseth us to the contrary: And yet the Devil for confirming in the
heads of ignorant Christians, that error first maintained among the Gentiles,
he whiles among the first kind of spirits that I speak of, appeared in time of
Papistrie and blindness, and haunted diverse houses, without doing any evil,
but doing as it were necessary turns up and down the house: and this spirit
they called Brownie in our language, who appeared like a rough-man: yea, some
were so blinded, as to believe that their house was all their sonsier, as they
called it, that such spirits resorted there.


PHI. But since the devils intention in all his actions, is ever to do evil,
what evil was there in that form of doing, since their actions outwardly were
good?


EPI. Was it not evil enough to deceive simple ignorants, in making them to
take him for an Angel of light, and so to account of Gods enemy as of their
particular friend? where by the contrary, all we that are Christians, ought
assuredly to know, that since the coming of Christ in the flesh, and
establishing of his Church by the Apostles, al miracles, visions, prophecies,
and appearances of Angels or good spirits, are ceased; which served only for
the first sowing of faith, and planting of the Church: Where now the Church
being established, and the white Horse whereof I spoke before, having made his
conquest, the Law and Prophets are thought sufficient to serve us, or make us
inexcusable, as Christ says in his parable of Lazarus and the rich man.


CHAP. III.
ARGV.
The description of a particular sort of that kind of following Spirits,
called Incubi and Succubi: And what is the reason wherefore these kinds of
Spirits haunt most the Northern and barbarous parts of the world.

PHILOMATHES. THe next question that I would speere, is likewise concerning
this first of these two kinds of Spirits that ye have conjoined; and it is
this: ye know how it is commonly written and reported, that amongst the rest of
the sorts of Spirits that follow certain persons, there is one more monstrous
nor all the rest, in respect as it is alleged, they converse naturally with
them whom they trouble and haunt with: and therefore I would know in two things
your opinion herein: First, if such a thing can be: and next if it be, whether
there be a difference of sexes amongst these Spirits or not?


EPI. That abominable kind of the devils abusing of men or women, was called
of old, Incubi and Succubi, according to the difference of the sexes that they
conuersed with. By two means this great kind of abuse might possibly be
performed: The one, when the devil only as a Spirit, and stealing out the
sperme of a dead body, abuses them that way, they not graithly seeing any
shape, or feeling any thing, but that which he so conueyes in that part, as we
read of a Monastery of Nuns which were burnt for their being that way
abused: The other mean is, when he borrowes a dead body and so visibly, and as
it seems unto them naturally as a man conuerses with them. But it is to be
noted, that in whatsoever way he uses it, that sperme seems intollerably cold
to the person abused: For if he steal out the nature of a quick person, it
cannot be so quickly carried, but it will both tine the strength and heat by
the way, which it could never have had for lack of agitation, which in the
time of procreation is the procurer and wakener up of these two natural
qualities: And if he occupying the dead body as his lodging, expel the same
out thereof in the due time, it must likewise be cold by the participation with
the qualities of the dead body whereout of it comes. And whereas ye enquire if
these Spirits be divided in sexes or not, I think the rules of Philosophy may
easily resolve a man of the contrary: For it is a sure principle of that Art,
that nothing can be divided in sexes, except such living bodies as must have a
natural seed to genere by: But we know Spirits have no seed proper to
themselves, nor yet can they gender one with an other.


PHI. How is it then, that they say sundry monsters have been gotten by that
way?


EPI. These tales are nothing but Aniles fabulae: For that they have no nature
of their own, I have showed you already: And that the cold nature of a dead
body, can work nothing in generation, it is more nor plain, as being
already dead of it self, as well as the rest of the body is, wanting the
natural heat, and such other natural operation, as is necessary for working
that effect, and in case such a thing were possible (which were utterly against
all the rules of nature) it would breed no monster, but only such a natural
offspring, as would have come betwixt that man or woman and that other abused
person, in case they both being alive had had a do with other: For the Devils
part therein, is but the naked carrying or expelling of that substance; and so
it could participate with no quality of the same. Indeed, it is possible to
the craft of the Devil to make a woman's belly to swell after he has that way
abused her, which he may do either by stirring up her own humor, or by
herbs, as we see beggars daily do: And when the time of her delivery should
come to make her thoil great dolours, like unto that natural course, and then
subtly to slip in the Mid-wiues hands, stocks, stones, or some monstrous
barn brought from some other place: but this is more reported and guessed at
by others, nor believed by me.


PHI. But what is the cause that this kind of abuse is thought to be most
common in such wild parts of the world, as Lap-land, and Fin-land, or in our
North Isles of Orknay and Schet-land?


EPI. Because where the Devil finds greatest ignorance and barbaritie, there
assailes he grosseliest, as I gave you the reason wherefore there were more
Witches of women-kinde nor men.


PHI. Can any be so unhappy as to give their willing consent to the Devils
vile abusing them in this form?


EPI. Yea, some of the Witches have confessed, that he has persuaded them to
give their willing consent thereunto, that he may thereby have them feltred
the sikarer in his snares: but as the other compelled sort is to be pitied and
prayed for, so is this most highly to be punished and detested.


PHI. Is it not the thing which we call the Mare, which takes folks sleeping
in their beds, a kind of these spirits, whereof ye are speaking?


EPI. No, that is but a natural sickness, which the Mediciners have given
that name of Incubus unto, ab incubando, because it being a thick fleume,
falling into our breast upon the heart, while we are sleeping, intercludes so
our vital spirits, and takes all powerfrom us, as makes us think that there
were some unnatural burden or spirit, lying upon us, and holding us down.


CHAP. IIII.
ARGV.
The description of the Daemoniackes and possessed: By what reason the Papists
may have power to cure them.

PHILOMATHES. WEll, I have told you now all my doubts, and ye have satisfied
me therein, concerning the first of these two kinds of spirits that ye have
conjoined: now I am to enquire only two things at you concerning the last
kind, I mean the Daemoniackes. The first is, whereby shall these possessed
folks be discerned fra them that are troubled with a natural Frenzy or
Many: The next is, how can it be that they can be remedied by the Papists
Church, whom we counting as Heretics, it should appear that one devil
should not cast out another, Matthew. 12. Mark 3.
for then would his kingdom be divided in it self, as Christ said.


EPI. As to your first question; there are diverse symptoms, whereby that
heavy trouble may be discerned from a natural sickness, and specially
three, omitting the diverse vain signs that the Papists attribute unto it:
Such as the raging at holy water, their fleeing abacke from the Cross, their
not abiding the hearing of God named, and innumerable such like vain things
that were alike fashious and feckles to recite: But to come to these three
symptoms then, whereof I spoke, I account the one of them to be the incredible
strength of the possessed creature, which will far exceed the strength of
six of the wightest and wodest of any other men that are not so troubled: The
next is the boldening up so far of the patients breast and belly, with such
an unnatural sturring and vehement agitation within them, and such an ironie
hardness of his sinews so stiffely bended out, that it were not possible to
prick out as it were the skin of any other person so far; so mightily
works the devil in all the members and senses of his body, he being locally
within the same, suppose of his soul and affections thereof, he have no more
power then of any other man's: The last is, the speaking of sundry languages,
which the patient is known, by them that were acquainted with him, never to
have learned, and that with an uncouth and hollow voice, and all the time of
his speaking, a greater motion being in his breast then in his mouth: But fra
this last symptom is excepted such, as are altogether in the time of their
possessing bereft of all their senses, being possessed with a dumb and blind
spirit, whereof Christ relieved one, in the 12. of Matthew. And as to your next
demand, it is first to be doubted if the Papists, or any not professing the
only true Religion, can relieve any of that trouble: and next, in case they
can, upon what respect it is possible unto them. As to the former, upon two
reasons it is grounded: first that it is known so many of them to be
counterfeit, which wyle the Clergy inuents for confirming of their rotten
Religion: The next is, that by experience we find, that few who are possessed
indeed, are fully cured by them; but rather the devil is content to release
the bodily hurting of them, for a short space, thereby to obtain the
perpetual hurt of the souls of so many that by these false miracles may be
induced or confirmed in the profession of that erroneous Religion; even as I
told you before that he does in the false cures or casting off of diseases by
Witches. As to the other part of the argument in case they can, which rather
(with reverence of the learned thinking otherwise) I am induced to believe, by
reason of the faithful report that men sound of Religion, have made according
to their sight thereof, I think if so be I say these may be the respects,
whereupon the Papists may have that power. Christ gave a commission and power
to his Apostles to cast out devils, which they according thereunto put in
execution: the rules he bade them observe in that action, was fasting and
prayer; and the action it self to be done in his name. This power of theirs
proceeded not then of any virtue in them, but only in him who directed them;
as was clearly proved by Judas his having as great power in that commission,
as any of the rest. It is easy then to be understood that the casting out of
devils, is by the virtue of fasting and prayer, and in calling of the Name of
God, suppose many imperfections be in the person that is the instrument, as
Christ himself teaches us of the power that false prophets shall have to cast
out devils. It is no wonder then, these respects of this action being
considered, that it may be possible to the Papists, though erring in sundry
points of Religion to accomplish this, if they use the right form prescribed
by Christ herein: For what the worse is that action that they err in other
things; more then their Baptism is the worse that they err in the other
Sacrament, and have eiked many vain freittes to the Baptism it self.


PHI. Surely it is no little wonder that God should permit the bodies of any of
the faithful to be so dishonored, as to be adwelling place to that unclean
spirit.


EPI. There is it which I told right now, would prove and strengthen my
argument of the devils entering into the dead bodies of the faithful: For if he
is permitted to enter into their living bodies, even when they are joined with
the soul; how much more will God permit him to enter into their dead carions,
which is no more man, Mark 7.
but the filthy and corruptible caise of man? For as Christ says, It is not
any thing that enters within man that defiles him, but only that which
proceeds and comes out of him.


CHAP. V.
ARGV.
The description of the fourth kind of Spirits, called the Phairie: What is
possible therein, and what is but illusions. How far this Dialogue entreates
of all these things, and to what end.

PHILOMATHES. NOw I pray you come on to that fourth kind of Spirits.


EPI. That fourth kind of Spirits, which by the Gentiles was called Diana, and
her wandering court, and amongst us was called the Phairie (as I told you) or
our good neighbors, was one of the sorts of illusions that was rifest in the
time of Papistrie: for although it was holden odious to prophecy by the devil,
yet whom these kind of Spirits carried away, and informed, they were thought to
be sonsiest and of best life. To speak of the many vain trattles founded upon
that illusion, How there was a King and Queen of Phairie, of such a jolly
court and train as they had, how they had a teynd, and duty, as it were, of
all goods, how they naturally rode and went, eat and drank, and did all other
actions like natural men and women, I think it liker Virgils Campi Elysij,
nor any thing that ought to be believed by Christians, except in general, that
as I spoke sundry times before, the devil illuded the senses of sundry
simple creatures, in making them believe that they saw and heard such things as
were nothing so indeed.


PHI. But how can it be then, that sundry Witches have gone to death with that
confession, that they have been transported with the Phairie to such a hill,
which opening, they went in, and there saw a fair Queen, who being now
lighter, gave them a stone that had sundry virtues, which at sundry times
has been produced in judgment?


EPI. I say that, even as I said before of that imaginar rauishing of the
Spirit forth of the body: For may not the devil object to their fantasy,
their senses being dulled, and as it were asleep, such hills and houses
within them, such glistering courts and trains, and whatsoever such like
wherewith he pleases to delude them, and in the mean time their bodies being
senseless, to convey in their hand any stone or such like thing, which he
makes them to imagine to have received in such a place.


PHI. But what say ye to their foretelling the death of sundry persons, whom
they allege to have seen in these places? that is, a soothdreame (as they
say) since they see it walking.


EPI. I think that either they have not been sharply enough examined, that
gave so blunt a reason for their prophecy, or otherwise, I think it likewise
as possible that the devil may prophecy to them when he deceiues their
imaginations in that sort, as well as when he plainly speaks unto them at
other times: for their prophesying, is but by a kind of vision, as it were,
wherein he commonly counterfeites God among the Ethnicks, as I told you before.


PHI. I would know now whether these kinds of Spirits may only appear to
Witches, or if they may also appear to any other.


EPI. They may do to both; to the innocent sort, either to affray them, or to
seem to be a better sort of folks nor unclean Spirits are; and to the
Witches to be a color of safety for them, that ignorant Magistrates may not
punish them for it, as I told even now: But as the one sort, for being perforce
troubled with them ought to be pitied, so ought the other sort (who may be
discerned by their taking upon them to prophecy by them,) that sort, I say,
ought as severely to be punished as any other Witches, and rather the more,
that they go dissemblingly to work.


PHI. And what makes the spirits have so different names from others?


EPI. Even the knauerie of that same devil; who as he illudes the Necromancers
with innumerable feined names for him and his angels, as in special, making
Satan, Beelzebub, and Lucifer, to be three sundry spirits, where we find the
two former, but diverse names given to the Prince of all the rebelling Angels by
the Scripture; as by Christ, the Prince of all the devils is called Beelzebub
in that place, which I alleged against the power of any hereticques to cast
out devils. By John in the Revelation, the old tempter is called Satan the
Prince of all the evil Angels: And the last, to wit, Lucifer, is but by
allegory taken from the day Star (so named in diverse places of the
Scriptures) because of his excellency (I mean the Prince of them) in his
creation before his fall; even so I say he deceiues the Witches, by
attributing to himself diverse names; as if every diverse shape that he
transformes himself in, were a diverse kind of spirit.


PHI. But I have heard many more strange tales of this Phairie, nor ye have yet
told me.


EPI. As well I do in that, as I did in all the rest of my discourse: For
because the ground of this conference of ours, proceeded of your speering at me
at our meeting: if there was such a thing as Witches or spirits: and if they
had any power: I therefore have framed my whole discourse, only to prove that
such things are and may be, by such number of examples as I show to be possible
by reason, and keep me from dipping any further in playing the part of a
Dictionarie, to tell what ever I have read or heard in that purpose, which both
would exceed faith, and rather would seem to teach such unlawful arts, nor
to disallow and condemn them, as it is the duty of all Christians to do.


CHAP. VI.
ARG.
Of the trial and punishment of Witches: What sort of accusation ought to be
admitted against them: What is the cause of the increasing so far of their
number in this aage.

PHILOMATHES. THen to make an end of our conference, since I see it draws
late, what form of punishment think ye merit these Magicians and Witches?
For I see that ye account them to be all alike guilty.


EPI. They ought to be put to death according to the Law of God, the civil and
imperial Law, and municipall Law of all Christian nations.


PHI. But what kind of death I pray you?


EPI. It is commonly used by fire, but that is an indifferent thing to be used
in every country, according to the Law or custom thereof.


PHI. But ought no sex, aage nor rank to be exempted?


EPI. None at all (being so used by the lawful magistrate) for it is the
highest point of Idolatry, wherein no exception is admitted by the law of God.


PHI. Then barnes may not be spared.


EPI. Yea; not a hair the less of my conclusion: For they are not that
capable of reason as to pactise such things: And for any being in company and
not reueiling thereof, their less and ignorant aage will no doubt excuse them.


PHI. I see ye condemn them all that are of the counsel of such crafts.


EPI. No doubt, for as I said, speaking of Magie, the consulters, trusters in,
ouer-seers, interteiners or stirrers up of these craftes-folkes, are equally
guilty with themselves that are the practisers.


PHI. Whether may the Prince then, or supreme Magistrate, spare or ouer-see
any that are guilty of that craft, upon some great respects known to him?


EPI. The Prince or Magistrate for further trials cause, may continue the
punishing of them such a certain space as he thinks convenient: But in the
end to spare the life, and not to strike when God bids strike, and so severely
punish in so odious a fault and treason against God, it is not only unlawful,
but doubtless no less sin in that Magistrate, nor it was in Saules sparing
of Agag; 1. Sam. 15.
and so comparable to the sin of Witchcraft it self, as Samuel alleged at
that time.


PHI. Surely then, I think since this crime ought to be so severely punished,
Judges ought to beware to condemn any, but such as they are sure are guilty,
neither should the clattering report of a carling serve in so weighty a case.


EPI. Judges ought indeed to beware whom they condemn: for it is as great a
crime (as Solomon says,) To condemn the innocent, Prou. 17.
as to let the guilty escape free; neither ought the report of any one
infamous person, be admitted for a sufficient proof, which can stand of no law.


PHI. And what may a number then of guilty persons confessions, work against
one that is accused?


EPI. The Assise must serve for interpretour of our law in that respect: But in
my opinion, since in a matter of treason against the Prince, barnes or wives,
or never so diffamed persons, may of our law serve for sufficient witnesses and
proofs; I think surely that by a far greater reason, such witnesses may be
sufficient in matters of high treason against God: For who but Witches can be
proves, and so witnesses of the doings of Witches?


PHI. Indeed, I trow they will be loath to put any honest man upon their
counsel: But what if they accuse folk to have been present at their Imaginar
conuentions in the spirit, when their bodies lie senseless, as ye have said?


EPI. I think they are not a hair the less guilty: For the Devil durst
never have borrowed their shadow or similitude to that turn, if their consent
had not been at it: And the consent in these turns is death of the law.


PHI. Then Samuel was a Witch: For the devil resembled his shape, and played
his person in giving response to Saul.


EPI. Samuel was dead as well before that; and so none could slander him with
meddling in that unlawful art. For the cause why, as I take it, that God will
not permit Satan to use the shapes of similitudes of any innocent persons at
such unlawful times, is, that God will not permit that any innocent persons
shall be slandered with that vile defection: for then the devil would find
ways anew, to calumniate the best. And this we have in proof by them that
are carried with the Phairie, who never see the shadows of any in that Court,
but of them that thereafter are tried to have been brethren and sisters of
that craft: And this was likewise proved by the confession of a young Less,
troubled with spirits, laid on her by Witchcraft: that although she saw the
shapes of diverse men and women troubling her, and naming the persons whom these
shadows represent: yet never one of them are found to be innocent, but all
clearly tried to be most guilty, and the most part of them confessing the
same. And besides that, I think it has been seldom heard tell of, that any,
whom persons guilty of that crime accused, as having known them to be their
marrowes by eyesight, and not by hearsay, but such as were so accused of
Witchcraft, could not be clearly tried upon them, were at the least publicly
known to be of a very evil life and reputation: so jealous is God I say, of
the fame of them that are innocent in such causes. And besides that, there are
two other good helps that may be used for their trial: The one is, the finding
of their mark, and the trying the insensiblenes thereof: The other is their
fleeting on the water: for as in a secret murder, if the dead carcass be at
any time thereafter handled by the murderer, it will gush out of blood, as if
the blood were crying to the heaven for revenge of the murderer, God having
appointed that secret supernatural sign, for trial of that secret unnatural
crime, so it appears that God has appointed (for a supernatural sign of the
monstrous impiety of Witches) that the water shall refuse to receive them in
her bosom, that have shaken off them the sacred water of Baptism, and
wilfully refused the benefit thereof: No, not so much as their eyes are able
to shed tears (threaten and torture them as ye please) while first they repent
(God not permitting them to dissemble their obstinacy in so horrible a crime)
albeit the women-kind especially, be able otherwise to shed tears at every
light occasion when they will, yea, although it were dissemblingly like the
Crocodiles.


PHI. Well, we have made this conference to last as long as leisure would
permit: and to conclude then, since I am to take my leave of you, I pray God to
purge this country of these devilish practices: for they were never so rife
in these parts, as they are now.


EPI. I pray God that so be too. But the causes are ouer-manifest, that make
them to be so rife: For the great wickedness of the people on the one part,
procures this horrible defection, whereby God justly punishes sin by a
greater iniquity: and on the other part, the consummation of the world, and
our deliverance drawing near, makes Satan to rage the more in his instruments,
knowing his kingdom to be so near an end. And so farewell for this time.


ASILIKON DOPON. OR HIS MAJESTY'S INSTRVCTIONS TO HIS DEAREST SON, HENRY THE
PRINCE.
THE ARGUMENT.
SONNET.
GOD gives not Kings the style of Gods in vain,
For on his Throne his Scepter do they swey:
And as their subjects ought them to obey,
So Kings should fear and serve their God again:
If then ye would enjoy a happy reign,
Observe the Statutes of your heavenly King,
And from his Law, make all your Laws to spring:
Since his Lieutenant here ye should remain,
Reward the just, be steadfast, true, and plain,
Repress the proud, maintayning aye the right,
Walk always so, as ever in his sight,
Who guardes the godly, plaguing the profane:
And so ye shall in Princely virtues shine,
Resembling right your mighty King Divine.
TO HENRY MY DEAREST SON, AND NATURAL SVCCESSOVR.
VVHom-to can so rightly appertain this Book of instructions to a Prince in
all the points of his calling, as well general, as a Christian toward God; as
particular, as a King toward his people? Whom-to, I say, can it so justly
appertain, as unto you my dearest Son? Since J the author thereof, as your
natural Father, must be careful for your godly and virtuous education, as my
eldest Son, and the first fruits of Gods blessing toward me in my
posterity: and as a King must timously provide for your trayning up in all the
points of a Kings Office; since ye are my natural and lawful successor
therein: that being rightly informed hereby, of the weight of your burden, ye
may in time begin to consider, that being borne to be a king, ye are rather
borne to onus, then honos: not excelling all your people so far in rank and
honor, as in daily care and hazardous paines-taking, for the dutiful
administration of that great office, that God has laid upon your shoulders.
Laying so a just symmetrie and proportion, betwixt the height of your
honorable place, and the heavy weight of your great charge: and consequently,
in case of failing, which God forbid, of the sadness of your fall, according
to the proportion of that height. J have therefore for the greater ease to your
memory, and that ye may at the first, cast up any part that ye have to do
with, divided this Treatise in three parts. The first teaches you your duty
toward God as a Christian: the next, your duty in your Office as a King: and
the third informs you how to behave your self in indifferent things, which
of themselves are neither right nor wrong, but according as they are rightly
or wrong used; and yet will serve according to your behavior therein, to
augment or empaire your fame and authority at the hands of your people.
Receive and welcome this Book then, as a faithful Praeceptour and counselor
unto you: which, because my affairs will not permit me ever to be present
with you, J ordain to be a resident faithful admonisher of you: And because
the hour of death is uncertain to me, as unto all flesh, J leave it as my
Testament and latter will unto you. Chargeing you in the presence of GOD, and
by the fatherly authority J have over you, that ye keep it ever with you, as
carefully, as Alexander did the Iliads of Homer. Ye will find it a just and
impartial counselor; neither flattering you in any vice, nor importuning you
at unmeet times. It will not come vn-called, neither speak vnspeered at: and
yet conferring with it when ye are at quiet, ye shall say with Scipio, that
ye are nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus. To conclude then, J charge you, as
ever ye think to deserve my Fatherly blessing, to follow and put in practice,
as far as lies in you, the praecepts hereafter following. And if ye follow
the contrary course, I take the Great GOD to record, that this Book shall one
day be a witness betwixt me and you; and shall procure to be ratified in
Heaven, the curse that in that case here I give unto you. For I protest before
that Great GOD, I had rather not be a Father, and childlesse, then be a
Father of wicked children. But hoping, yea, even promising unto my self, that
GOD, who in his great blessing sent you unto me; shall in the same blessing,
as he has given me a Son; so make him a good and a godly Son; not
repenting him of his Mercy showed unto me, I end, with my earnest prayer to
GOD, to work effectually into you, the fruits of that blessing, which here
from my heart I bestow upon you.

Your loving Father I. R.

TO THE READER.
CHaritable Reader, it is one of the golden Sentences, which Christ our Savior
uttered to his Apostles, that there is nothing so covered, Luke 12.
that shall not be revealed, neither so hid, that shall not be known: and
whatsoever they have spoken in darkness, should be heard in the light: and
that which they had spoken in the ear in secret place, should be publicly
preached on the tops of the houses: And since he has said it, most true must
it be, fince the author thereof is the fountain and very being of truth:
which should move all godly and honest men, to be very wary in all their
secretest actions, and whatsoever middesses they use for attaining to their
most wished ends; lest otherwise how auowable soever the mark be, whereat they
aim, the middesses being discovered to be shameful whereby they climb, it
may turn to the disgrace both of the good work it self, and of the author
thereof; since the deepest of our secrets, cannot be hid from that all-seeing
eye and penetrant light, piercing through the bowels of very darkness it
self.

But as this is generally true in the actions of all men, so is it more
specially true in the affairs of Kings: for Kings being public persons, by
reason of their office and authority, are as it were set (as it was said of
old) upon a public stage, in the sight of all the people; where all the
beholders eyes are attentively bent to look and pry in the least circumstance
of their secretest drifts: Which should make Kings the more careful not to
harbor the secretest thought in their mind, but such as in the own time they
shall not be ashamed openly to avouch; assuring themselves that Time the mother
of Verity, will in the due season bring her own daughter to perfection.

The true practice hereof, I have as a King often found in my own person, though
I thank God, never to my shame, having laid my count, ever to walk as in the
eyes of the Almighty, examining ever so the secretest of my drifts, before I
gave them course, as how they might some day bide the touchstone of a public
trial. And amongst therest of my secret actions, which have (unlooked for of
me) come to public knowledge, it has so fared with my (...), directed to my
eldest son; which I wrote for exercise of mine own ingyne, and instruction of
him, who is appointed by God (I hope) to sit on my Throne after me: For the
purpose and matter thereof being only fit for a King, as teaching him his
office; and the person whomfor it was ordained, a Kings heir, whose secret
counselor and faithful admonisher it must be, I thought it no ways
convenient nor comely, that either it should to all be proclaimed, which to one
only appertained (and specially being a messenger betwixt two so coniunct
persons) or yet that the mould whereupon he should frame his future behavior,
when he comes both unto the perfection of his years, and possession of his
inheritance, should before the hand be made common to the people, the subject
of his future happy government. And therefore for the more secret and close
keeping of them, I only permitted seven of them to be printed, the Printer
being first sworn for secrecy: and these seven I dispersed amongst some of my
trustiest servants, to be kept closely by them, lest in case by the iniquity
or wearing of time, any of them might have been lost, yet some of them might
have remained after me, as witnesses to my Son, both of the honest integrity
of my heart, and of my fatherly affection and natural care toward him. But
since contrary to my intention and expectation, as I have already said, this
Book is now vented, and set forth to the public view of the world, and
consequently subject to every man's censure, as the current of his affection
leads him, I am now forced, as well for resisting to the malice of the
children of envy, who like waspes suck venom out of every wholesome herb; as
for the satisfaction of the godly honest sort, in any thing that they may
mistake therein, both to publish and spread the true copies thereof, for
defacing of the false copies that are already spread, as I am informed; as
likewise by this Preface, to clear such parts thereof, as in respect of the
concised shortness of my Style, may be mis-interpreted therein.

To come then particularly to the matter of my Book, there are two special
great points, which (as I am informed) the malicious sort of men have detracted
therein; and some of the honest sort have seemed a little to mistake: whereof
the first and greatest is, that some sentences therein should seem to furnish
grounds to men, to doubt of my sincerity in that Religion, which I have ever
constantly professed: the other is, that in some parts thereof I should seem
to nourish in my mind, a vindictiue resolution against England, or at the
least, some principals there, for the Queen my mothers quarrel.

The first calumny (most grievous indeed) is grounded upon the sharp and
bitter words, that therein are used in the description of the humors of
Puritanes, and rash-headie Preachers, that think it their honor to contend
with Kings, and perturbe whole kingdoms. The other point is only grounded
upon the strait charge. I give my Son, not to hear nor suffer any vnreuerent
speeches or books against any of his parents or progenitors: wherein I do
allege my own experience anent the Queen my mother; affirming, that I never
found any that were of perfect aage the time of her reign here, so steadfastly
true to me in all my troubles, as these that constantly kept their allegiance
to her in her time. But if the charitable Reader will advisedly consider, both
the method and matter of my Treatise, he will easily judge, what wrong I have
sustained by the carping at both: For my Book, suppose very small, being
divided in three several parts; the first part thereof only treats of a Kings
duty toward God in Religion, wherein I have so clearly made profession of my
Religion, calling it the Religion wherein I was brought up, and ever made
profession of, and wishing him ever to continue in the same, as the only true
form of Gods worship; that I would have thought my sincere plainness in that
first part upon that subject, should have ditted the mouth of the most envious
Momus, that ever hell did hatch, from barking at any other part of my book
upon that ground, except they would allege me to be contrary to my self,
which in so small a volume would smell of too great weakness, and sliprinesse
of memory. And the second part of my book, teaches my Son how to use his
Office, in the administration of Justice and Politic Government: The third
only containing a Kings outward behavior in indifferent things; what
agreeance and conformity he ought to keep betwixt his outward behavior in
these things, and the virtuous qualities of his mind; and how they should
serve for trunsh-men, to interpret the inward disposition of the mind, to the
eyes of them that cannot see farther within him, and therefore must only judge
of him by the outward appearance: So as if there were no more to be looked
into, but the very method and order of the book, it will sufficiently clear
me of that first and grieuousest imputation, in the point of Religion: since in
the first part, where Religion is only treated of, I speak so plainly. And
what in other parts I speak of Puritanes, it is only of their moral faults,
in that part where I speak of Policy: declaring when they contemn the Law
and sovereign authority, what exemplare punishment they deserve for the same.
And now as to the matter it self whereupon this scandal is taken, that I may
sufficiently satisfy all honest men, and by a just Apology raise up a brazen
wall or bulwark against all the darts of the envious, I will the more narrowly
rip up the words, whereat they seem to be somewhat stomacked.

First then, as to the name of Puritanes, I am not ignorant that the style
thereof does properly belong only to that vile sect amongst the Anabaptists,
called the Family of love; because they think themselves only pure, and in a
manner without sin, the only trwe Church, and only worthy to be participant
of the Sacraments, and all the rest of the world to be but abomination in the
sight of God. Of this special sect I principally mean, when I speak of
Puritans; diverse of them, as Brown, Penry and others, having at sundry times
come into Scotland, to sow their popple amongst us (and from my heart I wish,
that they had left no scholars behind them, who by their fruits will in the
own time be manifested) and partly indeed, I give this style to such
brain-sicke and headie Preachers their disciples and followers, as refusing to
be called of that sect, yet participate too much with their humors, in
maintaining the above mentioned errors; not only agreeing with the general
rule of all Anabaptists, in the contempt of the civil Magistrate, and in
leaning to their own dreams and revelations; but particularly with this sect,
in accounting all men profane that swear not to all their fantasies, in making
for every particular question of the policy of the Church, as great commotion,
as if the article of the Trinity were called in controversy, in making the
scriptures to be ruled by their conscience, and not their conscience by the
Scripture; and he that denies the least jot of their grounds, sit tibi tanquam
ethnicus and publicanus; not worthy to enjoy the benefit of breathing, much
less to participate with them of the Sacraments: and before that any of their
grounds be impugned, let King, people, Law and all be trod under foot: Such
holy wars are to be preferred to an ungodly peace: no, in such cases
Christian Princes are not only to be resisted unto, but not to be prayed for,
for prayer must come of Faith; and it is revealed to their consciences, that
GOD will hear no prayer for such a Prince. Judge then, Christian Reader, if I
wrong this sort of people, in giving them the style of that sect, whose errors
they imitate: and since they are contented to wear their liuerie let them not
be ashamed to borrow also their name. It is only of this kind of men, that in
this book I write so sharply; and whom I wish my Son to punish, in-case they
refuse to obey the Law, and will not cease to stir up a rebellion: Whom
against I have written the more bitterly, in respect of diverse famous libels,
and injurious speeches spread by some of them, not only dishonourably inuectiue
against all Christian Princes, but even reproachful to our profession and
Religion, in respect they are come out under color thereof: and yet were
never answered but by Papists, who generally meddle as well against them, as the
religion it self; whereby the skandale was rather doubled, then taken away.
But on the other part, I protest upon mine honor, I mean it not generally of
all Preachers, or others, that like better of the single form of policy in
our Church, then of the many Ceremonies in the Church of England: that are
persuaded, that their Bishops smell of a Papal supremacy, that the Surplise,
the cornerd cap, and such like, are the outward badges of Popish errors. No, I
am so far from being contentious in these things (which for my own part I
ever esteemed as indifferent) as I do equally love and honor the learned and
grave men of either of these opinions. It can no ways become me to pronounce
so lightly a sentence, in so old a controversy. We all (God be praised) do
agree in the grounds; and the bitterness of men upon such questions, does but
trouble the peace of the Church; and gives advantage and entry to the Papists
by our division: But toward them, I only use this provision, that where the
Law is otherwise, they may content themselves soberly and quietly with their
own opinions, not resisting to the authority, nor breaking the Law of the
Country; neither above all, sturring any rebellion or schism: but possessing
their souls in peace, let them preasse by patience, and well grounded reasons,
either to persuade all the rest to like of their judgments; or where they see
better grounds on the other part, not to be ashamed peaceably to incline
thereunto, laying aside all praeoccupied opinions.

And that this is the only meaning of my Book, and not any coldness or
crack in Religion, that place does plainly witness, where, after I have
spoken of the faults in our Ecclesiastical estate I exhort my son to be
beneficial unto the good-men of the Ministry; praising God there, that there
is presently a sufficient number of good men of them in this kingdom: and yet
are they all known to be against the form of the English Church. Yea, so
far I am in that place from admitting corruption in Religion, as I wish him
in promoouing them, to use such caution, as may preserve their estate from
creeping to corruption; ever using that form through the whole Book, where
ever I speak of bad Preachers, terming them some of the Ministers, and not
Ministers or Ministry in general. And to conclude this point of Religion,
what indifferency of Religion can Momus call that in me, where, speaking of
my sons marriage (in case it pleased God before that time to cut the thread
of my life) I plainly forewarne him of the inconuenients that were like to
ensew, incase he should marry any that be of a different profession in Religion
from him: notwithstanding that the number of Princes professing our Religion be
so small, as it is hard to foresee, how he can be that way, meetly matched
according to his rank.

And as for the other point, that by some parts in this book, it should
appear, that I do nourish in my mind, a vindictiue resolution against
England, or some principals there; it is surely more then wonderful unto me,
upon what grounds they can have gathered such conclusions. For as upon the one
part, Ineither by name nor description point out England in that part of my
discourse; so upon the other, I plainly bewray my meaning to be of
Scottish-men, where I conclude that purpose in these terms: That the love I
bear to my Son, has moved me to be so plain in this argument: for so that
I discharge my conscience to him in uttering the verity, I care not what any
traitor or treason-allower do think of it. And Englishmen could not thereby
be meant, since they could be no traitors, where they ought no allegiance. I
am not ignorant of a wise and princely apophthegme, which the same Queen of
England uttered about the time of her own Coronation. But the drift of that
discourse does fully clear my intention, being only grounded upon that
precept to my Son, that he should not permit any vnreuerent detracting of his
praedecessours; bringing in that purpose of my mother only for an example of
my experience anent Scottishmen, without using any persuasion to him of
revenge. For a Kings giving of any fault the dew style, inferres no reduction
of the faulters pardon. No, I am by a degree nearer of kin unto my mother
then he is, neither think I my self, either that unworthy, or that near my
end, that I need to make such a Dauidicall testament; since I have ever
thought it the dewtie of a worthy Prince, rather with a pike, then a pen, to
write his just revenge: But in this matter I have no delight to be large,
wishing all men to judge of my future proiects, according to my bypast actions.

Thus having as much insisted in the clearing of these two points, as will (I
hope) give sufficient satisfaction to all honest men, and leaving the envious
to the food of their own venom; I will heartily pray thee, loving Reader,
charitably to conceive of my honest intention in this Book. I know the
greatest part of the people of this whole Isle, have been very curious for a
sight thereof: some for the love they bear me, either being particularly
acquainted with me, or by a good report that perhaps they have heard of me;
and therefore longed to see any thing, that proceeded from that author whom
they so loved and honored; since books are viue Idees of the authors mind.
Some only for mere curiosity, that think it their honor to know all new
things, were curious to glut their eyes therewith, only that they might vaunt
them to have seen it: and some fraughted with causlesse envy at the Author,
did greedily search out the book, thinking their stomach jit enough, for
turning never so wholesome food into noisome and infectiue bumours: So as this
their great concurrence in curiofitie (though proceeding from far different
complexions) has enforced the vn-timous divulgating of this Book, far
contrary to my intention, as I have already said. To which Hydra of
diuersly-enclined spectatours, I have no targe to oppone but plainness,
patience, and sincerity: plainness, for resolving and satisfying of the
first sort; patience, for to bear with the shallowness of the next; and
sincerity, to defy the malice of the third with-all. Though I cannot please
all men therein, I am contented, so that Ionely please the virtuous sort: and
though they also find not every thing therein, so fully to answer their
expectation, as the argument would seem to require; although I would wish them
modestly to remember, that God hes not bestowed all his gifts upon one, but
parted them by a justice distributive; and that many eyes see more then one;
and that the variety of men's minds is such, that tot capita totsensus; yea,
and that even the very faces, that God has by nature brought forth in the
world, do every one in some of their particular lineaments, differ from any
other: yet in truth it was not my intention in handling of this purpose (as it
is easy to perceive) fully to set down here all such grounds, as might out
of the best writers have been alleged, and out of my own invention and
experience added, for the perfect institution of a King: but only to give some
such precepts to my own Son, for the government of this kingdom, as was
meetest for him to be instructed in, and best became me to be the informer of.

If I in this Book have been too particularly plain, impute it to the
necessity of the subject, not so much being ordained for the institution of a
Prince in general, as I have said, as containing particular precepts to my
Son in special: whereof he could have made but a general use, if they had
not contained the particular diseases of this kingdom, with the best remedies
for the same, which it became me best as a King, having learned both the
theoricke and practicke thereof, more plainly to express, then any simple
school man, that only knows matters of kingdoms by contemplation.

But if in some places it seem too obscure, impute it to the shortness
thereof, being both for the respect of my self, and of my Son, constrained
there-unto: my own respect, for fault of leisure, being so continually
occupied in the affairs of my office, as my great burden, and restless
fashery is more then known, to all that knows or bears of me: for my Sons
respect, because I know by my self, that a Prince so long as he is young, will
be so carried away with some sort of delight or other, that he cannot patiently
abide the reading of any large volume: and when he comes to a full maturity of
aage, he must be so busied in the active part of his charge, as he will not be
permitted to bestow many hours upon the co^templatiue part thereof: So as it
was neither fit for him, nor possible for me, to have made this Treatise any
more ample then it is. Indeed I am little beholden to the curiosity of some,
who thinking it too large already (as appears) for lack of leisure to copy
it, drew some notes out of it, for speeds sake; putting in the one half of the
purpose, and leaving out the other: not unlike the man that alleged that part
of the Psalm, non est Deus, but left out the praeceeding words, Dixit
insipiens in cord suo. And of these notes, making a little pamphlet (lacking
both my method and half of my matter) entitled it, forsooth, the Kings
Testament, as if I had eiked a third Testament of my own to the two that are
in the holy Scriptures. It is true that in a place thereof, for affirmation of
the purpose I am speaking of to my Son, I bring my self in there, as
speaking upon my Testament: for in that sense, every record in write of a man's
opinion in anything (in respect that papers out-liue their authors) is as it
were a Testament of that man's will in that case: and in that sense it is, that
in that place I call this Treatise a Testament. But from any particular
sentence in a book, to give the book it self a title, is as ridiculous, as
to style the book of the Psalms, the book of Dixit insipiens, because with
these words one of them does begin.

Well, leaving these new baptizers and blockers of other men's books, to their
own follies, Ireturne to my purpose, anent the shortness of this book,
suspecting that all my excuses for the shortness thereof, shall not satisfy
some, especially in our neighbor country: who thought, that as I have so
narrowly in this Treatise touched all the principal sicknesses in our
kingdom, with ouertures for the remedies thereof, as I said before: so looked
they to have found something therein, that should have touched the sicknesses
of their state, in the like sort. But they will easily excuse me thereof, if
they will consider the form I have used in this Treatise; wherein I only
teach my Son, out of my own experience, what form of government is fittest
for this kingdom: and in one part thereof speaking of the borders, I plainly
there do excuse my self, that I will speak nothing of the state of England,
as a matter wherein I never had experience. I know indeed, no kingdom lackes
her own diseases, and likewise what interest I have in the prosperity of that
state: for although I would be silent, my blood and descent does sufficiently
proclaim it. But notwithstanding, since there is a lawful Queen there
presently reigning, who has so long with so great wisdom and felicity
governed her kingdoms, as (I must in true sincerity confess) the like has
not been read nor heard of, either in our time, or since the days of the
Roman Emperor Augustus; it could no ways become me, far inferior to her
in knowledge and experience, to be a busie-body in other princes matters, and
to fish in other folks waters, as the proverb is: No, I hope by the contrary
(with Gods grace) ever to keep that Christian rule, To do as I would be done
to: and I doubt nothing, yea even in her name I dare promise, by the bypast
experience of her happy government, as I have already said, that no good
subject shall be more careful to inform her of any corruptions stolen in in
her state, then she shall be zealous for the discharge of her conscience and
honor, to see the same purged, and restored to the ancient integrity; and
further during her time, becomes me least of any to meddle in.

And thus having resolved all the doubts, so far as I can imagine, may be
moved against this Treatise; it only rests to pray thee (charitable Reader) to
interpret favorably this birth of mine, according to the integrity of the
author, and not looking for perfection in the work it self. As for my part, I
only glory thereof in this point, that I trust no sort of virtue is condemned,
nor any degree of vice allowed in it: and that (though it be not perhaps so
gorgeously decked, and richly attired as it ought to be) it is at the least
rightly proportioned in all the members, without any menstrous deformity in
any of them: and specially that since it was first written in secret, and is
now published, not of ambition, but of a kind of necessity; it must be taken
of all men, for the true image of my very mind, and form of the rule, which I
have prescribed to my self and mine; Which as in all my actions I have
bitherto preassed to express, so far as the nature of my charge, and the
condition of time would permit me: so bears it a discovery of that which may
be looked for at my hand, and whereto even in my secret thoughts, I have
engaged my self for the time to come. And thus in a firm trust, that it shall
please God, who with my being and Crown, gave me this mind, to maintain and
augment the same in me and my posterity, to the discharge of our conscience,
the maintenance of our Honor, and weal of our people, I bid thee heartily
farewell.

OF A KINGS CHRISTIAN DVETIE TO WARDS GOD.
THE FIRST BOOK.
AS he cannot be thought worthy to rule and command others, that cannot rule
and dantone his own proper affections and unreasonable appetites, so can he
not be thought worthy to govern a Christian people, The true ground of good
government.
knowing and fearing God, that in his own person and heart, fears not and
loves not the Divine Majesty. Neither can any thing in his government succeed
well with him, (devise and labor as he list) as coming from a filthy spring,
if his person be unsanctified: for (as that royal Prophet says) Except the
Lord build the house, Psalm. 127 1.
they labor in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the City, the
keepers watch it in vain: in respect the blessing of God has only power to
give the success thereunto: and as Paul says, he planteth, 1. Cor. 3.6.
Apollos waters; but it is God only that gives the increase. Therefore (my
Son) first of all things, learn to know and love that God, whom-to ye have a
double obligation; Double bond of a Prince to God.
first, for that he made you a man; and next, for that he made you a little GOD
to sit on his Throne, and rule over other men. Remember, that as in dignity
he has erected you above others, so ought ye in thankfulness toward him,
go as far beyond all others. A moate in another eye, is a beam into yours:
a blemish in another, is a leprouse byle into you: and a venial sin (as the
Papists call it) in another, is a great crime into you. Think not therefore,
that the highness of your dignity, The greatness of the fault of a Prince.
dimmisheth your faults (much less gives you a license to sin) but by the
contrary your fault shall be aggrauated, according to the height of your
dignity; any sin that ye commit, not being a single sin procuring but the
fall of one; but being an exemplare sin, and therefore drawing with it the
whole multitude to be guilty of the same. Remember then, that this glistering
worldly glory of Kings, The true glory of Kings.
is given them by God, to teach them to preasse so to glister and shine before
their people, in all works of sanctification and righteousness, that their
persons as bright lamps of godliness and virtue, may, going in and out before
their people, give light to all their steps. Remember also, that by the right
knowledge, and fear of God (which is the beginning of Wisdom, Prou 9.10.
as Solomon says) ye shall know all the things necessary for the discharge of
your duty, both as a Christian, and as a King; seeing in him, as in a
mirror, the course of all earthly things, whereof he is the spring and only
moouer.

Now, the only way to bring you to this knowledge, The means to know God.
is diligently to read his word, and earnestly to pray for the right
understanding thereof. Search the Scriptures, says Christ, for they bear
testimony of me: and, John 5.39.
the whole Scripture, says Paul, is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness; that the man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. And most properly
of any other, belongs the reading thereof unto Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.
since in that part of Scripture, where the godly Kings are first made mention
of, that were ordained to rule over the people of God, there is an express and
most notable exhortation and commandment given them, to read and meditate in
the Law of God. I join to this, the careful hearing of the doctrine with
attendance and reverence: for, faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.
says the same Apostle. But above all, beware ye wrest not the word to your
own appetite, as over many do, making it like a bell to sound as ye please to
interpret: but by the contrary, frame all your affections, to follow precisely
the rule there set down.

The whole Scripture chiefly contains two things: a command, Wherein chiefly
the whole Scripture consists.
and a prohibition, to do such things, and to abstain from the contrary. Obey
in both; neither think it enough to abstain from evil, and do no good; nor
think not that if ye do many good things, it may serve you for a cloak to
mix evil turns therewith. And as in these two points, the whole Scripture
principally consists, Two degrees of the service of God.
so in two degrees stands the whole service of God by man: interior, or
upward; exterior, or downward: the first, by prayer in faith toward God; the
next, by works flowing therefra before the world: which is nothing else, but
the exercise of Religion toward God, and of equity toward your neighbor.

As for the particular points of Religion, I need not to dilate them; I am no
hypocrite, follow my footsteps, A regardable pattern.
and your own present education therein. I thank God, I was never ashamed to
give account of my profession, howsoever the malicious lying tongues of some
have traduced me: and if my conscience had not resolved me, that all my
Religion presently professed by me and my kingdom, was grounded upon the
plain words of the Scripture, without the which all points of Religion are
superfluous, as any thing contrary to the same is abomination, I had never
outwardly auowed it, for pleasure or awe of any flesh.

And as for the points of equity toward your neigbour (because that will fall
in properly, upon the second part concerning a Kings office) I leave it to the
own room.

For the first part then of man's service to his God, Religion.
which is Religion, that is, the worship of God according to his revealed will,
it is wholly grounded upon the Scripture, as I have already said, quickened by
faith, and conserved by conscience: For the Scripture, I have now spoken of it
in general, but that ye may the more readily make choice of any part thereof,
for your instruction or comfort, remember shortly this method.

The whole Scripture is dyted by Gods Spirit, The method of Scripture.
thereby, as by his lively word, to instruct and rule the whole Church militant
to the end of the word: It is composed of two parts, the Old and New
Testament: The ground of the former is the Law, which shows our sin, and
contains justice: the ground of the other is Christ, who pardoning sin
contains grace. The sum of the Law is the ten Commandments, more largely
delated in the books of Moses, Of the Law.
interpreted and applied by the Prophets; and by the histories, are the
examples showed of obedience or disobedience thereto, and what praemium or
poena was accordingly given by God: But because no man was able to keep the
Law, nor any part thereof, it pleased God of his infinite wisdom and
goodness, to incarnate his only Son in our nature, for satisfaction of his
justice in his suffering for us; that since we could not be saved by doing, we
might at least, be saved by believing.

The ground therefore of the word of grace, Of Grace.
is contained in the four histories of the birth, life, death, resurrection
and ascension of Christ: The larger interpretation and use thereof, is
contained in the Epistles of the Apostles: and the practice in the faithful or
unfaithful, with the history of the infancy and first progress of the
Church is contained in their Acts.

Would ye then know your sin by the Law? Use of the Law.
read the books of Moses containing it. Would ye have a commentary
thereupon? Read the Prophets, and likewise the books of the Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes, written by that great pattern of wisdom Solomon; which will
not only serve you for instruction, how to walk in the obedience of the Law
of God, but is also so full of golden sentences, and moral precepts, in all
things that can concern your conversation in the world, as among all the
profane Philosophers and Poets, ye shall not find so rich a storehouse of
precepts of natural wisdom, agreeing with the will and divine wisdom of
God. Would ye see how good men are rewarded, and wicked punished? look the
historical parts of these same books of Moses, together with the histories of
Joshua, the Judges, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, and Job: but especially the books
of the Kings and Chronicles, wherewith ye ought to be familiarly acquainted:
for there shall ye see your self, as in a myrrour, in the catalogue either of
the good or the evil Kings.

Would ye know the doctrine, life, and death of our Savior Christ? Use of the
Gospel.
read the Evangelists. Would ye be more particularly trained up in his
School? meditate upon the Epistles of the Apostles. And would ye be acquainted
with the practices of that doctrine in the persons of the primitive Church?
Cast up the Apostles Acts. And as to the Apocryphe books, I omit them,
because I am no Papist, as I said before; and indeed some of them are no ways
like the dytement of the Spirit of God.

But when ye read the Scripture, How to read the Scripture.
read it with a sanctified and chaste heart: admire reverently such obscure
places as ye understand not, blaming only your own capacity: read with
delight the plain places, and study carefully to understand those that are
somewhat difficile: preasse to be a good textuarie; for the Scripture is ever
the best interpreter of it self; but preasse not curiously to seek out
farther then is contained therein; for that were over unmannerly a presumption,
to strive to be further upon Gods secrets, then he has will ye be; for what
he thought needful for us to know, that has he revealed there: And delight
most in reading such parts of the Scripture, as may best serve for your
instruction in your calling; rejecting foolish curiosities upon genealogies and
contentions, Tit. 3.9.
which are but vain, and profit not, as Paul says.

Now, as to Faith, which is the nourisher and quickner of Religion, Faith the
nourisher of Religion.
as I have already said, It is a sure persuasion and apprehension of the
promises of God, applying them to your soul: and therefore may it justly be
called, the golden chain that linketh the faithful soul to Christ: And
because it grows not in our garden, but is the free gift of God, Philip. 1.29.
as the same Apostle says, it must be nourished by prayer, Which is nothing
else, but a friendly talking with God.

As for teaching you the form of your prayers, Prayer, and whence to learn
the best form thereof.
the Psalms of David are the meetest schoolmasters that ye can be acquainted
with (next the prayer of our Savior, which is the only rule of prayer)
whereout of, as of most rich and pure fountains, ye may learn all form of
prayer necessary for your comfort at all occasions: And so much the fitter are
they for you, then for the common sort, in respect the composer thereof was a
King: and therefore best behooved to know a Kings wants, and what things were
meetest to be required by a King at Gods hand for remedy thereof.

Use often to pray when ye are quietest, Several exercise of prayer.
especially forget it not in your bed how often soever ye do it at other times:
for public prayer serves as much for example, as for any particular comfort
to the supplicant.

In your prayer, be neither over strange with God, What rule or regard to be
used in prayer.
like the ignorant common sort, that prays nothing but out of books, nor yet
over homely with him, like some of the vain Pharisaicall puritanes, that
think they rule him upon their fingers: The former way will breed an uncouth
coldness in you toward him, the other will breed in you a contempt of him.
But in your prayer to God speak with all reverence: for if a subject will not
speak but reverently to a King, much less should any flesh presume to talk
with God as with his companion.

Crave in your prayer, not only things spiritual, but also things temporal,
What to crave of God.
sometimes of greater, and sometimes of less consequence; that ye may lay up
in store his grant of these things, for confirmation of your faith, and to be
an arles-peny unto you of his love. Pray, as ye find your heart moves you,
pro re nata: but see that ye suit no unlawful things, as revenge, Romans 14.23.
lust, or such like: for that prayer can not come of faith: and whatsoever is
done without faith, is sin, as the Apostle says.

When ye obtain your prayer, How to interpret the issue of prayer.
thank him joyfully therefore: if otherways, bear patiently, preassing to
win him with importunity, as the widow did the unrighteous Judge: and if
notwithstanding thereof ye be not heard, assure your self, God foreseeth that
which ye ask is not for your weal: and learn in time, so to interpret all
the adversities that God shall send unto you; so shall ye in the midst of
them, not only be armed with patience, but joyfully lift up your eyes from the
present trouble, to the happy end that God will turn it to. And when ye find
it once so fall out by proof, arm your self with the experience thereof
against the next trouble, assuring your self, though ye cannot in time of the
shower see through the cloud, yet in the end shall ye find, God sent it for
your weal, as ye found in the former.

And as for conscience, Conscience the conseruer of Religion.
which I called the conseruer of Religion, It is nothing else, but the light of
knowledge that God has planted in man, which ever watching over all his
actions, as it bears him a joyful testimony when he does right, so choppeth
it him with a feeling that he has done wrong, when ever he commits any
sin. And surely, although this conscience be a great torture to the wicked,
yet is it as great a comfort to the godly, if we will consider it rightly. For
have we not a great advantage, that have within our selves while we live
here, a Count-booke and Inuentarie of all the crimes that we shall be accused
of, The inuentarie of our life.
either at the hour of our death, or at the Great day of Judgment; which when
we please (yea though we forget) will chop, and remember us to look upon it;
that while we have leisure and are here, we may remember to amend; and so at
the day of our trial, compeare with new and white garments washed in the blood
of the Lamb, Reu 7.14.
as S. John says. Above all then, my Son, labor to keep sound this
conscience, which many prattle of, but over few feel: especially be careful
to keep it free from two diseases, wherewith it uses often to be infected; The
diseases of conscience.
to wit, Leaprosie, and Superstition: the former is the mother of Atheism, the
other of Heresies. By a leaprouse conscience, I mean a cauterized conscience,
1. Tim. 4.2.
as Paul calls it, being become senseless of sin, through sleeping in a
careless security, as King David's was after his murder and adultery, ever
til he was wakened by the Prophet Nathans similitude. And by superstition, I
mean, when one restraines himself to any other rule in the service of God,
then is warranted by the word, the only true square of Gods serucie.

As for a preservative against this Leaprosie, Preservative against leprosy of
conscience.
remember ever once in the four and twenty hours, either in the night, or
when ye are at greatest quiet, to call your self to account of all your last
days actions, either wherein ye have committed things ye should not, or
omitted the things ye should do, either in your Christian or Kingly calling:
and in that account, let not your self be smoothed over with that flattering
(...), which is ouerkindly a sickness to all mankind: but censure your self
as sharply, as if ye were your own enemy: For if ye judge your self, ye
shall not be judged, 1. Cor. 11.31.
as the Apostle says: and then according to your censure, reform your actions
as far as ye may, eschewing ever wilfully and wittingly to contrare your
conscience: For a small sin wilfully committed, with a deliberate resolution
to break the bridle of conscience therein, is far more grievous before God,
then a greater sin committed in a sudden passion, when conscience is
asleep. Last account.
Remember therefore in all your actions, of the great account that ye are one
day to make: in all the days of your life, ever learning to die, and living
every day as it were your last; Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
Horat. lib. 1. Epist.


And therefore, I would not have you to pray with the Papists, to be preserved
from sudden death, but that God would give you grace so to live, as ye may
every hour of your life be ready for death: so shall ye attain to the virtue
of true fortitude, never being afraid for the horror of death, True fortitude.
come when he list: And especially, beware to offend your conscience with use
of swearing or lying, suppose but in jest; for others are but an use, Foolish
use of oaths.
and a sin clothed with no delight nor gain, and therefore the more
inexcusable even in the sight of men: and lying comes also much of a vile
use, which banisheth shame: Therefore beware even to deny the truth, which is a
sort of lie, that may best be eschewed by a person of your rank. For if any
thing be asked at you that ye think not meet to reveal, if ye say, that
question is not pertinent for them to ask, who dare examine you further? and
using sometimes this answer both in true and false things that shall be asked
at you, such unmannerly people will never be the wiser thereof.

And for keeping your conscience sound from that sickness of superstition,
Against superstition.
ye must neither lay the safety of your conscience upon the credit of your
own conceits, nor yet of other men's humors, how great doctors of Divinity
that ever they be; but ye must only ground it upon the express Scripture:
for conscience not grounded upon sure knowledge, is either an ignorant
fantasy, or an arrogant vanity. Beware therefore in this case with two
extremities: the one, to believe with the Papists, the Churches authority,
better then your own knowledge; the other, to lean with the Anabaptists, to
your own conceits and dreamed revelations.

But learn wisely to discern betwixt points of salvation and indifferent
things, Difference of internal and external things.
betwixt substance and ceremonies; and betwixt the express commandment and
will of God in his word, and the invention or ordinance of man; since all that
is necessary for salvation is contained in the Scripture: For in any thing
that is expressly commanded or prohibited in the book of God, ye cannot be
over precise, even in the least thing; counting every sin, not according to
the light estimation and common use of it in the world, but as the book of God
counts of it. But as for all other things not contained in the Scripture,
spare not to use or alter them, as the necessity of the time shall require.
Account of things external.
And when any of the spiritual officebearers in the Church, speak unto you
any thing that is well warranted by the word, reverence and obey them as the
heralds of the most high God: but, if passing that bounds, they urge you to
embrace any of their fantasies in the place of Gods word, or would color their
particulars with a pretended zeal, acknowledge them for no other then vain
men, exceeding the bounds of their calling; and according to your office,
gravely and with authority redact them in order again.

To conclude then, Conclusion.
both this purpose of conscience, and the first part of this book, keep God
more sparingly in your mouth, but abundantly in your heart: be precise in
effect, but sociall in show: kythe more by your deeds then by your words, the
love of virtue and hatred of vice: and delight more to be godly and virtuous
indeed, then to be thought and called so; expecting more for your praise and
reward in heaven, then here: and apply to all your outward actions Christ's
command, to pray and give your alms secretly: So shall ye on the one part be
inwardly garnished with true Christian humility, not outwardly (with the proud
Pharisie) glorying in your godliness; but saying, as Christ commands us all,
when we have done all that we can, Luke 10.17.
Inutiles serui sumus: And on the other part, ye shall eschew outwardly before
the world, the suspicion of filthy proud hypocrisy, and deceitful
dissimulation.

OF A KINGS DVETIE IN HIS OFFICE.
THE SECOND BOOK.
BUT as ye are clothed with two callings, so must ye be alike careful for the
discharge of them both: that as ye are a good Christian, so ye may be a good
King, discharging your Office (as I showed before) in the points of Justice and
Equity: The Office of a King.
which in two sundry ways ye must do: the one, in establishing and
executing, Plato in Polit.
(which is the life of the Law) good Laws among your people: Isocr, in Sym.
the other, by your behavior in your own person, and with your servants, to
teach your people by your example: for people are naturally inclined to
counterfaite (like apes) their Princes manners, Plate in Polis.
according to the notable saying of Plato, expressed by the Poet -- --
Componitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum, nec sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, quam vitaregentis.
Claudian in 4. cons. Hon.


For the part of making, and executing of Laws, consider first the true
difference betwixt a lawful good King, and an usurping Tyran, and ye shall
the more easily understand your duty herein: Difference of a King and a Tyran.
for contraria iuxta se posita magis elucescunt. The one acknowledges himself
ordained for his people, having received from God a burden of government,
Plato in Polit.
whereof he must be countable: the other thinks his people ordined for him,
Arist. 5. Polit.
a prey to his passions and inordinate appetites, as the fruits of his
magnanimity: And therefore, as their ends are directly contrary, so are their
whole actions, as means, whereby they preasse to attain to their ends. A
good King, thinking his highest honor to consist in the due discharge of his
calling, emploieth all his study and pains, to procure and maintain, Xen. 8.
Cyr.
by the making and execution of good Laws, the welfare and peace of his
people; and as their natural father and kindly Master, Cic. lib. 5. de Rep.
thinks his greatest contentment stands in their prosperity, and his
greatest surety in having their hearts, subiecting his own private affections
and appetites to the weal and standing of his Subjects, ever thinking the
common interesse his chiefest particular: where by the contrary, an usurping
Tyran, thinking his greatest honor and felicity to consist in attaining per
fas, vel nefas, Arist. 5. Polit. Tacit. 4. hist.
to his ambitious pretenses, thinks never himself sure, but by the
dissension and factions among his people, and counterfaiting the Saint while he
once creep in credit, will then (by inuerting all good Laws to serve only
for his unruly private affections) frame the commonweal ever to advance his
particular: building his surety upon his peoples misery: and in the end (as a
step-father and an uncouth hireling) make up his own hand upon the ruins of
the Republicke. And according to their actions, The issue and rewards of a good
King.
so receive they their reward: For a good King (after a happy and famous
reign) dies in peace, lamented by his subjects, and admired by his
neighbors; and leaving a reverent renown behind him in earth, obtains the
Crown of eternal felicity in heaven. Cic. 6. de Rep.
And although some of them (which falls out very rarely) may be cut off by
the treason of some unnatural subjects, yet lives their fame after them, and
some notable plague fails never to overtake the committers in this life,
besides their infamy to all posterities hereafter: The issue of Tyrans, Arist.
5. Polit.
Where by the contrary, a Tyrannes miserable and infamous life, armeth in end
his own Subjects to become his burreaux: Isocr in Sym.
and although that rebellion be ever unlawful on their part, yet is the world
so wearied of him, that his fall is little meaned by the rest of his Subjects,
and but smiled at by his neighbors. And besides the infamous memory he
leaves behind him here, and the endless pain he sustaineth hereafter, it
often falls out, that the committers not only escape unpunished, but farther,
the fact will remain as allowed by the Law in diverse aages thereafter. It is
easy then for you (my Son) to make a choice of one of these two sorts of
rulers, by following the way of virtue to establish your standing; yea, incase
ye fell in the high way, yet should it be with the honorable report, and just
regrate of all honest men.

And therefore to return to my purpose anent the government of your Subjects,
Anent the making of Laws.
by making and putting good Laws to execution; I remit the making of them to
your own discretion, as ye shall find the necessity of new-rising
corruptions to require them: for, ex malis moribus bonae leges natae sunt:
besides, that in this country, we have already more good Laws then are well
execute, and am only to insist in your form of government anent their
execution. Only remember, that as Parliaments have been ordained for making of
Laws, so ye abuse not their institution, in holding them for any men's
particulars: The authority and true use of Parliaments.
For as a Parliament is the honourablest and highest judgment in the land (as
being the Kings head Court) if it be well used, which is by making of good
Laws in it; so is it the in-iustest Iudgement-seat that may be, L. 12. Tab.
being abused to men's particulars: irreuocable decreits against particular
parties, being given therein under color of general Laws, and oft-times
th'Estates not knowing themselves whom thereby they hurt. And therefore hold no
Parliaments, but for necessity of new Laws, which would be but seldom: for
few Laws and well put in execution, are best in a well ruled commonweal. As
for the matter of fore-faltures, which also are done in Parliament, it is not
good tigging with these things; but my advice is, Cic. 3 de leg. pro D. s. and
pro Sest.
ye fore-fault none but for such odious crimes as may make them unworthy ever
to be restored again: And for smaller offenses, ye have other penalties sharp
enough to be used against them.

And as for the execution of good Laws, whereat I left, Anent the execution of
Laws.
remember that among the differences that I put betwixt the forms of the
government of a good King, and an usurping Tyran; I show how a Tyran would
enter like a Saint while he found himself fast underfoot, and then would
suffer his unruly affections to burst forth. A just seneritic to be used at
the first. Sen. de cl. Ar. 7. pol.
Therefore be ye contrare at your first entry to your Kingdom, to that
Quinquennium Neronis, with his tender hearted wish, Vellem nescirem literas, in
giving the Law full execution against all breakers thereof but exception. For
since ye come not to your reign precario, nor by conquest, but by right and
due descent; fear no vproares for doing of justice, since ye may assure your
self, Plato 2. and 10 de Repub. Cic. ad Q. fr.
the most part of your people will ever naturally favor Justice: providing
always, that ye do it only for love to Justice, and not for satisfying any
particular passions of yours, under color thereof: otherwise, how justly that
ever the offender deserve it, ye are guilty of murder before God: For ye must
consider, that God ever looks to your inward intention in all your actions.

And when ye have by the severity of Justice once settled your countries, and
made them know that ye can strike, A good mixture. Plato in Pol. and 9. de L.
Sal. orat. ad Caesar.
then may ye thereafter all the days of your life mix Justice with Mercy,
punishing or sparing, as ye shall find the crime to have been wilfully or
rashly committed, and according to the bypast behavior of the committer. For
if otherwise ye kyth your clemency at the first, the offenses would soon come
to such heaps, and the contempt of you grow so great, that when ye would fall
to punish, the number of them to be punished, would exceed the innocent; and
ye would be troubled to resolve whom-at to begin: and against your nature
would be compelled then to wrack many, whom the chastisement of few in the
beginning might have preserved. But in this, A dear president.
But in this, my ouer-deare bought experience may serve you for a sufficient
lesson: For I confess, where I thought (by being gracious at the beginning) to
win all men's hearts to a loving and willing obedience, I by the contrary found,
the disorder of the country, and the loss of my thanks to be all my reward.

But as this severe Justice of yours upon all offenses would be but for a
time, (as I have already said) so is there some horrible crimes that ye are
bound in conscience never to forgive: such as Witchcraft, Crimes unpardonable.
wilful murder, Incest, (especially within the degrees of consanguinitie)
Sodomie, poisoning, and false coin. Treason against the Prince his person, or
authority.
As for offenses against your own person and authority, since the fault
concerns your self, I remit to your own choice to punish or pardon therein,
as your heart serves you, and according to the circumstances of the turn, and
the quality of the committer.

Here would I also eike another crime to be unpardonable, if I should not be
thought partial: but the fatherly love I bear you, will make me break the
bounds of shame in opening it unto you. Stayning of the blood.
It is then, the false and vnreuerent writing or speaking of malicious men
against your Parents and Predecessors: Exodus 20.12.
ye know the command in Gods law, Honor your Father and Mother: and
consequently, sen ye are the lawful magistrate, suffer not both your Princes
and your Parents to be dishonored by any; especially, since the example also
touches your self, Plat. 4. de Legib.
in leaving thereby to your successors, the measure of that which they shall
mete out again to you in your like behalf. I grant we have all our faults,
which, privately betwixt you and God, should serve you for examples to meditate
upon, and mend in your person; but should not be a matter of discourse to
others whatsoever. And since year come of as honorable Predecessors as any
Prince living, repress the insolence of such, as under pretense to tax a vice
in the person, seek craftily to stain the race, and to steal the affection
of the people from their posterity: For how can they love you, that hated them
whomof ye are come? Wherefore destroy men innocent young sucking Wolves and
Foxes, but for the hatred they bear to their race? and why will a coult of a
Courser of Naples, give a greater price in a market, then an Asse-colt, but for
love of the race? It is therefore a thing monstrous, to see a man love the
child, and hate the Parents: as on the other part, the infaming and making
odious of the parent, is the readiest way to bring the son in contempt. And
for conclusion of this point, I may also allege my own experience: For
besides the judgments of God, that with my eyes I have seen fall upon all them
that were chief traitors to my parents, I may justly affirm, I never found
yet a constant biding by me in all my straites, by any that were of perfect
aage in my parents days, but only by such as constantly bode by them; I mean
specially by them that served the Queen my mother for so that I discharge my
conscience to you, my Son, in revealing to you the truth, I care not, what
any traitor or treason-allower think of it.

And although the crime of oppression be not in this rank of unpardonable
crimes, Of oppression.
yet the ouer-common use of it in this nation, as if it were a virtue,
especially by the greatest rank of subjects in the land, requires the King to
be a sharp censurer thereof. Arist. 5. polit. Isocr. de reg. Cic. in Of. and
ad Q. fr.
Be diligent therefore to try, and awful to beat down the horns of proud
oppressors: embrace the quarrel of the poor and distressed, as your own
particular, thinking it your greatest honor to repress the oppressors: The
true glory of Kings.
care for the pleasure of none, neither spare ye any pains in your own
person, to see their wrongs redressed: and remember of the honorable style
given to my grandfather of worthy memory, A memorable and worthy pattern.
in being called the poor man's King. And as the most part of a Kings office,
stands in deciding that question of Meum and Tuum, among his subjects; so
remember when ye sit in judgment, that the Throne ye sit on is Gods, Deuteronomy. 1.
as Moses says, and sway neither to the right hand nor to the left; either
loving the rich, or pitying the poor. Justice should be blind and
friendlesse: it is not there ye should reward your friends, Plat. in polit.
C^^a. Q. frat. Arist. 1. Ret. Plat. in Is.
or seek to cross your enemies.

Here now speaking of oppressors and of justice, the purpose leads me to
speak of Hie-land and Border oppressions. As for the Hie-lands, Of the
Hielands.
I shortly comprehend them all in two sorts of people: the one, that dwells
in our maine land, that are barbarous for the most part, and yet mixed with
some show of civility: the other, that dwells in the Isles, and are
alluterly barbares, without any sort or show of civility. For the first sort,
put straightly to execution the Laws made already by me against their
Ouer-lords, and the chiefes of their Clannes, and it will be no difficulty to
danton them. As for the other sort, follow forth the course that I have
intended, in planting Colonies among them of answerable In-lands subjects, that
within short time may reform and ciuilize the best inclined among them;
rooting out or transporting the barbarous and stubborn sort, and planting
civility in their rooms.

But as for the Borders, because I know, if ye enjoy not this whole I Will, Of the
Borders.
according to Gods right and your lineall descent, ye will never get leave to
brook this North and barrennest part thereof; no, not your own head whereon
the Crown should stand; I need not in that case trouble you with them: for
then they will be the midst of the I Will, and so as easily ruled as any part
thereof.

And that ye may the readier with wisdom and Justice govern your subjects,
by knowing what vices they are naturally most inclined to, A necesiarie point
in a good government. Plato in polis.
as a good Physician, who must first know what peccant humors his Patient
naturally is most subject unto, before he can begin his cure: I shall
therefore shortly note unto you, the principal faults that every rank of the
people of this country is most affected unto. And as for England, I will not
speak be-gesse of them, never having been among them, although I hope in that
God, who ever favors the right, before I die, to be as well acquainted with
their fashions.

As the whole Subjects of our country (by the ancient and fundamental policy
of our Kingdom) are divided into three estates, A consideration of the three
estates.
so is every estate hereof generally subject to some special vices; which in
a manner by long habitude, are thought rather virtue then vice among them: not
that every particular man in any of these ranks of men, is subject unto them,
for there is good and evil of all sorts; but that I mean, I have found by
experience, these vices to have taken greatest hold with these ranks of men.

And first, that I prejudge not the Church of her ancient privileges, reason
would she should have the first place for orders sake, in this catalogue.

The natural sickness that has ever troubled, The diseases of the church.
and been the decay of all the Churches, since the beginning of the world,
changing the candlestick from one to another, as John says, has been Pride,
Ambition, and Avarice: and now last, these same infirmities wrought the
overthrow of the Popish Church, in this country and diverse others. But the
reformation of Religion in Scotland, being extraordinarily wrought by God,
wherein many things were inordinately done by a popular tumult and rebellion,
The occasion of the Tribunat of some Puritanes.
of such as blindly were doing the work of God, but clogged with their own
passions and particular respects, as well appeared by the destruction of our
policy, and not proceeding from the Princes order, as it did in our neighbor
country of England, as likewise in Denmark, and sundry parts of Germany;
some fiery spirited men in the ministry, got such a guiding of the people at
that time of confusion, as finding the gust of government sweet, they begouth
to fantasy to themselves a Democraticke form of government: and having (by
the iniquity of time) been ouerwell baited upon the wrack, first of my
Grandmother, and next of mine own mother, and after usurping the liberty of
the time in my long minority, Such were the Demagog^ at Athens.
settled themselves so fast upon that imagined Democracie, as they fed
themselves with the hope to become Tribuni plebis: and so in a popular
government by leading the people by the nose, to bear the sway of all the
rule. And for this cause, there never rose faction in the time of my minority,
Their forms in the State.
nor trouble sen-syne, but they that were upon that factious part, were ever
careful to persuade and allure these unruly spirits among the ministry, to
spouse that quarrel as their own: where-through I was ofttimes calumniated in
their populare Sermons, not for any evil or vice in me, but because I was a
King, which they thought the highest evil. And because they were ashamed to
profess this quarrel, they were busy to look narrowly in all my actions; and
I warrant you a mote in my eye, yea a false report, was matter enough for them
to work upon: and yet for all their cunning, whereby they pretended to
distinguish the lawfulness of the office, from the vice of the person, some of
them would sometimes snapper out well grossly with the truth of their
intentions, informing the people, Their razing the ground of the princely rule.
that all Kings and Princes were naturally enemies to the liberty of the
Church, and could never patiently bear the yoke of Christ: with such sound
doctrine fed they their flocks. And because the learned, grave, and honest men
of the ministry, were ever ashamed and offended with their temeritie and
presumption, preassing by all good means by their authority and example, to
reduce them to a greater moderation; there could be no way found out so meet
in their conceit, that were turbulent spirits among them, for maintaining their
plots, as paritie in the Church: whereby the ignorants were emboldened (as
bairdes) to cry the learned, Their pretense of paratie.
godly, and modest out of it: paritie the mother of confusion, and enemy to
Unity, which is the mother of order: For if by the example thereof, once
established in the Ecclesiastical government, the Politic and civil estate
should be drawn to the like, the great confusion that thereupon would arise
may easily be discerned. Take heed therefore (my Son) to such Puritanes,
very pestes in the Church and Commonweal, whom no deserts can oblige,
neither oaths or promises bind, An cuill sort of seed-men in the State.
breathing nothing but sedition and calumnies, aspiring without measure,
railing without reason, and making their own imaginations (without any warrant
of the word) the square of their conscience. I protest before the great God,
and since I am here as upon my Testament, it is no place for me to lie in, that
ye shall never find with any Hie-land or Border-theeues greater ingratitude,
and more lies and vile periuries, then with these phanaticke spirits: And suffer
not the principals of them to brook your land, if ye like to sit at rest;
except ye would keep them for trying your patience, Xantippe.
as Socrates did an evil wife.

And for preservative against their poison, Preservative against such poison.
entertain and advance the godly, learned, and modest men of the ministry,
whom-of (God be praised) there lacks not a sufficient number: and by their
provision to Bishoprics and Benefices (annulling that vile act of
Annexation, if ye find it not done to your hand) ye shall not only banish
their conceited paritie, whereof I have spoken, and their other imaginary
grounds; Parity incompatible with a Monarchy.
which can neither stand with the order of the Church, nor the peace of a
Commonweal and well ruled Monarchy: but ye shall also re-establish the old
institution of three Estates in Parliament, which can no otherwise be done. But
in this I hope (if God spare me days) to make you a fair entry, always
where I leave, follow ye my steps.

And to end my advice anent the Church estate, General advice in behalf of
the Church.
cherish no man more then a good Pastor, hate no man more then a proud
Puritan; thinking it one of your fairest styles, to be called a loving
nourish-father to the Church, seeing all the Churches within your dominions
planted with good Pastors, the Schools (the seminary of the Church)
maintained, the doctrine and discipline preserved in purity, according to Gods
word, a sufficient provision for their sustentation, a comely order in their
policy, pride punished, humility advanced, and they so to reverence their
superiors, and their flocks them, as the flourishing of your Church in
piety, peace, and learning, may be one of the chief points of your earthly
glory, being ever alike ware with both the extremities; as well as ye repress
the vain Puritan, so not to suffer proud Papal Bishops: but as some for
their qualities will deserve to be preferred before others, so chain them
with such bonds as may preserve that estate from creeping to corruption.

The next estate now that by order comes in purpose, according to their
ranks in Parliament, is the Nobility, although second in rank, Of the
Nobility and their forms.
yet over far first in greatness and power, either to do good or evil, as
they are inclined.

The natural sickness that I have perceived this estate subject to in my
time, has been, a fectlesse arrogant conceit of their greatness and power;
drinking in with their very nourish-milke, that their honor stood in committing
three points of iniquity: to thrall by oppression, the meaner sort that
dwells near them, to their service and following, although they hold
nothing of them: to maintain their servants and dependers in any wrong,
although they be not answerable to the laws (for any body will maintain his
man in a right cause) and for any displeasure, that they apprehend to be done
unto them by their neighbor, to take up a plain feide against him; and
(without respect to God, King, or commonweal) to bang it out bravely, he and
all his kin, against him and all his: yea they will think the King far in
their common, in-case they agree to grant an assurance to a short day, for
keeping of the peace: where, by their natural dewtie, they are oblished to
obey the law, and keep the peace all the days of their life, upon the peril
of their very craigges.

For remeid to these evils in their estate, Remedy of such evils. Arist. 5.
Polit.
teach your Nobility to keep your laws as precisely as the meanest: fear
not their orping or being discontented, as long as ye rule well; for their
pretended reformation of Princes takes never effect, but where evil
government precedeth. Acquaint your self so with all the honest men of your
Barrons and Gentlemen, Zeno in Cyr. Iso. in En. Cic. ad Q. fra.
and be in your giving access so open and affable to every rank of honest
persons, as may make them peart without scarring at you, to make their own
suites to you themselves, and not to employ the great Lords their
intercessours; for intercession to Saints is Papistrie: so shall ye bring to a
measure their monstrous backs. And for their barbarous feides, put the laws
to due execution made by me there-anent; beginning ever rathest at him that
ye love best, and is most oblished unto you; to make him an example to the
rest. For ye shall make all your reformations to begin at your elbow, and so
by degrees to flow to the extremities of the land. And rest not, until ye
root out these barbarous feides; that their effects may be as well smoared
down, as their barbarous name is unknown to any other nation: For if this
Treatise were written either in French or Latin, I could not get them named
unto you but by circumlocution. And for your easier abolishing of them, put
sharply to execution my laws made against Gunnes and traitorous Pistolets;
thinking in your heart, tearming in your speech, and using by your punishments,
all such as wear and use them, as brigands and cut-throates.

On the other part, eschew the other extremity, in lightlying and contemning
your Nobility. Remember how that error brake the King my grandfathers
heart. Plat. in 1. Al. in pol. and 5. del. Arist. 2. oecom.
But consider that virtue follows oftest noble blood: the worthiness of
their antecessors craves a reverent regard to be had unto them: honor them
therefore that are obedient to the law among them, as Peers and Fathers of your
land: the more frequently that your Court can be garnished with them; Zen^ in
Cyr.
think it the more your honor; acquainting and employing them in all your
greatest affairs; sen it is, they must be your arms and executers of your
laws: and so use your self lovingly to the obedient, and rigorously to the
stubborn, as may make the greatest of them to think, that the chiefest point
of their honor, stands in striving with the meanest of the land in humility
toward you, and obedience to your Laws: beating ever in their ears, that one
of the principal points of service that ye crave of them, is, in their persons
to practice, and by their power to procure due obedience to the Law, without
the which, no service they can make, can be agreeable unto you.

But the greatest hinderance to the execution of our Laws in this country,
are these heritable Shirefdomes and Regalities, Of Shirefdomes and Regalities.
which being in the hands of the great men, do wrack the whole country: For
which I know no present remedy, but by taking the sharper account of them in
their Offices; using all punishment against the slothful, that the Law will
permit: and ever as they vaike, for any offenses committed by them, Ar. 2. pol.
dispone them never heritably again: preassing, with time, Laudable custom of
England.
to draw it to the laudable custom of England: which ye may the easilier do,
being King of both, as I hope in God ye shall.

And as to the third and last estate, The third estate.
which is our Burghes (for the small Barrones are but an inferior part of the
Nobility and of their estate) they are composed of two sorts of men; Merchants
and Craftes-men: either of these sorts being subject to their own infirmities.

The Merchants think the whole commonweal ordained for making them up; and
accounting it their lawful gain and trade, The forms of Merchants.
to enrich themselves upon the loss of all the rest of the people, they
transport from us things necessary; bringing back sometimes unnecessary
things, and at other times nothing at all. They buy for us the worst wares, and
sell them at the dearest prices: and albeit the victuals fall or rise of their
prices, according to the abundance or skantnesse thereof; yet the prices of
their wares ever rise, but neuerfall: being as constant in that their evil
custom, as if it were a settled Law for them. They are also the special cause
of the corruption of the coin, transporting all our own, and bringing in
foreign, upon what price they please to set on it: For order putting to them,
put the good Laws in execution that are already made anent these abuses; but
especially do three things: Establish honest, diligent, but few Searchers, for
many hands make slight work; and have an honest and diligent Thesaurer to take
count of them: Pl. 2. de Rep. 8. and 11. de leg.
Permit and allure foreign Merchants to trade here: so shall ye have best and
best cheap wares, not buying them at the third hand: And set every year down
a certain price of all things; considering first, how it is in other
countries: and the price being set reasonably down, if the Merchants will not
bring them home on the price, cry forrainers free to bring them.

And because I have made mention here of the coin, A duice anent the coin.
make your money of fine Gold and Silver; causing the people be paid with
substance, and not abused with number: so shall ye enrich the commonweal, and
have a great treasure laid up in store, if ye fall in wars or in any
straites: For the making it baser, will breed your commodity; but it is not to
be used, but at a great necessity.

And the Craftes-men think, Of craftsmen. Plat. 11. de leg.
we should be content with their work, how bad and dear soever it be: and if
they in any thing be controlled, up goes the blew-blanket: A good policy of
England.
But for their part, take example by ENGLAND, how it has flourished both in
wealth and policy, since the strangers Craftes-men came in among them: Plat.
9. de leg.
Therefore not only permit, but allure strangers to come here also; taking as
strait order for repressing the mutining of ours at them, as was done in
ENGLAND, at their first in-bringing there.

But unto one fault is all the common people of this Kingdom subject, A
general fault in the people.
as well burgh as land; which is, to judge and speak rashly of their Prince,
Sal. in Iug.
setting the Commonweal upon four props, as we call it; ever wearying of
the present estate, and desirous of novelties. For remedy whereof (besides the
execution of Laws that are to be used against vnreuerent speakers) I know no
better mean, then so to rule, as may justly stop their mouths from all such
idle and vnreuerent speeches; and so to prop the weal of your people, with
provident care for their good government, that justly, Momus himself may have
no ground to grudge at: and yet so to temper and mix your severity with
mildnes, that as the unjust railers may be restrained with a reuerentawe; so
the good and loving Subjects, may not only live in surety and wealth, but be
stirred up and invited by your benign courtesies, to open their mouths in the
just praise of your so well moderated regiment. Arist. 5. pol. Isoc. in paneg.
In respect whereof, and therewith also the more to allure them to a common
amity among themselves, certain days in the year would be appointed, for
delighting the people with public spectacles of all honest games, and
exercise of arms: as also for conueening of neighbors, for entertaining
friendship and heartlinesse, by honest feasting and merrinesse: For I cannot
see what greater superstition can be in making plays and lawful games in
May, and good cheer at Christmas, then in eating fish in Lent, and upon
Fridayes, the Papists as well using the one as the other: so that always the
Sabboths be kept holy, and no unlawful pastime be used: And as this form of
contenting the peoples minds, has been used in all well governed Republics
so will it make you to perform in your government that old good sentence,
Omne tulit punctum, Hor. de art. poet.
qui miscuit vtile dulci.

Ye see now (my Son) how for the zeal I bear to acquaint you with the
plain and single verity of all things, I have not spared to be something
Satyricke, in touching well quickly the faults in all the estates of my
kingdom: But I protest before God, I do it with the fatherly love that I owe
to them all; only hating their vices, whereof there is a good number of honest
men free in every estate.

And because, for the better reformation of all these abuses among your
estates, it will be a great help unto you, to be well acquainted with the
nature and humors of all your Subjects, and to know particularly the estate of
every part of your dominions; I would therefore counsel you, Plat. in pol. and
Min. Tacit. 7. an. Mart.
once in the year to visit the principal parts of the country, ye shall be
in for the time: and because I hope ye shall be King of more countries then
this; once in the three years to visit all your Kingdoms; not lipening to
Vice-royes, but hearing your self their complaints; and having ordinary
Councels and iustice-seates in every Kingdom, of their own countriemen: and
the principal matters ever to be decided by your self when ye come in those
parts.

Ye have also to consider, Protection from foreign miuries. Xeno. 8. Cyr.
Arist. 5 pol. Polib. 6. Dion. Hal. de Romul.
that ye must not only be careful to keep your subjects, from receiving
any wrong of others within; but also ye must be careful to keep them from
the wrong of any foreign Prince without: sen the sword is given you by God not
only to revenge upon your own subjects, the wrongs committed amongst
themselves; but further, to revenge and free them of foreign injuries done
unto them: And therefore wars upon just quarrels are lawful: but about all,
let not the wrong cause be on your side.

Use all other Princes, as your brethren, honestly and kindly: What forms to
be used with other Princes. Isoc. in Plat. and Parag.
Keep precisely your promise unto them, although to your hurt. Strive with
eu^r^e one of them in courtesy and thankfulness: and as with all men, so
especially with them, be plain and trewthfull; keeping ever that Christian
rule, to do as ye would be done to: especially in counting rebellion against
any other Prince, a crime against your own self, because of the preparatiue.
Supply not therefore, nor trust not other Princes rebels; but pity and
succor all lawful Princes in their troubles. Arist. ad A. Verr. 11. de V. p.
R. Cu. 2. Of. Liu. lib. 4.
But if any of them will not abstain, notwithstanding what-soeuer your good
deserts, to wrong you or your subjects, crave redress at leisure; hear and
do all reason: and if no offer that is lawful or honorable, can make him to
abstain, nor repair his wrong doing; then for last refuge, Liu. lib. 1. Cic.
cod.
commit the justness of your cause to God, giving first honestly up with him,
and in a public and honorable form.

But omitting now to teach you the form of making wars, Of war.
because that art is largely treated of by many, Prop. 4. Eleg. Lucan. 7.
Varro 11. de V. P. R.
and is better learned by practice then speculation; I will only set down to
you here a few precepts therein. Let first the justness of your cause be your
greatest strength; and then omit not to use all lawful means for backing of
the same. Consult therefore with no Necromancier nor false Prophet, upon the
success of your wars, remembering on king Saules miserable end: 1. Sam. 31.
but keep your land clean of all South-sayers, Deuteronomy. 18.
according to the command in the Law of God, dilated by Jeremy. Neither
commit your quarrel to be tried by a Duel: for beside that generally all
Duel appears to be unlawful, committing the quarrel, as it were, to a lot;
whereof there is no warrant in the Scripture, since the abrogating of the old
Law: it is specially most vn-lawfull in the person of a King; Plutat. in
Sect. and Ant.
who being a public person has no power therefore to dispose of himself, in
respect, that to his preservation or fall, the safety or wrack of the whole
commonweal is necessarily coupled, as the body is to the head.

Before ye take on war, Luke 14.
play the wise Kings part described by Christ; foreseeing how ye may bear it
out with all necessary provision: especially remember, Thuc. 2. Sal in lug.
Cic. prol. Man. Demost. olyn. 2. Liu. li. 30. Veger 1. Caes. 1. and 3. de
(...), ciuil^. Proh. in Thras.
that money is Neruus belli. Choose old experimented Captains, and young able
soldiers. Be extremely strait and severe in martial Discipline, as well for
keeping of order, which is as requisite as hardiness in the wars, and
punishing of sloth, which at a time may put the whole army in hazard; as
likewise for repressing of mutinies, which in wars are wonderful dangerous.
And look to the Spaniard, whose great success in all his wars, has only
come through straitness of Discipline and order: for such errors may be
committed in the wars, as cannot be gotten mended again.

Be in your own person walkrife, Caes. 1. de bello ciu. Liu. l. 7. Xen. 1. and
5. C^r. and de discip. mi. Xen. in Ages.
diligent and painful; using the advice of such as are skilfullest in the
craft, as ye must also do in all other. Be homely with your soldiers as your
companions, for winning their hearts; and extremely liberal, for then is no
time of sparing. Be cold and foreseeing in devising, constant in your
resolutions, and forward and quick in your executions. Pol. l 5.
Fortify well your Camp, and assail not rashly without an advantage: X^n. 1.
Cyr. Thuc. 5.
neither fear not lightly your enemy. Be curious in devising stratagems, but
always honestly: for of any thing they work greatest effects in the wars,
Isoc. ad Phil. Pla. 9. de leg. Liu. l. 22. and 31. Tac. 2. his. Plut. de fort.
if secrecy be joined to invention. And once or twice in your own person
hazard your self fairly; but, having acquired so the fame of courage and
magnanimity, make not a daily soldier of your self, exposing rashly your
person to every peril: but conserve your self thereafter for the weal of
your people, for whose sake ye must more care for your self, then for your
own.

And as I have counseled you to be slow in taking on a war, Of Peace.
so advise I you to be slow in peacemaking. Isocr in Arch.
Before ye agree, look that the ground of your wars be satisfied in your
peace; Polib. 3. Cit. 1. Of. and 7. Phil. Tat. 4. his.
and that ye see a good surety for you and your people: otherways a
honorable and just war is more tolerable, then a dishonorable and
dis-aduantageous peace.

But it is not enough to a good King, by the scepter of good Laws well execute
to govern, and by force of arms to protect his people; if he join not
therewith his virtuous life in his own person, and in the person of his Court
and company; by good example alluring his Subjects to the love of virtue, A
Kings life must be exemplare. Plan pol. and 4. de leg.
and hatred of vice. And therefore (my Son) since all people are naturally
inclined to follow their Princes example (as I showed you before) let it not be
said, that ye command others to keep the contrary course to that, which in
your own person ye practice, making so your words and deeds to fight
together: but by the contrary, let your own life be a lawbooke and a mirror
to your people; that therein they may read the practice of their own Laws;
and therein they may see, by your image, what life they should lead.

And this example in your own life and person, I likewise divide in two parts:
The first, in the government of your Court and followers, in all godliness and
virtue: the next, in having your own mind decked and enriched so with all
virtuous qualities, that therewith ye may worthily rule your people: Plat. in
Thee. and Euth.
For it is not enough that ye have and retain (as prisoners) within your self
never so many good qualities and virtues, except ye employ them, and set them
on work, Arist. 1. Eth. Cic. in Offic.
for the weal of them that are committed to your charge: Virtutis enim laus
omnis in action consistit.

First then, as to the government of your Court and followers, Of the Court.
Psalm. 101.
King David sets down the best precepts, that any wise and Christian King can
practice in that point: For as ye ought to have a great care for the ruling
well of all your Subjects, so ought ye to have a double care for the ruling
well of your own servants; since unto them ye are both a Politic and
Oeconomicke governor. Cic. ad Q frat.
And as every one of the people will delight to follow the example of any of the
Courteours, as well in evil as in good: so what crime so horrible can there be
committed and ouer-seene in a Courteour, that will not be an exemplare excuse
for any other boldly to commit the like? And therefore in two points have ye to
take good heed anent your Court and household: first, in choosing them wisely;
next, in carefully ruling them whom ye have chosen.

It is an old and true saying, That a kindly Aver will never become a good
horse: Plat. 5. de Leg.
for albeit good education and company be great helps to Nature, and education
be therefore most justly called altera natura, Arist. 2. oecon.
yet is it evil to get out of the flesh, that is bred in the bone, as the old
proverb says. Be very ware then in making choice of your servants and
company; -- Nam
Turpius eiicitur, quam non admittitur hospes: Ovid. 5. de Trist.

and many respects may lawfully let an admission, that will not be sufficient
causes of deprivation.

All your servants and Court must be composed partly of minors, Of the choice
of scruants.
such as young Lords, to be brought up in your company, or Pages and such like;
and partly of men of perfect aage, for serving you in such roumes, as ought to
be filled with men of wisdom and discretion. For the first sort, ye can do
no more, but choose them within aage, Arist 1. and 5. p^lit.
that are come of a good and virtuous kind, In fide parentum, as Baptism is
used: For though anima non venit ex traduce, but is immediately created by God,
Cic. ad Q frat.
and infused from above; yet it is most certain, that virtue or vice will
oftentimes, with the heritage, be transferred from the parents to the
posterity, Witness the experience of the late house of Gowree. Plat. 6. de
Leg. Arist 2. oecon. and 1. pol.
and run on a blood (as the Proverb is) the sickness of the mind
becoming as kindly to some races, as these sickenesses of the body, that
infect in the seed: Especially choose such minors as are come of a true and
honest race, and have not had the house whereof they are descended, infected
with falsehood.

And as for the other sort of your company and servants, that ought to be of
perfect aage; Plat. 6. de leg. Isocr. in pan. Arist 5. pol.
first see that they be of a good fame and without blemish, otherwise, what can
the people think, but that ye have chosen a company unto you, according to
your own humor, and so have preferred these men, for the love of their vices
and crimes, that ye knew them to beguiltie of? Them. 2. ph.
For the people that see you not within, cannot judge of you, but according to
the outward appearance of your actions and company, which only is subject to
their sight: Plat. 7. de Rep. 3. et 12. de Leg. Arist. 5. et 6. pobit.
And next, see that they be endued with such honest qualities, as are meet for
such offices, as ye ordain them to serve in; that your judgment may be known
in employing every man according to his gifts: Psalm. 101.
And shortly, follow good king David's counsel in the choice of your servants,
by setting your eyes upon the faithful and upright of the land to dwell with
you.

But here I must not forget to remember, A transmission of hereditarie kindness.
and according to my fatherly authority, to charge you to prefer specially
to your service, so many as have trewly served me, and are able for it: the
rest, honorably to reward them, preferring their posterity before others, as
kindliest: so shall ye not only be best served, (for if the haters of your
parents cannot love you, as I showed before, it follows of necessity their
lovers must love you) but further, ye shall kyth your thankful memory of
your father, and procure the blessing of these old servants, in not missing
their old master in you; which otherwise would be turned in a prayer for me,
and a curse for you. Use them therefore when God shall call me, as the
testimonies of your affection toward me; trusting and advancing those
farthest, whom I found faithfullest: which ye must not discern by their
rewards at my hand (for rewards, as they are called Bona fortunae, so are they
subject unto fortune) but according to the trust I gave them; having oft-times
had better heart then hap to the rewarding of sundry: And on the other part, as
I wish you to kyth your constant love toward them that I loved, so desire I
you to kyth in the same measure, your constant hatred to them that I hated: I
mean, bring not home, nor restore not such, as ye find standing banished or
fore-faulted by me. The contrary would kyth in you over great a contempt of me,
and lightness in your own nature: for how can they be true to the Son, that
were false to the Father?

But to return to the purpose anent the choice of your servants, ye shall by
this wise form of doing, eschew the inconuenients, that in my minority I fell
in, anent the choice of my servants: For by them that had the command where I
was brought up, were my servants put unto me; not choosing them that were
meetest to serve me, but whom they thought meetest to serve their turn about
me, A domesticke and near example.
as kythed well in many of them at the first rebellion raised against me,
which compelled me to make a great alteration among my servants. And yet the
example of that corruption made me to be long troubled there-after with
solliciters, recommending servants unto me, more for serving in effect, their
friends that put them in, then their master that admitted them. Let my example
then teach you to follow the rules here set down, Arist. 2. pol.
choosing your servants for your own use, and not for the use of others: And
since ye must be communis parens to all your people, so choose your servants
indifferently out of all quarters; not respecting other men's appetites, but
their own qualities: For as ye must command all, so reason would, ye should be
served out of al, as ye please to make choice.

But specially take good heed to the choice of your servants, Of the officers
of the Crown Plat. de repub. Cic. ad Q. frat Isoc. in Panath. ad Nic. and de
pace. Thuc 6. Piutar. in pol.
that ye prefer to the offices of the Crown and estate: for in other offices
ye have only to take heed to your own weal; but these concern likewise
the weal of your people, for the which ye must be answerable to God. Choose
then for all these Offices, men of known wisdom, honesty, and good
conscience; well practiced in the points of the craft, that ye ordain them
for, and free of all factions and partialities; but specially free of that
filthy vice of Flattery, the pest of all Princes, and wrack of Republics:
Plat. in Phedr. and Menex. Arist. 5 pol. Isoc. in Sym. Tacit. 3. hist. Curt. 8.
For since in the first part of this Treatise, I forewarned you to be at war
with your own inward flatterer (...), how much more should ye be at war with
outward flatterers, who are nothing so sib to you, as your self is; by the
selling of such counterfeit wares, only preassing to ground their greatness
upon your ruins? And therefore be careful to prefer none, as ye will be
answerable to God but only for their worthiness: Of public receivers.
But specially choose honest, diligent, mean, but responsall men, to be your
receivers in money matters: mean I say, that ye may when ye please, take a
sharp account of their intromission, without peril of their breeding any
trouble to your estate: for this oversight has been the greatest cause of my
mis-thriuing in money matters. Especially, put never a forrainer, A special
principle in policy. Arist. 5. pol. Cic. ad Q. frat.
in any principal office of estate: for that will never fail to stir up
sedition and envy in the countrey-mens hearts, both against you and him: But
(as I said before) if God provide you with more countries then this; choose the
borne-men of every country, to be your chief counselors therein.

And for conclusion of my advice anent the choice of your servants, Plat. in 1.
Al. in pol. and 5. de legib. Arist. 2. oecon.
delight to be served with men of the noblest blood that may be had: for
besides that their service shall breed you great good will and least envy,
contrary to that of start-vps; ye shall often find virtue follow noble races,
as I have said before speaking of the Nobility.

Now, as to the other point, Government of the Court. Isocr. in Arcop.
anent your governing of your servants when ye have chosen them; make your
Court and company to be a pattern of godliness and all honest virtues, to
all the rest of the people. Idem in Panath.
Be a daily watchman over your servants, that they obey your laws precisely:
For how can your laws be kept in the country, if they be broken at your
ear? Punishing the breach thereof in a Courteour, more severely, then in the
person of any other of your subjects: and above all, suffer none of them (by
abusing their credit with you) to oppress or wrong any of your subjects. Be
homely or strange with them, Arist. 2. pol.
as ye think their behavior deserves, Tacit. 1. hist.
and their nature may bear with. Think a quarrellous man a pest in your
company. Val. lib. 2. Curt. 4.
Be careful ever to prefer the gentilest natured and trustiest, to the
inwardest Offices about you, especially in your chalmer. Suffer none about you
to meddle in any men's particulars, Demost. 8. phil. Sal. in Cat. Lin. 22.
but like the Turks Ianisares, let them know no father but you, nor particular
but yours. And if any will meddle in their kin or friends quarrels, give them
their leave: for since ye must be of no surname nor kin, but equal to all
honest men; it becomes you not to be followed with partial or factious
servants. Tacit. eod. and 1. An.
Teach obedience to your servants, and not to think themselves ouer-wise: and,
as when any of them deserves it, ye must not spare to put them away, so,
without a seen cause, change none of them. The groundstone of good government.
At. 5. polit. Tacit. in Ag. Dion li. 52. Xent. in Ages. Isoc. in Sym. et ad Ph.
Id. de permutat. Cic. ad Q. frat.
Pay them, as all others your subjects, with praemium or poena as they deserve,
which is the very ground-stone of good government. Employ every man as ye
think him qualified, but use not one in all things, lest he wax proud, and
be envied of his fellows. Love them best, that are plainnest with you, and
disguise not the truth for all their kin: suffer none to be evil tongued,
nor backbiters of them they hate: command a hartly and brotherly love among all
them that serve you. And shortly, maintain peace in your Court, bannish envy,
cherish modesty, bannish deboshed insolence, foster humility, and repress
pride: setting down such a comely and honorable order in all the points of
your service; that when strangers shall visit your Court, 1. King. 10.
they may with the Queen of Sheba, admire your wisdom in the glory of your
house, and comely order among your servants.

But the principal blessing that ye can get of good company, Of Marriage.
will stand in your marrying of a godly and virtuous wife: for she must be
nearer unto you, Genesis 2.23.
then any other company, being Flesh of your flesh, and bone of your bone, as
Adam said of Heuah. And because I know not but God may call me, before ye be
ready for Marriage; I will shortly set down to you here my advice therein.

First of all consider, that Marriage is the greatest earthly felicity or
misery, that can come to a man, according as it pleases God to bless or
curse the same. Since then without the blessing of GOD, ye cannot look for a
happy success in Marriage, ye must be careful both in your preparation for
it, Preparation to marriage.
and in the choice and usage of your wife, to procure the same. By your
preparation, I mean, that ye must keep your body clean and unpolluted,
till ye give it to your wife, whom-to only it belongs. For how can ye
justly crave to be joined with a pure virgin, if your body be polluted? why
should the one half be clean, and the other defiled? And although I know,
fornication is thought but a light and a venial sin, by the most part of the
world, yet remember well what I said to you in my first Book anent conscience,
and count every sin and breach of Gods law, not according as the vain world
esteems of it, but as God the Judge and maker of the law accounts of the
same Hear God commanding by the mouth of Paul, to abstain from fornication,
1. Cor. 6.10.
declaring that the fornicator shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven: and
by the mouth of John, reckoning out fornication amongst other grievous sins,
that debar the committers amongst dogs and swine, Revel. 22.25.
from entry in that spiritual and heavenly Jerusalem. And consider, if a man
shall once take upon him, to count that light, which God calls heavy; and
venial that, which God calls grievous; The dangerous effects of lust.
beginning first to measure any one sin by the rule of his lust and
appetites, and not of his conscience; what shall let him to do so with the
next, that his affections shall stir him to, the like reason serving for all:
and so to go forward till he place his whole corrupted affections in Gods
room? And then what shall come of him; but, as a man given over to his own
filthy affections, shall perish into them? And because we are all of that
nature, that sibbest examples touch us nearest, consider the difference of
success that God granted in the Marriages of the King my grandfather, and me
your own father: A domesticke example.
the reward of his incontinencie, (proceeding from his evil education) being
the sudden death at one time of two pleasant young Princes; and a daughter
only borne to succeed to him, whom he had never the hap, so much as once to
see or bless before his death: leaving a double curse behind him to the land,
both a Woman of sex, and a newborn babe of aage to reign over them. And as
for the blessing God has bestowed on me, in granting me both a greater
continency, and the fruits following there-upon, your self, and sib folks to
you, are (praise be to God) sufficient witnesses: which, I hope the same God of
his infinite mercy, shall continue and increase, without repentance to me and
my posterity. Be not ashamed then, to keep clean your body, which is the
Temple of the holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 6.19.
notwithstanding all vain allurements to the contrary, discerning trewly and
wisely of every virtue and vice, according to the true qualities thereof, and
not according to the vain conceits of men.

As for your choice in Marriage, respect chiefly the three causes, wherefore
Marriage was first ordained by God; and then join three accessories, so far
as they may be obtained, not derogating to the principalles.

The three causes it was ordained for, are, for staying of lust, Marriage
ordained for three causes. Arist. 7. pol.
for procreation of children, and that man should by his Wife, get a helper
like himself. Defer not then to Marie till your aage: for it is ordained for
quenching the lust of your youth: Especially a King must tymouslie Marie for
the weal of his people. Neither Marie ye, Id. cod.
for any accessory cause or worldly respects, a woman unable, either through
aage, nature, or accident, for procreation of children: for in a King that were
a double fault, as well against his own weal, as against the weal of his
people. Neither also Marie one of known evil conditions, or vicious
education: for the woman is ordained to be a helper, and not a hinderer to man.
Accessory causes of marriage. AEg. To. 2. de reg. pr.


The three accessories, which as I have said, ought also to be respected,
without derogating to the principal causes, are beauty, riches, and
friendship by alliance, which are all blessings of God. For beauty increases
your love to your Wife, contenting you the better with her, without caring for
others: and riches and great alliance, do both make her the abler to be a
helper unto you. But if over great respect being had to these accessories, the
principal causes be ouer-seene (which is over often practiced in the world) as
of themselves they are a blessing being well used; so the abuse of them will
turn them in a curse. For what can all these worldly respects avail, when a
man shall find himself coupled with a devil, to be one flesh with him, and
the half marrow in his bed? Then (though too late) shall he find that beauty
without bounty, wealth without wisdom, and great friendship without grace and
honesty; are but fair shows, and the deceitful masks of infinite miseries.

But have ye respect, my Son, to these three special causes in your Marriage,
Matthew. 13. A special caution in marriage.
which flow from the first institution thereof, and caetera omnia adijcientur
vobis. And therefore I would rathest have you to Marie one that were fully of
your own Religion; her rank and other qualities being agreeable to your
estate. For although that to my great regrate, the number of any Princes of
power and account, professing our Religion, be but very small; and that
therefore this advice seems to be the more strait and difficile: yet ye have
deeply to weigh, and consider upon these doubts, how ye and your wife can be
of one flesh, and keep unity betwixt you, being members of two opposite
Churches: disagreement in Religion brings ever with it, disagreement in
manners; and the dissension betwixt your Preachers and hers, will breed and
foster a dissension among your subjects, taking their example from your family;
besides the peril of the evil education of your children. Neither pride you
that ye will be able to frame and make her as ye please: that deceived Solomon
the wisest King that ever was; the grace of Perseverance, not being a flower
that grows in our garden.

Remember also that Marriage is one of the greatest actions that a man does in
all his time, especially in taking of his first Wife: and if he Marie first
basely beneath his rank, he will ever be the less accounted of thereafter.
For keeping the blood pure. Pla. 5. de Rep. Cic. 2. de Din. Arist. de genesis An.
Lucr. 4.
And lastly, remember to choose your Wife as I advised you to choose your
servants: that she be of a whole and clean race, not subject to the hereditary
sicknesses, either of the soul or the body: For if a man will be careful to
breed horses and dogs of good kinds, how much more careful should he be, for
the breed of his own loins? So shall ye in your Marriage have respect to your
conscience, honor, and natural weal in your successors.

When ye are Married, keep inuiolably your promise made to God in your
Marriage; which stands all in doing of one thing, and abstayning from another:
to treat her in all things as your wife, and the half of your self; and to
make your body (which then is no more yours, but properly hers) common with
none other. Pl. 11. de leg. Is. in Sym.
I trust I need not to insist here to dissuade you from the filthy vice of
adultery: remember only what solemn promise ye make to God at your Marriage:
and since it is only by the force of that promise that your children succeed
to you, which otherwise they could not do; aequitie and reason would, ye
should keep your part thereof. God is ever a severe auenger of all periuries;
Cic. 2. de leg.
and it is no oath made in jest, that gives power to children to succeed to
great kingdoms. Have the King my grandfathers example before your eyes, who
by his adultery, bred the wrack of his lawful daughter and heir; in
begetting that bastard, who unnaturally rebelled, and procured the ruin of his
own Souerane and sister. And what good her posterity has gotten sensyne, of
some of that unlawful generation, Bothuell his treacherous attempts can bear
witness. Keep praecisely then your promise made at Marriage, as ye would wish
to be partaker of the blessing therein.

And for your behavior to your Wife, the Scripture can best give you counsel
therein: Treat her as your own flesh, command her as her Lord, cherish her as
your helper, rule her as your pupil, and please her in all things reasonable;
Arist. 8. Aeth. and 1 Pel. Xen. and Arist. in oeco.
but teach her not to be curious in things that belong her not: Ye are the
head, she is your body; It is your office to command, and hers to obey; but
yet with such a sweet harmony, as she should be as ready to obey, as ye to
command; as willing to follow, as ye to go before; your love being wholly knit
unto her, and all her affections lovingly bent to follow your will.

And to conclude, keep specially three rules with your Wife: first, Arist. 1
rhet. Plu. in Meron. Aegid R. de reg pr. Plu. 5. de Re^ and 7. de leg.
suffer her never to meddle with the Politic government of the Commonweal,
but hold her at the Oeconomicke rule of the house; and yet all to be subject
to your direction: keep carefully good and chaste company about her, for women
are the frailest sex; and be never both angry at once, but when ye see her in
passion, ye should with reason danton yours: for both when ye are settled, ye
are meetest to judge of her errors; and when she is come to her self, she may
be best made to apprehend her offense, and reverence your rebuke.

If God send you succession, be careful for their virtuous education: A Kings
behavior toward his children. Plu. in These. 4. and 5 de Rep. and 6. and 7. de
l. Arist. 7. pol. A caution foreshewing future division.
love them as ye ought, but let them know as much of it, as the gentleness of
their nature will deserve; containing them ever in a reverent love and fear of
you. And in case it please God to provide you to all these three Kingdoms,
make your eldest son Isaac, leaving him all your kingdoms; and provide the
rest with private possessions: Otherwise by dividing your kingdoms, ye shall
leave the seed of division and discord among your posterity; as befell to this
I Will, by the division and assignement thereof, to the three sons of Brutus,
Locrine, Albanact, and Camber. Polid. 1. Crowns come not in commerce.
But if God give you not succession, defraud never the nearest by right,
what-soeuer conceit ye have of the person: For Kingdoms are ever at Gods
disposition, and in that case we are but liue-rentars, lying no more in the
Kings, nor peoples hands to dispossess the righteous heir.

And as your company should be a pattern to the rest of the people, Plu. in
Pol. Cic. ad Q. frat.
so should your person be a lamp and mirror to your company giving light to
your servants to walk in the path of virtue, and representing unto them such
worthy qualities, as they should preasse to imitate.

I need not to trouble you with the particular discourse of the four Cardinal
virtues, The right use of temperance. Arist. 5. pol. Pol. 6. Cic. 1. off. 2. de
inuen. and in Par.
it is so trodden a path: but I will shortly say unto you; make one of them,
which is Temperance, Queen of all the rest within you. I mean not by the
vulgar interpretation of Temperance, which only consists in gustu and tactu,
by the moderating of these two senses: but, I mean of that wise moderation,
that first commanding your self, shall as a Queen, command all the
affections and passions of your mind, and as a Phisician, wisely mix all your
actions according thereto. Therefore, not only in all your affections and
passions, In holiness.
but even in your most virtuous actions, make ever moderation to be the chief
ruler: For although holiness be the first and most requisite quality of a
Christian, as proceeding from a feeling fear and true knowledge of God: yet
ye remember how in the conclusion of my first book, I advised you to
moderateal your outward actions flowing there-fra. The like say I now of
Justice, which is the greatest virtue that properly belongs to a Kings office.

Use Justice, In justice. Pla. 4 de Leg. Arist. 1. mag. mor. Cic. 1. off. pro
Rab. and ad Q. frat. Seneca de cl.
but with such moderation, as it turn not in Tyranny: otherways summum Ius,
is summa iniuria. As for example: if a man of a known honest life, be invaded
by brigands or thieves for his purse, and in his own defense slay one of them,
they being both more in number, and also known to be deboshed and insolent
livers; where by the contrary, he was single alone, being a man of sound
reputation: yet because they were not at the horn, or there was no
eyewitness present that could verify their first inuading of him, shall he
therefore lose his head? And likewise, by the law-burrowes in our laws, men
are prohibited under great pecuniall pains, from any ways inuading or
molesting their neighbors person or bounds: if then his horse break the
halter, and pastor in his neighbors meadow, shall he pay two or three thousand
pounds for the wantonness of his horse, Arist. 5. aeth. and 1 rhet. Cicer. pro
Caec.
or the weakness of his halter? Surely no: for laws are ordained as rules of
virtuous and sociall living, and not to be snares to trap your good subjects:
and therefore the law must be interpreted according to the meaning, and not to
the literal sense thereof: Nam ratio est anima legis.

And as I said of Justice, so say I of Clemency, Magnanimity, Liberality,
Constancy, Humility, and all other Princely virtues; Nam in medio stat
virtus. The false semblance of extremities.
And it is but the craft of the Devil that falsely colors the two vices that
are on either side thereof, with the borrowed titles of it, albeit in very
deed they have no affinity therewith and the two extremities themselves,
although they seem contrary, yet growing to the height, Their coincidence.
run ever both in one: For in infinitis omnia concurrunt; and what difference
is betwixt extreme tyranny, delighting to destroy all mankind; and extreme
slackenesse of punishment, permitting every man to tyrannize over his
companion? Or what differs extreme prodigality, by wasting of all to
possess nothing; from extreme niggardnesse, by hoarding up all to enjoy
nothing; like the Ass that carrying victual on her back, is like to starve
for hunger, and will be glad of thrissels for her part? And what is betwixt
the pride of a glorious Nebuchadnezzar, and the preposterous humility of one
of the proud Puritanes, claiming to their Paritie, and crying, We are all but
vile worms, and yet will judge and give Law to their King, but will be judged
nor controlled by none? Surely there is more pride under such a ones black
bonnet, then under Alexander the great his Diadem, as was said of Diogenes in
the like case.

But above all virtues, study to know well your own craft, The right extention
of a kings craft.
which is to rule your people. And when I say this, I bid you know all crafts:
For except ye know every one, how can ye control every one, Plat. in pol. 5.
de Rep. and Epist. 7. Cic. ad Q. frat. and de or.
which is your proper office? Therefore besides your education, it is
necessary ye delight in reading, and seeking the knowledge of all lawful
things; but with these two restrictions: first, that ye choose idle hours for
it, not interrupting therewith the discharge of your office: and next, that ye
study not for knowledge nakedly, but that your principal end be, Id. 1. de
fin.
to make you able thereby to use your office; practicing according to your
knowledge in all the points of your calling: Id. 1. Offic.
not like these vain Astrologians, that study night and day on the course of
the stars, only that they may, for satisfying their curiosity, know their
course. But since all Arts and sciences are linked every one with other, their
greatest principles agreeing in one (which moved the Poets to feign the nine
Muses to be all sisters) study them, that out of their harmony, ye may suck
the knowledge of all faculties; and consequently be on the counsel of all
crafts, that ye may be able to contain them all in order, as I have already
said: For knowledge and learning is a light burden, the weight whereof will
never press your shoulders.

First of all then, study to be well seen in the Scriptures, The Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 17.
as I remembered you in the first book; as well for the knowledge of your own
salvation, as that ye may be able to contain your Church in their calling, as
Custos vtriusque Tabulae. For the ruling them well, is no small point of your
office; taking specially heed, that they vague not from their text in the
Pulpit: and if ever ye would have peace in your land, suffer them not to meddle
in that place with the estate or policy; but punish severely the first that
presumes to it. Do nothing toward them without a good ground and warrant,
but reason not much with them: for I have overmuch surfeited them with that,
and it is not their fashion to yield. And suffer no conuentions nor meetings
among Churchmen, but by your knowledge and permission.

Next the Scriptures, study well your own Laws: Of the Laws municipall.
for how can ye discern by the thing ye know not? But preasse to draw all
your Laws and processes, to be as short and plain as ye can: assure your
self the longsomnesse both of rights and processes, Plat. 4. de Rep. and 6. de
Leg. Arist 1. rhet.
breeds their unsure looseness and obscurity, the shortest being ever both
the surest and plainest form, and the longsomnesse serving only for the
enriching of the Advocates and Clerks, Cic 1. de Orat. Sen in Lud Resort to
the Session.
with the spoil of the whole country: And therefore delight to haunt your
Session, and spy carefully their proceedings; taking good heed, if any
briberie may be tried among them, which cannot over severely be punished. Spare
not to go there, for gracing that far any that ye favor, by your presence
to procure them expedition of Justice; although that should be specially done,
for the poor that cannot wait on, or are debarred by mightier parties. Plat.
in pol. Arist. 1. Rhet. Cic. ad Q. frat. Plut. in Is.
But when ye are there, remember the throne is Gods and not yours, that ye sit
in, and let no favor, nor whatsoever respects move you from the right. Ye sit
not there, as I show before, for rewarding of friends or servants, nor for
crossing of contemners, but only for doing of Justice. Learn also wisely to
discern betwixt Justice and equity; and for pity of the poor, rob not the
rich, because he may better spare it, but give the little man the larger coat
if it be his; eschewing the error of young Cyrus therein: Xen. 1. Cyr.
For Justice, by the Law, gives every man his own; and equity in things
arbitrall, gives every one that which is meetest for him.

Be an ordinary sitter in your secret Counsel: But specially to the secret
Counsel.
that judicature is only ordained for matters of estate, and repressing of
insolent oppressions. Make that judgment as compendious and plain as ye can;
and suffer no Advocates to be heard there with their dilatours, Cic. ad Q frat.
Tac. 1. hist. Plut. in Demet.
but let every party tell his own tale himself: and weary not to hear the
complaints of the oppressed, aut ne Rex sis. Remit every thing to the ordinary
judicature, for eschewing of confusion: but let it be your own craft, to take
a sharp account of every man in his office.

And next the Laws, Reading of histories.
I would have you to be well versed in authentic histories, and in the
Chronicles of all nations, but specially in our own histories (Ne sis
peregrinus domi) the example whereof most nearly concerns you: I mean not of
such infamous inuectiues, as Buchanans or Knoxes Chronicles: and if any of
these infamous libels remain until your days, use the Law upon the keepers
thereof: For in that point I would have you a Pythagorist, Plat. in Menon.
to think that the very spirits of these archibellouses of rebellion, have
made transition in them that hoardes their books, Arist. 1 Rhet. Polit. 1.
Plut. in Timo. Cic. 2. de Or.
or maintains their opinions; punishing them, even as it were their authors
risen again. But by reading of authenticke histories and Chronicles, ye shall
learn experience by Theoricke, applying the bypast things to the present
estate, Eccles. 1.
quia nihil nouum sub sole: such is the continual volubilitie of things
earthly, according to the roundnesse of the world, and revolution of the
heavenly circles: which is expressed by the wheels in Ezechiels visions,
Ezech. 1.
and counterfeited by the Poets in rota Fortunae. And likewise by the knowledge
of histories, ye shall know how to behave your self to all Ambassadors and
strangers; being able to discourse with them upon the estate of their own
country. And among al profane histories, I must not omit most specially to
recommend unto you, the Commentaries of Caesar; both for the sweet flowing of
the style, as also for the worthiness of the matter it self: For I have ever
been of that opinion, that of all the Ethnic Emperors, or great Captains
that ever were, he has farthest excelled, both in his practice, and in his
precepts in martial affairs.

As for the study of other liberal arts and sciences, Of the arts liberal.
Sen. ep. 84.
I would have you reasonably versed in them, but not preassing to be a
passe-master in any of them: for that cannot but distract you from the points
of your calling, as I showed you before: and when, by the enemy winning the
town, ye shall be interrupted in your demonstration, as Archimedes was; Liu.
I 24. Plut. in Mart.
your people (I think) will look very bluntly upon it. I grant it is meet
ye have some entrance, specially in the Mathematickes; Of Mathematickes. Pl.
7. de leg. Arist. 2. Meta. Iam. 2.17.
for the knowledge of the art military, in situation of Camps, ordering of
battles, making Fortifications, placing of batteries, or such like. And let not
this your knowledge be dead without fruits, as Saint James speaks of Faith:
but let it appear in your daily conversation, and in all the actions of your
life.

Embrace true magnanimity, not in being vindictiue, Of magnanimity. Arist.
4. eth. Sen. de cl.
which the corrupted judgments of the world think to be true Magnanimity;
but by the contrary, in thinking your offendour not worthy of your wrath,
Cic. 1. off. Virg. 6. Aen.
empyring over your own passion, and triumphing in the commanding your self
to forgive: husbanding the effects of your courage and wrath, to be rightly
employed upon repelling of injuries within, by revenge taking upon the
oppressors; and in revenging injuries without, by just wars upon foreign
enemies. And so, where ye find a notable injury, spare not to give course to
the torrents of your wrath. The wrath of a King, Prou. 20.
is like to the roaring of a Lion.

Foster true Humility, in bannishing pride, Of humility.
not only toward God (considering ye differ not in stuff, but in use, and
that only by his ordinance, from the basest of your people) but also toward
your Parents. Plat. 4. de Leg. Xen. 2. de dict. and fact. Soc.
And if it fall out that my Wife shall out-liue me, as ever ye think to
purchase my blessing, honor your mother: set Beersheba in a throne on your
right hand: offend her for nothing, much less wrong her: remember her Quae
longa december tulerit fastidia menses; and that your flesh and blood is made of
hers: and begin not, like the young lords and lairdes, your first wars
upon your Mother; but preasse earnestly to deserve her blessing. Neither
deceive your self with many that say, they care not for their Parents curse,
so they deserve it not. O inuert not the order of nature, by judging your
superiors, chiefly in your own particular! But assure your self, the
blessing or curse of the Parents, has almost ever a Propheticke power joined
with it: and if there were no more, honor your Parents, Exodus 20.
for the lengthning of your own days, Exodus 20. Xen. 1. and 3. Cyr.
as GOD in his Law promises. Honor also them that are in loco Parentum unto
you, such as your governors, vp-bringers, and Praeceptours: be thankful unto
them and reward them, which is your dewtie and honor.

But on the other part, let not this true humility stay your high indignation
to appear, Cic. ad Q frat.
when any great oppressors shall praesume to come in your presence; then
frown as ye ought: And in-case they use a color of Law in oppressing their
poor ones, as ouer-many do; that which ye cannot mend by Law, Arist. 5 pol.
mend by the withdrawing of your countenance from them: and once in the year
cross them, when their erands come in your way, Matthew. 18.
recompencing the oppressor, according to Christ's parable of the two debtours.

Keep true Constancy, Of Constancy. Arist. 4. aeth. Thuc. 3.6. Cic. 1. Of.
and ad Qf. Brut. ad Cic.
not only in your kindness toward honest men; but being also inuicti animi
against all adversities: not with that Stoicke insensible stupiditie, wherewith
many in our days, preassing to win honor, in imitating that ancient sect,
by their inconstant behavior in their own lives, belie their profession. But
although ye are not a stock, not to feel calamities; yet let not the feeling
of them, so overrule and doazen your reason, as may stay you from taking and
using the best resolution for remedy, that can be found out.

Use true Liberality in rewarding the good, and bestowing frankly for your
honor and weal: Of Liberality. Cic. 1. and 2. Of. Sal. in Iug. Sen. 4. de
ben.
but with that proportional discretion, that every man may be served according
to his measure, wherein respect must be had to his rank, deserts, and
necessity: And provide how to have, but cast not away without cause. In
special, empaire not by your Liberality the ordinary rents of your crown;
whereby the estate Royal of you, and your successors, must be maintained, ne
exhaurias fontem liberalitatis: for that would ever be kept sacrosanctum and
extra commercium: otherways, your Liberality would decline to Prodigality,
in helping others with your, and your successors hurt. Isoc epist. 7. Xen. 8.
Cyr. Phil. Com. 10.
And above all, enrich not your self with exactions upon your subjects; but
think the riches of your people your best treasure, by the sins of
offenders, where no praeuention can avail, making justly your commodity. And
in-case necessity of wars, or other extraordinaries compel you to lift
Subsidies, do it as rarely as ye can: employing it only to the use it was
ordained for; Arist. 5. pol.
and using your self in that case, as fidus depositarius to your people.

And principally, Anent reporters. Isocr. ad Ph. in Panath. and de per. Cic. ad
Q. fr. Plut. de curios.
exercise true Wisdom; in discerning wisely betwixt true and false reports:
First, considering the nature of the person reporter; Next, what entresse he
can have in the weal or evil of him, of whom he makes the report; Thirdly,
the likelihood of the purpose it self; And last, the nature and bypast life
of the dilated person: and where ye find a tratler, away with him. And
although it be true, that a Prince can never without secrecy do great
things, yet it is better ofttimes to try reports, then by credulity to foster
suspicion upon an honest man. For since suspicion is the Tyrants sickness,
Isoc. de pac. Cic. 3. Os.
as the fruits of an evil Conscience, potius in alteram partem peccato: I
mean, in not mistrusting one, whom-to no such unhonesty was known before.
But as for such as have slipped before, former experience may justly breed
praeuention by foresight.

And to conclude my advice anent your behavior in your person; consider that
GOD is the author of all virtue, having imprinted in men's minds by the very
light of nature, the love of all moral virtues; Cicer. 3. Tusc.
as was seen by the virtuous lives of the old Romans: and preasse then to
shine as far before your people, in all virtue and honesty; as in greatness
of rank: that the use thereof in all your actions, may turn, with time, to a
natural habitude in you; and as by their hearing of your Laws, so by their
sight of your person, both their eyes and their ears, may lead and allure
them to the love of virtue, and hatred of vice.

OF A KINGS BEHAVIOVR IN INDIFFERENT THINGS.
THE THIRD BOOK.
IT is a true old saying, C ph. 8.3. de leg. Ovid. ad Liu. Quin. 4. decl.
That a King is as one set on a stage, whose smallest actions and gestures, all
the people gazingly do behold: and therefore although a King be never so
praecise in the discharging of his Office, the people, who sees but the
outward part, will ever judge of the substance, by the circumstances; and
according to the outward appearance, if his behavior be light or dissolute,
will conceive prae-occupied conceits of the Kings inward intention: which
although with time, (the trier of all truth,) it will euanish, by the evidence
of the contrary effects, yet interim patitur iustus; Arist. 5. pol. In
different actions and their dependancie. Plato in Phil. and 9. de leg.
and praeiudged conceits will, in the mean time, breed contempt, the mother of
rebellion and disorder. And besides that, it is certain, that all the
indifferent actions and behavior of a man, have a certain holding and
dependence, either upon virtue or vice, according as they are used or ruled:
for there is not a mids betwixt them, no more then betwixt their rewards,
heaven and hell.

Be careful then, my Son, so to frame all your indifferent actions and
outward behavior, as they may serve for the furtherance and forth-setting of
your inward virtuous disposition.

The whole indifferent actions of a man, Two sorts of them.
I divide in two sorts: in his behavior in things necessary, as food,
sleeping, raiment, speaking, writing, and gesture; and in things not necessary,
though convenient and lawful, as pastimes or exercises, and using of company
for recreation.

As to the indifferent things necessary, First sort, and how they be
indifferent.
although that of themselves they cannot be wanted, and so in that case are
not indifferent; as likewise incase they be not used with moderation,
declining so to the extremity, which is vice; yet the quality and form of
using them, may smell of virtue or vice, and be great furtherers to any of them.

To begin then at the things necessary; one of the publickest indifferent
actions of a King, and that maniest, especially strangers, will narrowly take
heed to; is his manner of refection at his Table, and his behavior thereat.
Therefore, as Kings use often to eat publicly, Forms at the Table. Xen. in Cyr.
it is meet and honorable that ye also do so, as well to eschew the opinion
that ye love not to haunt company, which is one of the marks of a Tyrant; as
likewise, that your delight to eat priuatlie, be not thought to be for private
satisfying of your gluttony; which ye would be ashamed should be publicly
seen. Let your Table be honorably served; but serve your appetite with few
dishes, as young Cyrus did: which both is holesommest, Xen. 1. Cyr.
and freest from the vice of delicacie, which is a degree of gluttony. Plut.
in Apoth.
And use most to eat of reasonablie-groffe, and common-meates; as well for
making your body strong and durable for travel at all occasions, either in
peace or in war: as that ye may be the heartlier received by your mean
Subjects in their houses, when their cheer may suffice you: which otherwise
would be imputed to you for pride and daintiness, and breed coldness and
disdain in them. Let all your food be simple, Sen. ep. 96.
without composition or sauces; which are more like medecines then meat. The
using of them was counted amongst the ancient Romans a filthy vice of
delicacie; because they serve only for pleasing of the taste, and not for
satisfying of the necessity of nature; Sen. de consol. ad Alb. Iuuen. sat. 2.
abhorring Apicius their own citizen, for his vice of delicacie and monsterous
gluttony. Like as both the Grecians and Romans had in detestation the very
name of Philoxenus, Arist. 4 eth.
for his filthy wish of a Crane-craig. And therefore was that sentence used
amongst them, against these artificial false appetites, Xen. de dict. and
fact. Socr. Laert. in Socr. Cic. 5. Tus. Plat. 6. de Leg. Plin. l. 14.
optimum condimentum fames. But beware with using excess of meat and drink;
and chiefly, beware of drunkenness, which is a beastly vice, namely in a
King: but specially beware with it, because it is one of those vices that
increases with aage. In the form of your meate-eating, be neither uncivil,
like a gross Cynicke; nor affectatlie mignarde, like a dainty dame; but eat
in a manly, round, and honest fashion. Cic. 1. Off.
It is no ways comely to dispatch affairs, or to be pensive at meat: but
keep then an open and cheerful countenance, causing to read pleasant
histories unto you, that profit may be mixed with pleasure: and when ye are
not disposed, entertain pleasant, quick, but honest discourses.

And because meat provoke sleeping, be also moderate in your sleep; Of
sleep. Pla. 7. de leg.
for it goes much by use: and remember that if your whole life were divided in
four parts, three of them would be found to be consumed on meat, drink,
sleep, and unnecessary occupations.

But albeit ordinary times would commonly be kept in meat and sleep; yet
use your self sometimes so, Best form of diet. Pla. 6. de leg.
that any time in the four and twenty hours may be alike to you for any of
them; that thereby your diet may be accommodate to your affairs, and not your
affairs to your diet: not therefore using your self to over great-softnesse
and delicacie in your sleep, more then in your meat; and specially in-case
ye have ado with the wars.

Let not your Chalmer be throng and common in the time of your rest, Forms in
the Chalmer.
as well for comeliness as for eschewing of carrying reports out of the same.
Let them that have the credit to serve in your Chalmer, Val. 2. Cur. 4.
be trusty and secret; for a King will have need to use secrecy in many
things: but yet behave your self so in your greatest secrets, as ye need not
be ashamed, suppose they were all proclaimed at the mercate cross: Pla. 6. de
leg.
But specially see that those of your Chalmer be of a sound fame, and without
blemish.

Take no heed to any of your dreams, Dreams not to be taken heed to.
for all prophecies, visions, and propheticke dreams are accomplished and
ceased in Christ: And therefore take no heed to freets either in dreams, or
any other things; for that error proceeds of ignorance, and is unworthy of a
Christian, who should be assured, Romans 14. Titus 1.
Omnia esse pura puris, as Paul says; all days and meats being alike to
Christians.

Next follows to speak of raiment, Of apparel.
the on-putting whereof is the ordinary action that follows next to sleep.
Isocr. de reg.
Be also moderate in your raiment, neither over superfluous, like a deboshed
waster; nor yet over base, like a miserable wretch; not artificially trimmed
and decked, like a Courtizane, nor yet over sluggishly clothed, like a country
clown; not over lightly like a Candie soldier, or a vain young Courtier; nor
yet over gravely, Cic. 1. Offic.
like a Minister: but in your garments be proper, cleanely, comely and honest,
wearing your clothes in a careless, yet comely form: keeping in them a midde
form, inter Togatos and Paludatos, betwixt the gravity of the one, and
lightness of the other: thereby to signify, that by your calling ye are
mixed of both the professions; Plat. de rege.
Togatus, as a Judge making and pronouncing the Law; Paludatus, by the power of
the sword: as your office is likewise mixed, betwixt the Ecclesiastical and
civil estate: For a King is not mere laicus, as both the Papists and
Anabaptists would have him, to the which error also the Puritanes incline over
far. But to return to the purpose of garments, they ought to be used
according to their first institution by God, which was for three causes: first
to hide our nakedness and shame; next and consequently, to make us more
comely; and thirdly, to preserve us from the injuries of heat and cold. If to
hide our nakedness and shameful parts, then these natural parts ordained to
be hid, should not be represented by any indecent forms in the clothes: and
if they should help our comeliness, they should not then by their painted
preened fashion, serve for baits to filthy lechery, as false hair and
fairding does amongst unchaste women: and if they should preserve us from the
injuries of heat and cold, men should not, like senseless stones, contemn
God, in lightlying the seasons, glorying to conquer honor on heat and cold.
And although it be praiseworthy and necessary in a Prince, to be patiens
algoris and aestus, when he shall have ado with wars upon the fields; yet I
think it meeter that ye go both clothed and armed, then naked to the
battle, except you would make you light for away-running: and yet for cowards,
metus addit alas. And shortly, in your clothes keep a proportion, as well with
the seasons of the year, as of your aage: in the fashions of them being
careless, using them according to the common form of the time, sometimes
richlier, Cic. 1. Off.
sometimes meanlier clothed, as occasion serves, without keeping any precise
rule therein: For if your mind be found occupied upon them, Ar. ad. Alex.
it will be thought idle otherways, and ye shall be accounted in the number of
one of these compti iuuenes; which will make your spirit and judgment to be
less thought of. But specially eschew to be effeminate in your clothes, in
perfuming, preening, or such like: and fail never in time of wars to be
galliardest and brauest, both in clothes and countenance. And make not a fool
of your self in disguising or wearing long hair or nails, which are but
excrements of nature, and bewray such misusers of them, to be either of a
vindictiue, or a vain light natural. Especially, make no vows in such vain
and outward things, as concern either meat or clothes.

Let your self and all your Court wear no ordinary armor with your
clothes, but such as is knightly and honorable; What ordinary armor to be
worn at Court.
I mean rapierswordes, and daggers: For tuilyesome weapons in the Court,
betokens confusion in the country. And therefore bannish not only from your
Court, all traitorous offensive weapons, forbidden by the Laws, as guns and
such like (whereof I spoke already) but also all traitorous defensive arms,
as secrets, plate-sleeues, and such like unseen armor: For, besides that the
wearers thereof, may be presupposed to have a secret evil intention, they want
both the uses that defensive armor is ordained for; which is, to be able to
hold out violence, and by their outward glaunsing in their enemies eyes, to
strike a terror in their hearts: Where by the contrary, they can serve for
neither, being not only unable to resist, but dangerous for shots, and giving
no outward show against the enemy; being only ordained, for betraying under
trust, whereof honest men should be ashamed to bear the outward badge, not
resembling the thing they are not. And for answer against these arguments, I
know none but the old Scots fashion; which if it be wrong, is no more to be
allowed for ancientnesse, then the old Mass is, which also our forefathers
used.

The next thing that ye have to take heed to, Of language and gesture. Arist.
3. ad Theod. Cic. in orat. ad Q. frat. and ad Bren.
is your speaking and language; whereunto I join your gesture, since action is
one of the chiefest qualities, that is required in an orator: for as the
tongue speaks to the ears, so does the gesture speak to the eyes of the
auditour. In both your speaking and your gesture, use a natural and plain
form, Cic. 1. Offic.
not fairded with artifice: for (as the Frenchmen say) Rien contre-faict fin:
but eschew all affectate forms in both.

In your language be plain, honest, natural, comely, clean, short, Id. cod.
and sententious, eschewing both the extremities, as well in not using any
rusticall corrupt leide, as booke-language, and pen and inke-horne terms: and
least of all mignard and effoeminate terms. But let the greatest part of your
eloquence consist in a natural, clear, and sensible form of the delivery of
your mind, Cic. ad Q. frat. and ad Brut.
builded ever upon certain and good grounds; tempering it with gravity,
quickenesse, or merinesse, according to the subject, and occasion of the time;
not taunting in Theology, nor alleging and profaning the Scripture in
drinking purposes, as over many do.

Use also the like form in your gesture; Idem. 1. Off.
neither looking sillily, like a stupide pedant; nor vnsetledly, with an
uncouth morgue, like a new-comeouer Cavalier: but let your behavior be
natural, grave, and according to the fashion of the country. Phil. ad Alex.
Cic. 2. Off.
Be not ouer-sparing in your courtesies, for that will be imputed to
inciuilitie and arrogancy: nor yet over prodigal in iowking or nodding at
every step: for that form of being popular, becomes better aspiring
Absalons, Arist. 4. eth. Cic. ad At.
then lawful Kings: framing ever your gesture according to your present
actions: looking gravely and with a majesty when ye sit in judgment, or give
audience to Ambassadors; homely, when ye are in private with your own
servants; merrily, when ye are at any pastime or merry discourse; and let your
countenance smell of courage and magnanimity when ye are at the wars. And
remember (I say over again) to be plain and sensible in your language: Isoc.
de reg. and in Euagr.
for besides that it is the tongues office, to be the messenger of the mind, it
may be thought a point of imbecillitie of spirit in a King, to speak
obscurely, much more untruely; Cic. 3. Off.
as if he stood in awe of any in uttering his thoughts.

Remember also, Id. 1. Off. Forms in reasoning.
to put a difference betwixt your form of language in reasoning, and your
pronouncing of sentences, or declaratour of your will in judgment, or any other
ways in the points of your office: For in the former case, ye must reason
pleasantly and patiently, not like a king, but like a private man and a
scholar; otherways, your impatience of contradiction will be interpreted to be
for lack of reason on your part. Where in the points of your office, ye should
ripely advise indeed, before ye give forth your sentence: but fra it be
given forth, the suffering of any contradiction diminishes the majesty of
your authority, In judgment. Isoc. ad Nic. Cic. ad Q. frat.
and makes the processes endless. The like form would also be observed by
all your inferior Judges and Magistrates.

Now as to your writing, Of writing, and what style fitteth a Prince.
which is nothing else, but a form of en-registrate speech; use a plain,
short, but stately style, both in your Proclamations and missiues, especially
to foreign Princes. And if your engine spur you to write any works, either in
verse or in prose, I cannot but allow you to practice it: but take no longsome
works in hand, for distracting you from your calling.

Flatter not your self in your labors, Cic. 1. Off.
but before they be set forth, let them first be privily censured by some of
the best skilled men in that craft, that in these works ye meddle with. And
because your writes will remain as true pictures of your mind, to all
posterities; let them be free of all uncomeliness and vn-honestie: and
according to Horace his counsel -- Nonumque premantur in annum. De art
Poetica.
I mean both your verse and your prose; letting first that fury and heat,
wherewith they were written, cool at leisure; and then as an uncouth judge and
censour, reuising them over again, before they be published, -- quia nescit
vox missa reuerti. Idem eod.


If ye would write worthily, choose subjects worthy of you, that be not full
of vanity, but of virtue; eschewing obscurity, and delighting ever to be
plain and sensible. And if ye write in verse, remember that it is not the
principal part of a Poem to rhyme right, and flow well with many pretty
words: but the chief commendation of a Poem is, that when the verse shall
be shaken sundry in prose, Ar. de art. Poet.
it shall be found so rich in quick inventions, and poeticke flowers, and in
fair and pertinent comparisons; as it shall retain the luster of a Poem,
although in prose. And I would also advise you to write in your own language:
for there is nothing left to be said in Greek and Latin already; and ynew
of poor scholars would match you in these languages; and besides that, it
best becomes a King to purify and make famous his own tongue; wherein he
may go before all his subjects; as it sets him well to do in all honest
and lawful things.

And amongst all unnecessary things that are lawful and expedient, Of the
exercise of the body. Xen. 1. Cyr.
I think exercises of the body most commendable to be used by a young Prince,
in such honest games or pastimes, as may further ability and maintain health:
For albeit I grant it to be most requisite for a King to exercise his engine,
which surely with idleness will ruste and become blunt; yet certainly bodily
exercises and games are very commendable; Plat. 6. de leg. Ar. 7. and 8. pol.
Cic. 1. Off.
as well for bannishing of idleness (the mother of all vice) as for making his
body able and durable for travel, which is very necessary for a King. But
from this count I debar all rough and violent exercises, as the footeball;
meeter for laming, then making able the users thereof: as likewise such
tumbling tricks as only serve for Comoedians and Balladines, to win their
bread with. Pl. eod.
But the exercises that I would have you to use (although but moderately, not
making a craft of them) are running, leaping, wrestling, fencing, dancing, and
playing at the caitch or tennise, archerie, palle maille, and such like other
fair and pleasant field-games. Xen. in Cyr. Is. deiug.
And the honourablest and most commendable games that ye can use, are on
horseback: for it becomes a Prince best of any man, to be a fair and good
horseman. Use therefore to ride and danton great and courageous horses; that I
may say of you, as Philip said of great Alexander his son, (...). Plut. in
Alex.
And specially use such games on horseback, as may teach you to handle your
arms thereon; such as the tilt, the ring, and low-riding for handling of your
sword.

I cannot omit here the hunting, namely with running hounds; Of hunting.
which is the most honorable and noblest sort thereof: for it is a theeuish
form of hunting to shoot with gunnes and bows; and gray hound hunting is not
so martial a game: But because I would not be thought a partial praiser of
this sport, In Cyn. 1. Cyr. and de rep. Lac. Cic. 1. Offic.
I remit you to Xenophon, an old and famous writer, who had no mind of
flattering you or me in this purpose: and who also sets down a fair
pattern, Cyropoedia.
for the education of a young king, under the supposed name of Cyrus.

As for hawking I condemn it not, but I must praise it more sparingly, Of
hawking.
because it neither resembles the wars so near as hunting does, in making
a man hardy, and skilfully ridden in all grounds, and is more uncertain and
subject to mischances; and (which is worst of all) is there-through an extreme
stirrer up of passions: But in using either of these games, Arist. 10. Eth.
observe that moderation, that ye slip not therewith the hours appointed for
your affairs, which ye ought ever precisely to keep; remembering that these
games are but ordained for you, in enabling you for your office, for the which
ye are ordained.

And as for sitting house-pastimes, Of house-games.
wherewith men by driving time, spur a free and fast enough running horse (as
the proverb is) although they are not profitable for the exercise either of
mind or body, Arist. 8. pol.
yet can I not utterly condemn them; since they may at times supply the room,
which being empty, would be patent to pernicious idleness, quia nihil potest
esse vacuum. Dan. de lus. al.
I will not therefore agree with the curiosity of some learned men in our
aage, in forbidding cards, dice, and other such like games of hazard; although
otherwise surely I reverence them as notable and godly men: For they are
deceived therein, in founding their argument upon a mistaken ground, which is,
that the playing at such games, is a kind of casting of lot, and therefore
unlawful; wherein they deceive themselves: For the casting of lot was used for
trial of the truth in any obscure thing, that otherwise could not be gotten
cleared; and therefore was a sort of prophecy: whereby the contrary, no man
goes to any of these plays, to clear any obscure truth, but only to gage
so much of his own money, as he pleases, upon the hazard of the running of
the cards or dice, as well as he would do upon the speed of a horse or a dog,
or any such like gaigeour: And so, if they be unlawful, all gaigeours upon
uncertainties must likewayes be condemned: Not that thereby I take the defense
of vain carders and dicers, that waste their moyen, and their time (whereof
few consider the pretiousnesse) upon prodigal and continual playing: Cic. 1.
Offic.
no, I would rather allow it to be discharged, where such corruption cannot be
eschewed. But only I cannot condemn you at some times, when ye have no other
thing ado (as a good King will be seldom) and are weary of reading, or evil
disposed in your person, and when it is foul and stormy weather; then, I say,
may ye lawfully play at the cards or tables: For as to dicing, I think it
becomes best deboshed soldiers to play at, on the head of their drums, being
only ruled by hazard, and subject to knauish cogging. And as for the chesse, I
think it over fond, because it is ouer-wise and Philosophicke a folly: For
where all such light plays, are ordained to free men's heads for a time, from
the fashions thoughts on their affairs; it by the contrary fills and
troubles men's heads, with as many fashious toys of the play, as before it
was filled with thoughts on his affairs.

But in your playing, I would have you to keep three rules: first, Rules in
playing.
or ye play, consider ye do it only for your recreation, and resolve to
hazard the loss of all that ye play: and next, for that cause play no more
then ye care to cast among Pages: and last, play always fair play precisely,
that ye come not in use of tricking and lying in jest: otherwise, if ye
cannot keep these rules, my counsel is that ye allutterly abstain from
these plays: For neither a mad passion for loss, nor falsehood used for
desire of gain, can be called a play.

Now, it is not only lawful, but necessary, What choice of company.
that ye have company meet for every thing ye take on hand, as well in your
games and exercises, as in your grave and earnest affairs: Isoc. de reg. Cic.
1. Off.
But learn to distinguish time according to the occasion, choosing your
company accordingly. Confer not with hunters at your counsel, nor in your
counsel affairs: nor dispatch not affairs at hunting or other games. And
have the like respect to the seasons of your aage, using your sorts of
recreation and company therefore, agreeing thereunto: For it becomes best,
as kindliest, every aage to smell of their own quality, Ar. 2. ad Theod.
insolence and unlawful things being always eschewed: and not that a colt
should draw the plough, and an old horse run away with the harrowes. But take
heed specially, that your company for recreation, be chosen of honest
persons, not defamed or vicious, mixing filthy talk with merrinesse,
Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua. And chiefly abstain from haunting
before your marriage, Men.
the idle company of dames, which are nothing else, but irritamenta libidinis.
Be war likewaies to abuse your self, in making your sporters your
counselors: and delight not to keep ordinarily in your company, Comoedians
or Balladines: for the Tyrans delighted most in them, Pl. 3. de rep. Ar. 7. and
8. pol. Sen. 1. ep. Dyon.
glorying to be both authors and actors of Comoedies and Tragedies themselves:
Whereupon the answer that the poet Philoxenus disdainefully gave to the Tyran
of Syracuse there-anent, is now come in a proverb, reduc me in latomias.
Suidas.
And all the ruse that Nero made of himself when he died, was Qualis
artifexpereo? Suet. in Ner.
meaning of his skill in menstrally, and playing of Tragoedies: as indeed his
whole life and death, was all but one Tragoedie.

Delight not also to be in your own person a player upon instruments;
especially on such as commonly men win their living with: nor yet to be fine
of any mechanicke craft: 1. Sep.
Leur esprit s'en fuit au bout des doigts, says Du Bartas: whose works, as
they are all most worthy to be read by any Prince, or other good Christian;
so would I especially wish you to be well versed in them. But spare not
sometimes by merry company, to be free from importunity; for ye should be
ever moved with reason, which is the only quality whereby men differ from
beasts; and not with importunity: Curt. 8.
For the which cause (as also for augmenting your Majesty) ye shall not be so
facile of accesse-giuing at all times, as I have been; Liu. 35. Xen. in. Ages.
Cit. ad Q frat.
and yet not altogether retired or locked up, like the Kings of Persia:
appointing also certain hours for public audience.

And since my trust is, that God has ordained you for more Kingdoms then this
(as I have often already said) preasse by the outward behavior as well of your
own person, A special good rule in government.
as of your court, in all indifferent things, to allure piece and piece, the
rest of your kingdoms, to follow the fashions of that kingdom of yours, that
ye find most civil, easiest to be ruled, and most obedient to the Laws: for
these outward and indifferent things will serve greatly for allurements to the
people, to embrace and follow virtue. But beware of thrawing or constraining
them thereto; letting it be brought on with time, and at leisure; specially by
so mixing through alliance and daily conversation, the inhabitants of every
kingdom with other, as may with time make them to grow and welde all in one:
Which may easily be done betwixt these two nations, being both but one I Will of
Britain, and already joined in unity of Religion and language. The fruitful
effects of the union.
So that even as in the times of our ancestors, the long wars and many
bloody battles betwixt these two countries, bred a natural and hereditarie
hatred in every of them, against the other: the uniting and welding of them
hereafter in one, by all sort of friendship, commerce, and alliance, will by
the contrary produce and maintain a natural and inseparable unity of love
amongst them. Already kything in the happy amity.
As we have already (praise be to God) a great experience of the good beginning
hereof, and of the quenching of the old hate in the hearts of both the people;
procured by the means of this long and happy amity, between the Queen my
dearest sister and me; which during the whole time of both our Reigns, has
ever been inuiolably observed.

And for conclusion of this my whole Treatise, Conclusion in form of abridge
of the whole Treatise.
remember my Son, by your true and constant depending upon God, to look for
a blessing to all your actions in your office: by the outward using thereof, to
testify the inward uprightness of your heart; and by your behavior in all
indifferent things, to set forth the viue image of your virtuous disposition;
and in respect of the greatness and weight of your burden, to be patient in
hearing, keeping your heart free from praeoccupation, ripe in concluding, Thuc.
6. Dion. 52.
and constant in your resolution: For better it is to bide at your resolution,
although there were some defect in it, then by daily changing, to effectuate
nothing: taking the pattern thereof from the microcosme of your own body;
wherein ye have two eyes, signifying great foresight and providence, with a
narrow looking in all things; and also two ears, signifying patient hearing,
and that of both the parties: but ye have but one tongue, for pronouncing a
plain, sensible, and uniform sentence; and but one head, and one heart, for
keeping a constant and uniform resolution, according to your apprehension:
having two hands and two feet, with many fingers and toes for quick
execution, in employing all instruments meet for effectuating your
deliberations.

But forget not to digest ever your passion, before ye determine upon any
thing, since Ira furor breuis est: Her. lib. 1. epist.
uttering only your anger according to the Apostles rule, Irascimini, sed ne
peccetis: taking pleasure, not only to reward, Ephesians. 4.
but to advance the good, which is a chief point of a Kings glory (but make
none ouer-great, Arist. 5. pol. Dion. 52.
but according as the power of the country may bear) and punishing the evil;
but every man according to his own offense: not punishing nor blaming the
father for the son, Plat. 9. de leg.
nor the brother for the brother; much less generally to hate a whole race for
the fault of one: for noxa caput sequitur.

And above all, let the measure of your love to every one, be according to the
measure of his virtue; letting your favor to be no longer tied to any, then
the continuance of his virtuous disposition shall deserve: not admitting the
excuse upon a just revenge, to procure oversight to an injury: For the first
injury is committed against the party; but the parties revenging thereof at
his own hand, is a wrong committed against you, in usurping your office, whom
to only the sword belongs, for revenging of all the injuries committed
against any of your people.

Thus hoping in the goodness of God, that your natural inclination shall have a
happy sympathy with these prcepts, making the wise-mans scholemaster, which is
the example of others, to be your teacher, according to that old verse, Foelix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum; eschewing so the ouer-late repentance by
your own experience, which is the schoolmasters of fools; I will for end of
all, require you my Son, as ever ye think to deserve my fatherly blessing,
to keep continually before the eyes of your mind, the greatness of your
charge: Plat. in pol. Cic. 5. d^ re^.
making the faithful and due discharge thereof, the principal butt ye shoot at
in all your actions: counting it ever the principal, and all your other
actions but as accessories, to be employed as middesses for the furthering of
that principal. And being content to let others excel in other things, let it
be your chiefest earthly glory, to excel in your own craft: according to the
worthy counsel and charge of Anchises to his posterity, in that sublime and
heroical Poet, wherein also my dicton is included; Virg 6. Aeu.
Excudent alij spirantia mollius era,
Credo equidem, and viuos ducent de marmore vultus,
Orabunt causas melius, coelique meatus
Describent radio, and surgentia sydera dicent.
Tu, regere imperio populos, Roman, memento
(Hae tibi erunt arts) pacique imponere morem,
"Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos.


THE TRUE LAW OF FREE MONARCHIES: OR THE RECIPROCK AND MVTVALL DVETIE BETWIXT A
FREE KING, AND HIS natural Subjects.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
ACcept, J pray you (my dear countrymen) as thankefully this Pamphlet that J
offer unto you, as lovingly it is written for your weal. J would be loath both
to be faschious, and fectlesse: And therefore, if it be not sententious, at
least it is short. It may be ye miss many things that ye look for in it:
But for excuse thereof, consider rightly that I only lay down herein the true
grounds, to teach you the right-way, without wasting time upon refuting the
adversaries. And yet I trust, if ye will take narrow tent, ye shall find most
of their great gunnes paid home again, either with contrary conclusions, or
tacit objections, suppose in a dairned form, and indirectly: For my intention
is to instruct, and not irritat, if J may eschew it. The profit I would wish
you to make of it, is, as well so to frame all your actions according to these
grounds, as may confirm you in the course of honest and obedient Subjects to
your King in all times coming, as also, when ye shall fall in purpose with any
that shall praise or excuse the bypast rebellions that brake forth either in
this country, or in any other, ye shall herewith be armed against their
Sirene songs, laying their particular examples to the square of these grounds.
Whereby ye shall soundly keep the course of righteous Judgment, decerning
wisely of every action only according to the quality thereof, and not
according to your preiudged conceits of the committers: So shall ye, by reaping
profit to your selves, turn my pain into pleasure. But least the whole
Pamphlet run out at the gaping mouth of this Preface, if it were any more
enlarged; I end, with committing you to God, and me to your charitable censures.

C. (...)

THE TRUE LAW OF FREE MONARCHIES: OR The Reciprock and mutual duty betwixt a
free King and his natural Subjects.
AS there is not a thing so necessary to be known by the people of any land,
next the knowledge of their God, as the right knowledge of their allegiance,
according to the form of government established among them, especially in a
Monarchy (which form of government, as resembling the Divinity, approaches
nearest to perfection, as all the learned and wise men from the beginning have
agreed upon; Unity being the perfection of all things,) So has the ignorance,
and (which is worse) the seduced opinion of the multitude blinded by them, who
think themselves able to teach and instruct the ignorants, procured the wrack
and overthrow of sundry flourishing Commonwealths; and heaped heavy
calamities, threatening utter destruction upon others. And the smiling success,
that unlawful rebellions have oftentimes had against Princes in aages past
(such has been the misery, and iniquity of the time) has by way of practice
strengthened many in their error: albeit there cannot be a more deceivable
argument; then to judge ay the justness of the cause by the event thereof; as
hereafter shall be proved more at length. And among others, no Commonwealth,
that ever has been since the beginning, has had greater need of the true
knowledge of this ground, then this our so long disordered, and distracted
Commonwealth has: the misknowledge hereof being the only spring, from whence
have flowed so many endless calamities, miseries, and confusions, as is better
felt by many, then the cause thereof well known, and deeply considered. The
natural zeal therefore, that I bear to this my native country, with the
great pity I have to see the so-long disturbance thereof for lack of the
true knowledge of this ground (as I have said before) has compelled me at last
to break silence, to discharge my conscience to you my dear country men
herein, that knowing the ground from whence these your many endless troubles
have proceeded, as well as ye have already too-long tasted the bitter fruits
thereof, ye may by knowledge, and eschewing of the cause escape, and divert the
lamentable effects that ever necessarily follow thereupon. I have chosen then
only to set down in this short Treatise, the true grounds of the mutual
duty, and allegiance betwixt a free and absolute Monarche, and his people;
not to trouble your patience with answering the contrary propositions, which
some have not been ashamed to set down in writ, to the poisoning of infinite
number of simple souls, and their own perpetual, and well deserved infamy:
For by answering them, I could not have eschewed whiles to pick, and byte well
saltly their persons; which would rather have bred contentiousnesse among the
readers (as they had liked or misliked) then sound instruction of the truth:
Which I protest to him that is the searcher of all hearts, is the only mark
that I shoot at herein.

First then, I will set down the true grounds, whereupon I am to build, out of
the Scriptures, since Monarchy is the true pattern of Divinity, as I have
already said: next, from the fundamental Laws of our own Kingdom, which
nearest must concern us: thirdly, from the law of Nature, by diverse
similitudes drawn out of the same: and will conclude syne by answering the
most weighty and appearing incommodities that can be objected.

The Princes duty to his Subjects is so clearly set down in many places of
the Scriptures, and so openly confessed by all the good Princes, according to
their oath in their Coronation, as not needing to be long therein, I shall as
shortly as I can run through it.

Kings are called Gods by the prophetical King David, I sal. 82.6.
because they sit upon GOD his Throne in the earth, and have the count of their
administration to give unto him. Psalm. 101. Psalm. 101. 2. King. 18. 2. Chron.
29. 2. King. 22. and 23.2. chro. 34. and 35. Psalm. 72. 1. King 3.
Their office is, To minister Justice and Judgment to the people, as the same
David says: To advance the good, and punish the evil, as he likewise says:
To establish good Laws to his people, and procure obedience to the same, as
diverse good Kings of Judah did: To procure the peace of the people, as the same
David says: To decide all controversies that can arise among them, as Solomon
did: To be the Minister of God for the weal of them that do well, and as the
minister of God, Romans 13.
to take vengeance upon them that do evil, as S. Paul says. And finally, 1.
Sam. 8.
As a good Pastor, to go out and in before his people as is said in the first
of Samuel: Ierem. 29.
That through the Princes prosperity, the peoples peace may be procured, as
Jeremy says.

And therefore in the Coronation of our own Kings, as well as of every
Christian Monarche they give their Oath, first to maintain the Religion
presently professed within their country, according to their laws, whereby it
is established, and to punish all those that should press to alter, or
disturb the profession thereof; And next to maintain all the lowable and good
Laws made by their predecessors: to see them put in execution, and the
breakers and violaters thereof, to be punished, according to the tenor of the
same: And lastly, to maintain the whole country, and every state therein, in
all their ancient Privileges and Liberties, as well against all foreign
enemies, as among themselves: And shortly to procure the weal and flourishing
of his people, not only in maintaining and putting to execution the old
lowable laws of the country, and by establishing of new (as necessity and
evil manners will require) but by all other means possible to foresee and
prevent all dangers, that are likely to fall upon them, and to maintain
concord, wealth, and civility among them, as a loving Father, and careful
watchman, caring for them more then for himself, knowing himself to be
ordained for them, and they not for him; and therefore countable to that great
God, who placed him as his lieutenant over them, upon the peril of his soul
to procure the weal of both souls and bodies, as far as in him lies, of
all them that are committed to his charge. And this oath in the Coronation is
the clearest, civil, and fundamental Law, whereby the Kings office is
properly defined.

By the Law of Nature the King becomes a natural Father to all his Lieges at
his Coronation: And as the Father of his fatherly duty is bound to care for the
nourishing, education, and virtuous government of his children; even so is the
king bound to care for all his subjects. As all the toil and pain that the
father can take for his children, will be thought light and well bestowed by
him, so that the effect thereof redound to their profit and weal; so ought
the Prince to do toward his people. As the kindly father ought to foresee all
inconuenients and dangers that may arise toward his children, and though with
the hazard of his own person press to prevent the same; so ought the King
toward his people. As the fathers wrath and correction upon any of his
children that offends, ought to be by a fatherly chastisement seasoned with
pity, as long as there is any hope of amendment in them; so ought the King
toward any of his Lieges that offend in that measure. And shortly, as the
Fathers chief joy ought to be in procuring his childrens welfare, rejoicing at
their weal, sorrowing and pitying at their evil, to hazard for their safety,
travel for their rest, wake for their sleep; and in a word, to think that
his earthly felicity and life stands and lives more in them, nor in
himself; so ought a good Prince think of his people.

As to the other branch of this mutual and reciprock band, is the duty and
allegiance that the Lieges owe to their King: the ground whereof, I take out
of the words of Samuel, dited by Gods Spirit, when God had given him
commandment to hear the peoples voice in choosing and anointing them a King.
And because that place of Scripture being well understood, is so pertinent for
our purpose, I have insert herein the very words of the Text.

9 NOw therefore hearken to their voice: howbeit yet testify unto them, and
show them the manner of the King, that shall reign over them. 10 So Samuel
told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked a King of him. 11
And he said, This shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you: he
will take your sons, and appoint them to his Charets, and to be his horsemen,
and some shall run before his Charet. 12 Also, he will make them his
captains over thousands, and captains over fifties, and to ear his ground,
and to reap his harvest, and to make instruments of war, and the things that
serve for his charets: 13 He will also take your daughters, and make them
Apothicaries, and Cooks, and Bakers. 14 And he will take your fields, and
your vineyards, and your best Olive trees, and give them to his servants. 15
And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards, and give it to
his Eunuchs, and to his servants. 16 And he will take your men servants, and
your maid servants, and the chief of your young men, and your asses, and put
them to his work. 17 He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be
his servants. 18 And ye shall cry out at that day, because of your King, whom
ye have chosen you: and the Lord God will not bear you at that day. 19 But the
people would not hear the voice of Samuel, but did say: Nay, but there shall be
a King over us. 20 And we also will be like all other Nations, and our King
shall judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.
That these words, and discourses of Samuel were dited by Gods Spirit, it needs
no further probation, but that it is a place of Scripture; since the whole
Scripture is dited by that inspiration, as Paul says: which ground no good
Christian will, or dare deny. Whereupon it must necessarily follow, that these
speeches proceeded not from any ambition in Samuel, as one loath to quite the
reins that he so long had ruled, and therefore desirous, by making odious the
government of a King, to dissuade the people from their farther importunate
craving of one: For, as the text proves it plainly, he then conueened them to
give them a resolute grant of their demand, as God by his own mouth commanded
him, saying, Hearken to the voice of the people. And to press to dissuade them
from that, which he then came to grant unto them, were a thing very impertinent
in a wise man; much more in the Prophet of the most high God. And likewise, it
well appeared in all the course of his life after, that his so long refusing of
their suit before came not of any ambition in him: which he well proved in
praying, and as it were importuning God for the weal of Saul. Yea, after God
had declared his reprobation unto him, yet he desisted not, while God himself
was wrath at his praying, and discharged his fathers suit in that errand. And
that these words of Samuel were not uttered as a prophecy of Saul their first
Kings defection, it well appears, as well because we hear no mention made in
the Scripture of any his tyranny and oppression, (which, if it had been,
would not have been left unpainted out therein, as well as his other faults
were, as in a true mirror of all the Kings behauiours, whom it describes) as
likewise in respect that Saul was chosen by God for his virtue, and meet
qualities to govern his people: whereas his defection sprung after-hand from
the corruption of his own nature, and not through any default in God, whom
they that think so, would make as a step-father to his people, in making
wilfully a choice of the vnmeetest for governing them, since the election of
that King lay absolutely and immediately in Gods hand. But by the contrary it is
plain, and evident, that this speech of Samuel to the people, was to prepare
their hearts before the hand to the due obedience of that King, which God was
to give unto them; and therefore opened up unto them, what might be the
intolerable qualities that might fall in some of their kings, thereby
preparing them to patience, not to resist to Gods ordinance: but as he would
have said; Since God has granted your importunate suit in giving you a king,
as ye have else committed an error in shaking off Gods yoke, and ouer-hastie
seeking of a King; so beware ye fall not into the next, in casting off also
rashly that yoke, which God at your earnest suite has laid upon you, how hard
that ever it seem to be: For as ye could not have obtained one without the
permission and ordinance of God, so may ye no more, fro he be once set over
you, shake him off without the same warrant. And therefore in time arm
yourselues with patience and humility, since he that has the only power to
make him, has the only power to unmake him, and ye only to obey, bearing
with these straits that I now foreshew you, as with the finger of God, which
lies not in you to take off.

And will ye consider the very words of the text in order, as they are set
down, it shall plainly declare the obedience that the people owe to their
King in all respects.

First, God commands Samuel to do two things: the one, to grant the people
their suit in giving them a king; the other, to forewarne them, what some kings
will do unto them, that they may not thereafter in their grudging and
murmuring say, when they shall feel the snares here fore-spoken; We would never
have had a king of God, in case when we craved him, he had let us know how we
would have been used by him, as now we find but ouer-late. And this is meant
by these words:

Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet testify unto them, and
show them the manner of the King that shall rule over them.

And next, Samuel in execution of this commandment of God, he likewise does
two things.

First, he declares unto them, what points of justice and equity their king
will break in his behavior unto them: And next he puts them out of hope,
that weary as they will, they shall not have leave to shake off that yoke,
which God through their importunity has laid upon them. The points of
equity that the King shall break unto them, are expressed in these words: 11
He will take your sons, and appoint them to his Charets, and to be his
horsemen, and some shall run before his Charet. 12 Also he will make them his
captains over thousands, and captains over fifties, and to ear his ground,
and to reap his harvest, and to make instruments of war, and the things that
serve for his charets. 13 He will also take your daughters, and make them
Apothecaries, and Cooks, and Bakers.


The points of Justice, that he shall break unto them, are expressed in these
words: 14 He will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your best Olive
trees, and give them to his servants. 15 And he will take the tenth of your
seed, and of your vineyards, and give it to his Eunuchs and to his servants:
and also the tenth of your sheep.


As if he would say; The best and noblest of your blood shall be compelled in
slavish and servile offices to serve him: And not content of his own
patrimony, will make up a rent to his own use out of your best lands,
vineyards, orchards, and store of cattle: So as inuerting the Law of nature,
and office of a King, your persons and the persons of your posterity, together
with your lands, and all that ye possess shall serve his private use, and
inordinate appetite.

And as unto the next point (which is his fore-warning them, that, weary as
they will, they shall not have leave to shake off the yoke, which God through
their importunity has laid upon them) it is expressed in these words: 18 And
ye shall cry out at that day, because of your King whom ye have chosen you:
and the Lord will not hear you at that day.


As he would say; When ye shall find these things in proof that now I
fore-warne you of, although you shall grudge and murmr, yet it shall not be
lawful to you to cast it off, in respect it is not only the ordinance of God,
but also your selves have chosen him unto you, thereby renouncing for ever all
privileges, by your willing consent out of your hands, whereby in any time
hereafter ye would claim, and call back unto your selves again that power,
which God shall not permit you to do. And for further taking away of all
excuse, and retraction of this their contract, after their consent to vnder-lie
this yoke with all the burdens that he has declared unto them, he craves
their answer, and consent to his proposition: which appears by their
answer, as it is expressed in these words: 19 Nay, but there shall be a King
over us. 20 And we also will be like all other nations: and our king shall
judge us, and go out before us and fight our battles.


As if they would have said; All your speeches and hard conditions shall not
skarre us, but we will take the good and evil of it upon us, and we will be
content to bear whatsoever burden it shall please our King to lay upon us,
as well as other nations do. And for the good we will get of him in fighting
our battles, we will more patiently bear any burden that shall please him to
lay on us.

Now then, since the erection of this Kingdom and Monarchy among the Jews,
and the law thereof may, and ought to be a pattern to all Christian and well
founded Monarchies, as being founded by God himself, who by his Oracle, and
out of his own mouth gave the law thereof: what liberty can broiling spirits,
and rebellious minds claim justly to against any Christian Monarchy; since
they can claim to no greater liberty on their part, nor the people of God
might have done, and no greater tyranny was ever executed by any Prince or
tyrant, whom they can object, nor was here forewarned to the people of God,
(and yet all rebellion countermanded unto them) if tyrannizing over men's
persons, sons, daughters and servants; redacting noble houses, and men, and
women of noble blood, to slavish and scruile offices; and extortion, and spoil
of their lands and goods to the princes own private use and commodity, and of
his courteours, and servants, may be called a tyranny?

And that this proposition grounded upon the Scripture, may the more clearly
appear to be true by the practice often proved in the same book, we never
read, that ever the Prophets persuaded the people to rebel against the
Prince, how wicked soever he was.

When Samuel by Gods command pronounced to the same king Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
that his kingdom was rent from him, and given to another (which in effect was
a degrading of him) yet his next action following that, was peaceably to turn
home, and with floods of tears to pray to God to have some compassion upon him.

And David, notwithstanding he was inaugurate in that same degraded Kings
room, not only (when he was cruelly persecuted, for no offense; but good
service done unto him) would not presume, having him in his power, skantly, but
with great reverence, to touch the garment of the anointed of the Lord, and in
his words blessed him: but likewise, 1. Sam. 2 4. 2. Sam. 1.
when one came to him vanting himself untruely to have slain Saul, he,
without form of process, or trial of his guilt, caused only for guiltiness
of his tongue, put him to sudden death.

And although there was never a more monstrous persecutor, and tyrant nor Achab
was: yet all the rebellion, that Elias ever raised against him, was to fly to
the wilderness: where for fault of sustentation, he was fed with the Corbies.
And I think no man will doubt but Samuel, David, and Elias, had as great power
to persuade the people, if they had liked to have employed their credit to
vproares and rebellions against these wicked kings, as any of our seditious
preachers in these days of whatsoever religion, either in this country or in
France, had, that busied themselves most to stir up rebellion under cloak of
religion. This far the only love of verity, I protest, without hatred at
their persons, have moved me to be somewhat satyricke.

And if any will lean to the extraordinary examples of degrading or killing
of kings in the Scriptures, thereby to cloak the peoples rebellion, as by the
deed of Iehu, and such like extraordinaries: I answer, besides that they want
the like warrant that they had, if extraordinary examples of the Scripture
shall be drawn in daily practice; murder under traist as in the persons of
Ahud, and Iael; theft, as in the persons of the Israelites coming out of
Egypt; lying to their parents to the hurt of their brother, as in the person of
Jacob, shall all be counted as lawful and allowable virtues, as rebellion
against Princes. And to conclude, the practice through the whole Scripture
proves the peoples obedience given to that sentence in the law of God: Thou
shall not rail upon the Judges, neither speak evil of the ruler of thy
people.

To end then the ground of my proposition taken out of the Scripture, let two
special, and notable examples, one under the law, another under the Euangel,
Ier. 27.
conclude this part of my allegiance. Under the law, Jeremy threatens the
people of God with utter destruction for rebellion to Nabuchadnezar the king of
Babel: who although he was an idolatrous persecuter, a foreign King, a Tyrant,
and usurper of their liberties; yet in respect they had once received and
acknowledged him for their king, he not only commands them to obey him, Iere.
29.
but even to pray for his prosperity, adjoining the reason to it; because in
his prosperity stood their peace.

And under the Euangel, that king, whom Paul bids the Romans obey and serve
for conscience sake, Iere. 13.
was Nero that bloody tyrant, an infamy to his aage, and a monster to the
world, being also an idolatrous persecuter, as the King of Babel was. If then
Idolatry and defection from God, tyranny over their people, and persecution of
the Saints, for their profession sake, hindered not the Spirit of God to command
his people under all highest pain to give them all due and hearty obedience
for conscience sake, giving to Caesar that which was Caesar's, and to God that
which was Gods, as Christ says; and that this practice throughout the book of
God agrees with this law, which he made in the erection of that Monarchy (as
is at length before deduced) what shameless presumption is it to any Christian
people now adays to claim to that unlawful liberty, which God refused to
his own peculiar and chosen people? Shortly then to take up in two or three
sentences, grounded upon all these arguments, out of the law of God, the
duty, and allegiance of the people to their lawful king, their obedience, I
say, ought to be to him, as to Gods Lieutenant in earth, obeying his commands
in all things, except directly against God, as the commands of Gods Minister,
acknowledging him a Judge set by GOD over them, having power to judge them, but
to be judged only by GOD, whom to only he must give count of his judgment;
fearing him as their Judge; loving him as their father; praying for him as
their protector; for his continuance, if he be good; for his amendment, if he
be wicked; following and obeying his lawful commands, eschewing and flying
his fury in his unlawful, without resistance, but by sobbes and tears to God,
according to that sentence used in the primitive Church in the time of the
persecution.

Preces, and Lachrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae. Now, as for the describing the
allegiance, that the lieges owe to their native King, out of the fundamental
and civil Law, especially of this country, as I promised, the ground must
first be set down of the first manner of establishing the Laws and form of
government among us; that the ground being first right laid, we may
thereafter build rightly thereupon. Although it be true (according to the
affirmation of those that pride themselves to be the scourges of Tyrants) that
in the first beginning of Kings rising among Gentiles, in the time of the first
aage, diverse commonwealths and societies of men choosed out one among
themselves, who for his virtues and valor, being more eminent then the rest,
was chosen out by them, and set up in that room, to maintain the weakest in
their right, to throw down oppressors, and to foster and continue the
society among men; which could not otherwise, but by virtue of that unity be
well done: yet these examples are nothing pertinent to us; because our Kingdom
and diverse other Monarchies are not in that case, but had their beginning in a
far contrary fashion.

For as our Chronicles bear witness, this I Will, and especially our part of it,
being scantly inhabited, but by very few, and they as barbarous and scant of
civility, as number, there comes our first King Fergus, with a great number
with him, out of Ireland, which was long inhabited before us, and making
himself master of the country, by his own friendship, and force, as well of
the Ireland-men that came with him, as of the contrymen that willingly fell
to him, he made himself King and Lord, as well of the whole lands, as of the
whole inhabitants within the same. Thereafter he and his successors, a long
while after their being Kings, made and established their laws from time to
time, and as the occasion required. So the truth is directly contrary in our
state to the false affirmation of such seditious writers, as would persuade us,
that the Laws and state of our country were established before the admitting
of a king: where by the contrary ye see it plainly proved, that a wise king
coming in among barbares, first established the estate and form of
government, and thereafter made laws by himself, and his successors
according thereto.

The kings therefore in Scotland were before any estates or ranks of men
within the same, before any Parliaments were holden, or laws made: and by them
was the land distributed (which at the first was whole theirs) states erected
and decerned, and forms of government devised and established: And so it
follows of necessity, that the kings were the authors and makers of the
Laws, and not the Laws of the kings. And to prove this my assertion more
clearly, it is evident by the rolls of our Chancellery (which contain our
eldest and fundamental Laws) that the King is Dominus omnium bonorum, and
Dominus directus totius Dominij, the whole subjects being but his vassals, and
from him holding all their lands as their ouer-lord, who according to good
services done unto him, changes their holdings from tacke to few, from ward
to blanch, erecteth new Baronies, and unites old, without advice or
authority of either Parliament, or any other subalterin judicial seat: So as
if wrong might be admitted in play (albeit I grant wrong should be wrong in
all persons) the King might have a better color for his pleasure, without
further reason, to take the land from his lieges, as ouer-lord of the whole,
and do with it as pleases him, since all that they hold is of him, then, as
foolish writers say, the people might unmake the king, and put an other in his
room: But either of them as unlawful, and against the ordinance of God, ought
to be alike odious to be thought, much less put in practice.

And according to these fundamental Laws already alleged, we daily see that
in the Parliament (which is nothing else but the head Court of the king and his
vassals) the laws are but craved by his subjects, and only made by him at
their rogation, and with their advice: For albeit the king make daily statutes
and ordinances, enioyning such pains thereto as he thinks meet, without any
advice of Parliament or estates; yet it lies in the power of no Parliament, to
make any kind of Law or Statute, without his Scepter be to it, for giving it
the force of a Law: And although diverse changes have been in other countries
of the blood Royal, and kingly house, the kingdom being reft by conquest from
one to another, as in our neighbor country in England, (which was never in
ours) yet the same ground of the kings right over all the land, and subjects
thereof remains alike in all other free Monarchies, as well as in this: For
when the Bastard of Normandy came into England, and made himself king, was it
not by force, and with a mighty army? Where he gave the Law, and took none,
changed the Laws, inuerted the order of government, set down the strangers
his followers in many of the old possessours rooms, as at this day well
appears a great part of the Gentlemen in England, being come of the Norman
blood, and their old Laws, which to this day they are ruled by, are written in
his language, and not in theirs: And yet his successors have with great
happiness enjoyed the Crown to this day; Whereof the like was also done by
all them that conquested them before.

And for conclusion of this point, that the king is ouer-lord over the whole
lands, it is likewise daily proved by the Law of our hoordes, of want of
Heirs, and of Bastardies: For if a hoord be found under the earth, because it
is no more in the keeping or use of any person, it of the law pertains to the
king. If a person, inheritour of any lands or goods, dye without any sort of
heirs, all his lands and goods return to the king. And if a bastard die
vnrehabled without heirs of his body (which rehabling only lies in the kings
hands) all that he has likewise returns to the king. And as ye see it
manifest, that the King is ouer-Lord of the whole land: so is he Master over
every person that inhabiteth the same, having power over the life and death of
every one of them: For although a just Prince will not take the life of any of
his subjects without a clear law; yet the same laws whereby he takes them,
are made by himself, or his predecessors; and so the power flows always
from him self; as by daily experience we see, good and just Princes will from
time to time make new laws and statutes, adjoining the penalties to the
breakers thereof, which before the law was made, had been no crime to the
subject to have committed. Not that I deny the old definition of a King, and of
a law; which makes the king to be a speaking law, and the Law a dumb king:
for certainly a king that gouernes not by his law, can neither be countable
to God for his administration, nor have a happy and established reign: For
albeit it be true that I have at length proved, that the King is above the
law, as both the author and giver of strength thereto; yet a good king will not
only delight to rule his subjects by the law, but even will conform himself
in his own actions thereuneto, always keeping that ground, that the health of
the commonwealth be his chief law: And where he sees the law doubtsome or
rigorous, he may interpret or mitigate the same, lest otherwise Summum ius be
summa iniuria: And therefore general laws, made publicly in Parliament, may
upon known respects to the King by his authority be mitigated, and suspended
upon causes only known to him.

As likewise, although I have said, a good king will frame all his actions to
be according to the Law; yet is he not bound thereto but of his good will, and
for good example-giuing to his subjects: For as in the law of abstaining from
eating of flesh in Lenton, the king will, for examples sake, make his own
house to observe the Law; yet no man will think he needs to take a license to
eat flesh. And although by our Laws, the bearing and wearing of hag-buts, and
pistolets be forbidden, yet no man can find any fault in the King, for causing
his train use them in any raide upon the Borderers, or other malefactors or
rebellious subjects. So as I have already said, a good King, although he be
above the Law, will subject and frame his actions thereto, for examples sake to
his subjects, and of his own freewill, but not as subject or bound thereto.

Since I have so clearly proved then out of the fundamental laws and
practice of this country, what right and power a king has over his land and
subjects, it is easy to be understood, what allegiance and obedience his
lieges owe unto him; I mean always of such free Monarchies as our king is,
and not of elective kings, and much less of such sort of governors, as the
dukes of Venice are, whose Aristocratick and limited government, is nothing
like to free Monarchies; although the malice of some writers has not been
ashamed to mis-know any difference to be betwixt them. And if it be not lawful
to any particular Lords tenants or vassals, upon whatsoever pretext, to
control and displace their Master, and ouer-lord (as is clearer nor the Sun
by all Laws of the world) how much less may the subjects and vassals of the
great ouer-lord the KING control or displace him? And since in all inferior
judgments in the land, the people may not upon any respects displace their
Magistrates, although but subaltern: for the people of a borough, cannot
displace their Provost before the time of their election: nor in
Ecclesiastical policy the flock can upon any pretense displace the Pastor,
nor judge of him: yea even the poor Schoolmaster cannot be displaced by his
scholars: If these, I say (whereof some are but inferior, subaltern, and
temporal Magistrates, and none of them equal in any sort to the dignity of a
King) cannot be displaced for any occasion or pretext by them that are ruled by
them: how much less is it lawful upon any pretext to control or displace the
great Provost, and great Schoolmasters of the whole land: except by inuerting
the order of all Law and reason, the commanded may be made to command their
commander, the judged to judge their Judge, and they that are governed, to
govern their time about their Lord and governor.

And the agreement of the Law of nature in this our ground with the Laws and
constitutions of God, and man, already alleged, will by two similitudes easily
appear. The King toward his people is rightly compared to a father of
children, and to a head of a body composed of diverse members: For as fathers,
the good Princes, and Magistrates of the people of God acknowledged themselves
to their subjects. And for all other well ruled Commonwealths, the style of
Pater patriae was ever, and is commonly used to Kings. And the proper office of
a King toward his Subjects, agrees very well with the office of the head
toward the body, and all members thereof: For from the head, being the seat
of Judgment, proceeds the care and foresight of guiding, and preventing all
evil that may come to the body or any part thereof. The head cares for the
body, so does the King for his people. As the discourse and direction flows
from the head, and the execution according thereunto belongs to the rest of the
members, every one according to their office: so is it betwixt a wise Prince,
and his people. As the judgment coming from the head may not only employ the
members, every one in their own office, as long as they are able for it; but
likewise in case any of them be affected with any infirmity must care and
provide for their remedy, in-case it be curable, and if otherwise, gar cut them
off for fear of infecting of the rest: even so is it betwixt the Prince, and
his people. And as there is ever hope of curing any diseased member by the
direction of the head, as long as it is whole; but by the contrary, if it be
troubled, all the members are partakers of that pain, so is it betwixt the
Prince and his people.

And now first for the fathers part (whose natural love to his children I
described in the first part of this my discourse, speaking of the duty that
Kings owe to their Subjects) consider, I pray you what duty his children owe
to him, and whether upon any pretext whatsoever, it will not be thought
monstrous and unnatural to his sons, to rise up against him, to control him at
their appetite, and when they think good to sley him, or to cut him off, and
adopt to themselves any other they please in his room: Or can any pretense of
wickedness or rigor on his part be a just excuse for his children to put hand
into him? And although we see by the course of nature, that love uses to
descend more then to ascend, in case it were true, that the father hated and
wronged the children never so much, will any man, endued with the least sponke
of reason, think it lawful for them to meet him with the line? Yea, suppose
the father were furiously following his sons with a drawn sword, is it
lawful for them to turn and strike again, or make any resistance but by
flight? I think surely, if there were no more but the example of bruit beasts
and unreasonable creatures, it may serve well enough to qualify and prove this
my argnment. We read often the piety that the Storkes have to their old and
decayed parents: And generally we know, that there are many sorts of beasts
and fowls, that with violence and many bloody strokes will beat and banish
their young ones from them, how soon they perceive them to be able to fend
themselves; but we never read or heard of any resistance on their part, except
among the vipers; which proves such persons, as ought to be reasonable
creatures, and yet unnaturally follow this example, to be endued with their
viperous nature.

And for the similitude of the head and the body, it may very well fall out
that the head will be forced to garre cut off some rotten member (as I have
already said) to keep the rest of the body in integrity: but what state the
body can be in, if the head, for any infirmity that can fall to it, be cut
off, I leave it to the readers judgment.

So as (to conclude this part) if the children may upon any pretext that can be
imagined, lawfully rise up against their Father, cut him off, and choose any
other whom they please in his room; and if the body for the weal of it, may
for any infirmity that can be in the head, strike it off, then I cannot deny
that the people may rebel, control, and displace, or cut off their king at
their own pleasure, and upon respects moving them. And whether these
similitudes represent better the office of a King, or the offices of Masters or
Deacons of crafts, or Doctors in Physic (which jolly comparisons are used by
such writers as maintain the contrary proposition) I leave it also to the
readers discretion.

And in case any doubts might arise in any part of this treatise, I will
(according to my promise) with the solution of four principal and most
weighty doubts, that the adversaries may object, conclude this discourse. And
first it is casten up by diverse, that employ their pens upon Apologies for
rebellions and treasons that every man is borne to carry such a natural zeal
and duty to his commonwealth, as to his mother; that seeing it so rent and
deadly wounded, as whiles it will be by wicked and tyrannous Kings, good
Citizens will be forced, for the natural zeal and duty they owe to their
own native country, to put their hand to work for freeing their
commonwealth from such a pest.

Whereunto I give two answers: First, it is a sure Axiom in Theology, that
evil should not be done, that good may come of it: The wickedness therefore
of the King can never make them that are ordained to be judged by him, to
become his Judges. And if it be not lawful to a private man to revenge his
private injury upon his private adversary (since God has only given the sword
to the Magistrate) how much less is it lawful to the people, or any part of
them (who all are but private men, the authority being always with the
Magistrate, as I have already proved) to take upon them the use of the sword,
whom to it belongs not, against the public Magistrate, whom to only it
belongs.

Next, in place of relieuing the commonwealth out of distress (which is their
only excuse and color) they shall heap double distress and desolation upon
it; and so their rebellion shall procure the contrary effects that they pretend
it for: For a king cannot be imagined to be so unruly and tyrannous, but the
commonwealth will be kept in better order, notwithstanding thereof, by him,
then it can be by his way-taking. For first, all sudden mutations are perilous
in commonwealths, hope being thereby given to all bare men to set up
themselves, and fly with other men's feathers, the reins being loosed to all
the insolences that disordered people can commit by hope of impunitie, because
of the looseness of all things.

And next, it is certain that a king can never be so monstrously vicious, but
he will generally favor justice, and maintain some order, except in the
particulars, wherein his inordinate lusts and passions carry him away; where by
the contrary, no King being, nothing is unlawful to none: And so the old
opinion of the Philosophers proves true, That better it is to live in a
Commonwealth, where nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful to
all men; the Commonwealth at that time resembling an undaunted young horse that
has casten his rider: For as the divine Poet DV BARTAS says, Better it were
to suffer some disorder in the estate, and some spots in the Commonwealth,
then in pretending to reform, utterly to overthrow the Republicke.

The second objection they ground upon the curse that hangs over the
commonwealth, where a wicked king reigns: and, say they, there cannot be a
more acceptable deed in the sight of God, nor more dutiful to their
commonweal, then to free the country of such a curse, and vindicate to them
their liberty, which is natural to all creatures to crave.

Whereunto for answer, I grant indeed, that a wicked king is sent by God for a
curse to his people, and a plague for their sins: but that it is lawful to
them to shake off that curse at their own hand, which God has laid on them,
that I deny, and may so do justly. Will any deny that the king of Babel was a
curse to the people of God, as was plainly fore-spoken and threatened unto them
in the prophecy of their captivity? And what was Nero to the Christian Church
in his time? And yet Jeremy and Paul (as ye have else heard) commanded them
not only to obey them, but heartily to pray for their welfare.

It is certain then (as I have already by the Law of God sufficiently proved)
that patience, earnest prayers to God, and amendment of their lives, are the
only lawful means to move God to relieve them of that heavy curse. As for
vindicating to themselves their own liberty, what lawful power have they to
revoke to themselves again those privileges, which by their own consent
before were so fully put out of their hands? for if a Prince cannot justly
bring back again to himself the privileges once bestowed by him or his
predecessors upon any state or rank of his subjects; how much less may the
subjects reaue out of the princes hand that superiority, which he and his
Predecessors have so long brooked over them?

But the unhappy iniquity of the time, which has often times given over good
success to their treasonable attempts, furnishes them the ground of their
third objection: For, say they, the fortunate success that God has so often
given to such enterprises, proves plainly by the practice, that God favored
the justness of their quarrel.

To the which I answer, that it is true indeed, that all the success of
battles, as well as other worldly things, lies only in Gods hand: And
therefore it is that in the Scripture he takes to himself the style of God of
Hosts. But upon that general to conclude, that he ever gives victory to the
just quarrel, would prove the Philistims, and diverse other neighbor enemies
of the people of God to have often times had the just quarrel against the people
of God, in respect of the many victories they obtained against them. And by
that same argument they had also just quarrel against the Ark of God: For
they wan it in the field, and kept it long prisoner in their country. As
likewise by all good Writers, as well Theologues, as other, the Duels and
singular combats are disallowed; which are only made upon pretense, that GOD
will kith thereby the justice of the quarrel: For we must consider that the
innocent party is not innocent before God: And therefore God will make often
times them that have the wrong side revenge justly his quarrel; and when he
has done, cast his scourge in the fire; as he often times did to his own
people, stirring up and strengthening their enemies, while they were humbled in
his sight, and then delivered them in their hands. So God, as the great Judge
may justly punish his Deputy, and for his rebellion against him, stir up his
rebels to meet him with the like: And when it is done, the part of the
instrument is no better then the devils part is in tempting and torturing such
as God commits to him as his hangman to do: Therefore, as I said in the
beginning, it is often times a very deceivable argument, to judge of the cause
by the event.

And the last objection is grounded upon the mutual paction and adstipulation
(as they call it) betwixt the King and his people, at the time of his
coronation: For there, say they, there is a mutual paction, and contract bound
up, and sworn betwixt the king, and the people: Whereupon it follows, that
if the one part of the contract or the Indent be broken upon the Kings side,
the people are no longer bound to keep their part of it, but are thereby freed
of their oath: For (say they) a contract betwixt two parties, of all Law frees
the one party, if the other break unto him.

As to this contract alleged made at the coronation of a King, although I deny
any such contract to be made then, especially containing such a clause
irritant as they allege; yet I confess, that a king at his coronation, or at
the entry to his kingdom, willingly promises to his people, to discharge
honorably and trewly the office given him by God over them: But presuming that
thereafter he break his promise unto them never so inexcusable; the question
is, who should be judge of the break, giving unto them, this contractwere
made unto them never so sicker, according to their allegiance. I think no man
that has but the smallest entrance into the civil Law, will doubt that of all
Law, either civil or municipal of any nation, a contract cannot be thought
broken by the one party, and so the other likewise to be freed therefro,
except that first a lawful trial and cognition be had by the ordinary Judge
of the breakers thereof: Or else every man may be both party and Judge in his
own cause; which is absurd once to be thought. Now in this contract (I say)
betwixt the king and his people, God is doubtless the only Judge, both because
to him only the king must make count of his administration (as is often said
before) as likewise by the oath in the coronation, God is made judge and
revenger of the breakers: For in his presence, as only judge of oaths, all
oaths ought to be made. Then since God is the only Judge betwixt the two
parties contractors, the cognition and revenge must only appertain to him: It
follows therefore of necessity, that God must first give sentence upon the
King that breaks, before the people can think themselves freed of their
oath. What justice then is it, that the party shall be both judge and party,
usurping upon himself the office of God, may by this argument easily appear:
And shall it lie in the hands of headless multitude, when they please to weary
off subjection, to cast off the yoke of government that God has laid upon
them; to judge and punish him, whom-by they should be judged and punished; and
in that case, wherein by their violence they kythe themselves to be most
passionate parties, to use the office of an ungracious Judge or Arbiter? Nay,
to speak trewly of that case, as it stands betwixt the king and his people,
none of them ought to judge of the others break: For considering rightly the
two parties at the time of their mutual promise, the king is the one party,
and the whole people in one body are the other party. And therefore since it is
certain, that a king, in case so it should fall out, that his people in one
body had rebelled against him, he should not in that case, as thinking
himself free of his promise and oath; become an utter enemy, and practice the
wreake of his whole people and native country: although he ought justly to
punish the principal authors and bellows of that universal rebellion: how
much less then ought the people (that are always subject unto him, and naked
of all authority on their part) press to judge and overthrow him? otherwise
the people, as the one party contracters, shall no sooner challenge the king
as breaker, but he as soon shall judge them as breakers: so as the victors
making the tyners the traitors (as our proverb is) the party shall aye become
both judge and party in his own particular, as I have already said.

And it is here likewise to be noted, that the duty and allegiance, which the
people swears to their prince, is not only bound to themselves, but likewise
to their lawful heirs and posterity, the lineall succession of crowns being
begun among the people of God, and happily continued in diverse christian
commonwealths: So as no objection either of heresy, or whatsoever private
statute or law may free the people from their oath-giuing to their king, and
his succession, established by the old fundamental laws of the kingdom: For,
as he is their heritable ouer-lord, and so by birth, not by any right in the
coronation, comes to his crown, it is a like unlawful (the crown ever
standing full) to displace him that succeeds thereto, as to eiect the former:
For at the very moment of the expiring of the king reigning, the nearest and
lawful heir enters in his place: And so to refuse him, or intrude another, is
not to hold out vncomming in, but to expel and put out their righteous King.
And I trust at this time whole France acknowledges the superstitious rebellion
of the liguers, who upon pretense of heresy, by force of arms held so long
out, to the great desolation of their whole country, their native and
righteous king from possessing of his own crown and natural kingdom.

Not that by all this former discourse of mine, and Apology for kings, I mean
that whatsoever errors and intolerable abominations a sovereign prince
commit, he ought to escape all punishment, as if thereby the world were only
ordained for kings, and they without controlment to turn it vpside down at
their pleasure: but by the contrary, by remitting them to God (who is their
only ordinary Judge) I remit them to the soreit and sharpest schoolmaster
that can be devised for them: for the further a king is preferred by God above
all other ranks and degrees of men, and the higher that his seat is above
theirs, the greater is his obligation to his maker. And therefore in case he
forget himself (his unthankfulness being in the same measure of height) the
sadder and sharper will his correction be; and according to the greatness of the
height he is in, the weight of his fall will reco^pense the same: for the
further that any person is obliged to God, his offense becomes and grows so
much the greater, then it would be in any other. Jove's thunderclaps light
oftener and sorer upon the high and stately oaks, then on the low and supple
willow trees: and the highest bench is sliddriest to sit upon. Neither is it
ever heard that any king forgets himself toward God, or in his vocation; but
God with the greatness of the plague reuengeth the greatness of his
ingratitude: Neither think I by the force and argument of this my discourse so
to persuade the people, that none will hereafter be raised up, and rebel
against wicked Princes. But remitting to the justice and providence of God to
stir up such scourges as pleases him, for punishment of wicked kings (who
made the very vermin and filthy dust of the earth to bridle the insolency of
proud Pharaoh) my only purpose and intention in this treatise is to persuade,
as far as lies in me, by these sure and infallible grounds, all such good
Christian readers, as bear not only the naked name of a Christian, but kith
the fruits thereof in their daily form of life, to keep their hearts and
hands free from such monstrous and unnatural rebellions, whenever the
wickedness of a Prince shall procure the same at Gods hands: that, when it
shall please God to cast such scourges of princes, and instruments of his fury
in the fire, ye may stand up with clean hands, and unspotted consciences,
having proved your selves in all your actions true Christians toward God, and
dutiful subjects toward your King, having remitted the judgment and
punishment of all his wrongs to him, whom to only of right it appertains.

But craving at God, and hoping that God shall continue his blessing with us,
in not sending such fearful desolation, I heartily wish our kings behavior
so to be, and continue among us, as our God in earth, and loving Father, endued
with such properties as I described a King in the first part of this Treatise.
And that ye (my dear countrymen, and charitable readers) may press by all
means to procure the prosperity and welfare of your King; that as he must on
the one part think all his earthly felicity and happiness grounded upon your
weal, caring more for himself for your sake then for his own, thinking
himself only ordained for your weal; such holy and happy emulation may arise
betwixt him and you, as his care for your quietness, and your care for his
honor and preservation, may in all your actions daily strive together, that
the Land may think themselves blessed with such a King, and the king may
think himself most happy in ruling over so loving and obedient subjects.

FINIS.
A COVNTERBLASTE TO TOBACCO.
TO THE READER.
AS every humane body (dear Country men) how wholesome soever, is
notwithstanding subject, or at least naturally inclined to some sorts of
diseases, or infirmities: so is there no Commonwealth, or Body-politicke, how
well governed, or peaceable soever it be, that lackes the own popular errors,
and naturally inclined corruptions: and therefore is it no wonder, although
this our Country and Commonwealth, though peaceable, though wealthy, though
long flourishing in both, be amongst the rest, subject to the own natural
infirmities. We are of all Nations the people most loving, and most reverently
obedient to our Prince, yet are we (as time has often borne witness) too
easy to be seduced to make Rebellion upon very slight grounds. Our fortunate
and often proved valor in wars abroad, our hearty and reverent obedience to
our Princes at home, has bred us a long, and a thrice happy peace: Our peace
has bread wealth: And peace and wealth has brought forth a general
sluggishnesse, which makes us wallow in all sorts of idle delights, and soft
delicacies, the first seeds of the subversion of all great Monarchies. Our
Clergy are become negligent and lazy, Our Nobility and Gentry prodigal,
and sold to their private delights, Our Lawyers covetous, Our Common people
prodigal and curious; and generally all sorts of people more careful for
their private ends, then for their mother the Commonwealth.

For remedy whereof, it is the Kings part (as the proper Phisician of his
Politicke-bodie) to purge it of all those diseases, by Medicines meet for the
same: as by a certain mild, and yet just form of government, to maintain
the Public quietness, and prevent all occasions of Commotion: by the example
of his own Person and Court, to make us all ashamed of our sluggish delicacie,
and to stir us up to the practice again of all honest exercises, and
Martial shadows of War; As likewise by his, and his Courts moderatenesse in
Apparel, to make us ashamed of our prodigality: By his quick admonitions and
careful ouerseeing of the Clergy, to waken them up again, to be more
diligent in their Offices: By the sharp trial, and severe punishment of the
partial, covetous and bribing Lawyers, to reform their corruptions: And
generally by the example of his own Person, and by the due execution of good
Laws, to reform and abolish, piece and piece, these old and evil grounded
abuses: For this will not be Opus vnius diei, but as every one of these
diseases, must from the King receive the own cure proper for it, so are there
some sorts of abuses in Commonwealths, that though they be of so base and
contemptible a condition, as they are too low for the Law to look on, and to
mean for a King to interpone his authority, or bend his eye upon; yet are
they corruptions, as well as the greatest of them. So is an Ant an Animal,
as well as an Elephant: so is a Wrenne Auis, as well as a Swanne, and so is a
small dint of the Tooth-ake, a disease as well as the fearful Plague is. But
for these base sorts of corruption in Commonwealths, not only the King, or
any inferior Magistrate, but Quilibet e populo may serve to be a Phisician, by
discovering and impugning the error, and by persuading reformation thereof.

And surely in my opinion, there cannot be a more base, and yet hurtful,
corruption in a Country, then is the vile use (or rather abuse) of taking
Tobacco in this Kingdom, which has moved me, shortly to discover the abuses
thereof in this following little Pamphlet.

Jf any think it a light Argument, so is it but a toy that is bestowed upon
it. And since the Subject is but of Smoke, J think the fume of an idle brain,
may serve for a sufficient battery against so fumous and feeble an enemy. Jf
my grounds be found true, it is all J look for; but if they carry the force of
persuasion with them, it is all J can wish, and more then I can expect. My
only care is, that you, my dear Contrymen, may rightly conceive even by
this smallest trifle, of the sincerity of my meaning in greater matters, never
to spare any pain, that may tend to the procuring of your weal and
prosperity.

A COVNTERBLASTE TO TOBACCO.
THat the manifold abuses of this vile custom of Tobacco taking, may the
better be espied, it is fit, that first you enter into consideration both of
the first original thereof, and likewise of the reasons of the first entry
thereof into this Country. For certainly as such customs, that have their
first institution either from a godly, necessary, or honorable ground, and are
first brought in, by the means of some worthy, virtuous, and great Personage,
are ever, and most justly, holden in great and reverent estimation and account,
by all wise, virtuous, and temperate spirits: So should it by the contrary,
justly bring a great disgrace into that sort of customs, which having their
original from base corruption and barbaritie, do in like sort, make their
first entry into a Country, by an inconsiderate and childish affectation of
Novelty, as is the true case of the first invention of Tobacco taking, and of
the first entry thereof among us. For Tobacco being a common herb, which
(though under diverse names) grows almost every where, was first found out by
some of the barbarous Indians, to be a Preservative or Antidote against the
Pocks, a filthy disease, whereunto these barbarous people are (as all men know)
very much subject, what through the uncleanly and adust constitution of their
bodies, and what through the intemperate heat of their Climate: so that as
from them was first brought into Christendom, that most detestable disease; so
from them likewise was brought this use of Tobacco, as a stinking and
unsavory Antidote, for so corrupted and execrable a malady, the stinking
suffumigation whereof they yet use against that disease, making so one canker
or venime to eat out another.

And now good Contrymen, let us (I pray you) consider, what honor or policy
can move us to imitate the barbarous and beastly manners of the wild,
godless, and slavish Indians, especially in so vile and stinking a custom?
Shall we that disdain to imitate the manners of our neighbor France (having
the style of the first Christian Kingdom) and that cannot endure the spirit of
the Spaniards (their King being now comparable in largeness of Dominions, to
the great Emperor of Turkey) Shall we, I say, that have been so long civil
and wealthy in Peace, famous and invincible in War, fortunate in both, we
that have been ever able to aid any of our neighbors (but never deafed any of
their ears with any of our supplications for assistance) shall we, I say,
without blushing abase our selves so far, as to imitate these beastly
Indians, slaves to the Spaniards, refuse to the world, and as yet aliens from
the holy Covenant of God? Why do we not as well imitate them in walking naked
as they do? in preferring glasses, feathers, and such toys, to gold and
precious stones, as they do? yea why do we not deny God and adore the devil,
as they do?

Now to the corrupted baseness of the first use of this Tobacco, does very
well agree the foolish and groundless first entry thereof into this Kingdom.
It is not so long since the first entry of this abuse amongst us here, as this
present aage cannot yet very well remember, both the first Author, and the
form of the first introduction of it amongst us. It was neither brought in by
King, great Conqueror, nor learned doctor of Physic.

With the report of a great discovery for a Conquest, some two or three Savage
men, were brought in, together with this Savage custom. But the pity is, the
poor wild barbarous men died, but that vile barbarous custom is yet alive,
yea in fresh vigor: so as it seems a miracle to me, how a custom springing
from so vile a ground, and brought in by a father so generally hated, should be
welcomed upon so slender a warrant. For if they that first put it in practice
here, had remembered for what respect it was used by them from whence it came, I
am sure they would have been loath, to have taken so far the imputation of
that disease upon them as they did, by using the cure thereof: For Sanis non
est opus medico, and counterpoisons are never used, but where poison is thought
to precede.

But since it is true, that diverse customs slightly grounded, and with no
better warrant entered in a Commonwealth, may yet in the use of them
thereafter, prove both necessary and profitable; it is therefore next to be
examined, if there be not a full Sympathy and true Proportion, between the
base ground and foolish entry, and the loathsome and hurtful use of this
stinking Antidote.

I am now therefore heartily to pray you to consider, first upon what false and
erroneous grounds you have first built the general good liking thereof; and
next, what sins toward God, and foolish vanities before the world you
commit, in the detestable use of it.

As for these deceitful grounds, that have specially moved you to take a good
and great conceit thereof, I shall content my self to examine here only four
of the principals of them; two founded upon the Theoricke of a deceivable
appearance of reason, and two of them upon the mistaken practicke of general
experience.

First, it is thought by you a sure Aphorism in the Physickes, That the
brains of all men, being naturally cold and wet, all dry and hot things
should be good for them; of which nature this stinking suffumigation is, and
therefore of good use to them. Of this argument, both the proposition and
assumption are false, and so the conclusion cannot but be void of it self. For
as to the Proposition, That because the brains are cold and moist, therefore
things that are hot and dry are best for them, it is an inept consequence: For
man being compounded of the four Complexions, (whose fathers are the four
Elements) although there be a mixture of them all in all the parts of his body,
yet must the diverse parts of our Microcosme or little world within our selves,
be diversely more inclined, some to one, some to another complexion, according
to the diversity of their uses, that of these discords a perfect harmony may
be made up for the maintenance of the whole body.

The application then of a thing of a contrary nature, to any of these parts,
is to interrupt them of their due function, and by consequence hurtful to the
health of the whole body. As if a man, because the Liver is hot (as the
fountain of blood) and as it were an oven to the stomach, would therefore
apply and wear close upon his Liver and stomach a cake of lead; he might
within a very short time (I hope) be sustained very good cheap at an
Ordinary, beside the clearing of his conscience from that deadly sin of
gluttony. And as if, because the Heart is full of vital spirits, and in
perpetual motion, a man would therefore lay a heavy pound stone on his
breast, for staying and holding down that wanton palpitation, I doubt not but
his breast would be more bruised with the weight thereof, then the heart would
be comforted with such a disagreeable and contrarious cure. And even so is it
with the brains: For if a man, because the brains are cold and humide, would
therefore use inwardly by smells, or outwardly by application, things of hot
and dry quality, all the gain that he could make thereof would only be to
put himself in a great forwardnes for running mad, by ouerwatching himself,
the coldness and moistness of our brain being the only ordinary means that
procure our sleep and rest. Indeed I do not deny, but when it falls out that
any of these, or any part of our body grows to be distempered, and to tend to
an extremity, beyond the compass of Natures temperate mixture, that in that
case cures of contrary qualities, to the intemperate inclination of that part,
being wisely prepared and discreetly ministered, may be both necessary and
helpful for strengthening and assisting Nature in the expulsion of her enemies:
for this is the true definition of all profitable Physic.

But first these Cures ought not to be used, but where there is need of them,
the contrary whereof, is daily practiced in this general use of Tobacco by all
sorts and complexions of people.

And next, I deny the Minor of this argument, as I have already said, in
regard that this Tobacco, is not simply of a dry and hot quality; but rather
has a certain venomous faculty joined with the heat thereof, which makes it
have an Antipathy against nature, as by the hateful smell thereof does well
appear. For the nose being the proper Organ and conuoy of the sense of
smelling to the brains, which are the only fountain of that sense, does ever
serve us for an infallible witness, whether that odor which we smell, be
healthful or hurtful to the brain, (except when it falls out that the senseit
self is corrupted and abused through some infirmity, and distemper in the
brain.) And that the suffumigation thereof cannot have a drying quality, it
needs no further probation, then that it is a smoke, all smoke and vapor,
being of it self humide, as drawing near to the nature of the air, and easy
to be resolved again into water, whereof there needs no other proof but the
Meteors, which being bred of nothing else but of the vapors and exhalations
sucked up by the Sun out of the earth, the sea, and waters, yet are the same
smoakie vapors turned and transformed into raines, snowes, deawes, hoare
frosts, and such like waterie Meteors, as by the contrary the rainie clouds
are often transformed and euaporated in blustering winds.

The second Argument grounded on a show of reason is, That this filthy smoke,
as well through the heat and strength thereof, as by a natural force and
quality, is able and fit to purge both the head and stomach of rhewmes and
distillations, as experience teaches, by the spitting and avoiding fleame,
immediately after the taking of it. But the fallacy of this Argument may easily
appear, by my late preceding description of the Meteors. For even as the
smoakie vapors sucked up by the Sun, and stayed in the lowest and cold
Region of the air, are there contracted into clouds, and turned into rain and
such other watery Meteors: So this stinking smoke being sucked up by the nose,
and imprisoned in the cold and moist brains, is by their cold and wet
faculty, turned and cast forth again in waterie distillations, and so are you
made free and purged of nothing, but that wherewith you wilfully burdened your
selves: and therefore are you no wiser in taking Tobacco for purging you of
distillations, then if for preventing the Cholicke you would take all kind of
windy meats and drinks; and for preventing of the Stone, you would take all
kind of meats and drinks that would breed gravel in the kidneys, and then
when you were forced to avoid much wind out of your stomach, and much
gravel in your Urine, that you should attribute the thank thereof to such
nourishments, as bred those within you, that behooued either to be expelled by
the force of Nature, or you to have burst at the broad side, as the Proverb is.

As for the other two reasons founded upon experience, the first of which is,
That the whole people would not have taken so general a good liking thereof,
if they had not by experience found it very sovereign and good for them: For
answer thereunto, how easily the minds of any people, wherewith God has
replenished this world may be drawn to the foolish affectation of any
novelty, I leave it to the discreet judgment of any man that is reasonable.

Do we not daily see, that a man can no sooner bring over from beyond the seas
any new form of apparel, but that he cannot be thought a man of spirit, that
would not presently imitate the same? And so from hand to hand it spreads, till
it be practiced by all, not for any commodity that is in it, but only because
it is come to be the fashion. For such is the force of that natural self-love
in every one of us, and such is the corruption of envy bred in the breast of
every one, as we cannot be content unless we imitate every thing that our
fellows do, and so prove our selves capable of every thing whereof they are
capable, like Apes, counterfeiting the manners of others, to our own
destruction. For let one or two of the greatest Masters of Mathematics in any
of the two famous Universities, but constantly affirm any clear day, that
they seesome strange apparition in the skies; they will I warrant you be
seconded by the greatest part of the students in that profession: So loath will
they be, to be thought inferior to their fellows, either in depth of knowledge
or sharpnes of sight: And therefore the general good liking and embracing of
this foolish custom, does but only proceed from that affectation of novelty,
and popular error, whereof I have already spoken.

The other argument drawn from a mistaken experience, is but the more
particular probation of this general, because it is alleged to be found true
by proof, that by the taking of Tobacco diverse and very many do find
themselves cured of diverse diseases; as on the other part, no man ever received
harm thereby. In this argument there is first a great mistaking, and next a
monstrous absurdity: For is it not a very great mistaking, to take non causam
pro causa, as they say in the Logickes? because peradventure when a sick man
has had his disease at the height, he has at that instant taken Tobacco, and
afterward his disease taking the natural course of declining, and consequently
the Patient of recovering his health, O then the Tobacco forsooth, was the
worker of that miracle. Beside that, it is a thing well known to all Physicians,
that the apprehension and conceit of the patient, has by wakening and uniting
the vital spirits, and so strengthening nature, a great power and virtue to
cure diverse diseases. For an evident proof of mistaking in the like case, I
pray you what foolish boy, what silly wench, what old doting wife, or ignorant
country clown, is not a Physician for the toothach, for the cholicke, and
diverse such common diseases? Yea, will not every man you meet withal, teach
you a sundry curefor the same, and swear by that mean either himself, or
some of his nearest kinsemen and friends was cured? And yet I hope no man is so
foolish as to believe them. And all these toys do only proceed fro the
mistaking Non causam pro causa, as I have already said, and so if a man chance
to recover one of any disease, after he has taken Tobacco, that must have the
thanks of all. But by the contrary, if a man smoke himself to death with it
(and many have done) O then some other disease must bear the blame for that
fault. So do old harlots thank their harlotrie for their many years, that
custom being healthful (say they) ad purgandos Renes, but never have mind how
many die of the Pockes in the flower of their youth. And so do old drunkards
think they prolong their days, by their swinelike diet, but never remember
how many die drowned in drink before they be half old.

And what greater absurdity can therebe, then to say that one cure shall serve
for diverse, nay, co^trarious sorts of diseases? It is an undoubted ground among
all Physicians, that there is almost no sort either of nourishment or medicine,
that has not some thing in it disagreeable to some part of man's body, because
as I have already said, the nature of the temperature of every part, is so
different from another, that according to the old proverb, That which is good
for the head, is evil for the neck and the shoulders: For even as a strong
enemy, that inuades a town or fortress, although in his siege thereof, he do
belay and compass it round about, yet he makes his breach and entry, at some
one or few special parts thereof, which he has tried and found to be
weakest and least able to resist; so sickness does make her particular assault,
upon such part or parts of our body, as are weakest and easiest to be overcome
by that sort of disease, which then does assail us, although all the rest of
the body by Sympathy feel it self to be as it were belayed, and besieged by
the affliction of that special part, the grief and smart thereof being by the
sense of feeling dispersed through all the rest of our members. And therefore
the skillful Physician presses by such cures to purge and strengthen that part
which is afflicted, as are only fit for that sort of disease, and do best
agree with the nature of that infirm part; which being abused to a disease of
another nature, would prove as hurtful for the one, as helpful for the other.
Yea, not only will a skillful and wary Physician becarefull to use no cure but
that which is fit for that sort of disease, but he will also consider all other
circumstances, and make the remedies suitable thereunto; as the temperature of
the clime where the Patient is, the constitution of the Planets, the time of
the Moon, the season of the year, the aage and complexion of the Patient, and
the present state of his body, in strength or weakness: For one cure must not
ever be used for the selfsame disease, but according to the varying of any of
the foresaid circumstances, that sort of remedy must be used which is fittest
for the same. Where by the contrary in this case, such is the miraculous
omnipotency of our strong tasted Tobacco, as it cures al sorts of diseases
(which never any drugge could do before) in all persons, and at all times. It
cures all manner of distillations, either in the head or stomach (if you
believe their Axioms) although in very deed it do both corrupt the brain,
and by causing over quick digestion, fill the stomach full of crudities. It
cures the gowt in the feet, and (which is miraculous) in that very instant when
the smoke thereof, as light, flies up into the head, the virtue thereof, as
heavy, runs down to the little toe. It helps all sorts of agues. It makes a man
sober that was drunk. It refreshes a weary man, and yet makes a man hungry.
Being taken when they go to bed, it makes one sleep soundly, and yet being
taken when a man is sleepie and drowsy, it will, as they say, awake his
brain, and quicken his understanding. As for curing of the Pockes, it serves
for that use but among the pockie Indian slaves. Here in England it is refined,
and will not deigne to cure here any other then cleanly and gentlemanly
diseases. O omnipotent power of Tobacco! And if it could by the smoke thereof
chase out devils, as the smoke of Tobias fish did (which I am sure could smell
no stronglier) it would serve for a precious Relicke, both for the
superstitious Priests, and the insolent Puritanes, to cast out devils withal.

Admitting then, and not confessing, that the use thereof were healthful for
some sorts of diseases; should it be used for all sicknesses? should it be used
by all men? should it be used at all times? yea should it be used by able,
young, strong, healthful men? Medicine has that virtue, that it never leaves a
man in that state wherein it finds him: it makes a sick man whole, but a whole
man sick: And as Medicine helps nature being taken at times of necessity, so
being ever and continually used, it does but weaken, weary, and wear nature.
What speak I of Medicine? Nay let a man every hour of the day, or as often as
many in this country use to take Tobacco, let a man I say, but take as often the
best sorts of nourishments in meat and drink that can be devised, he shall
with the continual use thereof weaken both his head and his stomach: all his
members shall becomefeeble, his spirits dull, and in the end, as a drowsy
lazy belly-god, he shall euanish in a Lethargy.

And from this weakness it proceeds, that many in this kingdom have had such
a continual use of taking this unsavory smoke, as now they are not able to
forbear the same, no more then an old drunkard can abide to be long sober,
without falling into an incurable weakness and evil constitution: for their
continual custom has made to them, habitum, alteram naturam: so to those
that from their birth have been continually nourished upon poison and things
venomous, wholesome meats are only poisonable.

Thus having, as I trust, sufficiently answered the most principal arguments
that are used in defense of this vile custom, it rests only to inform you
what sins and vanities you commit in the filthy abuse thereof. First, are you
not guilty of sinful and shameful lust? (for lust may be as well in any of
the senses as in feeling) that although you be troubled with no disease, but in
perfect health, yet can you neither be merry at an Ordinary, nor lascivious in
the Stews, if you lack Tobacco to provoke your appetite to any of those sorts
of recreation, lusting after it as the children of Israel did in the
wilderness after Quails? Secondly it is, as you use or rather abuse it, a
branch of the sin of drunkenness, which is the root of all sins: for as the
only delight that drunkards take in wine is in the strength of the taste, and
the force of the fume thereof that mounts up to the brain: for no drunkards
love any weak, or sweet drink: so are not those (I mean the strong heat and
the fume) the only qualities that make Tobacco so delectable to all the lovers
of it? And as no man likes strong heady drink the first day (because nemo
repent fit turpissimus) but by custom is piece and piece allured, while in
the end, a drunkard will have as great a thirst to be drunk, as a sober man
to quench his thirst with a draught when he has need of it: So is not this the
very case of all the great takers of Tobacco? which therefore they themselves
do attribute to a bewitching quality in it. Thirdly, is it not the greatest
sin of all, that you the people of all sorts of this kingdom, who are
created and ordained by God, to bestow both your persons and goods, for the
maintenance both of the honor and safety of your King and Common wealth,
should disable your selves in both? In your persons having by this continual
vile custom brought your selves to this shameful imbecilitie, that you are
not able to ride or walk the journey of a Jews Sabbath, but you must have a
reekie cole brought you from the next poor house to kindle your Tobacco with?
whereas he cannot be thought able for any service in the wars, that cannot
endure oftentimes the want of meat, drink, and sleep, much more then must he
endure the want of Tobacco. In the times of the many glorious and victorious
battles fought by this Nation, there was no word of Tobacco: but now if it
were time of wars, and that you were to make some sudden Caualcado upon your
enemies, if any of you should seek leisure to stay behind his fellow for
taking of Tobacco, for my part I should never be sorry for any evil chance that
might befall him. To take a custom in any thing that cannot be left again, is
most harmeful to the people of any land. Mollicies and delicacie were the
wrack and overthrow, first of the Persian, and next of the Roman Empire. And
this very custom of taking Tobacco (whereof our present purpose is) is even at
this day accounted so effeminate among the Indians themselves, as in the market
they will offer no price for a slave to be sold, whom they find to be a great
Tobacco taker.

Now how you are by this custom disabled in your goods, let the Gentry of this
land bear witness, some of them bestowing three, some four hundred pounds a
year upon this precious stink, which I am sure might be bestowed upon many
far better uses. I read indeed of a knauish Courtier, who for abusing the
favor of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus his master, by taking bribes to
intercede, for sundry persons in his masters ear, (for who^ he never once
opened his mouth) was justly choked with smoke, with this doom, Fumo pereat,
qui fumum vendidit: but of so many smokebuyers, as are at this present in this
kingdom, I never read nor heard.

And for the vanities committed in this filthy custom, is it not both great
vanity and uncleanness, that at the table, a place of respect, of
cleanliness, of modesty, men should not be ashamed, to sit tossing of Tobacco
pipes, and puffing of the smoke of Tobacco one to another, making the filthy
smoke and stink thereof, to exhale athwart the dishes, and infect the air,
when very often, men that abhor it are at their repast? Surely smoke becomes
a kitchen far better then a dining chamber, and yet it makes a kitchen also
oftentimes in the inward parts of men, soyling and infecting them, with an
unctuous and oily kind of soote, as has been found in some great Tobacco
takers, that after their death were opened. And not only meat time, but no
other time nor action is exempted from the public use of this uncivil trick:
so as if the wives of Diepe list to contest with this Nation for good manners,
their worst manners would in all reason be found at least not so dishonest (as
ours are) in this point. The public use whereof, at all times, and in all
places, has now so far prevailed, as diverse men very sound both in judgment
and complexion, have been at last forced to take it also without desire,
partly because they were ashamed to seem singular, (like the two Philosophers
that were forced to ducke themselves in that rain water, and so become fools
as well as the rest of the people) and partly to be as one that was content to
eat Garlic (which he did not love) that he might not be troubled with the
smell of it, in the breath of his fellows. And is it not a great vanity, that
a man cannot heartily welcome his friend now, but straight they must be in hand
with Tobacco: No it is become in place of a eure, a point of good fellowship,
and he that will refuse to take a pipe of Tobacco among his fellows, (though
by his own election he would rather feel the savor of a Sink) is accounted
peevish and no good company, even as they do with tippling in the cold
Eastern countries. Yea the Mistress cannot in a more manerly kind, entertain
her servant, then by giving him out of her fair hand a pipe of Tobacco. But
herein is not only a great vanity, but a great contempt of Gods good gifts,
that the sweetness of man's breath, being a good gift of God, should be
wilfully corrupted by this stinking smoke, wherein I must confess, it has too
strong a virtue; and so that which is an ornament of nature, and can neither by
any artifice be at the first acquired, nor once lost be recovered again,
shall be filthily corrupted with an incurable stink, which vile quality is as
directly contrary to that wrong opinion which is holden of the wholesomnesse
thereof, as the venime of putrefaction is contrary to the virtue Preservative.

Moreover, which is a great iniquity, and against all humanity, the husband
shall not be ashamed, to reduce thereby his delicate, wholesome, and clean
complexioned wife to that extremity, that either she must also corrupt her
sweet breath therewith, or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking torment.

Have you not reason then to be ashamed, and to forbear this filthy novelty,
so basely grounded, so foolishly received, and so grossly mistaken in the
right use thereof? In your abuse thereof sinning against God, harming your
selves both in persons and goods, and raking also thereby the marks and notes
of vanity upon you; by the custom thereof making your selves to be wondered
at by all foreign civil Nations, and by all strangers that come among you, to
be scorned and contemned: A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose,
harmefull to the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black stinking
fume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stigian smoke of the pit that is
bottomless.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE MANNER OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE POWDERTREASON, JOINED WITH
THE EXAMINATION OF SOME OF THE PRISONERS.
THere is a time when no man ought to keep silence. For it has ever been held
as a general rule, and undoubted Maxim, in all well governed Commonwealths
(whether Christian, and so guided by the divine light of Gods word; or
Ethnicke, and so led by the glimmering twilight of Nature) yet howsoever their
profession was, upon this ground have they all agreed, That when either their
Religion, their King, or their country was in any extreme hazard, no good
countreyman ought then to withhold either his tongue or his hand, according to
his calling and faculty, from ayding to repel the injury, repress the
violence, and avenge the guilt upon the authors thereof. But if ever any people
had such an occasion ministered unto them, It is surely this people now, nay
this whole Isle, and all the rest belonging to this great and glorious
Monarchy. For if in any heathenish republique, no private man could think his
life more happily and gloriously bestowed, then in the defense of any one of
these three, That is, either pro Aris, pro Focis, or pro Patre patriae; And
that the endangering of any one of these, would at once stir the whole body
of the Commonwealth, not any more as divided members, but as a solid and
individual lump: How much more ought we the trewly Christian people that
inhabit this united and trewly happy Isle, Insula fortunata.
under the wings of our gracious and religious Monarch? Nay, how infinitely
greater cause have we to feel and ressent our selves of the smart of that
wound, not only intended and execrated (not consecrated) for the utter
extinguishing of our true Christian profession, nor jointly therewith only for
the cutting off of our Head and father Politic, Sed vt nefas istud and
sacrilegiosum parricidium omnibus modis absolutum reddi possit? And that
nothing might be wanting for making this sacrilegious parricide a pattern of
mischief, and a crime (nay, a mother or storehouse of all crimes) without
example, they should have joined the destruction of the body to the head, so
as Grex cum Rege, Arae cum focis, Lares cum Penatibus, should all at one
thunderclap have been sent to heaven together: The King our head, the Queen
our fertile mother, and those young and hopeful Olive plants, not theirs but
ours: Our reverend Clergy, our honorable Nobility, the faithful
Counselors, the grave Judges, the greatest part of the worthy Knights and
Gentry, as well as of the wisest Burgesses; The whole Clerks of the Crown,
Counsel, Signet, Seals, or of any other principal Judgment seat. All the
learned Lawyers, together with an infinite number of the Common people: Nay,
their furious rage should not only have lighted upon reasonable and sensible
creatures without distinction either of degree, sex or aage; But even the
insensible stocks and stones should not have bin free of their fury. The hal
of Justice; The house of Parliament, The Church used for the Coronation of our
Kings; The Monuments of our former Princes; The Crown and other marks of
Royalty; All the Records, as well of Parliament, as of every particular man's
right, with a great number of Charters and such like, should all have been
comprehended under that fearful Chaos. And so the earth as it were opened,
should have sent forth of the bottom of the Stygian lake such sulphured
smoke, furious flames, and fearful thunder, as should have by their
diabolical Domesday destroyed and defaced, in the twinkling of an eye, not
only our present living Princes and people, but even our insensible Monuments
reserved for future aages. So as not only our selves that are mortal, but the
immortal Monuments of our ancient Princes and Nobility, that have been so
preciously preserved from aage to aage, as the remaining Trophies of their
eternal glory, and have so long triumphed over envious time, should now have
been all consumed together; and so not only we, but the memory of us and
ours, should have been thus extinguished in an instant. The true horror
therefore of this detestable device, has stirred me up to bethink my self,
wherein I may best discharge my conscience in a cause so general and common,
if it were to bring but one stone to the building, or rather with the Widow one
mite to the common box. But since to so hateful and unheard of invention,
there can be no greater enemy then the self, the simple truth thereof being
once publicly known; and that there needs no stronger argument to bring such
a plot in universal detestatio^, then the certainty that so monstrous a thing
could once be devised, nay concluded upon, wrought in, in full readiness, and
within twelve hours of the execution: My threefold zeal to those blessings,
whereof they would have so violently made us all widows, has made me resolve
to set down here the true Narration of that monstrous and unnatural intended
Tragedy, having better occasion by the means of my service and continual
attendance in Court, to know the truth thereof, then others that peradventure
have it only by relation at the third or fourth hand. So that whereas those
worse then Catilines, thought to have extirped us and our memories; Their
infamous memory shall by these means remain to the end of the world, upon the
one part: and upon the other, Gods great and merciful deliverance of his
Anointed and us all, shall remain in neuer-dying Records. And God grant that
it may be in marble tables of Thankfulness engraven in our hearts.

WHile this Land and whole Monarchy flourished in a most happy and plentiful
PEACE, as well at home as abroad, sustained and conducted by these two maine
Pillars of all good Government, PIETY and JUSTICE, no foreign grudge, nor
inward whispering of coffeehouse any way appearing; The King being upon his
return from his hunting exercise at Royston, upon occasion of the drawing
near of the Parliament time, which had been twice prorogued already, partly
in regard of the season of the year, and partly of the Term; As the winds are
ever stillest immediately before a storm; and as the Sun blenks often hottest
to foretell a following shower: So at that time of greatest calm did this
secretly-hatched thunder begin to cast forth the first flashes, and flaming
lightnings of the approaching tempest. For the Saturday of the week immediately
preceding the Kings return, which was upon a Thursday (being but ten days
before the Parliament) The Lord Mountegle, son and heir to the Lord Morley,
A letter delivered to the Lord Mountegle.
being in his own lodging ready to go to supper at suen of the clock at
night, one of his footmen (whom he had sent of an errand over the street) was
met by an unknown man of a reasonable tall personage, who delivered him a
Letter, charging him to put it in my Lord his masters hands: which my Lord no
sooner received, but that having broken it up, and perceiving the same to be
of an unknown and somewhat vnlegible hand, and without either date or
subscription; did call one of his men unto him for helping him to read it. But
no sooner did he conceive the strange contents thereof, although he was
somewhat perplexed what construction to make of it (as whether of a matter of
consequence, as indeed it was, or whether some foolish devised Pasquil by some
of his enemies, to skarre him from his attendance at the Parliament) yet did he
as a most dutiful and loyal Subject, conclude not to conceal it, what ever
might come of it. Whereupon, notwithstauding the latenesse and darkness of the
night in that season of the year, he presently repaired to his Majesty's
Palace at Whitehall, and there delivered the same to the Earl of Salisbury
his Majesty's principal Secretary. Revealed to the Earl of Salisbury.
Whereupon the said Earl of Salisbury having read the Letter, and heard the
manner of the coming of it to his hands, did greatly encourage and commend my
Lord for his discretion, telling him plainly, that whatsoever the purpose of
the Letter might prove hereafter, yet did this accident put him in mind of
diverse aduertisements he had received from beyond the Seas, wherewith he had
acquainted as well the King himself, as diverse of his Privy Counselors,
concerning some business the Papists were in, both at home and abroad, making
preparations for some combination amongst them against this Parliament time,
for enabling them to deliver at that time to the King some petition for
toleration of Religion: Purpose of the Papists for delivering a petition to his
Majesty, to crave toleration of Religion.
which should be delivered in some such order and so well backed, as the King
should be loath to refuse their requests; like the sturdie beggars craving alms
with one open hand, but carrying a stone in the other, in case of refusal. And
therefore did the Earl of Salisbury conclude with the Lord Mountegle, that he
would in regard of the Kings absence impart the same Letter to some more of his
Majesty's Council; whereof my L. Mountegle liked well: only adding this
request by way of protestation, That whatsoever the event hereof might prove,
it should not be imputed to him, as proceeding from too light and too sudden
an apprehension, that he delivered this Letter, being only moved thereunto
for demonstration of his ready devotion, and care for preservation of his
Majesty and the State. And thus did the Earl of Salisbury presently acquaint
the Lord Chamberlain with the said letter: The Lord Chamberlain made privy
to the Letter by the Earl of Salubury.
Whereupon they two in presence of the Lord Mountegle, calling to mind the
former intelligence already mentioned, which seemed to have some relation with
this Letter; The tender care which they ever carried to the preservation of his
Majesty's person, made them apprehend, that some perilous attempt did thereby
appear to be intended against the same, which did the more nearly concern the
said L. Chamberlain to have a care of, in regard that it does belong to the
charge of his Office to ouersee as well all places of Assembly where his
Majesty is to repair, as his Highness own private houses. And therefore did
the said two Counsailors conclude, That they should join unto themselves three
more of the Council, to wit, the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester and
Northampton, to be also particularly acquainted with this accident, who having
all of them concurred together to the re-examination of the Contents of the
said Letter, they did conclude, That how slight a matter it might at the first
appear to be, yet was it not absolutely to be contemned, in respect of the
care which it behooued them to have of the preservation of his Majesty's
person: But yet resolved for two reasons, Thought meet by the Counselors to
acquaint the King with the Letter.
first to acquaint the King himself with the same before they proceeded to any
further inquisition in the matter, as well for the expectation and experience
they had of his Majesty's fortunate Judgment in clearing and soluing of
obscure riddles and doubtful mysteries; as also because the more time would in
the mean while be given for the Practice to ripen, if any was, whereby the
Discovery might be the more clear and evident, and the ground of proceeding
thereupon more safe, just, and easy. And so according to their determination
did the said Earl of Salisbury repair to the King in his Gallery upon Friday,
being Athallow day, in the afternoon, Upon Alhallow day the Earl of Sasuburie
showed the Letter to the King.
which was the day after his Majesty's arrival, and none but himself being
present with his Highness at that time, where without any other speech or
judgment giving of the Letter, but only relating simply the form of the
delivery thereof, he presented it to his Majesty. The contents whereof follow.

MY Lord, Out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of
your preservation. Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life, to
devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament. For God and
man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this Time. And think not
slightly of this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where
you may expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any
stir, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet
they shall not see who burts them. This counsel is not to be contemned,
because it may do you good, and can do you no harm; for the danger is past
so soon as you have burnt the Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace
to make good use of it: To whose holy protection I commend you.

The King no sooner read the Letter, but after a little pause, His Majesty's
judgment of the Letter.
and then reading it over again, he delivered his judgment of it in such
sort, as he thought it was not to be contemned, for that the Style of it
seemed to be more quick and pithie, then is usual to be in any Pasquil or
libel (the superfluities of idle brains:) But the Earl of Salisbury
perceiving the King to apprehend it deepelier then he looked for, knowing his
nature, told him that he thought by one sentence in it, that it was like to be
written by some fool or madman, reading to him this sentence in it, For the
danger is past as soon as you have burnt the Letter; which he said, was
likely to be the saying of a fool: for if the danger was past so soon as the
Letter was burnt, then the warning behooued to be of little avail, when the
burning of the Letter might make the danger to be eschewed. But the King by the
contrary considering the former sentence in the Letter, That they should
receive a terrible Blow at this Parliament, and yet should not see who hurt
them, Joining it to the sentence immediately following, already alleged, did
thereupon conjecture, That the danger mentioned, should be some sudden danger
by blowing up of Powder: For no other Insurrection, Rebellion, or whatsoever
other private and desperate Attempt could be committed or attempted in time of
Parliament, and the Authors thereof unseen, except only it were by a blowing
up of Powder, which might be performed by one base knave in a dark corner;
whereupon he was moved to interpret and construe the latter Sentence in the
Letter (alleged by the Earl of Salisburie) against all ordinary sense and
construction in Grammar, as if by these words, For the danger is past as soon
as you have burned the Letter, should be closely understood the suddaintie and
quickenesse of the danger, which should be as quickly performed and at an end,
as that paper should be of bleasing up in the fire; turning that word of as
soon, to the sense of, as quickly: And therefore wished, that before his going
to the Parliament, His Majesty's opinion for searching of the under room: of
the Parliament House.
the under roumes of the Parliament house might be well and narrowly searched.
But the Earl of Salisbury wondering at this his Majesty's Commentary, which he
knew to be so far contrary to his ordinary and natural disposition, who did
rather ever sin upon the other side; in not apprehending nor trusting due
Aduertisements of Practices and Perils when he was trewly informed of them,
whereby he had many times drawn himself into many desperate dangers: and
interpreting rightly this extraordinary Caution at this time to proceed from
the vigilant care he had of the whole State, more then of his own Person,
which could not but have all perished together, if this designement had
succeeded: He thought good to dissemble still unto the King, that there had
been any just cause of such apprehension: And ending the purpose with some
merry jest upon this Subject, as his custom is, took his leave for that
time.

But though he seemed so to neglect it to his Majesty; yet his customable and
watchful care of the King and the State still boiling within him, And having
with the blessed Virgin Marie laid up in his heart the Kings so strange
judgment and construction of it; He could not be at rest til he acquainted the
foresaid Lords what had passed between the King and him in private: Whereupon
they were all so earnest to renew again the memory of the same purpose to his
Majesty, as it was agreed that he should the next day, being Saturday, repair
to his Highness: which he did in the same privy Gallery, and renewed the
memory thereof, the L. Chamberlain then being present with the King. The
determination to search the Parliament house and the roumes under it.
At what time it was determined, that the said Lord Chamberlain should,
according to his custom and Office, view all the Parliament Houses, both above
and below, and consider what likelihood or appearance of any such danger might
possibly be gathered by the sight of them: But yet, as well for staying of idle
rumors, as for being the more able to discern any mystery, the nearer that
things were in readiness, his journey thither was ordained to be deferred
till the afternoon before the sitting down of the Parliament, which was upon
the Monday following. At what time he (according to this conclusion) went to
the Parliament house accompanied with my Lord Mountegle, being in zeal to the
Kings service earnest and curious to see the event of that accident whereof he
had the fortune to be the first discouerer: where, having viewed all the lower
roumes, Wood and Coal found by the Lord Chamberlain in the Vault.
he found in the Vault under the upper House great store and provision of
Billets, Faggots, and Coals: And enquiring of Whyneard Keeper of the Wardrobe,
to what use he had put those lower roumes and cellars: he told him, That
Thomas Percie had hired both the House, and part of the Cellar or Vault under
the same, and that the Wood and Coal therein was the said Gentlemansowne
provision: Whereupon the Lord Chamberlain, casting his eye aside, perceived a
fellow standing in a corner there, calling himself the said Percies man, and
keeper of that house for him, but indeed was Guido Fawkes, Guido Fawkes bearing
the name of Percies man.
the owner of that hand which should have acted that monstrous Tragedy.

The Lord Chamberlain looking upon all things with a heedfull indeed, yet in
outward appearance with but a careless and racklesse eye (as became so wise
and diligent a minister) he presently addressed himself to the King in the
said privy Gallery, wherein the presence of the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Admiral, the Earls of Worcester, Northampton, and Salisbury, The Lord
Chamberlaines report and judgment of what he had observed in the search.
he made his report, what he had seen and observed there; noting that
Mountegle had told him, That he no sooner heard Thomas Percy named to be the
possessour of that house, but considering both his backwardnes in Religion, and
the old dearness in friendship between himself and the said Percy, he did
greatly suspect the matter, and that the Letter should come from him. The said
Lord Chamberlain also told, That he did not wonder a little at the
extraordinary great provision of wood and coal in that house, where Thomas
Percie had so seldom occasion to remain; As likewise it gave him in his mind
that his man looked like a very tall and desperate fellow.

This could not but increase the Kings former apprehension and jealousy:
whereupon he insisted (as before) that the House was narrowly to be searched,
and that those Billets and Coals would be searched to the bottom, it being
most suspicious that they were laid there only for covering of the powder. Of
this same mind also were all the Counsailours then present: Disputation about
the manner of the further search.
But upon the fashion of making of the search was it long debated: For upon the
one side they were all so jealous of the Kings safety, that they all agreed,
that there could not be too much caution used for preventing his danger. And
yet upon the other part they were all extreme loath and dainty, that in case
this Letter should prove to be nothing but the euaporation of an idle brain;
then a curious search being made, and nothing found, should not only turn to
the general scandal of the King and the State, as being so suspicious of
every light and frivolous toy, but likewise lay an ill favored imputation upon
the Earl of Northumberland one of his Majesty's greatest Subjects and
Counsailors, this Tho. Percie being his kinsman, and most confident familiar.
And the rather were they curious upon this point, knowing how far the King
detested to be thought suspicious or jealous of any of his good Subjects,
though of the meanest degree. And therefore though they all agreed upon the
maine ground, which was to provide for the security of the Kings Person, yet
did they much differ in the circumstances, by which this action might be best
carried with least dinne and occasion of slander. But the King himself still
persisting that there were diverse shrewd appearances, and that a narrow search
of those places could preiudge no man that was innocent, he at last plainly
resolved them, That either must all the parts of those roumes be narrowly
searched, and no possibility of danger left unexamined, or else he and they
all must resolve not to meddle in it at all, but plainly to go the next day to
the Parliament, and leave the success to Fortune, which he believed they would
be loath to take upon their consciences: for in such a case as this, Agreed that
the search should be under color of seeking for Wardrobe stuff missed by
Whynniard.
an half doing was worse then no doing at all. Whereupon it was at last
concluded, That nothing should be left unsearched in those Houses: And yet for
the better color and stay of rumor, in case nothing were found, it was
thought meet, that upon a pretense of Whyneards missing some of the Kings
stuff or Hangings which he had in keeping, all those roumes should be narrowly
ripped for them. And to this purpose was Sir Thomas Kneuet (a Gentleman of his
Majesty's privy Chamber) employed, being a Justice of Peace in Westminster,
and one, of whose ancient fidelity both the late Queen and our now Sovereign
have had large proof: who according to the trust committed unto him, went
about the midnight next after, to the Parliament House, accompanied with such a
small number as was fit for that errand. But before his entry in the house,
Fawkes found at midnight without the house.
finding Thomas Percies alleged man standing without the doors, his clothes
and boots on at so dead a time of the night, he resolved to apprehend him, as
he did, and thereafter went forward to the searching of the house, where after
he had caused to be ouerturned some of the Billets and Coals, he first found
one of the small Barrels of Powder, and after all the rest, to the number of
thirty six Barrels, great and small: And thereafter searching the fellow, whom
he had taken, found three matches, and all other instruments fit for blowing up
the Powder, ready upon him, which made him instantly confess his own
guiltiness, declaring also unto him, That if he had happened to be within the
house when he took him, as he was immediately before (at the ending of his
work) he would not have failed to have blown him up, house and all.

Thus after Sir Thomas had caused the wretch to be surely bound, and well
guarded by the company he had brought with him, he himself returned back to
the Kings Palace, and gave warning of his success to the Lord Chamberlain,
and Earl of Salisburie, who immediately warning the rest of the Council that
lay in the house, as soon as they could get themselves ready, came, with their
fellow Counselors, to the Kings Bedchamber, being at that time near four of
the clock in the morning. And at the first entry of the Kings Chamber door,
Upon Sir Thomas Kneuets return the Council warned.
the Lord Chamberlain, being not any longer able to conceal his joy for the
preventing of so great a danger, told the King in a confused haste, that all
was found and discovered, and the Traitor in hands and fast bound.

Then, order being first taken for sending for the rest of the Council that
lay in the Town, The prisoner himself was brought into the house, where in
respect of the strangenes of the accident, no man was stayed from the sight or
speaking with him. And within a while after, the Council did examine him; Who
seeming to put on a Roman resolution, did both to the Council, and to every
other person that spoke with him that day, appear so constant and settled upon
his grounds, as we all thought we had found some new Mutius Scaeuola borne in
England. For notwithstanding the horror of the fact, the guilt of his
conscience, his sudden surprising, the terror which should have been stricken
in him by coming into the presence of so grave a Council, and the restless
and confused questions that every man all that day did vex him with; Yet was
his countenance so far from being dejected, as he often smiled in scornful
manner, not only auowing the Fact, but repenting only, with the said Scaeuola,
his failing in the execution thereof, whereof (he said) the devil and not God,
was the discouerer: Answering quickly to every man's objection, scoffing at any
idle questions which were propounded unto him, and jesting with such as he
thought had no authority to examine him. All that day could the Council get
nothing out of him touching his Accomplices, refusing to answer to any such
questions which he thought might discover the plot, and laying all the blame
upon himself; Whereunto he said he was moved only for Religion and
conscience sake, denying the King to be his lawful Sovereign, or the Anointed
of God, in respect he was an heretic, and giving himself no other name then
John Johnson, servant to Thomas Percie. But the next morning being carried to
the Tower, he did not there remain above two or three days, being twice or
thrice in that space reexamined, and the Rack only offered and showed unto
him, when the mask of his Roman fortitude did visibly begin to wear and
slide off his face; And then did he begin to confess part of the truth,
and thereafter to open the whole matter, as does appear by his depositions
immediately following.

THE TRUE COPY OF THE DECLARATION OF GVIDO FAWKES, TAKEN IN THE PRESENCE OF
THE Counselors, whose names are under written.
I Confess, that a practice in general was first broken unto me, against his
Majesty for relief of the Catholic cause, and not invented or propounded by
my self. And this was first propounded unto me about Easter last was twelve
month beyond the Seas, in the Low Countries of the Archdukes obeisance, by
Thomas Winter, who came thereupon with me into England, and there we imparted
our purpose to three other Gentlemen more, namely, Robert Catesby, Thomas
Percie, and John Wright; who all five consulting together of the means how to
execute the same, and taking a vow among our selves for secrecy; Catesby
propounded to have it performed by Gunpowder, and by making a Mine under the
upper House of Parliament: which place we made choice of the rather, because
Religion having been unjustly suppressed there, it was fittest that Justice and
punishment should be executed there.

This being resolved amongst us, Thomas Percy hired an house at Westminster for
that purpose, near adjoining to the Parliament House, and there we begun to
make our Mine about the 11. of December 1604.

The five that first entered into the work, were Thomas Percy, Robert Catesby,
Thomas Winter, John Wright, and my self: and soon after we took another
unto us, Christopher Wright, having sworn him also, and taken the Sacrament
for secrecy.

When we came to the very foundation of the wall of the House, which was about
three yards thick, and found it a matter of great difficulty, we took unto
us another Gentleman, Robert Winter, in like manner with oath and Sacrament as
aforesaid.

It was about Christmas when we brought our Mine unto the Wall, and about
Candlemas we had wrought the Wall half through: And whilst they were in
working, I stood as Sentinel to descrie any man that came near, whereof I
gave them warning, and so they ceased until I gave notice again to proceed.

All we seven lay in the House, and had shot and powder, being resolved to die
in that place before we should yield or be taken.

As they were working upon the wall, they heard a rushing in a cellar of
remoouing of coals, whereupon we feared we had been discovered: and they sent
me to go to the cellar, who finding that the coals were a selling, and that
the cellar was to be let, viewing the commodity thereof for our purpose, Percy
went and hired the same for yearly rent.

We had before this provided and brought into the House twenty barrels of
powder, which we removed into the cellar, and covered the same with billets
and faggots, which were provided for that purpose.

About Easter, the Parliament being prorogued till October next, we dispersed
our selves, and I retired into the Low countries by advice and direction of the
rest, as well to acquaint Owen with the particulars of the plot, as also lest by
my longer stay I might have grown suspicious, and so have come in question.

In the mean time Percy having the key of the cellar, laid in more powder and
wood into it. I returned about the beginning of September next, and then
receiving the key again of Percy, we brought in more powder and billets to
cover the same again, and so I went for a time into the country till the 30.
of October.

It was further resolved amongst us, that the same day that this act should
have been performed, some other of our confederates should have surprised the
person of the Lady ELIZABETH the Kings eldest daughter, who was kept in
Warwickshire at the Lord Haringtons house, and presently have proclaimed her
Queen, having a project of a Proclamation ready for that purpose, wherein we
made no mention of altering of Religion, nor would have auowed the deed to be
ours, until we should have had power enough to make our party good, and then
we would have auowed both.

Concerning duke CHARLES the Kings second son, we had sundry consultations
how to seize on his person: But because we found no means how to compass it
(the duke being kept near London, where we had not forces enough) we resolved
to serve our turn with the Lady ELIZABETH.

THE NAMES OF OTHER PRINCIPAL PERSONS, THAT WERE MADE PRIVY Afterward to
this horrible conspiracy.
Euerard Digby knight. Ambrose Rookwood. Francis Tresham. John Grant. Robert
Keys.
Commiss. Notingham. Worcester. Suffolk. Devonshire. Northampton. Salisbury.
Mar. Dunbar. Popham.
Edw. Cook. William Waad.


ANd in regard that before this discourse could be ready to go to the Press,
Thomas Winter being apprehended, and brought to the Tower, made a confession in
substance agreeing with this former of Fawkes, only larger in some
circumstances: I have thought good to insert the same likewise in this place,
for the further clearing of the matter, and greater benefit of the Reader.

THOMAS WINTERS CONFESSION, TAKEN THE XXIII. OF NOVEMBER 1605. IN THE PRESENCE
OF the Counselors, whose names are underwritten.
My most Honorable Lords,
NOt out of hope to obtain pardon: for, speaking of my temporal part, I may
say, The fault is greater then can be forgiven; nor affecting hereby the title
of a good Subject; for I must redeem my country from as great a danger, as I
have hazarded the bringing of her into, before I can purchase any such opinion,
Only at your Honors command I will briefly set down mine own accusation,
and how far I have proceeded in this business; which I shall the
faithfullier do, since I see such courses are not pleasing to Almighty God,
and that all, or the most material parts have been already confessed.

I remained with my brother in the country, from Alhallontyde until the
beginning of Lent, in the year of our Lord 1603. the first year of the Kings
reign: about which time master Catesby sent thither, entreating me to come to
London, where he and other my friends would be glad to see me. I desired him
to excuse me: for I found my self not very well disposed; and (which had
happened never to me before) returned the messenger without my company.
Shortly I received another letter, in any wise to come. At the second summons I
presently came up, and found him with master John Wright at Lambeth, where he
brake with me, how necessary it was not to forsake our country (for he knew I
had then a resolution to go over) but to deliver her from the servitude in
which she remained, or at least to assist her with our uttermost endeavors. I
answered, That I had often hazarded my life upon far lighter terms, and now
would not refuse any good occasion, wherein I might do service to the
Catholic cause; but for my self I knew no mean probable to succeed. He said
that he had bethought him of a way at one instant to deliver us from all our
bonds, and without any foreign help to replant again the Catholic
Religion; and with all told me in a word, It was to blow up the Parliament
house with Gunpowder; for, said he, in that place have they done us all the
mischief, and perchance God has desseigned that place for their punishment. I
wondered at the strangeness of the conceit, and told him that true it was,
this struck at the root, and would breed a confusion fit to beget new
alterations; But if it should not take effect (as most of this nature
miscarried) the scandal would be so great which Catholic Religion might
hereby sustain, as not only our enemies, but our friends also would with good
reason condemn us. He told me, The nature of the disease required so sharp a
remedy, and asked me if I would give my consent. I told him, yes, in this or
what else soever; if he resolved upon it, I would venture my life. But I
proposed many difficulties, As want of an house, and of one to carry the Mine,
noise in the working, and such like. His answer was, Let us give an attempt,
and where it fails, pass no further. But first, quoth he, Because we will
leave no peaceable and quiet way untried, you shall go over, and inform the
Constable of the state of the Catholics here in England, entreating him to
solicit his Majesty at his coming hither, that the penal Laws may be
recalled, and we admitted into the rank of his other Subjects; withal, you
may bring over some confident Gentleman, such as you shall understand best able
for this business, and named unto me master Fawkes. Shortly after, I passed
the Sea, and found the Constable at Bergen near Dunkirke, where, by help of
master Owen I delivered my message; Whose answer was, that he had strict
command from his Master, to do all good Offices for the Catholics, and for
his own part he thought himself bound in conscience so to do, and that no
good occasion should be omitted, but spoke to him nothing of this matter.

Returning to Dunkirck with master Owen, we had speech whether he thought the
Constable would faithfully help us, or no. He said he believed nothing less,
and that they sought only their own ends, holding small account of
Catholics. I told him that there were many Gentlemen in England, who would not
forsake their country until they had tried the uttermost, and rather venture
their lives, then forsake her in this misery. And to add one more to our
number, as a fit man both for counsel and execution of whatsoever we should
resolve, wished for master Fawkes, whom I had heard good commendations of: he
told me the Gentleman deserved no less, but was at Brussels, and that if he
came not, as happily he might, before my departure, he would send him shortly
after into England. I went soon after to Ostend, where sir William Stanley as
then was not, but came two days after. I remained with him three or four
days, in which time I asked him, if the Catholics in England should do any
thing to help themselves, whether he thought the Archduke would second them?
He answered, No, for all those parts were so desirous of peace with England, as
they would endure no speech of other enterprise: neither were it fit, said he,
to set any project afoot, now the Peace is upon concluding. I told him there
was no such resolution, and so fell to discourse of other matters, until I
came to speak of master Fawkes, whose company I wished over into England. I
asked of his sufficiency in the wars, and told him we should need such as
he, if occasion required; he gave very good commendations of him. And as we
were thus discoursing, and I ready to depart for Newport, and taking my leave
of Sir William, Master Fawkes came into our company, newly returned, and
saluted us. This is the Gentleman, said Sir William, that you wished for, and
so we embraced again. I told him some good friends of his wished his company
in England, and that if he pleased to come to Dunkircke, we would have
further conference, whither I was then going: so taking my leave of them both,
I departed. About two days after came Master Fawkes to Dunkirck, where I told
him that we were upon a resolution to do somewhat in England, if the Peace
with Spain helped us not, but had as yet resolved upon nothing; such or the
like talk we passed at Graueling, where I lay for a wind, and when it served
came both in one Passage to Greenwich, near which place we took a pair of
Oars, and so came up to London, and came to Master Catesby whom we found in
his lodging; he welcomed us into England, and asked me what news from the
Constable. I told him, good words, but I feared the deeds would not answer:
This was the beginning of Easter Term, and about the midst of the same
Term, (whether sent for by Master Catesby, or upon some business of his own)
up came Master Thomas Percy. The first word he spoke (after he came into our
company) was, Shall we always (Gentlemen) talk, and never do any thing?
Master Catesby took him aside, and had speech about somewhat to be done, so as
first we might all take an oath of secrecy, which we resolved within two or
three days to do: so as there we met behind S. Clements, Master Catesby,
Master Percy, Master Wright, Master Guy Fawkes, and my self; and having upon a
Primer given each other the oath of secrecy, in a chamber where no other body
was, we went after into the next room and heard Mass, and received the
blessed Sacrament upon the same. Then did Master Catesby disclose to Master
Percy, and I together with Jack Wright, tell to Master Fawkes the business
for which we took this oath, which they both approved. And then was M. Percy
sent to take the house, which M. Catesby in mine absence, had learned did
belong to one Ferris, which with some difficulty in the end he obtained, and
became, as Ferris before was, Tenant to Whynniard. M. Fawkes underwent the name
of M. Percies man, calling himself Johnson, because his face was the most
unknown, and received the keys of the house, until we heard that the
Parliament was adiourned to the seventh of February: At which time we all
departed several ways into the country, to meet again at the beginning of
Michaelmas Term. Before this time also it was thought convenient to have a
house that might answer to M. Percies, where we might make provision of powder
and wood for the Mine, which being there made ready, should in a night be
conveyed by boat to the house by the Parliament, because we were loath to
foil that with often going in and out. There was none that we could devise so
fit as Lambeth, where Master Catesby often lay, and to be keeper thereof (by
M. Catesbies choice) we received into the number, Keys, as a trusty honest
man: this was about a month before Michaelmas.

Some fortnight after toward the beginning of the Term, M. Fawkes and I came
to M. Catesby at Morecrofts, where we agreed that now was time to begin and
set things in order for the Mine. So as Master Fawkes went to London, and the
next day sent for me to come over to him: when I came, the cause was, for that
the Scottish Lords were appointed to sit in conference of the Union in Master
Percies house. This hindered our beginning until a fortnight before Christmas,
by which time both Master Percie and Master Wright were come to London, and we
against their coming had provided a good part of the powder: so as we all
five entered with tools fit to begin our work, having provided our selves of
Baked-meates, the less to need sending abroad. We entered late in the night,
and were never seen save only Master Percies man, until Christmas Eve, In
which time we wrought under a little Entry to the wall of the Parliament house,
and underpropped it, as we went, with wood.

Whilst we were together, we began to fashion our business, and discoursed
what we should do after this deed was done. The first question was how we
might surprise the next heir, the Prince happily would be at the Parliament
with the King his Father, how should we then be able to seize on the Duke?
This burden Master Percie undertook, that by his acquaintance, he, with
another Gentleman would enter the Chamber without suspicion, and having some
doozen others at several doors to expect his coming, and two or three on
horseback at the Court gate to receive him, he would undertake (the blow
being given, until which he would attend in the Dukes Chamber) to carry him
safe away: for he supposed most of the Court would be absent, and such as
were there not suspecting, or unprovided for any such matter. For the Lady
ELIZABETH, it were easy to surprise her in the Country, by drawing friends
together at an hunting near the Lord Haringtons, and Ashbie, M. Catesbies
house, being not far off was a fit place for preparation.

The next was for money and horses, which if we could provide in any
reasonable measure (having the Heir apparent) and the first knowledge by four
or five days, was odds sufficient.

Then what Lords we should save from the Parliament, which was first agreed in
general as many as we could that were Catholics, or so disposed: but after
we descended to speak of particulars.

Next, what foreign Princes we should acquaint with this before, or join
with after. For this point we agreed, that first we could not enjoin Princes
to that secrecy, nor oblige them by oath, so to be secure of their promise:
besides, we knew not whether they will approve the project or dislike it: And
if they do allow thereof, to prepare before, might beget suspicion, and not to
provide until the business were acted, the same letter that carried news of
the thing done, might as well entreat their help and furtherance. Spain is
too slow in his preparations to hope any good from in the first extremities,
and France too near and too dangerous, who with the shipping of Holland, we
feared of all the world might make away with us.

But while we were in the middle of these discourses, we heard that the
Parliament should be anew adiourned until after Michaelmas, upon which
tidings we broke off both discourse and working until after Christmas. About
Candlemas we brought over in a boat the powder, which we had provided at
Lambeth, and laid it in M. Percies house, because we were willing to have all
our danger in one place.

We wrought also another fortnight in the Mine against the stone wall, which
was very hard to beat through; at which time we called in Kit Wright, and near
to Easter, as we wrought the third time, opportunity was given to hire the
Cellar, in which we resolved to lay the powder, and leave the Mine.

Now by reason that the charge of maintaining us all so long together, besides
the number of several houses, which for several uses had been hired, and
buying of powder etc. had layen heavy on M. Catesby alone to support; it was
necessary for him to call in some others to ease his charge, and to that end
desired leave, that he, with M. Percy, and a third, whom they should call,
might acquaint whom they thought fit and willing to the business: for many,
said he, may be content that I should know, who would not therefore that all
the company should be acquainted with their names: to this we all agreed.

After this Master Fawkes laid into the Cellar (which he had newly taken) a
thousand of Billets, and five hundred of Faggots, and with that covered the
Powder, because we might have the House free, to suffer any one to enter that
would. Master Catesby wished us to consider, whether it were not now necessary
to send M. Fawkes over, both to absent himself for a time, as also to acquaint
Sir William Stanley and M. Owen with this matter. We agreed that he should
(provided that he gave it them with the same oath that we had taken it
before) videlicet, to keep it secret from all the world. The reason why we
desired Sir William Stanley should be acquainted herewith was, to have him with
us so soon as he could: And for M. Owen, he might hold good correspondencie
after with foreign Princes. So M. Fawkes departed about Easter for Flanders,
and returned the latter end of August. He told me that when he arrived at
Brussels, Sir William Stanley was not returned from Spain, so as he uttered
the matter only to Owen, who seemed well pleased with the business, but told
him that furely Sir William would not be acquainted with any plot, as having
business now afoot in the Court of England; but he himself would be always
ready to tell it him, and send him away so soon as it were done.

About this time did M. Percy and M. Catesby meet at the Bathe, where they
agreed that the company being yet but few, M. Catesby should have the others
authority to call in whom he thought best; By which authority he called in
after, Sir Euerard Digby, though at what time I know not, and last of all M.
Francis Tresham. The first promised, as I heard M. Catesby say, fifteen
hundred pounds; the second two thousand pounds; M. Percy himself promised all
that he could get of the Earl of Northumberlands rents, which was about four
thousand pounds, and to provide many galloping horses to the number of ten.

Mean while M. Fawkes and my self alone bought some new Powder, as suspecting
the first to be danke, and conveyed it into the Cellar, and set it in order, as
we resolved it should stand. Then was the Parliament anew prorogued until the
fifth of November, so as we all went down until some ten days before, when M.
Catesby came up with M. Fawkes to an house by Enfield Chase called
White-webbes, whither I came to them, and M. Catesby willed me to enquire
whether the young Prince came to the Parliament: I told him that I heard that
his Grace thought not to be there. Then must we have our Horses said M.
Catesby beyond the water, and provision of more company to surprise the Prince,
and leave the Duke alone.

Two days after being Sunday at night, in came one to my chamber, and told me
that a letter had been given to my L. Mountegle to this effect, That he wished
his Lordships absence from the Parliament, because a blow would there be given;
which letter he presently carried to my L. of Salisbury.

On the morrow I went to White-webbes, and told it M. Catesby, assuring him
withal that the matter was disclosed; and wishing him in any case to forsake
his Country. He told me he would see further as yet, and resolved to send M.
Fawkes to try the uttermost, protesting if the part belonged to himself, he
would try the same adventure.

On Wednesday Master Fawkes went and returned at night, of which we were very
glad.

Thursday I came to London, and Friday Master Catesby, Master Tresham and I met
at Barnet, where we questioned how this Letter should be sent to my L.
Mountegle, but could not conceive, for Master Tresham forsware it, whom we
only suspected.

On Saturday night I met M. Tresham again in Lincolnes Inn walks: wherein he
told such speeches, that my Lord of Salisbury should use to the King, as I
gave it lost the second time, and repeated the same to M. Catesby, who hereupon
was resolved to be gone, but stayed to have M. Percy come up, whose consent
herein we wanted. On Sunday M. Percy being dealt with to that end, would needs
abide the uttermost trial.

This suspicion of all hands put us into such confusion, as M. Catesby resolved
to go down into the country the Monday that M. Percy went to Syon, and M.
Percy resolved to follow the same night, or early the next morning. About five
of the clock being Tuesday, came the younger Wright to my Chamber, and told me
that a Nobleman called the L. Mountegle, saying, Arise, and come along to Essex
house, for I am going to call up my L. of Northumberland, saying withal, The
matter is discovered Go back M. Wright (quoth I) and learn what you can
about Essex gate. Shortly he returned and said, Surely all is lost: for Lepton
is got on horseback at Essex door, and as he parted, he asked if their
Lordships would have any more with him: and being answered No, is rode fast up
Fleetstreete as he can ride. Go you then (quoth I) to M. Percy, for sure it
is for him they seek, and bid him be gone, I will stay and see the uttermost.
Then I went to the Court gates, and found them straightly guarded, so as no body
could enter. From thence I went down toward the Parliament house, and in the
middle of Kings-street, found the Guard standing that would not let me pass.
And as I returned I heard one say, There is a Treason discovered, in which the
King and the Lords should have been blown up. So then I was fully satisfied
that all was known, and went to the Stable where my gelding stood, and rode
into the country. Master Catesby had appointed our meeting at Dunchurch, but I
could not overtake them until I came to my brothers, which was Wednesday
night. On Thursday we took the Armor at my Lord Windsores, and went that
night to one Stephen Littletons house, where the next day (being Friday) as I
was early abroad to discover, my man came to me, and said, that an heavy
mischance had severed all the company, for that M. Catesby, M. Rookwood, and M.
Grant, were burned with Gunpowder upon which sight the rest dispersed. Master
Littleton wished me to fly, and so would he. I told him I would first see the
body of my friend and bury him, whatsoever befell me. When I came, I found M.
Catesby reasonable well, Master Percy, both the Wrights, M. Rookwood, and
Master Grant. I asked them what they resolved to do: they answered, We mean
here to die. I said again, I would take such part as they did. About eleven of
the clock came the company to beset the house, and as I walked into the court,
I was shot into the shoulder, which lost me the use of mine arm: the next shot
was the elder Wright stricken dead, after him the younger M. Wright, and
fourthly Ambrose Rookwood shot. Then said M. Catesby to me, (standing before
the door they were to enter) Stand by me Tom, and we will die together. Sir
(quoth I) I have lost the use of my right arm, and I fear that will cause me
to be taken. So as we stood close together, M. Catesby, M. Percy, and my
self, they two were shot (as far as I could guess with one Bullet) and then
the company entered upon me, hurt me in the Belly with a Pike, and gave me other
wounds, until one came behind, and caught hold of both mine arms.

And so I remain yours, etc.
Commiss. Notingham, Suffolk, Worcester, Devonshire, Northampton, Salisburie,
Mar, Dunbar, Popham.
Ed. Coke. W. Waad.

The names of those that were first in the Treason, and labored in the Mine.
Esquires. Robert Catesby. Robert Winter.
Gentlemen. Thomas Percy. Thomas Winter. John Wright. Christopher Wright. Guido
Fawkes.
And Bates, Catesbyes man.
Those that were made acquainted with it, though not personally laboring in
the Mine, nor in the Cellar.
Euerard Digby. Knight. Esquires. Ambrose Rookewood. Francis Tresham.
John Grant. Gent. Robert Keys.


But here let us leave Fawkes in a lodging fit for such a guest, and taking
time to advise upon his conscience; and turn our selves to that part of the
History, which concerns the fortune of the rest of his partakers in that
abominable Treason. The news was no sooner spread abroad that morning, which
was upon a Tuesday, the 5. of November, and the first day designed for that
Session of Parliament; The news (I say) of this so strange and unlooked for
accident, was no sooner diuulged, but some of those Conspiratours, namely
Winter, and the two brothers of Wrights thought it high time for them to hasten
out of the town (for Catesby was gone the night before, and Percy at four of
the clock in the morning the same day of the Discovery) and all of them held
their course, with more haste then good speed to Warwick Shire toward Couentry,
where the next day morning being Wednesday, and about the same hour that Fawks
was taken in Westminster, one Grant a gentleman having associated unto him
some others of his opinion, all violent Papists and strong Recusants, came to a
Stable of one Benocke a rider of great Horses, The taking of the horses out of
the stable at Warwick by Granut and others.
and having violently broken up the same, carried along with them all the great
Horses that were therein, to the number of seven or eight, belonging to diverse
Noblemen and Gentlemen of that Country, who had put them into the Riders hands
to be made fit for there service. And so both that company of them which fled
out of London, as also Grant and his accomplices met all together at Dunchurch
at Sir Euerard Digby his lodging the Tuesday at night, after the discovery of
this treacherous Attempt: The which Digby had likewise for his part appointed a
match of hunting to have been hunted the next day, The hunting match appointed
by Sir Euerard Digby.
which was Wednesday, though his mind was Nimrod-like upon a far other manner
of hunting, more bent upon the blood of reasonable men then brute beasts.

This company and hellish society thus conuened, finding their purpose
discovered, Their going into arms after the Plot discovered.
and their treachery prevented, did resolve to run a desperate course, and
since they could not prevail by so private a Blow, to practice by a public
rebellion, either to attain to their Intents, or at least to save themselves
in the throng of others. And therefore gathering all the company they could
unto them, and pretending the quarrel of Religion, having intercepted such
provision of Armor, Horses, and Powder, as the time could permit, thought by
running up and down the Country both to augment piece and piece their number
(dreaming to themselves that they had the virtue of a Snow-ball, which being
little at the first, and tumbling down from a great hill grows to a great
quantity, by increasing it self with the Snow that it meets by the way) and
also that they beginning first this brave show in one part of the Country,
should by their Sympathy and example stir up and encourage the rest of their
Religion in other parts of England to rise, as they had done there. But when
they had gathered their force to the greatest, Their number never above
fourscore.
they came not to the number of fourscore, and yet were they troubled all the
hours of the day to keep and contain their own servants from stealing from
them; who (notwithstanding of all their care) daily left them, being far
inferior to Gedeons host in number, but far more in faith or justness of
quarrel.

And so after that this Catholic troop had wandered a while through
Warwicke-shire to Worcestershire, and from thence to the edge and borders of
Staffordshire, this gallantly armed band had not the honor at the last to be
beaten with a Kings Lieutenant or extraordinary Commissioner sent down for the
purpose, Their flight.
but only by the ordinary Shiriffe of Worcestershire were they all beaten,
killed, taken and dispersed. Wherein ye have to note this following
circumstance so admirable, and so lively displaying the greatness of Gods
justice, as it could not be concealed without betraying in a manner the glory
due to the Almighty for the same.

Although diverse of the Kings Proclamations were posted down after these
Traitors with all the speed possible, declaring the odiousness of that bloody
attempt, the necessity to have had Percie preserved alive, if it had been
possible, and the assembly together of that rightly-damned crew, now no more
darned Conspirators, but open and auowed Rebels: yet the far distance of the
way (which was above an hundred miles) together with the extreme deepenesse
thereof, joined also with the shortness of the day, was the cause that the
hearty and loving affections of the Kings good Subjects in those parts
prevented the speed of his Proclamations: For upon the third day after the
flying down of these Rebels, Overtaken at Holbeech, in Stafford shire, Stephen
Littletons house.
which was upon the Friday next after the discovery of their Plot, they were
most of them all surprised by the Shiriffe of Worcestershire at Holbeach,
about the noone of the day, and that in manner following.

Grant, of whom I have made mention before for taking the great horses, who
had not all the preceding time stirred from his own house till the next
morning after the attempt should have been put in execution, he then laying his
account without his Host (as the proverb is) that their Plot had, without
failing, received the day before their hoped-for success; Took, or rather
stole out those horses (as I said before) for enabling him, and so many of that
soule-lesse society that had still remained in the Country near about him, to
make a sudden surprise upon the Kings elder daughter, the Lady ELIZABETH,
having her residence nere by that place, Grant attempt to surprise the Lady
Elizabeth.
whom they thought to have used for the color of their treacherous dessigne
(His Majesty her father, her mother, and male children being all destroyed
above.) And to this purpose also had that Nimrod, Digby, provided his hunting
match against that same time, that numbers of people being flocked together
upon the pretense thereof, they might the easilier have brought to pass the
sudden surprise of her person.

Now the violent taking away of those horses long before day, did seem to be
so great a riot in the eyes of the Common People, that knew of no greater
mystery: And the bold attempting thereof did engender such a suspicion of some
following Rebellion in the hearts of the wiser sort, as both great and small
began to stir and arm themselves, upon this unlooked for accident: Among
whom Sir Fulke Greuill the Elder, Knight, as became one both so ancient in
years and good reputation, and by his Office, being Deputy Lieutenant of
Warwicke-shire, though unable in his body, yet by the zeal and true feruencie
of his mind, did first apprehend this foresaid Riot to be nothing but the
sparkles and sure indices of a following Rebellion; whereupon both stoutly and
honestly he took order to get into his own hands, the Munition and Armor of
all such Gentlemen about him, as were either absent from their own houses, or
in doubtful guard; and also sent such direction to the Towns about him, as
thereupon did follow the striking of Winter by a poor Smith, who had likewise
been taken by those vulgar people, but that he was rescued by the rest of his
company, who perceiving that the Country before them had notice of them,
hastened away with loss in their own sight, sixteen of their followers being
taken by the townes-men, and sent presently to the Shiriffe at Warwick, and
from thence to London.

But before twelve or sixteen hours past, Catesby, Percy, the Winters,
Wrights, Rookewood and the rest, bringing then the assurance that their maine
Plot was failed and bewrayed, whereupon they had builded the golden mountains
of their glorious hopes: They then took their last desperate resolution to
flock together in a troop, and wander, as they did, for the reasons
aforetold. But as upon the one part, the zealous duty to their God and their
Sovereign was so deeply imprinted in the hearts of all the meanest and
poorest sort of the people (although then knowing of no further mystery then
such public misbehauiours, as their own eyes taught them) as notwithstanding
of their fair shows and pretense of their Catholic cause, no creature, man
or woman through all the Country, would once so much as give them willingly a
cup of drink, or any sort of comfort or support, but with execrations
detested them: So on the other part, the Sheriffs of the Shires, where-through
they wandered, conuening their people with all speed possible, hunted as hotly
after them, as the euilnesse of the way, and the vnprouidednesse of their
people upon that sudden could permit them. And so at last after Sir Richard
Verney, Shiriffe of Warwicke-shire, had carefully and straightly been in chase
of them to the confines of his County, part of the meaner sort being also
apprehended by him: Sir Richard Walsh Shiriffe of Worcestershire did likewise
duetifully and hotely pursue them through his Shire; And having gotten sure
trial of their taking harbor at the house aboue-named, he did send
Trumpetters and Messengers to them, commanding them in the Kings name to
render unto him, his Majesty's minister; and knowing no more at that time of
their guilt then was publicly visible, did promise upon their duetifull and
obedient rendering unto him, to intercede at the Kings hands for the sparing of
their lives: who received only from them this scornful answer (they being
better witnesses to themselves of their inward evil consciences) That he had
need of better assistance, then of those few numbers that were with him, before
he could be able to command or comptroll them.

But here fell the wondrous work of Gods Justice, The preparation to assault
the house.
That while this message passed between the Shiriffe and them, The Shiriffes
and his peoples zeal being justly kindled and augmented by their arrogant
answer, and so they preparing themselves to give a furious assault; and the
other party making themselves ready within the house to perform their
promise by a defense as resolute; It pleased God that in the mending of the
fire in their chamber, one small spark should fly out, and light among less
then two pound weight of Powder, which was drying a little from the chimney;
which being thereby blown up, so maimed the faces of some of the principal
Rebels, and the hands and sides of others of them (blowing up with it also a
great bag full of Powder, which notwithstanding never took fire) as they were
not only disabled and discouraged hereby from any further resistance, in
respect Catesby himself, Rookwood, Grant, and diverse others of greatest
account among them, Catesby who was the first inuentor of this Treason in
general, and of the manner of working the same by powder, in special, himself
now first maimed with the blowing up of powder, and next he and Percy both
killed with one shot proceeding from powder.
were thereby made unable for defense: but also wonderfully stricken with
amazement in their guilty consciences, calling to memory how God had justly
punished them with that same Instrument, which they should have used for the
effectuating of so great a sin, according to the old Latin, saying, In quo
peccamus, in eodem plectimur; as they presently (see the wonderful power of
Gods Justice upon guilty consciences) did all fall down upon their knees,
praying GOD to pardon them for their bloody enterprise; And thereafter giving
over any further debate, opened the gate, suffered the Sheriffs people to rush
in furiously among them, and desperately sought their own present destruction;
The three specials of them joining backs together, Catesby, Percy, and Winter,
whereof two with one shot, Catesby and Percy were slain, and the third,
VVinter, taken and saved alive.

And thus these resolute and high aspiring Catholics, who dreamed of no less
then the destruction of Kings and kingdoms, and promised to themselves no
lower estate then the government of great and ancient Monarchies, were
miserably defeated, and quite overthrown in an instant, falling in the pit
which they had prepared for others; and so fulfilling that sentence which his
Majesty did in a manner prophecy of them in his Oration to the Parliament:
some presently slain, others deadly wounded, stripped of their clothes, left
lying miserably naked, and so dying rather of cold, then of the danger of their
wounds; and the rest that either were whole, or but lightly hurt, taken and led
prisoners by the Sheriff the ordinary minister of Justice, to the Jail, the
ordinary place even of the basest malefactors, where they remained till their
sending up to London, being met with a huge confluence of people of all sorts,
desirous to see them as the rarest sort of Monsters; fools to laugh at them,
women and children to wonder, all the common people to gaze, the wiser sort to
satisfy their curiosity in seeing the outward cases of so unheard of a
villeny: and generally all sorts of people to satiate and fill their eyes with
the sight of them, whom in their hearts they so far admired and detested:
serving so for a fearful and public spectacle of Gods fierce wrath and just
indignation.

What hereafter will be done with them, is to be left to the Justice of his
Majesty and the State: Which as no good Subject needs to doubt will be
performed in the own due time by a public and an exemplarie punishment: So
have we all that are faithful and humble Subjects, great cause to pray
earnestly to the Almighty, that it will please him who has the hearts of all
Princes in his hands, to put it in his Majesty's heart to make such a
conclusion of this Tragedy to the Traitors, but Tragicomedie to the King and
all his true Subjects; as thereby the glory of God and his true Religion may be
advanced, the future security of the King and his estate procured and provided
for, all hollow and dishonest hearts discovered and prevented, and this horrible
attempt (lacking due epitheres) to be so justly avenged, That where they
thought by one Catholic indeed and universal blow to accomplish the wish of
that Roman tyrant, who wished all the bodies in Rome to have but one neck,
and so by the violent force of Powder to break up as with a Pettard our triple
locked peaceful gates of Ianus, which (God be thanked) they could not compass
by any other means; they may justly be so recompensed for their trewly
viperous intended parricide, As Aeneas Syl^^^^ does notably write concerning
the murder of K. James the first of Scotland, and the following punishment of
the traitors, whereof himself was an eye witness. Hist. de Europa, cap. 46.
as the shame and infamy that otherwise would light upon this whole Nation,
for having unfortunately hatched such cockatrice eggs, may be repaired by the
execution of famous and honorable Justice upon the offenders; and so the
kingdom purged of them, may hereafter perpetually flourish in peace and
prosperity, by the happy conjunction of the hearts of all honest and true
Subjects, with their just and religious Sovereign.

And thus whereas they thought to have effaced our memories, the memory of them
shall remain (but to their perpetual infamy) and we (as I said in the
beginning) shall with all thankfulness eternally preserve the memory of so
great a benefit. To which let every good Subject say AMEN.

Triplici nodo, triplex cuneus. OR AN APOLOGY FOR THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.
AGAINST THE TWO BREVES OF POPE PAVLVS QVINTVS, AND THE late Letter of
Cardinal BELLARMINE to G. BLACKVVEL the Archpriest.
What a monstrous, rare, nay never heard-of Treacherous attempt, was plotted
within these few years here in England, for the destruction of Me, my
Bedfellow, and our posterity, the whole house of Parliament, and a great
number of good Subjects of all sorts and degrees; is so famous already through
the whole world by the infamy thereof, as it is needless to be repeated or
published any more; the horror of the sin it self does so lowdly proclaim
it. For if those Genesis 4.10.
crying sins, (whereof mention is made in the Scripture) have that epithet
given them for their public infamy, and for procuring as it were with a loud
cry from heaven a just vengeance and recompense, and yet those sins are both
old and too common, neither the world, nor any one Country being ever at any
time clean void of them: If those sins (I say) are said in the Scripture to
cry so loud; What then must this sin do, plotted without cause, infinite in
cruelty, and singular from all examples? What proceeded hereupon is likewise
notorious to the whole world; our Justice only taking hold upon the offenders,
and that in as honorable and public a form of Trial, as ever was used in
this Kingdom.

2. For although the only reason they gave for plotting so heinous an attempt,
was the zeal they carried to the Romish Religion; yet were never any other of
that profession the worse used for that cause, as by our gracious Proclamation
immediately after the discovery of the said fact does plainly appear: only at
the next sitting down again of the Parliament, there were Laws made, setting
down some such orders as were thought fit for preventing the like mischief in
time to come. Amongst which a form of OATH was framed to be taken by my
Subjects, whereby they should make a clear profession of their resolution,
faithfully to persist in their obedience unto me, according to their natural
allegiance; To the end that I might hereby make a separation, not only
between all my good Subjects in general, and unfaithful Traitors, that
intended to withdraw themselves from my obedience; But specially to make a
separation between so many of my Subjects, who although they were otherwise
Popishly affected, yet retained in their hearts the print of their natural
duty to their Sovereign; and those who being carried away with the like
fanaticall zeal that the Powder-Traitors were, could not contain themselves
within the bounds of their natural Allegiance, but thought diversity of
religion a safe pretext for all kind of treasons, and rebellions against their
Sovereign. Which godly and wise intent, God did bless with success
accordingly: For very many of my Subjects that were Popishly affected, as well
Priests, as Layicks, did freely take the same Oath: whereby they both gave me
occasion to think the better of their fidelity, and likewise freed themselves
of that heavy slander, that although they were fellow professors of one
Religion with the powder-Traitors, yet were they not joined with them in
treasonable courses against their Sovereign; whereby all quietly minded
Papists were put out of despair, and I gave a good proof that I intended no
persecution against them for conscience cause, but only desired to be secured
of them for civil obedience, which for conscience cause they were bound to
perform.

3. But the devil could not have devised a more malicious trick for
interrupting this so calm and clement a course, then fell out by the sending
hither, and publishing a Breue of the Popes, countermanding all them of his
profession to take this Oath; Thereby sowing new seeds of jealousy between me
and my Popish Subjects, by stirring them up to disobey that lawful
commandment of their Sovereign, which was ordained to be taken of them as a
pledge of their fidelity; And so by their refusal of so just a charge, to
give me so great and just a ground for punishment of them, without touching
any matter of conscience: throwing themselves needlessly into one of these
desperate straits; either with the loss of their lives and goods to renounce
their Allegiance to their natural Sovereign; or else to procure the
condemnation of their souls by renouncing the Catholic faith, as he
alleges.

4. And on the other part, although disparitie of Religion (the Pope being head
of the contrary part) can permit no intelligence nor intercourse of messengers
between me and the Pope: yet there being no denounced war between us, he
has by this action broken the rules of common civility and justice between
Christian Princes, in thus condemning me unheard, both by accounting me a
persecutor, which cannot be but implied by exhorting the Papists to endure
Martyrdom; as likewise by so straightly commanding all those of his profession
in England, to refuse the taking of this Oath; thereby refusing to profess
their natural obedience to me their Sovereign. For if he think himself my
lawful Judge, wherefore has he condemned me unheard? And, if he have nothing
to do with me and my government (as indeed he has not) why does he mittere
falcem in alienam messem, to meddle between me and my Subjects, especially in
matters that merely and only concern civil obedience? And yet could Pius
Quintus in his greatest fury and auowed quarrel against the late Queen, do
no more injury unto her; then he has in this case offered unto me, without
so much as a pretended or an alleged cause. For what difference there is,
between the commanding Subjects to rebel, and loosing them from their Oath of
Allegiance as Pius Quintus did; and the commanding of Subjects not to obey in
making profession of their Oath of their dutiful Allegiance, as this Pope has
now done: no man can easily discern.

5. But to draw near unto his Brene, wherein certainly he has taken more
pains then he needed, by setting down in the said Breue the whole body of the
Oath at length; whereas the only naming of the Title thereof might as well
have served, for any answer he has made thereunto (making Vna litura, that
is, the flat and general condemnation of the whole Oath to serve for all his
refutation.) Therein having as well in this respect as in the former, dealt
both indiscreetly with me, and injuriously with his own Catholics. With me;
in not refuting particularly what special words he quarrelled in that Oath;
which if he had done, it might have been that for the fatherly care I have
not to put any of my Subjects to a needless extremity, I might have been
contented in some sort to have reformed or interpreted those words. With his
own Catholics: for either if I had so done, they had been thereby fully
eased in that business; or at least if I would not have condescended to have
altered any thing in the said Oath, yet would thereby some appearance or
shadow of excuse have been left unto them for refusing the same not as seeming
thereby to swerve from their Obedience and Allegiance unto me, but only
being stayed from taking the same upon the scrupulous tenderness of their
consciences, in regard of those particular words which the Pope had noted and
condemned therein.

And now let us hear the words of his thunder.

POPE PAVLVS THE FIFTH, to the ENGLISH Catholics.
Well-beloved Sons, The Pope his first Breue.
Salutation and Apostolical Benediction. The tribulations and calamities,
which ye have continually sustained for the keeping of the Catholic Faith,
have always afflicted us with great grief of mind. But for as much as we
understand that at this time all things are more grievous, our affliction
hereby is wonderfully increased. For we have heard how you are compelled, by
most grievous punishments set before you, to go to the Churches of Heretics,
to frequent their assemblies, to be present at their Sermons. Truly we do
undoubtedly believe, that they which with so great constancy and fortitude,
have hitherto endured most cruel persecutions and almost infinite miseries,
that they may walk without spot in the Law of the Lord; will never suffer
themselves to be defiled with the communion of those that have forsaken the
divine Law. Yet notwithstanding, being compelled by the zeal of our Pastoral
Office, and by our Fatherly care which we do continually take for the
salvation of your souls, we are enforced to admonish and desire you, that by
no means you come unto the Churches of the Heretics, or hear their Sermons,
or communicate with them in their Rites, lest you incur the wrath of God: For
these things may ye not do without indamaging the worship of God, and your
own salvation. As likewise you cannot, without most evident and grievous
wronging of Gods Honor, bind your selves by the Oath, which in like manner we
have heard with very great grief of our heart is administered unto you, of the
tenor underwritten. viz.

I A. B. do trewly and sincerely acknowledge, The Oath.
profess, testify and declare in my conscience before God and the world, That
our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, is lawful King of this Realm, and of all
other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries: And that the Pope neither of
himself, nor by any authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other
means with any other, has any power or authority to depose the King, or to
dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any
foreign Prince to invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any
of his Subjects of their Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give
License or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise tumults, or to offer any
violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any
of his Majesty's subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear
from my heart, that, notwithstanding any declaration or sentence of
Excommunication, or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted, by
the Pope or his successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be
derived from him or his Sea, against the said King, his heirs or successors,
or any absolution of the said subjects from their obedience; I will bear faith
and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his heirs and successors, and him and
them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and
attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their
Crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such sentence, or declaration,
or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto
his Majesty, his heirs and successors, all Treasons and traitorous
conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them.
And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure
as impious and Heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, That Princes
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by
their Subjects or any other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in conscience am
resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person whatsoever, has power to
absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof; which I acknowledge by good and
full authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all
Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly
and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me
spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the
same words, without any Equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgment heartily,
willingly, and trewly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me GOD.

Which things since they are thus; it must evidently appear unto you by the
words themselves, That such an Oath cannot be taken without hurting of the
Catholic Faith, and the salvation of your souls; seeing it conteines many
things which are flat contrary to Faith and salvation. Wherefore we do
admonish you, that you do utterly abstain from taking this and the like
Oaths: which thing we do the more earnestly require of you, because we have
experience of the constancy of your faith, which is tried like gold in the
fire of perpetual tribulation. We do well know, that you will cheerfully
undergo all kind of cruel torments whatsoever, yea and constantly endure
death it self, rather then you will in any thing offend the Majesty of GOD.
And this our confidence is confirmed by those things, which are daily reported
unto us, of the singular virtue, valor, and fortitude which in these last
times does no less shine in your Martyrs, then it did in the first beginning
of the Church. Stand therefore, your loins being girt about with verity, and
having on the breast plate of righteousness, taking the shield of Faith, be ye
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; And let nothing hinder you.
He which will crown you, and does in Heaven behold your conflicts, will
finish the good work which he has begun in you. You know how he has
promised his disciples, that he will never leave them Orphans: for he is
faithful which has promised. Hold fast therefore his correction, that is,
being rooted and grounded in Charity, whatsoever ye do, whatsoever ye
endeavor, do it with one accord, in simplicity of heart, in meekness of
Spirit, without murmuring or doubting. For by this do all men know that we are
the disciples of CHRIST, if we have love one to another. Which charity, as it
is very greatly to be desired of all faithful Christians; So certainly is it
altogether necessary for you, most blessed sons. For by this your charity,
the power of the devil is weakened, who does so much assail you, since that
power of his is especially vpheld by the contentions and disagreement of our
sons. We exhort you therefore by the bowels of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, by
whose love we are taken out of the jaws of eternal death; That above all
things, you would have mutual charity among you. Surely Pope Clement the
eight of happy memory, has given you most profitable precepts of practicing
brotherly charity one to another, in his Letters in form of a Breue, to our
well-beloved son M. George Arch priest of the Kingdom of England, dated the 5.
day of the month of October 1602. Put them therefore diligently in practice,
and be not hindered by any difficulty or doubtfulnesse. We command you that ye
do exactly observe the words of those letters, and that ye take and
understand them simply as they sound, and as they lie; all power to interpret
them otherwise, being taken away. In the mean while, we will never cease to
pray to the Father of Mercies, that he would with pity behold your afflictions
and your pains; And that he would keep and defend you with his continual
protection: whom we do gently greet with our Apostolical Benediction. Dated
at Rome at S. Mark, under the Signet of the Fisherman, the tenth of the
Calends of October, 1606. the second year of our Popedom.

THE ANSWER TO THE FIRST BREVE.
FIrst, the Pope expresses herein his sorrow, for that persecution which the
Catholics sustain for the faiths sake. Wherein, besides the maine vntrewth
whereby I am so injuriously used, I must ever auow and maintain, as the truth
is according to mine own knowledge, that the late Queen of famous memory,
never punished any Papist for Religion, but that their own punishment was ever
extorted out of her hands against her will, by their own misbehauiour, which
both the time and circumstances of her actions will manifestly make proof of.
For before Pius Quintus his excommunication giving her over for a prey, and
setting her Subjects at liberty to rebel, it is well known she never meddled
with the blood or hard punishment of any Catholic, nor made any rigorous
Laws against them. And since that time, who list to compare with an
indifferent eye, the manifold intended invasions against her whole Kingdom,
the foreign practices, the internal public rebellions, the private plots and
machinations, poysonings, murders, and all sorts of devises, and quid non?
daily set abroach; and all these wares continually fostered and fomented from
Rome; together with the continual corrupting of her Subjects, as well by
temporal bribes, as by fair and specious promises of eternal felicity; and
nothing but book upon book publicly set forth by her fugitives, for
approbation of so holy designs: who list, I say, with an indifferent eye, to
look on the one part, upon those infinite and intolerable temptations, and on
the other part upon the just, yet moderate punishment of a part of these
heinous offenders; shall easily see that that blessed defunct LADY was as free
from persecution, as they shall free these hellish Instruments from the honor
of martyrdom.

5. But now having sacrificed (if I may so say) to the Manes of my late
Predecessor, I may next with Saint PAVL justly vindicate mine own fame, from
those innumerable calumnies spread against me, in testifying the truth of my
behavior toward the Papists: wherein I may trewly affirm, That whatsoever was
her just and merciful Government over the Papists in her time, my Government
over them since has so far exceeded hers, in Mercy and Clemency, as not
only the Papists themselves grew to that height of pride, in confidence of my
mildness, as they did directly expect, and assuredly promise to themselves
liberty of Conscience, and equality with other of my Subjects in all things;
but even a number of the best and faithfulliest of my said Subjects, were cast
in great fear and amazement of my course and proceedings, ever prognosticating
and justly suspecting that sour fruit to come of it, which showed it self
clearly in the Powder Treason. How many did I honor with Knighthood, of
known and open Recusants? How indifferently did I give audience, and access
to both sides, bestowing equally all favors and honors on both professions?
How free and continual access, had all ranks and degrees of Papists in my
Court and company? And above all, how frankely and freely did I free Recusants
of their ordinary paiments? Besides, it is cuident what strait order was given
out of my own mouth to the Judges, to spare the execution of all Priests,
(notwithstanding their conviction,) joining thereunto a gracious Proclamation,
whereby all Priests, that were at liberty, and not taken, might go out of the
country by such a day: my general Pardon having been extended to all
convicted Priests in prison: whereupon they were set at liberty as good
Subjects: and all Priests that were taken after, sent over and set at liberty
there. But time and paper will fail me to make enumeration of all the benefits
and favors that I bestowed in general and particular upon Papists: in
recounting whereof, every scrape of my pen would serve but for a blot of the
Popes ingratitude and injustice, in meating me with so hard a measure for the
same. So as I think I have sufficiently, or at least with good reason wiped
the Magno cum anims moerore, etc.
tears from the Popes eyes, for complaining upon such persecution, who if he
had been but politickely wise, although he had had no respect to Justice and
Verity, would have in this complaint of his, made a difference between my
present time, and the time of the late Queen: And so by his commending of my
moderation, in regard of former times, might have had hope to have moved me to
have continued in the same clement course: For it is a true saying, that
alleged kindness upon noble minds, does ever work much. And for the maine
vntrewth of any persecution in my time, it can never be proved, that any
were, or are put to death since I came to the Crown for cause of Conscience;
except that now this discharge given by the Pope to all Catholics to take
their Oath of Allegiance to me, be the cause of the due punishment of many:
which if it fall out to be, let the blood light upon the Popes head, who is the
only cause thereof.

As for the next point contained in his Breue concerning his discharge of all
Papists to come to our Church, or frequent our rites and ceremonies, I am not
to meddle at this time with that matter, because my errand now only is to
publish to the world the Injury and Injustice done unto me, in discharging my
subjects to make profession of their obedience unto me. The intendement of
this discourse.
Now as to the point where the Oath is quarrelled, it is set down in few, but
very weighty words; to wit, That it ought to be clear unto all Catholics,
that this Oath cannot be taken with safety of the Catholic Faith, and of
their souls health, since it contains many things that are plainly and
directly contrary to their faith and salvation. To this, the old saying
fathered upon the Philosopher, may very fitly be applied, Multa dicit, sed
pauca probat; nay indeed, Nihil omnino probat: For how the profession of the
natural Allegiance of Subjects to their Prince can be directly opposite to the
faith and salvation of souls, is so far beyond my simple reading in
Divinity, as I must think it a strange and new Assertion, to proceed out of
the mouth of that pretended general Pastor of all Christian souls. I read
indeed, and not in one, or two, or three places of Scripture, that Subjects
are bound to obey their Princes for conscience sake, whether they were good or
wicked Princes. So said the people to Josh. 1.17.
Joshua, As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee. So the Iere.
27.12.
Prophet commanded the people to obey the King of Babel, saying, Put your
necks under the yoke of the King of Babel, and serve him and his people, that
ye may live. So were the children of Israel, unto Exodus 5.1.
Pharaoh, desiring him to let them go: so to Ezra 1.3.
Cyrus, obtaining leave of him to return to build the Temple: and in a word,
the Apostle willed all men Romans 13 5.
to be subject to the higher powers for conscience sake. Agreeable to the
Scriptures did the Fathers teach. August. in Psalm. 124.
Augustine speaking of Julian, says, Julian was an unbelieving Emperor: was
he not an Apostata, an Oppressor, and an Idolater? Christian Soldiers served
that unbelieving Emperor: when they came to the cause of CHRIST, they would
acknowledge no Lord, but him that is in heaven. When he would have them to
worship Idols and to sacrifice, they preferred GOD before him: But when he
said, Go forth to fight, invade such a nation, they presently obeyed. They
distinguished their eternal Lord from their temporal, and yet were they
subject even unto their temporal Lord, for his sake that was their eternal
Lord and Master. Tertull. ad Scap.
Tertullian says, A Christian is enemy to no man, much less to the Prince,
whom he knows to be appointed of God; and so of necessity must love,
reverence and honor him, and wish him safe with the whole Roman Empire, so
long as the world shall last: for so long shall it endure. We honor therefore
the Emperor in such sort, as is lawful for us, and expedient for him, as a
man, the next unto God, and obtaining from God whatsoever he has, and only
inferior unto God. This the Emperor himself would: for so is he greater
then all, while he is inferior only to the true God. Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
ad. Ant. Imperat.
Iustine Martyr; We only adore the Lord, and in all other things cheerfully
perform service to you, professing that you are Emperors and Princes of men.
Amb. in oratcont. Auxentiu^, de basilicis traden. habetur lib. 5. epist. Ambr.
Ambrose; I may lament, weep, and sigh: My tears are my weapons against their
arms, soldiers, and the Goths also such are the weapons of a Priest:
Ocherwise neither ought I, neither can Iresist. Optat. contra Parmen. lib. 3.
Optatus; Over the Emperor, there is none but only God, that made the
Emperor. And Greg. Mag. Epist. lib. 2. indict. 11. Epist. 61.
Gregory writing to Mauritius about a certain Law, that a Soldier should not
be received into a Monastery, nondum expleta militia, The Almighty God, says
he, holds him guilty, that is not upright to the most excellent Emperor in
all things that he does or speaks. And then calling himself the unworthy
servant of his Godliness, goes on in the whole Epistle to show the injustice
of that Law, as he pretends: and in the end concludes his Epistle with
these words; I being subject to your command, have caused the same Law to be
sent through diverse parts of your Dominions: and because the Law it self does
not agree to the Law of the Almighty God, I have signified the same by my
Letters to your most excellent Lordship: so that on both parts I have paid
what I ought; because I have yielded obedience to the Emperor, and have not
holden my peace, in what I thought for God. Now how great a contrariety there
is, betwixt this ancient Popes action in obeying an Emperor by the publication
of his Decree, which in his own conscience he thought unlawful, and this
present Popes prohibition to a Kings Subjects from obedience unto him in things
most lawful and mere temporal; I remit it to the Readers indifferency. And
answerably to the Fathers, spoke the Councels in their Decrees. As the Council
of Council Arelatense sub Carolo Mag. Can. 26.
Arles, submitting the whole Council to the Emperor in these words; These
things we have decreed to be presented to our Lord the Emperor, beseeching
his Clemency, that if we have done less then we ought, it may be supplied by
his wisdom: if any thing otherwise then reason requires, it may be corrected
by his judgment: if any thing be found fault with by us with reason, it may
be perfected by his aid with GODS favorable assistance.

But why should I speak of Charles the great, to whom not one Council, but
six several Councels, Frankeford, Arles, Tours, Chalons, Ments and Rhemes did
wholly submit themselves? and not rather speak of all the general Councels,
that of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and the four other commonly
so reputed, which did submit themselves to the Emperors wisdom and piety in
all things? Insomuch as that of Ephesus repeated it four several times, That
they were summoned by the Emperors Oracle, beck, charge and command, and
betook themselves to his Godliness: Vide Epistola^^ general^^ Conc. Ephesians. ad
August.
beseeching him, that the Decrees made against Nestorius and his followers,
might by his power have their full force and validity, as appears manifestly
in the Epistle of the general Council of Ephesus written ad Augustos. I also
read that Christsaid, His 2 John 18 36.
kingdom was not of this world, bidding, Give to 3 Matt. 22.21.
Caesar what was Cesars, and to God what was Gods. And I ever held it for an
infallible Maxim in Divinity, That temporal obedience to a temporal
Magistrate, did nothing repugne to matters of faith or salvation of souls: But
that ever temporal obedience was against faith and salvation of souls, as in
this Breue is alleged, was never before heard nor read of in the Christian
Church. And therefore I would have wished the Pope, before he had set down
this commandment to all Papists here, That, since in him is the power by the
infabillity of his spirit, to make new Articles of Faith when ever it shall
please him, he had first set it down for an Article of Faith, before he had
commanded all Catholics to believe and obey it. I will then conclude the
answer to this point in a Dilemma.

Either it is lawful to obey the Sovereign in temporal things, Question.
or not.

Pope so unjust, and so cruel toward his own Catholics, as to command them
to disobey their Sovereigns lawful commandment?

If it be unlawful,

And as for the vehement exhortation unto them to persevere in constancy,
Answer to the Popes exhortation.
and to suffer Martyrdom and all tribulation for this cause; it requires no
other answer then only this, That if the ground be good whereupon he has
commanded them to stand, then exhortation to constancy is necessary: but if
the ground be unjust and naught (as indeed it is, and I have in part already
proved) then this exhortation of his can work no other effect, then to make
him guilty of the blood of so many of his sheep, whom he does thus wilfully
cast away; not only to the needless loss of their lives, and ruin of their
families, but even to the laying on of a perpetual slander upon all Papists;
as if no zealous Papist could be a true subject to his Prince; and that the
profession of that Religion, and the Temporal obedience to the Civil
Magistrate, were two things repugnant and incompatible in themselves. Famae
vires acquirit eundo.
But evil information, and untrue reports (which being carried so far as
between this and Rome, cannot but increase by the way) might have abused the
Pope, and made him dispatch this Breue so rashly: For that great City, Queen
of the World, and as themselves confess, Eusebius, Oecumenius and Leo hold,
that by Babylon, in 1. Pet. 5.13. Rome is meant, as the Rhemists themselves
confess.
mystically Babylon, cannot but be so full of all sorts of Intelligencies.
Besides, all complainers (as the Catholics here are) be naturally given to
exaggerate their own griefs, and multiply thereupon: So that it is no wonder,
that even a just Judge sitting there, should upon wrong information, give an
unrighteous sentence; as some of their own party do not stick to confess,
That Pius Quintus was too rashly carried upon wrong information, to pronounce
his thunder of Excommunication upon the late Queen. And it may be, the like
excuse shall hereafter be made for the two Breues, which See the Relation of
the whole proceedings against the Traitors, Garnet and his confederates.
Clemens Octauus sent to ENGLAND immediately before her death, for debarring me
of the Crown, or any other that either would profess, or any ways tolerate
the professors of our Religion; contrary to his manifold vows and
protestations, simul and eodem tempore, and as it were, delivered vno and eodem
spiritu, to diverse of my ministers abroad, professing such kindness, and
showing such forwardness to advance me to this Crown. The Catholics opinion
of the Brene.
Nay, the most part of Catholics here, finding this Breue when it came to
their hands to be so far against Divinity, Policy, or natural sense,
were firmly persuaded that it was but a counterfeit Libell, devised in hatred
of the Pope; or at the farthest, a thing hastily done upon wrong information,
as was before said. Of which opinion were not only the simpler sort of
Papists, but even some amongst them of best account, both for learning and
experience; whereof the Archpriest himself was one: But for soluing of this
objection, the Pope himself has taken new pains by sending forth a second
Breue, only for giving faith and confirmation to the former; That whereas
before, his sin might have been thought to have proceeded from rashness and
misinformation, he will now wilfully and willingly double the same; whereof
the Copy follows.

The second Breue.
TO OUR BELOVED SONS the English Catholics, Paulus P.P.Vtus.
Beloved sons, Salutation and Apostolical Benediction.
It is reported unto us, that there are found certain amongst you, who when as
we have sufficiently declared by our Letters, dated the last year on the tenth
of the Calends of October in the form of a Breue, that ye cannot with safe
Conscience take the Oath, which was then required of you; and when as we have
further straightly commanded you, that by no means ye should take it: yet there
are some, I say, among you, which dare now affirm, that such Letters
concerning the forbidding of the Oath were not written of our own accord, or
of our own proper will, but rather for the respect and at the instigation of
other men. And for that cause the same men do go about to persuade you, that
our commands in the said Letters are not to be regarded. Surely this news did
trouble us; and that so much the more, because having had experience of your
obedience (most dearly beloved sons) who to the end ye might obey this holy
Sea, have godlily and valiantly contemned your riches wealth, honor, liberty,
yea and life it self; we should never have suspected that the truth of our
Apostolic Letters could once be called into question among you, that by this
pretense ye might exempt your selves from our Commandments. But we do herein
perceive the subtlety and craft of the enemy of man's salvation, and we do
attribute this your backwardness rather to him, then to your own will. And
for this cause, we have thought good to write the second time unto you, and to
signify unto you again, That our Apostolic Letters dated the last year on
the tenth of the Calends of October, concerning the prohibition of the Oath,
were written not only upon our proper motion, and of our certain knowledge,
but also after long and weighty deliberation used concerning all those things,
which are contained in them; and that for that cause ye are bound fully to
observe them, rejecting all interpretation persuading to the contrary. And this
is our mere, pure, and perfect will, being always careful of your salvation,
and always minding those things, which are most profitable unto you. And we
do pray without ceasing, that he that has appointed our lowliness to the
keeping of the flock of Christ, would inlighten our thoughts and our counsels:
whom we do also continually desire, that he would increase in you (our beloved
Sons) faith, constancy, and mutual charity and peace one to another. All
whom, we do most lovingly bless with all charitable affection.

Dated at Rome at Saint Marks under the Signet of the Fisherman, the x. of the
Calends of September, 1607. the third year of our Popedom.
THE ANSWER TO THE second BREVE.
NOw for this Breue, I may justly reflect his own phrase upon him, in tearming
it to be The craft of the Devil. For if the Devil had studied a thousand
years, for to find out a mischief for our Catholics here, he has found
it in this; that now when many Catholics have taken their Oath, and some
Priests also; yea, the Archpriest himself, without compunction or sticking,
they shall not now only be bound to refuse the profession of their natural
Allegiance to their Sovereign, which might yet have been some way colored
upon diverse scruples conceived upon the words of the Oath; but they must now
renounce and forswear their profession of obedience already sworn, and so
must as it were at the third instance forswear their former two Oaths, first
closely sworn, by their birth in their natural Allegiance; and next, clearly
confirmed by this Oath, which does nothing but express the same: so as no man
can now hold the faith, or procure the salvation of his soul in ENGLAND, that
must not abjure and renounce his borne and sworn Allegiance to his natural
Sovereign.

And yet it is not sufficient to ratify the last years Breue, by a new one
come forth this year; but (that not only every year, but every month may
produce a new monster) the great and famous Writer of the Controversies, the
late vn-Iesuited Cardinal Bellarmine, must add his talent to this good work,
by blowing the bellows of sedition, and sharpening the spur to rebellion, by
sending such a Letter of his to the Archpriest here, as it is a wonder how
passion, and an ambitious desire of maintaining that Monarchy, should charm
the wits of so famously learned a man.

The Copy whereof here follows.

TO THE VERY REVEREND Mr. GEORGE BLACKWELL, ARCHPRIEST of the ENGLISH: ROBERT
BELLARMINE Cardinal of the holy Church of Rome, Greeting.
Reverend Sir, and brother in CHRIST; It is almost forty years since we did
see one the other: but yet I have never been unmindful of our ancient
acquaintance, neither have I ceased, seeing I could do you no other good, to
commend your laboring most painfully in the Lords Vineyard, in my prayers to
God. And I doubt not, but that I have lived all this while in your memory, and
have had some place in your prayers at the Lords Altar. So therefore even unto
this time we have abidden, as S. John speaks, in the mutual love one of the
other, not by word or letter, but in deed and truth. But alate message which
was brought unto us within these few days, of your bonds and imprisonment,
has enforced me to break off this silence; which message, although it seemed
heavy in regard of the loss which that Church has received, by their being
thus deprived of the comfort of your pastoral function amongst them, yet
withal it seemed joyous, because you drew near unto the glory of Martyrdom,
then the which gift of God there is none more happy; That you, who have fed
your flock so many years with the word and doctrine, should now feed it more
gloriously by the example of your patience. But another heavy tidings did not
a little disquiet and almost take away this joy, which immediately followed, of
the adversaries assault, and peradventure of the slip and fall of your
constancy in refusing an unlawful Oath. Neither trewly (most dear brother)
could that Oath therefore be lawful, because it was offered in sort tempered
and modified: for you know that those kind of modifications are nothing else,
but sleights and subtilties of Satan, that the Catholic faith touching the
Primacie of the Sea Apostolic, might either secretly or openly be shot at; for
the which faith so many worthy Martyrs even in that very England it self, have
resisted unto blood. For most certain it is, that in whatsoever words the Oath
is conceived by the adversaries of the faith in that Kingdom, it tends to this
end, that the Authority of the head of the Church in England, may be
transferred from the successor of S. Peter, to the successor of King Henry
the eight: For that which is pretended of the danger of the Kings life, if the
high Priest should have the same power in England, which he has in all other
Christian Kingdoms, it is altogether idle, as all that have any understanding,
may easily perceive. For it was never heard of from the Churches infancy
until this day, that ever any Pope did command, that any Prince, though an
Heretic, though an Ethnike, though a persecutour, should be murdered; or did
approve of the fact, when it was done by any other. And why, I pray you, does
only the King of England sear that, which none of all other the Princes in
Christendom either does fear, or ever did fear?

But, as I said, these vain pretexts are but the traps and stratagemes of
Satan: Of which kind I could produce not a few out of ancient Stories, if I
went about to write a Book and not an Epistle. One only for example sake, I
will call to your memory. S. Gregorius Nazianzenus in his first Oration against
Julian the Emperor, reports, That he, the more easily to beguile the simple
Christians, did insert the Images of the false gods into the pictures of the
Emperor, which the Romans did use to bow down unto with a civil kind of
reverence: so that no man could do reverence to the Emperors picture, but
withal he must adore the Images of the false gods; whereupon it came to pass
that many were deceived. And if there were any that found out the Emperors
craft and refused to worship his picture, those were most grievously punished,
as men that had contemned the Emperor in his Image. Some such like thing, me
thinks, I see in the Oath that is offered to you; which is so craftily
composed, that no man can detest Treason against the King and make profession
of his Civil subjection, but he must be constramed perfidiously to deny the
Primacie of the Apostolic Sea. But the servants of Christ, and especially the
chief Priests of the Lord, ought to be so far from taking an unlawful
Oath, where they may indamage the Faith, that they ought to beware that they
give not the least suspicion of dissimulation that they have taken it, least
they might seem to have left any example of preuarication to faithful people.
Which thing that worthy Eleazar did most notably perform, who would neither
eat swines flesh, nor so much as feign to have eaten it, although he saw the
great torments that did hang over his head; least, as himself speaks in the
second Book of the Machabees, many young men might be brought through that
simulation, to preuaricate with the Law. Neither did Basil the Great by his
example, which is more fit for our purpose, carry himself less worthily toward
Valens the Emperor. For as Theodoret writes in his History, when the Deputy
of that heretical Emperor did persuade Saint Basil, that he would not resist
the Emperor for a little subtlety of a few points of doctrine; that most holy
and prudent man made answer, That it was not to be endured, that the least
syllable of Gods word should be corrupted, but rather all kind of torment was
to be embraced, for the maintenance of the Truth thereof. Now I suppose, that
there wants not amongst you, who say that they are but subtilties of Opinions
that are contained in the Oath that is offered to the Catholics, and that you
are not to strius against the Kings Authority for such a little matter. But
there are not wanting also amongst you holy men like unto Basil the Great,
which will openly auow, that the very least syllable of Gods divine Truth is
not to be corrupted, though many torments were to be endured, and death it
self set before you: Amongst whom it is meet, that you should be one, or
rather the Standard bearer, and General to the rest. And whatsoever has been
the cause, that your Constancy has quailed, whether it be the suddainenesse
of your apprehension, or the bitterness of your persecution, or the
imbecilitie of your old aage: yet we trust in the goodness of God, and in
your own long continued virtue, that it will come to pass, that as you seem
in some part to have imitated the fall of Peter and Marcellinus, so you shall
happily imitate their valor in recovering your strength, and maintaining the
Truth: For if you will diligently weigh the whole matter with your self,
trewly you shall see, it is no small matter that is called in question by this
Oath, but one of the principal heads of our Faith, and foundations of
Catholic Religion. For hear what your Apostle Saint Gregory the Great has
written in his 24. Epistle of his 11. Book. Let not the reverence due to the
Apostolic Sea, be troubled by any man's presumption; for then the state of the
members does remain entire, when the Head of the Faith is not bruised by any
injury: Therefore by Saint Gregory's testimony, when they are busy about
disturbing or diminishing, or taking away of the Primacie of the Apostolic
Sea; then are they busy about cutting off the very head of the faith, and
dissoluing of the state of the whole body, and of all the members. Which self
same thing S. Le^^ ^^th confirm in his third Sermon of his Assumption to the
Popedom, when he says; Our Lord had a special care of Peter, and prayed
properly for Peter's faith, as though the state of others were more stable, when
their Princes mind was not to be overcome. Whereupon himself in his Epistle to
the bishops of the province of Vienna, does not doubt to affirm, that he is
not partaker of the divine Mystery, that dare depart from the solidity of
Peter; who also says, That who thinks the Primacy to be denied to that Sea,
he can in no sort lessen the authority of it; but by being puffed up with the
spirit of his own pride, does cast himself headlong into hell. These and many
other of this kind, I am very sure are most familiar to you: who besides many
other books, have diligently read over the visible Monarchy of your own
Sanders, a most diligent writer, and one who has worthily deserved of the
Church of England. Neither can you be ignorant, that these most holy and
learned men, John bishop of Rochester, and Tho. Moore, within our memory, for
this one most weighty head of doctrine, led the way to Martyrdom to many
others, to the exceeding glory of the English nation. But I would put you in
remembrance that you should take heart, and considering the weightines of the
cause, not to trust too much to your own judgment, neither be wise above that
is meet to be wise: and if peradventure your fall have proceeded not upon want
of consideration, but through humane infirmity, and for fear of punishment and
imprisonment, yet do not prefer a temporal liberty to the liberty of the
glory of the Sons of God: neither for escaping a light and momentanie
tribulation, lose an eternal weight of glory, which tribulation it self does
work in you. You have fought a good fight a long time, you have wel-neere
finished your course; so many years have you kept the faith: do not therefore
lose the reward of such labors; do not deprive your self of that crown of
righteousness, which so long agone is prepared for you; Do not make the faces of
so many yours both brethren and children ashamed. Upon you at this time are
fixed the eyes of all the Church: yea also, you are made a spectacle to the
world, to Angels, to men; Do not so carry your self in this your last act,
that you leave nothing but laments to your friends, and joy to your enemies.
But rather on the contrary, which we assuredly hope, and for which we
continually power forth prayers to God, display gloriously the banner of faith,
and make to rejoice the Church, which you have made heavy; so shall you not
only merit pardon at Gods hands, but a Crown. Farewell. Quite you like a
man, and let your heart be strengthened. From Rome the 28. day of September
1607.

Your very Reuerendships brother and servant in Christ, Robert Bellarmine
Cardinal.


THE ANSWER TO THE CARDINALS LETTER.
ANd now that I am to enter into the field against him by refuting his Letter,
I must first use this protestation; That no desire of vainglory by matching
with so learned a man, makes me to undertake this task; but only the care
and conscience I have, that such smooth Circes charms and gilded pills, as
full of exterior eloquence, as of inward vntrewths, may not have that public
passage through the world without an answer: whereby my reputation might
unjustly be darkened, by such cloudie and foggie mists of vntrewths and false
imputations, the hearts of unstayed and simple men be misse-led, and the truth
it self smothered.

But before I come to the particular answer of this Letter, A great mistaking
of the state of the Question, and case in hand.
I must here desire the world to wonder with me, at the committing of so gross
an error by so learned a man as that he should have pained himself to have
set down so elaborate a Letter, for the refutation of a quite mistaken
question: For it appears, that our English Fugitives, of whose inward
society with him he so greatly vaunteth, have so fast hammered in his head the
Oath of Supremacy, which has ever been so great a scarre unto them, as he
thinking by his Letter to have refuted the last Oath, has in place thereof
only paid the Oath of Supremacy, which was most in his head; as a man that
being earnestly carried in his thoughts upon another matter, then he is
presently in doing, will often name the matter or person he is thinking of, in
place of the other thing he has at that time in hand.

For as the Oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a difference between
Papists, and them of our profession: so was this Oath, The difference between
the Oath of Supremacy, and this of Allegiance.
which he would seem to impugn, ordained for making a difference between
the ciuilly obedient Papists, and the perverse disciples of the Powder Treason.
Yet does all his Letter run upon an Inuectiue against the compulsion of
Catholics to deny the authority of S. Peter's successors, and in place
thereof to acknowledge the Successors of King Henry the eight: For in K. Henry
the eights time, was the Oath of Supremacy first made: By him were Thomas
Moore and Roffensis put to death, partly for refusing of it: From his time till
now, have all the Princes of this land professing this Religion, successively
in effect maintained the same: and in that Oath only is contained the Kings
absolute power, to be Judge over all persons, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical,
excluding al foreign powers and Potentates to be Judges within his dominions;
whereas this last made Oath contains no such matter, only meddling with the
civil obedience of Subjects to their Sovereign, in mere temporal causes.

And that it may the better appear, that whereas by name he seems to
condemn the last Oath; yet indeed his whole Letter runs upon nothing, but
upon the condemnation of the Oath of Supremacy: I have here thought good to
set down the said Oath, leaving it then to the discretion of every indifferent
reader to judge, whether he does not in substance only answer to the Oath of
Supremacy, but that he gives the child a wrong name.

I A B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within
this Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities; and do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors: and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to
the Imperial Crown of the Realm: So help me God; and by the Contents of
this book.

And that the injustice, as well as the error of his gross mistaking in this
point, may yet be more clearly discovered; I have also thought good to insert
here immediately after the Oath of Supremacy, the contrary conclusions to all
the points and Articles, whereof this other late Oath does consist: whereby it
may appear, what unreasonable and rebellious points he would drive my
Subjects unto, by refusing the whole body of that Oath, as it is conceived: For
he that shall refuse to take this Oath, must of necessity hold all, or some of
these propositions following.

That I King JAMES,

That the Pope by his own authority may depose me: Rome: If not by some other
authority of the Church and Sea of Rome, yet by other means with others
help, he may depose me.

That the Pope may dispose of my Kingdoms and Dominions.

That the Pope may give authority to some foreign Prince to invade my
Dominions.

That the Pope may discharge my Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to
me.

That the Pope may give license to one,

That the Pope may give leave to my Subjects to offer violence to my Person, or
to my government, or to some of my Subjects.

That if the Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose me,

If the Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose me,

If the Pope shall give out any Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation
against me, my Subjects by reason o^ that Sentence,

That it is not heretical and detestable to hold, Pope, may be either deposed
or killed by their Subjects, or any other.

That the Pope has power to absolve my Subjects from this Oath,

That this Oath is not administered to my Subjects,

That this Oath is to be taken with Equivocation, mental evasion,

These are the true and natural branches of the body of this Oath. The
affirmative of all which negatiues, Touching the pretended Council of Lateran.
See Plat. In vita Innocen. III.
do neither concern in any case the Popes Supremacy in Spiritual causes:
nor yet were ever concluded, and defined by any complete general Council to
belong to the Popes authority; and their own school Doctors are at
irreconciliable odds and iarres about them.

And that the world may yet farther see ours and the whole States setting down
of this Oath, The Oath of Allegiance confirmed by the authority of ancient
Councels.
did not proceed from any new invention of our own, but as it is warranted by
the word of GOD: so does it take the example from an Oath of Allegiance
decreed a thousand years agone, which a famous Council then, together with
diverse other Councels, were so far from condemning (as the Pope now has done
this Oath) as I have thought good to set down their own words here in that
purpose* whereby it may appear that I crave nothing now of my Subjects in this
Oath, which was not expressly and carefully commanded then, by the Councels to
be obeyed without exception of persons. Nay not in the very particular point of
Equiuocatio^, The ancient Councels provided for Equivocation. The difference
between the ancient Councels, and the Pope counselling of the Catholics.
which I in this Oath was so careful to have eschewed: but you shall here see
the said Councels in their Decrees, as careful to provide for the eschewing of
the same; so as almost every point of that action, and this of ours shall be
found to have relation and agreeance one with the other, save only in this,
that those old Councels were careful and strait in commanding the taking of the
same: whereas by the contrary, he that now vanteth himself to be head of al
Councels, is as careful and strait in the prohibition of all men from the
taking of this Oath of Allegiance.

The words of the Council be these:

Hear our Sentence.

Whosoever of us, Council. Tolet. 4 can. 47. Anno 633.
or of all the people thorowout all Spain, shall go about by any means of
conspiracy or practice, to violate the Oath of his fidelity, which he has
taken for the preservation of his Country, or of the Kings life; or who shall
attempt to put violent hands upon the King; or to deprive him of his kingly
power; or that by tyrannical presumption would usurp the Sovereignty of the
Kingdom: Let him be accursed in the sight of God the Father, and of his
Angels; and let him be made and declared a stranger from the Catholic
Church, which he has profaned by his perjury; and an aliant from the
company of all Christian people, together with all the accomplices of his
impiety; because it behooves all those that be guilty of the like offense,
to vnder-lie the like punishment. Which sentence is three several times
together, and almost in the same words, repeated in the same Canon. After
this, the Synod desired, That this Sentence of theirs now this third time
rehearsed, might be confirmed by the voice and consent of all that were
present. Then the whole Clergy and people answered, Whosoever shall carry
himself presumptuously against this your definitive sentence, let them be
Anathema maranatha, that is, let them be utterly destroyed at the Lords
coming, and let them and their accomplices have their portion with Judas
Iscarioth. Amen.

And in the fifth Council. Tolet. 5. Can. 7. anno 636.
Council, there it is decreed, That this Act touching the Oath of Allegiance,
shall be repeated in every Council of the Bishops of Spain. The Decree is in
these words: In consideration that the minds of men are easily inclined to
evil and forgetfulness, therefore this most holy Synod has ordained; and
does enact, That in every Council of the Bishops of Spain, the Decree of the
general Synod. Tolet 4. vniuersalis, and magna Synodus dicta, Synod Tolet. 5.
cap 2.
Council which was made for the safety of our Princes, shall be with an
audible voice proclaimed and pronounced, after the conclusion of all other
things in the Synod: That so it being often sounded into their ears, at
least by continual remembrance, the minds of wicked men being terrified,
might be reformed, which by oblivion and facility [to euill] are brought to
preuaricate.

And in the sixth Council. Tolet. 6. Can. 18. Anno 638.
Council, We do protest before God, and all the orders of Angels, in the
presence of the Prophets and Apostles, and all the company of Martyrs, and
before all the Catholic Church, and assemblies of the Christians; That no man
shall go about to seek the destruction of the King: No man shall touch the
life of the Prince: No man shall deprive him of the Kingdom: No man by any
tyrannical presumption shall usurp to himself the Sovereignty of the
Kingdom: No man by any Machination shall in his adversity associate to
himself any pack of Conspirators against him: And that if any of us shall be
presumptuous by rashness in any of these cases, let him be stricken with the
anatheme of God, and reputed as condemned in eternal judgment without any
hope of recovery.

And in the tenth Council. Tolet. 10. Can. 2. Era 694.
Council (to omit diverse others held also at Toledo) it is said: That if any
religious man, even from the Bishop to the lowest Order of the Churchmen or
Monks, shall be found to have violated the general Oaths made for the
preservation of the Kings Person, or of the Nation and Country with a profane
mind; forth with let him be deprived of all dignity, and excluded from all
place and Honor. The occasion of the Decrees made for this Oath, was, That the
Christians were suspected for want of fidelity to their Kings; and did either
equivocate in taking their Oath, or make no conscience to keep it, when they
had given it; as may appear by sundry speeches in the Council. Tolet. 4. cap.
74.
Council, saying, There is a general report, that there is that
perfidiousnesse in the minds of many people of diverse Nations, that they make
no conscience to keep the Oath and fidelity that they have sworn unto their
Kings: but do dissemble a profession of fidelity in their mouths, when they
hold an impious perfidiousnesse in their minds. And Council. Tolet. 4. cap. 74.
again, They swear to their Kings, and yet do they preuaricate in the
fidelity which they have promised: Neither do they fear the Volume of Gods
judgment, by the which the curse of God is brought upon them, with great
threatening of punishments, which do swear lyingly in the Name of God. To the
like effect spoke they in the Council of Council. Aquisgran. sub Ludo Pio, and
Greg. 4. Can. 12. anno 836.
Aquisgran: If any of the Bishops, or other Churchman of inferior degree,
hereafter through fear or covetousness, or any other persuasion, shall make
defection from our Lord the Orthodoxe Emperor Lodowicke, or shall violate the
Oath of fidelity made unto him, or shall with their perverse intention adhere
to his enemies; let him by this Canonical and Synodall sentence be deprived
of whatsoever place he is possessed of.

And now to come to a particular answer of his Letter. First, as concerning
the sweet memory he has of his old acquaintance with the Archpriest; it may
indeed be pleasing for him to recount: but sure I am, his acquaintance with him
and the rest of his society, our Fugitives (whereof he also vanteth himself
in his Preface to the Reader in his Book of Controversies) has proved sour
to us and our State: For some of such Priests and Jesuits, as were the greatest
Traitors and fomenters of the greatest conspiracies against the late Queen,
gave up Father Rob: Campian and Heart. See the conference in the Tower.
Bellarmine for one of their greatest authorities and oracles: And therefore I
do not envy the great honor he can win, by his vaunt of his inward
familiarity with an other Princes traitors and fugitives; whom unto if he teach
no better manners then hitherto he has done, I think his fellowship are little
beholding unto him.

And for desiring him to remember him in his prayers at the Altar of the Lord:
if the Arch-Priests prayers prove no more profitable to his soul, then
Bellarmines counsel is like to prove profitable, both to the soul and body
of Blackwell (if he would follow it) the author of this Letter might very well
be without his prayers.

Now the first messenger that I can find which brought joyful news of the
Archpriest to Bellarmine, was he that brought the news of the Arch-Priests
taking, and first appearance of Martyrdom. A great sign surely of the
Cardinals mortification, that he was so rejoiced to hear of the apprehension,
imprisonment and appearance of putting to death of so old and dear a friend of
his. But yet apparently he should first have been sure, that he was only to
be punished for cause of Religion, before he had so triumphed upon the
expectation of his Martyrdom. For first, by what rule of charity was it
lawful for him to judge me a persecutour, The Cardinals charity.
before proof had been made of it by the said Arch-Priests condemnation and
death? What could he know, that the said Archpriest was not taken upon
suspicion of his guiltiness in the Powder Treason? What certain information
had he then received upon the particulars, whereupon he was to be accused?
And last of all, by what inspiration could he foretell whereupon he was to be
accused? For at that time there was yet nothing laid to his charge. And if
charity should not be suspicious, what warrant had he absolutely to condemn
me of using persecution and tyranny, which could not be but employed upon
me, if Blackwel was to be a Martyr? But surely it may justly be said of
Bellarmine in this case, that our Savior CHRIST says of all worldly and
carnal men, who think it enough to love their Mar. 5.43.
friends, and hate their enemies; the limits of the Cardinals charity
extending no farther, then to them of his own profession. For what ever he
added in superfluous charity to Blackwel, in rejoicing in the speculation of
his future Martyrdom; he detracted as much unjustly and uncharitably from me,
in accounting of me thereby as of a bloody Persecutour. And whereas this joy of
his was interrupted by the next messenger, that brought the news of the said
Archpriest his failing in his constancy, by taking of this Oath; he needed
never to have been troubled, either with his former joy or his second sorrow,
both being alike falsely grounded. For as it was never my intention to lay any
thing unto the said Arch-Priests charge, as I have never done to any for cause
of conscience; so was Blackwels constancy never brangled by taking of this
Oath; It being a thing which he ever thought lawful before his apprehension,
and whereunto he persuaded all Catholics to give obedience; like as after
his apprehension, he never made doubt or stop in it; but at the first offering
it unto him, did freely take it, as a thing most lawful; neither means of
threatening, or flattery being ever used unto him, as himself can yet bear
witness.

And as for the temperature and modification of this Oath, except that a
reasonable and lawful matter is there set down in reasonable and temperate
words, agreeing thereunto; I know not what he can mean, by quarelling it for
that fault: For no temperatnesse nor modifications in words therein, can justly
be called the Devils craft; when the thing it self is so plain, and so
plainly interpreted to all them that take it; as the only troublesome thing
in it all, be the words used in the end thereof, for eschewing Aequiuocation
and Mental reservation. Which new Catholic doctrine, may far iustlier be
called the Devils craft, then any plain and temperate words, in so plain and
clear a matter. But what shall we say of these strange country clownes, whom
of with the Satyr we may justly complain, that they blow both hot and cold
out of one mouth? For Luther and all our bold and free-speaking Writers are
mightily railed upon by them, as hote-brained fellows, and speakers by the
Devils instinct: and now if we speak moderately and temperately of them, it
must be termed the Devils craft: And therefore we may justly complain with
CHRIST, that when we Mat. 11.17.
mourn, they will not lament: and when we pipe, they will not dance. But neither
John Baptist his severity, nor CHRIST his meekness and lenity can please
them, who build but to their own Monarchy upon the ground of their own
Traditions; and not to CHRIST upon the ground of his word and infallible truth.

But what can be meant by alleging, that the craft of the Devil herein, is
only used for subversion of the Catholic Faith, and euersion of Saint Peter's
Primacie; had need be commented anew by Bellarmine himself: For in all this
Letter of his, never one word is used, to prove that by any part of this Oath
the Primacie of Saint Peter is any way meddled with, except Master Bellarmine
his bare alleging; which without proouing it by more clear demonstration,
can never satisfy the conscience of any reasonable man. For (for ought that I
know) heaven and earth are no farther asunder, then the profession of a
temporal obedience to a temporal King, is different from any thing belonging
to the Catholic Faith, or Supremacy of Saint Peter: For as for the
Catholic Faith; No decision of any point of Religion in the Oath of
Allegiance.
can there be one word found in all that Oath, tending or sounding to matter of
Religion? Does he that takes it, promise there to believe, or not to believe
any article of Religion? Or does he so much as name a true or false Church
there? And as for Saint Peter's Primacie; I know no Apostles name that is
therein named, except the name of JAMES, it being my Christen name: though it
please him not to deigne to name me in all the Letter; albeit, the contents
thereof concern me in the highest degree. Neither is there any mention at all
made therein, either disertis verbis, or by any other indirect means, either
of the Hierarchy of the Church, of Saint Peter's succession, of the Sea
Apostolic, or of any such matter: but that the Author of our Letter does
bravely make mention of Saint Peter's succession, bringing it in comparison with
the succession of Henry the eight. Of which unapt and unmannerly similitude, I
wonder he should not be much ashamed: For as to King Henry's Successor (which
he means by me) as I, I say, never did, nor will presume to create any
Article of Faith, or to be Judge thereof; but to submit my exemplarie
obedience unto them, in as great humility as the meanest of the land: so if
the Pope could be as well able to prove his either Personal or Doctrinall
Succession from Saint Peter, as I am able to prove my lineall descent from the
Kings of England and Scotland; there had never been so long ado, nor so much
stir kept about this question in Christendom; neither had Bellar. de Romans
Pont. li. 4. cap. 6. Ibid. l 2. ca. 12.
Master Bellarmine himself needed to have bestowed so many sheets of paper De
summo Pontifice, in his great books of Controversies: And when all is done, to
conclude with a moral certitude, and a pie credendum; bringing in the Idem
ibid. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Popes, that are parties in this cause, to be his witnesses: and yet their
historical narration must be no article of Faith. And I am without vanterie
sure, that I do far more nearly imitate the worthy actions of my
Predecessors, then the Popes in our aage can be well proved to be similes
Petro, especially in cursing of Kings, and setting free their Subjects from
their Allegiance unto them.

But now we come to his strongest argument, which is, That he would allege
upon me a Panicke terror, as if I were possessed with a needless fear: The
Cardinals weightiest Argument.
For, says the Cardinal, from the beginning of the Churches first infancy,
even to this day, where was it ever heard, that ever a Pope either commanded
to be killed, or allowed the slaughter of any Prince whatsoever, whether he
were an Heretic, an Ethnicke, or Persecutour? But first, wherefore does he
here wilfully, and of purpose omit the rest of the points mentioned in that
Oath, for deposing; degrading, stirring up of arms, or rebelling against them,
which are as well mentioned in that Oath, as the killing of them? as being all
of one consequence against a King, no Subject being so scrupulous, as that he
will attempt the one, and leave the other unperformed if he can. And yet
surely I cannot blame him for passing it over, since he could not otherwise
have eschewed the direct belying of himself in terms, which he now does
but in substance and effect: For Bellarm. de Rom Pont. lib. 5. cap. 8. et lib.
3. cap. 16.
as for the Popes deposing and degrading of Kings, he makes so brave vaunts
and bragges of it in his former books, as he could never with civil honesty
have denied it here.

But to return to the Popes allowing of killing of Kings, I know not with what
face he can set so stout a denial upon it against his own knowledge. How
many Emperors did the Pope raise war against in their own bowels? Who as
they were overcome in battle, were subject to have been killed therein,
which I hope the Pope could not but have allowed, when he was so far enraged
at Gotfrid. Viterb. Helmod. Cuspinian.
Henry the fifth for giving burial to his fathers dead corpse, after the
Paschal. 2.
Pope had stirred him up to rebel against his father, and procured his ruin.
But leaving these old Histories to Bellarmines own books, that do most
authentically cite them, as I have already said, let us turn our eyes upon our
own time, and therein remember what a Panegyricke See the Oration of S^xtus
Quintus, made in the Consistory upon the death of Henry the 3.
Oration was made by the Pope, in praise and approbation of the Friar and his
fact, that murdered king Henry the third of France, who was so far from
either being Heretic, Ethnicke, or Persecutor in their account, that the said
Popes own words in that Oration are, That a true Friar has killed a
counterfeit Friar. And besides that vehement Oration and congratulation for
that fact, how near it escaped, that the said Friar was not canonized for that
glorious act, is better known to Bellarmine and his followers, then to us here.

But sure I am, if some Cardinals had not been more wise and circumspect in
that errand, then the Pope himself was, the Popes own Calendar of his Saints
would have sufficiently proved Bellarmin a lier in this case. And to draw yet
nearer unto our selves; how many practices and attempts were made against the
late Queens life, which were directly enjoined to those Traitors by their
Confessors, and plainly authorized by the Popes allowance? For verification
whereof, there needs no more proof, then that never Pope either then or since,
called any Churchman in question for meddling in any those treasonable
conspiracies; nay, the Cardinals own S. Sanderus mentioned in his Letter,
could well verify this truth, if he were alive; and who will look his
books, will find them filled with no other doctrine then this. And what
difference there is between the killing, or allowing the slaughter of Kings,
and the stirring up and approbation of practices to kill them; I remit to
Bellarmines own judgment. It may then very clearly appear, how strangely
this Authors passion has made him forget himself, by implicating himself in
so strong a contradiction against his own knowledge and conscience, against
the witness of his former books, and against the practice of our own times.
But who can wonder at this contradiction of himself in this point, when his
own great Volumes are so filled with contradictions? which when either he, or
any other shall ever be able to reconcile, I will then believe that he may
easily reconcile this impudent strong denial of his in his Letter, of any
Popes meddling against Kings, with his own former books, as I have already
said.

And that I may not seem to imitate him in affirming boldly that which I no
ways prove; I will therefore send the Reader to look for witnesses of his
contradictions, in such places here mentioned in his own book. In his books
of Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Justification, there he affirms, That for the uncertainty of our own
proper righteousness, and for avoiding of vainglory, it is most sure and
safe, to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy and goodness of God;
Contrary to all his five books de Iustificatione.
Which proposition of his, is directly contrary to the discourse, and current
of all his five books de Iustificatione, wherein the same is contained.

God does not incline a man to evil, either Bellar. de amiss gra. and stat.
pecca. li. 2. c. 13.
naturally or morally.

Presently after, he affirms the contrary, That God does not incline to
evil naturally, but Ibidem paulo post.
morally.

All the Fathers teach constantly, That Bellar. declericis, lib. 1. c. 14.
Bishops do succeed the Apostles, and Priests the seventy disciples.

Elsewhere he affirms the contrary, That Bellar. de Pont. l. 4. c. 25.
Bishops do not properly succeed the Apostles.

That Bellar. de Pont. lib. 1. c 12.
Judas did not believe.

Contrary, That Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 3. c. 14.
Judas was just and certainly good.

The keeping of the Bellar. de gra. and lib arbit. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Law according to the substance of the work, does require that the
Commandment be so kept, that sin be not committed, and the man be not
guilty for having not kept the Commandment.

Contrary, Eodem lib. cap. 9.
It is to be known, that it is not all one, to do a good moral work, and to
keep the Commandment according to the substance of the work: For the
Commandment may be kept according to the substance of the work, even with
sin; as if one should restore to his friend the thing committed to him of
trust, to the end that thieves might afterward take it from him.

Bellar. de Pont. lib 4 c. 3.
Peter did not loose that faith, whereby the heart believes unto justification.

Contrary, Bell. de Just. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Peter's sin was deadly.

3 Bell. de Rom Pontif. lib 3. cap. 14.
Antichrist shall be a Magician, and after the manner of other Magicians shall
secretly worship the devil.

Ibid. ex sentent. Hypol. and Cyril and cap. 12. eiusdem libri.
Contrary, He shall not admit of idolatry: he shall hate idols, and reedifie
the Temple.

By the words of Bell. lib. 1. de missa. cap. 17.
Consecration the true and solemn oblation is made.

Contrary, The sacrifice does not consist in the words: but in the Bellar. de
miss lib. 2. cap. 12.
oblation of the thing it self.

Bellar. de anim. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 5.
That the end of the world cannot be known.

Bellar. de Pont. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Contrary, After the death of Antichrist, there shall be but five and forty
days till the end of the world.

Bellar. de Pont. lib. 3. cap. 13.
That the ten Kings shall burn the scarlet Whore, that is, Rome.

Bellar. ibid.
Contrary, Antichrist shall hate Rome, and fight against it, and burn it.

Bellar. de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 31.
The name of universal Bishop may be understood two ways; one way, that he
which is said to be universal Bishop, may be thought to be the only Bishop
of all Christian Cities; so that all others are not indeed Bishops, but only
Vicars to him, who is called universal Bishop: in which sense, the Pope is not
vniuershall Bishop.

Contrary, All ordinary Bellar. de Pont. lib. 2. cap. 24.
jurisdiction of Bishops does descend immediately from the Pope; and is in him,
and from him is derived to others. Which few places I have only selected
amongst many the like, that the discreet and judicious Reader may discern ex
vngue Leonem: For when ever he is pressed with a weighty objection, he never
cares, nor remembers how his solution and answer to that, may make him
gainesay his own doctrine in some other places, so it serve him for a shift to
put off the present storm withal.

But now to return to our matter again: Since Popes, says he, have never
at any time meddled against Kings, wherefore, I pray you, should only the King
of ENGLAND be afraid of that, whereof never Christian King is, or was afraid?
Was never Christian Emperor or King afraid of the Popes? How then were these
miserable Emperors tossed and turmoiled, and in the end utterly ruined by the
Popes: for proof whereof I have already cited Bellarmines own books? Was not
the Henry 4.
Emperor afraid, who Abbas V^spergen. Lamb Scaff. Anno 1077. Plat. in vit.
Greg. 7.
waited barefooted in the frost and snow three days at the Popes gate, before
he could get entry? Was not the Frederick Barbarosia.
Emperor also afraid, Naucler. gener, 40. Jacob. Bergom. in Supplem. chron.
Alfons. Clacon. in vit. Alex. 3.
who was driven to lie agroofe on his belly, and suffer another Pope to tread
upon his neck? And was not another Henry 6.
Emperor afraid, R. Houeden in Rich 1 Ranulph in Polycronico. lib. 7.
who was constrained in like manner to endure a third Pope to beat off from his
head the Imperial Crown with his foot? Was not Abbas Vrsper. ad Ann. 1191.
Nanc. genesis 40. Cuspin. in Philippo.
Philip afraid, being made Emperor against Pope Innocentius the thirds good
liking, when he brake out into these words, Either the Pope shall take the
Crown from Philip, or Philip shall take the Miter from the Pope? whereupon the
Pope stirred up Ottho against him, who caused him to be slain; and presently
went to Rome, and was crowned Emperor by the Pope, though afterward the Pope
Abbas Vrsper.
deposed him too. Was not the Emperor Math. Paris. in Henr. 3. Petr de Vineis,
Epist. li. 1. and 2. Cuspin in Freder. 2.
Frederick afraid, when Innocentius the fourth excommunicated him, deprived
him of his crown, absolved Princes of their Oath of fidelity to him, and in
Apulia corrupted one to give him poison? whereof the Emperor recovering, he
hired his bastard son Manfredus to poison him; whereof he died. What did Vita
Frederici Germanice conscripta.
Alexander the third write to the Sultan? That if he would live quietly, he
should by some slight murder the Frederick Barbarossa.
Emperor; and to that end sent him the Emperors picture. And did not Paul.
Iouius, Hist. lib. 2. Cuspinian. in Bajazet. 11. Guicc^ard. lib 2.
Alexander the sixth take of the Turk Baiazetes two hundred thousand crowns to
kill his brother Gemen; or as some call him, Sisimus, whom he held captive at
Rome? Did he not accept of the conditions to poison the man, and had his pay?
Was not our Houeden, page 308. Matthew. Paris. in Henric 2. Walsinga. in Hypodig.
Neustriae. Joan. Capgraue.
Henry the second afraid after the slaughter of Thomas Becket; that besides his
going barefooted in Pilgrimage, was whipped up and down the Chapter House like
a schoole-boy, and glad to escape so to? Had not this French King his great
grandfather King John reason to be afraid, when the Gomecius de rebus gest.
Fran. Ximenij Archiepis. Tolet. lib. 5.
Pope gave away his kingdom of Navarre to the King of Spain, whereof he yet
possesses the best half? Had not this King, his Successor reason to be
afraid, when he was forced to beg so submissiuely the relaxation of his
Excommunication, as he was content likewise to suffer his Ambassador to be
whipped at Rome for penance? And had not the late Queen reason to look to her
self, when she was excommunicated by Pius Quintus, her Subjects loosed from
their fidelity and Allegiance toward her, her Kingdom of Ireland given to the
King of Spain, and that famous fugitive divine, honored with the like degree
of a red Hat as Bellarmine is, was not ashamed to publish in Printan Card.
Allens Answer to Stan. letter, Anno 1587.
Apology for Stanleys treason, maintaining, that by reason of her
excommunication and heresy, it was not only lawful for any of her Subjects,
but even they were bound in conscience to deprive her of any strength, which
lay in their power to do? And whether it were armies, towns, or fortresses of
hers which they had in their hands, they were obliged to put them in the King
of Spain her enemies hands, she no more being the right owner of anything?
But albeit it be true, that wise men are moved by the examples of others
dangers to use providence and caution, according to the old Proverb,
Tumtuares agitur, paries cum proximus ardet: yet was I much neerlier summoned
to use this caution, by the practice of it in mine own person.

First, by the sending forth of these Bulls whereof I made mention already,
for debarring me from entry unto this Crown, and Kingdom. And next after my
entry, and full possession thereof, by the horrible Powder Treason, which
should have bereft both me and mine, both of crown and life. And howsoever the
Pope will seem to clear himself of any allowance of the said Powder Treason,
yet can it not be denied, that his principal ministers here, and his chief
Mancipia the Jesuits, were the plain practisers thereof: for which the
principal of them has died confessing it, and other have fled the Country
for the crime; yea, some of them gone into Italy: and yet neither these that
fled out of this Country for it, nor yet Baldwine, who though he then remained
in the Low Countries, was of counsel in it, were ever called to account for it
by the Pope; much less punished for meddling in so scandalous and enormous
business. And now what needs so great wonder and exclamation, that the only
King of England fears: And what other Christian King does, or ever did fear
but he? As if by the force of his rhetoric he could make me and my good
Subjects to mistrust our senses, deny the Sun to shine at midday, and not
with the serpent to stop our cares to his charming, but to the plain and
visible verity it self. And yet for all this wonder, he can never prove me
to be troubled with such a Panicke terror. Have I ever importuned the Pope
with any request for my security? Or have I either troubled other Christian
Princes my friends and allies, to entreat for me at the Popes hand? Or yet have
I begged from them any aid or assistance for my farther security? No. All
this wondred-at fear of mine, stretches no further, then wisely to make
distinction between the sheep and goats in my own pasture. For since, what
ever the Popes part has been in the Powder Treason; yet certain it is, that
all these caitife monsters did to their death maintain, that only zeal of
Religion moved them to that horrible attempt: yea, some of them at their
death, would not crave pardon at God or King for their offense; exhorting other
of their followers to the like constancy. Had not we then, and our Parliament
great reason, by this Oath to set a mark of distinction between good
Subjects, and bad? Yea, between Papists, though peradventure zealous in their
religion, yet otherwise ciuilly honest and good Subjects, and such terrible
firebrands of hell, as would maintain the like maxims, which these Powder-men
did? Nay, could there be a more gracious part in a King, suppose I say it,
toward Subjects of a contrary Religion, then by making them to take this Oath,
to publish their honest fidelity in temporal things to me their Sovereign,
and thereby to wipe off that imputation and great slander which was laid upon
the whole professors of that Religion, by the furious enterprise of these
Powder-men?

And whereas for illustration of this strong argument of his, he has brought
in for a similitude the history of Nazianzen. in Julian. ^^ectiua prima.
Julian the Apostata his dealing with the Christians, when as he straited them
either to commit idolatry, or to come within the compass of treason: I would
wish the author to remember, that although a similitude may be permitted
claudicare vno pede; The disproportion of the Cardinals similitude.
yet this was a very ill chosen similitude, which is lame both of feet and
hands, and every member of the body: For I shall in few words prove, that it
agrees in no one point save one, with our purpose, which is, that Julian was
an Emperor, and I a King. First, Julian was an Apostata, one that had
renounced the whole Christian faith, which he had once professed, and became an
Ethnike again, or rather an Atheist: whereas I am a Christian, who never
changed that Religion, that I drank in with my milk: nor ever, I thank GOD,
was ashamed of my profession. Julian dealt against Christians only for the
profession of CHRIST'S cause: I deal in this cause with my Subjects, only to
make a distinction between true Subjects, and falese-hearted traitors.
Iulians end was the overthrow of the Christians: my only end is, to maintain
Christianity in a peaceable government. Iulians drift was to make them commit
Idolatry: my purpose is, to cause my Subjects to make open profession of their
natural Allegiance, and civil Obedience. Iulians means whereby he went about
it, was by craft, and insnaring them before they were aware: my course in this
is plain, clear, and void of all obscurity; never refusing leave to any that
are required to take this Oath, to study it at leisure, and giving them all the
interpretation of it they can crave. But the greatest dissimilitude of all, is
in this: that Julian pressed them to commit idolatry to Idols and Images: but
as well I, as all the Subjects of my profession are so far from guilt in this
point, as we are counted heretics by you, because we will not commit
idolatry. So as in the maine point of all, is the greatest contrariety. For,
Julian persecuted the Christians because they would not commit idolatry; and
ye count me a persecutour, because I will not admit idolatry: So as to
conclude this point, this old sentence may well be applied to Bellarmine, in
using so unapt a similitude,

Perdere quos vult Jupiter, hos dementat. And therefore his uncharitable
conclusion does not rightly follow: That it seems unto him, that some such
thing should be subtly or fraudulently included in this Oath; as if no man
can detest Treason against the King, or profess civil subjection, except he
renounce the Primacie of the Apostolic Sea. But how he has sucked this
apprehension out at his fingers ends, I cannot imagine: for sure I am, as I
have often said, he never goes about to prove it: and to answer an improbable
imagination, is to fight against a vanishing shadow. It cannot be denied
indeed, that many servants of CHRIST, as well Priests, as others, have endured
constantly all sorts of torments, and death, for the profession of CHRIST: and
therefore to all such his examples, as he brings in for verifying the same,
I need not to give him any other answer, save only to remember him, that he
plays the part of a sophister in all these his examples of the constancy of
Martyrs; ever taking Controuersum pro confesso, as if this our case were of the
same nature.

But yet that the Reader may the better discover, not only how unaptly his
similitudes are applied, but likewise how dishonestly he uses himself in all
his citations: I have thought good to set down the very places themselves
cited by him, together with a short deduction of the true state of those
particular cases: whereby, how little these examples can touch our case; nay,
by the contrary, how rightly their true sense may be used, as our own weapons
to be thrown back upon him that alleges them, shall easily appear. And
first, for 2. Maccab. chap. 6. ver. 18.
Eleazar: If the Archpriest his ground of refusing the Oath, were as good as
Eleazars was, to forbear to eat the swines flesh, it might not unfitly be
applied by the Cardinal to this purpose: An answer to the Card example of
Eleazar.
For as Eleazar was a principal Scribe, so is he a principal Priest: As
Eleazars example had a great force in it, to animate the younger Scribes to
keep the Law, or in his colorable eating it, to have taught them to
dissemble: so has the Arch-priests, either to make the inferior Priests to
take the Oath, or to refuse it: but the ground failing, the building cannot
stand: For what example is there in all the Scripture, in which disobedience to
the Oath of the King, or want of Allegiance is allowed? If the Cardinal would
remember, that when the Church makes a Law (suppose to forbid flesh on
certain days) he that refuses to obey it, incurreth the just censure of the
Church: If a man then ought to die rather then to break the least of Gods
Ceremonial Laws, and to pine and starve his body, rather then to violate the
Church his positive Law: will he not give leave to a man to redeem his soul
from sin, and to keep his body from punishment, by keeping a Kings politic
Law, and by giving good example in his Person, raise up a good opinion in me of
like Allegiance in the inferior of his order? This application, as I take it,
would have better fitted this example.

But let me remember the Cardinal of another 1. Sam. 14.25.
Oath enjoined by a King to his people, whereby he endangered his own life,
and hazarded the safety of the whole army, when he made the people swear in
the morning, not to taste of any meat until night: which Oath he exacted so
strictly, that his eldest son, and heir apparent, Jonathan, for breaking of
it, by tasting a little honey of the top of his rod, though he heard not when
the King gave that Oath, had well-nigh died for it. And shall an Oath given
upon so urgent an occasion as this was, for the apparent safety of me and my
posterity, forbidding my people to drink so deeply in the bitter cup of
Antichristian fornications, but that they may keep so much honey in their
hearts, as may argue them still espoused to me their Sovereign in the maine
knot of true Allegiance; shall this Law, I say, by him be condemned to hell
for a stratageme of Satan? I say no more, but Gods lot in the Oath of Saul's,
and Bellarmines verdict upon this Oath of ours, seem not to be cast out of one
lap.

Now to this example of Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 19. An answer to the Card.
example of S. Basil.
Basil, which is (as he says) so fit for his purpose: First, I must observe,
that if the Cardinal would leave a common and ordinary trick of his in all
his Citations, which is to take what makes for him, and leave out what makes
against him; and cite the Authors sense, as well as his Sentence, we should
not be so much troubled with answering the Ancients which he alleges. To
instance it in this very place: if he had continued his allegation one line
further, he should have found this place out of Theodoret, of more force to
have moved Blackwell to take the Oath, then to have dissuaded him from it: For
in the very next words it follows, Imperatoris quidem amicitiam magnise
pendere, cum pietaet; quaremota, perniciosam esse dicere. But that it may
appear, whether of us have greatest right to this place, I will in few words
show the Authors drift.

The Emperor Valens being an Arrian, at the persuasion of his wife, when he
had deprived all the Churches of their Pastors, came to Caesarea, where
Theodoret. lib. 4 cap. 19.
S. Basil was then Bishop, who, as the history reports, was accounted the
Light of the world. Before he came, he sent his Mode^^^^ as Nazia^z^^ upon
the de^t. of Basil calls him in his orat^on
deputy to work it, that S. Basil should hold fellowship with Eudoxius (which
Look cap. 12. eiusd^m libri.
Eudoxius was bishop of Constantinople, and the principal of the Arrian
faction) or if he would not, that he should put him to banishment. Now when
the Emperors Deputy came to Caesarea, he sent for Basil, entreated him
honorably, spoke pleasingly unto him, desired he would give way to the time,
neither that he would hazard the good of so many Churches tenui exquisitione
dogmatis: promised him the Emperors favor, and himself to be mediator for
his good. But S. Basil answered, These intising speeches were fit to be used
to children, that use to gape after such things: but for them that were
thoroughly instructed in Gods word, they could never suffer any syllable thereof
to be corrupted: Nay, if need required, they would for the maintenance thereof
refuse no kind of death. Indeed the love of the Emperor ought to be greatly
esteemed with piety; but piety taken away, it was pernicious.

This is the truth of the history. Now compare the case of Basil with the
Arch-priests: Basil was solicited to become an Arrian: the Arch priest not
once touched for any article of faith. Basil would have obeyed the Emperor,
but that the word of GOD forbade him: this man is willed to obey, because the
word of GOD commands him. Basil highly esteemed the Emperors favor, if it
might have stood with piety: the Archpriest is exhorted to reject it, though
it stand with true godliness in deed, to embrace it. But that he may lay load
upon the Archpriest, The Cardinal assimilating of the Archpr. case to S.
Peter's, and Marcellinus, considered.
it is not sufficient to exhort him to courage and constancy by Eleazarus and
Basils examples; but he must be utterly cast down with the comparing his fall
to S. Peter, and Marcellinus: which two men's cases were the most fearful,
considering their persons and places, that are to be found, or read of, either
in all the books of divine Scripture, or the volumes of Ecclesiastical
histories; the one denying the only true GOD, the other our Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST; the one sacrificing to Idols, with the profane heathen: the
other forswearing his Lord and Master, with the hard-hearted Jews. Unless the
Cardinal would drive the Archpriest to some horror of conscience, and pit of
despair, I know not what he can mean by this comparison: For sure I am, all
that are not intoxicated with their cup, cannot but wonder to hear of an Oath
of Allegiance to a natural Sovereign, to be likened to an Apostats denying of
God, and forswearing of his Savior.

But to let pass the Disdiapason of the cases (as his ill-fauoured coupling S.
Peter the head of their Church, with an apostate Pope) I marvel he would
remember this example of Look Platina in vita Marcellini.
Marcellinus, since his brother Cardinal Baronius, and the late Edition of the
Councels by Council. Tom. 1. page 222. Look Baronius, Ann. 302. number. 96.
Binnius seem to call the credit of the whole history into question, saying,
That it might plainly be refuted, and that it is probably to be showed, that
the story is but obreptious, but that he would not swerve from the common
received opinion.

And if a man might have leave to conjecture; so would his Cardinalship too, if
it were not for one or two sentences in that Council of Sinuessa, See Tom. 1.
Council. in Act. Council. Sinuess.
which served for his purpose; namely, that Prima seeds a nemine iudicatur:
And, Iudica causam tuam: nostra sententia non condemnaberis. But to what
purpose a great Council (as he terms it) of three hundred Bishops and others,
should meet together, who before they met, knew they could do nothing; when
they were there, did nothing, but like Cuckowes, sing over and over the same
song: that, Prima seeds a nemine iudicatur; and so after three days sitting
(along time indeed for a great and grave Council) brake so bluntly up: and
yet, that there should be seventy two witnesses brought against him, and that
they should subscribe his excommunication, and that at his own mouth he took
the Anathema maranatha: how these untoward contradictions shall be made to
agree, I must send the Cardinal to Venice, to Padre Paulo, who in his Apol.
Pat. Paul. aduersus opposite. Card. Bellar.
Apology against the Cardinals oppositions, has handled them very learnedly.

But from one Pope, An answer to the place alleged out of S. Gregory.
let us pass to another: (for, what a principal article of Faith and Religion
this Oath is, I have already sufficiently proved.) Why he called S. Greg.
lib. 11. cap. 42.
Gregory our Apostle, I know not, unless perhaps it be, for that he sent Beda
Ecclesi Hist. genesis Ang. lib. 1 cap. 25.
Augustine the Monk and others with him into England, to convert us to the
faith of Christ, wherein I wish the Popes his successors would follow his
pattern: For albeit he sent them by divine revelation (as he said) into
England unto King Ethelbert; yet when they came, they exercised no part of
their function, but by the Kings leave and permission. So did King Beda
Ecclesi. Hist genesis Ang. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Lucius send to Eleutherius his predecessor, and he sent him diverse Bishops,
who were all placed by the Kings authority. These converted men to the faith,
and taught them to obey the King. And if the Popes in these days would but
insist in these steps of their forefathers; then would they not entertain
Princes fugitives abroad, nor send them home, not only without my leave, but
directly against the Laws, with plots of treason and doctrine of rebellion, to
draw Subjects from their obedience to me their natural King: nor be so cruel
to their own Mancipia, as returning them with these wares, put either a State
in jealousy of them; or them in hazard of their own lives. Now to our Apostle
(since the Cardinal will have him so called) I persuade my self I should do
a good service to the Church in this my labor, if I could but reap this one
fruit of it, to move the Cardinal to deal faithfully with the Fathers, and
never to allege their opinions against their own purpose: For, this letter of
Gregorius was written to John Bishop of Greg. lib. 11. cap. 42.
Palermo in Sicily, to whom he granted vsum pallij, to be worn in such times,
and in such order as the Priests in the I Will of Sicily, and his predecessors
were wont to use: and withal gives him a caveat, That the reverence to the
Apostolic Sea, be not disturbed by the presumption of any: for then the state
of the members does remain sound, when the head of the Faith is not bruised
by any injury, and the authority of the Canons always remain safe and sound.

Now let us examine the words. The Epistle was written to a Bishop, especially
to grant him the use of the Pall; a ceremony and matter indifferent. As it
appears, the Bishop of Rome took it well at his hands, that he would not
presume to take it upon him without leave from the Apostolic Sea, giving him
that admonition which follows in the words alleged out of him: which
doctrine we are so far from impugning, that we altogether approve and allow
of the same, that whatsoever ceremony for order is thought meet by the
Christian Magistrate, and the Church, the same ought inuiolably to be kept: and
where the head and governor in matters of that nature are not obeyed, the
members of that Church must needs run to hellish confusion: But that Gregory by
that term, caput fidei, held himself the head of our faith, and the head of
all religion, cannot stand with the course of his doctrine and writings: For
first, when an John of Constantinople. See Greg. lib. 4. Ep^st^. 2
other would have had this style to be called Vniuersalis Episcopus, he said,
Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
I do confidently avouch, that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be
called Universal Bishop, in this advancing of himself, is the forerunner of
the Antichrist: which notwithstanding was a style far inferior to that of
Caput fidei. And when it was offered to himself, the words of S. Gregory be
these, refusing that Title: Greg. lib. 4. epist. 32. and 36.
None of my predecessors [Bishops of Rome,] ever consented to use this
profane name [of universal Bishop.] None of my predecessors ever took upon
him this name of singularity, neither consented to use it, We the Bishops of
Rome do not seek, nor yet accept this glorious title, being offered unto us.
And now, I pray you, would he that refused to be called Universal Bishop, be
styled Caput fidei, unless it were in that sense, as I have expressed? which
sense if he will not admit, give me leave to say that of Gregory, which
himself says of Bellar. de Rom Pont lib. 2. cap. 10.
Lyra, Minus caute locutus est: or which he elsewhere says of Chrysostom,
Idem lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 10.
Locutus est per excessum. To redeem therefore our Apostle out of his hands,
and to let him remain ours, and not his in this case; it is very true that he
says in that sense he spoke it. When ye go about to disturb, diminish, or
take away the authority or supremacy of the Church, which rests on the head
of the King, within his dominions, ye cut off the head and chief governor
thereof, and disturb the state and members of the whole body. And for a
conclusion of this point, I pray him to think, that we are so well persuaded of
the good mind of our Apostle S. Gregory to us, that we desire no other thing
to be suggested to the Pope and his Cardinals, then our Apostle S. Gregory
desired Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 1.
Sabinian to suggest unto the Emperor and the State in his time. His words be
these: One thing there is, of which I would have you shortly to suggest to your
most noble Lord and Master: That if I his servant would have had my hand in
slaying of the Lombards, at this day the Nation of the Lombards had neither had
King, nor Dukes, nor Earls, and had been divided asunder in utter confusion;
but because I fear God, I dread to have my hand in the blood of any man.

And thus having answered to S. Gregory, An answer to the authority out of
Leo.
I come to another Pope, his Apostle, S. Leo. And that he may see, I have not
in the former citations, quarelled him like a Sophister for contention sake,
but for finding out of the truth, I do grant, that the authorities out of Leo
primus in die assump. suae ad Pont. sermon. 3. Leo Epist. 89. ad Episc. Vien.
Idem ibid. ca. 2.
Leo, are rightly alleged all three, the words trewly set down, together
with his true intent and purpose: but withal, let me tell him, and I appeal
unto his own conscience, whether I speak not trewly, that what Tullie said to
Cic. in Hort.
Hortensius, when he did immoderately praise eloquence, that he would have
lift her up to Heaven, that himself might have gone up with her; So his S. Leo
lift up S. Peter with praises to the sky, that he being his For so he calls
himself in sermon. 1. in die assum.
heir, might have gone up with him: For his S. Leo was a great Orator, who by
the power of his eloquence redeemed Rome from fire, when both Ex breniario
Romano.
Attilas and Gensericus would have burnt it.

Some fruits of this rhetoric he bestowed upon S. Peter, saying, The Lord
Epist. 89.
did take Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible unity: which words
being coupled to the sentence alleged by the Cardinal (that he has no part
in the divine Mystery, that dare depart from the soliditie of Peter) should
have given him, I think, such a skarre, as he should never have dared to have
taken any advantage by the words immediately preceding, for the benefit of the
Church of Rome, and the head thereof; since those which immediately follow, are
so much derogatorie to the divine Majesty. And again, My Epist. 52.
writings be strengthened by the authority and merit of my Lord, most blessed
S. Peter. We Epist. 89.
beseech you to keep the things decreed by us through the inspiration of God,
and the Apostle most blessed S. Peter. If In sermon. 2. in die anniuer. assum.
suae.
any thing be well done, or decreed by us; If any thing be obtained of Gods
mercy by daily prayers, it is to be ascribed to S. Peter's works and merits,
whose power does live, and authority excel in his own Sea. He Sermon. 3. in
die anniuer. assump. suae.
was so plentifully watered of the very fountain of all graces, that whereas
he received many things alone, yet nothing passes over to any other, but he
was partaker of it. And in a word, he was so desirous to extol Saint Peter,
that a messenger from him was an Epist. 24.
embassage from Saint Peter: Epist. 4.
any thing done in his presence, was in S. Peter's presence. Neither did he use
all this Rhetoric without purpose: for at that time the Patriarch of
Constantinople contended with him for Primacie. And in the Council of Council.
Chalceden. Act. 16. and Can. 28.
Chalcedon, the Bishops, six hundred and more, gave equal authority to the
Patriarch of that Sea, and would not admit any Privilege to the Sea of Rome
above him; but went against him. And yet he that gave so much to Peter, took
nothing from Caesar; but gave him both his Titles and due, giving the power of
calling a Council to the Emperor; as it may appear by these one or two
places following of many. If it may please your Epist 9. Theodosie.
godliness to vouchsafe at our supplication to condescend, that you will
command a Council of Bishops to be holden within Italy. And writing unto the
Bishop of Constantinople: Because the most clement Epist. 16. Flan.
Emperor, careful of the peace of the Church, will have a Council to be
holden; albeit it evidently appear, the matter to be handled does in no case
stand in need of a Council. And again, Albeit Epist. 17. Theodosie.
my occasions will not permit me to be present upon the day of the Council of
Bishops, which your godliness has appointed. So as by this it may well
appear, that he that gave so much to Peter, gave also to Caesar his due and
prerogative. But yet he plays not fair play in this, that even in all these
his wrong applied arguments and examples, he produces no other witnesses, but
the parties themselves; bringing ever the Popes sentences for approbation of
their own authority.

Now indeed for one word of his in the midst of his examples, I cannot but
greatly commend him; that is, that Martyrs ought to endure all sorts of
tortures and death, before they suffer one syllable to be corrupted of the Law
of God. Which lesson, if he and all the rest of his own profession would
apply to themselves, then would not the Sacrament be administered sub vna
specie, directly contrary to Christ's institution, the practice of the Apostles
and of the whole Primitive Church for many hundred years: then would not the
private Masses be in place of the Lords Supper: then would not the words of
the Bellar. de sacra Encharist. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Canon of the Mass be opposed to the words of S. Paul and S. Luke, as our
Adversary himself confesses, and cannot reconcile them: nor then would not
so many hundreths other traditions of men be set up in their Church, not only
as equal, but even preferred to the word of God. But sure in this point I
fear I have mistaken him: for I think he does not mean by his Diuina
Dogmata, the word of the God of heaven, but only the Canons and Laws of his
Dominus Deus Papa: otherwise all his Primacie of the Apostolic Sea would not
be so much sticken upon, having so slender ground in the word of God.

And for the great fear he has, that the suddennes of the apprehension, the
bitterness of the persecution, the weakness of his aage, and other such
infirmities might have been the cause of the Arch-priests fall; in this, I have
already sufficiently answered him; having declared, as the truth is, and as
the said Blackwell himself will yet testify, that he took this Oath freely
of himself, without any inducement thereunto, either Precibus or Minis.

But amongst all his citations, Some of Sanders his worthy sayings remembered.
he must not forget holy Sanderus and his visibilis Monarchia, whose person
and actions I did already a little touch. And surely who will with impartial
eyes read his books, they may well think, that he has deserved well of his
English Romane-Church; but they can never think, but that he deserved very
ill of his English Sovereign and State: Witness his own books; whereout I
have made choice to set down here these few sentences following, as flowers
picked out of so worthy a garland. Sand de visib. Monar. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Elizabeth Queen of ENGLAND, does exercise the Priestly act of teaching and
preaching the Gospel in ENGLAND, with no less authority then Christ himself,
or Moses ever did. The supremacy of a Sand de clau. David. li. 6. c. 1.
woman in Church matters is from no other, then from the Devil. And of all
things in general thus he speaks, The Sand. de visib. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 4.
King that will not inthrall himself to the Popes authority, be ought not to
be tolerated; but his Subjects ought to give all diligence, that another may be
chosen in his place as soon as may be. A King that is an Ibidem.
Heretic, ought to be removed from the Kingdom that he holds over
Christians; and the Bishops ought to endeavor to set up another, as soon as
possibly they can. We do constantly Ibidem.
affirm, that all Christian Kings are so far under Bishops and Priests in
all matters appertaining to faith, that if they shall continue in a fault
against Christian Religion, after one or two admonitions, obstinately, for that
cause they may and ought to be deposed by the Bishops from their temporal
authority they hold over Christians. Ibidem.
Bishops are set over temporal kingdoms, if those kingdoms do submit
themselves to the faith of Christ. We do justly Sand. de clan. David. li. 5.
c. 2.
affirm, that all Secular power, whether Regal, or any other, is of men. The
Ibidem.
anointing which is powered upon the head of the King by the Priest, does
declare that he is inferior to the Priest. It is altogether against the will
of Sand. de clan. David. li. 5. c. 4.
Christ, that Christian kings should have supremacy in the Church.

And whereas for the crown and conclusion of all his examples, The Cardinals
pair of Martyrs weighed.
he reckons his two English Martyrs, Moore and Roffensis, who died for that
one most weighty head of doctrine, as he alleges, refusing the Oath of
Supremacy; I must tell him, that he has not been well informed in some
material points, which do very nearly concern his two said Martyrs: For it
is clear and apparently to be proved by diverse Records, that they were both
of them committed to the Tower about a year before either of them was called
in question upon their lives, for the Popes Supremacy; And that partly for
their backwardness in the point of the establishment of the Kings succession,
whereunto the whole Realm had subscribed, and partly for that one of them, to
wit, Fisher, had had his hand in the matter of the holy Called Elizabeth
Barton. See the Act of Parliament.
maid of Kent; he being for his concealment of that false prophets abuse,
found guilty of misprision of Treason. And as these were the principal causes
of their imprisonment (the King resting secure of his Supremacy, as the Realm
stood then affected, but especially troubled for settling the Crown upon the
issue of his second marriage) so was it easily to be conceived, that being
thereupon discontented, their humors were thereby made apt to draw them by
degrees, to further opposition against the King and his authority, as indeed
it fell out: For in the time of their being in prison, the Kings lawful
authority in cases Ecclesiastical being published and promulged, as well by a
general decree of the Clergy in their Synod, as by an Act of Parliament
made thereupon; they behaved themselves so peeuishly therein, as the old
coals of the Kings anger being thereby raked up of new, they were again
brought in question; as well for this one most weighty head of doctrine of the
Pope his supremacy, as for the matter of the Kings marriage and succession, as
by the confession of one of themselves, even Thomas Moore, is evident: For
being condemned, he used these words at the bar before the Lords, Non ignoro
cur me morti adiudicaueritis; videlicet ob id, Histor. aliquet Martyrum nostri
seculi, Anno 1550.
quod nunquam voluerim assentiri in negotio matrimonij Regis. That is, I am not
ignorant why you have adjudged me to death: to wit, for that I would never
consent in the business of the new marriage of the King. By which his own
confession it is plain, that this great martyr himself took the cause of his
own death, to be only for his being refractary to the King in this said
matter of Marriage and Succession; which is but a very fleshly cause of
Martyrdom, as I conceive.

And as for Roffensis his fellow Martyr (who could have been content to have
taken the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, with a certain modification, which
Moore refused) as his imprisonment was neither only, nor principally for the
cause of Supremacy, so died he but a halting and a singular Martyr or
witness for that most weighty head of doctrine; the whole Church of England
going at that time, in one current and stream as it were against him in that
Argument, diverse of them being of far greater reputation for learning and
sound judgment, then ever he was. So as in this point we may well arm our
selves with the Cardinals own reason, where he gives amongst other notes of
the true Church, Universality for one, we having the general and Catholic
conclusion of the whole Church of England, on our side in this case, as
appears by their book set out by the whole Convocation of England, called,
The Institution of a Christian man; the same matter being likewise very
learnedly handled by diverse particular learned men of our Church, as by Steven
Gardener in his book De vera obedientia, with a Preface of Bishop Boners
adjoining to it, De summo and absoluto Regis Imperio, published by M. Bekinsaw,
De vera differentia Regiae Potestatis and Ecclesiasticae, Bishop Tonstals
Sermon, Bishop Longlands Sermon, the letter of Tonstall to Cardinal Poole, and
diverse other both in English and Latin. And if the bitterness of Fishers
coffeehouse had not been fed with his daily ambitious expectation of the
Cardinals hat, which came so near as Calis before he lost his head to fill it
with, I have great reason to doubt, if he would have constantly perseuered in
enduring his Martyrdom for that one most weighty head of doctrine.

And surely these two Captains and ringleaders to Martyrdom were but ill
followed by the rest of their countrymen: for I can never read of any after
them, being of any great account, and that not many, that ever sealed that
weighty head of doctrine with their blood in England. So as the true causes of
their first falling in trouble (whereof I have already made mention) being
rightly considered upon the one part, and upon the other the scant number of
witnesses, that with their blood sealed it, (a point so greatly accounted of by
our Cardinal) there can but small glory redound thereby to our English nation,
these only two, Enoch and Elias, serving for witnesses against our
Antichristian doctrine.

And I am sure the Supremacy of Kings may, The Supremacy of Kings sufficiently
warranted by the Scriptures.
and will ever be better maintained by the word of God (which must ever be the
true rule to discern all weighty heads of doctrine by) to be the true and
proper office of Christian Kings in their own dominions, then he will be ever
able to maintain his annihilating Kings, and their authorities, together with
his base and irreverent speeches of them, wherewith both his former great
Volumes, and his late Books against Venice are filled. In the old Testament,
Kings were directly 2. Chron. 19.4.
Governors over the Church within their Dominions, 2. Sam. 5.6.
purged their corruptions; reformed their abuses, brought the 1. Chron. 13.12.
Arc to her resting place, the King 2. Sam. 6.16
dancing before it; 1. Chron. 28.6.
built the Temple; 2. Chron. 6.
dedicated the same, assisting in their own persons to the sanctification
thereof; 2. King. 22.11.
made the Book of the Law newfound, to be read to the people; Nehe. 9.38.
David. Solomon.
renewed the Covenant between God and his people; 2. King. 18.4
bruised the brazen serpent in pieces, which was set up by the express
commandment of God, and was a figure of Christ; destroyed 1. King. 15.12. 2.
king. 13.4.
all Idols, and false gods; made 2. Chron. 17.8.
a public reformation, by a Commission of Secular men and Priests mixed for
that purpose; deposed 1. King. 2.27
the high Priest, and set up another in his place: and generally, ordered every
thing belonging to the Church-gouernment, their Titles and Prerogatives given
them by God, agreeing to these their actions. They are called the 2. Sam. 7.14
Sons of the most High, nay, Gods Psalm. 82.6. and exodus 22.8.
themselves; The 1. Sam. 24.11.
Lords anointed, Sitting 2. Chro. 9.8.
in Gods throne; His 2. Chro. 6.15.
servants; The Angels 2. Sam. 14.20.
of God; According to his 1. Sam. 13.14.
hearts desire; The light 2. Sam. 21.17.
of Israel; The Isa. 49.23.
nursing fathers of the Church, with innumerable such styles of honor,
wherewith the old Testament is filled; whereof our adversary can pretend no
ignorance. And as to the new Testament, Every soul is commanded to be subject
unto them, even for Romans 13.5.
conscience sake. All men 1. Tim. 2.2.
must be prayed for; but especially Kings, and those that are in Authority,
that under them we may lead a godly, peaceable, and an honest life.

The Romans 13.4.
Magistrate is the minister of God, to do vengeance on him that does evil,
and reward him that does well. Ye must obey all higher powers, but 1. Pet.
2.13.
especially Princes, and those that are supereminent. Give every man his due,
fear Romans 13.7.
to whom fear belongs, and honor to whom honor. Give Mat. 22.21.
unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is Gods. John 18.36.
Regnum meum non est huius mundi. Luke 12.14.
Quis me constituit Iudicem super vos? Luke 22.25.
Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic. If these examples,
sentences, titles, and prerogatives, and innumerable other in the Old and New
Testament do not warrant Christian Kings, within their own dominions, to
govern their Church, as well as the rest of their people, in being Custodes
vtriusque Tabulae, not by making new Articles of Faith, (which is the Popes
office, as I said before) but by commanding obedience to be given to the word
of God, by reforming the religion according to his prescribed will, by
assisting the spiritual power with the temporal sword, by reforming of
corruptions, by procuring due obedience to the Church, by judging, and cutting
off all frivolous questions and schisms, as Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constantini.
Constantine did; and finally, by making decorum to be observed in every thing,
and establishing orders to be observed in all indifferent things for that
purpose, which is the only intent of our Oath of Supremacy: If this Office of
a King, I say, do not agree with the power given him by Gods word, let any
indifferent man void of passion, judge. But how these honorable offices,
styles, and prerogatives given by God to Kings in the Old and New Testament, as
I have now cited, can agree with the brave styles and titles that Bellarmine
gives them, I can hardly conceive.

De laicis cap. 7.
That Kings are rather slaves then Lords.

De Pent. li. 1. cap. 7.
That they are not only subjects to Popes, to Bishops, to Priests, but even to
Deacons.

Ibidem.
That an Emperor must content himself to drink, not only after a Bishop,
but after a Bishops Chaplen.

Ibid. and de Cler. cap. 28.
That Kings have not their Authority nor Office immediately from God, nor his
Law, but only from the Law of Nations.

De Pont. lib. 3. cap. 16.
That Popes have degraded many Emperors, but never Emperor degraded the Pope;
nay, even De Romans Pontif. lib. 5. cap 8.
Bishops, that are but the Popes vassals, may depose Kings, and abrogate their
laws.

De laicis cap. 8.
That Churchmen are so far above Kings, as the soul is above the body.

De Pont. li. 5. cap. 18.
That Kings may be deposed by their people, for diverse respects.

De Pon. lib. 2. cap. 26.
But Popes can by no means be deposed: for no flesh has power to judge of
them.

De Pont. lib. 4. cap. 15.
That obedience due to the Pope, is for conscience sake.

De Clericis, cap. 28.
But the obedience due to Kings, is only for certain respects of order and
policy.

Ibidem.
That these very Churchmen that are borne, and inhabit in Sovereign Princes
countries, are notwithstanding not their Subjects, and cannot be judged by
them, although they may judge them.

Ibidem.
And, that the obedience that Churchmen give to Princes, even in the meanest
and mere temporal things, is not by way of any necessary subjection, but
only out of discretion, and for observation of good order and custom.

These contrarieties between the Book of God, and Bellarmines books, have I
here set in opposition each to other, Vt ex contrariis iuxta se positis,
veritas magis elucescere possit. And thus far I dare boldly affirm, that
whosoever will indifferently weigh these irreconciliable contradictions here
set down, will easily confess, that CHRIST is no more contrary to Belial,
light to darkness, and heaven to hell, then Bellarmines estimation of Kings,
is to Gods.

Now as to the conclusion of his letter, which is only filled with strong and
pithie exhortations, to persuade and confirm Blackwell to the patient and
constant enduring of martyrdom, I have nothing to answer, save by way of
regrate; that so many good sentences drawn out of the Scripture, so well and
so handsomely packed up together, should be so ill and untruely applied: But an
evil cause is never the better for so good a cloak; and an ill matter never
amended by good words: And therefore I may justly turn over that craft of the
devil upon himself, in using so holy-like an exhortation to so evil a
purpose. Only I could have wished him, that he had a little better observed
his decorum herein, in not letting slip two or three profane words amongst
so many godly mortified Scripture sentences. For in all the Scripture,
especially in the New Testament, I never read of Pontifex Maximus. And the Pope
must be content in that style to succeed according to the Law and institution
of Numa Pompilius, and not to S. Peter, who never heard nor dreamed of such an
Office.

And for his Caput fidei, which I remembered before, the Apostles (I am sure)
never gave that style to any, but to CHRIST: So as these styles, whereof some
were never found in Scripture, and some were never applied but to CHRIST in
that sense, as he applies it, had been better to have been left out of so
holy and mortified a letter.

To conclude then this present Discourse, I heartily wish all indifferent
readers of the Breues and Letter, not to judge by the speciousnesse of the
words, but by the weight of the matter; not looking to that which is strongly
alleged, but iudiciously to consider what is justly proved. And for all my
own good and natural Subjects, that their hearts may remain established in
the truth; that these foreign inticements may not seduce them from their
natall and natural duty; and that all, as well strangers, as natural
subjects, to whose eyes this Discourse shall come, may wisely and impartially
judge of the Verity, as it is nakedly here set down, for clearing these mists
and clouds of calumnies, which were iniustly heaped upon me; for which end
only I heartily pray the courteous Reader to be persuaded, that I took
occasion to publish this Discourse.

A PREMONITION TO ALL MOST MIGHTY MONARCHS, KINGS, FREE PRINCES, AND STATES
OF CHRISTENDOM.
TO THE MOST SACRED AND INVINCIBLE PRINCE, RODOLPHE THE II. by GODS Clemency
Elect Emperor of the ROMANS; KING OF GERMANY, HVNGARIE, BOHEME, DALMATIE,
CROATIE, SCLAVONIE, etc. ARCH-DVKE OF AUSTRIA, DVKE OF BVRGVNDIE, STIRIA,
CARINTHIA, CARNIOLA, and WIRTEMBERG, etc. Earl of TYROLIS, etc.
AND TO ALL OTHER RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY KINGS; And Right Excellent free
Princes and States of CHRISTENDOM: Our loving BRETHREN, COSINS, ALLIES,
CONFEDERATES and FRIENDS;
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND;
Professor, Maintainer and Defender of the True, Christian, Catholic and
Apostolic FAITH, Professed by the ancient and Primitive CHVRCH, and sealed
with the blood of so many Holy Bishops, and other faithful crowned with the
glory of MARTYRDOM;
WISHES cuerlasting felicity in CHRIST our SAVIOVR. TO YOU MOST SACRED AND
INVINCIBLE EMPEROVR; RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY KINGS; RIGHT EXCELLENT FREE PRINCES
AND STATES, MY LOVING BRETHREN AND COSINS:
To you, I say, as of right belongs, do I consecrate and direct this Warning
of mine, or rather Preamble to my reprinted Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance: For the cause is general, and concerns the Authority and
privilege of Kings in general, and all supereminent Temporal powers. And if
in whatsoever Society, or Corporation of men, either in Corporations of
Cities, or in the Corporation of any mechanicke craft or handie-worke, every
man is careful to maintain the privileges of that Society whereunto he is
sworn; nay, they will rather cluster all in one, making it a common cause,
exposing themselves to all sorts of peril, then suffer the least breach in
their Liberties; If those of the baser sort of people, I say, be so curious and
zealous for the preservation of their common privileges and liberties, as if
the meanest amongst them be touched in any such point, they think it
concerns them all: Then what should we do in such a case, whom GOD has
placed in the highest thrones upon earth, made his Lieutenants and
Vicegerents, and even seated us upon his own Throne to execute his
Judgments? The consideration hereof has now moved me to expone a Case unto
you, which does not so nearly touch me in my particular, as it does open a
breach against our Authority, (I speak in the plural of all Kings) and
privilege in general. And since not only all ranks and sorts of people in
all Nations do inuiolably observe this Maxim, but even the Civil Law, by
which the greatest part of Christendom is governed, does give them an
interest, qui fouent consimilem causam; How much more then have ye interest in
this cause, not being similis or par causa to yours, but eadem with yours? and
indeed ye all fouetis, or at least fouere debetis eandem causam mecum. And
since this cause is common to us all; both the Civil Laws, and the municipall
Laws of all Nations, permit and warn them, that have a common interest, to
concur in one for the defense of their common cause; yea, common sense
teaches us with the Poet, Ecquid Ad te post paulo ventura pericula sentis?
Nam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet.


A wake then while it is time, and suffer not, by your longer sleep, the
strings of your Authority to be cut in singulis, and one and one to your
general ruin, which by your united forces, would rather make a strong rope
for the enemy to hang himself in, with Achitophel, then that he should ever
be able to break it. As for this Apology of mine, it is true, that I thought
good to set it first out without putting my name unto it; but never so, as I
thought to deny it, remembering well mine own words, but taken out of the
Scripture, in the beginning of the Preface to the Reader, in my (...), that
nothing is so bid, which shall not be opened, etc. promising there, which with
GOD his grace I shall ever perform, never to do that in secret, which I shall
need to be ashamed of, when it shall come to be proclaimed in public.

In deed I thought it fit, for two respects, that this my Apology should first
visit the world without having my name written in the forehead thereof. First
because of the matter, and next of the persons that I meddled with. The matter,
it being a Treatise, which I was to write, containing reasons and discourses in
Divinity, for the defense of the Oath of Alleagiance, and refutation of the
condemners thereof; I thought it not comely for one of my place, to put my name
to books concerning Scholasticke Disputations; whose calling is to set forth
Decrees in the Imperative mood: for I think my self as good a man as the
Pope, by his reverence, for whom these my Answerers make the like excuse; for
that his Breues are so summary without yielding any reason unto them. My next
reason was the respect of the persons whom with I meddled. Wherein, although I
shortly answered the Popes Breues; yet the point I most labored, being the
refutation of Bellarmines Letter, I was never the man, I confess, that could
think a Cardinal a meet match for a King: especially, having many hundredth
thousands of my subjects of as good birth as he. As for his Church dignity,
his Cardinalship I mean, I know not how to rank or value it, either by the
warrant of God his word, or by the ordinance of Emperors or Kings, it being
indeed only a new Papal erection, tolerated by the sleeping conniuence of our
Predecessors (I mean still by the plural of Kings) But notwithstanding of
this my forbearing to put my name unto it, some Ambassadors of some of you (my
loving Brethren and Cousins) whom this cause did neereliest concern, can
witness, that I made Presents of some of those books, at their first
printing, unto them, and that auowedly in my own name. As also the English
Paragraphist, or rather perverse Pamphleter Parsons, since all his description
must run upon a P. has trewly observed, that my Arms are affixed in the
frontispice thereof, which uses not to be in books of other men's doing;
whereby his malice in pretending his ignorane, that he might pay me the
soundlier, is the more inexcusable. But now that I find my sparing to put my
name unto it has not procured my sparing by these answerers, who have neither
spared my Person directly in naming me, nor indirectly by railing upon the
Author of the Book: it is now high time for me no longer to conceal nor
disauow my self, as if I were ashamed of my own deed. And therefore that ye
may the better understand the nature of the cause, I will begin at the first
ground thereof.

The never enough wondered at and abhorred POVVDER-TREASON (though the
repetition thereof grieueth, I know, the gentle hearted Jesuit Parsons) this
Treason, I say, being not only intended a against me and my Posterity, but
even against the whole house of Parliament, plotted only by Papists, and they
only led thereto by a preposterous zeal for the advancement of their
Religion; some of them continuing so obstinate, that even at their death they
would not acknowledge their fault; but in their last words, immediately before
the expiring of their breath, refused to condemn themselves and crave pardon
for their deed, except the Romish Church should first condemn it; And soon
after, it being discovered, that a great number of my Popish Subjects of all
ranks and sexes, both men and women, as well within as without the Country;
had a confused notion and an obscure knowledge, that some great thing was to
be done in that Parliament for the weal of the Church; although, for
secrecies cause, they were not acquainted with the particulars; certain forms
of prayer having likewise been set down and used for the good success of
that great errand; adding heereunto, that diverse times, and from diverse
Priests, the Archtraitours themselves received the Sacrament for confirmation
of their heart, and observation of secrecy; Some of the principal Jesuits
likewise being found guilty of the foreknowledge of the Treason it self; of
which number some fled from their trial, others were apprehended (as holy
Garnet himself and Owldcorne were) and justly executed upon their own plain
confession of their guilt: If this Treason now, clad with these circumstances,
did not minister a just occasion to that Parliament house, whom they thought
to have destroyed, courageously and zealously at their next sitting down, to
use all means of trial, whether any more of that mind were yet left in the
Country; I leave it to you to judge, whom God has appointed his highest
Depute Judges upon earth: And amongst other things for this purpose, This Oath
of Allegiance, so unjustly impugned, was then devised and enacted. And in case
any sharper Laws were then made against the Papists, that were not obedient to
the former Laws of the Country; if ye will consider the Time, Place and
Persons, it will be thought no wonder, seeing that occasion did so justly
exasperate them to make seuerer Laws, then otherwise they would have done. The
Time, I say, being the very next sitting down of the Parliament, after the
discovery of that abominable Treason: the Place being the same, where they
should all have been blown up, and so bringing it freshly to their memory
again: the Persons being the very Parliament men whom they thought to have
destroyed. And yet so far has both my heart and government been from any
bitterness, as almost never one of those sharp additions to the former Laws
have ever yet been put in execution.

And that ye may yet know further, for the more conuincing these Libellers of
wilful malice, who impudently affirm, That this Oath of Allegiance was
devised for deceiving and intrapping of Papists in points of Conscience; The
truth is, that the Lower house of Parliament at the first framing of this
Oath, made it to contain, That the Pope had no power to excommunicate me,
which I caused them to reform, only making it to conclude, That no
excommunication of the Popes, can warrant my Subjects to practice against my
Person or State; denying the deposition of Kings to be in the Popes lawful
power; as indeed I take any such temporal violence, to be far without the
limits of such a Spiritual censure as Excommunication is. So careful was I
that nothing should be contained in this Oath, except the profession of natural
Allegiance, and civil and temporal obedience, with a promise to resist to all
contrary uncivil violence.

This Oath now grounded upon so great and just an occasion, set forth in so
reasonable terms, and ordained only for making of a true distinction between
Papists of quiet disposition, and in all other things good subjects, and such
other Papists as in their hearts maintained the like violent bloody Maxims,
that the Powder-Traitours did: This Oath, I say, being published and put in
practice, bred such evil blood in the Popes head and his Clergy, as Breue
after Breue comes forth, vt vndam vnda sequitur; prohibiting all Catholics
from taking the same, as a thing clean contrary to the Catholic faith; and
that the taking thereof cannot stand with the salvation of their souls.

There comes likewise a letter of Cardinal Bellarmines to Blackwell to the
same purpose; but discoursing more at length upon the said Oath. Whereupon,
after I had entered in consideration of their unjust impugning that so just and
lawful an Oath; and fearing that by their untrue calumnies and Sophistry the
hearts of a number of the most simple and ignorant of my people should be
misse-led, under that fair and deceitful cloak of Conscience; I thought good
to set forth an Apology for the said Oath: wherein I proved, that as this
Oath contained nothing but matter of civil and temporal Obedience, due by
Subjects to their Sovereign Prince; so this quarrelling therewith was nothing
but a late usurpation of Popes (against the warrant of all Scriptures, ancient
Councels and Fathers) upon the Temporal power of Kings, wherewith only my
Apology does meddle. But the publishing of this Book of mine has brought
such two Answerers, or rather Railers upon me, as all the world may wonder at:
For my Book being first written in English, an English Oath being the subject
thereof, and the use of it properly belonging to my Subjects of England; and
immediately thereafter being translated into Latin, upon a desire that some had
of further publishing it abroad; it comes home to me now answered in both
the Languages. And, I think, if it had been set forth in all the tongues that
were at the confusion of Babel, it would have been returned answered in them
all again. Thus may a man see how busy a Bishop the Devil is, and how he
omitteth no diligence for venting of his poisoned wares. But herein their
malice does clearly appear, that they pay me so quickly with a double
answer; and yet have never answered their own Archpriest, who has written a
book for the maintenance of the same Oath, and of the temporal authority of
Kings, alleging a cloud of their own Scholemen against them.

As for the English Answerer, my unnatural and fugitive Subject; I will
neither defile my pen, nor your sacred eyes or ears with the describing of
him, who ashames, nay, abhorres not to rail, nay, to rage and spew forth
blasphemies against the late Queen of famous memory. A Subject to rail
against his natural Sovereign by birth; A man to rail against a Lady by
sex; A holy man (in outward profession) to insult upon the dead; nay to take
Radamanthus office over his head, and to sit down and play the Judge in hell,
And all his quarrel is, that either her Successor, or any of her servants
should speak honorably of her. Cursed be he that curses the Anointed of God:
and destroyed might he be with the destruction of Korah, that has sinned in
the contradiction of Korah. Without might such dogs and swine be cast forth, I
say, out of the Spiritual Jerusalem.

As for my Latin Answerer, I have nothing to say to his person; he is not my
Subject; he stands or falls unto his own Lord: But sure I am, they two
have casten lotts upon my Book, since they could not divide it: the one of
them, my fugitive, to rail upon my late Predecessor, (but a rope is the
fittest answer for such an Historian;) the other, a stranger, thinks he may
be boldest both to pay my person and my Book, as indeed he does; which how
justly either in matter or manner, we are now to examine.

But first, who should be the true Author of this book, I can but guess. He
calls himself Mattheus Tortus, Cardinal Bellarmins Chaplain. A Being a
proper word to express the true meaning of Tortus.
thrown Evangelist indeed, full of throward Divinity; an obscure Author,
utterly unknown to me, being yet little known to the world for any other of
his works: and therefore must be a very desperate fellow in beginning his
apprentisage, not only to refute, but to rail upon a King. But who will
consider the carriage of the whole book, shall find that he writes with
such authority, or at the least tam elato stylo, so little sparing either
Kings in general, or my person in particular; and with such a greatness, P.
46.
Habemus enim exemplaria Breuium illorum in manibus, and P. 63.
Decernimus: as it shall appear, or at least be very probable, that it is the
Masters, and not the man's labor; especially in one place, where he
quarrelleth me for casting up his moralis certitudo and pie credi unto him;
Page 69.
he there grossly forgetting himself, says, mala fide nobiscum agit,
thereby making this Author to be one person with Bellarmine. But let it be
the work of a Tortus indeed, and not of a personated Cardinal; yet must it
be the Cardinals deed, since Master Tortus is the Cardinals man, and does it
in his Masters defense. The errand then being the Cardinals, and done by his
own man, it cannot but be accounted as his own deed; especially since the
English Answerer does four times promise, that Bellarmine, or one by his
appointment, shall sufficiently answer it.

And now to come to his matter and manner of Answer: Surely if there were no
more but his unmannerly manner, it is enough to disgrace the whole matter
thereof. For first, to show his pride, in his Printers preface of the Politan
edition of this elegans libellus, he must equal the Cardinals greatness with
mine in every thing. For though he confesses this Master Tortus to be an
obscure man; yet being the Cardinals Chapleine, he is sufficient enough
forsooth to answer an English book, that lacks the name of an Author; as
if a personated obscure name for Author of a Cardinals book, were a meet
match for answering a KINGS Book, that lacks the name of an Author; and a
Cardinals Chapleine to meet with the Deane of the Kings Chapel, whom Parsons
with the Cardinal, have (as it seems) agreed upon to entitle to be the
Author of my Apology. And not only in the Preface, but also through the
whole book does he keep this comparatiue greatness. He must be as short
in his answer, as I am in my Book, he must refute all that I have said
against the Popes second Breue, with equal brevity, and upon one page almost,
as I have done mine: and because I have set down the substance of the Oath in
fourteen Articles; in just as many Articles must he set down that Act of
Parliament of mine, wherein the Oath is contained: And yet, had he contented
himself with his own pride, by the demonstration of his own greatness,
without further wronging of me, it had been the more tolerable. But what
cause gave I him to farce his whole book with injuries, both against my Person
and Book? For whereas in all my Apology I have never given him a foul word,
and especially never gave him the Lie: he by the contrary gives me nine
times the Lie in express terms, and seven times charge me with falsehood,
which phrase is equivalent with a Lie. And as for all other words of reproach,
as nugae, conuitia, temeritas, vanitas, impudentia, blasphemiae, sermonis
barbaries, cum eadem foelicitate scribendi, cauillationes, applicatio inepta,
fingere historias, audacia quae in hominem sanae mentis cadere non potest, vel
sensu communi caret, imperitia and leuitas, omnem omnino pudorem and
conscientiam exuisse, mala fide nobiscum agit, vt lectoribus per fas and nefas
imponat: of such like reproaches, I say, I doubt if there be a page in all his
Book free, except where he idly sets down the Popes Breues, and his own
Letter. And in case this might only seem to touch the unknown Author of the
Book, whom notwithstanding he knew well enough, as I show before; he spares
not my Person with my own name: sometimes saying, Page 47.
that Pope Clement thought me to be inclined to their Religion: Sometimes,
that I was a Puritan in Scotland, Page 98.
and a persecutour of Protestants. In one place he concludes, Page 87.
Quia Iacobus non est Catholicus, hoc ipso Haereticus est. In another place,
Page 98.
Ex Christiano Caluinistam fecerunt. In another place he says, Neque omnino
verum est, Ibid.
Iacobum nunquam deseruisse Religionem quam primo susceperat. And in another
place, after that he has compared and ranked me with Julian the Apostate,
he concludes, Cum Catholicus not sit, Page 97.
neque Christianus est. If this now be mannerly dealing with a King, I leave
it to you to judge, who cannot but resent such indignities done to one of your
quality.

And as for the Matter of his Book, it well fittes indeed the Manner thereof:
for he never answers directly to the maine question in my Book. For whereas
my Apology handles only two points, as I told you before; One, to prove
that the Oath of Allegiance does only meddle with the civil and temporal
Obedience, due by Subjects to their natural Sovereigns: The other, that this
late usurpation of Popes over the temporal power of Princes, is against the
rule of all Scriptures, ancient Councels and Fathers: he never improoues the
first, but by a false inference; that the Oath denies the Popes power of
Excommunication directly, since it denies his authority in deposing of Kings.
And for the second point, he brings no proof to the contrary, but, Pasce
oues meas: and, Tibi dabo claues regni Coelorum: and, That no Catholic ever
doubted of it. So as I may trewly say of him, that he either understands
not, or at least will not seem to understand my Book, in never directly
answering the maine question, as I have already said; and so may I justly
turn over upon himself that doom of ignorance, which in the beginning of his
Book he rashly pronounces upon me; saying, that I neither understand the
Popes Breues, his Letter, nor the Oath it self: And as he delights to
repeat over and over, I know not how often, and triumphs in this wrong
inference of his; That to deny the Popes power to depose Kings, is to deny the
Popes Primacie, and his spiritual power of Excommunication: So does he, upon
that ground of Pasce oues meas, give the Pope so ample a power over Kings, to
throne or dethrone them at his pleasure (and yet only subiecting Christian
Kings to that slavery) as I doubt not but in your own Honors ye will resent
you of such indignities; the rather since it concerns so many of you as
profess the Romish religion, far more then me: For since he accounts me an
heretic, and like Julian the Apostate; I am consequently extra caulam, and
none of the Popes flock, and so am in the case of Ethnicke Princes, over whom
he confesses the Pope has no power. But ye are in the Popes fold; and you,
that great Pastor may lead as sheep to the slaughter, when it shall please
him. And as the Asses ears must be horns, if the Lion list so to interpret
it; so must ye be removed as scabbed sheep from the flock, if so the Pope
think you to be, though your skin be indeed never so sound.

Thus has he set such a new goodly interpretation upon the words of CHRIST,
Pasce, oues meas, as if it were as much to say, as, depose Christian Kings; and
that Quodcunque solueris gave the Pope power to dispense with all sorts of
Oaths, Vows, Penalties, Censures and Laws, even with the natural obedience
of Subjects to their Sovereign Lords; much like to that new coined gloss that
his brother Senten. Card. Baron. super excom. Venet.
Baronius made upon the words in Saint Peter's vision, Surge Petre, occide and
manduca; That is (said he to the Pope) Go kill and confound the Venetians.

And because I have in my Book (by citing a place in his controversies)
discovered him to be a small friend to Kings, he is much commoued: For whereas
in his said Controversies, Lib. de Cler. cap. 28.
speaking de Clericis, he is so bold as to affirm, that Churchmen are
exempted from the power of earthly Kings; and that they ought them no
subjection even in temporal matters, but only vi rationis and in their own
discretion, for the preservation of peace and good order, because, I say,
citing this place of his in my Book, I tell with admiration, that he freeth
all Churchmen from any subjection to Kings, even those that are their borne
Subjects: he is angry with this phrase, and says it is an addition for
breeding envy unto him, and raising of hatred against him: For, says he,
although Bellarmine affirmed generally, that Churchmen were not subject to
earthly Kings; yet did he not insert that particular clause [though they were
borne and dwelling in their Dominions] as if the words of Churchmen and
earthly Kings in general imported not as much: for Layickes as well as
Churchmen are subject to none but to their natural Sovereign: And yet does
he not stick to confess, that he meant it, though it was not fit (he says)
to be expressed.

And thus quarrels he me for revealing his Printed secret. But whose hatred
did he fear in this? was it not yours? Who have interest, but KINGS, in
withdrawing of due subjection from KINGS? And when the greatest Monarchs
amongst you will remember, that almost the third part of your Subjects and of
your Territories, is Churchmen, and Church-liuings; I hope, ye will then
consider and weigh, what a feather he pulles out of your wings, when he
denudeth you of so many Subjects and their possessions, in the Popes favor:
nay, what briars and thorns are left within the heart of your dominions, when
so populous and potent a party shall have their birth, education and
liuelihood in your Countries, and yet owe you no subjection, nor acknowledge
you for their SOVEREIGNS? So as where the Churchmen of old were content with
their tithe of every man's goods; the Pope now will have little less then the
third part of every Kings Subjects and Dominions. And as in this place, so
throughout all the rest of his book, he does nothing but amplify the Popes
power over Kings, and exaggerate my unreasonable rigor for pressing this Oath;
which he will needs have to be nothing but a renewed Oath of Supremacy in
more subtle and crafty terms, only to rob the Pope of his Primacie and
spiritual power: making his temporal power and authority over Princes, to be
one of the chief Articles of the Catholic Faith.

But that it may the better appear unto you, that all my labor and intention
in this errand, was only to meddle with that due temporal Obedience which my
Subjects owe unto me; and not to entrap or inthrall their Consciences, as he
most falsely affirms: Ye shall first see how far other Godly and Christian
Emperors and Kings were from acknowledging the Popes temporal Supremacy over
them; nay, have created, controlled and deposed Popes: and next, what a number
of my Predecessors in this Kingdom have at all occasions, even in the times of
the greatest Greatness of Popes, resisted and plainly withstood them in this
point.

And first, all Christian Emperors were for a long time so far from
acknowledging the Popes Superiority over them, as by the contrary the Popes
acknowledged themselves for their Vassals, reuerencing and obeying the
Emperors as their Lords, for proof whereof, I remit you to my Apology.

And for the creating of Popes; the Emperors were in so long and continual
possession thereof, as I will use for my first witness a Pope himself; who
(in a Sigebert. ad ann. 773. Walthram. Naumburg. lib. (...) Episc.
inuestiturae. Mart. Polon. ad ann. 780. Theod. a Niem. de priuileg and Iurib.
Imperij and did. 63. C. Hadrian.
Synod of an hundredth fifty and three Bishops and Abbots) did ordeine, That
the Emperor CHARLES the Great should have the Right of choosing the Pope, and
ordeining the Apostolical Seat, and the Dignity of the Roman Principality:
nay, farther he ordained; That all Archbishops and Bishops should receive
their Inuestiture from the Emperor, or else be of no avail; And, that a
Bishop wanting it, should not be consecrate, pronouncing an Anathema against
all that should disobey this Sentence.

And that the Emperors assent to the Popes Election was a thing ordinary for a
long time, See Platin. in vit. Pelag. 2. Gregor. 1. and Seuerini.
Platina, and a number of the Popes own writers bear witness: And Lib. de
Clericis.
Bellarmine himself, in his book of Controversies, cannot get it handsomely
denied. Nay, the Popes were even forced then to pay a certain sum of money
to the Emperors for their Confirmation: And this lasted almost seven hundredth
years after CHRIST; witness In Chron. ad ann. 680.
Sigebert and In vit. Agathen. and Anast. in vit. eiusd Agath. and Herm.
Contract. ad ann. 678. edit. poster. and did. 63. c. Agathe.
Luitprandus, with other Popish Historians.

And for Emperors deposing of Popes, there are likewise diverse examples. The
Emperor Luitpr Hist. lib 6. ca. 10.11. Rhegino ad an. 963. and Platin. in vit.
Joan. 13.
Ottho deposed Pope John the twelfth of that name, for diverse crimes and vices;
especially of Lechery. The Emperor Marianus Scot. Sigeb. Abbas Vrsp. ad ann.
1046 and Plat in vit. Greg. 6.
Henry the third in a short time deposed three Popes; Benedict the ninth,
Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixth, as well for the sin of Avarice,
as for abusing their extraordinary authority against Kings and Princes.

And as for KINGS that have denied this Temporal Superiority of Popes; First,
we have the vnanime testimony of diverse famous HISTORIOGRAPHERS for the
general of many CHRISTIAN Kingdoms. As Walthram. Naumburz. in lib. de inuest.
Episc. Vixit circa ann. 1110.
Walthram testifies, That the Bishops of Spain, Scotland, England, Hungary,
from ancient institution till this modern novelty, had their Inuestiture by
KINGS, with peaceable inioyning of their Temporalities wholly and entirely; and
whosoever (says he) is peaceably solicitous, let him peruse the lives of the
Ancients, and read the Histories, and he shall understand thus much. And for
verification of this general Assertion; we will first begin at the practice
of the KINGS of France, though not named by Walthram in this his enumeration of
Kingdoms: amongst whom my first witness shall be that vulgarly known letter
of See Annals Franciae Nicolai Gillij in Phil. Pulchro.
Philip le Bell King of France, to Pope Boniface the eighth, the beginning
whereof, after a scornful salutation, is, Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, nos in
temporalibus nemini subesse.

And likewise after that Anno 1268. ex Arrestis Senatus Parifiens.
Jews the ninth, surnamed Sanctus, had by a public instrument (called
Pragmatica sanctio) forbidden all the exactions of the Popes Court within his
Realm: Pope Pius Joan. Maierius. lib. de Scismat and Council.
the second, in the beginning of Jews the eleventh his time, greatly
misseliking this Decree so long before made, sent his Legate to the said King
Jews, with Letters Patent, urging his promise which he had made when he was
Dolphin of France, to repeal that Sanction if ever he came to be King. The
King refers the Legate over with his Letters Patent to the Council of
Paris: where the matter being propounded, was impugned by Johannes Romanus, the
Kings Attorney; with whose opinion the University of Paris concurring, an
Appeal was made from the attempts of the Pope to the next general Council;
the Cardinal departing with indignation.

But that the King of France and Church thereof have ever stoken to their
Gallican immunitie, in denying the Pope any Temporal power over them, and in
resisting the Popes as often as ever they pressed to meddle with their Temporal
power, even in the donation of Benefices; the Histories are so full of them, as
the only examples thereof would make up a big Volume by it self. And so
far were the Sorbonistes for the Kings and French Churches privilege in this
point, as they were wont to maintain; That if the Pope fell a quarrelling the
King for that cause, the Gallican Church might elect a Patriarch of their own,
renouncing any obedience to the Pope. And Gerson was so far from giving the
Pope that temporal authority over Kings (who otherwise was a devout Roman
Catholic) as he wrote a Book de Auferibilitate Papae; not only from the
power over Kings, but even over the Church.

And now pretermitting all further examples of foreign Kings actions, I will
only content me at this time with some of my own Predecessors examples of
this kingdom of England; that it may thereby the more clearly appear, that
even in those times when the world was fullest of darkened blindness and
ignorance, the Kings of England have oftentimes, not only repined, but even
strongly resisted and withstood this temporal usurpation and encrochment of
ambitious Popes.

And I will first begin at Matthew. Paris. in Henr. 1. anno 1100.
King Henry the first of that name, after the Conquest; who after he was
crowned gave the Bishopric of Winchester to William Gifford, and forthwith
invested him into all the possessions belonging to the Bishopric, contrary to
the Canons of the new Synod. Idem ibid. anno 1113.
King Henry also gave the Archbishopricke of Canterbury to Radulph Bishop of
London; and gave him inuestiture by a Ring and a Crosiers staff.

Also Pope Idem ibid. anno 1119.
Calixtus held a Council at RHEMES, whither King Henry had appointed certain
Bishops of ENGLAND and NORMANDY to go; Thurstan also, elected Archbishop of
YORK, got leave of the King to go thither, giving his faith that he would
not receive Consecration of the Pope; And coming to the Synod, by his
liberal gifts (as the fashion is) wanne the ROMANS favor, and by their
means obtained to be consecrated at the Popes hand: Which as soon as the King
of ENGLAND knew, he forbade him to come within his Dominions.

Moreover King Edward the first prohibited the Abbot of Ex Archiuis Regni.
Waltham and Deane of Paul's, to collect a tenth of every man's goods for a
supply to the holy Land, which the Pope by three Bulls had committed to their
charge; and the said Deane of Paul's compeering before the King and his
Council, promised for the reverence he did bear unto the King, not to meddle
any more in that matter, without the Kings good leave and permission. Here (I
hope) a Churchman disobeyed the Pope for obedience to his Prince even in
Church matters: but this new Iesuited Divinity was not then known in the
world.

The same Edward I. impleaded the Deane of the Chapel of Vuluerhampton,
because the said Deane had, against the privileges of the Kingdom, given a
Prebend of the same Chapel to one at the Popes command: whereupon the said
Deane compeered, and put himself in the Kings will for his offense.

The said Edward I. deprived also the Bishop of Durham of all his liberties,
for disobeying a prohibition of the Kings. So as it appears, the Kings in
those days thought the Churchmen their Subjects, though now we be taught
other Seraphicall doctrine.

For further proof whereof John of Ibstocke was committed to the goal by the
said King, for having a suite in the Court of Rome seven years for the
Rectorie of Newchurch.

And Edward II. following the footsteps of his Father; after giving out a
Summons against the Abbot of Walden, for citing the Abbot of Saint Albons and
others in the Court of Rome, gave out letters for his apprehension.

And likewise, because a certain Prebend of Banburie had drawn one Beuercoat
by a Plea to Rome without the Kings Dominions, therefore were letters of
Caption sent forth against the said Prebend.

And Edward III. following likewise the example of his Predecessors; Because a
Parson of Liche had summoned the Prior of S. Oswalds before the Pope at
Auinion; for having before the Judges in England recovered the arrerage of a
pension; directed a Precept, for seasing upon all the goods both Spiritual and
Temporal of the said Parson, because he had done this in prejudice of the
King and Crown. The said King also made one Harwoden to be declared culpable
and worthy to be punished, for procuring the Popes Bulls against a Judgment
that was given by the Kings Judges.

And likewise; Because one entered upon the Priorie of Barnewell by the Popes
Bull, the said Intrant was committed to the Tower of London, there to remain
during the Kings pleasure.

So as my Predecessors (ye see) of this Kingdom, even when the Popes triumphed
in their greatness, spared not to punish any of their Subjects, that would
prefer the Popes Obedience to theirs, even in Church Matters: So far were
they then from either acknowledging the Pope for their temporal Superior, or
yet from doubting that their own Churchmen were not their Subjects. And now I
will close up all these examples with an Act of Parliament in King Richard II.
his time; whereby it was prohibited, That none should procure a Benefice from
Rome, under pain to be put out of the Kings protection. And thus may ye see,
that what those Kings successively one to another by four generations have
acted in private, the same was also maintained by a public Law.

By these few examples now (I hope) I have sufficiently cleared my self from
the imputation, that any ambition or desire of Novelty in me should have
stirred me, either to rob the Pope of any thing due unto him, or to assume
unto my self any farther authority, then that which other Christian Emperors
and Kings through the world, and my own Predecessors of England in especial,
have long agone maintained. Neither is it enough to say (as Parsons does in
his Answer to the Lord Coke) That far more Kings of this Country have given
many more examples of acknowledging, or not resisting the Popes usurped
Authorities; some perchance lacking the occasion; and some the ability of
resisting them: for even by the Civil Law, in the case of violent intrusion
and long and wrongful possession against me, it is enough if I prove that I
have made lawful interruption upon convenient occasions.

But the Cardinal thinks the Oath, not only unlawful for the substance
thereof, but also in regard of the Person whom unto it is to be sworn: For
(says he) The King is not a Catholic; And in two or three other places of
his book, he sticks not to call me by my name very broadly, an Heretic, as
I have already told. But yet before I be publicly declared an Heretic; by the
Popes own Law my people ought not to refuse their Obedience unto me. And (I
trust) if I were but a subject, and accused by the Pope in his Conclaue before
his Cardinals, he would have hard proving me an Heretic, if he judged me by
their own ancient Orders.

For first, I am no Apostate, as the Cardinal would make me; not only having
ever been brought up in that Religion which I presently profess, but even my
Father and Grandfather on that side professing the same: and so cannot be
properly an Heretic, by their own doctrine, since I never was of their
Church. And as for the Queen my Mother of worthy memory; although she
continued in that Religion wherein she was nourished, yet was she so far
from being superstitious or Iesuited therein, that at my Baptism (although I
was baptized by a Popish Archbishop) she sent him word to forbear to use the
spettle in my Baptism; which was obeyed, being indeed a filthy and an apish
trick, rather in scorn then imitation of CHRIST. And her own very words
were, That she would not have a pockie priest to spet in her child's mouth. As
also the Font wherein I was Christened, was sent from the late Queen here of
famous memory, who was my Godmother; and what her Religion was, Pius V. was not
ignorant. And for further proof, that that renowned Queen my Mother was not
superstitious; as in all her Letters (whereof I received many) she never made
mention of Religion, nor labored to persuade me in it; so at her last words,
she commanded her Master-houshold, a Scottish Gentleman my servant and yet
alive, she commanded him (I say) to tell me; That although she was of another
Religion then that wherein I was brought up; yet she would not press me to
change, except my own Conscience forced me to it: For so that I led a good
life, and were careful to do Justice and govern well; she doubted not but I
would be in a good case with the profession of my own Religion. Thus am I no
Apostate, nor yet a deborder from that Religion which one part of my Parents
professed, and an other part gave me good allowance of. Neither can my
Baptism in the rites of their Religion make me an Apostate, or Heretic in
respect of my present profession, since we all agree in the substance thereof,
being all Baptized In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
upon which head there is no variance amongst us.

And now for the point of Heretic; I will never be ashamed to render an
account of my profession, and of that hope that is in me, as the Apostle
prescribes. I am such a CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN, as believes the three Creeds;
That of the Apostles, that of the Council of Nice, and that of Athanasius; the
two latter being Paraphrases to the former: And I believe them in that sense,
as the ancient Fathers and Councels that made them did understand them: To
which three Creeds all the Ministers of England do subscribe at their
Ordination. And I also acknowledge for Orthodoxe all those other forms of
Creedes, that either were devised by Councels or particular Fathers, against
such particular Heresies as most reigned in their times.

I reverence and admit the four first general Councels as Catholic and
Orthodoxe: And the said four general Councels are acknowledged by our Acts of
Parliament, and received for Orthodoxe by our Church.

As for the Fathers; I reverence them as much and more then the Ie suites do,
and as much as themselves ever craved. For what ever the Fathers for the first
five hundredth years did with an vnanime consent agree upon, to be believed as
a necessary point of salvation, I either will believe it also, or at least will
be humbly silent; not taking upon me to condemn the same: But for every
private Fathers opinion, it binds not my conscience more then Bellarmines;
every one of the Fathers usually contradicting others. I will therefore in that
case follow Lib. 2. cont. Cresconium. cap. 32.
S. Augustines rule in judging of their opinions, as I find them agree with
the Scriptures: what I find agreeable thereunto I will gladly embrace; what is
otherwise I will (with their reverence) reject.

As for the Scriptures; no man doubts I will believe them: But even for the
Apocrypha; I hold them in the same account that the Ancients did: They are
still printed and bound with our Bibles, and publicly read in our Churches: I
reverence them as the writings of holy and good men: but since they are not
found in the Canon, we account them to be secundae lectionis, or Lib. 1. de
verb. Vei. c. 4.
ordinis (which is Bellarmines own distinction) and therefore not sufficient
whereupon alone to ground any article of Faith, except it be confirmed by some
other place of Canonical Scripture; Concluding this point with Ruffinus (who
is no Nouelist, I hope) That the Apocryphal books were by the Fathers
permitted to be read; not for confirmation of Doctrine, but only for
instruction of the people.

As for the Saints departed, I honor their memory, and in honor of them do
we in our Church observe the days of so many of them, as the Scripture does
canonize for Saints; but I am loath to believe all the tales of the Legended
saints.

And first for the blessed Virgin MARIE, I yield her that which the Angel
Gabriel pronounced of her, and which in her Canticle she prophesied of
herself: that is, That Luke 1.28.
she is blessed amongst women, and Ibid. ver. 48.
That all generations shall call her blessed. I reverence her as the Mother of
CHRIST, whom of our Savior took his flesh, and so the Mother of GOD, since
the Divinity and Humanity of CHRIST are inseparable. And I freely confess,
that she is in glory both above Angels and men, her own Son (that is both
GOD and man) only excepted. But I dare not mock her and blaspheme against
GOD, calling her not only Diua but Dea, and praying her to command and
control her Son, who is her GOD; and her SAVIOVR: Nor yet not I think,
that she has no other thing to do in heaven, then to hear every idle man's
suite, and busy her self in their errands; whiles requesting, whiles
commanding her Son, whiles coming down to kiss and make love with
Priests, and whiles disputing and brawling with Devils. In heaven she is in
eternal glory and joy, never to be interrupted with any worldly business;
and there I leave her with her blessed Son our SAVIOVR and hers in eternal
felicity.

As for Prayer to Saints; Mart. 11.28.
CHRIST (I am sure) has commanded us to Come all to him that are laden with
sin, and he will relieve us: and Saint Paul has forbidden us to worship
Angels; Coloss. 2.8, 23.
or to use any such voluntary worship, that has a show of humility in that it
spares not the flesh. But what warrant we have to have recourse unto these
Dij Penates or Tutelares, these Courtiers of GOD, I know not; I remit that to
these Philosophical Neoterike Divines. It satisfies me to pray to GOD
through CHRIST as I am commanded, which I am sure must be the safest way; and I
am sure the safest way is the best way in points of salvation. But if the
Romish Church has coined new Articles of Faith, never heard of in the first
500. years after CHRIST, I hope I shall never be condemned for an Heretic,
for not being a Nouelist. Such are the private Masses, where the Priest plays
the part both of the Priest and of the people; And such are the Amputation of
the one half of the Sacrament from the people; The Transsubstantiation,
Elevation for Adoration, and Circumportation in Procession of the Sacrament;
the works of Supererogation, rightly named Thesaurus Ecclesiae; the Baptising
of Bells, and a thousand other tricks: But above all, the worshipping of
Images. If my faith beeweake in these, I confess I had rather believe too
little then too much: And yet since I believe as much as the Scriptures do
warrant, the Creeds do persuade, and the ancient Councels decreed, I may well
be a Schismatike from Rome, but I am sure I am no Heretic.

For Relics of Saints; If I had any such that I were assured were members of
their bodies, I would honorably bury them, and not give them the reward of
condemned men's members, which are only ordained to be deprived of burial.
But for worshipping either them or Images, I must account it damnable Idolatry.

I am no Iconomachus; I quarrel not the making of Images, either for public
decoration, or for men's private uses: But that they should be worshipped, be
prayed to, or any holiness attributed unto them, was never known of the
Ancients: And the Scriptures are so directly, vehemently and punctually against
it, as I wonder what brain of man, or suggestion of Satan durst offer it to
Christians; and all must be salued with nice Philosophical distinctions: As,
Idolum nihilest: and, They worship (forsooth) the Images of things in being,
and the Image of the true GOD. But the Scripture forbids to worship the
Image of any thing that GOD created. It was not a nibil then that God forbade
only to be worshipped, neither was the brazen Serpent, nor the body of Moses a
nihil; and yet the one was destroyed, and the other hidden for eschewing of
Idolatry. Yea, the Image of GOD himself is not only expressly forbidden to
be worshipped, but even to be made. The reason is given, That no eye ever saw
GOD; and how can we paint his face, when Moses (the man that ever was most
familiar with GOD) never saw but his back parts? Surely, since he cannot be
drawn to the viue, it is a thankelesse labor to mar it with a false
representation; which no Prince, nor scarce any other man will be contented
with in their own pictures. Let them therefore that maintain this doctrine,
answer it to CHRIST at the latter day, when he shall accuse them of Idolatry;
And then I doubt if he will be paid with such nice sophistical Distinctions.

But CHRIST'S Cross must have a particular privilege (say they) and be
worshipped ratione contactus. But first we must know what kind of touching of
CHRIST'S body drew a virtue from it; whether every touching, or only touching
by faith? That every touching of his body drew not virtue from it, is more then
manifest. When Luke 8.
the woman in the bloody flux touched him, she was healed of her faith: But
Peter then told him that a crowd and throng of many people then touched him;
and yet none of them received any benefit or virtue from him. Judas touched
him many and many a time, besides his last kiss; so did the villains that
buffeted and crucified him; and yet I may safely pronounce them accursed, that
would bestow any worship upon their relics: yea we cannot deny but the land
of Canaan itself (whereupon our Lord did daily tread) is so visibly accursed,
being governed by faithless Turks, full of innumerable sects of heretical
Christians, and the very fertility thereof so far degenerated into a
pitiful sterilitie, as he must be accursed that accounts it blessed. Nay,
when a certain Luke 11.28.
woman blessed the belly that bare CHRIST, and the breasts that gave him
suck; Nay, rather (says he) Blessed are those that hear the Word of God,
and keep it. Except then they could first prove that CHRIST had resolved to
bless that tree of the Cross whereupon he was nailed; they can never prove
that his touching it could give it any virtue. And put the case it had a virtue
of doing miracles, as Peter's shadow had; yet does it not follow, that it is
lawful to worship it, which Peter would never accept of. Surely the Prophets
that in so many places curse those that worship Images, that have eyes and see
not, that have ears and hear not, would much more have cursed them that
worship a piece of a stick, that has not so much as any resemblance or
representation of eyes or ears.

As for Purgatory and all the Jubilees, Indulgences, satisfactions for the
dead, etc.
trash depending thereupon, it is not worth the talking of; Bellarmine cannot
find any ground for it in all the Scriptures. Only I would pray him to tell
me; If that fair green Meadow that is in Purgatory, have a brook running
through it; Lib. 2 de Purgat. cap 7.
that in case I come there, I may have hawking upon it. But as for me; I am
sure there is a Heaven and a Hell, praemium and poena, for the Elect and
reprobate: How many other rooms there be, I am not on God his counsel. John
14.
Multae sunt mansiones in domo Patris mei, says CHRIST, who is the true
Purgatory for our sins: But how many chambers and anti-chambers the devil
has, they can best tell that go to him: But in case there were more places
for souls to go to then we know of, yet let us content us with that which in
his Word he has revealed unto us, and not inquire further into his secrets.
Heaven and Hell are there revealed to be the eternal home of all mankind: let
us endeavor to win the one and eschew the other; and there is an end.

Now in all this discourse have I yet left out the maine Article of the Romish
faith; and that is the Head of the Church or Peter's Primacie; for who denies
this, denies fidem Catholicam, says Bellarmine. That Bishops ought to be in
the Church, I ever maintained it, as an Apostolic institution, and so the
ordinance of God; contrary to the Puritanes, and likewise to Boll. lib. 4. de
Romans Pont. cap. 25.
Bellarmine; who denies that Bishops have their Jurisdiction immediately from
God (But it is no wonder he takes the Puritanes part, since Jesuits are nothing
but Puritan-papists.) And as I ever maintained the state of Bishops, and the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy for order sake; so was I ever an enemy to the
confused Anarchie or paritie of the Puritanes, as well appears in my (...).
Heaven is governed by order, and all the good Angels there; nay, Hell it self
could not subsist without some order; And the very devils are divided into
Legions, and have their chiefetaines: how can any society then upon earth,
subsist without order and degrees? And therefore I cannot enough wonder with
what brazen face this Answerer could say, That I was a Puritan in Scotland,
and an enemy to Protestants: Page 98.
I that was persecuted by Puritanes there, not from my birth only, but even
since four months before my birth? I that in the year of God 84 erected
Bishops, and depressed all their popular Paritie, I then being not 18. years
of aage? I that in my said Book to my Son, do speak ten times more
bitterly of them nor of the Papists; having in my second Edition thereof,
affixed a long Apologetike Preface, only in odium Puritanorum? and I that for
the space of six years before my coming into England, labored nothing so
much as to depresse their Paritie, and re-erect Bishops again? Nay, if the
daily Commentaries of my life and actions in Scotland, were written (as Julius
Caesar's were) there would scarcely a month pass in all my life, since my
entering into the 13. year of my aage, wherein someaccident or other would not
convince the Cardinal of a Lie in this point. And surely I give a fair
commendation to the Puritanes in that place of my book, Where I affirm that I
have found greater honesty with the highland and border thieves, then with
that sort of people. But leaving him to his own impudence, I return to my
purpose.

Of Bishops and Church Hierarchy I very well allow (as I said before) and
likewise of Ranks and Degrees amongst Bishops. Patriarchs (I know) were in the
time of the Primitive Church, and I likewise reverence that Institution for
order sake: and amongst them was a contention for the first place. And for my
self (if that were yet the question) I would with all my heart give my consent
that the Bishop of Rome should have the first Seat: I being a western King
would go with the Patriarch of the West. And for his temporal Principality
over the Signory of Rome, I do not quarrel it neither; let him in God his
Name be Primus Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps Episcoporum; so it
be no otherwise but as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum. But as I well allow of
the Hierarchy of the Church for distinction of orders (for so I understand it)
so I utterly deny that there is an earthly Monarch thereof, whose word must be
a Law, and who cannot err in his Sentence, by an infallibility of Spirit.
Because carthly Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs; it does not follow,
that the Church must have a visible Monarch too: for the world has not ONE
earthly temporal Monarch. CHRIST is his Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost
his Deputy: Luke 22.25.
Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic. CHRIST did not promise
before his ascension, to leave Peter with them to direct and iustruct them in
all things; John 14.26.
but he promised to send the holy Ghost unto them for that end.

And as for these two before cited places, whereby Bellarmine makes the Pope
to triumph over Kings: Matthew. 18.18.
I mean Pasce oues, and Tibi dobo claues: the Cardinal knows well enough,
that the same words of Tibi dabo, are in another place spoken by Christ in the
plural number. And he likewise knows what reason the Ancients do give, why
Christ bade Pater pascere oues and also what a cloud of witnesses there is,
both of Ancients, and even of late Popish writers, yea diverse Cardinals, that
do all agree that both these speeches used to Peter, were meant to all the
Apostles represenred in his person: 1. Cor. 5.4.
Otherwise how could Paul direct the Church of Corinth to excommunicate the
incestuous person cum spiritu suo, whereas he should then have said, cum
spiritu Petri? And how could all the Apostles have otherwise used all their
censures, only in Christ's Name, and never a word of his Vicar* Peter (we
read) did in all the Apostles meetings sit amongst them as one of their
number: And when chosen men were sent to Antiochia from that great Apostolic
Council at Jerusalem ( Acts 15.) Act. 15.22, 23.
The text says, It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders with the whole
Church, to send chosen men, but no mention made of the Head thereof; and so in
their Letters no mention is made of Peter, but only of the Apostles, Elders
and Brethren. And it is a wonder, why Paul rebukes the Church of Corinth for
making exception of Persons, because some followed Paul, some Apollos, some
Cephas, if Peter was their visible Head! 1. Cor. 1.12.
for then those that followed not Peter or Cephas, renounced the Catholic
faith. But it appears well that Paul knew little of our new doctrine, since
he handles Peter so rudely, Galat. 2.
as he not only compares but prefers himself unto him. But our Cardinal
proves Peter's superiority, Galat. 1.18.
by Paul's going to visit him. Indeed Paul says, he went to Jerusalem to
visit Peter, and confer with him; but he should have added, and to kiss his
feet.

To conclude then, The trweth is that Peter was both in aage, and in the time
of CHRIST'S calling him, one of the first of the Apostles; In order the
principal of the first twelve, and one of the three whom CHRIST for order sake
preferred to all the rest. And no further did the Bishop of Rome claim for
three hundred years after CHRIST: Subject they were to the general Councels,
and even but of late did the Council of Constance depose three Popes, and set
up the fourth. And until Phocas days (that murdered his master) were they
subject to Emperors. But how they are now come to be Christ's Vicars, nay, Gods
on earth, triple-crowned, Kings of heaven, earth and hell, Judges of all the
world, and none to judge them; Heads of the faith, Absolute deciders of all
Controversies by the infallibility of their spirit, having all power both
Spiritual and Temporal in their hands; the high Bishops, Monarchs of the
whole earth, Superiors to all Emperors and Kings; yea, Supreme Vice-gods, who
whether they will or not cannot err: how they are now come (I say) to the
top of greatness, I know not: but sure I am, We that are KINGS have
greatest need to look unto it. As for me, Paul and Peter I know, but these
men I know not: And yet to doubt of this, is to deny the Catholic faith;
Nay, the world it self must be turned vpside down, Bellar. de Romans Pont. li.
1. cap. 17.
and the order of Nature inuerted (making the left hand to have the place
before the Right, and the last named to be the first in honor) that this
primacie may be maintained.

Thus have I now made a free Confession of my Faith: And (I hope) I have fully
cleared my self from being an Apostate, and as far from being an Heretic,
as one may be that believes the Scriptures, and the three Creedes, and
acknowledges the four first general Councels. If I be loath to believe too
much, especially of Novelties, men of greater knowledge may well pity my
weakness; but I am sure none will condemn me for an Heretic, save such as
make the Pope their God; and think him such aspeaking Scripture, as they can
define Heresy no otherwise, but to be whatsoever Opinion is maintained
against the Popes definition of faith. And I will sincerely promise, that when
ever any point of the Religion I profess, shall be proved to be new, and not
Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic (I mean for matter of Faith) I will as
soon renounce it; closing up this head with the Maxim of Vincentius
Lirinensis, Libello adnersus hareses.
that I will never refuse to embrace any opinion in Divinity necessary to
salvation, which the whole Catholic Church With an vnanime consent, have
constantly taught and believed even from the Apostles days, for the space of
many aages thereafter without any interruption. But in the Cardinals opinion, I
have showed my self an Heretic (I am sure) in playing with the name of
Babylon, and the Town upon seven hills; as if I would insinuate Rome at this
present to be spiritually Babylon. And yet that Rome is called Babylon, 1. Pet.
5.13.
both in Saint Peter's Epistle, and in the Apocalypse, our Answerer freely
confesses. As for the definition of the Antichrist, I will not urge so obscure
a point, as a matter of Faith to be necessarily believed of all Christians;
but what I think herein, I will simply declare.

That there must be an Antichrist, and in his time a general Defection; we
all agree. But the Time, Seat, and Person of this Antichrist, are the chief
Questions whereupon we differ: and for that we must search the Scriptures for
our resolution. 2. These. 2.
As for my opinion; I think S. Paul in the 2. to the Thessalonians does utter
more clearly that which Saint John speaks more mystically of the Antichrist.

First, that in that place he means the Antichrist, it is plain, since he
says, Verse 3.
There must be first a Defection; and that in the Antichrists time only that
eclipse of Defection must fall upon the Church, all the Romish Catholics are
strong enough: otherwise their Church must be daily subject to err, Verse 3, 4.
which is clean contrary to their maine doctrine. Then describing him (he
says) that The man of Sin, Filius perditionis, shall exalt himself above
all that is called God. But who these be whom of the Psalmist says Dixi vos
Dij estis, Psalm. 82.6.
Bellarmine can tell. In old Divinity it was wont to be Kings; Bellarmine
will add Churchmen; Let it be both. It is well enough known, who now
exalts himself above both the swords.

And after that S. Paul has thus described the Person, he next describes the
Seat, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and tells that He shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, the bosom of the
Church; yea, in the very heart thereof. Now where this Apostolic Seat is, I
leave to be guessed: And likewise who it is that sitting there, shows
himself to be GOD; pardoning sins, redeeming souls, and defining Faith,
controlling and judging all men, and to be judged of none.

Anent the Time, S. Paul is plainest of all: For he calls the Thessalonians
to memory, Verse 5.
That when he was with them, he told them these things; and therefore they
know (says he) what the impediment was, Verse 6.
and who did withbold that the man of Sin was not revealed, Verse 7.
although the mystery of iniquity was already working. That the Roman
Emperors in Saint Paul's time needed no revealing to the Christians to be men
of Sin or sinful men, no child doubts: but the revelation he speaks of
was a mystery, a secret; It should therefore seem that he durst not publish
in his Epistle what that impediment was. It may be he meant by the translating
of the Seat of the Roman Empire, and that the translation thereof should leave
a room for the man of Sin to sit down in. And that he meant not that man of
Sin of these Ethnicke Emperors in his time, his introduction to this
discourse makes it more then manifest. For he says (fearing they should be
deceived, thinking the day of the Lords second coming to be at hand) he has
therefore thought good to forewarne them that this general Defection must
first come: Whereby it well appears that he could not mean by the present
time but by a future, and that a good long time; otherwise he proved ill his
argument, that the Lords coming was not at hand. Neither can the form of the
Destruction of this man of Sin agree with that manner of spoil, that the
Goths and Vandals made of For so does Tortus call Rome when it was spoiled by
them, though it was Christian many years before.
Ethnic Rome: For our Apostle says, 1 Verse 8.
That this wicked man shull be consumed by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, and
abolished by his coming. Now I would think that the word of God and the
Preaching thereof, should be meant by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, which
should piece and piece consume and diminish the power of that man of Sin,
till the brightness of the Lords second coming should utterly abolish him. And
by his expressing the means of his working, he does likewise (in my opinion)
explane his meaning very much: For he says, It shall be by a strong delusion,
Verse. 8.9.
by lying wonders, etc. Well, what Church it is that vanteth them of their
innumerable miracles, and yet most of them contrary to their own doctrine;
Bellarmine can best tell you with his hungry Mare, Bellar lib. 3. de Eucharist.
cap. 8
that turned her tail to her prouender and kneeled to the Sacrament: And yet
(I am sure) he will be ashamed to say, that the holy Sacrament is ordained to
be worshipped by Oues and Boues, and caetera pecora campi.

Thus have I proved out of S. Paul now, that the time of the Antichrists
coming, and the general Defection was not to be till long after the time that
he wrote in; That his Seat was to be in the Temple and Church of God; and, That
his Action (which can best point at his Person) should be to Exalt himself
above all that were called Gods. S. John indeed does more amply, though
mystically describe this Antichrist, which under the figure of a monstrous
Beast, with seven heads and ten horns, he sets forth in the xiij. chap. and
then interprets in the xvij. where he calls her a Whore sitting upon many
waters, and riding upon the said monstrous Beast; Revel. 17. v. 1. Verse. 3.
concluding that chapter with calling that Woman, that great City which
reigns over the Kings of the earth. And both in that Chapter, Verse 18.
and in the beginning of the next he calls that great City, Babylon. Verse. 5.
Cap. 18. v. 2.


So as to continue herein my formerly purposed Method, of the Time, Seat, and
Person of Antichrist; this place does clearly and vndenyably declare that Rome
is, or shall be the Seat of that Antichrist. For first, no Papist now denies
that by Babylon here Rome is directly meant; and that this Woman is the
Antichrist, does clearly appear by the time of his working (described by 42.
months in the xiij. Chap.) Verse. 5.
which does justly agree with that three years and a halfes time, which all
the Papists give to the Reign of Antichrist. Besides that, the Beast it self
with seven heads and ten horns, having one of her heads wounded and healed
again, is described just alike in the xiij. and xvij. Chap. being in the
former proved to be the Antichrist by the time of her reign; and in the
latter Rome by the name of Babylon, by the confession of all the Papists, So as
one point is now clear, that Rome is the Seat of the Antichrist.

Neither will that place in the eleventh Chapter serve to shift off this point,
and prove the Antichrists Seat to be in Jerusalem; where it is said; Chap.
11.8.
That the Corpses of the Witnesses shall lie in the great City, spiritually
Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified. For the word spiritually
is applied both to Sodom, Egypt and Jerusalem in that place; And when he has
named Sodom and Egypt, he does not subioyne Jerusalem with a single vbi; but
with an vbi and, as if he would say; and this Antichrists abomination shall
be so great, as his Seat shall be as full of Spiritual whoredoms and
Idolatries, as Sodom and Egypt was; nay, and so bloody in the persecution of
the Saints, as our Lord shall be crucified again in his members. And who has
so meanly read the Scriptures (if he have ever read them at all) that knows
it not to be a common phrase in them, Matt. 25.40.
to call CHRIST persecuted and slain, when his Saints are so used? Acts 9.4.
So did CHRIST say, speaking of the latter day; and in the same style did he
speak to S. Paul at his conversion. And that Babylon, or Rome (since
Bellarmine is contented it be so called) is that great City where our Lord
was crucified, Revel. 18.24.
the last verse of the xviij. Chap. does also clearly prove it: For there it
is said, That in that City was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; and I hope CHRIST was one
of them that were slain upon the earth. And besides that it may well be said
that he was slain in that great City Babylon, since by the Roman authority
he was put to death, under a Roman Judge, and for a Roman quarrel: for he
could not be a friend to Caesar, that was not his enemy.

This point now being cleared of the Antichrists Seat, as I have already said;
we are next to find out the Time when the Antichrist shall reign, if it be not
already come. Cha. 13.3.
In the xiij. Chapter. S. John says, that this Beast with the seven heads and
ten horns, Chap. 17.10.
had one of his heads wounded and healed again; and interpreting that in the
xvij. he says, that these seven heads are also seven Kings, whereof five are
fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come, and when he comes he shall
continue a short space. Verse 11.
And the Beast that was and is not, is the eight, and yet one of the seven. By
which Beast he means the Antichrist, who was not then come, I mean in the
Apostles days, but was to come after. So as between the time of the Apostles
and the end of the world, must the Time of the Antichrists coming be; and
with this the Papists do also agree. Whereby it appears that Babylon, which
is Rome, shall be the Seat of the Antichrist; Revel. 1.1. and chap. 4.1.
but not that Ethnicke Rome which was in the Apostles days (for John himself
professes that he is to write of nothing, but that which is to come after his
time.) Nor yet that turning Christian Rome while she was in the converting,
which immediately followed the Apostles time, glorious by the Martyrdom of so
many godly Bishops: But that Antichristian Rome, when as the Antichrist shall
set down his seat there, after that by the working of that Mystery of
iniquity, Christian Rome shall become to be corrupted; and so that deadly
wound, which the Goths and Vandales gave Rome, shall be cured in that Head or
King, the Antichrist, who thereafter shall arise and reign for a long space.

But here it may be objected, that the Antichrist cannot reign a long space;
since S. John says in two or three sundry places, that the Antichrist shall
work but the space of three years and a half. Surely who will but a little
acquaint himself with the phrases and Style of S. John in his Apocalypse, shall
find that he does ordinarily set down numerum certum pro incerto. Chap. 7.
Chap. 9.16, 18.
So does he in his twelve thousand of every Tribe that will be safe; so
does he in his Army of two hundred thousand, that were sent to kill the third
part of the men; and so does he in diverse other places. And therefore who will
but remember that in all his Visions in the said Book, he directly imitates
the fashions of the Prophet Ezekiels, Daniels, and Zacharies Visions (borrowing
their phrases that prophesied before CHRIST, to utter his Prophecies in, that
was to speak of the last days) shall find it very probable that in these
three days and a half, he imitated Daniels Weeks, accounting for his Week
the time between CHRIST'S first and second coming, and making Antichrist to
triumph the half of that time or spiritual Week. For as to that literal
interpretation (as all the Papists make it) of three years and a half, and
that time to sall out directly the very last days, save five and forty,
before CHRIST his second coming, it is directly repugnant to the whole New
TESTAMENT. For CHRIST says, That in the latter days men shall be feasting,
marrying, and at all such worldly business, when the last hour shall come in
a clap upon them; One shall be at the Mill; One upon the top of the house,
Matthew. 24.41.
and so forth. CHRIST tells a Parable of the five foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.
to show the unlooked for coming of this hour, Nay, he says, the Son of
man, nor the Angels in heaven know not this time. S. Peter bids us WATCH AND
PRAY, ever awaiting upon that hour. And S. John in this same Apocalypse does
Revel. 3.3. and 16.^5.
twice tell us, that CHRIST will come as a thief in the night; And so does
CHRIST say in the Matthew. 24.44.
Euangel. Whereas if the Antichrist shall reign three years and a half
before the Latter day, and that there shall be but just forty five days of
time after his destruction; then shall not the just day and hour of the Latter
day, be unknown to them that shall be alive in the world, at the time of
Antichrists destruction. For first according to the Papists doctrine, all the
world shall know him to be the Antichrist, both by the two Witnesses doctrine,
and his sudden destruction; And consequently they cannot be ignorant, that the
Latter day shall come just forty five days after: and so CHRIST shall not
come as a thief, nor the world be taken at unawares; contrary to all the
Scriptures before alleged, and many more. And thus have we proved Rome to be
the Seat of the Antichrist, and the second half of that spiritual Week
between the first and second coming of CHRIST, to be the time of his Reign:
For in the first half thereof the mystery of iniquity began to work; but
the man of Sin was not yet revealed.

But who these Witnesses should be, is a great question. The general conceit
of the Papists is, that it must be Enoch and Elias. And herein is Bellarmine
so strong, as he thinks him in a great error (if not an Heretic) that
doubts of it. But the vanity of the Jewish fable I will in few words
discover.

The Cardinal, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 6.
in his book of Controversies, brings four places of Scripture for
probation of this idle dream: two in the Old Testament, Malachie and
Ecclesiasticus, and two in the New, CHRIST in Matthew (he might have added
Mark too) and John in the xj. of the Apocalypse. First, for the general of all
those places, I dare boldly affirm, That there is not a word in them, nor in
all the rest of the Scriptures that says, that either Enoch or Elias shall
return to fight against Antichrist, and shall be slain by him, nor any such
like matter. Next as to every place in particular, to begin with Malachie, I
know not who can better interpret him then CHRIST, Matt. 11.14. and 17.12. Mar.
9.13.
who twice in Matthew, Chap. xj. and xvij. and once in Mark, tells both the
multitude, and his own Disciples, that John Baptist was that promised Elias.
And herein does Bellarmine deal most unfaithfully with CHRIST: for in his
demonstration that Antichrist is not yet come, because Enoch and Elias are not
yet returned; he, for his probation thereof, cites these words of CHRIST in
the xvij of Matthew, Elias shall indeed come, and restore all things; but omits
his very next words interpreting the same, That be is already come, in the
person of John Baptist. Nay, whereby he takes upon him to answer Biblianders
objection, that CHRIST did by John the Baptist, understand the prophecy of
Elias coming to be accomplished, he picketh out the words, Qui habet aures,
audiat, in the xj. of Matthew, immediately following that purpose of Elias,
making of them a great mystery: and never takes knowledge, that in the xvij.
by himself before alleged, CHRIST does interpret Malachie in the same manner
without any subioyning of these words, Qui habet aures, audiat; adjoining
shamelesly hereunto a foul Paraphrase of his own, telling us what CHRIST
would have said; nay, in my conscience, he meant what CHRIST should and ought
to have said, if he had been a good Catholic, setting down there a gloss of
Orleance that destroys the Text. Thus ye see: how shamefully he abuses
CHRIST'S words, who in three sundry places (as I have said) interprets the
second coming of Elias to be meant by John the Baptist. He likewise cauils
most dishonestly upon that word Venturus. For CHRIST uses that word but in the
repeating their opinion: but interpreting it that he was already come, in the
person of John Baptist. Matt. 17.11.
As if he had said, The prophecy is indeed true that Elias shall come; but I
say unto you, that Elias iam venit, meaning of John Baptist: and so he first
repeats the words of the prophecy in the future time, as the Prophet spoke
them, and next shows them to be now accomplished in the person of John, in
the present time. Malach. 4.5. Matthew. 27.
Neither can these words of Malachie [Dies magnus and borribilis] falsify
CHRIST'S Commentary upon him. For if that day whereupon the Savior of the
world suffered, when the This obscuring of the Sun was so extraordinary and
fearful, that Dionysius, only led by the light of Nature and humane
learning, cried out at the sight thereof, Aut Deus patitur, aut vices patientis
dolet. Mala. 4.6.
Sun was totally obscured from the sixth hour to the ninth; the Veil of the
Temple rent asunder from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, the
stones were cloven, the graves did open themselves, and the dead arose^ If that
day (I say) was not a great and horrible day, I know not what to call a
horrible day. Which day no doubt had destroyed the whole nation of the Jews
without exception by a just Anatheme, if the said John the forerunner had not
first converted many by the doctrine of Repentance and by Baptism. But why
should I presume any more to interpret Malachie, since it is sufficient that
CHRIST himself has interpreted him so? And since Ipse dixit; nay, ter dixit,
per quem facta sunt omnia, what mortal man dare interpret him otherwise; nay,
directly contrary?

Now for that place of Ecclesiasticus; Ecclus. 48.8.
as the son of Sirach only borrows it from Malachie (as appears by these
words of his, Mala. 4.6.
of converting the sons hearts to their fathers, which are Malachies own
words) so does CHRIST'S Co^mentary serve as well to interpret the one as the
other: it being no shame for that mortal Jesus, to be commented and interpreted
by the immortal and true JESUS, though to the shame and confusion of the
Jesuits heresies herein.

But Enoch must be joined to Elias in this errand, only to bear up the
couples, as I think. For no place of Scripture speaks of his returning
again, only it is said in Ecclesiasticus the 44. that Enoch pleased GOD, and
was translated to Paradise, vt daret Gentibus sapientiam, or poenitentiam;
Ecclus. 44.16.
since they will have it so. And what is this to say? marry that Enoch shall
return again to this world, and fight against the Antichrist. A pretty large
Comment indeed, but no right Commentary upon that Text. When Bellarmine was
talking of Elias; he insisted, That Elias must come to convert the Jews
principally, restituere tribus Jacob. But when he speaks here of Enoch, he
must dare Gentibus paenitentiam, and not a word of Jews. Belike they shall
come for sundry errands, and not both for one: Or like Paul and Peter, the one
shall be Apostle for the Jews, and the other for the Gentiles. What need such
wild racked Commentaries for such three words? Will not the sense stand well
and clearly enough, that Enoch pleased GOD, and was translated to Paradise;
that by the example of his reward, the Nations might repent and imitate his
Holy footsteps? For what could more mightily persuade the Nations to repent;
then by letting them see that holy Man carried quick up to Heaven, for reward
of his uprightness; whereas all the rest of the people died and went to
corruption? And where Scripture fails, the Cardinal must help himself with
the Fathers, to prove both that Enoch and Elias are yet alive, and that they
shall hereafter die; but with the like felicity, as in his alleging of
Scriptures; to use his own words of me in his Page 27.
pamphlet: For which purpose he cites five Fathers; Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Epiphanius, Hierome and Augustine. Upon this they all agree in deed, that Enoch
and Elias are still alive both, which no Christian (I hope) will deny: For
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are all still alive, Mart. 22, 32.
as CHRIST tells us; for God is Deus viuentium, non mortuorum. Much more then
are Enoch and Elias alive, who never tasted of death after the manner of other
men. But as to the next point, that they should die hereafter, Lib. 5.
his first two witnesses, Irenaeus and Tertullian say the direct contrary: For
Irenaeus says, that they shall remain in Paradise, till the consummation,
conspicantes incorruptionem. Now to remain there till the consummation, and to
see incorruption is directly contrary to their returning to the world again
and suffering of death. Lib cont. Iudeos. cap. 2.
Tertullian likewise agreeing hereunto, says most clearly, That Enoch has
never tasted of death, vt aeternitatis candidatus: now he is ill privileged
with eternity, if he must die again. As for his places cited out of the other
three Fathers, they all confirm that first point, That they are still alive but
that they must die again, they make no mention.

But he speaking of the Ancient Fathers, let me take this occasion to
forewarne you concerning them: That though they mistake and understand not
rightly many mysteries in the Apocalypse, it is no wonder: For the book
thereof, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
was still sealed in their days. And though the mystery of iniquity was
already working, yet was not the man of Sin yet revealed. And it is a
certain rule in all dark prophecies; That they are never clearly understood,
till they be accomplished.

And thus having answered his two places, in the Old Testament, by his third in
the New Testament, containing Christ's own words: which being luce clariora, I
need speak no more of them. I am now to speak of the fourth place of
Scripture, which is in the xj. of the Apocalypse: For the two Witnesses
(forsooth) there mentioned, Reuelat. 11.
must be Enoch and Elias. But how this can stand with any point of Divinity or
likelihood of reason, that these two glorified Bodies shall come down out of
heaven or Paradise, (make it what you will) preach, and fight against the
Antichrist, be slain by him after many thousand years exempted from the
natural course of death, rise again the third day in imitation of CHRIST, and
then (having wrought many wonders) to go up again to Heaven, making an
ordinary Post betwixt Heaven and Earth: how this (I say) can agree either with
Divinity or good Reason, I confess it passes my capacity. And especially
that they must be clad in Sackcloth, whose bodies (I hope) have been so long
agone free from sin, as I think they shall need no more such maceration for
sin: For they must be now either in Heaven or Paradise: If in heaven, (as
doubtless they are) their bodies must be glorified; for no corruptible thing
can enter there; Revel. 21.27.
and consequently they can no more be subject to the sensible things of this
world, especially to death: But if they be in earthly Paradise, we must first
know where it is.

Bellarmine indeed in his Controversies is much troubled to find out the place
where Paradise is, Lib de Great. primi hominis.
and whether it be in the earth, or in the air. But these are all vanities.
The Scriptures tell us, Genesis 2.
that Paradise and the garden of Eden therein, was a certain place upon the
earth, which GOD chose out to set Adam into, and having thereafter for his
sin banished him from the same, it is a blasphemy to think that any of
Adams posterity came ever there again. For in Adam were all his posterity
accursed, and banished from the earthly Paradise: like as all the earth in
general, and Paradise in special were accursed in him; the second Adam having
by grace, called a certain number of them to be Coheritours with him of the
heavenly Paradise and Jerusalem. And doubtlesly, the earthly Paradise was
defaced at the Flood, if not before: and so lost all that exquisite fertility
and pleasantness, wherein it once surpassed all the rest of the earth. And
that it should be lifted up in the air, is like one of the dreams of the
Alcoran. Surely no such miracle is mentioned in the Scriptures, and has no
ground but from the curious fancies of some boiling brains, who cannot be
content, Sapere ad sobrietatem. Romans 12.3.


In heaven then for certain are Enoch and Elias: Gen 5.24. 2. King. 2.10, 11.
for Enoch (says the Text) walked with GOD, and was taken up, and Elias was
seen catied up to heaven in a fiery chariot. And that they who have been the
In-dwellers of Heaven these many thousand years, and are freed from the Laws
of mortality; that these glorious and incorruptible bodies (I say) shall come
in the world again, preach and work miracles, and fighting against the
Antichrist be slain by him, whom natural death could not before take hold of:
as it is a fabulous invention, so is it quite contrary to the nature of such
sanctified creatures. Especially I wonder, why Enoch should be thought to be
one of these two Witnesses for CHRIST: For it was Moses and Elias that were
with CHRIST, at the transsiguration; signifying the Law and the Prophets: which
would be the fittest witnesses for conuincing of Antichrist. But why they have
exempted Moses, and put Enochs head in the yoke, I cannot conceive. So as I
have too much labored in the refuting of this foolish, and indeed childish
fable; which I am so far from believing in any sort, as I protest in GODS
presence, I cannot hold any learned Divine (in our aage now) to be a Christian,
that will believe it; but worthy to be ranked with the Scribes and Pharisees,
that raued and dreamed upon the coming again of Elias, though CHRIST told
them the contrary. As for some of the Ancients that mistook this matter, I do
not censure them so hardly; for the reason that I have already alleged
concerning them.

And having now refuted that idle fable; that those two Witnesses were Enoch
and Elias: it falls me next to guess, what in my opinion should be meant
by them. I confess, it is far easier to refute such a groundless fable as
this is, contrary to all grounds of Divinity and Reason; then to set down a
true interpretation of so high and dark a Mystery. And therefore as I will not
presume to bind any other man to my opinion herein, if his own reason lead
him not thereunto; so shall I propone such probable conjectures, as (I hope)
shall be free from Heresy, or unlawful curiosity.

In two diverse fashions may the Mystery of these Witnesses be lawfully and
probably interpreted, in my opinion. Whereof the one is, that by these two
Witnesses should be meant the Old and New Testaments: For as the Antichrist
cannot choose but be an adversary to the Word of GOD above all things; so will
he omit no endeavor to disgrace, corrupt, suppress and destroy the same. And
now whether this Book of the two Testaments, or two Witnesses of CHRIST, have
suffered any violence by the Babylonian Monarchy or not; I need say nothing;
Res ipsaloquitur. I will not weary you with recounting those Common Places used
for disgracing it: as calling it a Nose of wax, a dead Letter, a leaden Rule,
a hundredth such like phrases of reproach. But how far the Traditions of men,
and authority of the Church are preferred to these Witnesses, does
sufficiently appear in the Babylonian doctrine. And if there were no more but
that little book, Cardinal Pe^on.
with that pretty Inscription, De l'Insuffisance de l'Escriture Saint, it is
enough to prove it.

And as to the corrupting thereof; the corruptions of the old Latin transltion
must not be corrected, Luke 15.8.
though it bid euertere domum in stead of euerrere, John 21.22, 23.
for seeking of a penie; and though it say of John, Sic eum volo manner donec
veniam, in place of Si, though it be known a plain Lie, and that the very
next words of the Text disprove the same. Nay, so far must we be from
correcting it, as that the Vulgar Translation must be preferred by Catholics,
to the Bible in the own Original tongue. And is it a small corrupting of
Scriptures to make all, or the most part of the Apocrypha of equal faith with
the Canonical Scriptures, contrary to the Fathers opinions and Decrees of
ancient Councels? And what blasphemous corrupting of Scripture is it, to turn
Dominus into Domina throughout the whole Psalms? Made by Boneuentura Doctor
Seraphicus.
And thus our Ladies Psalter was lately reprinted in Paris. Is not this to
confound CHRIST'S person with hers? And as for suppressing of the Scriptures;
how many hundredth years were the people kept in such blindenes, as these
Witnesses were almost unknown? for the Layicks durst not, being forbidden, and
the most part of the Clergy, either would or could not meddle with them.

Thus were these two Witnesses of CHRIST, (whom of himself says, Scrutamini
Scriptur as, John 5.39.
illae enim testimonium perhibent de me) These Revel. 11.4.
two Olives bringing peace to all the believers, even peace of Conscience:
These Ibid.
two Candlesticks standing in the sight of GOD, and giving light to the
Nations; represented by Candlesticks even in the very order of the Roman Mass:
See Expositio Missae, annexed to Ordo Romanus, set forth by G. Cassander.
Thus were these two Witnesses (I say) disgraced, corrupted and suppressed
(nay, so suppressed and silenced, as he was brent for an Heretic that durst
presume to look upon them) kept close in a strange tongue, that they might not
be understood, Legends and lying wonders supplying their place in the Pulpits.
Verse 8.
And so did their Bodies lie in the streets of the great City, spiritually
Sodom, Coloss. 2.20.
for spiritual fornication which is idolatry; spiritually Egypt, for bringing
the Saints of God in bondage of humane traditions [Quare oneramini ritibus.] So
did their bodies (I say) lie 3. days and a half; that is, Verse 8.
the half of that spiritual Week between CHRIST his first and second
coming; and as dead carkases indeed did the Scriptures then lie without a
monument, being laid open to all contempt, cared for almost by none,
understood by as few; nay, no man durst call for them for fear of punishment,
as I have already said. And thus lying dead, as it were, 2. Chro. 34.14. Verse
10.
without life or vigor (as the Law of GOD did till it was revived in Josias
time) The Inhabitants of the earth, that is, worldly men rejoiced and sent
gifts to other, for joy that their fleshly liberty was now no more awed, nor
curbed by that two edged sword, for they were now sure, that do what they
would, their purse would procure them pardons from Babylon. Omnia Vaenalia
Romae; so as men needed no more to look up to heaven, but down to their
purses to find Pardons. Nay, what needed any more suing to heaven, or taking
it by violence and feruencie of zeal; when the Pardons came and offered
themselves at every man's doors? And diverse spiritual men vanted themselves,
that they neither understood Old Testament nor New.

Thus were these 2. Witnesses used in the second half of this spiritual week;
Verse 3.
who in the first half thereof were clad in sackcloth; that is, preached
repentance to all nations, for the space of 500. or 600. years after Christ:
Revel. 6.2.
God making his Word or Witness so triumph, riding upon the white horse in the
time of the Primitive Church, as that they overcame all that opposed themselves
unto it, beating down every high thing, as Paul says; 2. Cor. 10.4.
excluding from heaven all that believe not therein: as strongly with the
spiritual fire thereof, conuincing the stif-necked pride of unbelievers, as
ever Moses or Elias did, by the plagues of Egypt and famine, convince the
rebellious Egyptians and stif-necked Israelites.

Neither shall it be enough to disgrace, corrupt and suppress them; Revel.
11.7.
but Killed must they be at the last. To which purpose comes forth Printed at
Venice. Anno 562.
Censura generalis, vt mucrone censorio iugulare eas possit; and cutteth their
throats indeed: For the author ordains al translations, but their own to be
burnt, which is yet commonly practiced: nay he professes, he comes not to
correct but to destroy them, controlling and calling every place of Scripture
Heretical, that disagreeth from their Traditions (with almost as many foul
words and railing epithetes, as the Cardinal bestows on my Apology) not
ruling, nor interpreting Scripture by Scripture, but making their Traditions to
be such a touchstone for it, as he condemns of Heresy, not only those
places of Scripture that he cites, but lays the same general condemnation
upon al other the like places wheresoever they be written in the Scriptures.
And yet (praised be God) we begin now with our eyes, as our predecessors have
done in some aages before, to see these Witnesses rise again, Verse 11.12.
and shine in their former glory: GOD, as it were, setting them up again upon
their feet, and raising them to the Heavens in a triumphall cloud of glory,
like Elias his fiery chariot. Which exalting of the Gospel again, 13.
has bred such an earthquake and alteration amongst many Nations; as a tenth
part, or a good portion of these that were in subjection to that Great City,
to wit, Babylon, are fallen from her; seven thousand, that is, many thousands
having been killed upon the occasion of that great alteration; and many other
converted to the fear of GOD, and giving glory to the God of heaven. This now
is one of the ways, by which (I think) this place of Scripture may be
lawfully and probably interpreted.

The other is more common, and seems more literally to agree with the Text.
And this is to interpret, not the word of God, but the Preachers thereof to be
meant by these Witnesses. Few they were that first began to reveal the man of
Sin, and discover his corruptions; and therefore well described by the number
of two Witnesses: Deuteronomy. 19.15.
Nam in ore duorum aut trium testium stabit omne verbum. And in no greater
number were they that began this work, Revel. 11.3.
then the greatness of the errand did necessarily require. They prophesied in
sackecloth, for they preached repentance. That diverse of them were put to
cruel deaths, is notorious to the world: And likewise that (in the persons of
their Successors in doctrine) Sanguis Martyrum est semen Eccl-siae. Verse 11.
they rose again; and that in such power and efficacy, as is more then
miraculous: For where it is accounted in the Scriptures a miraculous work of
GOD wrought by his holy Spirit, Acts 2.41.
When the Apostle Saint Peter converted about three thousand in one day; these
Witnesses I speak of, by the force of the same Spirit, converted many mighty
Nations in few years, who still continue praising GOD, that he has delivered
us from the tyranny of Antichrist, that reigns over that great City; and
with a full cry proclaiming, Go out of her my people, Revel. 18.4.
lest ye be partaker of her sins and of her plagues. Let therefore these
Miracle-mongers that surfeit the world, and raise the price of paper daily,
with setting forth old, though new gilded Miracles and Legends of lies; Let
such (I say) consider of this great and wonderful Miracle indeed, and to their
shame, compare it with their paultry wares. Thus having in two fashions
delivered my conjecture, what I take to be meant by these two Witnesses in the
xj. of the Apocalypse, there being no great difference between them: In the
one, taking it to be the Word of GOD it self; In the other, the Word of God
too, but in the mouths of his Preachers: It rests now that I come to the
third point of the description of Antichrist; which is anent his Person.

That by the Whore of Babylon that rides upon the Beast, is meant a Seat of
an Empire, and a successiue number of men sitting thereupon, and not any one
man; does well appear by the form of the description of the Antichrist
thorowout all the said Book. Cap. xvij.
For in the last verse of the xvij. Verse 18.
Chapter, the Woman is expounded to be, That great City that reigns over
the Kings of the earth; which cannot signify the only Person of one man,
Verse. 9.
but a successiue number of men (as I have already said) whose Seat that great
City must be: like as in the same Chapter, The seven heads of the Beast are
two ways expounded. First, they are called seven Hills, which is plain; and
next they are called seven Kings, which cannot be meant by the Kings that
shall give their power to the Beast, Verse 13.
and be subject unto her, which is immediately after expressed by the ten
horns: Verse 12.
But rather appears to be those seven forms of government of that Seat: five
of which had already been and fallen; As Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemuiri
and Tribuni militum. The sixth was in the time of S. John his writing of this
book, which was the Government of the Emperor. The seventh which was not yet
come, and was to last but for a short space, was the From the time of
Constantine the Great, his removing of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople,
till the time of Bonifacius the third, to wit, about 276. veeres.
Ecclesiastical government by Bishops, which was not come upon the translation
of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople; though their government was in a
manner substitute to the Emperors: For though that form of Government lasted
about the space of 276. years; yet was it but short in comparison of the long
time of the reign of the Antichrist (not yet expired) which succeeded
immediately thereunto. And the eight, which is the Beast that was and is not,
and is to go to perdition, is the ANTICHRIST: the eight form of Government
indeed by his absoluteness, and yet the Verse 11.
and yet the seventh, because he seems but to succeed to the Bishop in an
Ecclesiastical form of Government, though by his greatness he shall make
Babylons Empire in glory, like to that magnificence wherein that great City
triumphed, when it most flourished: which in Saint John's time was much decayed,
by the factions of the great men, the mutinies of the armies, and the
unworthiness of the Emperors. And so that flourishing state of that great City
or Beast, which it was in before S. John's time, and being much Not in respect
of the extent, and limits of the Empire: but in regard of the government
thereof, and glory of the Citre. Revel. 18. Ver. 9. and 11. Ver 10.16, 19.
Verse. 9.
decayed was but in a manner in his time, should be restored unto it again by
Antichrist: who as he ascends out of the bottomless pit, so must he go to
Destruction. And likewise by that great lamentation that is made for the
destruction of Babylon in the eighteenth Chapter, both by the Kings, and by the
Merchants of the earth; where it is thrice repeated for aggravating the pity
of her desolation, that That great City fell in an hour: By that great
lamentation (I say) it well appears, That the reign of Antichrist must
continue longer then three years and a half, or any one man's time: For the
Kings that had committed fornication with her, and in delicijs vixerant;
behooved to have had a longer time for contracting of that great acquaintance:
Verse. 12.
And the Merchants of the earth set her forth and describe her at great length,
as the very staple of all their riches; which could not be so soon gathered as
in one man's time. And to conclude now this description of the Antichrist; I
will set down unto you all that is spoken of him in the Apocalypse in a short
method, for the further explaining of these three points that I have already
handled.

The Antichrist is four times (in my opinion) described by John in the
Apocalypse, in four sundry visions; and a short Compendium of him repeated
again in the xx. Chapter. Description of Antichrist. Revel. cap. 6. Verse 2.
He is first described by a pale Horse in the vision of the Seals in the sixth
Chapter: For after that CHRIST had triumphed upon a white Horse in the first
Seal, by the propagation of the Gospel; and that the red Horse in the second
Seal, is as busy in persecution, Verse 4.
as CHRIST is in ouercomming by the constancy of his Martyrs; and that famine
and other plagues signified by the black Horse in the third Seal, Verse 5.
Verse 8.
have succeeded to these former persecutions: Then comes forth the Antichrist
upon a pale horse in the 4. Seal, having Death for his rider, and Hell for his
conuoy; which rider fitted well his color of palenesse: and be had power given
Or them, after other Translations, whereby is jointly understood the said pale
horse, together with his rider and conuoy, Death and Hell.
him over the fourth part of the earth (which is Europe) to kill with the
sword, and use great persecution; as Ethnic Rome did, figured by the red
horse: and to kill with spiritual hunger or famine of the true word of God; as
the black horse did by corporal famine and with death, whereby spiritual death
is meant. For the Antichrist, signified by this pale horse, shall afflict the
Church both by persecution and temporal death; as also by alluring the Nations
to idolatry, and so to spiritual death: and by the beast of the earth shall he
procure their spiritual death; for he shall send out the Locusts (over whom he
is King) mentioned in the 9. Chap. of this book; and the 3. frogs, mentioned
in the 16. of the same; for intising of al Kings and nations to drink of the
cup of her abominations. Verse 9.
That that description now of Antichrist ends there, it is more then plain:
for at the opening of the first Seal, the souls and blood of the murdered
Saints cry for vengeance and hasting of judgment; Verse 10.
Verse 12.
which in the sixth Seal is granted unto them by CHRIST'S coming at the Latter
day; signified by heavens departing away, like a scroll when it is rolled: with
a number of other sentences to the same purpose.

But because this might seem a short and obscure description of the
Antichrist, The second. description.
he describes him much more largely and specifikely, especially in the vision
of the Trumpets in the 9. Reu. Chap. 9. Verse 1.
Chapter. For there he says, at the blowing of the sift Trumpet, Heresies
being first spread abroad in three of the four former blasts; to wit, in the
first, third, and fourth blast (for I take temporal persecution to be only
signified by the second blast) he then saw a star fall from Heaven, Verse 2.
to whom was given the key of the bottomless pit; which being opened by him,
Verse 3.
with the smoke thereof came forth a number of Locusts, whom he largely
describes, both by their craft and their strength; and then tells the name
of this their king, who brought them out of the bottomless pit, which is, Verse
11.
Destroyer. By this star fallen from heaven, being signified, as I take it,
some person of great dignity in the Church, whose duty being to give light
to the word (as CHRIST says) does contrary thereunto fall away like Lucifer,
Matthew. 5.14.
and set up a kingdom, by the sending forth of that noisome pack of crafty
cruel vermin, described by Locusts: and so is the Seat of the Antichrist
begun to be erected, whose doctrine is at length declared in the second woe,
after the blast of the sixth Trumpet; Verse 13. Verse 20.
where it is said, That the remnant of men which were not killed by the
plagues, repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils, and idols of gold, and of filuer and of brass and of stone,
and of wood, which neither can see, Lib de Cultu Adoratio. lib. 3 disp. 1. cap
5. Verse. 21.
hear, nor go. (As for worshipping of devils; look your great Iesuited
doctor, Vasques: and as for all the rest, it is the maine doctrine of the
Roman Church.) And then it is subioyned in this Text, that they repented not of
their murder, their sorcerie, their fornications, nor their theft.

By their murder, their persecution is meant, and bloody massacres: For their
Sorcery consider of their Agnus Dei, that will slocken fire; of the hallowed
shirts, and diverse sorts of Relics; and also of Prayers that will preserve
men from the violence of shot, of fire, of sword, of thunder, and such like
dangers; And judge, if this be not very like to Sorcerie and incantation of
charms.

By their Fornication is meant both their spiritual fornication of Idolatry,
and also their corporal fornication; which does the more abound amongst them,
as well by reason of the restraint of their Churchmen from marriage, as also
because of the many Orders of idle Monastike lives amongst them, as well for
men as women: And continual experience proves, that idleness is ever the
greatest spur to lechery. And they are guilty of Theft, in stealing from
GOD the titles and greatness of power due to him, and bestowing it upon their
head, the Antichrist: As also by heaping up their treasure with their iuggling
wares and merchandise of the souls of men, by Iubiles, Pardons, Relics and
such like strong delusions.

That he ends this description of Antichrist in the same ninth Chapter may
likewise well appear, Cap. 10. ver. 6.
by the Oath that that Mighty Angel swears in the sixth verse of the tenth
Chapter: And after the blast of the sixth Trumpet, that time shall be no more,
Verse 7.
and that when the seventh Angel shall blow his Trumpet, the mystery of GOD
shall be finished, as he had declared it to his servants the Prophets. Cap. 11.
Only in the eleventh Chapter he describes the means whereby the Antichrist
was overcome, whose reign he had before described in the ix. Chapter; and
tells us that the two witnesses; Verse 3.
after that they have been persecuted by the Antichrist shall in the end
procure his destruction. And in case any should think, that the Antichrist is
only spoken of in the xj. Chapter, and that the Beast spoken of in the xiij.
and xvij. Chapters does only signify Ethnicke Rome; there needs no other
refutation of that conceit, then to remember them, that the Antichrist is never
named in all that xj. Chapter, Cap. 11.
but where he is called in the seventh verse thereof the Beast that comes
forth of the bottomeles pit: Verse 7.
which by the description of the place he comes out of, proves it to be the
same Beast which has the same original in the xvij. Chapter, and in the very
same words; so as it is ever but the same Antichrist repeated, and diversely
described in diverse visions.

Now in the xij. and xiij. Chapters and so forth till the xvij. The third
description.
he makes a more large and ample prophetical description of the state of the
Church, and reign of the Antichrist: For in the xij. Chap. he figureth the
Church by a Woman flying from the Dragon (the Devil) to the wilderness; Chap
xij. Verse 6.
And when the Dragon sees he cannot otherwise ouer-reach her, Verse 15.
he speweth forth waters like floods to carry her away; which signifies many
Nations, that were let loose to persecute and vex the Church. And in the xiij.
Chapter, out of that Sea of Nations that persecuted her, Chap. xiij.
arises that great City (Queen of all the Nations, and head of that
persecution) figured by a Beast with seven heads and ten horns, verse 1.
Verse 2.
like a Leopard; as well for the color because it was full of spots, that is,
defiled with corruptions; as also using a bastard form of government, in show
spiritual, but in deed temporal over the Kings of the earth; like the Leopard
that is a bastard beast betwixt a Lion and a Parde: having feet like a Bear,
to signify his great strength, and the mouth of a Lion, to show his ravenous
and cruel disposition.

This Beast who had his power from the Dragon, Verse 3.
and had gotten a deadly wound in one of his heads, or forms of government (by
the Goths and Vandals) and yet was healed again; Verse 6. Verse 7.
opened his mouth to blasphemies, and made war against the Saints: nay, all
the world must worship him; which worship Ethnicke Rome never craved of any,
being contented to call their neighbor Kings Amici and socij populi Romani.
And whether worship or adoration, even with that same title, he used to Popes
at their creation, our Cardinal can best tell you.

But then comes another beast up out of the earth, Verse 11.
having indeed a more firm and settled original: for she does visibly and
outwardly succeed to the true Church, and therefore she has two horns like
the Lamb, in outward show representing the spouse of CHRIST, and pretending
CHRIST to be her defense: But she speaks like the Dragon, teaching damnable
and deuilish doctrine. And this Apostatike (I should say Apostolic) Church,
after that she has made her great power manifest to the world, by doing all
that the first Beast could do, Verse 12.
In conspectu eius; that is, by showing the greatness of her power, to be
nothing inferior to the greatness of the former Ethnicke Empire: she then is
moved with so great a desire to advance this Beast, now become Antichrist, as
she causes the earth and all that dwell therein, to worship this former Beast
or Roman Monarch; transferring so, as it were, her own power in his person.
Yea, even Emperors and Kings shall be feign to kiss his feet. And for this
purpose shall she work great Miracles, wherein she greatly prides her self,
deceiving men with lying wonders and efficacy of lies, 2. These. 2.9.
as S. Paul says. And amongst the rest of her wonders, Verse 13.
she must bring Fire out of heaven, Fulmen excommunications, which can dethrone
Princes: Verse 15.
So that all that will not worship the image of the Beast, that is, his
unlimited Supremacy, must be killed and burnt as Heretics. Yea, so peremptory
will this Beast or false Prophet be (so called in the xvj. Chapter of this
book) for the advancement of the other Beast or Antichrist; Verse 17.
as all sorts and ranks of people must receive the mark or name of that Beast
in their right hand, Verse 16.
or in their forehead; without the which it should be lawful to none to buy,
or sell: by the Mark in the forehead, signifying their outward profession and
acknowledgement of their subjection unto her; and by the Mark in their right
hand, signifying their actual implicit obedience unto her, who they think
cannot err, though she should command them to rebel against their natural
princes; like that Caeca obedientia whereunto all the Jesuits are sworn: and
like those Romish Priests in this Country, that have renounced and forsworn
again that Oath of Allegiance, grounded upon their natural Oath; which though
at their taking it, they confessed they did it out of conscience, and as
obliged thereunto by their natural duty; yet now must they forswear it
again, for obedience to the Popes command; to whose will their conscience and
reason must be blindly captiuated. And who ever denied this absolute power,
might neither buy nor sell; for no man was bound to keep any faith, or observe
any civil contracts with Heretics: yea, to aequiuocate and commit perjury
toward them, is a lawful thing in a Catholic.

Now as to the Mystery anent the Number of his name; whether it shall be
understood by the number composed of the Letters in that Greek word (...);
which word well suits with the Romish Church, Irenaeus aduersus Haeres. lib. 5.
Romish Faith, and Latin Service: Or whether in respect that in the Text it is
called the number of the man, ye will take it for the number or date of the
year of GOD, wherein that first man lived, that firstooke the title of the
Antichrist upon him; I leave it to the Readers choice. By that first Man, I
mean Bonifacius tertius, who first called himself Universal Bishop; which S.
Gregory, that lived till within three years of his time, Epist. lib. 6. cap.
30.
foretold would be the style of the Antichrist, or his Praecursor: for though
he died threescore years before the 666. of CHRIST; yet was that Title but
fully settled upon his Successors, sixty years after his time. Or if ye list
to count it from Pompey his spoiling of the Temple, to this same Man's time; it
will go very near to make just up the said number 666.

Now the reign of the Antichrist being thus prophetically described in the
xiij. Chapter, his fall is prophesied in the xiiij. Chap. xiiij. Verse 3.
First by the joyful and triumphall New song of the Saints in heaven: And next
by the proclamation of three Angels; Verse 6.
whereof the first having an everlasting Gospel in his hand to preach to all
Nations (the true armor indeed wherewith the Witnesses fought against the
Antichrist;) The first Angel, I say, Verse 7.
proclaimed Fear and glory to GOD, since the hour of his Judgment was come.
Verse 8.
And the second proclaimed the fall of Babylon, which is the destruction of the
Antichrist. Verse 9.
And the third prohibited under great pains, even the pain of eternal
damnation, that none should worship the Beast, or receive his Mark. But though
that in the rest of this Chapter the Latter day be again prophesied, as a
thing that shall come shortly after the revealing of the man of Sin: yet in
the xv. Chap. he tells of seven plagues, under the name of Vials, Chap. xv.
Verse 1.
that shall first fall upon the Antichrist and his kingdom; which, being
particularly set down in the xvj. Chapter, he reckons among the rest. Chap.
xvi.
In the fifth vial, the plague of darkness; yea, Verse 10.
such darkness as the kingdom of Antichrist shall be obscured. Whereby at the
pouring forth of the sixth Vial, the way of the Kings of the East shall be
prepared; Verse 12.
the man of Sin being begun to be revealed, and so all impediments removed
that might let the invasion of that Monarchy: even as that great river
Euphrates that runs by the literal Babylon, guarded it from the Kings of
the East, the Medes and Persians, the time of the Babylonian Monarchy, till by
the drying thereof, or unexpected passage made through it by Cyrus, Dan. 5.3.
Babylon was won, and Baltasar destroyed, and his Monarchy overthrown, even
while he was sitting in that literal Babylon, corporally drunken and quaffing
in the vessels ordained for GODS Service; and so sitting as it were in the
Temple of GOD, and abusing the holy Mysteries thereof.

For remedy whereof, Verse 13.
at the pouring forth of the sixth Vial, three unclean spirits, like frogs,
shall then come forth out of the mouth of the Dragon, that beast, and of the
false prophet; which I take to be as much to say, as that how soon as the
kingdom of Antichrist shall be so obscured, with such a gross and a palpable
ignorance, as learning shall be almost lost out of the world, and that few of
the very Priests themselves shall be able to read Latin, much less to
understand it; and so a plain way made for the Destruction of Babylon: Then
shall a new sect of Spirits arise for the defense of that falling Throne,
called three in number, by reason of their threefold direction; being raised
and inspired by the Dragon Satan, authorized and maintained by the Beast the
Antichrist, and instructed by the false prophet the Apostatike Church, that
has the horns like the Lamb, but speaks like the Dragon. These Spirits
indeed, thus sent forth by this threefold authority for the defense of their
Triple-crowned Monarch, are well likened to frogs; for they are Amphibions,
and can live in either Element, earth or water: for though they be Churchmen by
profession, yet can they use the trade of politic Statesmen; Verse 14.
going to the Kings of the earth, to gather them to the battle of that Great
day of GOD Almighty. What Massacres have by their persuasion been wrought
through many parts of Christendom, and how euilly Kings have sped that have
been counseled by them; all the impartial Histories of our time do bear
record. And whatsoever King or State will not receive them, and follow their
advise, rooted out must that King or State be, even with Gunpowder ere it
fail. And these frogs had reason indeed to labor to become learned, thereby
to dissipate that gross mist of ignorance, wherewith the reign of Antichrist
was plagued before their coming forth. Verse 17.
Then does this Chapter conclude with the last plague that is powered out of
the seventh Vial upon the Antichrist, Verse 19.
which is the day of Judgment: for then Babylon (says he) came in remembrance
before God.

But in the 17. The fourth description. Chap. 17. Verse 3.
Chapter is the former Vision interpreted and expounded; and there is the
Antichrist represented by a Woman, sitting upon that many-headed Beast; because
as CHRIST his true Spouse and Church is represented by a Woman in the twelfth
Chapter, so here is the Head of his adulterous spouse or false Church
represented also by a woman, but having a cup full of abominations in her hand:
Verse 4.
as her self is called a Whore, for her spiritual adultery, Verse 1.
having seduced the Kings of the earth to be partakers of her Spiritual
fornication: Verse 2.
And yet wonderful gorgious and glorious was she in outward show; but drunken
with the blood of the Saints, Verse 6.
by a violent persecution of them. And that she may the better be known, he
writes her name upon her forehead agreeable to her qualities: A Mystery, that
great Babylon, the Mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth. A
Mystery is a name that belongs unto her two manner of ways: Verse 5.
One, as she takes it to her self; another, as she deserves indeed. To her
self she takes it, in calling her self the visible Head of the mystical
Body of CHRIST, in professing her self to be the dispenser of the mysteries
of GOD, and by her only must they be expounded: This great God in earth and
Head of the Faith, being a Mystes by his profession; that is, a Priest. And if
the observation of one be true, that he had of old the word Mystery written
on his Myter; then is this Prophecy very plainly accomplished. Now that
indeed she deserves that name, the rest of her Title does bear witness that
shows her to be the Mother of all the whoredoms and abominations of the
earth: Verse 5.
and so is she under the pretext of holiness, a Mystery indeed of all
iniquity and abominations; under the mask of pretended feeding of Souls,
devouring Kingdoms, and making Christendom swim in blood.

Now after that this scarlet or bloody Beast and her Rider are described, by
their shape, garments name and qualities: the Angel does next interpret this
vision unto John, expounding unto him what is signified both by the Beast and
her Rider; telling him, Verse 9.
the seven heads of the Beast are seven Hills, meaning by the situation of
that City or seat of Empire; and that they are also seven Kings or forms of
government in the said City, whereof I have told you my conceit already. As
for the ten Horns, Verse 12.
which he shows to be ten Kings, that shall at one hour receive their
power and kingdom with the Beast, I take that number of ten to be Numerus
certus pro incerto; even as the number of seven heads and ten horns upon the
Dragon the Devil, cannot but be an uncertain number. And that he also
imitates in those ten horns, the ten horns of the seven headed Beast in the
seventh of Daniel: and therefore I take these ten Kings to signify, all the
Christian Kings, and free Princes and States in general, even you whom to I
consecrate these my Labors, and that of us all he prophesies, that although
our first becoming absolute and free Princes, should be in one hour with the
Beast; (for great Christian Kingdoms and Monarchs did but rise, and receive
their liberty by the ruins of the Ethnicke Roman Empire, and at the
destruction thereof) and at the very time of the beginning of the planting of
the Antichrist there; Verse 13.
and that we should for a long time continue to worship the Beast, having one
Catholic or common consenting mind in obeying her, yielding our power and
authority unto her, and kissing her feet, drinking with her in her cup of
Idolatry, Verse 14.
and fighting with the Lamb, in the persecution of his Saints, at her command
that governs so many Nations and people: yet notwithstanding all this, we
shall in the time appointed by GOD, Verse 16.
having thus fought with the Lamb, Verse 16.
but being overcome by him, that is, converted by his Word; we shall then (I
say) hate the Whore, and make her desolate, and make her naked, by discovering
her hypocrisy and false pretense of zeal; and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire. And thus shall the way of the Kings of the east be prepared,
Revel. 16.12.
as ye heard in the sixteenth Chapter. And then does he subioyne the reason
of this strange change in us: for (says he) GOD has put it in their hearts
to fulfill his will, Verse 17.
and with one consent to give their Kingdoms to the Beast, till the words of
GOD be fulfilled, according to that sentence of Solomon; That the hearts of
Kings are in the hands of GOD, Prou. 21.1.
to be turned at his pleasure. And having thus interpreted the Beast or
Empire; he in a word expounds, Verse 18.
that by the Woman that rode upon her, or Monarch that governed her, was meant
that great City that reigned over the Kings of the earth: by the Scate of the
Empire pointing out the quality of the persons that should sit and domine
there.

Then is the greatness of her fall, Chap. 18.
and the great lamentation that both the Kings and Merchants of the earth shall
make for the same, proclaimed by an other Angel in the eighteenth Chapter.
Verse 9.10.
The Kings lamenting her fall, because they lived in pleasure with her; which
no Kings could do with Ethnicke Rome, who conquered them by her sword: for
she honored them with Titles, and dispensed with their lusts and unlawful
marriages. Verse 11, 15, 16, 17, 18.
And the Merchants of the earth, and all Shipmasters, and traffikers upon the
Sea, shall lament the fall of that great City, which never had a fellow, for
the loss of their riches and traffic, which they enjoyed by her means.
Verse 12, 13.
And there he describes all sorts of rich wares, whereof that great City was
the Staple: for indeed she has a necessary use for all such rich and glorious
wares, as well for ornaments to her Churches and princely Prelates, as for
garments and ornaments to her wooden Saints; for the blessed Virgin must be
daily clothed and decked in the newest and most curious fashion, though it
should resemble the habit of a Curtizane. And of all those rich wares, Verse 13.
the most precious is last named, which is the Souls of men: for so much
bestowed upon Masses, and so much doted to this or that Cloister of Monks or
Friars, but most of all now to that irregular and incomprehensible order of
Jesuits; shall both redeem his own Soul, and all his parents to the hundredth
generation, from broyling in the fire of Purgatory. And (I hope) it is no small
merchandise of Souls, when men are so highly deluded by the hopes and promise
of Salvation, as to make a Friar murder his Henry 3. K. of France.
Sovereign; a young knave attempt the murder of his next Henry 4.
Successor; many one to conspire and attempt the like against the late Queen;
and in my time, to attempt the destruction of a whole Kingdom and State by a
blast of Powder: and hereby to play bankerupt with both the souls mentioned in
the Scriptures, Animus and Anima.

But notwithstanding of this their great Lamentation, they are commanded by a
voice from heaven to do two things: Verse 4.
One, to flee from Babylon, lest they be partakers of her sins, and
consequently of her punishment Which warning I pray God that ye all, my
Beloved Brethren and Cousins, would take heed unto in time, humbly beseeching
him to open your eyes for this purpose. The other command is, Verse 6.
to reward her as she has rewarded you; yea, even to the double. For as she
did fly but with your feathers, borrowing as well her Titles of greatness and
forms of honoring her from you; as also enjoying all her Temporal living by
your liberalities; so if every man do but take his own again, she will stand
up Cornicula Aesopica. Verse 7.
naked; and the reason is given, because of her pride: For she glorifieth her
self living in pleasure, and in her heart says, she sits as a Queen
(outward prosperity being one of their notes of a true Church) and is no
Widow; for her Spouse CHRIST is bound to her by an inviolable knot (for he has
sworn never to forsake her) and she shall see no mourning: for she cannot
err, nor the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her.

But though the earth and worldly men lament thus for the fall of Babylon in
this eighteenth Chapter, yet in the nineteenth, Cap. xix. Verse 1. Verse 2.
Heaven and all the Angels and Saints therein do sing a triumphall Cantique
for joy of her fall, praising God for the fall of that great Whore: Great
indeed, for our Bellar. in Res. ad Gerson. confid. 11.
Cardinal confesses, that it is hard to describe what the Pope is, such is
his greatness. Verse 19. Verse 20.
And in the end of that Chapter is the obstinacy of that Whore described, who
even fought to the uttermost against him that sat on the white Horse, and his
army; till the Beast or Antichrist was taken, and the false Prophet, or false
Church with him; who by Miracles, and lying wonders deceived them that received
the mark of the Beast; and both were cast quick into the burning lake of fire
and brimstone; vnde nulla redemptio. Like as in the end of the former Chapter,
to describe the fullness of the Antichrists fall (not like to that reparable
wound that Ethnicke Rome gate) it is first compared to a Millstone cast into the
sea, that can never rise and fleet again: Cap 18.21. Ibidem. Verse. 22, 32.
And next it is expressed by a number of joyful things that shall never be
heard there again, where nothing shall inhabit but desolation. But that the
patience and constancy of Saints on earth, and God his Elected may the better
be strengthened and confirmed; their persecution in the latter days, is
shortly prophesied and repeated again, Cap. 11. Verse 2.
after that Satan has been bound, or his fury restrained, by the worlds
enjoying of peace for a thousand years, or a great indefinite time; their
persecuters being named Gog and Magog, the secret and revealed enemies of
CHRIST. Verse 8.
Whether this be meant of the Pope and the Turk, or not; (who both began to
rise to their greatness about one time) I leave to be guessed; Verse 9.
always their utter confusion is there assuredly promised: and it is said;
that the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, Verse 10.
shall all three be cast in that lake of fire and brimstone, to be tormented
for ever. Verse 11, 12, 13. Matthew. 24.22.
And thereafter is the latter day described again (which must be hastened for
the Elects sake) and then for the further comfort of the Elect, and that they
may the more constantly and patiently endure these temporal and finite
troubles, limited but to a short space; in the last two Chapters are the joys
of the eternal Jerusalem largely described. Cap. xxj. xxij.


Thus has the Cardinals shameless wresting of those two places of Scripture,
Pasce oues meas, and Tibi dabo claues, for proouing of the Popes supreme
Temporal authority over Princes; animated me to prove the Pope to be THE
ANTICHRIST, out of this foresaid book of Scripture; so to pay him in his own
money again. And this opinion no Pope can ever make me to recant; except they
first renounce any further meddling with Princes, in any thing belonging to
their Temporal Jurisdiction. And my only wish shall be, that if any man
shall have a fancy to refute this my conjecture of the Antichrist; that he
answer me orderly to every point of my discourse; not contenting him to
disprooue my opinion, except he set down some other Method after his form
for interpretation of that Book of the Apocalypse, which may not contradict no
part of the Text, nor contain no absurdities: Otherwise, it is an easy thing
for Momus to pick quarrels in another man's tale, and tell it worse himself;
it being a more easy practice to find faults, then amend them.

Having now made this digression anent the Antichrist, which I am sure I can
better fasten upon the Pope, then Bellarmine can do his pretended Temporal
Superiority over Kings: I will return again to speak of this Answerer; who
(as I have already told you) so fitteth his matter with his manner of
answering, that as his Style is nothing but a Satyr and heap full of
injurious and reproachful speeches, as well against my Person, as my Book; so
is his matter as full of lies and falsities indeed, as he unjustly lays to
my charge: For three lies he makes against the Oath of Alleagiance, contained
and maintained in my Book; besides that ordinary repeated lie against my
Book, of his omitting to answer my lies, trattles, injurious speeches and
blasphemies. One gross lie he makes even of the Popes first Breue. One lie of
the Puritanes, whom he would gladly have to be of his party. And one also of
the Powder-Traitours, anent the occasion that moved them to undertake that
treasonable practice. Three lies he makes of that Act of Parliament wherein
this Oath of Alleagiance is contained. He also makes one notable lie against
his own Catholic Writers. And two, of the causes for which two Jesuits have
been put to death in England. And he either falsifies, denies or wrests five
sundry Histories and a printed Pamphlet: besides that impudent lie that he
makes of my Person; that I was a Puritan in Scotland, which I have already
refuted. And for the better filling up of his book with such good stuff; he
has also five so strange and new principles of Divinity therein, as they are
either new, or at least allowed by very few of his own Religion. All which
lies, with diverse others, and five strange, and (as I think) erroneous points
of Doctrine, with sundry falsifications of Histories; are set down in a Table
by themselves in the end of this my Epistle, having their Refutation annexed to
every one of them.

But as for the particular answering of his book; it is both unnecessary and
uncomely for me to make a Reply. Unnecessary, because (as I have already told
you) my Book is never yet answered, so far as belongs to the maine
question anent the Oath of Alleagiance: the picking of advantages upon the
wrong placing of the figures in the citations, or such errors in the Print by
casual addition, or omission of words that make nothing to the Argument; being
the greatest weapons wherewith he assaults my Book. And uncomely it must
needs be (in my opinion) for a King to fall in altercation with a Cardinal, at
least with one no more nobly descended then he is: That Ecclesiastical
dignity, though by the sloth of Princes (as I said before) it be now come to
that height of usurped honor, yet being in the true original and foundation
thereof nothing else, but the title of the Priests and Deacons of the Parish
Churches in the town of Rome; at the first, the style of Cardinals being
generally given to all Priests and Deacons of any Cathedral Church, though the
multitude of such Cardinal Priests and Deacons resorting to Rome, was the cause
that after bred the restraining of that title of Cardinal Priests and Deacons,
only to the Parish Priests and Deacons of Rome. And since that it is S.
Gregory, who in his Epistles six hundredth years after CHRIST, makes the
first mention of Cardinals (and so these now Electours of the Apostolic Sea,
being long and many hundredth years unknown or unheard of, after the
Apostolik aage; and yet does he speak of them but in this sense as I have
now described) I hope the Cardinal, who calls him the Apostle of England,
cannot blame me that am King thereof, to acknowledge the Cardinal in no other
degree of honor, then our said Apostle did. But how they should now become to
be so strangely exalted above their first original institution, that from
Parish Priests and Deacons (Priests inferiors) they should now come to be
Princes and Peers to Kings; and from a degree under Bishops (as both Lib. de
Clericis, cap. 16.
Bellarmine and Lib. de Episcopatibus, Titulis and Diaconijs Cardinalium.
Onuphrius confess) to be now the Popes sole Electours, supplying with him
the place of a General Council; whereby the conuening of General Councels is
now utterly antiquated and abolished; nay, out of their number only, the Pope
to be elected; who claims the absolute Superiority over all Kings: how this
their strange usurped exaltation (I say) should thus creep in and be
suffered, it belongs to all them in our place and calling to look unto it;
who being GOD his Lieutenants in earth, have good reason to be jealous of such
vpstart Princes, mean in their original, come to that height by their own
creation, and now accounting themselves Kings fellows. But the special harm
they do us, is by their defrauding us of our common and Christian interest in
General Councels; they having (as I said) utterly abolished the same, by
rolling it up, and making as it were a Monopoly thereof, in their Conclaue with
the Pope. Whereas, if ever there were a possibility to be expected of reducing
all Christians to an uniformity of Religion, it mustcome by the means of a
General Council: the place of their meeting being chosen so indifferent, as
all Christian Princes, either in their own Persons, or their Deputy
Commissioners, and all Churchmen of Christian profession that believe and
profess all the ancient grounds of the true, ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic Faith, might have tutum accessum thereunto; All the incendiaries and
Nouelist firebrarnds on either side being debarred from the same, as well
Jesuits as Puritanes.

And therefore having resolved not to pain my self with making a Reply for
these reasons here specified, grounded as well upon the consideration of the
matter, as of the person of the Answerer; I have thought good to content my
self with the reprinting of my Apology: having in a manner corrected nothing
but the Copiers or Printers faults therein, and prefixed this my Epistle of
Dedication and Warning thereunto; that I may yet see, if any thing will be
justly said against it: Not doubting but enough of my Subjects will reply upon
these Libellers, and answer them sufficiently; wishing YOU deeply to
consider, and weigh your common interest in this Cause. For neither in all my
Apology, nor in his pretended Refutation thereof, is there any question made
anent the Popes power over me in particular, for the excommunicating or
deposing of me: For in my particular; the Cardinal does me that grace, that
he says, The Pope thought it not expedient at this time to excommunicate me
by name; our question being only general, Whether the Pope may lawfully
pretend any temporal power over Kings, or no?

That no Churchmen can by his rule be subject to any Temporal Prince, I have
already showed you; And what Obedience any of you may look for of any of them
de facto, he plainly forewarneth you of, by the example of Gregory the Great
his obedience to the Emperor Mauritius: not being ashamed to slander that
great Personages Christian humility and Obedience to the Emperor, with the
title of a constrained and forced obedience, because he might, or durst do no
otherwise. Whereby he not only wrongs the said Gregory in particular, but even
does by that means lay on an heavy slander and reproach upon the Christian
humility and patience of the whole Primitive Church, especially in the time of
persecution: if the whole glory of their Martyrdom and Christian patience
shall be thus blotted with that vile gloss of their coacted and constrained
suffering, because they could or durst do no otherwise; like the patience and
obedience of the Jews or Turkish slaves in our time, clean contrary to Saint
Paul and Saint Peter's doctrine of obedience for conscience sake; Romans 13.5. 1.
Pet. 2.13.
and as contrary to Tertullians Apology for Christians, and all the
protestations of the ancient Fathers in that case. But it was good luck for
the ancient Christians in the days of Ethnicke Emperors, that this profane
and new conceit was then unknown among them: otherwise they would have been
utterly destroyed and rooted out in that time, and no man to have pitied them,
as most dangerous members in a Commonwealth; who would no longer be obedient,
then till they were furnished with sufficient ability and power to resist and
rebel.

Thus may ye see, how upon the one part our Cardinal will have all Kings and
Monarchs to be the Popes Vassals; and yet will not on the other side, allow
the meanest of the Pope his vassals, to be subject to any Christian Prince. But
he not thinking it enough to make the Pope our Superior, has in a late
Treatise of his (called the Recognition of his books of Controversies) made
the people and Subjects of every one of us, our Superiors. For having taken
occasion to reuisite again his books of Controversies, and to correct or
explain what he finds amiss or mistaketh in them; in imitation of S.
Augustine his retractions (for so he says in his Preface) he does in place of
retracting any of his former errors, or any matter of substance; not retract,
but recant indeed, I mean sing over again, and obstinatly confirm a number
of the grossest of them: Among the which, the exempting of all Churchmen from
subjection to any Temporal Prince, and the setting up not only of the Pope,
but even of the People above their natural King; are two of his maine points.

As for the exemption of the Clerickes; he is so greedy there to prove that
point, as he denies Caesar to have been Paul's lawful Judge: Acts. 25.10.
contrary to the express Text, and Paul's plain Appellation, and acknowledging
him his Judge; besides his many times claiming to the Roman privileges, Acts
22.28.
and auowing himself a Roman by freedom; and therefore of necessity a
Subject to the Roman Emperor. But it is a wonder that these Roman Catholics,
who vaunt themselves of the ancientie both of their doctrine and Church, and
reproach us so bitterly of our Novelties, should not be ashamed to make such a
new inept gloss as this upon S. Paul's Text; which as it is directly contrary
to the Apostles words, so is it without any warrant, either of any ancient
Council, or of so much as any one particular Father that ever interprets that
place in this sort: Neither was it ever doubted by any Christian in the
Primitive Church, that the Apostles, or any other degree of Christians, were
subject to the Emperor.

And as for the setting up of the People above their own natural King, he
brings in that principle of Sedition, that he may thereby prove, that Kings
have not their power and authority immediately from God, as the Pope has his:
For every King (says he) is made and chosen by his people; nay, they do but
so transfer their power in the Kings person, as they do notwithstanding
retain their habitual power in their own hands, which upon certain
occasions they may actually take to themselves again. This, I am sure, is an
excellent ground in Divinity for all Rebels and rebellious people, who are
hereby allowed to rebel against their Princes; and assume liberty unto
themselves, when in their discretions they shall think it convenient.

And amongst his other Testimonies for probation, that all Kings are made and
created by the People; he alleges the Creation of three Kings in the
Scripture, Saul, David and Jeroboam; and though he be compelled by the
express words of the Text, to confess, that God by his Prophet Samuel
anointed both 1. Sam. 10.1
Saul and 1. Sam. 16.12.13.
David; yet will he, by the postconsent of the people, prove that those Kings
were not immediately made by God, but mediatly by the people; though he repeat
thrice that word of Lot, by the casting whereof he confesses that Saul was
chosen. And if the Election by Lot be not an immediate Election from God; then
was not Matthias, Acts 1.
who was so chosen and made an Apostle, immediately chosen by GOD: and
consequently, he that sits in the Apostolic Sea cannot for shame claim to
be immediately chosen by God, if Matthias (that was one of the twelve Apostles,
supplying Judas his place) was not so chosen. But as it were a blasphemous
impiety, to doubt that Matthias was immediately chosen by GOD, and yet was he
chosen by the casting of Lots, as Saul was: so is it well enough known to some
of you (my loving Brethren) by what holy Spirit or casting of Lots the Popes
use to be elected; the College of Cardinals, his electors, having been
divided in two mighty factions ever since long before my time; and in place of
casting of Lotts, great fat pensions being cast into some of their greedy
mouths for the election of the Pope, according to the partial humors of
Princes. But I do most of all wonder at the weakness of his memory: for in
this place he makes the post-consent of the people to be the thing that made
both these Kings, notwithstanding of their preceding inauguration and
anoyntment by the Prophet at GODS commandment; forgetting that in the
beginning of this same little book of his, answering one that alleges a
sentence of S. Cyprian, to prove that the Bishops were judged by the people in
Cyprians time, he there confesses, that by these words, the consent of the
people to the Bishops Election must be only understood. Nor will he there any
ways be moved to grant, that the peoples power, in consenting to or refusing
the Election of a Bishop, should be so understood, as that thereby they have
power to elect Bishops: And yet do these words of Cyprian seem to be far
stronger, for granting the peoples power to elect Churchmen, then any words
that he alleges out of the Scripture are for the peoples power in electing a
King. For the very words of Cyprian by himself there cited, Cyprian. lib. 1.
Epist. 4.
are, That the very people have principally the power, either to choose such
Priests as are worthy, or to refuse such as are unworthy: And, I hope, he can
never prove by the Scripture, that it had been lawful to the people of
Israel, or that it was left in their choice, to have admitted or refused Saul
or David at their pleasure, after that the Prophet had anointed them, and
persented them unto them.

Thus ye see how little he cares (even in so little a volume) to contradict
himself, so it may make for his purpose; making the consent of the people to
signify their power of Election in the making of Kings: though in the making
of Bishops, by the peoples consent, their approbation of a deed done by others
must only be understood. And as for his example of Ieroboams election to be
King; 1 King. 12.20.
he knows well enough, that Jeroboam was made King in a popular mutinous
tumult and rebellion; only permitted by God, and that in his wrath, both
against these two Kings and their people. But if he will needs help himself,
against all rules of Divinity, with such an extraordinary example for proof
of a general Rule; why is it not as lawful for us Kings to oppose hereunto
the example of Iehu his Inauguration to the Kingdom; 2. King. 9.2, 3.
who upon the Prophets private anointment of him, and that in most secret
manner, took presently the Kings office upon him, without ever craving any
sort of approbation from the people?

And thus may ye now clearly see, how deep the claim of the Babylonian
Monarch touches us in all our common interest: for (as I have already told)
the Pope, nor any of his Vassals, I mean Churchmen must be subject to no
Kings nor Princes: and yet all Kings and their Vassals must not only be
subject to the Pope, but even to their own people. And now, what a large
liberty is by this doctrine left to Churchmen, to hatch or foster any
treasonable attempts against Princes; I leave it to your considerations, since
do what they will, they are accountable to none of us: nay, all their
treasonable practices must be accounted works of piety, and they (being
justly punished for the same) must be presently enrolled in the list of Martyrs
and Saints; like as our new printed Martyrologie has put Garnet and Ouldcorne
in the Register of English Martyrs abroad, that were hanged at home for Treason
against the Crown and whole State of England: so as I may justly with Isaiah,
pronounce a Woe to them that speak good of evil, Isai 5.20.
and evil of good; which put light for darkness, and darkness for light;
Verse 23.
which justify the wicked for are ward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. For even as in the time of the greatest blindness in
Popery, though a man should find his wife or his daughter lying a bed in her
Confessors arms; yet was it not lawful for him so much as to suspect that the
Friar had any errand there, but to Confess and instruct her: Even so, though
Jesuits practicing in Treason be sufficiently verified, and that themselves
cannot but confess it; yet must they be accounted to suffer Martyrdom for the
Faith, and their blood work miracles, and frame a stramineum argumentum upon
strawes; when their heads are standing aloft, withered by the Sun and the
wind, a public spectacle for the eternal commemoration of their treachery.
Yea, one of the reasons, that is given in the Printers Epistle of the Colonian
edition of the Cardinal or his Chaplains pamphlet, why he does the more
willingly print it, is; because that the innocence of that most holy and
constant man Henry Garnet, is declared and set forth in that book; against
whom, some (he knew not who) had scattered a false rumor of his guiltiness of
the English treason.

But, Lord, what an impudency or wilful ignorance is this, that he, who was
so publicly and solemnly convicted and executed, upon his own so clear,
unforced and often repeated confession, of his knowledge and concealing of that
horrible Treason, should now be said to have a certain rumor spread upon him of
his guiltiness, by I know not who? with so many attributes of godliness,
constancy and innocence bestowed upon him, as if public Sentences and
Executions of Justice, were rumors of I know not who. Indeed, I must confess,
the book it self shows a great affection to perform, what is thus promised
in the Preface thereof: for in two or three places therein, is there most
honorable lying mention made of that straw-Saint; wherein, though he confess
that Garnet was upon the foreknowledge of the Powder Treason, yet in regard it
was (as he says) only under the Seal of Confession, he sticks not to
praise him for his concealing thereof, and would gladly give him the crown of
glory for the same: not being ashamed to proclaim it as a principal head of
Catholic doctrine; That the secret of Sacramental confession ought not to be
revealed, not for the eschewing of whatsoever evil. But how damnable this
doctrine is, and how dangerously prejudicial to all Princes and States; I
leave it to you to judge, whom all it most highly concerns. For although it
be true, that when the Schoolmen came to be Doctors in the Church, and to
mar the old grounds in Divinity by sowing in among them their Philosophical
distinctions; though they (I say) do maintain, That whatsoever thing is told a
Confessor under the veil of confession, how dangerous soever the matter be,
yet he is bound to conceal the parties name: yet do none of them, I mean of
the old Schoolmen, deny; that if a matter be revealed unto them, the
concealing whereof may breed a great or public danger; but that in that case
the Confessor may disclose the matter, though not the person, and by some
indirect means make it come to light, that the danger thereof may be prevented.
But that no treason nor deuilish plot, though it should tend to the ruin or
exterminion of a whole Kingdom, must be revealed, if it be told under
Confession, no not the matter so far indirectly disclosed, as may give
occasion for preventing the danger thereof: though it agree with the conceit of
some three or four new Iesuited Doctors, it is such a new and dangerous head
of doctrine, as no King nor State can live in security where that Position is
maintained.

And now, that I may as well prove him a liar in facto, in his narration of
this particular History; as I have showed him to be in iure, by this his
damnable and false ground in Divinity: I will trewly inform you of Garnets
case, which is far otherwise then this Answerer alleges. For first, it can
never be accounted a thing under Confession, which he that reueals it does not
discover with a remorse, accounting it a sin whereof he repents him; but
by the contrary, discouers it as a good motion, and is therein not dissuaded by
his Confessor, nor any penance enjoined him for the same: and in this form was
this Treason revealed to Garnet, as himself confessed. And next, though he
stood long upon it, that it was revealed unto him under the veil of
Confession, in respect it was done in that time, while as the party was making
his Confession unto him; Yet at the last he did freely confess, that the
party revealed it unto him as they were walking, and not in the time of
Confession: But (he said) he delivered it unto him under the greatest Seal
that might be, and so he took that he meant by the Seal of Confession; And
it had (as he thought) a relation to Confession, in regard that he was that
parties Confessor, and had taken his Confession sometimes before, and was to
take it again within few days thereafter. He also said, that he pretended to
the party, that he would not conceal it from his Superior. And further it is
to be noted, that he confessed, that two diverse persons conferred with him
anent this Treason; and that when the one of them which was Catesby, conferred
with him thereupon, it was in the other parties presence and hearing: and what
a Confession can this be in the hearing of a third person? And how far his
last words (whereof our Answerer so much vaunts him) did disprove it to have
been under Confession, the Earl of Northamptons book does bear witness.

Now as to the other parties name, that revealed the Powder Treason unto him,
it was Greenewell the Jesuit; and so a Jesuit revealed to a Jesuit this
Treasonable plot, the Jesuit reuealer not showing any remorse, and the Jesuit
whom-to it was revealed not so much as enioyning him any penance for the same.
And that ye may know that more Jesuits were also upon the party, Owldcorne the
other Powder-Martyr, after the misgiuing and discovery of that Treason,
preached consolatory doctrine to his Catholic auditorie; exhorting them not
to faint for the misgiuing of this enterprise, nor to think the worse thereof
that it succeeded not; alleging diverse Presidents of such godly enterprises
that misgaue in like manner: especially, one of S. Jews King of France, who in
his second journey to the Holy Land died by the way, the greatest part of his
army being destroyed by the plague; his first journey having likewise misgiuen
him by the Soldans taking of him: exhorting them thereupon not to give over,
but still to hope that GOD would bless their enterprise at some other time,
though this did fail.

Thus see ye now, with what boldness and impudency he has belied the
publicly known verity in this errand; both in auowing generally that no
Jesuit was any ways guilty of that Treason, for so he affirms in his
book; and also that Garnet knew nothing thereof, but under the Seal of
Confession. But if this were the first lie of the affairs of this State, which
my fugitive Priests and Jesuits have coined and spread abroad, I could charm
them of it, as the proverb is. But as well the walls of diverse Monasteries
and Jesuits Colleges abroad, are filled with the painting of such lying
Histories, as also the books of our said fugitives are farced with such sort
of shameless stuff; such are the innumerable sorts of torments and cruel
deaths, that they record their Martyrs to have suffered here, some torn at
four Horses; some sowed in Bears skins, and then killed with Dogs; nay,
women have not been spared (they say) and a thousand other strange fictions;
the vanities of all which I will in two words discover unto you.

First, as for the cause of their punishment, I do constantly maintain that
which I have said in my Apology: That no man, either in my time, or in the
late Queens, ever died here for his conscience. For let him be never so devout
a Papist, nay, though he profess the same never so constantly, his life is in
no danger by the Law, if he break not out into some outward act expressly
against the words of the Law; or plot not some unlawful or dangerous practice
or attempt; Priests and Popish Churchmen only excepted, that receive Orders
beyond the Seas; who for the manifold treasonable practices that they have
kindled and plotted in this country, are discharged to come home again under
pain of Treason, after their receiving of the said Orders abroad; and yet,
without some other guilt in them then their bare home-comming, have none of
them been ever put to death. And next, for the cruel torments and strange
sorts of death that they say so many of them have been put unto; if there were
no more but the Law and continually observed custom of England, these many
hundred years, in all criminal matters, it will sufficiently serve to refute
all these monstrous lies: for no tortures are ever used here, but the Manacles
or the Rack, and these never but in cases of high Treason; and all sorts of
Traitors die but one manner of death here, whether they be Papist or Protestant
Traitors; Queen Mary's time only excepted. For then indeed no sorts of
cruel deaths were spared unexecuted upon men, women and children professing
our Religion: yea, even against the Laws of God and Nature, women with child
were put to cruel death for their profession; and a living child falling out
of the mothers belly, was thrown in the same fire again that consumed the
mother. But these tyrannous persecutions were done by the Bishops of that time,
under the warrant of the Popes authority; and therefore were not subject to
that constant order and forms of execution, which as they are here
established by our Laws and customs, so are they accordingly observed in the
punishment of all criminals: For all Priests and Popish Traitors here receive
their Judgments in the temporal Courts, and so do never exceed those forms
of execution which are prescribed by the Law, or approved by continual
custom. One thing is also to be marked in this case that strangers are never
called in question here for their religion, which is far otherwise (I hope)
in any place where the Inquisition domines.

But having now too much wearied you with this long discourse, whereby I have
made you plainly see, that the wrong done unto me in particular first by the
Popes Breues, and then by these Libellers, does as deeply interest you all in
general, that are Kings, free Princes, or States as it does me in particular:
I will now conclude, with my humble prayers to God, that he will waken us up
all out of that Lethargike slumber of Security, wherein our Predecessors and
we have lien so long; and that we may first gravely consider, what we are
bound in conscience to do for the planting and spreading of the true worship
of God, according to his revealed will, in all our Dominions; therein hearing
the voice of our only Pastor ( for his Sheep will know his Voice, John 10.27.
as himself says) and not following the vain, corrupt and changeable
traditions of men. And next, that we may prouidently look to the security of
our own States, and not suffer this incroching Babylonian Monarch to win
still ground upon us. And if GOD has so mercifully dealt with us, that are his
Lieutenants upon earth, as that he has joined his cause with our interest, the
spiritual liberty of the Gospel with our temporal freedom: with what zeal
and courage may we then embrace this work: for our labors herein being
assured, to receive at the last the eternal and inestimable reward of
felicity in the kingdom of Heaven; and in the mean time to procure unto our
selves a temporal security, in our temporal Kingdoms in this world.

As for so many of you as are already persuaded of that Truth which I
profess, though differing among your selves in some particular points; I
think little persuasion should move you to this holy and wise Resolution: Our
Greatness, nor our number, praised be GOD, being not so contemptible, but
that we may show good example to our neighbors; since almost the half of all
Christian people and of all sorts and degrees, are of our profession; I mean,
all gone out of Babylon, even from Kings and free Princes, to the meanest sort
of People. But above all (my loving Brethren and Cosins) keep fast the unity
of Faith among your selves; Reject 1. Tim. 1.4.
questions of Genealogies and Ibid c. 4.7.
Aniles fabulas, as Paul says; Let not the foolish heat of your Preachers for
idle Controversies or indifferent things, tear asunder that Mystical Body,
whereof ye are a part, since the very coat of him whose members we are was
without a seame: And let not our division breed a slander of our faith, and be
a word of reproach in the mouths of our adversaries, who make Unity to be one
of the special notes of the true Church.

And as for you (my loving Brethren and Cosins) whom it has not yet pleased
GOD to illuminate with the light of his truth; I can but humbly pray with
Elizeus, that it would please GOD to open your eyes, that ye might see what
innumerable and invincible armies of Angels are ever prepared and ready to
defend the truth of GOD: Acts. 26.29.
and with S. Paul I wish, that ye were as I am in this case; especially that
ye would search the Scriptures, and ground your Faith upon your own certain
knowledge, and not upon the report of others; Abac. 2.4.
since every Man must be safe by his own faith. But, leaving this to GOD his
merciful providence in his due time, I have good reason to remember you, to
maintain the ancient liberties of your Crowns and Commonwealths, not
suffering any under GOD to set himself up above you; and therein to imitate
your own noble predecessors, who (even in the days of greatest blindness)
did diverse times courageously oppose themselves to the incroaching ambition of
Popes. Yea, some of your Kingdoms have in all aages maintained, and without
any interruption enjoyed your liberty, against the most ambitious Popes. And
some have of very late had an evident proof of the Popes ambitious aspiring
over your Temporal power; wherein ye have constantly maintained and defended
your lawful freedom, to your immortal honor. And therefore I heartily wish
you all, to do in this case the Office of godly and just Kings and earthly
Judges: which consists not only in not wronging or inuading the Liberties of
any other person (for to that will I never press to persuade you) but also in
defending and maintaining these lawful Liberties wherewith GOD has endued
you: For ye, whom GOD has ordained to protect your people from injuries,
should be ashamed to suffer your selves to be wronged by any. And thus,
assuring my self, that ye will with a settled Judgment, free of prejudice,
weigh the reasons of this my Discourse, and accept my plainness in good part,
gracing this my Apology with your favors, and yet no longer then till it
shall be justly and worthily refuted; I end, with my earnest prayers to the
ALMIGHTY for your prosperities, and that after your happy Temporal Reigns
in earth, ye may live and reign in Heaven with him for ever.

A CATALOGVE OF THE LIES OF TORTVS, TOGETHER WITH A BRIEF Confutation of them.
TORTVS. Edit. Politan. page 9. IN the Oath of Allegiance the Popes power to
excommunicate even Heretical Kings, is expressly denied.

CONFVTATION. The point touching the Popes power in excommunicating Kings, is
neither treated of, nor defined in the Oath of Allegiance, but was purposely
declined. See the words of the Oath, and the Praemonition. page 292.

TORTVS. page 10. 2 For all Catholic writers do collect from the words of
Christ, Whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven, that
there appertains to the Popes authority, not only a power to absolve from
sins, but also from penalties, Censures, Laws, Vows, and Oaths.

CONFVTATION. That all Roman-Catholike writers do not concur with this
Libeller, in thus collecting from CHRIST'S words, Matthew. 16. To omit other
reasons, it may appear by this that many of them do write, that what CHRIST
promised there, that he did actually exhibit to his Disciples, John 20. when
he said, Whose sins ye remit, they shall be remitted, thereby restraining
this power of loosing formerly promised, unto loosing from sins, not
mentioning any absolution from Laws, Vows and Oaths in this place. So do
Theophylact, Anselme, Hugo Cardin. and Ferus in Matt. 16. So do the principal
Schoolmen, Alexand. Hales in Summa. part. 4. q. 79. memb. 5. and 6. art. 3.
Thom. in 4. did. 24. q. 3. art. 2. Scotus in 4. did. 19. art. 1. Pope
Hadrian. 6. in 4. did. q. 2. de clauib. page 302. edit. Parisien. anno 1530.
who also alleges for this interpretation, Augustine and the interlinear
Gloss.

TORTVS. Page 18. 3 I abhor all Parricide, I detest all conspiracies: yet it
cannot be denied but occasions of despair were given [to the Powder-plotters.]

CONFVTATION. That it was not any just occasion of despair given to the
Powder-Traitours, as this Libeller would bear us in hand, but the instructions
which they had from the Jesuits, that caused them to attempt this bloody
design: See the Premonition, page 291. and 335. and the book entitled, The
proceedings against the late Traitors.

TORTVS. Pap. 26. 4 For not only the Catholics, but also the Caluinist
puritanes detest the taking of this Oath.

CONFVTATION. The Puritanes do not decline the Oath of Supremacy, but daily
do take it, neither ever refused it. And the same Supremacy is defended by
Calvin himself, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20.

TORTVS. Page 28. 5 First of all the Pope writes not, that he was grieved at
the calamities which the Catholics did suffer for the keeping of the Orthodox
faith in the time of the late Queen, or in the beginning of King James his
reign in England, but for the calamities which they suffer at this present
time.

CONFVTATION. The only recital of the words of the Breue will sufficiently
confute this Lie. For thus writes the Pope, The tribulations and calamities
which ye have continually sustained for the keeping of the Catholic faith,
have always afflicted us with great grief of mind. But for as much as we
understand, that at this time all things are more grievous, our affliction
hereby is wonderfully increased.

TORTVS. Page 28. 6 In the first article [of the Statute] the Laws of Queen
Elizabeth are confirmed.

CONFVTATION. There is no mention at all made of confirming the Laws of Queen
Elizabeth, in the first article of that Statute.

TORTVS. Page 29. 7 In the 10. Article [of the said Statute] it is added, that
if the [Catholicks] refuse the third time to take the Oath being tendered unto
them, they shall incur the danger of loosing their lives.

CONFVTATION. There is no mention in this whole Statute either of offering the
Oath the third time, or any indangering of their lives.

TORTVS. Page 30. 8 In the 12. Article, it is enacted, that whosoever goes out
of the land to serve in the wars under foreign Princes, they shall first of
all take this Oath, or else be accounted for Traitors.

CONFVTATION. It is no where said in that Statute, that they which shall thus
serve in the wars under foreign Princes, before they have taken this Oath,
shall be accounted for Traitors, but only for Felons.

TORTVS. Page 35. 9 We have already declared, that the [Popes] Apostolic
power in binding and loosing is denied in that [Oath of Allegiance.]

CONFVTATION. There is no Assertory sentence in that Oath, nor any word but
only conditional, touching the power of the Pope in binding and loosing.

TORTVS. Page 37. 10 The Popes themselves, even will they, nill they, were
constrained to subject themselves to Nero and Diocletian.

CONFVTATION. That Christians without exception, not upon constraint but
willingly and for conscience sake, did subject themselves to the Ethnicke
Emperors, it may appear by our Apology, page 255, 256. and the Apologetickes
of the ancient Fathers.

TORTVS. Page 47. 11 In which words [of the Breues of Clement the 8.] not only
James King of Scotland, was not excluded, but included rather.

CONFVTATION. If the Breues [of Clement] did not exclude me from the Kingdom,
but rather did include me, why did Garnet burn them? why would he not reserve
them that I might have seen them, that so he might have obtained more favor
at my hands for him and his Catholics?

TORTVS. Page 60. 12 Of those 14. Articles [conteined in the Oath of
Alleagiance] eleven of them concern the Primacie of the Pope in matters
Spiritual.

CONFVTATION. No one Article of that Oath does meddle with the Primacie of the
Pope in matter Spiritual: for to what end should that have been, since we have
an express Oath elsewhere against the Popes Primacie in matters Spiritual?

TORTVS. Page 64. 13 Amongst other calumnies this is mentioned, that Bellarmine
was privy to sundry conspiracies against Q. Elizabeth, if not the author.

CONFVTATION. It is no where said [in the Apologie] that Bellarmine was either
the Author, or privy to any conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth; but that
he was their principal instructor and teacher, who corrupted their judgment
with such dangerous positions and principles, that it was an easy matter to
reduce the generals into particulars, and to apply the dictates which he gave
out of his chair, as opporunitie served, to their several designs.

TORTVS. Page 64. 14 For he [Bellarmine] knows, that Campian only conspired
against Heretical impiety.

CONFVTATION. That the true and proper cause of Campians execution, was not for
his conspiring against Heretical impiety, but for conspiring against Queen
Elizabeth and the State of this Kingdom, it was most evident hy the judicial
proceedings against him.

TORTVS. Page 65. 15 Why was H. Garnet, a man incomparable for learning in all
kinds, and holiness of life, put to death, but because he would not reveal
that which he could not do with a safe conscience.

CONFVTATION. That Garnet came to the knowledge of this horrible Plot not only
in confession as this Libeller would have it, but by other means, neither by
the relation of one alone, but by diverse, so as he might with safe-conscience
have disclosed it; See the Premonition, page 334, 335, etc. and the Earl of
Northamptons book.

TORTVS. Page 71. 16 Pope Sixtus 5. neither commanded the French King to be
murdered, neither approved that fact, as it was done by a private person.

CONFVTATION. The falsehood of this does easily appear by the Oration of
Sixtus 5.

TORTVS. Page 91. 17 That which is added concerning Stanley his Treason, is
neither faithfully nor trewly related: for the Apologer (as his manner is) does
miserably deprave it, by adding many lies.

CONFVTATION. That which the Apology relates concerning Stanley his Treason,
is word for word recited out of Cardinal Allens Apology for Stanleys treason:
as it is to be seen there.

TORTVS. Page 93. 18 It is very certain that H. Garnet at his arraignement,
did always constantly avouch, that neither he nor any Jesuit either were
authors, or compartners, or aduisers, or consenting any way [to the
Powder Treason.] And a little after. The same thing he protested at his death
in a large speech, in the presence of innumerable people.

CONFVTATION. The book of the proceedings against the late Traitors, and our
Premonition, page 334, 335, etc. do clearly prove the contrary of this to
be true.

TORTVS. Page 97. 19 King James since he is no Catholic, neither is he a
Christian.

CONFVTATION. Contrary: I am a true Catholic, a professor of the trewly
ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith: and therefore am a true Christian.
See the confession of my faith in the Premonition, page 302. 303, etc.

TORTVS. Page 98. 20 And if the reports of them which knew him most inwardly,
be true, when he was in Scotland, he was a Puritan, and an enemy to
Protestants: Now in England he professes himself a Protestant, and an enemy
to the Puritans.

CONFVTATION. Contrary; and what a Puritan I was in Scotland: See my (...) and
this my Premonition, page 305, 306.

HIS FALSIFICATIONS IN HIS ALLEGING OF HISTORIES, together with a brief
declaration of their falsehood
THE WORDS OF TORTVS. Page 70. 1 IT was certain that he [Henry 4. the
Emperour] died a natural death.

CONFVTATION. It was not certain: since sundry Historians write otherwise,
that he died upon his imprisonment by his son Henry 5. either with the
noysomnesse and loathsomeness of the prison, or being pined to death by hunger.
Read Fasciculus temporum at the year 1094. Laziardus epitom. universal.
Histor. c. 198. Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizensi at the year 1105. and
Iacobus Wimphelingus epitome Rerum Germanic. c. 28.

TORTVS. Page 83. 2 Henry 4. The Emperor feared indeed, but not any corporal
death, but the censure of Excommunication, from the which that he might procure
absolution, of his own accord, he did thus demissely humble himself [ before
Gregory 7.]

CONFVTATION. That Henry 4. thus dejected himself before the Pope, it was
neither of his own accord, neither upon any fear of the Popes
Excommunication, which [in this particular] he esteemed of no force, but upon
fear of the loss of his Kingdom and life, as the records of antiquity do
evidently testify. See Lambertus Schafnaburg at the year 1077. Abbas
Vrspergen. at the year 1075. The Author of the life of Henry 4. Bruno in his
History of the Saxon war. Laziard in epitom. universal. Histor. c. 193.
Cuspinian. in Henr. 4. Sigonius de Regno Italiae lib. 9.

TORTVS. Page 83. 3 The truth of the History [ of Alexander 3 treading upon
the neck of Frederick Barbarossa with his foot] may beaustly doubted of.

CONFVTATION. But no Historian doubts of it; and many do avouch it, as
Hieronym. Bard. in victor. Naual. ex Bessarion. Chronico apud Baron. ad an.
1177. number. 5. Gerson de potestate Ecclesiae consid. 1. Jacob Bergom. in
supplem. Chronic. ad an. 1160. Nauclerus Gener. 40 Petrus Justinian lib. 2.
Rerum Venetar. Papirius Masson. lib. 5. de Episcop. vrbis. who alleges for
this Gennadius Patriarch of Constantinople. Besides Alphonsus Ciacconius de
vit. Pontif. in Alexand. 3. and Azorius the Jesuit: Instit. Moral. part. lib.
5. c. 43.

TORTVS. Page 83. 4 What other thing feared Frederick Barbarossa but
excommunication?

CONFVTATION. That Frederick feared only Pope Alexander his Excommunication,
no ancient Historian does testify. But many do write, that this submission of
his was principally for fear of loosing his Empire and Dominions. See for
this, Martin Polon. ad an. 1166. Platina in vita Alexan. 3. Laziard. in epitom.
Historiae universal. c. 212. Naucler. Generat 40. Iacobus Wimphelingus in
epitom. Rerum Germanic. c. 32.

TORTVS. Page 88. 5 Add heereunto, that Cuspinian. [ in relating the history
of the Turks brother who was poisoned by Alexander 6.] has not the consent of
other writers to witness the truth of this History.

CONFVTATION. The same History, which is reported by Cuspinian, is recorded
also by sundry other famous Historians. See Francis Guicciardin. lib. 2.
Histor. Ital. Paulus Iouius lib. 2. Hist. sui temporis. Sabellic. Ennead. 10.
lib. 9. Continuator Palmerij, at the year. 1494.

THE NOVEL DOCTRINES, WITH A BRIEF DECLARATION of their Novelty.
NOVEL DOCTRINE. Page 9. 1 IT is agreed upon amongst all, that the Pope may
lawfully depose Heretical Princes, and free their Subjects from yielding
obedience unto them.

CONFVTATION. Nay, all are so far from consenting in this point, that it may
much more trewly be avouched, that none entertained that conceit before
Hildebrand: since he was the first brocher of this new doctrine never before
heard of, as many learned men of that aage, and the aage next following (to
omit others of succeeding aages) have expressly testified. See for this point,
the Epistle of the whole Clergy of Liege to Pope Paschal the second. See the
judgment of many Bishops of those times, recorded by Auentine in his history,
lib. 5. fol. 579. Also the speech uttered by Conrade bishop of Vtretcht, in the
said fifth book of Auentine, fol. 582. And another by Eberhardus, Archbishop
of Saltzburge. Ibid. lib. 7. p. 684. Also the judgment of the Archbishop of
Triers, in constitut. Imperialib. a M. Haimensfeldio editis. page 47. The
Epistle of Walthram Bishop of Megburgh which is extant in Dodechine his
Appendix to the Chronicle of Marianus Scotus, at the year 1090. Benno in the
life of Hildebrand. The author of the book De vnitate Ecclesiae, or the
Apology for Henry the fourth. Sigebert in his Chronicle, at the year 1088.
Godfrey of Viterbio in his History entitled Pantheon, part. 17. Ottho
Frisingensis, lib. 6. c. 35. and praefat. in lib. 7. Frederick Barbarossa. lib.
6. Gunther. Ligurin. de gestis Frederici. and lib. 1. c. 10. of Raduicus de
gestis eiusdem Frederici. Vincentius in speculo historiali lib. 15. c. 84. with
sundry others.

NOVEL DOCTRINE. Page 51. 2 In our supernatural birth in Baptism we are to
conceive of a secret and implied oath, which we take at our new birth, to yield
obedience to the spiritual Prince, which is Christ's Vicar.

CONFVTATION. It is to be wondered at, whence this fellow had this strange new
Divinity, which surely was first framed in his own fantastical brain. Else
let him make us a Catalogue of his Authors, that hold and teach, that all
Christians, whether infants or of aage, are by virtue of an oath taken in their
Baptism, bound to yield absolute obedience to CHRIST'S Vicar the Pope, or
baptized in any but in CHRIST.

NOVEL DOCTRINE. Page 94. 3 But since that Catholic doctrine does not permit
for the auoidance of any mischief whatsoever, to discover the secret of
Sacramental confession, he [Garnet] rather chose to suffer most bitter death,
then to violate the seal of so great a Sacrament.

CONFVTATION. That the secret of Sacramental confession is by no means to be
disclosed, no not indirectly, or in general, so the person confessing be
concealed, for auoydance and prevention of no mischief, how great soever:
Besides that it is a position most dangerous to all Princes and Commonwealths,
as I show in my Praemonition, page 333, 334. It is also a Novel Assertion, not
heard of till of late days in the Christian world: Since the common opinion
even of the Schoolmen and Canonists both old and new, is unto the contrary;
witness these Authors following: Alexander Hales part. 4. qu. 78. mem. 2. art.
2. Thom. 4. did. 21. qu. 3. art. 1. ad 1. Scotus in 4. did. 21. qu. 2.
Hadrian. 6. in 4. did. vbi de Sacramen. Confess. edit. Paris. 1530. page 289.
Dominic. Sot. in 4. did. 18. q. 4. art. 5. Francis. de victor. sum. de
Sacram. n. 189. Nauar. in Enchirid. c. 8. Joseph. Angles in Florib. part. 1.
page 247. edit. Antuerp. Petrus Soto lect. 11. de confess. The Jesuits also
accord hereunto, Suarez. Tom. 4. disp. in 3. part. Thom. disp. 33. 3. Gregor.
de Valentia. Tom. 4. disp. 7. q. 13. punct. 3. who says the common opinion of
the Schoolmen is so.

NOVEL DOCTRINE. Page 102. 4 I dare boldly auow, that the Catholics have
better reason to refuse the Oath [ of Allegeance] then Eleazar had to refuse
the eating of Swines flesh.

CONFVTATION. This assertion implies a strange doctrine indeed, that the
Popes Breues are to be preferred before Moses Law: And that Papists are more
bound to obey the Popes decree, then the Jews were to obey the Law of God
pronounced by Moses.

NOVEL DOCTRINE. Page 135. 5 Churchmen are exempted from the Jurisdiction of
secular Princes, and therefore are no subjects to Kings: yet ought they to
observe their Laws concerning matters temporal, not by virtue of any Law, but
by enforcement of reason, that is to say, not for that they are their Subjects,
but because reason will give it, that such Laws are to be kept for the public
good, and the quiet of the Commonwealth.

CONFVTATION. How true friends the Cardinal and his Chaplen are to Kings that
would have so many Subjects exempted from their power: See my Praemonition,
Page 296, 297. Also, Page, 330. 331. etc. But as for this and the like new
Aphorisms, I would have these cunning Merchants to cease to vent such stuff
for ancient and Catholic wares in the Christian world, till they have
disprooued their own Venetians, who charge them with Novelty and forgerie in
this point.

A DECLARATION CONCERNING THE PROCEEDINGS WITH THE STATES GENERAL, OF THE
UNITED PROVINCES OF THE LOW COVNTREYS, Jn the cause of D. CONRADVS VORSTIVS.
TO THE HONOR OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST, THE ETERNAL SON OF THE
ETERNAL FATHER, THE ONLY THEANTHPOPOS, MEDIATOVR, AND RECONCILER OF MANKIND,
IN SIGN OF THANKFVLNES, HIS MOST HVMBLE, AND MOST OBLIGED SERVANT, JAMES BY
THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND, Defender of the
FAITH, Does DEDICATE, and CONSECRATE this his DECLARATION.

THat it is one of the principal parts of that duty which appertains unto a
Christian King, to protect the true Church within his own Dominions, and to
extirpate heresies, is a Maxim without all controversy; in which respect
those honorable Titles of Custos and Vindex vtriusque Tabulae, Keeper and
Auenger of both the Tables of the Law, and Nutritious Ecclesiae, Nursing Father
of the Church, do rightly belong unto every Emperor, King, and Christian
Monarch. But what interest a Christian King may justly pretend to meddle in
aliena Repub. within another State or Common wealth in matters of this nature
(where Strangers are not allowed to be too curious) is the point in question,
and whereof we mean at this time to treat.

For our zeal to the glory of God, being the only motive that induced us (as
he who is the searcher of the heart and reins can witness) to make sundry
Instances and Requests unto the States General of the United Provinces, for
the banishment of a wretched Heretic, or rather Athiest, out of their
Dominions, named D. Conradus Vorstius, has been so ill interpreted, or rather
wrested to a perverse sense, by a sort of people, whose corrupted stomach
turns all good nourishment into bad and pernicious humors, (as if it had been
some vanity and desire of vain glory in us, or else an Ambition to encroach
by little and little upon the liberty of their State, which had carried us
headlong into the business) As both to clear our own honor from the dark
mists of these false and scandalous imputations, as also to make it trewly
appear unto the Christian world, in what sort we have proceeded herein; We
have thought good to publish this present Declaration, containing as well the
discourse of our whole Negotiation hitherto with the States in this cause, as
also the reasons which have moved us to take it so to heart, and to persevere
therein as we have done, and will do (God willing) until it please him, to
bring it to some good and happy end.

In Autumn last, about the end of August, being in our hunting Progress,
there came to our hands two books of the said Vorstius, the one entitled
Tractatus Theologicus de Deo, dedicated to the Lantgraue of Hessen, imprinted
in the year 1610. the other his Exegesis Apologetica upon that book,
dedicated to the States, and printed in the year 1611. Which books, as soon as
we had received, and (not without much horror and detestation) cast our eye
only upon some of the principal Articles of his disputations contained in the
first book, and his Commentary thereupon in the second, God is our witness,
that the zeal of his glory did so transport us, as (to say with S. Paul) We
stayed not one hour, but dispatched a Letter presently to our Ambassador
resident with the States, to this purpose following.

Trusty and well-beloved, etc.
You shall repair to the States General, with all possible diligence in our
name, telling them, that we doubt not, but that their Ambassadors which were
with us about two years since, did inform them of a forewarning, that we
wished the said Ambassadors to make unto them in our name, to beware in time,
of seditious and heretical Preachers, and not to suffer any such to creep
into their State. Our principal meaning was of Arminius, who though himself
were lately dead, yet had he left too many of his disciples behind him. Now
according to that care which we continually have of the weal of their State,
we have thought good to send unto them a new advertisement upon the like
occasion, which is this: That there is lately come to our hands a piece of
work of one Vorstius, a Divine in those parts, wherein he has published such
monstrous blasphemy and horrible Atheism, as out of the care that a Christian
Prince, and Defender of the Faith, (as we have ever been) ought to have of the
good of the Church, we hold not only such a scandalous book worthy to be
burnt, but even the Author himself to be most severely punished. This
notwithstanding we are informed, that the States are so far from being
sensible of so great a scandal to the Church, as that the most part of them
have already yielded him their free consents and voices, for the obteining of
the place of Divinity Reader in the University of Leyden, which the
aboue-named Arminius of little better stuff, lately enjoyed: and though
himself be dead, has left his sting yet living among them. Having therefore
understood, that the time of Election will be about Michaelmas next, and
holding our selves bound in honor and conscience, as a Christian Prince, and
one who has vouchsafed the States our Royal favor and support in respect of
their Religion, to prevent so great a mischief so far as we are able: We
will and require you to let them understand, how infinitely we shall be
displeased if such a Monster receive advancement in the Church. And if it be
alleged, that he has recanted his Atheistical opinions, and that thereupon
he may be capable of the place, you shall tell them, that we think his
Recantation so slender a satisfaction for so foul an offense, as that we hold
him rather worthy of punishment, or at least to be debarred from all promotion:
Wherein though we assure our self, that they will of their own discretions
eschew such a viper, who may make a fearful rent not only in their
Ecclesiastical, but also in their Politic State, yet notwithstanding all
this, if they will continue their resolution to prefer him, you shall then
make a protestation to them in our name, That we will not fail to make known
to the world publicly in print, how much we detest such abominable Heresies,
and all allowers and tolerators of them: And because the States shall know upon
what reasons we have grounded this our Admonition, you shall receive herewith a
This Catalogue is here purposely omitted for avoiding a needless repetition,
seeing the principal points thereof are contained in a little Collection
annexed at the end of our second letter written to Wynwood.
Catalogue of his damnable Positions, of which no one page of the book is free.

Given under our Signet, etc.

For observing, that so prodigious a Monster began to live among them, We could
do no less (considering the infinite obligations which we owe unto God) then
to make Our zeal appear against such an enemy to the Essence of the Deity.
Besides, the charity, which We bear to the said States Our neighbors and
Confederates, professing the same Religion that we do, did enforce Us to
admonish them, to eschew and prevent in time so dangerous a contagion, which
dispersing it self, might infect, not only the body of their State, but all
Christendom also; the danger whereof was so much greater to our Dominions then
to many others, by how much the Provinces of the said States are nearer unto Us
in their situation.

Our Ambassador therefore having sufficiently acquitted himself of that which
We gave him in charge, by exhorting them in Our Name, timely to prevent the
danger which might ensue by enterteyning such a guest as VORSTIVS; (which at
that time they might easily have done, seeing he was not yet settled at Leyden,
neither was he lodged in the house appointed for the public Reader, nor were
his wife and family yet arrived, and therefore much more easy for them to have
rid him out of their country, sending him back to the place from whence he
came, according to the old Proverb,

Turpius eijcitur, quam non admittitur hospes. It is more honest to refuse a
guest, then when you have once received him, to thrust him out of doors.) Yet
notwithstanding all the diligence that Our Ambassador could use, and the
opportunity which at that time was offered them to discharge him, all the
answer he could procure from them, was but this, that,

Whereas a Proposition was made on the behalf of his Majesty of Great
Britain, in the assembly of the Lords States General of the United Provinces
by Sir Ralph Winwood his Majesty's Ambassador and Counselor in the Council
of State in those countries, exhibited in writing the 21. of the month
precedent (the substance thereof being first amply debated by the Deputies of
the States of Holland and West-Frizeland, and thereupon mature deliberation
had) The said Lords States General in answer to the said Proposition, have
most humbly requested, and by these presents do humbly request his Majesty to
believe, that as, for preservation of the liberty, rights and privileges of
the Low Countries, against the unjust, tyrannical and bloody courses contrary
thereunto, practiced for many years upon the consciences, bodies and fortunes
of the good Inhabitants of all qualities of those Countries by the Spaniards
and their Adherents, they have been constrained after a long patience, many
Remonstrances, Requests and other submissiue proceedings used in vain, to take
arms for their necessary defense, (when they saw no other remedy,) as also to
crave the assistance of his Majesty particularly, and of other Kings, Princes
and Common wealths, by whose favor, but principally by his Majesty's they have
since continually sustained for many years, with an exceeding great constancy
and moderation as well in prosperity as in adversity, a heavy, chargeable and
bloody war, many terrible and cruel encounters, notable Battles both by
land and sea, matchless Sieges of a number of Towns, Ruins, and deuastation
of Cities and Countries, and other difficulties incident to the war: So do
their Lordships always confess, that in specie the chief and principal
reason which has moved them at first to entertain, and since to maintain the
said resolution, has been the foresaid tyranny exercised upon the
consciences, bodies, and goods of their people, by introduction of the
Inquisition and constraint in matter of Religion: For which respects their
Obligation to his Majesty is greatly increased, in that after so many
demonstrations of affection, favors, and assistances in the pursuit of their
just cause, his Majesty is yet pleased, like a loving Father, to assure unto
them the continuance of the same Royal affection and assistance, by taking
care that the true Christian reformed Religion be purely and sincerely taught
within their Countries, as well in Churches as in Schools; For which the Lords
States General do most humbly thank his Majesty, and will for their parts
by all lawful means, endeavor so to second his sincere and Christian
intention in this particular, as his Majesty shall receive all good
contentment.

As concerning the business of Doct. Vorstius, principally handled in the
foresaid Proposition, the Lords States General (to make the matter more
plain) have informed themselves, First that the Curators of the University of
Leyden (according to their duty, and the ancient custom ever since the
foundation of that University,) having diligently made inquiry for some
Doctor to be chosen into the place of Divinity Professor there, at that time
void, after mature deliberation were given to understand, that at Steinford
within the Dominions of the Counts of Tecklenbourg, Bentem, etc. ( who were of
the first Counts that in Germany had cast off the yoke of the Papacy,
Idolatry, and impure religion, and embraced the reformed Religion, which to
this day they maintain) there did remain one Doct. Conradus Vorstius, who had
continued in that place about fifteen years a Professor of true Religion, and
a Minister; and that the said Conradus Vorstius for his learning and other
good parts was much sought after by Prince Maurice, Lantgraue of Hessen, with
intent to make him Divinity Professor in some University of his Country.
Moreover, that he had sufficiently, and to the great contentment, even of
those that are now become his greatest adversaries, showed with a Christian
moderation his learning and purity in the holy knowledge of Divinity, against
the renowned Jesuit Bellarmine: And that the said Conradus Vorstius was
thereupon sent for by the Curators aforesaid, about the beginning of July,
1610. which message being seconded by letters of recommendation from his
Excellency, and from the deputy Councelors for the States of Holland and
Westfrizeland, unto the said Counts of Tecklenburg, did accordingly take
effect. In the month of August following, the said Election and Calling was
countermined by certain persons, to whose office or disposition the business
did nothing at all belong: which being perceived, and the said Vorstius charged
with some unsoundness of doctrine, the Curators did thereupon think fit, with
the good liking of Vorstius himself, that as well in the University of
Leyden, as at the Hage, he should appear in his own justification to answer
all accusers and accusations whatsoever. At which time there was not any one
that did offer to charge him. In the month of May following, six Ministers
did undertake to prove, that VORSTIVS had published false and unsound
doctrine, who afterward being heard in full assembly of the States of Holland
and Westfrizeland, ( in the presence of the Curators, and six other Ministers)
on the one part, and Vorstius in his own defense on the other part; and that
which could be said on either side to the several points in their sever all
refutations respectively: The said Lords States having gravely deliberated upon
the allegations as well of the one part as of the other, as also heard the
opinions of the said Ministers (after the manner and custom of the said
assembly) could not see any reason, why the execution of that which was done by
the Curators lawfully, and according to order, ought to be hindered for
impeached. In August following there being sent over hither certain other
Articles, wherewith Vorstius was charged, and dispersed in little printed
Pamphlets amongst the people, the said Lords States entered into a new
consultation, and there resolved, that Vorstius (according both to Gods Law,
the Law of Nature, and the law written; as also according to the laudable use
and customs of their country,) should be heard against his new accusers,
concerning those Articles there laid to his charge. And moreover, it was
generally declared by the States of Holland and Westfrizeland there assembled,
(as every one of them likewise in his own particular, and the Curators and
Bourgmasters of Leyden for their parts did specially declare:) That there was
never any intention to permit other Religion to be taught in the University of
Leyden, then the Christian Religion reformed and grounded upon the word of God:
And besides, that if the said Vorstius should be found guilty in any of the
aforesaid points whereof he was accused, that they would not admit him to the
place of Professor. The Deputies of the said Lords States of Holland and
Westfrizeland further declaring, that they do assuredly believe, that if his
Majesty of Great Britain were well informed of the true circumstances of this
business, and of their sincere intention therein, he would (according to his
high wisdom, prudence, and benignity) conceive favorably of them, and their
proceedings: whereof the Lords States General are no less confident; and the
rather, for that the said Deputies have assured them, that the Lords States of
Holland and Westfrizeland their Superiors would proceed in this business (as
in all others) with all due reverence, care, and respect unto his Majesty's
serious admonition, as becomes them.

And the Lords States General, do request the said Lord Ambassador to
recommend this their Answer unto his Majesty with favor.

Given at the Hage, in the Assembly of the said Lords States General. 1.
October. 1611.
But before we had received this answer from the States, some of Vorstius
books were brought over into England, and (as it was reported) not without the
knowledge and direction of the Author. And about the same time one Bertius, a
scholar of the late Arminius, (who was the first in our aage that infected
Leyden with Heresy) was so impudent, as to send a Letter unto the Archbishop
of Canterbury, with a Book entitled, De Apostasia Sanctorum. And not thinking
it sufficient to auow the sending of such a book, (the title whereof only,
were enough to make it worthy the fire) he was moreover so shameless, as to
maintain in his Letter to the Archbishop, that the doctrine contained in his
book, was agreeable with the doctrine of the Church of England. Let the Church
of CHRIST then judge, whether it was not high time for us to bestirre our
selves, when as this Gangrene had not only taken hold amongst our nearest
neighbors; so as Nonsolum paries proximus iam ardebat: not only the next
house was on fire, but did also begin to creep into the bowels of our own
Kindome; For which cause having first given order, that the said books of
Vorstius should be publicly burnt, as well in Paul's Churchyard, as in both
the Universities of this Kingdom, we thought good to renew our former request
unto the States, for the banishment of Vorstius, by a Letter which we caused
our Ambassador to deliver unto them from us at their Assembly in the Hage, the
fifth of November; whereunto they had referred us in their former answer, the
tenor of which Letter was as follows:

HIgh and mighty Lords,
Having understood by your answer to that Proposition which was made unto you
in our name by our Ambassador there resident, That at your Assembly to be
holden in November next, you are resolved then to give order concerning the
business of that wretched D. Vorstius, We have thought good (notwithstanding
the declaration which our Ambassador has already made unto you in our name
touching that particular,) to put you again in remembrance thereof by this
Letter, and thereby freely to discharge our selves, both in point of our duty
toward God, and of that sincere friendship which we bear toward you.

First We assure Our selves that you are sufficiently persuaded that no worldly
respect could move Us to have thus importuned you in an affair of this nature,
being drawn into it only through Our zeal to the glory of God, and the care
which We have that all occasion of such great scandals as this is, unto the
true reformed Church of God, might be in due time foreseen and prevented. We
are therefore to let you understand, that We do not a little wonder, that you
have not only sought to provide an habitation in so eminent a place amongst
you, for such a corrupted person as this Vorstius is, but that you have also
afforded him your license and protection to print that Apology which he has
dedicated unto you; A book wherein he does most impudently maintain the
execrable blasphemies, which in his former he had disgorged; The which we are
now able to affirm out of our own knowledge, having since that Letter which
we wrote unto our Ambassador, read over and over again with our own eyes
(not without extreme mislike and horror) both his books, the first dedicated
to the Lantgraue of Hessen, and the other to you. We had well hoped, that the
corrupt seed which that enemy of God Arminius did sow amongst you some few
years since (whose disciples and followers are yet too bold and frequent
within your Dominions) had given you a sufficient warning, afterward to take
heed of such infected persons, seeing your own Country men already divided
into Factions upon this occasion, a matter so opposite to unity (which is
indeed the only prop and safety of your State next under God) as of
necessity it must by little and little bring you to utter ruin, if wisely you
do not provide against it, and that in time.

It is true that it was Our hard hap not to hear of this Arminius before he
was dead, and that all the Reformed Churches of Germany had with open mouth
complained of him. But as soon as We understood of that distraction in your
State, which after his death he left behind him, We did not fail (taking the
opportunity when your last extraordinary Ambassadors were here with Us) to use
some such speeches unto them concerning this matter, as We thought fittest for
the good of your State, and which we doubt not but they have faithfully
reported unto you; For what need We make any question of the arrogancy of
these Heretics, or rather Atheistical Sectaries amongst you, when one of
them at this present remaining in your town of Leyden, has not only presumed
to publish of late a blasphemous Book of the Apostasy of the Saints, but has
besides been so impudent, as to send the other day a copy thereof, as a
goodly present, to Our Archbishop of Canterbury, together with a letter,
wherein he is not ashamed (as also in his Book) to lie so grossly, as to
auowe, that his Heresies contained in the said Book, are agreeable with the
Religion and profession of Our Church of England. For these respects therefore
have We cause enough very heartily to request you, to root out with speed
those Heresies and Schisms, which are beginning to bud forth amongst you,
which if you suffer to have the reins any longer, you cannot expect any other
issue thereof, then the curse of God, infamy throughout all the reformed
Churches, and a perpetual rent and distraction in the whole body of your
State. But if peradventure this wretched Vorstius should deny or equivocate
upon those blasphemous points of Heresy and Atheism, which already he has
broached, that perhaps may move you to spare his person, and not cause him to
be burned (which never any Heretic better deserved, and wherein we will
leave him to your own (bristian wisdom) but to suffer him upon any defense
or abnegation, which he shall offer to make, still to continue and to teach
amongst you, is a thing so abominable, as we assure our selves it will not once
enter into any of your thoughts: For admit he would prove himself innocent
(which nevertheless he cannot do) in most of those points wherewith he is
charged; yet were it but the scandal of his person, which will still remain,
it were cause more then enough for you to remove him out of your Dominions.
You know what is written of Caesar's wife, that it was not sufficient for her to
be innocent, but she must also be free from all occasion of suspicion: how
much more then ought you to be wary and cautious in a matter of so great
importance as this, which concerns the glory of God, the salvation of your
souls, the souls of your people, and the safety of your State; and not to
suffer so dangerous a spark to lie kindling amongst you? For a man may easily
conjecture, that fear and the horror of his own actions will make him boldly
deny that poison which boyleth at his heart: For what will not be deny, that
denies the Eternity and Omnipotency of God? And howbeit he were innocent
(as we have said before) the Church of God is not so ill furnished with men of
sufficiency for that place, as that you need be unprovided of some other, who
shall not be subject to that scandal, wherewith he is so tainted, as it must
be a long penance, and many years of probation, that must wear it away. But
especially ought you to be very careful, not to hazard the corruption of your
youth in so famous an University by the doctrine of so scandalous a person,
who (it is to be feared) when he finds himself once well settled there,
will return again to his ancient vomit.

We will therefore conclude with this request unto you, that you will assure
your selves, that the affection only which we bear unto your State, has
enforced us to use this liberty toward you, not doubting for our part, but
that, as this which we have written unto you proceeds from the sincerity of
our conscience, so our good God will be pleased to give you a due apprehension
thereof, and that your resolution in a matter of so great consequence, may tend
to his glory, to your own honor and safety, to the extirpation of these
springing Atheismes and Heresies, and to the satisfaction, not only of us, but
of all the reformed Churches, who have been hitherto extremely scandalized
therewith: But if on the contrary part, we fail of that we expect at your
hands (which God forbid) and that you suffer hereafter such pestilent
Heretics to nestle among you, who dare take upon them that licentious
liberty, to fetch again from Hell the ancient Heresies long since condemned,
or else to invent new of their own brain, contrary to the belief of the true
Catholic Church, we shall then be constrained (to our great grief)
publicly to protest against these abominations: and (as God has honored us
with the Title of Defender of the Faith) not only to depart and separate our
selves from the union of such false and heretical Churches, but also to exhort
all other reformed Churches to join with us in a common Council, how to
extinguish and remand to hell these abominable Heresies, that now newly begin
to put forth again. And furthermore for our own particular, we shall be
enforced strictly to inhibite the youth of our Dominions from repairing to so
infected a place, as is the University of Leyden. Sed meliora speramus and
ominamur, We hope and expect for better, assuring our selves in the mercy of
our good God, that as he has a long time preserved you from your temporal
enemies, and at this time is beginning to establish your Estate to the
contentment of all your friends, (but especially to ours, who have never been
wanting to assist you upon all occasions) that the same God will not leave you
for a prey to your spiritual adversaries, who gape at nothing but your utter
destruction. And in this confidence we will recommend you and the prosperity
of your affairs to the protection of God, remaining as we have ever been,

Your good friend JAMES R.
Given at our Palace of Westminster the 6. of October. 1611.

We writ likewise at the same time, another Letter to our Ambassador, for his
direction in the whole business; the Copy whereof is this which follows:

Trusty and well-beloved.
Perceiving by the States their answer to your Proposition delivered to them
in our name, concerning the matter of Vorstius, that they have taken time for
their proceeding with him; and having some reason to think that his favorers
amongst them are stronger then were to be wished, We have thought good to
renew our Admonition unto them in this matter, by a Letter of our own, written
at good length, and in earnest manner, which you shall heerewith receive, and at
the time of their meeting for this purpose, present unto them in our name:
Insisting with them with all the earnestness you can, both for the remoouing
of this blasphemous Monster, as also that they may now at least take some such
solid order, as this licentious liberty of disputing or arguing such
unprofitable questions (whereby new opinions may be daily set abroach against
the grounds of Divinity) may hereafter be restrained as well at Leyden, as in
all the rest of their Dominions. And for the better strengthening of this
motion, we do herewith send you a Note of some of the most special
Atheistical points, wherewith his book is full farced. But if contrary to our
expectation, all our labor cannot move them to give satisfaction, not to us,
but to the whole Church of God in this case; Then are you (if no better may be)
to renew our Protestation unto them, which we sent you in our former Letter,
assuring them, that our first labor shall be to publish to the world their
defection from the Faith, and true Church of Christ: We mean the defection of
them, whom they maintain and harbor in their bosoms: though we purposely
omitted this point in our Letter unto them for being too harsh, except all
other remedies were desperate. But we both wish and hope for better.

Theobaldes. 6. October. 1611.

But before our Ambassador had opportunity to deliver our Letter to the
States, there were not only certain people more cunning then zealous, who
caused a rumor to be spread amongst the States, that we were become exceeding
cold in the business, nay that we had almost quite given it over; but also in
the mean time, the said Vorstius was settled at Leyden, lodged in the quality
of a public Reader, and his wife, and his family there arrived, as he
himself witnesses in his Book called Christiana, and modestarespo^sio. For
his own words in his preface are these, Quum igitur Diuina vocatione sic
ferente in eavrbe ac Prouincia sedem fixerim, cunque domo tota nunc habitem,
quae supremam in terra iurisdictionem vestram agnoscit, etc. That is to say,
Since therefore (God so disposing of me,) I have settled my self, and with my
whole family do now inhabit in that City and province, which acknowledges
your supreme authority on earth, etc. Our Ambassador therefore having on the
one side consideration of that false report which was spread abroad of our
coldness in the business, and on the other side observing how Vorstius was
established at Leyden after our first Admonition and request made unto the
States, but before their Assembly on the fifth of November, he then resolved
first to present unto them our Letter, making likewise himself a remonstrance
to the same purpose, which We have here set down, together with an extract of
certain passages, collected out of the said Books of Vorstius, which We sent
unto our Ambassador, and was by him then showed unto the States, that they
might discern the Lion by his pawe.

MY Lords: If ever the King of Great Britain my Master has merited any thing
of this State, (and how much he has merited in respect of his great favors,
and Royal assistances, your Lordships acknowledging them with all gratitude
can best witness, and best judge) be has surely merited at this present
having by his Letters full of zeal and piety, which he has written unto you,
endenoured to procure the establishment of that Religion only within your
Provinces, which the Reformed Churches of Great Britain, France and Germany,
by a mutual consent, have generally embraced. For what is it to his Majesty,
whether D. Vorstius be admitted Professor in the University of Leyden, or not?
or whether the doctrine of Arminius be preached in your Churches? saving that
as a Christian Prince, he desires the advancement of the Gospel, and as your
best friend and allye, the strengthening of your Commonwealth, whose first
foundations were cymented with the blood of his subjects, and which in his
judgment can no way subsist, if wittingly and willingly you suffer the
Reformed Religion to be either by the practices of your Doctors sophisticated,
or by their malice depraved.

If therefore Religion be as it were the Palladium of your Common wealth, and
that to preserve the one in her glory and perfection, be to maintain the
other in her purity, let your selves then be judge, in how great a danger the
State must needs be at this present, so long as you permit the Schisms of
Arminius to have such vogue as now they have in the principal Towns of
Holland, and if you suffer Vorstius to be received Divinity Professor in the
University of Leyden (the Seminary of your (burch) who in scorn of the Holy
word of GOD, has after his own fancy, devised a new Sect, patched together
of sener all pieces of all sorts of ancient and modern Heresies. The fool
said in his heart, There is no God: but he that with open mouth, of set
purpose, and of prepensed malice, has let his pen run at random, to
disgorge so many blasphemies against the Sacred Majesty of GOD, this fellow
shall wear the garland of all that ever yet were heard of, since by the means
of the Gospel, the light of Christian Religion has shined unto the world. If
any man doubt of it, for a proof, see here what his Majesty with his own
hand has collected out of his writings.

OVT OF HIS ANNOTATIONS.
CAEterum, nihil vetat Deo etiam corpus ascribere, Page 210.
si vocabulum corporis in significatione latiore sumamus.

But there is nothing forbids us to say, that God has a Body, so as we take a
body in the largest signification.

Non satis igitur circumspecte loquuntur, qui Deum vt essentia, Page 212.
sic etiam volimtate prorsus immutabilem esse affirmant.

They therefore do not speak circumspectly enough, who say, that God is
altogether as unchangeable in his will, as he is in his essence.

Nusquam scriptum legimus Dei substantiam simpliciter immensam esse, Page 232.
immo non pauca sunt, quae contrarium sensum habere videntur.

We find it no where written, That the substance of God is simply immense:
nay, there are many places, which seem to carry a contrary meaning.

Magnitudo nulla actu infinita est: ergo nec Deus. Page 237.


No Magnitude is actually infinite, and therefore God is not actually infinite.

Etsane si omnia, and singula rerum euenta, praecise and ab aeterno definita
fuissent, Page 308.
nihil opus esset continua rerum inspectione, and procuratione, quae tamen Deo
passim tribuitur.

And surely, if all and every event of things were precisely set down, and
from eternity, there needed not then that continual inspection and
procuration, which nevertheless is every where attributed unto God.

Before tamen respondere videntur, Page 441.
qui certam quidem in genere vniuersalem Dei scientiam esse docent; Sed ita
tamen, vt plures certitudinis causas in visione praesentium, ac praeteritorum,
quam in visione futurorum contingentium agnoscant.

They therefore, who teach that there is in God a certain universal knowledge
in genere, do seem to answer more fully; but so as they do confess
likewise that there be more causes of certainty in the vision of things
present, then in the vision of things future contingent.

Omnia etiam decreta quae semel apud se praecise definiuit, vno modo and actu,
Page 271.
post factam definitionem accuratissime nouit: sed de alijs omnibus, and
singulis, quaecunque sunt and fiunt, seorsim, and per se consideratis, hoc
affirmari non potest; quippe quae non modo successiue in tempore, verumetiam
contingenter, and saepe conditionaliter existunt.

All things which GOD has once decreed, and precisely determined, vno modo and
actu, he does after such his determination exactly know them: But this cannot
be affirmed of all and every other thing, which are, or come to pass, being
considered severally and by themselves, because they have their existence, not
only successively in time, but also contingently, and oftentimes conditionally.

OVT OF HIS APOLOGY.
PAter peculiarem quandam entitatem, Page 38.
seu quasi limitatam, and restrictam essentiam habere putandus est.

It is to be understood that the Father has a certain peculiar being, or as
it were a limited and bounded essence.

Vnde porro non difficulter efficitur, Page 43.
etiam interna quaedam accidentia in Deo, hoc est, in ipsa (vt sic dicere
liceat) proaeretica Dei mente, ac voluntate, reuera existere.

From whence it is easily proved, that there are really certain internal
accidents in God, that is to say, (if it be lawful to use such a word) in the
very fore-electing mind and will of God.

In the 16. Chapter, he does dangerously dissent from the received opinion of
Divines, concerning the Vbiquitie of Gods presence. In the 19. Chapter, page
99. he does attribute unto God, Magnitude and Quantity.
These are in part the opinions of that great Divine, whom they have chosen to
domineere in the Chair at Leyden: In opposition whereunto, I mean not to say
any thing else, then that which the Roman Orator did once pronounce in the
like case: Mala est and impia consuetudo contra Deum disputandi, sieve serio id
fit, sieve simulate It is an evil and a wicked custom (says he) to dispute
against God, whether it be in earnest, or in jest.

Now my Lords, I address my self unto your Lordships, and according unto the
charge which I have received from the King my Master, I conjure you by the
amity that is betwixt his Kingdoms and your Provinces, (the which on his part
will continue always inviolable) to awaken your spirits, and to have a
careful eye at this Assembly of Holland, ( which is already begun) ne quid
Respublica detrimenti capiat, That the Common wealth take no harm: which
undoubtedly, at one time or other, will be turned vpside down, if you suffer
such a dangerous contagion to harbor so near you, and not remove it out of
your Provinces as soon as possibly you may. The disciples of Socinus ( with
whose doctrine he has been suckled in his childhood) do seek him for their
Master, and are ready to embrace him. Let him go, be is a Bird of their own
feather: Et dignum sane patella operculum; A cover fit for such a dish.

On the other side, the Students in Divinity at Leyden to the number of 56. by
a duetiful Remonstrance presented unto the States of Holland the 16. of October
the last year, did most humbly beseech the said States, not to use their
authority in compelling them to receive a Professor, who both by the
attestations of the Divinity Colleges at Basil and Heydelberg, as also by
manifest evidence out of his own writings, is convinced of an infinite number
of Heresies.

These reasons therefore, namely, the proofs of so many enormous and horrible
Heresies maintained in his Books, the instance of his Majesty grounded upon
the welfare and honor of this Country, the requests either of all, or of the
most part of your Provinces, the petitions of all the Ministers (excepting
those only which are of Arminius Sect) should me thinks prevail so far
with my Lords the States of Holland, and (we hope) will so far prevail, as
they will at the last apply themselves to the performance of that, which both
the sincerity of Religion, and the service of their Country requires at
their hands. Furthermore, I have commandment from his Majesty to move you in
his Name, to set down some certain Reglement in matters of Religion
throughout your Provinces, that this licentious freedom of disputation, may by
that means be restrained, which breeds nothing but Factions, and part-taking;
and that you would absolutely take away the liberty of Prophesying, which
Vorstius does so much recommend unto you in the dedicatorie Epistle of his
Anti-Bellarmine, the Book whereof his Patrons do boast so much.

To conclude, his Majesty does exhort you, seeing you have heretofore taken
Arms for the liberty of your consciences, and have so much endured in a
violent and bloody war, the space of forty years, for the profession of
the Gospel, that now having gotten the upper hand of your miseries, you would
not suffer the followers of Arminius, to make your actions an example for them
to proclaim throughout the world, that wicked doctrine of the Apostasy of the
Saints.

To be short, the account which his Majesty does make of your amity
appears sufficiently by the Treaties which he has made with your Lordships,
by the succors which your Provinces have received from his crowns, by the
deluge of blood, which his subjects have spent in your wars. Religion is the
only sowder of this Amity: For his Majesty being, by the Grace of GOD,
Defender of the Faith, (by which Title he does more value himself, then by
the Title of King of Great Britain) does hold himself obliged to defend all
those, who profess the same Faith and Religion with him. But if once your
zeal begin to grow cold therein, his Majesty will then straightwayes
imagine, that your friendship toward him and his subjects will likewise freeze
by little and little. Thus much I had in charge to add unto that which his
Majesty in his own letters has written unto you. You may be pleased to
consider of it, as the importance of the cause does require, and to resolve
thereupon, that which your wisdoms shall think fittest for the honor and
service of your Country.

But our Ambassador having, after a delay for the space of diverse weeks,
received this cold and ambiguous answer unto our Letter and Proposition, that
is to say, That, The Lords States General having seriously deliberated upon
the Proposition which was made unto them by our Ambassador the fifth of
November, as also upon our Letters of the sixth of October delivered unto them
at the same time, did very humbly give us thanks for the continuance of our
Royal affection toward the welfare of their Countries, and the preservation of
the true reformed Christian Religion therein; And that the said States
General, as also the States of Holland and Westfrizeland in their several
assemblies respectively, having entered into consultation (with all due
reverence and regard unto us) concerning those Articles wherewith Doctor
Conradus Vorstius was charged, the Curators of the University of Leyden did
thereupon take occasion to make an order prouisionall, that the said Vorstius
should not be admitted to the exercise of his place, which was accordingly
performed; So as upon the matter, he was then in the City of Leyden, but as
an inhabitant or Citizen. And that in case the said Vorstius should not be
able to clear himself from those accusations which were laid to his charge,
before, or in the next Assembly of the States of Holland and Westfrizeland (
which was to be holden in February following) the Lords States General did
then assure themselves, that the States of Holland and Westfrizeland would
decide the matter with good contentment. And therefore forasmuch as at that
time there could be no more done in the cause, without great inconvenience and
distaste to the principal Towns of the said Provinces, our Ambassador was
required to recommend thus much in the best manner he could unto us, and with
the most advantage to the service of their Country.

Upon the coldness therefore of this Answer, (which he feared would give us
no satisfaction) he thought it was now high time to consider what the last
remedy might be, whereof use was to be made for the advancement of this
business: and perceiving that he had already performed all the rest of our
commandments, excepting only to Protest in case of refusal, and esteeming
such a cold answer, accompanied with so many delays, to be no less in effect
then an absolute refusal, he thereupon resolved to make this Protestation in
their public assembly, which hereafter follows.

MY Lords; The Historiographers, who have diligently looked into the
Antiquities of France, do observe, that the Advocates there in times past,
were accustomed to begin their pleadings with some Latin Sentence taken out of
the holy Scriptures: I shall at this time follow their example, and my Sentence
shall be this: Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, argue eum inter te and ipsum
solum; si audiuerit te, lucratus es fratrem tuum; si non audiuerit te,
adhibevnum atque alterum, vt in ore duorum vel trium stet omne verbum: si non
audiuerit eos, dic Ecclesiae. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and
tell him his fault between him and thee alone; if he hear thee, thou have
won thy brother; but if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two,
that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be confirmed: and
if he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the Church.

There is not any one of you (as I suppose) in this Assembly, that will not
acknowledge the brotherly love wherewith the King my Master has always
affected the good of your Provinces, and the fatherly care which he has ever
had to procure the establishment of your State. In which respect, his Majesty
having understood, that my Lords the States of Holland were determined to call
unto the place of Divinity Professor in the Vniuer sitie of Leyden, one
Doctor Conradus Vorstius, a person attainted by many witnesses, iuris and
facti, of a number of Heresies (the shame whereof would light upon the Church
of God, and consequently upon his Majesty's person and Crowns) is therewith
exceedingly offended: And for the more timely prevention of an infinity of
evils, which necessarily would thereupon ensue, did give me in charge by
express Letters to exhort you (which I did the 21. of September last) to wash
your hands from that man, and not to fuffer him to come within your Country.
To this exhortation, your answer was, that in the carriage of this business,
all due observance and regard should be had unto his Majesty. Nevertheless so
it is, that his Majesty has received so little respect herein, as that in
stead of debarring Vorstius from coming into the Country (which even by the
laws of friendship his Majesty might have required) the proceedings have
been clean contrary; for he is suffered to come unto Leyden, has been
received there with all honor, has there taken up his habitation, where he is
treated and lodged in the quality of a public Professor. His Majesty then
perceiving, that his first motion had so little prevailed, thought good to
write himself a Letter unto you, to the same purpose, full of zeal and
affection, persuading you by many reasons there set down at length, not to
stain your own honor, and the honor of the reformed Churches, by calling
unto you that wretched and wicked Atheist. These Letters were presented in this
Assembly the fifth of November, a great number of the Deputies of the Towns of
Holland being then present; At which time (as I was commanded by his Majesty)
I used some speech my self to the same effect. Some six weeks after, I
received an Answer to my Proposition but an Answer confused, ambiguous and
wholly impertinent, by which I have reason to conceive, that there is no
meaning at all to send Vorstius away, who is at this present in Leyden,
received and acknowledged, respected and treated as public Professor,
whether it be to grace that University in stead of the deceased Joseph
Scaliger, I cannot tell, or whether it be to give him means to do more
mischief in secret, which perhaps for shame he durst not in public: For
these reasons, according unto that charge, which I have received from the King
my Master, I do in his name, and on his behalf Protest in this Assembly,
against the wrong, injury, and scandal done unto the reformed Religion by the
receiving and reteining of Conradus Vorstius in the University of Leyden, and
against the violence offered unto that Alliance which is betwixt his Majesty
and your Provinces; the which being founded upon the preservation and
maintenance of the reformed Religion, you have not let (so much as in you
lies) absolutely to violate in the proceeding of this cause. Of which enormous
indignities committed against the Church of GOD and against his Majesty's
person, in preferring the presence of Vorstius before his Amity and Alliance,
the King my Master holds himself bound to be sensible, and if reparation
thereof be not made, and that speedily, (which cannot be by any other means
then by sending Vorstius away) his Majesty will make it appear unto the world
by some such Declaration, as he will cause to be printed and published how much
he detests the Atheismes and Heresies of Vorstius, and all those that
maintain, favor and cherish them. This is my charge, which if I had failed to
perform, I had failed in my duty, both toward the Service of GOD, which is
now in question, as also toward the honor of the King my Master, who will
always be ready to maintain the purity of the reformed Religion, though it
were with the profusion of his own blood, the blood of his children, and
subjects.

This Protestation being made, the States after some deliberation, framed us an
answer in these terms: That howsoever His Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN had not
yet received that contentment which He might expect in this business of
Vorstius; nevertheless, they did not doubt but that at the Assembly of the
States of Holland in February next, His Majesty should receive entire
satisfaction. Which answer gave some life to our hope, that at the said
assembly of the States, to be holden the fifteenth day of the next month of
February, GOD will vouchsafe so to open the eyes of those of Holland, as that
they may be able to discern, what a Cockatrice egg they hatch within their
bosom, and that (seeing the smooth speeches of Vorstius do but verify the
old Proverb, Latet anguis in herba, There lurkes a snake in the grass,) they
will at that assembly resolve to purge their Territories from the poison of his
Heresy. We mention Holland, because the other Provinces, namely Frizeland and
Zeland, and some part of Holland likewise, are already so distasted with his
Heresies, as of themselves they have desired Holland to banish him out of the
Country.

And certainly we are no less sorry, then amazed, that the Curators of
Leyden, (as appears by a long letter which they have written to the States
Ambassador resident with us) can have their understanding so stupefied, as to
have made choice of the person of Vorstius for a man well qualified, to appease
the Schisms and troubles of their Church and University, and as an apt
instrument of peace. For to show their blindness in this, they need no other
answer, then, Exitus acta probat, The issue tries the action; Seeing to our
great grief it cannot be denied, but that there has been more distraction of
spirits, and a greater division in their State since the coming of Vorstius,
then was for many years before witness so many Books and Accusations written
against him, and his answers thereunto; witness also the protestation of a
great number of Professors of Leyden against him, and many of the principal
members, as well Provinces as Towns of the United body of that State, who have
accused him as before we have said. So as if for that purpose only, they
brought him unto their University, they must needs acknowledge it has had a
very unhappy success.

Having now finished the discourse of our whole proceeding in this cause, from
the beginning until this present, It remains that we set down the reasons
which persuaded us to engage our selves in aliena republica in a business of
this nature. But we have done that already, although but summarily, and by the
way: For in that place where we make mention of the books of Vorstius which
were brought into our Kingdom, we yield three Reasons, which moved us to
take this cause to heart: First, the zeal of Gods glory, to whom we are so
much bound: Secondly, charity toward our next neighbors and Allies: and
Thirdly, the just reason we had to fear the like infection within our own
Dominions.

As concerning the Glory of God; If the subject of Vorstius his Heresies had
not been grounded upon Questions of a higher quality then touching the number
and nature of the Sacraments, the points of Justification, of Merits, of
Purgatory, of the visible head of the Church, or any such matters, as are in
controversy at this day betwixt the Papists and us; Nay more, If he had
meddled only with the nature and works of GOD ad extra, (as the Schoolmen
speak,) If (we say) he had soared no higher pitch (although we should have
been very sorry to see such Heresies begin to take root amongst our Allies and
ancient confederates;) Nevertheless, we do freely profess, that in that
case we should never have troubled our selves with the business in such
fashion, and with that feruencie as hitherto we have done. But this Vorstius
mounting aloft like an Anti-S. John with the wings of the Eagle, up to the
Heavens, and to the Throne of GOD, disputing of his Sacred and ineffable
Essence, Quae tremenda and admiranda est, sed non scrutanda, Which is to be
trembled at, and admired, but not to be searched into; confounding infinity,
(one of the proper attributes of GOD,) and immensitie, (sometime applied to
creatures,) the essence and substance, with the hypostasis, disputing of a
first and second creation, immediate and mediate, making GOD to be quale and
quantum, changing eternity, into euiternitie, teaching eternity to consist of
a number of aages, and in the end as a sworn enemy not only to Divinity,
but even to all Philosophy, both humane and natural, denying God to be Actus
purus, and void of qualities, but having in some sort (with horror be it
spoken) aliquid diuersitatis aut multiplicitatis in se ipso, etiam principium
cuiusdam mut abilitatis; That is to say, Some kind of diversity or
multiplicitie in himself, yea even a beginning of a certain mutabilitie: Let
the world then judge whether we had not occasion hereupon, to be moved, not
only as one that makes profession of thereformed Religion, but as a Christian
at large; yea, even as a Theist, or a man that acknowledges a GOD, or as a
Platonique Philosopher at the least.

Secondly, for the Charity which we owe to our neighbors and Allies; the
Charity of every Christian ought to extend to all men, but especially toward
them that be of the Household of says. The States then being not only our
confederates, but the principal bond of our conjunction being our uniformity
in the true Religion, we had reason to admonish them, not to permit such
dangerous Heresies to spring, and take root amongst them, which being once
suffered, could produce no other effects, then the danger of their souls, a
rent betwixt them and all other Christian Churches, and at the last a rupture
and division in their Temporal State, which (next under God) can be maintained
by nothing but Unity. To which resolution we were the rather induced by the
example of diverse other Provinces under the dominion of the said States, who
did accuse Vorstius, and persuaded Holland to send him away out of their
country, as before we have declared.

It is true, that if Vorstius had been a native of Holland, as John of Leyden
was, it had been sufficient for us to have given them a general warning of
the danger, and then to have referred it unto themselves, to take such course
therein, as to them should seem convenient: But this Vorstius being a
stranger, and sent for out of another Country to instruct their youth, he can
challenge no such privilege by reason of his birth, but that the States may
lawfully discharge him, whenever they please. And for his profession, it is
(without doubt) less dangerous, to suffer a thousand Lay Heretics to live in
a Common wealth (for that is but matter of policy, so long as they offend not
in their speech, and seduce not others,) then to have so much as one Doctor
that may poison the youth: For, Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem
Testa diu; The vessel will tastea long time after of that liquor wherewith it
is first seasoned; And what shall become of the little brooks, if their
Fountain be corrupted?

And from hence is derived our third reason which persuaded us to meddle in
this business. For if generally the youth of those Countries our nearest
neighbors should happen to be infected, in what danger then were we?
especially seeing so many of the younger sort of our Subjects do repair for
learning sake to the University of Leyden: an University of long time famous,
but so much the more renowned, for that, within our remembrance, it has been
adorned with those two excellent personages Scaliger and Iunius. It is
furthermore to be noted, that the spiritual infection of Heresy, is so much
more dangerous, then the bodily infection of the plague, by how much the soul
is more noble then the body, which caused the Apostle S. John, when, entering
into a Bath, he met there by chance Cerinthus the Heretic, to turn back
again upon the sudden for fear of infection. Now if that great Apostle the
beloved of Christ did so much fear the infection of Heresy, as himself has
given us a warning in one of his Epistles, Ne dicas illi, Aue; Bid him not God
speed: have not we then much more cause to fear the corruption of the youth of
our own Kingdoms?

But we very well know, that some will say Vorstius is not rightly understood;
that some consequences are violently wrested out of his words, contrary to the
intention of the Author; that those things which he propounds scholastically by
way of question, should not be taken for his own resolution; and admit
pearaduenture he may have spoken in some phrases minus caute, not warily
enough, yet that is but Logomachie, contention about words, and ought not to
be imputed unto him for Heresy; and besies that, in his last works he has
sufficiently purged himself from all calumnies, and renounced all manner of
Heresies.

To the first Objection we answer, that we never accused him by consequences,
but that we find his own words and sentences full of Heresies.

To the second, concerning his questions or disquisitions (as he terms them)
we say, that in doubtful matters, and where a man may resolve either one way
or other, without danger of making shipwreck of Faith, it is not only
tolerable, but very commendable to propound questions or arguments, at
leastwise in Schools: But to devise new questions upon the principal Articles
of our Faith, to enter not only into the secret Cabinet of GOD, but to intrude
our selves into his Essence, to pry into his most inward parts, and like the
Physicians of Pantagruel, to visit with torch-light all the most hidden places
in the Essence of GOD, we may boldy pronounce, Omnia haec ad destructionem,
plane nihil ad aedificationem; All these things tend to destruction, and
nothing surely to edification. S. Augustine speaks against the curiosity of
those people, who would needs know what GOD did before he made the Fabrique of
the world. The Jews during their integrity, did bear another manner of
reverence to the Divinity, who thought themselves dead, if once they should
see GOD. And their great Lawgiver Moses could obtain no more
(notwithstanding his humble and instant request) then to see the hinder parts
of GOD. So as to call into question, or to make doubts of these high points of
the Essence of GOD, of the Trinity, of the bypostaticall Union in the person
of CHRIST, or to speak of them in other terms then the Church of GOD has
uniformly established, and in all aages successively approved, as it is
contained in all the Orthodox Creeds, and declared in the four first Councels,
is by no means lawful: And to make any question or disquisition upon these
high mysteries, is as much in effect, as to make a contrary conclusion; and
such a disquisition deserves the punishment of the Inquision. Non est bonum
ludere cum Sanctis, multo minus ergo cum Deo; It is not good to jest with
Saints, much less therefore with GOD: and one of the first verses which our
little children are taught, is this: Mitte arcana Dei, coelumque inquirere quid
sit; Let the secrets of God alone, and be not too curious to enquire into
heaven. For what difference is there I pray you, to say, It may be that such a
Lady is a whore; or that there be probable arguments to persuade us that she is
such a one; or to say absolutely that she is a whore? And (we imagine)
Vorstius would not hold him for his friend, that should say it were a matter
very disputable whether Vorstius were a damnable Heretic, and should go
quick to Hell, yea or no: not that he did believe him to be such a one, but
that there were many arguments probable enough to persuade a man to take him
for no less. The nature of man, through the transgression of our first parents
has lost free will, and reteineth not now any shadow thereof, saving an
inclination to evil, those only excepted whom God of his mere grace has
sanctified and purged from this original Leprosy; Insomuch as it is a very
perilous thing to set abroach these new and dangerous questions, although they
be accompanied with good answers: For the greatest part of the world,
following the footsteps of our first Parents, are naturally inclined to choose
the evil, and to leave that which is good, and therefore the Divine Poet Du
Bartas, speaking of the destruction of Sodom, and loath to name the sin for
which it was destroyed, says thus; De peur qu' en offencant des saints
l'oreille tender,
Ie ne les semble plus enseigner, que reprendre.
For fear that in offending of good peoples tender ear,
I rather seem to teach them, then to wish them to forbear.
And there is a report (I know not how true it is) that Bellarmines books of
Controversies, are not very well received in Italy, because his objections are
too strong, and his answers too weak. In which quality, as also in one
other, whereof we will speak anon, Vorstius has a certain tincture of
Bellarmine.

To the third objection, where it is alleged, that perhaps he has not been
wary enough in some of his phrases of speech, and that it is but contention
for words. To that we answer, as before we have said, That it is in no sort
lawful to speak of those great Mysteries of the Essence of God, of the
Trinity, of the Hypostaticall union of natures in the Person of Christ, or any
such high points, unless we use the same phrases and manner of speech, which
the Church of GOD has always used in speaking of the said Mysteries. They
that will talk of Chanaan, must use the language of Chanaan. And the sons of
Aaron were severely punished, for presuming to bring strange fire unto the
Altar. By the difference of less then one letter, between Siboleth and
Shiboleth, the ten Tribes of Israel could discern their friends from their
foes, and that by the pronuntiation only: And the like difference of one
little letter betwixt homoousion, and homoiousion, served to make a distinction
betwixt the enemies of Christ in the East Church, and the Church Orthodoxall.

As concerning the fourth and last excuse; namely, that Vorstius has in his
last Books sufficiently purged himself from these calumnies, and renounced
all Heresies: Our answer is, That we would very heartily request the States in
their next Assembly, seriously and advisedly to consider and observe the style
which he uses in his writings and excuses, and then shall they be able to
judge what kind of spirit it is that guides his pen.

For, to begin with the Preface of his Book, entitled his Christian and
modest Answer, he makes there so light reckoning of his questions
beforementioned, as if it were but about the tale of Tobies dog. For in the
second page of his said Preface, these be his words: Omnis homo est mendax,
immo vanitate ipsa vanior, solus vero Deus est verax, etc. Quod cum in omnibus
magni momenti negotijs, tum maxim in sanctissima fidei causa humiliter nobis
semper agnoscendum est: ne videlicet quidquam quod prima front nobis nouum,
immo falsum, and absurdum videatur, facile damnemus, nec contra quicquid vulgo
receptum est, (in rebus praesertim abstrusis ac perplexis, nec tamen ad salutem
scitu necessarijs) and quidem cum opinione praecisae necessitatis, statim
approbemus. In his talibus, si quis Regem, aut Principem, alioqui pientissimum,
immo Reges, and Principes eiusmodi complures, (addo and Episcopos, seu Doctores
Ecclesiae, non dissimiles) aliquantulum errare dixerit, nihil opinor aduersus
Regiam Maiestatem, nihil aduersus Principum, aut Episcoporum dignitatem reuera
peccauerit, modo semper rations suorum dictorum modeste reddere paratus sit.
That is to say, Every man is a liar, yea, more vain then vanity it self, God
only is true, etc. Which seeing we ought ever humbly to acknowledge in all
great and weighty causes, most of all ought we to confess it in the most holy
cause of our Faith: insomuch as we should not therefore easily condemn every
thing which at the first seems strange, yea false and absurd unto our ears,
nor on the contrary side, ought we foorth-with to approve, and that with an
opinion of precise necessity, whatsoever is commonly received, especially in
matters abstruse and intricate, whereof the knowledge is not necessary to
salvation. In such points as these, if any man shall say, that such a King, or
Prince, howsoever otherwise most godly and religious, yea that many such Kings,
and Princes (nay, I will not except Bishops, or the like Doctors of the Church)
have in some sort erred, I am of opinion, he shall not give any just cause of
offense, either to the Majesty of Kings, or to the dignity of Princes and
Bishops, so as he be always ready modestly to yield a reason for that which
he shall affirm. In which words, he maintains two Principles: First, that
every man is a liar, as well in matter of Faith, as in any thing else; and next,
that we must not ever esteem the vulgar opinion, and that which is generally
received in matter of Faith to be the trewest, nor always condemn every
opinion for absurd, which at the first seems unto us uncouth, and new. Now we
pray you observe, that this man is not accused of small scapes, and therefore
being not charged with lesser peccadillos, then those which before we have
mentioned, it necessarily follows, that in his excuse he must understand the
same points whereof he is accused. And we hope by the mercy of GOD, that no
Christian (we speak in this particular, as well for the Papists, as for our
selves) shall ever be found to err in any of those maine points: at the least
we will answer, (by the grace of God,) for one of those Kings whom he names
in general. And as for his new opinions, which he would so gladly vent abroad,
the ancient Faith needs not be changed like an old garment, either in
substance, or fashion.

Furthermore, in the third page of his Preface, he uses these words, Sed
neque plures vno aliquo semper hic ditiores sunt. Nemo igitur vnus sibi arroget
omnia. Nec numero plures vni alicui, singular quidquam inuideant. Neither are
many men always richer [in knowledge] then some one man. Let not therefore any
one man arrogate all things to himself. Nor let the greater multitude envy a
particular man, for having some singularity more then his fellows. The true
principle and foundation of the error of the Anabaptists, taking away by this
means, all manner of government from the Church: For having first overthrown
the Monarchical power of the Pope, he sweepes away next all manner of power
both Aristocraticall and Democraticall from the Church, clean contrary to the
Apostles institution, which ordeineth, that the spirits of the Prophets should
be subject to the Prophets. For if one particular man may take upon him such a
singularity as this, how shall he be subject to General, National, and
Synodicall Councels? For straight will he say unto them; Sirs, ye have no
authority to judge me, for I have a singular gift above you all. And in the
fifth Page, these are his words: Plamssime enim persuasus sum, Serenissimo Regi
nunquam in animo fuisse, nunquam in animo fore, alienae conscientiae (quod ne
Apostoli quidem sibi vnquam arrogarunt) five direct, five indirecte, sieve per
seipsum, sieve per alios vllatenus dominari, vel fidem nostram vlli humanae
authoritati alligare velle. For I am absolutely persuaded, that it was never
his Majesty's meaning, nor ever will be, either directly, or indirectly, by
himself, or by others, in any sort to overrule another man's conscience,
(which even the Apostles never challenged to themselves) nor did, or will his
Majesty ever seek to tie our Faith to any humane authority. Whereby he is
plainly discovered, to be resolved not to be subject in any sort to the
judgment of the Church, in those matters whereof he is accused. For he
knows too well, that the ancient Church has established upon necessary
consequences drawn from the holy Scripture, both a form of belief, and a
form of speech concerning the holy Mysteries aforesaid: And this is the reason
why he will not in these points submit himself to the judgment of any
mortal man; But upon this occasion in the seventh page of his Preface,
maintains his Christian liberty in this manner: Qui quidem humanas decisiones
a Diuinis mysterijs scrupulose segregem; and praesertim in audaces Scholarum
hypotheses, pro Christiana liberate interdum diligentius inquiram; I, who
curiously make a separation betwixt the judgments of men and the Divine
mysteries, and especially according to Christian liberty, do sometimes more
narrowly look into the bold supositions of the Schoolmen. As if the School
Divines had been too ventrous, to explain and to defend the Articles
aforesaid, already so established by the Church: But we may trewly wish in that
point, as Bellarmine did touching Calvin: Vtinam semper sic errassent
Scholastici; Would God the Scholemen had always so erred: For in the maine
grounds of Christian Religion, they are worthy of all commendation. Read
Aquinas against the Gentiles. But in matters of controversy, where they were
to flatter the Pope in his resolutions, and to auow the new ordinances and
traditions of their Church, there they yielded (alas) unto the iniquity of the
time, and the mystery of iniquity, which was even then in working, got
likewise the upper hand over them. And as for this Christian liberty, which he
does urge so much, certainly he does it with no other intention, but only
under this fair pretext, to have the better means, and with more safety to
abuse the world: For Christian liberty is never meant in the holy Scripture,
but only in matters indifferent, or when it is taken for our deliverance from
the thraldom of the Law, or from the burden of humane traditions, and in that
sense S. Paul speaks in his Epistle to the Colossians, Quare
oneraminiritibus? Why are ye burdened with traditions? But to abuse Christian
liberty, in presuming to propound a new doctrine unto the world, in point of
the highest and holiest mysteries of GOD, is a most audacious rashness, and an
impudent arrogancy: Concerning which S. Paul says, Though an Angel from
heaven, preach unto you otherwise then that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. And Saint John likewise commands us, that we should
not so much as say, God speed to that man, which shall bring us any other
doctrine, as we have observed before.

Now to show that he is a forger of new opinions, by which he would feign make
himself singular, see but his words immediately preceding those which a
little before we mentioned, where he boasts, and is wonderfully in love
with a new name which he has taken upon himself, that is to say, Purus putus
Euangelicus, A mainly pure Gospeller; although indeed the word pure was never
yet taken in a good part. For amongst the ancient Heretics, there was a Sect
that called themselves Catharoi, and there was also another Sect among the
Anabaptists, that were called Puritanes, from whence the Precisians of our
Kingdoms, who out of self-will and fancy refuse to conform themselves to
the Orders of our Church, have borrowed their name. And for the word Gospeller,
although it has been assumed in diverse places by some of our Religion, yet
has it this ill fortune, that it is more usually received in those parts of
Hungary and Boheme, where there are such infinite diversities of Sects
(agreeing in nothing but in their Union against the Pope) then in any other
place. The holy Scripture it self in the Acts of the Apostles, mentions the
name of Christians: and the ancient Primitive Church did attribute unto the
faithful, the names of Catholic and Orthodox. So as for such a fellow as
Vorstius, to affect new Titles for his Religion, it has surely no good relish:
his intention without doubt being no other, then by this means to make a
distinction, and in time a rupture betwixt himself, and the Orthodox
professors of our Religion. And for proof that he is steadfastly resolved to
persist in all these novelties, and not to retract any thing of that which he
has written, see what he says in the last page save one of his said Preface.
Opinor enim ipse (vt magni illius Erasmi verba hic aemuler) in libris meis
nihil reperiri, quo deterior quispiam reddi possit. For I am of opinion (to use
the words of that great Erasmus) that there is nothing to be found in my
Books, that can make any man the worse that reads them.

As for his Book which follows this Preface, it verifies the Proverb, Dignum
patella operculum, A cover fit for such a dish. For it is so full of
distinctions, and sophistical euasions, so stuffed with As it weres, in some
sorts, in my sense, and such words as these, as even in that point he has
also a tincture of Bellarmine. But God is Unity it self, and Verity is One,
and naked, and in our usual manner of speech, we call it the simple Verity,
but never was it yet called, the double verity.

We have thought good to set down here two places of his said Book, that
thereby the Reader may judge of the rest; whereof one is in the twelfth page,
in these words, Argumenta quae adferuntur a Patribus, vel a recentioribus
Theologis pro aeterna Christi generatione, aut fallacia sunt, aut friuola. The
arguments which are used both by the Fathers and by the modern Divines, for
the eternal generation of Christ, are either sophistical or frivolous. These
words (as he says) he is charged to have used, and he cannot bethink him of
any other evasion, but to add the word Quaedam, some arguments, etc. Now we
shall desire thee (good Reader) here to observe, that this man condemning some
arguments which the Fathers had gathered out of the holy Scripture, to prove
the eternal generation of Christ, as deceitful and frivolous, he will be
sure howsoever not to allege any other arguments, either out of the Fathers,
or of his own brain, which shall be stronger then those which he has
rejected. And in the same fashion he behaues himself throughout his whole
Book: for we show you this but for a scantling. In the other place, he
directly denies, that ever he affirmed in his other Book, that Fear and
Desperation were incident to God: his words are these in the eighth page, Nam
metum and desperationem ne quidem vspiam nominaui. For I did never so much as
name Fear and Desperation, in any place. And yet nevertheless, let any man
look upon his other Book, Tract. Theol. de Deo.
page 114. and page 450. and he shall find two several Discourses of a good
length, concerning these two points. Herein having no other shift, he betakes
himself to an absolute and flat Negative. But to the intent, that the Reader
may judge of his manner of speaking through his whole last Book entitled, A
Christian and modest Answer, and how he plays the Sophister therein; we have
set down diverse of his phrases (in manner of a Table) which we have caused to
be extracted out of his said Book.

1. Estne Deus essentialiter immensus, and vbique presens?

Page 16. lin. 16.
NVsquam diserte scriptum est, substantiam Dei simpliciter, seu quouis modo,
immensam and infinitam esse. Page 16. lin. 23.
Et non pauca in S. Literis occurrunt, quae contrarium, non dico clare
asserunt, sed tamen asserere videntur. Interim aliud est videri, aliud reuera
esse. Respondeo tamen ex sensu meo.

Page 22. lin. 23.
Quoad Thesin, seurem ipsam est.

Tametsi non quoad Page 4. l. 19.
specialem modum, seu Page 22. l. 26.
hypothesin scholasticam.

Page 23. l. 1.
Quae tamen falsa non est, verum aliquatenus hactenus infirmius asserta, and
sic aliquatenus dubia.

Is God essentially immense, and every where present?

It is in no place clearly set down, that the substance of God is simply, and
every way immense, and infinite. And there be many places in the holy
Scripture, which (I do not say, clearly affirm) yet seem to affirm the
contrary. In the mean time, it is one thing to seem, and another thing to be
indeed. Yet in mine own sense I answer thus:

Simply, and positiuely it is.

Howsoever, not in that special manner and sort as the Scholemen hold.

Which opinion, nevertheless, I do not say is false, but I say it has
hitherto been somewhat weakly proved, and therefore in some sort doubtful.

2. Estne in Deo quantitas?

Est, sed Page 2. l. 28.
non physica.

Verum Page 23. l. 12.
hyperphysica.

Attamen Page 2. l. 29.
nobis plane imperceptibilis, and mere spiritualis.

Is there Quantity in God?

There is, but not a natural Quantity:

But a supernatural.

Nevertheless, not possible to be perceived by us, but merely spiritual.

3. Estne Deus infinitus?

Page 3. l. 16.
Omnia Entia certam and definitam essentiam habent, id quod Deo ipsi
aliquatenus aptare licet. Page 3. l. 18.
Deum quolibet sensu recte infinitum dici non posse, quum infinitudo illa quae
definitioni certae oponitur in Deum reuera non cadat.

Is God infinite?

Every thing that has a being has a certain and definite Essence, which may
be applied in some kind unto God. That God cannot rightly in every sense be
said to be infinite, seeing that infiniteness which is opposite to certain
definitenesse, cannot indeed be attributed unto God.

4. Estne Deus in aliquo loco?

Est, sed non Page 3. l. 22, 23.
physico;

Verum in spatio abstractissime sumpto, quod Deus suo diuino modo adimplet.

Is God in a place?

He is, but not in a natural place;

But in spatio abstractissime sumpto, which God after his Divine manner does
fill.

5. Estne Deus corporeus?

Page 3. l. 34.
Proprie loquendo minime corporeus est.

Page 15. l. 6.
Sed tamen nihil absurdi erit, si Deo (improprie loquendo) corpus ascribamus,
Page 4. l. 3.
nempe quatenus vocabulum Corporis improprie and latissime pro vera substantia
Page 15. l. 14.
non prorsus absurd sumitur, Page 15. l. 10. and 3.
iuxta latam significationem, quae figurata, and impropria, seu mauis
catachrestica est.

Has God a body?

If we will speak properly, he has none.

Yet is it no absurdity, speaking improperly, to ascribe a body unto God, that
is to say, as the word Body is taken improperly and generally, (and yet not
very absurdly) for a true substance, in a large signification which is
figurative, and improper, or (if you will) abusiue.

6. Estne Deus compositus e materia and forma?

Page 5. l. 3.
Nullo modo, proprie loquendo. Est tamen in sensu quodam improprio, vel, si
mauis, per (...) quandam, per quam vocabulum Corporis, item quasi materiae and
formae, seu quasi compositionis ex genere and differentia, aliquando eidem
attribui posse non immerito alicui videatur.

Is God compounded of matter and form?

By no means, speaking properly: Although it be true in a certain improper
sense, or (if you please) by a certain Catachresis, by the which the word
Body, and as it were materia and forma, or as it were a Composition ex genere
and differentia, may sometimes seem to some (and not without cause) to be
fitly attributed to God.

7. Estne Deus immutabilis, vt essentia, sic voluntate?

Non est Page 15. l. 15.
vt essentia, sic voluntate; Id est, non est aequaliter.

Is God unchangeable in his Will, as he is in his Essence?

He is not unchangeable in his will, as he is in his Essence. That is, not
alike unchangeable in the one, as he is in the other.

8. Estne Deus subiectus accidentibus?

Page 7. l. 8.
Non vllis veris.

Page 7. l. 9.
Tametsi per liberam voluntatem quaedam accidentia latissime sic dicta, tum ad
se, tum in se recipit Deus.

Is God subject to accidents?

Not to any true accidents.

Although God does by his Free will take to himself, and into himself,
certain accidents, so called in the largest sense.

9. An Deus per discursum conijcit de futuris?

Interdum, Page 7. l. 24.
aliquatenus, Page 8. l. 9.
discursum quendam instituit, and quasi de incertis conijcit, Page 7. l. 22.
sed improprie and metaphorice, citraque omnem imperfectionem.

4 Page 8. l. 2.
Conijcit autem non coniectura qualis hominum esse solet, sed plane diuina.

Does God conjecture of things to come by discourse?

Sometimes in some sort, he frames to himself a certain discourse, and does
(as it were) conjecture of things uncertain, but improperly and
metaphorically, and without all imperfection.

And he does conjecture not in such sort as men do, but after a merely
divine manner.

10. Affectus amoris, odij, etc. Deone proprie attribuuntur?

Proprie sed Page 8. l. 16.
vt pro veritate potius, quam pro vsitata nobisque nota proprietate accipiendum
sit.

Page 9. l. 1.
Nulli affectus cum humana infirmitate coniuncti proprie Deo attribuuntur; vere
tamen, and suo modo proprie, hoc est, pro suae, non pro naturae nostrae
proprietate.

The affections of love, hatred, etc. be they properly attributed unto God or
not?

Yes, but so as ye take it rather for a verity, then for that property which
is vulgarly understood and known unto us.

No affections accompanied with humane infirmity are properly attributed unto
God: yet trewly, and in his own kind properly, that is to say, as they are
proper to his nature, and not to ours.

11. Pater, habetne peculiarem quandam, seu quasi restrictam essentiam?

Page 21. l. 13.
Vox essentiae, perinde vt Entis, amplissimam significationem habet, and sic
nihil omnino vetat vtramque non minus ad personas diuinas, quam ad ipsam
Deitatis naturam in sano sensu referri.

Has the Father a certain peculiar, or (as it were) limited Essence?

The word Essence, as well as Ens, has a very large signification, and we may
apply both of them safely, in a good sense, as well to the Divine persons, as
to the nature of the Deity it self.

12. Suntne Patrum argumenta friuola, pro aeterna Christi generatione?

Siquidem Page 14. l. 3.
vnica vox [quaedam] ab initio inseratur, argumenta a Patribus hactenus aptata,
aut fallacia, aut friuola sunt.

Be those arguments which the Fathers have used to prove the Eternal
generation of Christ, frivolous or no?

If this one word [ quaedam, some,] were added to the beginning of that
position, it were then true, that the arguments which the Fathers have at any
time applied to prove the Eternal generation of Christ, are either
deceitful, or frivolous.

13 Estne in Deo visio praesentium, and praeteritorum magis certa, quam
futurorum praeuisio?

Page 18. l. 19, 20.
Nota modestiam meam in verbo [videntur,] opinionem duntaxat probabilem hic
afferri, non autem dogmaticam assertionem.

Futura Page 18. l. 29.
contingentia (comparatiue loquendo) etiam coram Deo dici possunt minus certa
quam praeterita, and praesentia.

Whether does God see things past and present, more certainly then things to
come?

Note here my modesty in this word [videntur] for in this place I deliver
only a probable opinion, and not a dogmaticall assertion.

Things future contingent (speaking comparatively) may be said to be less
certain, even unto God, then things past, and present.

By this may the Reader manifestly discern, that there is nothing which a man,
speaking in this fashion shall not be able to maintain, and by this means
easily prove quidlibet ex quolibet. And certainly his manner of excuses and
euasions are framed just after the mould of the ancient Heretics, and namely
of Arrius, and Paulus Samosatenus, when they saw themselves pinched with the
Arguments of the Orthodoxe Church, and had no power to resist. The same also
does more plainly appear by an other little book which he has published,
entitled, Theological positions, which book he has made of purpose to
blind the world withal; because they are indeed but the same Theses or
Positions, upon which he has disputed in his first wicked book, that bears
the title Of God and his Attributes. For in the Theses themselves there is but
little harm, but in his disputations thereupon are couched all the horrible
Heresies: And therefore in this book has he published only his Theses which
are justifiable; and left out his disputations upon the Theses, wherein all the
poison is contained. It is moreover somewhat suspicious in such a tainted
person as he is, that in an Appendix which he has placed at the end of his
Theses, he takes occasion to name a number of Heretics who are adversaries
to the doctrine of his Theses, and those especially who have erred concerning
the Divinity, Humanity, Person, or Office of CHRIST, as the Ebionites,
Cerinthians, Arrians, Praxians, Sabellians, Marcionites, Manichees, Docites,
Apollinarists, Mennonites, Swenkfeldians, Nestorians, Monothelites, Eutychians,
Monophysites, Jews, Millenaries, Papists. Amongst which rabble he does not
once make mention of Paulus Samosatenus, nor of Photinius, who succeeded him as
well in his Bishopric as in his error: Yet nevertheless it is reported,
that Vorstius in his heart is not very far from their erroneous opinion.

Now in the Preface of this little book he has taken upon him very
succinctly to make answer to five Articles which he confesses were laid to
his charge, by which answer, in our opinion, he discouers himself very
plainly.

The first point is, That he was once accused (as himself says) of the
Samosatenian Heresy, because he had sometime both written and received letters
from diverse of that Sect; which he confesses he did indeed in his youth, to
this end, that by that means he might the more easily come by some of their
books, but that afterward he did forbear all correspondencie with them.
First of all then, we would be glad to know why he forgot the Heresy of
Samosatenus in his Appendix, where he names so many others, and yet confesses
in the Preface of his said book, that he himself was accused of that error.
Secondly, to what end had he in his youth so great traffic with these
Heretics? was it to enable him the better to confute them? We hear him not
say so much, as indeed it was never his end. Surely this fellow would be an
excellent cleanser of a Pesthouse, for he fears no infection: Picem
contrectare non timet, he dares handle any pitch: And yet for all that, the
Proverb is true, Qui ambulat in Sole, colorabitur; He that walks in the
Sunshine, shall be Sunburned. It follows then, seeing his intention was not
to arm himself against them, that it must be of necessity to make himself
worthy of their School, the which he almost confesses in the last words of
his Answer to that point, where he says thus; Non enim (quod multi solent)
alienis sensibus hic fidendum putaui, aut temere quidquam in causa Fidei
damnandum: For I do not think it fit (as many others do) to rely in these
cases upon other men's constructions, or rashly to condemn any thing which
concerns matter of Faith.

To the second Article of his Accusation, he confesses that he gave some of
his Samosatenian books unto his scholars; Surely, a goodly gift: But the
caution was pretty which he gave withal unto them when he delivered them the
books; which was that they ought to read them with judgment, not rashly
rejecting the doctrine commonly received. What an Epithet is here for our
holy Orthodoxe Faith, to term it no otherwise then the doctrine commonly
received? And as for his caution, not rashly to forsake the old doctrine, it is
no more then the Turks would give unto any Christian, that should suddenly
offer to become a Mahometist. Nay what Christian did ever solicit a Pagan, or
Heretic to be converted, but with this caution? Who Would persuade a man to
receive the holy Sacrament rashly? S. Paul commands every man to examine
himself diligently, before he come to that holy Table. But on the other side,
an Orthodoxe Christian would in this case have said to his scholars: If you
will read these wicked books, read them with horror and detestation, and
with an intent to arm your selves against such wiles and subtilties of Satan,
and withal pray unto GOD to keep you constant in the holy Catholic and
Orthodoxe Faith, that these Heresies may have no power once to move you,
trusting in his mercy, and not in your own strength.

To the third Article, he confesses that his scholars did publish books of
the Socinian Heresy; and his excuse is, that it was without his knowledge: But
howsoever, he condemns them not for having done it only this he says, That
they declared upon their oaths, they did not favor the Heresy.

To the fourth point, he confesses that about ten years since, he wrote a
book De Filiatione Christi, (for which Title only, an Author, so suspected
as he, is worthy of the faggot,) and all his excuse is, That he wrote an Epitome
upon Bellarmine. We doubt not but he did it for his recreation. Forsooth, a
pretty conceit. Yet it appears not by his words, that he detests the subject
of that Book: but says, That no man can thereby conjecture what his opinion
is of that argument, no more then they can upon his Epitome of Bellarmine,
which was likewise his work. For to condemn it, had been contrary to that
which he auowed in his other book, never to repent himself of any thing that
he has once written, as already we have observed.

As for the fifth and last point, he will neither confess, nor deny the
accusation: only he says, That a certain book entitled Dominicus Lopez,
which is (as we have heard) a very blasphemous Treatise, was suppressed by him
pacis ergo, for peace sake; but he is so far from condemning it, as that he
alleges, the book has been maintained by others, which in time shall
appear. Two things are here to be observed; First, that he suppressed it
pacis ergo, for quietness sake; Not therefore for the wickedness of the
subject, The next, that in his due time: the truth thereof shall appear. In
which last point only, we will willingly join with him, beseeching our good
GOD, for his CHRIST'S sake, that he will be pleased to discover the truth of
this man's intentions, as well for his own Glory, as to purge the scandal, and
to avoid the danger which may ensue unto Christendom, by the darnell of
Heresies which he has sown.

It is therefore to be noted, That to all these five Articles his answers are
so silly and weak, as in three of them we have found him plane confitentem
reum, plainly pleading guilty; blanching it only with some poor excuses.
And to the other two points his answers are doubtful; yet neither condemning
the act of his scholars, nor the last wicked book called Dominicus Lopez.

Having now therefore briefly laid open the subtilties, frivolous
distinctions, and excuses of the said Vorstius, we will conclude this point
with this protestation; That if he had been our own Subject, we would have bid
him Excrea, spit out: and forced him to have produced, and confessed those
wicked Heresies, that are rooted in his heart. And in case he should stand upon
his Negative, we would enjoin him to say (according to the ancient custom of
the Primitive Church in the like cases of Heretics) I renounce and from my
soul detest them: Anathema, Maranatha upon such and such Heresies; And not to
say For peace sake I caused this book to be suppressed, And these books are
to be read with great judgment and discretion. S. Hierome likes not that any
man should take it patiently, to be suspected of Heresy.

And now to make an end of this Discourse, we do very heartily desire all good
Christians in general, and My Lords the States in particular (to whom the
managing of this affair does most specially belong) to consider but two
things: First what kind of people they be that slander us, and our sincere
intention in this cause: And next, what private interest we can possibly have
(in respect of any worldly honor or advancement) herein to engage our selves
in such sort as we have done.

Concerning the first point, There are but three sorts of people, that seek to
calumniate us upon this occasion: That is to say; either such as are infected
with the same, or the like Heresies, wherewith Vorstius is tainted, and ideo
fouent consimilem causam, and therefore do maintain the like cause: or else
such as be of the Roman Religion, who in this confusion, and liberty of
prophesying would thrust in for a part; conceiving it more reasonable, that
their doctrine should be tolerated by those of our Religion, then the doctrine
of Vorstius: or else such, as for reason of State envy peradventure the good
amity and correspondencie which is betwixt us, and the United Provinces.

Touching our own interest, the whole course of our life does sufficiently
witness, that we have always been contented with that portion which GOD has
put into our hands, without seeking to invade the possessions of any other.
Besides, in two of our books, as well in our (...), as in the Preface to our
Apology, we have showed the same inclination. For in the first book, speaking
of war, we say that a King ought not to make any invasion upon another
Dominions, until Justice be first denied him. And in the other book, having
showed the usurpation of the Pope, above all the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, our conclusion is, that we will never go about to persuade them
to assault him within his Dominions, but only to resume, and preserve their
own just Privileges from his violent intrusion. So as (thanks be to GOD)
both our Theorique and Practique agree well together, to clear us from this
unjust and slanderous imputation. And as for the States in particular, it is
very unlikely that we (who have all our life time held so strict an amity with
them, as for their defense we have been contented to expose the lives of many
of our Subjects of both Nations,) would now practice against then State, and
that upon so poor a subject as Vorstius: especially, that so damnable a thing
could ever enter into our heart, as under the veil and pretext of the glory of
GOD, to plot the advancement of our own private deseignes.

The reasons which induced us to meddle in this business, we have already
declared. We leave it now to his own proper Judges to consider what a nursling
they foster in their bosom: A stranger, bred in the Socinian Heresy (as it is
said;) often times accused of Heresy by the Churches of Germany; one that
has written so wicked and scandalous books; maintaining and seriously
protesting in the preface of his Apology to the States, for the liberty of
prophesying; and twice or thrice insisting upon that liberty in the Preface of
his Modest Answer (a dangerous and pernicious liberty, or rather
licentiousness, opening a gap to all rupture, Schism, and confusion in the
Church;) yea having had some disciples that be Heretics themselves, and
others that accuse him of Heresy. And though there were no other cause then
the silly and idle shifts wherewith he seeks to defend himself in his last
books, it were enough to convince him, either to have maintained a bad cause,
and in that respect worthy of a far greater punishment then to be put by his
place of Professor; or at the least to be a person unworthy of the name of a
Professor in so famous an University, for having so weakly maintained a
cause that is just. For our part, GOD is our witness, we have no quarrel
against his person; he is a Stranger, borne far from our dominions: he is a
Germane, and it is well known, that all Germany are our friends, and the most
part of the great Princes there, be either nearly allied unto us, or our
Confederates: he does outwardly profess the same Religion which we do: he has
written against Bellarmine: and has not mentioned us, either in speech or
writing (for any thing we know) but with all the honor and respect that may
be. GOD knows, the worst that we do wish him is, that he may sincerely return
into the high beaten pathway of the Catholic and Orthodoxall Faith.

And for my Lords the States (seeing we have discharged our conscience) we
will now refer the managing of the whole Action unto their own discretions.
For we are so far from prescribing them any rule herein, as we shall be very
well contented (so as the business be well done) that there be even no mention
at all made of our intercession, in their public Acts or Records. Their manner
of proceeding, we leave absolutely to their own Wisdoms. Modo praedicetur
Christus, so as CHRIST be preached, let them use their own forms in the Name
of GOD. For we desire that GOD should so judge us at the last Day, as we affect
not in this Action any worldly glory, beseeching the Creator so to open their
eyes, to illuminate their understandings, direct their resolutions, and, above
all, to kindle their zeal, sanctify their affections, and at the last so to
bless their Actions and their proceedings in this cause, as the issue thereof
may tend to his Glory, to the comfort and solace of the Faithful, to the
honor of our Religion, to the confusion and extirpation (at the least,
profligation) of Heresies, and, in particular, to the corroboration of the
Union of the said Provinces.

A REMONSTRANCE FOR THE RIGHT OF KINGS, AND THE INDEPENDANCE OF THEIR CROWNS,
AGAINST AN ORATION OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS CARD. OF PERRON, PRONOVNCED IN THE
Chamber of the third Estate. IAN. 15. 1615.
THE PREFACE.
I Have no humor to play the Curious in a foreign Common wealth, or,
unrequested, to carry any hand in my neighbors affairs It has more
congruitie with Royal dignity, whereof God has given me the honor, to
prescribe Laws at home for my Subjects, rather then to furnish foreign
Kingdoms and people with counsels. Howbeit, my late entire affection to K.
Henry IV. of happy memory, my most honored brother, and my exceeding sorrow
for the most detestable parricide acted upon the sacred person of a King, so
complete in all heroical and Princely virtues; as also the remembrance of my
own dangers, incurred by the practice of conspiracies flowing from the same
source, has wrought me to sympathize with my friends in their grievous
occurrents: no doubt so much more dangerous, as they are less apprehended and
felt of Kings themselves, even when the danger hangs over their own heads.
Upon whom, in case the power and virtue of my aduertisements be not able
effectually to work, at least many millions of children and people yet
unborn, shall bear me witness, that in these dangers of the highest nature
and strain, J have not been defective: and that neither the subuersions of
States, nor the murders of Kings, which may unhappily betide hereafter, shall
have so free passage in the world for want of timely advertisement before. For
touching my particular, my rest is up, that one of the maynes for which God
has advanced me upon the lofty stage of the supreme Throne, is, that my words
uttered from so eminent a place for Gods honor, most shamefully traduced and
vilified in his own Deputies and Lieutenants, might with greater facility be
conceived.

Now touching France, fair was the hope which J conceived of the States
assembled in Parliament at Paris: That calling to mind the murders of their
Noble Kings, and the wars of the League which followed the Popes
fulminations, as when a great storm of hail powers down after a
Thunder-cracke, and a world of writings addressed to justify the parricides,
and the dethronings of kings, they would have joined heads, hearts, and hands
together, to hammer out some apt and wholesome remedy against so many fearful
attempts and practices. To my hope was added no little joy, when I was given to
understand the third Estate had preferred an Article or Bill, the tenor and
substance whereof was concerning the means whereby the people might be
vnwitched of this pernicious opinion; That Popes may toss the French King his
Throne like a tennis ball, and that killing of Kings is an act meritorious to
the purchase of the crown of Martyrdom. But in fine, the project was
encountered with success clean coutrary to Expectation. For this Article of
the third Estate, like a sigh of liberty breathing her last, served only so
much the more to inthrall the Crown, and to make the bondage more grievous and
sensible then before. Even as those medicines which work no ease to the
patient, do leave the disease in much worse terms: so this remedy invented
and tendered by the third Estate, did only exasperate the present malady of the
State; for so much as the operation and virtue of the wholesome remedy was
ouermatched with peccant humors, then stirred by the force of thwarting and
crossing opposition. Yea much better had it been, the matter had not been
stirred at all, then after it was once on foot and in motion, to give the
Truth leave to lie gasping and sprawling under the violence of a foreign
faction. For the opinion by which the Crowns of Kings are made subject unto
the Popes will and power, was then auowed in a most Honorable Assembly, by the
auerment of a Prelate in great authority, and of no less learning: He did not
plead the cause as a private person, but as one by representation that stood
for the whole body of the Clergy; was there applauded, and seconded with
approbation of the Nobility; no resolution taken to the contrary, or in bar
to his plea. After praises and thanks from the Pope, followed the printing of
his eloquent harangue or Oration, made in full Parliament: a set discourse,
maintaining Kings to be deposeable by the Pope, if he speak the word. The said
Oration was not only Printed with the Kings privilege, but was likewise
addressed to me by the Author and Orator himself; who presupposed the reading
thereof would forsooth drive me to say, Lord Cardinal, in this high subject
your Honor has satisfied me to the full. All this poysed in the balance of
equal judgment, why may not J trewly and freely affirm, the said Estates
assembled in Parliament, have set Royal Majesty upon a doubtful chance, or
left it resting upon uncertain terms: and that now if the doctrine there
maintained by the Clergy should bear any pawme, it may lawfully be doubted,
who is King in France? For I make no question, he is but a titular King that
reigns only at an others discretion, and whose Princely head the Pope has
power to bare of his Regal Crown. In temporal matters, how can one be
Sovereign, that may be fleeced of all his Temporalties by any superior power?
But let men at a near sight mark the pith and marrow of the Article proposed
by the third Estate, and they shall soon perceive the skillful Architects
thereof aimed only to make their King a true and real King, to be recognized
for Sovereign within his own Realm, and that killing their King might no
longer pass the muster of works acceptable to God.

But by the vehement instance and strong current of the Clergy and Nobles,
this was borne down as a pernicious Article, as a cause of Schism, as a gate
which opens to all sorts of Heresies: yea, there it was maintained tooth and
nail, that in case the doctrine of this Article might go for current
doctrine, it must follow, that for many aages past in sequence, the Church has
been the kingdom of Antichrist, and the synagogue of Satan. The Pope upon so
good issue of the cause, had reason, J trow, to address his Letters of triumph
unto the Nobility and Clergy, who had so far aprrooued themselves faithful
to his Holiness; and to vaunt withal, that he had nipped Christian Kings in
the Crown, that he had given them check with mate, through the magnanimous
resolution of this courageous Nobility, by whose brave making head, the third
Estate had been so valiantly forced to give ground. Jn a scornful reproach
he qualified the Deputies of the third Estate, I have received advertisement
from diverse parts, that in the Popes letters to the Nobitie these words were
extant, howsoever they have bin left out in the impression, and rased out of
the copies of the said letters.
nebulones ex foece plebis, a sort or a number of knaves, the very dregs of
the base vulgar, a pack of people, presuming to personate well affected
Subjects, and men of deep understanding, and to read their masters a learned
Lecture. Now it is no wonder, that, in so good an office and loyal carriage
toward their King, the third Estate has outgone the Clergy. For the Clergy
deny themselves to have any rank among the Subjects of the King: they stand
for a Sovereign out of the Kingdom, to whom as to the Lord Paramount they owe
suite and service: they are bound to advance that Monarchy, to the body
whereof they properly apperteine as parts or members, as elsewhere I have
written more at large. But for the Nobility, the Kings right arm, to
prostitute and set as it were to sale the dignity of their King, as if the
arm should give a thrust unto the head; J say for the Nobility to hold and
maintain even in Parliament, their King is liable to deposition by any
foreign power or Potentate, may it not pass among the strangest miracles and
rarest wonders of the world? For that once granted, this consequence is good
and necessary; That in case the King, once lawfully deposed, shall stand upon
the defensive, and hold out for his right, he may then lawfully be murdered.
Let me then here freely profess my opinion, and this it is: That now the
French Nobility may seem to have some reason to disrobe themselves of their
titles, and to transfer them by resignation unto the third Estate. For that
body of that third Estate alone has carried a right noble heart: in as much as
the could neither be tickled with promises, nor terrified by threatenings, from
resolute standing to those fundamental points and reasons of State, which most
concern the honor of their King, and the security of his person.

Of all the Clergy, the man that has most abandoned, or set his honor to
sale, the man to whom France is least obliged, is the Lord Cardinal of Perron:
a man otherwise inferior to few in matter of learning, and in the grace of a
sweet style. This man in two several Orations, whereof the one was pronounced
before the Nobility, the other had audience before the third Estate, has set
his best wits on work, to draw that doctrine into all hatred and infamy,
which teaches Kings to be indeposeable by the Pope. To this purpose he terms
the same doctrine, a breeder of Schisms, a gate that opens to make way, and
to give entrance unto all heresies; in brief, a doctrine to be held in so
high a degree of detestation, that rather then he and his fellow-Bishops will
yield to the signing thereof, they will be contented like Martyrs to burn at
a stake. At which resolution, or obstinacy rather in his opinion, I am in a
manner amassed, more then I can be moved for the like brauado in many other:
forasmuch as he was many years together, a follower of the late King, even
when the King followed a contrary Religion, and was deposed by the Pope: as
also because not long before, in a certain Assembly holden at the Iacobins in
Paris, he withstood the Popes Nuntio to his face, when the said Nuntio
labored to make this doctrine, touching the Popes temporal Sovereignty,
pass for an Article of Faith. But in both Orations, he sings a contrary
song, and from his own mouth passes sentence of condemnation against his
former course and profession. J fuppose, not without sollide iudgemen; as one
that herein has well accommodated himself to the times: For as in the reign
of the late King, he durst not offer to broach this doctrine (such was his
fore-wit;) so now he is bold to proclaim and publish it in Parliament under
the reign of the said Kings son; whose tender years and late succession to
the Crown, do make him lie the more open to injuries, and the more facill to
be circumuented: Such is now his afterwisedome.

Of these two Orations, that made in presence of the Nobility he has, for
fear of incurring the Popes displeasure, cautelously suppressed. For therein
he has been somewhat prodigal in affirming this doctrine maintained by the
Clergy, to be but problematicall; and in taking upon him to avouch, that
Catholics of my Kingdom are bound to yield me the honor of obedience:
Whereas on the other side, he is not ignorant, how this doctrine of deposing
Princes and Kings, the Pope holds for merely necessary, and approoueth not
by any means Alleagiance to be performed unto me by the Catholics of my
Kingdom. Yea if credit may be given unto the abridgement of his other Oration
published, wherein he paralells the Popes power in receiving honors in the
name of the Church, with the power of the Venetian Duke in receiving honors in
the name of that most renowned Rebublike; no marvel that when this Oration
was dispatched to the press, he commanded the same to be gelded of this clause
and other like, for fear of giving his Holiness any offensive distaste.

His pleasure therefore was, and content withal, that his Oration imparted to
the third Estate, should be put in Print, and of his courtesy he vouchsafed to
address unto me a copy of the same. Which after J had perused, J forthwith
well perceived, what and how great discrepance there is between one man that
perorateth from the ingenuous and sincere disposition of a sound heart, and an
other that flaunteth in flourishing speech with inward checkes of his own
conscience: For every where he contradicts himself, and seems to be afraid
lest men should pick out his right meaning.

First, In 12. several passages the L. Card. seems to speak against his
own conscience. Page 85.
he grants this Question is not hither to decided by the holy Scriptures, or by
the Decrees of the ancient Church, or by the analogy of other Ecclesiastical
proceedings: and nevertheless he confidently does affirm, that whosoever
maintain this doctrine to be wicked and abominable, that Popes have no power
to put Kings by their supreme Thrones, they teach men to believe, there has
not been any Church for many aages past, and that indeed the Church is the very
Synagogue of Antichrist.

Secondly, he exhorts his hearers to hold this doctrine at least for
problematicall, and not necessary: and yet herein he calls them to all humble
submission unto the judgment of the Pope and Clergy, by whom the cause has
been already put out of all question, as out of all hunger and cold.

Thirdly, he does auerre, in case this Article be authorized, it makes the
Pope in good consequence to be the Antichrist: Page 99.
and yet he grants that many of the French are tolerated by the Pope to dissent
in this point from his Holiness; provided, their doctrine be not proposed as
necessary, and material to faith; As if the Pope in any sort gave toleration
to hold any doctrine contrary to his own, and most of all that doctrine which
by consequence inferres himself to be the Antichrist.

Fourthly, he protests forwardness to undergo the flames of Martyrdom,
rather then to sign this doctrine, which teaches Kings Crowns to sit faster
on their heads, then to be stirred by any Papal power whatsoever: and yet says
withal, the Pope winketh at the French, by his toleration to hold this
dogmaticall point for problematicall. And by this means, the Martyrdom that
he affects in this cause, will prove but a problematicall Martyrdom,
whereof question might grow very well, whether it were to be mustered with
grievous crimes, or with phreneticall passions of the brain, or with deserved
punishments.

Fifthly, he denounces Anathema, discharges maledictions like haile-shot,
against parricides of Kings: and yet elsewhere he lays himself open to
speak of Kings only so long as they stand Kings. But who does not know that
a King deposed is no longer King? And so that limme of Satan, which murdered
Henry the III. then vn-king'd by the Pope, did not stabbe a King to death.

Sixthly, he does not allow a King to be made away by murder: and yet he thinks
it not much out of the way, to take away al means whereby he might be able to
stand in defense of his life.

Seventhly, Page 95.97.
he abhors killing of Kings by apposted throatcutting, for fear lest body
and soul should perish in the same instant: and yet he does not mislike their
killing in a pitched field, and to have them slaughtered in a set battle: For
he presupposes, no doubt out of his charitable mind, that by this means the
soul of a poor King so dispatched out of the way, shall instantly fly up to
heaven.

Eighthly, he says a King deposed, retains still a certain internal habitude
and politic impression, by virtue and efficacy whereof he may, being once
reformed and become a new man, be restored to the lawful use and practice of
Regalitie. Whereby he would bear us in hand, that when a foreign Prince has
invaded and rauenously seized the kingdom into his hands, he will not only
take pity of his predecessor to save his life, but will also prove so
kindhearted, upon fight of his repentance, to restore his kingdom without
fraud or guile.

Ninthly, he says every where in his Discourse, that he deals not in the
cause, otherwise then as a problematicall discourser, and without any
resolution one way or other: and yet with might and maine he contends for the
opinion, that leaves the States and Crowns of Kings controulable by the Pope:
refutes objections, propounds the authority of Popes and Councils, by name the
Lateran Council under Innocent. III. as also the consent of the Church. And to
cross the Churches judgment, is, in his opinion to bring in schism, and to
leave the world without a Church for many hundred years together: which (to my
understanding) is to speak with resolution, and without all hesitation.

Tenthly, he acknowledges none other cause of sufficient validity for the
deposing of a King, besides herefie, apostasy, and infidelity: nevertheless
that Popes have power to displace Kings for herefie and apostasy, he proves
by examples of Kings whom the Pope has curbed with deposition, not for
heresy, but for matrimonial causes, for civil pretenses, and for lack of
capacity.

Eleuenthly, he alleges every where passages, as well of holy Scripture, as
of the Fathers and modern histories; but so impertinent, and with so little
truth, as hereafter we shall cause to appear, that for a man of his deep
learning and knowledge, it seems not possible so to speak out of his
judgment.

Lastly, whereas all this has been hudled and heaped together into one mass,
to currie with the Pope: yet he suffers diverse points to fall from his lips,
which may well distaste his Holiness in the highest degree. As by name, where
he prefers the authority of the Council before that of the Pope, and makes
his judgment inferior to the judgment of the French; as in fit place
hereafter shall be showed. Again, where he represents to his hearers the
decrees of Popes and Councils already passed concerning this noble subject; and
yet affirms that he does not debate the question, but as a Questionist, and
without resolution: As if a Cardinal should be afraid to be positive, and to
speak in peremptory strains, after Popes and Councils have once decided the
Question: Or as if a man should perorate upon hazard, in a cause for the honor
whereof, he would make no difficulty to suffer Martyrdom. Add hereunto, that
his Lordship has always taken the contrary part heretofore, and this total
must needs arise, that before the third Estate, his lips looked one way, and
his conscience another.

All these points, by the discourse which is to follow, and by the ripping up
of his Oration (which by Gods assistance J will undertake) tending to the
reproach of Kings, and the subversion of kingdoms, J confidently speak it,
shall be made manifest. Yet do J not conceive it can any way make for my honor,
to enter the lists against a Cardinal: For J am not ignorant how far a
Cardinals Hat, comes under the Crown and Scepter of a King; For well J wot
unto what sublimitie the Scripture has exalted Kings, when it styles them
Gods; Whereas the dignity of a Cardinal is but a late vpstart invention of
man; In the Preface to my Apology.
as J have elsewhere proved. But J have imbarqued my self in this action,
moved thereunto: First, by the common interest of Kings in the cause it self:
Then by the L. Cardinal, who speaks not in this Oration as a private person,
but as one representing the body of the Clergy and Nobility, by whom the
cause has been won, and the garland borne away from the third Estate:
Again, by mine own particular; because he is pleased to take me up for a
sower of dissension, and a persecutour, under whom the Church is hardly able to
fetch her breath; yea, for one by whom the Catholics of my Kingdom are
compelled to endure all sorts of punishments; and withal he terms this
Article of the third Estate, a monster with a fishes tail that came swimming
out of England: Last of all, by the present state of France; because France
being now reduced to so miserable terms, that it is now become a crime for a
Frenchman to stand for his King; it is a necessary duty of her neighbors to
speak in her cause, and to make trial whether they can put life into the
truth now dying, and ready to be buried by the power of violence, that it may
resound and ring again from remote regions.

J have no purpose once to touch many pretty toys which the ridges of his
whole book are sown withal: Such are his allegations of Pericles, Agesilaus,
Aristotle, Minos, the Druides, the French Ladies, Hannibal, Pindarus, and
Poetical fables: All resembling the red and blew flowers that pester the corn
when it stands in the fields, where they are more noy some to the growing
crop, then beautiful to the beholding eye. Such petty matters, nothing at all
beseemed the dignity of the Assembly, and of the maine subject, or of the
Orator himself: For it was no Decorum to enter the Stage with a Pericles in
his mouth, but with the sacred Name of God; nor should he have marshalled the
passage of a Royal Poet, after the example of an heathen Orator.

Neither will J give any touch to his conceit of the Roman conquests, 2 Page 4.
which the L. Cardinal bestows in the list of Gods graces and temporal
blessings, as a recompense of their zeal to the service and worship of Idols:
As if God were a recompencer of wickedness, or as if the forcible eiecting of
Tenants out of their farms and other possessions, might be reckoned among the
blessings of God.

Nor to that of the Milesian Virgins, Page 7. and 8.
dragged stark-naked after they were dead; which the L. Cardinal draws into
his discourse for an example of the eternal torments denounced by the Laws
Ecclesiastical, to be inflicted after this life.

Nor to his exposition of the word Problematicall; Page 13.
where he gives to understand that by Problematicall, he means such things
as are of no necessity to matter of faith; and in case men shall believe the
contradictory of the said points, they are not bound for such belief, to
undergo the solemn curse of the Church, and the loss of communion: Whereas
Aristotle, Aristet. 1. top. cap. 4. (...), sound both one thing, (...),
provided the word (...) or vtrum, do stand before, as, Vtrum homo sit animal.
of whom all Schools have borrowed their terms, has taught us that every
proposition is called a Problem, when it is propounded in a formal doubt,
though in it proper nature it contains a necessary truth, concerning the
matter thereof; As for example, to say in form of question, Whether is there
but one God? or, Whether is man a creature endued with reason? By which
examples it is plain, that propositions in problematicall form, do not
forgo the necessity of their nature; and that many times the contradictory
binds the believers thereof to Anathema and loss of communion. There is a
confused heap or bundle of other like toys, which my purpose is to pass over
in silence, that J may now come to cast anchor, as it were in the very bottom
and substance of the cause.

A REMONSTRANCE FOR THE RIGHT OF KINGS, AND THE INDEPENDANCE OF THEIR CROWNS.
Against an Oration of the most Illustrious Cardinal of PERRON, pronounced in
the Chamber of the third Estate.
The 15. of Ianuar. 1615.
THE L. Cardinal even in the first passage of his Oration, has laid a firm
foundation, That Ecclesiastics in France are more deeply obliged to the King,
then the Nobility, and third Estate: His reason; Because the Clergy do
sweetly enjoy their dignities and promotions, with all their infinite wealth,
of the Kings mere grace, without all danger, and with fair immunities;
whereas the other two Orders hold their offices by a chargeable and burdensome
title or tenure, even to the great expense of their blood, and of their
substance. But see now, how loose and weak a frame he has erected and pinned
together, upon his firm and solid foundation: Ergo, the third Estate is to
lay all care to provide remedies against apposted cutthroats, upon the Clergy;
and the said remedies (as he boldly affirms) must be derived from the laws of
conscience, which may carry an effectual acting or operative efficacy upon
the soul, and not from civil or temporal punishments. Now this consequence
limpeth like a lame creple after the premises: For it is no usual and common
matter, to see men that are deepest in obligation, perform their duties and
covenants with most fidelity. Again, were it granted the Clergy had well
hitherto demonstrated their careful watching over the life and honor of their
Prince; yet is it not for spiritual punishments thundered by Ecclesiastics, to
bind the hands of the civil Magistrate, nor to stop the current of temporal
punishments: which ordinarily do carry a greater force and virtue to the
bridling of the wicked, then the apprehension of Gods judgment.

The third Estate therefore, by whom all the officers of France are properly
represented, as to whom the administration of justice and protection of the
Kings rights and Honor does appertain, can deserve no blame in carrying so
watchful an eye, by their wholesome remedy to provide for the safety of the
King, and for the dignity of his Crown. For if the Clergy shall not stand to
their tackle, but shrink when it comes to the push of their duty; who
shall charge themselves with careful foresight and prevention of mischiefs?
Shall not the people? Now, have not all the calamities, which the third Estate
have sought prouidently to prevent; have they not all sprung from the Clergy,
as from their proper and natural fountain? From whence did the last civil
wars, wherein a world of blood was not more profusely then prodigiously and
unnaturally spilt, and wherein the parricide of King Henry III. was impiously
and abominably committed: from whence did those bloody wars proceed, but
from the deposing of the said King by the Head of the Church? Were they not
Prelates, Curats, and Confessors; were they not Ecclesiastics, who partly by
seditious preachments, and partly by secret confessions, powered many a jar of
oil upon this flame? Was not he that killed the forenamed King, was not he one
of the Clergy? Was not Guignard a Jesuit? Was not John Chastel brought up in
the same school? Did not Rauaillac that monster of men, upon interrogatories
made at his examination; among the rest, by whom he had been so diabolically
tempted and stirred up to his most execrable attempt and act of extreme horror:
did not he refer his examiners to the Sermons made the Lent next before,
where they might be satisfied concerning the causes of his abominable
undertaking and execution? Are not Bellarmine, Eudaemonoiohannes, Suarez,
Becanus, Mariana, with such other monsters, who teach the doctrine of
parricides, uphold the craft of Ianus-like Equivocations in Courts of Justice,
and in secret confessions: are they not all Clerics? are not all their books
approved and allowed, as it were by a corporation or gross company of
Doctors, with their signs manuel to the said books? What were the heads, the
chief promoters, the accomplices of the powder-conspiracie in my Kingdom? were
they not Ecclesiastics? Has not Faux by name, a confederate of the same damned
crew; has not he stoutly stood to the gunners part, which then he was to act
in that most doleful Tragedy, with asseueration of a conscience well assured
and settled, touching the lawfulness of his enterprise? Did he not yield this
reason? to wit, because he had bin armed with instruction of musket proof in
the case, before he made passage over from the Low Countries? Is it not also
the general belief of that Order, that Clerics are exempted from the
condition of Subjects to the King? Nay, Page 7.
is it not confessed by the L. Cardinal himself, that King-killers have
engaged themselves to undertake the detestable act of parricide under a false
credence of Religion, as being instructed by their schoolemasters in Religion?
And who were they but Ecclesiastical persons? All this presupposed as matter
of truth, I draw this conclusion: Howsoever no small number of the French
Clergy may perhaps bear the affection of loving Subjects to their King, and
may not suffer the Clericall character to deface the impression of natural
allegiance; yet, for so much as the Order of Clerics is dipped in a deeper die,
and bears a worse tincture of dangerous practices then the other Orders; the
third Estate had been greatly wanting to their excellent providence and
wisdom, if they should have relinquished and transferred the care of
designements and proiects for the life of their King, and the safety of his
Crown, to the Clergiealone. Moreover, the Clergy stands bound to refer
the judgment of all matters in controversy, to the sentence of the Pope, in
this cause being a party, and one that pretends Crowns to depend upon his
Mitre. What hope then might the third Estate conceive, that his Holiness would
pass against his own cause, when his judgment of the controversy had been
sundry times before published and testified to the world? And whereas the plot
or model of remedies proiected by the third Estate, and the Kings Officers,
has not proved sortable in the event: was it because the said remedies were
not good and lawful? No verily: but because the Clergy refused to become
contributors of their duty and means to the grand service. Likewise, for that
after the burning of books, addressed to justify rebellious people, traitors,
and parricides of Kings; nevertheless the authors of the said books are
winked at, and backed with favor. Lastly, for that some wretched parricides
drink off the cup of public justice; whereas to the firebrands of sedition,
the sowers of this abominable doctrine, no man says so much as black is their
eye.

It sufficiently appears, as I supose, by the former passage, that his
Lordship exhorting the third Estate to refer the whole care of this Regal
cause unto the Clergy, has tacked his frame of weak joints and tenons to a
very worthy but wrong foundation. Page 9.
Howbeit, he labors to fortify his exhortation with a more weak and feeble
reason: For to make good his project he affirms, that matters and maxims out
of all doubt and question, may not be shuffled together with points in
controversy. Now his rules indubitable are two: The first, It is not lawful
to murder Kings for any cause whatsoever: This he confirms by the example of
Saul (as he says) deposed from his Throne, whose life or limbs David
nevertheless durst not once hurt or wrong for his life: Conc. Constan. Sess.
15.
Likewise he confirms the same by a Decree of the Council held at Constance:
His other point indubitable; The Kings of France are Sovereigns in all
Temporal Sovereignty, within the French Kingdom, and hold not by fealty
either of the Pope, as having received or obliged their Crowns upon such
tenure and condition, or of any other Prince in the whole world; Which point,
nevertheless he takes not for certain and indubitable, but only according to
humane and historical certainty. Now a third point he makes to be so full of
controversy, and so far within the circle of disputable questions, as it may
not be drawn into the rank of classical and authentical points, for fear
of making a certain point doubtful, by shuffling and iumbling therewith some
point in controversy. Now the question so disputable, as he pretends, is
this: A Christian Prince breaks his oath solemnly taken to God, both to live
and to die in the Catholic Religion: Say this Prince turns Arrian, or
Mohammedan, falls to proclaim open war, and to wage battle with Jesus Christ:
Whether may such a Prince be declared to have lost his Kingdom, and who shall
declare the Subjects of such a Prince to be quit of their oath of allegiance?
The L. Cardinal holds the affirmative, and makes no bones to maintain, that
all other parts of the Catholic Church, yea the French Church, even from the
first birth of her Theological Schools, to Caluins time and teaching, have
professed that such a Prince may be lawfully removed from his Throne by the
Pope, and by the Council: and suppose the contrary doctrine were the very
Quintessence or spirit of truth, yet might it not in case of faith be urged
and pressed otherwise then by way of problematicall disceptation. That is the
sum of his Lordships ample discourse: The refuting whereof I am constrained
to put off, and refer unto an other place; because he has served us with the
same dishes over and over again. There we shall see the L. Cardinal makes
way to the dispatching of Kings after deposition: that Saul was not deposed, as
he has presumed: that in the Council of Constance there is nothing to the
purpose of murdering Sovereign Princes: that his Lordship, supposing the
French King may be deprived of his Crown by a superior power, does not hold
his liege Lord to be Sovereign in France: that by the position of the French
Church from aage to aage, the Kings of France are not subject unto any censure
of deposition by the Pope: that his Holiness has no just and lawful pretense
to produce, that any Christian King holds of him by fealty, or is obliged to
do the Pope homage for his Crown.

Well then, for the purpose; he dwells only upon the third point pretended
questionable, and this he affirms: If any shall condemn, or wrappe under
the solemn curse, the abettours of the Popes power to unking lawful and
Sovereign Kings; the same shall run upon four dangerous rocks of apparent
incongruities and absurdities.

First, he shall offer to force and entangle the consciences of many devout
persons: For he shall bind them to believe and swear that doctrine, Page 14.
the contrary whereof is believed of the whole Church, and has been believed
by their Predecessors.

Secondly, Faith: For what is that degree of boldness, but open usurping of
the Priesthood; what is it but putting of profane hands upon the Arc; what is
it but laying of unholy fingers upon the holy Censor for perfumes?

Thirdly,

Lastly,

The L. Cardinal spends his whole discourse in confirmation of these four
heads, which we now intend to sift in order, and demonstratiuely to prove
that all the said inconveniences are mere nullities, matters of imagination,
and built upon false presuppositions. But before we come to the maine, the
reader is to be informed and advertised, that his Lordship sets a false
gloss upon the question; and propounds the case not only contrary to the
truth of the subject in controversy, but also to the Popes own mind and
meaning: For he restraines the Popes power to depose Kings, only to cases of
Heresy, Apostasy, and persecuting of the Church; whereas Popes extend their
power to a further distance. They depose Princes for infringing, or in any sort
diminishing the Privileges of Monasteries: witness Gregory the first in the
pretended Charter granted to the Abbey of S. Medard at Soissons; the said
Charter being annexed to his Epistles in the rere. The same he testifies in
his Epistle to Senator, by name the tenth of the eleventh book. They depose
for natural dullness and lack of capacity, wether inbred and true indeed,
or only pretended and imagined: witness the glorious vaunt of Gregory VII.
that Childeric King of France was hoysted out of his Throne by Pope Zachary,
Cause. 15. Can. Alius. Qu. 6.
Not so much for his wicked life, as for his unableness to bear the weighty
burden of so great a Kingdom. They depose for collating of Benefices and
Prebends: witness the great quarrels and sore contentions between Pope
Innocent III. and John King of England: as also between Philip the Fair and
Boniface VIII. They depose for adulteries and Matrimonial suites: witness
Philip I. for the repudiating or casting off his lawful wife Bertha, and
marrying in her place with Bertrade wife to the Earl of Aniou. Paul. Aemil. in
Phil. 3.
Finally, feign would I learn into what Heresy or degree of Apostasy, either
Henry IV. or Frederic Barbarossa, or Frederic II. Emperors were fallen, when
they were smitten with Papal fulminations, even to the deprivation of their
Imperial Thrones. What? was it for Heresy or Apostasy, that Pope Martin IV.
bare so hard a hand against Peter King of Arragon, that he acquitted and
released the Aragonnois from their oath of Alleagiance to Peter their lawful
King? Was it for Heresy or Apostasy, for Arrianisme or Mahumetisme, that
Lewis XII. so good a King and Father of his Country, was put down by Julius
the II? Was it for Heresy or Apostasy, that Sixtus V. usurped a power against
Henry III. even so far as to denounce him vnkingd; the issue whereof was the
parricide of that good King, and the most woeful desolation of a most
flourishing Kingdom? But his Lordship best liked to work upon that ground,
which to the outward show and appearance, is the most beautiful cause that can
be alleged for the dishonouring of Kings by the weapon of deposition: making
himself to believe that he acted the part of an Orator before personages not
much acquainted with ancient and modern histories, and such as little
understood the state of the question then in hand. It had therefore been a
good warrant for his Lordship, to have brought some authentical instrument
from the Pope, whereby the French might have been secured, that his Holiness
renounceth all other causes auouchable for the degrading of Kings; and that he
will henceforth rest in the case of Heresy, for the turning of Kings out of
their Freehold: as also that his Holiness by the same or like instrument
might have certified his pleasure, that he will not hereafter make himself
Judge, whether Kings be tainted with damnable Heresy, or free from Heretical
infection. For that were to make himself both Judge and Plaintiff, that it
might be in his power to call that doctrine Heretical, which is pure
Orthodoxe: and all for this end, to make himself master of the Kingdom, and
there to settle a Successor, who receiving the Crown of the Popes free gift
and grant, might be tied thereby to depend altogether upon his Holiness. Has
not Pope Boniface VIII. declared in his proud Letters all those to be
Heretics, that dare undertake to affirm, the collating of Prebends
appertemeth to the King? It was that Popes gross error, not in the fact, but
in the right. The like crime forsooth was by Popes imputed to the unhappy
Emperor Henry IV. And what was the issue of the said imputation? The son is
instigated thereby to rebel against his father, and to impeach the interrement
of his dead corpse, who never in his life had beat his brains to trouble the
sweet waters of Theological fountains. Annal. Beio. Lib. 3. I^^^anen. Episcop.
It is recorded by Auentine, that Bishop Virgilius was declared Heretic, for
teaching the Position of Antipodes. The Bull Exurge, marching in the rere of
the last Lateran Council, sets down this Position for one of Luthers heresies,
A new life is the best repentance. Optima poenitentia noua vita. Conc. Constan.
Sess. 2.
Among the crimes which the Council of Constance charged Pope John XXIII.
withal, one was this, that he denied the immortality of the soul, and that
so much was publicly, manifestly, and notoriously known. Now if the Pope
shall be carried by the stream of these or the like errors, and in his
Heretical prauitie shall depose a King of the contrary opinion, I shall hardly
be persuaded, the said King is lawfully deposed.

THE FIRST INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED.
THE first inconvenience growing (in the Cardinal his conceit) by entertaining
the Article of the third Estate (whereby the Kings of France are declared to be
indeposeable by any superior power spiritual or temporal) is this: It
offers force to the conscience, under the penalty of Anathema, to condemn a
doctrine believed and practiced in the Church, in the continual current of the
last eleven hundred years. In these words he makes a secret confession, that
in the first five hundred years, the same doctrine was neither apprehended by
faith, nor approved by practice. Wherein, to my understanding, the L.
Cardinal voluntarily gives over the suite: For the Church in the time of the
Apostles, their disciples, and successors, for 500. years together, was no
more ignorant what authority the Church is to challenge over Emperors and
Kings, then at any time since in any succeeding aage; in which as pride has
still flowed to the height of a full Sea, so purity of religion and manners
has kept for the most part at a low water mark. Which point is the rather to
be considered, for that during the first 500. years, the Church groned under
the heavy burden, both of heathen Emperors, and of heretical Kings; the
Visigot Kings in Spain, and the Vandals in Africa. Of whose displeasure the
Pope had small reason or cause to stand in any fear, being so remote from
their dominions, and no way under the lee of their Sovereignty.

But let us come to see, what aid the L. Cardinal has amassed and piled
together out of latter histories: provided we still bear in mind, that our
question is not of popular tumults, nor of the rebellion of subjects making
insurrections out of their own discontented spirits and brainesicke humors,
nor of lawful Excommunications, nor of Canonical censures and reprehensions;
but only of a iuridicall sentence of deposition, pronounced by the Pope, as
armed with ordinary and lawful power to depose, against a Sovereign Prince.

Now then, Exampl. 1. page 18 Enag hist Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 32.
The L. Cardinal sets on, and gives the first charge with Anastasius the
Emperor, whom Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople would never acknowledge
for Emperor: (that is to say, would never consent he should be created
Emperor by the help of his voice or suffrage) except he would first subscribe
to the Chalcedon Creed: notwithstanding the great Empress and Senate sought by
violent courses and practices to make him yield. And when afterward the said
Emperor, contrary to his oath taken, played the relaps by falling into his
former heresy, and became a persecutor; he was first admonished, and then
excommunicated by Symmachus Bishop of Rome. To this the L. Cardinal adds,
that when the said Emperor was minded to choppe the poison of his heretical
assertions into the public forms of divine service, then the people of
Constantinople made an vproare against Anastasius their Emperor; and one of
his Commanders by force of arms, constrained him to call back certain
Bishops whom he had sent into banishment before.

In this first example the L. Cardinal by his good leave, neither comes close
to the question, nor falutes it a far off. Euphemius was not Bishop of Rome:
Anastasius was not deposed by Euphemius; the Patriarch only made no way to the
creating of Anastasius. The sudden commotion of the base multitude makes
nothing, the rebellion of a Greek Commander makes less, for the authorizing
of the Pope to depose a Sovereign Prince. The Greek Emperor was
excommunicated by Pope Symmachus: who knows whether that be true or forged?
For the Pope himself is the only witness here produced by the L. Cardinal
upon the point: and who knows not how false, how suppositious, the writings
and Epistles of the ancient Popes are justly esteemmed? But grant it a
truth; yet Anasta sius excommunicated by Pope Symmachus, is not Anastasius
deposed by Pope Symmachus. And to make a full answer, I say further, that
excommunication denounced by a foreign Bishop, againsta party not being
within the limits of his jurisdiction, or one of his own flock, was not any
bar to the party from the communion of the Church, but only a kind of
publication, that he the said Bishop in his particular, would hold no further
communion with any such party.

For proof whereof, I produce the Canons of the Councils held at Carthage. In
one of the said Canons it is thus provided and ordained; Nomecan. Affric Can.
77. (...)
If any Bishop shall wilfully absent himself from the usual and accustomed
Synodes, let him not be admitted to the communion of other Churches, but let
him only use the benefit and liberty of his own Church. In an other of the
same Canons thus; Can. 81. eiusd. Nomo. (...)
If a Bishop shall insinuate himself to make a conuciance of his Monastery,
and the ordering thereof unto a Monk of any other Cloister; let him be cut
off, let him be separated from the communion with other Churches and content
himself to live in the communion of his own flock. In the same sense
Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers excommunicated Liberius Bishop of Rome, for
subscribing to the Arrian Confession. Anathematibi a me Liberi. Faber in frag.
Hilarij.
In the same sense, John Bishop of Antioch excommunicated Caelestine of Rome,
and Cyrill of Alexandria, Bishops; for proceeding to sentence against
Nestorius, without staying his coming to answer in his own cause. In the
same sense likewise, Victor Bishop of Rome did cut off all the Bishops of the
East, not from the communion of their own flocks, but from communion with
Victor and the Roman Church. What resemblance, what agreement, what
proportion, between this course of excommunication, and that way of unjust
fulmination which the Popes of Rome have usurped against Kings, Examp. 2.
but yet certain long courses of time after that ancient course?

And this may stand for a full answer likewise to the example of Clotharius.
This ancient King of the French, fearing the censures of Pope Agapetus, erected
the Territory of Yuetor unto the title of a Kingdom, by way of satisfaction
for murdering of Gualter, Lord of Yuetot. For this example the L. Cardinal
has ransackt records of 900. years antiquity and upward; in which times it
were no hard piece of work to show, that Popes would not have any hand, nor so
much as a finger in the affairs and acts of the French Kings. Gregory of
Tours that lived in the same aage, has recorded many acts of excess, and
violent injuries done against Bishops by their Kings, and namely against
Praetextatus Bishop of Roan; for any of which injurious prankes then played,
the Bishop of Rome durst not reprove the said Kings with due remonstrance. But
see here the words of Gregory himself to King Chilperic: If any of us, O
King, shall swerve from the path of Justice, him have thou power to punish: But
in case thou shall at any time transgress the lines of equity, who shall once
touch thee with reproof? To thee we speak, but are never heeded and
regarded, except it be thy pleasure: and be thou not pleased, who shall
challenge thy greatness, but he that justly challenges to be Justice it
self? The good Bishop, notwithstanding these humble remonstrances, was but
roughly entreated, and packt into exile, being banished into the Isle of
Guernsay. But I am not minded to make any deep search or inquisition, into the
titles of the Lords of Yuetot; whose honorable privileges and titles are the
most honorable badges and cognizances of their Ancestors, and of some
remarkable service done to the Crown of France: so far I take them to
differ from a satisfaction for sin: And for the purpose I only affirm, that
were the credit of this history beyond all exception, yet makes it nothing to
the present question, Wherein the power of deposing, and not of excommunicating
supreme Kings, is debated. And suppose the King by Charter granted the said
privileges for fear of Excommunication; how is it proved thereby, that Pope
Agapetus had lawful and ordinary power to deprive him of his Crown? Nay,
doubtless it was rather a means to eleuate and advance the dignity of the
Crown of France, and to style the French King, a King of Kings, as one that
was able to give the quality of King, to all the rest of the Nobles and Gentry
of his Kingdom. Does not some part of the Spanish Kings greatness, consist
in creating of his, great?

In the next place follows Gregory I. Examp. 3. page 22.
who in the 10. Epistle of the 11. book, confirming the privileges of the
Hospital at Augustodunum in Bourgongne, prohibiteth all Kings and Prelates
whatsoever, to infringe or diminish the said privileges, in whole or in part.
His formal and express words be these: If any King, Prelate, Judge, or any
other Secular person, informed of this our Constitution, shall presume to go
or do contrary thereunto, let him be cast down from his power and dignity.
I answer; the Lord Cardinal here wrongs himselse very much, in taking
imprecations for Decrees. Might not even the meanest of the people use the same
tenor of words, and say? If any shall touch the life, or the most sacred
Majesty of our Kings, be he Emperor, or be he Pope, let him be accursed; let
him fall from his eminent place of authority; let him lose his dignity; let
him tumble into beggerie, diseases, and all kinds of calamities? I forbear to
show how easy a matter it is for Monks, to forge titles after their own
humor, and to their own liking, for the upholding and maintaining of their
privileges. As for the purpose, the same Gregory cites in the end of his
Epistles another privilege, of the like stuff and stamp to the former,
granted to the Abbey of S. Medard at Soissons: It is fenced with a like clause
to the other; But of how great vntrewth, and of how little weight it is, the
very date that it bears, makes manifest proof: For it runs, Dated the year
of our Lords Incarnation 593. the 11. Indiction; whereas the 10. Indiction
agrees to the year 593. Besides, it was not Gregory's manner to date his
Epistles according to the year of the Lord. Again, the said privilege was
signed by the Bishops of Alexandria and Carthage, who never knew (as may well
be thought) whether any such Abbey of S. Medard, or city of Soissons, was
ever built in the world. Moreover, they signed in the thickest of a crowd as it
were of Italian Bishops. Lastly, he that shall read in this Gregory's
Epistles, with what spirit of reverence and humility he speaks of Emperors,
will hardly believe that ever he armed himself with authority to give or to
take away Kingdoms. He styles himself Epist. 6. l. 3. Ego antem indignus
pietatin tuae seruils. Ego vero haec Dominis meis Ioquens, quid sum nisi pulu
is and vermis? Ibid. Egc quidem iussioni subiectus, etc. Epist. 61. l. 2.
The Emperors unworthy servant: presuming to speak unto his Lord, when he
knows himself to be but dust and a very worm: He professes subjection
unto the Emperors commands, even to the publishing of a certain Law of the
Emperors, which in his judgment somewhat iarred and iustled with Gods Law; as
elsewhere I have spoken more at large.

The L. Cardinal next brings upon the stage Justinian II. He, Examp. 4.
being in some choler with Sergius Bishop of Rome, because he would not
favor the erroneous Synod of Constantinople, would have caused the Bishop to
be apprehended by his Constable Zacharias. But by the Roman Militia, (that
is, the troops which the Emperor then had in Italy) Zacharias was repulsed
and hindered from his deseigne, even with opprobrious and reproachful terms.
His Lordship must have my shallowness excused, if I reach not his intent by
this Allegation; wherein I see not one word of deposing from the Empire, or of
any sentence pronounced by the Pope.

Here are now 712. years expired after the birth of Jesus Christ: in all
which long tract of time, the L. Cardinal has not light upon any instance,
which might make for his purpose with never so little show: For the example of
the Emperor Philippicus by the Cardinal alleged next in sequence, Examp. 5.
belongs to the year 713. And thus lies the history: This Emperor
Philippicus Bardanes, was a professed enemy to the worshipping of Images, and
commanded them to be broken in pieces. In that very time the Roman Empire was
overthrown in the West, and sore shaken by the Saracenes in the East. Besides
those miseries, the Emperor was also encumbered with a civil and intestine
war. The greatest part of Italy was then seized by the Lombards, and the
Emperor in Italy had nothing left save only the Exarchat of Rauenna, and the
Duchy of Rome, then half abandoned by reason of the Emperors want of
forces. Pope Constantine gripes this occasion whereon to ground his greatness,
and to shake off the yoke of the Emperor his Lord, Undertakes against
Philippicus the cause of Images: by a Council declares the Emperor Heretic:
Prohibites his rescripts or coin to be received, and to go current in Rome:
Forbids his Imperial statue to be set up in the Temple, according to ancient
custom: The tumult grows to a height: The Pope is principal promoter of the
tumult: In the heat of the tumult the Exarche of Rauenna loses his life. Here
see now the mutiny of a subject against his Prince, to pull from him by force
and violence a city of his Empire. But who sees in all this any sentence of
deposition from the Imperial dignity? Nay, the Pope then missed the cushion,
and was disappointed utterly of his purpose: The city of Rome stood firm, and
continued still in their obedience to the Emperor.

About some 12. years after, Exemp. 6.
the Emperor Leo Isauricus (whom the Lord of Perron calls Iconoclast) falls
to fight it out at sharp, and to prosecute worshippers of Images with all
extremity. Upon this occasion, Pope Gregory 2. then treading in the steps of
his predecessor, when he perceived the city of Rome to be but weakly provided
of men or munition, and the Emperor to have his hands full in other places,
found such means to make the city rise in rebellious arms against the
Emperor, that he made himself in short time master thereof. Thus far the
Lord Cardinal, whereunto my answer for satisfaction is; that degrading an
Emperor from his Imperial dignity, and reducing a city to revolt against
her Master, that a man at last may carry the piece himself, and make himself
Lord thereof, are two several actions of special difference. If the freehold
of the city had been conveyed to some other by the Pope depriving the
Emperor, as proprietarie thereof, this example might have challenged some
credit at least in show: but so to invade the city to his own use, and so to
seize on the right and authority of another, what is it but open rebellion, and
notorious ambition? For it is far from Ecclesiastical censure, when the
spiritual Pastor of souls forsooth, pulles the cloak of a poor sinner from
his back by violence, or cuts his purse, and thereby appropriates an other
man's goods to his private use. It is to be observed withal, that when the
Emperors were not of sufficient strength, and Popes had power to beard and to
brave Emperors, then these Papal practices were first set on foot. This
Emperor notwithstanding, turned head and peckt again: his Lieutenant entered
Rome, and Gregory 3. successor to this Gregory 2. was glad to honor the same
Emperor with style and title of his Lord: witness two several Epistles of
the said Gregory 3. written to Boniface, and subscribed in this form: Dat.
10. Call. December Imperante Dom. pijssimo Augusto Leone, a Deo coronato, magno
Imp. anno decimo Imperij eius. Examp. 7.
Dated the tenth (alends of December: In the reign of our most pious and
religious Lord, Augustus Leo, crowned of God, the great Emperor, in the tenth
year of his reign.

The L. Cardinal with no less abuse alleges Pope Zachary, by whom the
French, as he affirms, were absolved of the oath of all egiance, wherein they
stood bound to Childeric their King: And for this instance, he stands upon
the testimony of Paulus Aemilius, and du Tillet, a pair of late writers. But
by authors more near that aage wherein Childeric reigned, it is more trewly
testified, that it was a free and voluntary act of the French, only asking
the advice of Pope Zachary, but requiring neither leave nor absolution. Ado
Bishop of Vienna, in his Chronicles has it after this manner: The French,
following the Counsel of Ambassadors, and of Pope Zachary, elected Pepin their
King, and established him in the Kingdom. Trithemius in his abridgement of
Annals, thus: Childeric, as one unfit for government, was turned out of his
Kingdom, with common consent of the Estates and Peers of the Realm, so
advised by Zachary Pope of Rome. Godfridus of Viterbe in the 17. part of his
Chronicle, and Guauguin in the life of Pepin, affirm the same. And was it not
an easy matter to work Pepin by counsel to lay hold on the Kingdom, when he
could not be hindered from fastening on the Crown, and had already seizd it in
effect, howsoever he had not yet attained to the name of King? Moreover, the
rudeness of that Nation, then wanting knowledge and Schools either of
divinity, or of Academicall sciences, was a kind of spur to make them run
for counsel over the mountains: which nevertheless in a cause of such
nature, they required not as necessary, but only as decent and for fashion
sake. The Popealso for his part was well appaied, by this means to draw Pepin
unto his part; as one that stood in some need of his aid against the
Lombards; and the more, because his Lord the Emperor of Constantinople was
then brought so low, that he was not able to send him sufficient aid, for the
defense of his territories against his enemies. But had Zachary (to deal
plainly) not stood upon the respect of his own commodity, more then upon the
regard of Gods fear; he would never have given counsel unto the servant,
under the pretended color of his Masters dull spirit, so to turn rebel
against his Master. The Laws provide Gardians, or overseers, for such as are
not well in their wits; they never deprive and spoil them of their estate:
they punish crimes, but not diseases and infirmities by nature. Yea, in France
it is a very ancient custom, when the King is troubled in his wits to
establish a Regent, who for the time of the Kings disability, may bear the
burden of the Kingdoms affairs. So was the practice of that State in the case
of Charles 6. when he fell into a frenzy; whom the Pope notwithstanding his
most grievous and sharp fits, never offered to degrade. And to be short, what
reason, what equity will bear the children to be punished for the fathers
debilitie? Yet such punishment was laid upon Childerics whole race and house;
who by this practice were all disinherited of the Kingdom. But shall we now
take some view, of the L. Page 25.
Cardinals excuse for this exemplarie fact? The cause of Childerics deposing,
(as the L. Cardinal says) did nearly concern and touch Religion: For
Childerics imbecility brought all France into danger, to suffer a most woeful
shipwreck of Christian religion, upon the barbarous and hostile invasion of
the Saracens. Admit now this reason had been of just weight and value, yet
consideration should have been taken, whether some one or other of that Royal
stem, and of the Kings own successors nearest of blood, was not of better
capacity to rule and manage that mighty State. The fear of uncertain and
accidental mischief, should not have driven them to fly unto the certain
mischief of actual and effectual deposition. They should rather have set
before their eyes the example of Charles Martel, this Pepins father; who in a
far more eminent danger, when the Saracens had already mastered, and subdued
a great part of France, valiantly encountered, and withal defeated the
Saracens; ruled the Kingdom under the title of Steward of the Kings house, the
principal Officer of the Crown; without affecting or aspiring to the Throne
for all that great step of advantage, especially when the Saracens were quite
broken, and no longer dreadful to the French Nation.

In our own Scotland, the sway of the Kingdom was in the hand of Walls,
during the time of Bruise his imprisonment in England, who then was lawful
heir to the Crown. This Walls or Vallas had the whole power of the Kingdom
at his beck and command. His Edicts and ordinances to this day stand in full
force. By the deadly hatred of Bruise his mortal enemy, it may be coniectured,
that he might have been provoked and inflamed with desire to trusse the
Kingdom in his tallants. And notwithstanding all these incitements, he never
assumed or usurped other title to himself, then of Governor or Administratour
of the Kingdom. The reason: He had not been brought up in this new doctrine
and late discipline, whereby the Church is endowed with power to give and to
take away Crowns. But now (as the L. Cardinal would bear the world in hand)
the state of Kings is brought to a very dead lift. The Pope forsooth must send
his Physicians, to know by way of inspection or some other course of Art,
whether the Kings brain be cract or sound: and in case there be found any
debilitie of wit and reason in the King, then the Pope must remove and
translate the Crown, from the weaker brain to a stronger: and for the acting
of the stratageme, the name of Religion must be pretended. Ho, these Heretics
begin to crawle in the Kingdom: order must be taken they be not suffered by
their multitudes and swarms, like locusts or caterpillars to pester and poison
the whole Realm. Or in a case of Matrimony, thus: Ho, marriage is a Sacrament:
touch the Order of Matrimony, and Relgion is wounded. By this device not only
the Kings vices, but likewise his natural diseases and infirmities are fetched
into the circle of Religion; and the L. Cardinal has not done himself right,
in restraining the Popes power to depose Kings, unto the cases of Heresy,
Apostasy, and persecution of the Church.

In the next place follows Leo III. who by setting the Imperial Crown upon
the head of Charles, absolved all the Subjects in the West, of their obedience
to the Greek Emperors, if the L. of Perron might be credited in this
Example. But indeed it is crowded among the rest by a sly trick, and clean
contrary to the naked truth of all histories: For it shall never be justified
by good history, that so much as one single person or man (I say not one
Country, or one people) was then wrought or won by the Pope to change his
copy and Lord, or from a subject of the Greek Emperors, to turn subject unto
Charlemaine. Let me see but one Town that Charlemaine recovered from the
Greek Emperors, by his right and title to his Empire in the West: No, the
Greek Emperors had taken their farewell of the West Empire long before: And
therefore to nicke this upon the tallie of Pope Leo his Acts, that he took
away the West from the Greek Emperor, it is even as if one should say, that
in this aage the Pope takes the Dukedom of Milan from the French Kings, or the
city of Rome from the Emperors of Germany, because their Predecessors in
former aages had been right Lords and governors of them both. It is one of
the Popes ordinary and solemn practices to take away, much after the manner of
his giving: For as he gives what he has not in his right and power to give,
or bestows upon others what is already their own; even so he takes away
from Kings and Emperors the possessions which they have not in present hold and
possession. After this manner he takes the West from the Greek Emperors, when
they hold nothing in the West, and lay no claim to any city or town of the
West Empire. And what shall we call this way of deprivation, but spoiling a
naked man of his garments, and killing a man already dead? True it is the
Imperial Crown was then set on Charlemaines head by Leo the Pope: did Leo
therefore give him the Empire? No more then a Bishop that crowns a King, at
his Royal and solemn consecration, does give him the Kingdom: For shall the
Pope himself take the Popedom from the Bishop of Ostia as of his gift,
because the crowning of the Pope is an Office of long time peculiar to the
Ostian Bishop? It was the custom of Emperors, to be crowned Kings of Italy by
the hands of the Archbishop of Milan: did he therefore give the Kingdom of
Italy to the said Emperors? And to return unto Charlemaine; If the Pope had
conveyed the Empire to him by free and gracious donation, the Pope doubtless
in the solemnity of his coronation, would never have performed unto his
ownecreature, an Emperor of his own making the duties of adoration,
Perfectit landibus, a Pontifice more Principum antiquorum adoratus est.

Auentinus Annalium Boiorum, lib. 4. Posthaec ab eodem Pontifice vt caeteri
veterum Prineipum, mere maiorum aioratus est Magnus.

Sigeb. ad an. 801.

Marianus Scotus lib. 3. Annalium. Plat. in vita Leon. 3.

Auent. Annal. Boio. lib. 4. Imperium transfer iure suo in Germanos,
Carolumque tacito Senatus consulto, plebiscitoque decernunt.


as Ado that lived in the same aage, has left it on record: After the solemn
praises ended (says Ado) the chief Bishop honored him with adoration,
according to the custom of ancient Princes. The same is like wise put down by
Auentine, in the 4. book of his Annals of Bauaria. The like by the President
Fauchet in his Antiquities: and by Monsieur Petau Counselor in the Court of
Parliament at Paris, in his Preface before the Chronicles of Eusebius, Hierome,
and Sigebert. It was therefore the people of Rome, that called this Charles the
Great unto the Imperial dignity, and cast on him the title of Emperor. So
testifies Sigebert upon the year 801. All the Romans with one general voice
and consent, ring out acclamations of Imperial praises to the Emperor, they
crown him by the bands of Leo the Pope, they give him the style of Caesar and
Augustus. Marianus Scotus has as much in effect: Charles was then called
Augustus by the Romans. And so Platina: After the solemn service, Leo
declares and proclaims Charles Emperor, according to the public Decree and
general request of the people of Rome. Auentine, and Sigonius in his 4. book
of the Kingdom of Italy witness the same. Neuerthelsse, to gratify the L.
Cardinal; Suppose Pope Leo dispossessed the Greek Emperors of the West
Empire: What was the cause? what infamous act had they done? what profane and
irreligious crime had they committed? Nicephorus and Irene, who reigned in the
Greek Empire in Charlemaines time, were not reputed by the Pope, or taken for
Heretics. How then? The L. Cardinal helps at a pinch, and puts us in
mind, that Constantine and Leo, predecessors to the said Emperors, had been
poisoned with Heresy, and stained with persecution. Here then behold an
Orthodoxe Prince deposed: For what cause? for Heresy forsooth, not in
himself, but in some of his Predecessors long before An admirable case: For I
am of a contrary mind, that he was worthy of double honor, in restoring and
setting up the truth again, which under his predecessors had endured
oppression, and suffered persecution. Doubtless Pope Siluester was greatly
ouerseene, and played not well the Pope, when he winked at Constantine the
Great, and cast him not down from his Imperial Throne, for the strange infide
litie and Paganism of Diocletian, of Maximian, and Maxentius, whom Constantine
succeeded in the Empire.

From this example the L. of Perron passes to Fulke Archbishop of Reims:
Examp. 9. page 21.
by whom Charles the Simple was threatened with Excommunication, and refusing to
continue any longer in the fidelity and allegiance of a subject. To what
purpose is this example? For who can be ignorant, that all aages have brought
forth turbulent and stirring spirits, men altogether forgetful of respect and
observance toward their Kings, especially when the world finds them shallow
and simple-witted, like unto this Prince? But in this example, where is there
so much as one word of the Pope, or the deposing of Kings?

Here the L. Cardinal chops in the example of Philip I. King of France, but
mangled, and strangely disguised, as hereafter shall be showed.

At last he leads us to Gregory VII. surnamed Hildebrand, Exam. 11. An. 1076.
the scourge of Emperors, the firebrand of war, the scorn of his aage. This
Pope, after he had (in the spirit of pride, and in the very height of all
audaciousnesse) thundered the sentence of excommunication and deposition,
against the Emperor Henry IIII. after he had enterprised this act without all
precedent example: after he had filled all Europe with blood: this Pope, I say,
sunk down under the weight of his affairs, and died as a fugitive at
Salerne, overwhelmed with discontent and sorrow of heart: Here lying at the
point of giving up the ghoast, Sigeb. ad. an. 1085.
calling unto him (as it is in Sigebert) a certain Cardinal whom he much
favored, He confesses to God, and Saint Peter, and the whole Church, that he
had been greatly defective in the Pastor all charge committed to his care; and
that by the Devils instigation, he had kindled the fire of Gods wrath and
hatred against mankind: Then he sent his Confessor to the Emperor, and to the
whole Church to pray for his pardon, because he perceived that his life was at
an end. Likewise Cardinal Benno that lived in the said Gregory's time, does
testify, That so soon as he was risen out of his Chair to excommunicate the
Emperor from his Cathedral seat: by the will of God the said Cathedral
seat, new made of strong board or plancke, did crack and cleave into many
pieces or parts; to manifest how great and terrible Schisms had been sown
against the Church of Christ, by an excommunication of so dangerous
consequence, pronounced by the man that had fit Judge therein. Now to bring and
allege the example of such a man, who by attempting an act which never any
man had the heart of face to attempt before, has condemned all his
predecessors of cowardice, or at least of ignorance; what is it else, but even
to send us to the school of mighty robbers, and to seek to correct and
reform ancient virtues by late vices? Which Otho Frisingensis calling into his
own private consideration, Otho Frisingens. in vita Hen. 4. lib. 4. cap 31.
he durst freely profess, that he had not read of any Emperor before this
Henry the IIII. excommunicated or driven out of his Imperial Throne and
Kingdom by the chief Bishop of Rome. But if this quarrel may be tried and
fought out with weapons of examples, I leave any indifferent reader to judge
what examples ought in the cause to be of chiefest authority and weight:
whether late examples of Kings deposed by Popes, for the most part never taking
the intended effect; or ancient examples of Popes actually and effectually
thrust out of their thrones by Emperors and Kings.

The Emperor Constantius expelled Liberius Bishop of Rome out of the city,
banished him as far as Beroe, and placed Foelix in his room. Theo. lib. 2.
Hist. cap. 16.
Indeed Constantius was an Arrian, and therein used no less impious then
unjust proceeding: Nevertheless, the ancient Fathers of the Church, do not
blame Constantius for his hard and sharp dealing with a chief Bishop, over
whom he had no lawful power, but only as an enemy to the Orthodoxe faith,
and one that raged with extreme rigor of persecution against innocent
believers.

In the reign of Valentinian the I. and year of the Lord 367. Ammia. lib. 27
the contention between Damasus and Vrcisinus competitors for the Bishopric,
filled the city of Rome with a bloody sedition, in which were wickedly and
cruelly murdered 137. Decret. did. 79.
persons. To meet with such turbulent actions, Honorius made a law extant in
the Decreetalls, the words whereof be these; If it shall happen henceforth by
the temeritie of competitors, that any two Bishops be elected to the Sea, we
straightly charge and command that neither of both shall fit in the said See.
Platina. Sigebertus.
By virtue of this Law, the same Honorius in the year 420. expelled Bonifacius
and Eulalius, competitors and Antipopes out of Rome, though not long after he
revoked Bonifacius, and settled him in the Papal See.

Theodoric the Goth King of Italy, Anastatint. Platina. Lib. Pontifi. Diaconus.
sent John Bishop of Rome Ambassador to the Emperor Justinian, called him home
again, and clapped him up in the close prison, where he starued to death. By the
same King, Peter Bishop of Altine was dispatched to Rome, to hear the cause
and examine the process of Pope Symmachus, then indicted and accused of sundry
crimes.

King Theodatus about the year 537. had the service of Pope Agapetus, as his
Ambassador to the Emperor Justinian, upon a treaty of peace. Agapetus dying
in the time of that scruice, Syluerius is made Bishop by Theodatus. Not long
after, Syluerius is driven out by Belisarius the Emperor his Lieutenant, and
sent into banishment. After Syluerius next succeeds Vigilius, who with
current coin purchased the Popedom of Belisarius. The Emperor Justinian
sends for Vigilius to Constantinople, and receives him there with great honor.
Soon after, the Emperor takes offense at his freeness in speaking his mind,
commands him to be beaten with stripes in manner to death, and with a roape
about his neck to be drawn through the city like a thief, as Platina relates
the history. Nicephorus in his 26. book, and 17. chapter, comes very near
the same relation.

The Emperor Constantius, Platina. Baronius. Sigeberius.
in the year 654. caused Pope Martin to be bound with chains, and banished
him into Chersonesus, where he ended his life. The Popes in that aage writing
to the Emperors, used none but submissiue terms, by way of most humble
supplications; made profession of bowing the knee before their sacred
Majesty's, and of executing their commands with entire obedience; paid to the
Emperors twenty pound weight of gold for their Inuestiture; which tribute was
afterward released and remitted, Justin. Authent. 123. cap. 3.
by Constantine the Bearded, to Pope Agatho, in the year 679. as I have
observed in an other place.

Nay further, even when the power and riches of the Popes was grown to great
height, by the most profuse and immense munificence of Charlemayne and Lewis
his son; the Emperors of the West did not relinquish and give over the
making and vnmaking of Popes, as they saw cause. Pope Adrian 1. willingly
submitted his neck to this yoke: and made this Law to be passed in a Council,
that in Charlemayne should rest all right and power for the Popes election, and
for the government of the Papal See. This Constitution is incerted in the
Decretals, Distinct. 63. Can. Note that in the same Did. the Can of Greg. 4.
beginning with Cum Hadrianus 2. is false, and supposititious, because Gregory
4. was Pope long before Hadr. 2. Triateterrima monstra.
Hadrianus, and was confirmed by the practice of many years.

In the year of the Lord 963. the Emperor Otho took away the Popedom from
John 13. and placed Leo 8. in his room. In like manner, John 14. Gregory 5. and
Siluester 2. were seated in the Papal Throne by the Othos.

The Emperor Henry 2. in the year 1007. deposed three Popes, namely, Bendict
9. Siluester 3. and Gregory 6. whom Platina does not stick to call, three
most detestable and vile monsters. This custom continued, this practice stood
in force for diverse aages, even until the times of Gregory 7. by whom the
whole West was tossed and turmoiled with lamentable wars, which plagued the
world, and the Empire by name with intolerable troubles and mischiefs. For
after the said Gregorian wars, the Empire fell from bad to worse, and so went
on to decay, till Emperors at last were driven to beg and receive the
Imperial Crown of the Pope.

The Kingdom of France met not with so rude entreatie, but was dealt withal
by courses of a milder temper. Gregory 4. about the year of the Lord, 832.
was the first Pope that persuaded himself to use the censure of
Excommunication against a King of France. This Pope having a hand in the
troublesome factions of the Realm, was nothing backward to side with the
sons of Lewis surnamed the Courteous, by wicked conspiracy entering into a
desperate course and complot against Lewis their own father; as witnesses
Sigebert in these words, Pope Gregory coming into France, joined himself to
the sons against the Emperor their Father. Bochel. Decret. Eccles. Gallican.
lib. 2. tit. 16.
But Annals of the very same times, and he that furbushed Aimonius, a
Religious of S. Benedicts Order, do testify, that all the Bishops of France
fell upon this resolution; by no means to rest in the Popes pleasure, or to
give any place unto his design: and contrariwise, In case the Pope should
proceed to Excommunication of their King, he should return out of France to
Rome an excommunicate person himself. The Chronicle of S. Denis has words in
this form: The Lord Apostolical returned answer, that he was not come into
France for any other purpose, but only to excommunicate the King and his
Bishops, if they would be in any sort opposite unto the sons of Lewis, or
disobedient unto the will and pleasure of his Holiness: The Prelates informed
hereof, made answer, that in this case they would never yield obedience to
the Excommunication of the said Bishops; because it was contrary to the
authority and advise of the ancient Canons.

After these times, Pope Nicolas 1. deprived King Lotharius of Communion (for
in those times not a word of deposing) to make him repudiate or quit Valdrada,
and to resume or take again Thetberga his former wife. The Articles framed by
the French upon this point, are to be found in the writing of Hinemarus,
Archbishop of Reims, and are of this purport; that in the judgment of men both
learned and wise, it is an ouerruled case, that as the King whatsoever he
shall do, ought not by his own Bishops to be excommunicated, even so no
foreign Bishop has power to sit for his Judge: because the King is to be
subject only unto God, and his Imperial authority, who alone had the
all-sufficient power to settle him in his Kingdom. Moreover, the Clergy
addressed letters of answer unto the same Pope, full of stinging and bitter
terms, with speeches of great scorn and contempt, as they are set down by
Auentine in his Annals of Bauaria, Annal. Boi^. lib. 4.
not forbearing to call him thief, wolf, and tyrant.

When Pope Hadrian took upon him like a Lord, to command Charles the Bald upon
pain of interdiction, that he should suffer the Kingdom of Lotharius to be
fully and entirely conveyed and conferred upon Lewis his son; the same
Hincmarus, a man of great authority and estimation in that aage, sent his
letters containing sundry remonstrances touching that subject: Among other
matters thus he writes, The Ecclesiastics and Seculars of the Kingdom
assembled at Reims, have affirmed and now do affirm by way of reproach,
vpbraiding, and exprobation, that never was the like Mandate sent before from
the Sea of Rome to any of our predecessors. And a little after: The chief
Bishops of the Apostolic See, or any other Bishops of the greatest authority
and holiness, never withdrew themselves from the presence, from the reverend
salutation, or from the conference of Empererours and Kings, whether Heretics,
or Schismatikes and Tyrants: as Constantius the Arrian, Iulianus the Apostata,
and Maximus the Tyrant. And yet a little after, Wherefore if the Apostolic
Lord be minded to seek peace, let him seek it so, that he stir no brawles,
and breed no quarrels: For we are no such babes to believe, that we can or ever
shall attain to Gods Kingdom, unless we receive him for our King in earth,
whom God himself recommendeth to us from heaven. It is added by Hincmarus in
the same place, that by the said Bishops and Lords Temporal, such threatening
words were blown forth, as he is afraid once to speak and utter. As for the
King himself, what reckoning he made of the Popes mandates, it appears by
the Kings own letters addressed to Pope Hadrianus, as we may read every where
in the Epistles of Hincmarus. For there, after King Charles has taxed and
challenged the Pope of pride, and hit him in the teeth with a spirit of
usurpation, he breaks out into these words: What Hell has cast up this law
so cross and preposterous? what infernal gulf has disgorged this law out of
the darkest and obscurest dens? a law quite contrary, and altogether
repugnant unto the beaten way showed us in the holy Scriptures, etc. Yea, he
flatly and peremptorily forbids the Pope, except he mean or desire to be
recompensed with dishonor and contempt, to send any more the like Mandates,
either to himself, or to his Bishops.

Under the reign of Hugo Capetus and Robert his son, a Council now extant
in all men's hands, was held and celebrated at Reims by the Kings authority.
There Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, then Prolocutor and Speaker of the Council,
calls the Pope Antichrist, and lets not also to paint him forth like a monster:
as well for the deformed and ugly vices of that unholy See, which then were in
their exaltation, as also because the Pope then won with presents, and namely
with certain goodly horses, then presented to his Holiness, took part
against the King, with Arnulphus Bishop of Reims, then dispossessed of his
Pastoral charge.

When Philip 1. had repudiated his wife Bertha, daughter to the Earl of
Holland; and in her place had also taken to wife Bertrade the wife of Fulco
Earl of Aniou yet being alive; he was excommunicated, and his Kingdom
interdicted by Vrbanus then Pope, (though he was then bearded with an Antipope)
as the L. Cardinal here gives us to understand. But his Lordship has skipt
over two principal points recorded in the history. The first is, that Philip
was not deposed by the Pope: whereupon it is to be inferred, that in this
passage there is nothing material to make for the Popes power against a Kings
Throne and Scepter. The other point is, that by the censures of the Pope, the
course of obedience due to the King before was not interrupted, nor the King
disauowed, refused, or disclaimed: but on the contrary, that Iuo of Chartres
taking Pope Vrbanus part, was punished for his presumption, dispoyled of his
estate, and kept in prison: whereof he makes complaint himself in his 19. and
20. Epistles. The L. Cardinal besides, in my understanding for his Masters
honor, should have made no words of interdicting the whole Kingdom. For when
the Pope, to give a King chastisement, does interdict his Kingdom, he makes
the people to bear the punishment of the Kings offense: For during the time of
interdiction, the Church doors through the whole Kingdom are kept continually
shut and locked up: public service is intermitted in all places: bells every
where silent: Sacraments not administered to the people bodies of the dead so
prostituted and abandoned, that none dares bury the said bodies in holy
ground. More, it is believed, that a man dying under the curse of the interdict
(without some special indulgence or privilege) is for ever damned and
adjudged to eternal punishments, as one that dies out of the communion of the
Church. Put case then the interdict holds and continues for many years
together; alas, how many millions of poor souls are damned, and go to hell
for an others offense? For what can, or what may the faltlesse and innocent
people do withal, if the King will repudiate his wife, and she yet living,
join himself in matrimony to an other?

The Lord Cardinal after Philip the 1. produces Philippus Augustus, Examp. 12.
who having renounced his wife Ingeberga daughter to the King of Denmark, and
marrying with Agnes daughter to the Duke of Morauia, was by Pope Innocent the
third interdicted himself and his whole Kingdom. But his Lordshippe was not
pleased to insert withal, what is auerred in the Chronicle of Saint Denis:
that Pope Caelestinus 3. sent forth two Legates at once upon this errand:
Bochel. page 320
Who being come into the assembly and general Council of all the French
Prelates, became like dumb dogs that can not bark, so as they could not bring
the service which they had undertaken to any good pass, because they stood in
a bodily fear of their own bydes. Not long after, the Cardinal of Capua was
in the like taking: For he durst not bring the Realm within the limits of the
interdict, before he was got out of the limits of the Kingdom. The King
herewith incensed, thrust all the Prelates that had given consent unto these
proceedings out of their Sees, confiscated their goods, etc. To the same effect
is that which we read in Matthew Paris. After the Pope had given his Majesty
to understand by the Cardinal of Anagnia, that his kingdom should be
interdicted, unless he would be reconciled to the King of England; the King
returned the Pope this answer, that he was not in any sort afraid of the Popes
sentence, for as much as it could not be grounded upon any equity of the
cause: and added withal, that it did no way appertain unto the Church of Rome
to sentence Kings, especially the King of France. And this was done, says
Johannes Tilius Register in Court of Parliament of Paris, by the counsel of
the French Barons.

Most notable is the example of Philip the fair, and hits the bird in the
right eye. In the year 1032. the Pope dispatched the Archbishop of Narbona
with mandates into France, commanding the King to release the Bishop of Apamia
then detained in prison, for contumelious words tending to the Kings
defamation, and spoken to the Kings own head. In very deed this Pope had
conceived a secret grudge, and no light displeasure against King Philip before:
namely, because the King had taken upon him the collation of Benefices, and
other Ecclesiastical dignities. Upon which occasion the Pope sent letters to
the King of this tenor and style: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: We
would have thee know, that in Spiritual and Temporal causes thou art subject
unto our self: that collating of Benefices and Prebends, does not in any sort
appertain to thy office and place: that, in case as keeper of the
Spiritualties, thou have the custody of Benefices and Prebends in thy hand
when they become void, thou shall by sequestration reserve the fruits of the
same, to the use and benefit of the next Incumbents and successors: and in case
thou have heretofore collated any, we ordain the said collations to be merely
void: and so far as herein thou have proceeded to the fact, we revoke the
said collations. We hold them for heretics whosoever are not of this belief.
A Legate comes to Paris, and brings these brauing letters: By some of the Kings
faithful servants they are violently snatched and pulled out of the Legates
hands: by the Earl of Artois they are cast into the fire. The good King
answers the Pope, and pays him in as good coin as he had sent. Philip by the
grace of God King of the French, to Boniface calling and bearing himself the
Sovereign Bishop, little greeting or none at all. May thy exceeding
sottishness understand, that in Temporal causes we are not subject unto any
mortal and earthly creature: that collating of Benefices and Prebends, by
Regal right appertains to our office and place: that appropriating their
fruits when they become void, belongs to our self alone during their
vacancie: that all collations by us heretofore made, or to be made hereafter,
shall stand in force: that in the validity and virtue of the said collations,
we will ever courageously defend and maintain, all Incumbents and possessors
of Benefices and Prebends so by us collated. We hold them all for sots and
senseless, whosoever are not of this belief. The Pope incensed herewith,
excommunicates the King: but no man dares publish that censure, or become
bearer thereof. The King notwithstanding the said proceedings of the Pope,
assembles his Prelates, Barons, and Knights at Paris: asks the whole assembly,
of whom they hold their Fees, with all other the Temporalties of the Church.
They make answer with one voice, that in the said matters they disclaim the
Pope, and know none other Lord beside his Majesty. Mean while the Pope
works with Germany and the Low Countries, to stir them up against France.
But Philip sends William of Nogaret into Italy. William by the direction and
aid of Sciarra Columnensis, takes the Pope at Anagnia, mounts him upon a lean
ill-fauoured jade, caries him prisoner to Rome; where overcome with choler,
anguish, and great indignation, he takes his last leave of the Popedom and his
life. All this notwithstanding, the King presently after, from the successors
of Boniface receives very ample and gracious Bulls, in which the memory of all
the former passages and actions is utterly abolished. Extrauag. Meruit.
Witness the Epistle of Clement 5. wherein this King is honored with praises,
for a pious and religious Prince, and his Kingdom is restored to the former
estate. In that aage the French Nobility carried other manner of spirits, then
the modern and present Nobility do: I mean those by whom the L. Cardinal
was applauded and assisted in his Oration. Yea, in those former times the
Prelates of the Realm stood better affected toward their King, then the L.
Cardinal himself now stands: who could find none other way to dally with,
and to shift off this pregnant example, but by plain glosing, that heresy and
Apostasy was no ground of that question, or subject of that controversy.
Wherein he not only condemns the Pope, as one that proceeded against Philip
without a just cause and good ground; but likewise gives the Pope the Lie, who
in his goodly letters but a little above recited, has enrowled Philip in the
list of heretics. He says moreover, that indeed the knot of the question
was touching the Popes pretense, in challenging to himself the temporal
Sovereignty of France, that is to say, in qualifying himself King of France:
But indeed and indeed no such matter to be found. His whole pretense was the
collating of Benefices, and to perch above the King, to crow over his Crown
in Temporal causes. At which pretense his Holiness yet aims, still
attributing and challenging to himself plenarie power to depose the King. Now
if the L. Cardinal shall yet proceed to cavil, that Boniface the eighth was
taken by the French for an usurper, and no lawful Pope, but for one that crept
into the Papacy by fraud and symonie; he must be pleased to set down
positiuely who was Pope, seeing that Boniface then sat not in the Papal
chair. To conclude, If he that creeps and steals into the Papacy by
symonie, by canuases or laboring of suffrages under hand, or by bribery, be
not lawful Pope; I dare be bold to profess, there will hardly be found two
lawful Popes in the three last aages. See the treatise of Charles du Moulin
contra paruas Datas, wherein he reports a notable Decree of the Court under
Charles 6.


Pope Benedict in the year 1408. being in choler with Charles the sixth,
because Charles had bridled and curbed the gainefull exactions and extorsions
of the Popes Court, by which the Realm of France had been exhausted of their
treasure, sent an excommunicatorie Bull into France, against Charles the King,
and all his Princes. The University of Paris made request or motion that his
Bull might be mangled, and Pope Benedict himself, by some called Petrus de
Luna, might be declared heretic, schismatike, and perturber of the peace.
Theodoric. Niemens. in nemore union. Tract. 6. and somnium viridar ij.
The said Bull was mangled and rent in pieces, according to the petition of the
University, by Decree of Court upon the tenth of June, 1408. Ten days
after, the Court rising at eleven in the morning, two Bul-bearers of the said
excommunicatorie censure underwent ignominious punishment upon the Palace or
great Hal stairs. From thence were led to the Louure in such manner as they had
been brought from thence before: drawn in two tumbrels, clad in coats of
painted linen, wore paper-mytres on their heads, were proclaimed with sound of
Trumpet, and every where disgraced with public derision: So little reckoning
was made of the Popes thundering canons in those days. And what would they
have done, if the said Bulls had imported sentence of deposition against King
Charles?

The French Church assembled at Tours in the year 1510. decreed that Lewis
XII. might with safe conscience contemn the abusiue Bulls, and unjust censures
of Pope Julius the II. and by arms might withstand the Popes usurpations, in
case he should proceed to excommunicate or depose the King. More, by a
Council holden at Pisa, this Lewis declared the Pope to be fallen from the
Popedom, and coined crowns with a stamp of this inscription, I will destroy
the name of Babylon. To this the L. of Perron makes answer, that all this was
done by the French, as acknowledging these iars to have sprung not from the
fountain of Religion, but from passion of state: Wherein he condemns Pope
Julius, for giving so great scope unto his public censures, as to serve his
ambition, and not rather to advance Religion. He secretly teaches us besides,
that when the Pope undertakes to depose the King of France, then the French are
to sit as Judges concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the cause; and
in case they shall find the cause to be unlawful, then to disanull his
judgments, and to scoff at his thunderbolts.

John d'Albret King of Navarre, whose Realm was given by the foresaid Pope to
Ferdinand King of Arragon, was also wrapped and entangled with strict bands of
deposition. Now if the French had been touched with no better feeling of
affection to their King, then the subjects of Navarre were to the Nauarrois;
doubtless France had sought a new Lord, by virtue of the Popes (as the L.
Cardinal himself does acknowledge and confess) unjust sentence. But behold,
to make the said sentence against John d'Albret seem the less contrary to
equity, the L. Cardinal pretends, the Popes donation was not indeed the
principal cause, Page 31.
howsoever Ferdinand himself made it his pretense. But his Lo. gives this for
the principal cause: that John d'Albret had quitted his alliance made with
condition; that in case the Kings of Navarre should infringe the said alliance,
and break the league, then the kingdom of Navarre should return to the
Crown of Arragon. This condition, between Kings never made, and without all
show of probability, serves to none other purpose from the Cardinals mouth,
but only to insinuate and work a persuasion in his King, that he has no
right nor lawful pretension to the Crown of Navarre: and whatsoever he now
holds in the said kingdom of Navarre, is none of his own, but by usurpation
and unlawful possession. Thus his Lordship French-borne, makes himself an
Advocate for the Spanish King, against his own King, and King of the French:
who shall be feign, as he ought (if this Aduocats plea may take place) to draw
his title and style of King of Navarre out of his Royal titles, and to
acknowledge that all the great endeavors of his predecessors to recover the
said Kingdom, were dishonorable and unjust. Is it possible, that in the very
heart and head City of France, a spirit and tongue so licentious can be
brooked? What, shall so great blasphemy (as it were) of the Kings freehold,
be powered forth in so honorable an assembly, without punishment or fine?
What, without any contradiction for the Kings right, and on the Kings behalf?
I may perhaps confess the indignity might be the better borne, and the
pretense alleged might pass for a poor excuse, if it served his purpose
never so little. For how does all this touch or come near the question? in
which the Popes usurpation in the deposing of Kings, and the resolution of the
French in resisting this tyrannical practice, is the proper issue of the
cause: both which points are never a whit more of the less consequence and
importance, howsoever Ferdinand in his own justification stood upon the
foresaid pretense. Thus much is confessed, and we ask no more: Pope Julius
took the Kingdom from the one, and gave it unto the other: the French
thereupon resisted the Pope, and declared him to be fallen from the Papacy.

This noble spirit and courage of the French, in maintayning the dignity and
honor of their Kings Crowns, bred those ancient customs, which in the
sequence of many aages have been observed and kept in use. This for one: That
no Legate of the Pope, Page 26. Nisi de consensu Regis Christianissimi.
nor any of his rescripts nor mandates, are admitted and received in France,
without license from the King: and unless the Legate impart his faculties to
the Kings Attorney General, to be perused and verified in Court of Parliament:
where they are to be tied by certain modifications and restrictions, unto such
points as are not derogatorie from the Kings right, from the liberties of the
Church, and from the ordinances of the Kingdom. When Cardinal Balua, Bochellus.
contrary to this ancient form, entered France in the year 1484. and there
without leave of the King did execute the office, and speed certain Acts of
the Popes Legate; the Court upon motion made by the Kings Attorney General,
decreed a Commission, to be informed against him by two Counselors of the said
Court, and inhibited his further proceeding to use any faculty or power of the
Popes Legate, upon pain of being proclaimed rebel.

In the year 1561. Johannes Tanquerellus Batchelour in Divinity, by order of
the Court was condemned to make open confession, that he had indiscreetly and
rashly without consideration defended this proposition, Indiscrete ac
inconsiderate.
The Pope is the Vicar of Christ, a Monarke that has power both Spiritual and
Secular, and he may deprive Princes, which rebel against his commandments of
their dignities. Doctrinaliter tantum and non iuridice.
Which proposition, howsoever he protested that he had propounded the same
only to be argued, and not iudicially to be determined in the affirmative,
Tanquerellus nevertheless was compelled openly to recant. Here the L.
Cardinal answers; The history of Tanquerellus is from the matter, because
his proposition treats neither of Heresy nor of Infidelity: but I answer,
The said proposition treats of both, forasmuch as it makes mention of
disobedience to the Pope. For I suppose he will not deny, that whosoever
shall stand out in Heresy, contrary to the Popes monitorie proceedings, he
shall show but poor and simple obedience to the Pope. Moreover, the case is
clear by the former examples, that no Pope will suffer his power to cast down
Kings, to be restrained unto the cause of Heresy and Infidelity.

In the heat of the last wars, raised by that holy-prophane League,
admonitory Bulls were sent by Pope Gregory 14. from Rome, Anno 1591. By these
Bulls King Henry 4. as an Heretic and relapse, was declared incapable of the
Crown of France, and his Kingdom was exposed to havoc and spoil. The Court
of Parliament being assembled at Tours the 5. of August, decreed the said
admonitorie Bulls to be cancelled, torn in pieces, and cast into a great fire
by the hand of the public executioner. The Arrest it self or Decree is of
this tenor: The Court duly pondering and approouing the concluding and
unanswerable reasons of the Kings Attorney General, has declared, and by
these present does declare, the admonitorie Bulls given at Rome the 1. of
March 1591. to be of no validity, abusiue, seditious, damnable, full of
impiety and impostures, contrary to the holy decrees rights, franchises, and
liberties of the French Church: does ordeine the Copies of the said Bulls,
sealed with the seal of Marsilius Landrianus, and signed Septilius Lamprius,
to be rent in pieces by the public executioner, and by him to be burnt in a
great fire to be made for such purpose, before the great gates of the common
Hall or Palace, etc. Then, even then the L. of Perron was firm for the better
part, and stood for his King against Gregory the Pope, notwithstanding the
crime of eresie pretended against Henry his Lord.

All the former examples by us alleged, are drawn out of the times after
Schools of Divinity were established in France: For I thought good to bound
my self within those dooles and limits of time, which the L. Cardinal himself
has set. Who goes not sincerely to work and in good earnest, where he
tells us there be three instances (as if we had no more) objected against
Papal power, to remove Kings out of their chaires of State: Page 47.
by name, the example of Philip the Fair, of Lewis XII. and of Tanquerellus:
For in very truth all the former examples by us produced, are no less
pregnant and evident, howsoever the L. Cardinal has been pleased to conceal
them all for fear of hurting his cause.

Nay, France even in the days of her sorest servitude, was never unfurnished
of great Divines, by whom this usurped power of the Pope, over the Temporalties
and Crowns of Kings, has been utterly misliked and condemned.

Robert Earl of Flanders was commanded by Pope Paschal 2. to persecute with
fire and sword the Clergy of Liege, who then adhered and stood to the cause of
the Emperor Henry 4. whom the Pope had ignominiously deposed. Robert by the
Popes order and command, was to handle the Clergy of Liege in like sort as
before he had served the Clergy of Cambray, who by the said Earl had been
cruelly stripped both of goods and life: The Pope promised the said Earl and his
army pardon of their sins for the said execution. The Clergy of Liege
addressed answer to the Pope at large: They cried out upon the Church of Rome,
and called her Babylon: Told the Pope home, that God had commanded to give unto
Caesar that which is Caesar's: that every soul must be subject unto the
superior powers: that no man is exempted out of this precept: and that every
oath of alleagiance is to be kept inviolable; yea, that hereof they themselves
are not ignorant, in as much as they by a new Schism, and new traditions,
making a separation and rent of the Priesthood from the Kingdom, do promise
to absolve of perjury, such as have perfidiously forsworn themselves against
their King. And whereas by way of despite and in opprobrious manner, they were
excommunicated by the Pope, they gave his Holiness to understand, that David's
heart had uttered a good matter, but Paschals heart had spewed up sordid and
railing words, like old bawdes and spinsters or websters of linen, when they
scold and brawle one with another. Finally, they rejected his Papal
excommunication, as a sentence given without discretion. This was the voice and
free speech of that Clergy, in the life time of their noble Emperor: But
after he was thrust out of the Empire by the rebellion of his own son,
instigated and stirred up thereunto by the Popes persuasion and practice, and
was brought unto a miserable death; it is no matter of wonder, that for the
safeguard of their life, the said Clergy were driven to sue unto the Pope for
their pardon. Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 3.


Hildebert Bishop of Caenomanum upon the river of Sartre, living under the
reign of King Philip the first, affirms in his Epistles 40. and 75. that
Kings are to be admonished and instructed, rather then punished: to be dealt
with by counsel, rather then by command, by doctrine and instruction, rather
then by correction: For no such sword belongs to the Church, because the
sword of the Church is Ecclesiastical discipline, and nothing else. De
consider. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Bernard writes to Pope Eugenius after this manner: Whosoever they be that
are of this mind and opinion, shall never be able to make proof, that any one
of the Apostles did ever fit in quality of Judge or Diuider of lands. I read
where they have stood to be judged, but never where they sat down to give
judgment. Again, Your authority stretches unto crimes, not unto
possessions: because you have received the keys of the kingdom of heaven, not
in regard of possessions, but of crimes, to keep all that plead by couin or
collusion, and not lawful possessors, out of the heavenly kingdom. A little
after: These base things of the earth are judged by the Kings and Princes of
this world: wherefore do you thrust your sickle into an others harvest?
wherefore do you incroach and intrude upon an others limits? Lib. 2. cap. 6.
Elsewhere. The Apostles are directly forbid to make themselves Lords and
rulers. Go thou then, and being a Lord usurp Apostleship, or being an
Apostle usurp Lordship. If thou needs wilt have both, doubtless thou shall
have neither.

Johannes Mayor Doctor of Paris: Did. 24. quest. 3
The Sovereign Bishop has no temporal authority over Kings. The reason:
Because it follows (the contrary being once granted) that Kings are the Popes
vassals. Now let other men judge, whether he that has power to dispossess
Kings of all their Temporalties, has not likewise authority over their
Temporalties.

The same Author: Comment in l. 4. Sent. Did. 24 fol. 214.
The Pope has no manner of title over the French or Spanish Kings in temporal
matters. Where it is further added, That Pope Innocent 3. has been pleased to
testify, that Kings of France in Temporal causes do acknowledge no
superior: For so the Pope excused himself to a certain Lord of Montpellier,
who in stead of suing to the King, had petitioned to the Pope for a
dispensation for his bastard. But perhaps (as he speaks) it will be alleged
out of the gloss, that he acknowledges no superior by fact, and yet ought
by right. But I tell you the gloss is an Aurelian gloss, which marres the
text. Amongst other arguments, Mayor brings this for one: This opinion
ministers matter unto Popes, to take away an others Empire by force and
violence: which the Pope shall never bring to pass, as we read of Boniface 8.
against Philip the Fair: Says besides, That from hence proceed wars, in
time of which many outrageous mischiefs are done, and that Gerson calls them
egregious flatterers by whom such opinion is maintained. In the same place
Mayor denies that Childeric was deposed by Pope Zachary: The word, He
deposed, says Mayor, is not so to be understood, as it is taken at the first
blush or fight; but he deposed, is thus expounded in the gloss, He gave his
consent unto those by whom he was deposed.

John of Paris: De potest. Regia and Papali. cap. 10.
Were it granted that Christ was armed with Temporal power, yet he committed
no such power to Peter. A little after: The power of Kings is the highest power
upon earth: in Temporal causes it has no superior power above it self, no
more then the Pope has in spiritual matters. This author says indeed, the
Pope has power to excommunicate the King; but he speaks not of any power in
the Pope to put down the King from his regal dignity and authority: He only
says, When a Prince is once excommunicated, he may accidentally or by
occasion be deposed: because his precedent excommunication, incites the people
to disarme him of all secular dignity and power. The same John on the other
side holds opinion; that in the Emperor there is invested a power to depose
the Pope, in case the Pope shall abuse his power.

Almainus Doctor of the Sorbonic school: Almain. de potesi. Eccl and Laica
Quest. 3. cap. 8. De deminio naturali civil and Eccl. 5. vlt. pars.
It is essential in the Lay-power to inflict civil punishment, as death,
banishment, and privation or loss of goods. But according to divine
institution, the power Ecclesiastical can lay no such punishment upon
delinquents: nay more, not lay in prison, as to some Doctors it seems
probable: but stretches and reaches only to spiritual punishment, as namely
to excommunication: all other punishments inflicted by the spiritual power,
are merely by the Law positive. If then Ecclesiastical power by Gods Law
has no authority to deprive any private man of his goods; how dares the Pope
and his flatterers build their power to deprive Kings of their scepters upon
the word of God?

The same author in an other place: Quaest. 1. de potest. Eccles. and laic. c.
12. and 14
Be it granted that Constantine had power to give the Empire unto the Pope;
yet is it not hereupon to be inferred, that Popes have authority over the
Kingdom of France, because that Kingdom was never subject unto Constantine:
For the King of France never had any superior in Temporal matters. A little
after: It is not in any place to be found, that God has given the Pope power
to make and unmake Temporal Kings.

He maintains elsewhere, that Zachary did not depose Childeric, Quaest. 2.
c. 8. and sic nond: posuit autoruat (...).
but only consented to his deposing; and so deposed him not as by authority.
In the same book, taking up the words of Occam, whom he styles the Doctor: The
Emperor is the Popes Lord in things Temporal, and the Pope calls him Lord,
Quae. 3. c. 2. Quaest. 11. can. Sacerd.
as it is witnessed in the body of the Text. The Lord Cardinal has dissembled
and concealed these words of Doctor Almainus, with many like places: and has
been pleased to allege Almainus reciting Occams authority, in stead of
quoting Almainus himself in those passages, where he speaks as out of his
own opinion, and in his own words. A notable piece of sly and cunning
conueiance: For what heresy may not be fathered and fastened upon S.
Augustine, or S. Hierome, if they should be deemed to approve all the passages
which they allege out of other authors? And that is the reason wherefore the
L. Cardinal does not allege his testimonies whole and perfect, as they are
couched in their proper texts, but clipped and curtaild. Thus he deals even in
the first passage or testimony of Almainus; he brings it in mangled and pared:
he hides and conceales the words added by Almainus, to contradict and cross
the words going before: For Almainus makes this addition and supply; Howsoever
some other Doctors do stand for the negative, and teach the Pope has power
only to declare that Kings and Princes are to be deposed. And so much
appears by this reason; because this ample and Sovereign power of the Pope,
might give him occasion to be puffed up with great pride, and the same fullness
of power might prove extremely hurtful to the subjects, etc.

The same Almainus brings in Occams opinion in express terms deciding the
question, Quaest. 2. de potest. Eccl. and Laic. cap. 12.
and there ioynes his own opinion with Occams. The Doctors opinion, says
Almainus, does simply carry the most probability; that a Pope has no power,
neither by excommunication, nor by any other means, to depose a Prince from
his Imperial and Royal dignity. In cap. 9 10. and 11.
And a little before, having maintained the Greek Empire was never transported
by the Pope to the Germans, and that when the Pope crowns the Emperor, he
does not give him the Empire, no more then the Archbishop of Reims when he
crowns the King of France, does give him the kingdom; he draws this
conclusion according to Occams opinion: I deny that an Emperor is bound by
oath to promise the Pope allegiance. On the other side, if the Pope hold any
Temporal possessions, he is bound to swear allegiance unto the Emperor, and
to pay him tribute. The said Occam alleged by Almainus does further auerre,
that Justinian was acknowledged by the Pope for his superior in Temporal
causes: for as much as diverse Laws which the Pope is bound to keep and
observe, were enacted by Justinian; as by name the Law of prescription for an
hundred years: which Law stands yet in force against the Bishop of Rome. And
to the end that all men may clearly see, how great distance there is between
Occams opinion and the L. Cardinals, who toward the end of his Oration,
exhorts his hearers at no hand to dissent from the Pope; take you here a view
of Occams own words, as they are alleged by Almainus: The Doctor assoyles
the arguments of Pope Innocent, Quest. 1. cap. 14.
by which the Pope would prove out of these words of CHRIST, Whatsoever
thoushalt bind, etc. that fullness of power in Temporal matters, belongs to
the Sovereign Bishop: For Innocent says, Whatsoever, excepteth nothing: But
Occam assoyles Innocents authority, as not only false, but also heretical;
and says withal, that many things are spoken by Innocent, which by his leave
savor and smell of herefie, etc.

The L. Page 40.
Cardinal with less fidelity alleges two places out of Thomas his Sum.
The first, in the second of his second, Quest. 10. Art. 10. in the body of the
Article; In which place (let it be narrowly examined) Thomas will easily be
found to speak, not of the subjection of believing Subjects under Infidel
Kings, as the Lord Cardinal pretends, but of believing servants that live
under Masters, whether Jews or Infidels: As when a Jew keeps servants which
profess Jesus Christ; or as when some of the faithful kept in Caesar's house;
who are not considered by Thomas as they were subjects of the Empire, but as
they were servants of the family. The other place is taken out of Quest. 11.
and 2. Art. in the body of the article: where no such matter as the L. Cardinal
alleges can be found.

With like fidelity he takes Gerson in hand: Page 44.
who indeed in his book of Ecclesiastical power, and 12. Consider. does
affirm, When the abuse of Secular power redoundeth to manifest impugning of
the faith, and blaspheming of the Creator, then shall it not be amiss to have
recourse unto the last branch of this 12. Consider. where, in such case as
aforesaid, a certain regitiue, directive, regulatiue, and ordinatiue
authority is committed to the Ecclesiastical power. His very words: which
make no mention at all of deposing, or of any compulsiue power over Sovereign
Princes: For that form of rule and government whereof Gerson speaks, is
exercised by Ecclesiastical censures and excommunications; not by loss of
goods, of Kingdoms, or of Empires. This place then is wrested by the L.
Cardinal to a contrary sense. Neither should his Lordship have omitted, that
Gerson, in the question of Kings subjection in Temporal matters, or of the
dependence of their Crowns upon the Popes power, excepteth always the King of
France: witness that which Gerson a little before the place alleged by the
Cardinal, has plainly affirmed: Now since Peter's time, says Gerson, all
Imperial, Regal, and Secular power is not immediately to draw virtue and
strength from the Sovereign Bishop: as in this manner the most Christian King
of France has no Superior, nor acknowledges any such upon the face of the
earth. Now here need no great sharpness of wit for the searching out of this
deep mystery; that if the Pope has power to give or take away Crowns for
any cause or any pretended occasion whatsoever, the Crown of France must needs
depend upon the Pope.

But for as much as we are now hit in with Gerson, Page 108.109.119. where the
Card. takes Char. 7. for Charl. 6.
we will examine the L. Cardinals allegations toward the end of his Oration,
taken out of Gersons famous Oration made before Charles the 6. for the
University of Paris: where he brings in Gerson to affirm, That killing a
Tyrant is a sacrifice acceptable to God. But Gerson (let it be diligently
noted) there speaks not in his own person: he there brings in sedition
speaking the words: Of which words uttered by sedition, and other like
speeches, you shall now hear what judgment Gerson himself has given. When
sedition had spoken with such a furious voice, I turned away my face as if I
had been smitten with death, to show that I was not able to endure her madness
any longer. And indeed when dissimulation on the one side, and sedition on the
other, had suggested the devises of two contrary extremes, he brings forth
Discretion as a Judge, keeping the mean between both extremes, and uttering
those words which the L. Cardinal alleges against himself. If the head, (
says Gerson) or some other member of the civil body, should grow to so
desperate a pass, that it would gulpe and swallow down the deadly poison of
tyranny; every member in his place, with all power possible for him to raise
by expedient means, and such as might prevent a greater inconvenience, should
set himself against so mad a purpose, and so deadly practice: For if the
head be grieved with some light pain, it is not fit for the hand to smite the
head: no that were but a foolish and a mad part: Nor is the hand forthwith to
chop off or separate the head from the body, but rather to cure the head with
good speech and other means, like a skillful and wise Physician: Yea nothing
would be more cruel or more void of reason, then to seek to stop the strong
and violent stream of tyranny by sedition. These words, me think, do make
very strongly and expressly against butchering even of Tyrannical Kings. And
whereas a little after the said passage, he teaches to expel Tyranny, he
has not a word of expelling the Tyrant, but only of breaking and shaking off
the yoke of Tyranny. Yet for all that, he would not have the remedies for the
repressing of Tyranny, to be fetched from the Pope, who presumes to degrade
Kings, but from Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines, and personages of good
conversation. It appears now by all that has bin said before, that whereas
Gerson in the 7. Considerat. against Flatterers, does affirm: Whenever the
Prince does manifestly pursue and prosecute his natural subjects, and show
himself obstinately bent with notorious injustice, to vex them of set
purpose, and with full consent, so far as to the fact; then this rule and law
of Nature does take place, It is lawful to resist and repel force by force;
and the sentence of Seneca, There is no sacrifice more acceptable to God, then
a tyrant offered in sacrifice; the words, does take place, are so to be
understood, as he speaks in another passage, to wit, with or amongst
seditious persons. Or else the words, does take place, do only signify, is
put in practice. And so Gerson there speaks not as out of his own judgment.

His Lordship also should not have balked and left out Sigebertus, who with
more reason might have passed for French, then Thomas and Occam, whom he
puts upon us for French. Sigebertus in his Chronicle upon the year 1088.
speaking of the Emperors deposing by the Pope, has words of this tenor: This
Heresy was not crept out of the shell in those days, that his Priests, who
has said to the King Apostata, and makes an hypocrite to rule for the sins
of the people, should teach the people they owe no subjection unto wicked
Kings, nor any alleagiance, notwithstanding they have taken the oath of
alleagiance.

Now after the L. Cardinal has coursed in this manner through the histories of
the last aages (which in case they all made for his purpose, do lack the
weight of authority) in stead of searching the will of God in the sacred
Oracles of his word and standing upon examples of the ancient Church; at last,
leaving the troop of his own allegations, he betakes himself to the
sharpening and rebating of the points of his adversaries weapons.

For the purpose, he brings in his adversaries, the champions of Kings Crowns,
and makes them to speak out of his own mouth (for his Lordship says it will
be objected) after this manner: Page 52. and sequentibus.
It may come to pass, that Popes either carried with passion, or misled by
sinister information, may without just cause fasten upon Kings the imputation
of heresy or apostasy. Then for King-deposers he frames this answer: That by
heresy they understand notorious heresy, and formerly condemned by sentence
of the Church. Moreover, in case the Pope has erred in the fact, it is the
Clergies part adhering to their King, to make remonstrances unto the Pope, and
to require the cause may be referred to the judgment of a full Council, the
French Church then and there being present. Now in this answer, the L.
Cardinal is of another mind then Bellarmine his brother Cardinal: Aduers.
Barclaium.
For he goes thus far, That a Prince condemned by unjust sentence of the
Pope, ought nevertheless to quit his Kingdom, and that his Pastors unjust
sentence shall not redound to his detriment; provided that he give way to the
said sentence, and show himself not refractarie, but stay the time in
patience, until the holy Father shall renounce his error, and revoke his
foresaid unjust sentence. In which case these two material points are to be
presupposed: The one, That he who now has seized the kingdom of the Prince
displaced, will forthwith (if the Pope shall solicit and intercede) return the
Kingdom to the hand of the late possessor: The other, That in the interim the
Prince unjustly deposed, shall not need to fear the bloody murderers
merciless blade and weapon. But on the other side, the Popes power of so large
a size, as Bellarmine has shaped, is no whit pleasing to the L. Cardinals eye.
For in case the King should be unjustly deposed by the Pope not well informed,
he is not of the mind the Kingdom should stoop to the Popes behests, but
will rather have the Kingdom to deal by remonstrance, and to refer the
cause unto the Council: Wherein he makes the Council to be of more absolute and
supreme authority then the Pope; a strain to which the holy father will never
lend his ear. And yet doubtless, the Council required in this case must be
universal; wherein the French, for so much as they stand firm for the King
and his cause, can be no Judges: and in that regard the L. Cardinal requires
only the presence of the French Church. Who sees not here into what pickle
the French cause is brought by this means? The Bishops of Italy forsooth, of
Spain, of Sicilie, of Germany, the subjects of Sovereigns many times at
professed or privy enmity with France, shall have the cause compremitted and
referred to their judgment, whether the Kindome of France shall drive out her
Kings, and shall kindle the flames of seditious troubles, in the very heart and
bowels of the Realm. But is it not possible, that a King may lack the love of
his own subjects, and they taking the vantage of that occasion, may put him to
his trumps in his own Kingdom? Is it not possible, that calumniations whereby
a credulous Pope has been seduced, may in like manner deceive some part of a
credulous people? Is it not possible that one part of the people may cleave to
the Popes Faction, another may hold and stand out for the Kings rightful
cause, and civil wars may be kindled by the spleen of these two sides? Is it
not possible, that his Holiness will not rest in the remonstrances of the
French, and will no further pursue his cause? And whereas now a days a
General Council cannot be held, except it be called and assembled by the
Popes authority; is it credible, the Pope will take order for the convocation
of a Council, by whom he shall be judged? And how can the Pope be President in
a Council, where himself is the party impleaded? and to whom the sifting of
his own sentence is referred, as it were to Committies, to examine whether it
was denounced according to Law, or against Justice? But in the mean time,
whilst all these remonstrances and addresses of the Council are on foot;
behold, the Royal Majesty of the King hangs as it were by loose gimmals,
and must stay the judgment of the Council to whom it is referred. Well: what
if the Council should hap to be two or three years in assembling, and to
continue or hold eighteen years, like the Council of Trent; should not poor
France, I beseech you, be reduced to a very bad plight? should she not be in a
very wise and warm taking? To be short; His Lordships whole speech for the
untying of this knot, not only surmounteth possibility, but is stuffed with
ridiculous toys. This I make manifest by his addition in the same passage. If
the Pope deceived in fact, shall rashly and unjustly declare the King to be an
heretic; then the Popes declaration shall not be seconded with actual
deposition, unless the Realm shall consent unto the Kings deposing. What needs
any man to be instructed in this doctrine? Who does not know, that a King, so
long as he is vpheld and maintained in his Kingdom by his people, cannot
actually and effectually be deposed from his Throne? He that speaks such
language and phrase, in effect says, and says no more then this: A King is
never deprived of his Crown, so long as he can keep his Crown on his head: a
King is never turned and stripped naked, so long as he can keep his clothes on
his back: a King is never deposed, so long as he can make the stronger party
and side against his enemies: in brief, a King is King, and shall still
remain King, so long as he can hold the possession of his Kingdom, and
sitfast in his Chair of Estate. Howbeit, let us here by the way, take notice
of these words uttered by his Lordship: That for the deposing of a King, the
consent of the people must be obtained: For by these words the people are
exalted above the King, and are made the Judges of the Kings deposing.

But here is yet a greater matter: Can. Si Papa, Did. 40. Nisi sit a side
demins.
For that Popes may err in faith, it is acknowledged by Popes themselves: For
some of them have condemned Pope Honorius for a Monothelite: S. Hierome, and S.
Hilarious, and S. Athanasius do testify, that Pope Liberius started aside, and
subscribed to Arrianisme: Pope John 23. was condemned in the Council of
Constance, for maintaining there is neither hell nor heaven: Diverse other
Popes have been tainted with error in faith. If therefore any Pope heretical
in himself, shall depose an Orthodoxe King for heresy; can it be imagined,
that he which boasts himself to bear all divine and humane laws in the privy
coffer or casket of his breast, Omnia ^^^a in serinio pectoris.
will stoop to the remonstrances of the French, and veil to the reasons which
they shall propound, though never so justifiable, and of never so great
validity? And how can he, that may be infected with damnable heresy (when
himself is not always free from heresy) be a judge of heresy in a King? In
this question some are of opinion, that as a man, the Pope may fall into error,
but not as Pope. Very good: I demand then upon the matter, wherefore the Pope
does not instruct and reform the man? or wherefore the man does not require
the Popes instructions? But whether a King be deposed by that man the Pope, or
by that Pope the man, is it not all one? is he not deposed? Others affirm, the
Pope may err in a question of the fact, but not in a question of the right. An
egregious gullery and imposture: For if he may be ignorant whether Jesus Christ
died for our sins, doubtless he may also be to seek, whether we should repose
all our trust and assured confidence in the death of Christ. Consider with me
the Prophets of old: They were all inspired and taught of God, to admonish and
reprove the Kings of Judah and Israel: they neither erred in matter of fact,
nor in point of right: they were as far from being blinded and fetched over by
deceitful calumniations, as from being seduced by the painted show of corrupt
and false doctrine: As they never trod awry in matter of faith; so they never
whetted the edge of their tongue or style against the faultlesse. Had it not
been a trim device in their times, to say, that as Esaias and as Daniel they
might have sunk into heresy, but not as Prophets? For doubtless in this
case, that Esaias would have taken counsel of the Prophet which was himself. To
be short; If Kings are only so long to be taken for Kings, until they shall
be declared heretics, and shall be deposed by the Pope; they continually stand
in extreme danger, to undergo a very heavy and unjust sentence. Their safest
way were to know nothing, and to believe by proxy; least, if they should
happen to talk of God, or to think of religion, they should be drawn for
heretics into the Popes Inquisition.

All the examples hitherto produced by the Lord Cardinal on a row, are of a
latter date, they lack weight, are drawn from the time of bondage, and make
the Popes themselves witnesses in their own cause: They descant not upon the
point of deposition, but only strike out and sound the notes of
excommunication and interdiction, which make nothing at all to the music of
the question. And therefore he tells us (in kindness as I take it) more
oftentimes then once or twice, that he speaks only of the fact; as one that
does acknowledge himself to be out of the right: He relates things done,
but never what should be done: which, as the Judicious know, is to teach
nothing.

THE SECOND INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED.
THE second Iuconuenience like to grow, Page 86.
(as the Lord Cardinal seems to be half afraid) if the Article of the third
Estate might have passed with approbation, is couched in these words: Laymen
shall by authority be strengthened with power, to judge in matters of
Religion; as also to determine the doctrine comprised in the said Article to
have requisite conformity with Gods word: yeathey shall have it in their hands
to compel Ecclesiastics by necessity, to swear, preach, and teach the
opinion of the one fide, as also by Sermons and public writings to impugn the
other. This inconvenience he aggrauateth with swelling words, and breaks out
into these vehement exclamations: O reproach, O scandal, O gate set open to a
world of heresies. He therefore labors both by reasons, and by authorities
of holy Scripture, to make such usurped power of Laics, a foul, shameful, and
odious practice. In the whole, his Lordship toils himself in vain, and
makes suppositions of castles in the air. For in preferring this Article, the
third Estate have born themselves not as judges or vmpires, but altogether as
petitioners: requesting the said Article might be received into the number of
the Parliament books to be presented unto the King and his Counsel, unto
whom in all humility they referred the judgment of the said Article;
conceiving all good hope the Clergy and Nobility would be pleased to join
for the furtherance of their humble petition. They were not so ignorant of
State-matters, or so unmindful of their own places and charges, to bear
themselves in hand, that a petition put up and preferred by the third Estate,
can carry the force of a Law or Statute, so long as the other two Orders
withstand the same, and so long as the King himself holds back his Royal
consent. Besides, the said Article was not propounded as a point of Religious
doctrine; but for ever after to remain and continue a fundamental Law of the
Commonwealth and State it self, the due care whereof was put into their
hands, and committed to their trust. If the King had ratified the said Article
with Royal consent, and had commanded the Clergy to put in execution the
contents thereof; it had been their duty to see the Kings will and pleasure
fulfilled, as they are subjects bound to give him aid in all things, which may
any way serve to procure the safety of his life, and the tranquillity of his
Kingdom: Which if the Clergy had performed to the uttermost of their power,
they had not showed obedience as underlings, unto the third Estate, but unto
the King alone; by whom such command had been imposed, upon suggestion of his
faithful subjects, made the more watchful by the negligence of the Clergy;
whom they perceive to be lincked with stricter bands unto the Pope, then they
are unto their King. Here then the Cardinal fights with mere shadows, and
mooues a doubt whereof his adversaries have not so much as once thought in a
dream: But yet, according to his great dexterity and nimblenesse of spirit,
by this device he cunningly takes upon him to give the King a lesson with more
liberty; making semblance to direct his masked Oration to the Deputies of the
people, when he shoots in effect, and pricketh at his King, the Princes also
and Lords of his Counsel, whom the Cardinal compriseth under the name of
Laics; whose judgment (it is not unlikely) was apprehended much better by the
Clergy, then the judgment of the third Estate. Now these are the men whom he
terms intruders into other men's charges, and such as open a gate for I wot
not how many legions of heresies, to rush into the Church: For if it be proper
to the Clergy and their Head, to judge in this cause of the Right of Kings;
then the King himself, his Princes, and Nobility, are debarred and wiped of
all judgment in the same cause, no less then the representative body of the
people.

Well then, Page 61.
the L. Cardinal showers down like hail sundry places and testimonies of
Scripture, where the people are commanded to have their Pastors in singular
love, and to bear them all respects of due observance. Be it so; yet are the
said passages of Scripture no bar to the people, for their vigilant
circumspection, to preserve the life and Crown of their Prince, against all
the wicked enterprises of men stirred up by the Clergy, who have their Head
out of the Kingdom, and hold themselves to be none of the Kings subjects: a
thing never spoken by the sacrificing Priests and Prelates, mentioned in the
passages alleged by the Lord Cardinal. He likewise produces two Christian
Emperors, Page 62.
Constantine and Valentinian by name; the first refusing to meddle with
judgment in Episcopal causes: the other forbearing to judge of subtle
Questions in Divinity, with protestation, that He would never be so curious,
to diue into the streams, or sound the bottom of so deep matters. But who
does not know, that working and providing for the Kings indemnitie and safety,
is neither Episcopal cause, nor matter of curious and subtle inquisition? The
same answer meets with all the rest of the places produced by the L. Orat. ad
ciues timme perculsos.
Cardinal out of the Fathers. And that one for example, out of Gregory
Nazianzenus, is not cited by the Cardinal with fair dealing. For Gregory
does not board the Emperor himself, but his Deputy or L. President, on this
manner: (...)
For we also are in authority and place of a Ruler, we have command as well as
your self: whereas the the L. Cardinal with foul play, turns the place in
these terms, We also are Emperors. Which words can bear no such
interpretation, as well because he to whom the Bishop then spoke, was not of
Imperial dignity; as also because if the Bishop himself, a Bishop of so
small a city as Nazianzum, had qualified himself Emperor, he should have
passed all the bounds of modesty, and had showed himself arrogant above
measure. For as touching subjection due to Christian Emperors, he freely
acknowledges a little before, (...)
that himself and his people are subject unto the superior powers, yea bound
to pay them tribute. The history of the same Gregory's life does testify,
that he was drawn by the Arrians before the Consuls judgment seat, and from
thence returned acquitted, without either stripes or any other kind of
contumelious entreatie and use: yet now at last up starts a Prelate, who dares
make this good Father vaunt himself to be an Emperor. It is willingly
granted, that Emperors never challenged, never arrogated, to be Sovereign
Judges in controversies of doctrine and faith; nevertheless it is clearer then
the Suns light at high noone, that for moderation at Synods, for
determinations and orders established in Councils, and for the discipline of
the Church, they have made a good and a full use of their Imperial authority.
Vide Canones Graecos a Tilio editos.
The first Council held at Constantinople, bears this title or inscription;
The dedication of the holy Synod to the most religious Emperor Theodosius the
Great, to whose will and pleasure they have submitted these Canons by them
addressed and established in Council. And there they also beseech the
Emperor, to confirm and approve the said Canons. The like has been done by
the Council of Trullo, by whom the Canons of the fifth and sixth Councils were
put forth and published. This was not done, because Emperors took upon them
to be infallible Judges of doctrine; but only that Emperors might see and
judge, whether Bishops (who feel the prick of ambition as other men do) did
propound nothing in their Conuocations and Consultations, but most of all in
their Determinations, to undermine the Emperors authority, to disturb the
tranquillity of the Commonwealth, and to cross the determinations of
precedent Councils. Now to take the cognizance of such matters out of the Kings
hand or power; what is it but even to transform the King into a standing
Image, to wring and wrest him out of all care of himself and his Kingly
Charge, yea to bring him down to this basest condition, to become only an
executioner, and (which I scorn to speak) the unhappy hangman of the Clergies
will, without any further cognizance, not so much as of matters which most
nearly touch himself, and his Royal estate?

I grant it is for Divinity Schools, to judge how far the power of the Keys
does stretch: I grant again, that Clerics both may, and ought also to display
the colors and ensigns of their censures against Princes, who violating their
public and solemn oath, do raise and make open war against Jesus Christ: I
grant yet again, that in this case they need not admit Laics to be of their
counsel, nor allow them any scope or liberty of judgment. Yet all this makes
no bar to Clerics, for extending the power of their keys, many times a whole
degree further then they ought; and when they are pleased, to make use of their
said power, to deprive the people of their goods, or the Prince of his Crown:
all this does not hinder Prince or people from taking care for the
preservation of their own rights and estates, nor from requiring Clerics to
show their cards, and produce their Charts, and to make demonstration by
Scripture, that such power as they assume and challenge, is given them from
God. For to leave the Pope absolute Judge in the same cause, wherein he is a
party, and (which is the strongest rampire and bulwark, yea the most glorious
and eminent point of his domination) to arm him with power to unhorse Kings
out of their seats; what is it else but even to draw them into a state of
despair for ever winning the day, or prevailing in their honorable and
rightful cause?

It is moreover granted, if a King shall command any thing directly contrary to
Gods word, and tending to the subuerting of the Church; that Clerics in this
case ought not only to dispense with subjects for their obedience, but also
expressly to forbid their obedience: For it is always better to obey God then
man. Howbeit in all other matters, whereby the glory and majesty of God is not
impeached or impaired, it is the duty of Clerics to plie the people with
wholesome exhortation to constant obedience, and to auert by earnest
disswasions the said people from tumultuous revolt and seditious insurrection.
This practice under the Pagan Emperors, was held and followed by the ancient
Christians; by whose godly zeal and patience in bearing the yoke, the Church
in times past grew and flourished in her happy and plentiful increase, far
greater then Popery shall ever purchase and attain unto by all her cunning
devices and sleights: as namely by degrading of Kings, by interdicting of
Kingdoms, by apposted murders, and by Diabolical trains of Gunne-powder-mines.

The places of Scripture alleged in order by the Cardinal, Page 66.
in favor of those that stand for the Popes claim of power and authority to
depose Kings, are cited with no more sincerity then the former: They allege
(these are his words) that Samuel deposed King Saul, or declared him to be
deposed, because he had violated the Laws of the Jews Religion: His Lordship
avouches elsewere, that Saul was deposed, because he had sought profanely to
usurp the holy Priesthood. Both false and contrary to the tenor of truth in
the sacred history: For Saul was never deposed according to the sense of the
word (I mean, depose) in the present question; to wit, as deposing is taken
for despoiling the King of his royal dignity, and reducing the King to the
condition of a private person: But Saul held the title of King, and continued
in possession of his Kingdom, even to his dying day. 1. Sam. 23.20. and 24.15.
and 2. Sam. 2.5.
Yea, the Scripture styles him King, even to the periodicall and last day of
his life, by the testimony of David himself, who both by Gods promise, and by
precedent unction, was then heir apparent as it were to the Crown, in a manner
then ready to gird and adorn the temples of his head. For if Samuel, by Gods
commandment, had then actually removed Saul from his Throne, doubtless the
whole Church of Israel had committed a gross error, in taking and honoring
Saul for their King, after such deposition: doubtless the Prophet Samuel
himself, making known the Lords Ordinance unto the people, would have
enjoined them by strict prohibition to call him no longer the King of Israel:
Doubtless, David would never have held his hand from the throat of Saul, 1.
Sam. 26.11
for this respect and consideration, because he was the Lords Anointed. For if
Saul had lost his Kingly authority, from that instant when Samuel gave him
knowledge of his reiection; then David, lest otherwise the Body of the Kingdom
should want a Royal Head, was to begin his Reign, and to bear the Royal
scepter in the very same instant: which were to charge the holy Scriptures with
vntrewth, in as much as the sacred history begins the computation of the
years of David's Reign, from the day of Saul's death. True it is, that in the
1. Sam. cap. 15. Saul was denounced by Gods own sentence, a man rejected, and
as it were excommunicated out of the Kingdom, that he should not rule and
reign any longer as King over Israel, nevertheless, the said sentence was not
put in execution, before the day when God, executing upon Saul an exemplarie
judgment, did strike him with death. From whence it is manifest and clear, 1.
Sam. 16.23.
that when David was anointed King by Samuel, that action was only a promise,
and a testimony of the choice, which God had made of David for succession
immediately after Saul; and not a present establishment, inuestment, or
installment of David in the Kingdom. We read the like in 1. King. cap. 19.
where God commands Elias the Prophet, to anoint Hasael King of Syria: For
can any man be so blind and ignorant in the sacred history, to believe the
Prophets of Israel established, or sacred the Kings of Syria? For this cause,
2. Sam. 2.4.
when David was actually established in the Kingdom, he was anointed the
second time.

In the next place he brings in the Popes champions using these words; Rehoboam
was deposed by Ahiah the Prophet, 1 King. 12.
from his Royal right over the ten Tribes of Israel, because his father
Solomon had played the Apostata, in falling from the Law of God. This I say
also is more, then the truth of the sacred history does afoard: For Ahiah
never spoke to Rehoboam (for ought we read,) nor brought unto him any message
from the Lord; As for the passage quoted by the L. Cardinal out of 3. Reg.
chap. 11. it has not reference to the time of Rehoboams reign, but rather
indeed to Salomons time: nor does it carry the face of a iudicatorie sentence
for the Kings deposing, but rather of a Prophetical prediction: For how could
Rehoboam, before he was made King, be deprived of the Kingdom? Last of all,
but worst of all; to allege this passage for an example of a just sentence in
matter of deposing a King, is to approve the disloyal treachery of a servant
against his master, and the rebellion of Jeroboam branded in Scripture with a
mark of perpetual infamy for his wickedness and impiety.

He goes on with an other example of no more truth; 1. King. 19.
King Achab was deposed by Elias the Prophet, because he embraced false
religion, and worshipped false gods. False too like the former; King Achab lost
his crown and his life both together. The Scripture, that speaks not
according to man's fancy, but according to the truth, does extend and number
the years of Achabs reign, to the time of his death. Predictions of a Kings
ruin, are no sentences of deposition. Elias never gave the subjects of Achab
absolution from their oath of obedience; never gave them the least inckling of
any such absolution; never set up, or placed any other King in Achabs throne.

That of the L. Cardinal a little after, Page 68.
is no less untrue: That King Vzziah was driven from the conversation of the
people by Azarias the Priest, and thereby the administration of his Kingdom
was left no longer in his power. Nor so: For when God had smitten Vzziah with
leprosy in his forehead, 2. Chro. 26.
he withdrew himself, or went out into an house apart, for fear of infecting
such as were whole by his contagious disease. The high Priest smote him not
with any sentence of deposition, or denounced him suspended from the
administration of his Kingdom. No: the days of his reign are numbered in
Scripture, to the day of his death. And whereas the Priest, according to the
Law in the 13. of Leuit. judged the King to be unclean; he gave sentence
against him, not as against a criminal person, and thereby within the compass
of deposition; but as against a diseased body: For the Law inflicteth
punishments, not upon diseases, but upon crimes. Hereupon, whereas it is
recorded by Josephus in his Antiquities, Antiq. l. 9. cap. 11.
that Vzziah led a private, and in a manner, a solitary life; the said author
does not mean, that Vzziah was deposed, but only that he disburdened
himself of care to manage the public affairs.

The example of Mattathias, Page 69.
by whom the Jews were stirred up to rebel against Antiochus, is no better
worth: For in that example we find no sentence of deposition, but only an
heartning and commotion of a people then grievously afflicted and oppressed. He
that makes himself the ringleader of conspiracy against a King, does not
forthwith assume the person, or take up the office and charge of a Judge, in
form of Law, and iuridically to deprive a King of his Regal rights, and
Royal prerogatives. Mattathias was chief of that conspiracy, not in quality
of Priest, but of cheiftaine, or leader in war and a man the best qualified
of all the people. Things acted by the sudden violence of the base vulgar,
must not stand for Laws, nor yet for proofs and arguments of ordinary power,
such as the Pope challenges to himself, and appropriateth to his
triple-Crowne.

These be our solid answers: Page 67.
we disclaim the light armor which the L. Cardinal is pleased to furnish us
withal, forsooth to recreate himself, in rebating the points of such weapons,
as he has vouchsafed to put into our hands. Now it will be worth our labor to
beat by his thrusts, fetched from the ordinary mission of the New Testament,
from leprosy, stones, and locks of wool: A leach no doubt of admirable skill,
one that for subiecting the Crowns of Kings unto the Pope, is able to extract
arguments out of stones; yea, out of the leprosy, and the dry scab, only
forsooth because heresy is a kind of leprosy, and an heretic has some
affinity with aleper. But may not his Quoniam, Page 66.
be as fitly applied to any contagious and inueterate vice of the mind beside
heresy? His warning-piece therefore is discharged to purpose, whereby he
notifies that he pretends to handle nothing with resolution: For indeed upon
so weak arguments, a resolution is but ill-fauouredly and weakly grounded.

His bulwarks thus beaten down, Page 69.
let us now view the strength of our own. First, he makes us to fortify on
this manner: They that are for the negative, do allege the authority of S.
Paul; Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: For whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. And likewise that of S.
Peter; Submit your selves, whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior,
or unto governors, etc. Upon these passages, and the like, they infer, that
obedience is due to Kings by the Law of God, and not dispensable by any
Spiritual or Temporal authority. Thus he brings us in with our first weapon.
But here the very chief sinew and strength of our argument, he does
wittingly balke, and of purpose conceal: To wit; That all the Emperors of whom
the said holy Apostles have made any mention in their divine Epistles, were
professed enemies to CHRIST, Pagans, Infidels, fearful and bloody Tyrants: to
whom notwithstanding every soul, and therefore the Bishop of Rome for one, is
commanded to submit himself, and to profess subjection. Thus much Chrysostom
has expressly taught in his Hom. 23. upon the Epistle to the Romans; The
Apostle gives this commandment unto all: even to Priests also, and cloistered
Monks not only to Secular: be thou an Apostle an Evangelist, a Prophet, etc.
Besides, it is here worthy to be noted, that howsoever the Apostles rule is
general, and therefore binds all the faithful in equal bands; yet is it
particularly, directly and of purpose addressed to the Church of Rome by S.
Paul, as by one who in the spirit of an Apostle did foresee, that rebellion
against Princes was to rise and spring from the city of Rome. Now in case the
Head of that Church by warrant of any privilege, contained in the most holy
Register of Gods holy word, is exempted from the binding power of this general
precept or rule; did it not become his Lordship to show by the book, that it
is a book case, and to lay it forth before that honorable assembly, who no
doubt expected and waited to hear when it might fall from his learned lips?
But in stead of any such authentical and canonical confirmation, he flies to
a slight shift, and with a cavil is bold to affirm the foundation, laid by
those of our side, does no way touch the knot of the controversy. Let us
hear him speak: It is not in controversy, whether obedience be due to kings
by Gods Law, so long as they are kings, or acknowledged for Kings, but our
point controuerted, is whether by Gods Law it be required, that he who has
been once recognized and received for King by the body of Estates, can at any
time be taken and reputed as no King, that is to say can do no manner of act
whereby he may loose his right, and so cease to be saluted King. This answer
of the L. Cardinal is the rare devise evasion, and starting hole of the
Jesuits: In whose ears of delicate and tender touch, King-killing sounds
very harsh; but forsooth to vn-king a King first, and then to give him the
stab, that is a point of just and true descant: For to kill a King, once
vnking'd by deposition, is not killing of a King: For the present, I have one
of that Jesuitical Order in prison, who has face enough to speak this
language of Ashdod, and to maintain this doctrine of the Jesuits Colleges.
The L. Cardinal harpes upon the same string; He can like subjection and
obedience to the King, whilst he sits King: but his Holiness must have all
power, and give order withal, to hoyst him out of his Royal Seat. I therefore
now answer, that in very deed the former passages of S. Paul and S. Peter
should come nothing near the question, if the state of the question were such
as he brings it, made and forged in his own shop. But certes the state of the
question is not, whether a King may do some act, by reason whereof he may
fall from his right, or may not any longer be acknowledged for King: For all
our contention is, concerning the Popes power to vn-authorize Princes; whereas
in the question framed and fitted by the L. Cardinal, not a word of the Pope.
For were it granted and agreed on both sides, that a King by election might fall
from his Kingdom, yet still the knot of the question would hold, whether he can
be dispossessed of his Regal authority, by any power in the Pope, and whether
the Pope has such fulness of power, to strip a King of those Royal robes,
rights, and revenues of the Crown, which were never given him by the Pope; as
also by what authority of holy Scripture, the Pope is able to bear out
himself in this power, and to make it good.

But here the L. Card. stoutly says in his own defense by way of reioinder;
Page 71.
As one text has, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; in like
manner an other text has, Obey your Prelates, and be subject unto your
Pastors:for they watch over your souls, as men that shall give an account for
your souls. This reason is void of reason, and makes against himself: For may
not Prelates be obeyed and honored, without Kings be deposed? If Prelates
preach the doctrine of the Cospell, will they in the pulpit stir up subjects
to rebel against Kings? Moreover, whereas the universal Church in these days
is divided into so many discrepant parts, that now Prelates neither do nor can
draw all one way; is it not exceeding hard, keeping our obedience toward God,
to honor them all at once with due obedience? Nay is not here offered unto me
a dart out of the L. Cardinals armorie, to cast at himself? For as God
charge all men with obedience to Kings, and yet from that commandment of
God, the L. Cardinal would not have it inferred, that Kings have power to
degrade Ecclesiastical Prelates: even so God gives charge to obey Prelates,
yet does it not follow from hence, that Prelates have power to depose Kings.
These two degrees of obedience agree well together, and are each of them
bounded with peculiar and proper limits.

But for so much as in this point, we have on our side the whole ancient
Church, which, albeit she lived and groned for many aages together under
heathen Emperors, heretics, and persecuters, did never so much as whisper a
word about rebelling and falling from their Sovereign Lords, and was never by
any mortal creature freed from the oath of allegiance to the Emperor; the
Cardinal is not unwilling to grant, that ancient Chrisuans in those times
were bound to perform such fidelity and allegiance, for as much as the Church
(the Cardinal for shame durst not say the Pope) then had not absolved them of
their oath. No doubt a pleasant dream, or a merry conceit rather, to imagine
the Bishop of Rome was armed with power to take away the Empire of the world
from Nero, or Claudius, or Domitianus; to whom it was not known, whether the
city of Rome had any Bishop at all. Is it not a master-iest, of a strain most
ridiculous, to presuppose the Grand-masters and absolute Lords of the whole
world, had a sent so dull, that they were not able to smell out, and to nose
things under their own noses? that they saw so little with other men's eyes and
their own, that within their capital city, they could not spy that
Sovereign armed with ordinary and lawful authority to degrade, and to turn
them out of their renowned Empire? Doubtless the said Emperors, vassals
belike of the Popes Empire, are to be held excused for not acknowledging and
honoring the Pope in quality of their Lord, as became his vassals; because
they did not know there was any such power in the world, as aftertimes have
magnified and adored under the quality of Pope: For the Bishops of Rome in
those times, were of no greater authority, power, and means, then some of the
Bishops are in these days within my Kingdoms.

But certes those Popes of that primitive aage, thought it not expedient in the
said times to draw their swords: they exercised their power in a more mild and
soft kind of carriage toward those miserable Emperors, for three several
reasons alleged by the L. Cardinal.

The first: because the Bishops then durst not by their censures whet and
provoke those Emperors, for fear of plunging the Church in a Sea of
persecutions. But if I be not clean void of common sense, this reason serves
to charge not only the Bishops of Rome, but all the ancient professors of
Christ besides, with deep dissimulation and hypocrisy: For it is all one as
if he had professed, that all their obedience to their Sovereigns, was but
counterfeit, and extorted, or wrong out of them by force; that all the
submissiue supplications of the ancient Fathers, the assured testimonies and
pledges of their allegiance, humility, and patience, were but certain forms
of disguised speech, proceeding not freely from the suggestions of fidelity,
but faintly and fainedly, or at least from the strong twitches and violent
conuulsions of fear. Whereupon it follows, that all their torments and
punishments, even to the death, are wrongfully honored with the title, and
crowned with the crown of Martyrdom; because their patience proceeded not
from their own free choice and election, but was taught by the force of
necessity, as by compulsion: and whereas they had not mutinously and
rebelliously risen in arms, to assuage the scorching heat and burning flames
of tyrannical persecuters, it was not for want of will, but for lack of
power. Which false and forged imputation, the Fathers have cleared themselves
of in their writings. Tert. Apol. cap. 37. Hesterni sumus and omnia restra
impleuimus.
Tertullian in his Apologet: All places are full of Christians, the cities,
isles, castles, buroughs, armies, etc. If we that are so infinite a power, and
multitude of men, had broken from you into some remote nooke or corner of the
world, the cities no doubt had become naked and solitary: there had been a
dreadful and horrible filence over the face of the whole Empire: the great
Emperors had been driven to seek out new cities, and to disconer new
nations, over whom to bear Sovereign sway and rule; there had remained more
enemies to the State, then subjects and friends. Cypr. cont. Demetr.
Cyprian also against Demetrianus: None of us all, howsoever we are a people
mighty and without number, have made resistance against any of your unjust and
wrongful actions, executed with all violence; neither have sought by
rebellious arms, or by any other sinister practices, to cry quittance with
you at any time for the righting of our selves. Certain it is, that under
Iulianus, the whole Empire in a manner professed the Christian Religion; yea,
that his Leiftenants and great Commanders, as Iouinianus, and Valentinianus by
name, professed Christ: Which two Princes not long after attained to the
Imperial dignity, but might have solicited the Pope sooner to degrade
Iulianus from the Imperial Throne. For say that Iulians whole army had
renounced the Christian Religion: (as the L. Cardinal against all show and
appearance of truth would bear us in hand, and contrary to the general voice
of the said whole army, making this profession with one consent when Julian was
dead, Socr. lib 3. cap 19. Theod. lib. 4. cap. 1. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1.
We are all Christians:) yet Italy then persisting in the faith of Christ,
and the army of Julian then lying quartered in Persia, the utmost limit of the
Empire to the East, the Bishop of Rome had fit opporunitie to draw the sword of
his authority (if he had then any such sword hanging at his Pontifical side)
to make Julian feel the sharp edge of his weapon, and thereby to pull him
down from the stately perch of the Roman Empire. I say moreover, that by
this general and sudden profession of the whole Caesarian army, We are all
Christians, it is clearly testified, that if his army or soldiers were then
addicted to Paganism, it was wrought by compulsion, and clean contrary to
their settled persuasion before: and then it follows, that with greater
patience they would have borne the deposing of Julian, then if he had suffered
them to use the liberty of their conscience. To be short in the matter; S.
Augustine makes all whole, and by his testimony does euince, that Iulians army
perseuered in the faith of Christ. August. in Psalm. 124.
The soldiers of Christ served a Heathen Emperor: But when the cause of
Christ was called in question, they acknowledged none but Christ in heaven:
When the Emperor would have them to serve, and to perfume his idols with
frankincense, they gave obedience to God, rather then to the Emperor. After
which words, Page 82.
the very same words alleged by the L. Cardinal against himself do follow;
They did then distinguish between the Lord Eternal, and the Lord temporal:
nevertheless, they were subject unto the Lord temporal, for the Lord
Eternal. It was therefore to pay God his duty of obedience, and not for
fear to incense the Emperor, or to draw persecution upon the Church (as the
L. Cardinal would make us believe) that Christians of the Primitive Church, and
Bishops by their censures, durst not anger and provoke their Emperors. But his
Lordship by his colored pretenses does manifestly provoke and stir up the
people to rebellion, so soon as they know their own strength to bear out a
rebellious practice: Whereupon it follows, that in case their conspiracy
shall take no good effect, all the blame and fault must lie, not in their
disloyalty and treason, but in the bad choice of their times for the best
advantage, and in the want of taking a true sight of their own weakness. Let
stirring spirits be trained up in such practical precepts, let desperate wits
be seasoned with such rules of discipline; and what need we, or how can we
wonder they contriue Powder-conspiracies, and practice the damnable art of
parricides?

After Julian, his Lordship falls upon Valentinian the younger, who
maintaining Arrianisme with great and open violence, might have been deposed by
the Christians from his Empire, and yet (say we) they never dreamed of any
such practice. Here the L. Cardinal makes answer: Page 82.
The Christians moved with respect unto the fresh memory both of the brother
and father, as also unto the weak estate of the sons young years, abstained
from all counsels and courses of sharper effect and operation. To which answer
I reply: these are but frivolous conjectures, devised and framed to ticle his
own fancy: For had Valentinianus the younger been the son of an Arrian,
and had then also attained to threescore years of aage, they would never have
borne themselves in other fashion then they did, toward their Emperor. Then
the Cardinal goes on: The people would not abandon the factious and seditious
party, but were so firm or obstinate rather for the faction, that Valentinian
for fear of the tumultuous vproares was constrained to give way, and was
threatened by the soldiers, that except he would adhere unto the Catholics,
they would yield him no assistance, nor stand for his party. Now this answer
of the L. Cardinal makes nothing to the purpose, concerning the Popes power to
pull down Kings from their stately nest. Let us take notice of his proper
consequence. Valentinian was afraid of the popular tumult at Milan: the Pope
therefore has power to curb Heretical Kings by deposition. Now mark what
distance is between Rome and Milan, what difference between the people of
Milan, and the Bishop of Rome; between a popular tumult, and a iudicatorie
sentence; between fact and right, things done by the people or soldiers of
Milan, and things to be done according to right and law by the Bishop of Rome;
the same distance, the same difference (if not far greater) is between the
L. Cardinals antecedent and his consequent, between his reason, and the maine
cause or argument which we have in hand. The mad commotion of the people was
not here so much to be regarded, as the sad instruction of the Pastor, of
their good and godly Pastor S. Ambrose so far from hartening the people of
Milan to rebel, that being Bishop of Milan, he offered himself to suffer
Martydome: If the Emperor abuse his Imperial authority, (for so Theodoret
has recited his words) to tyrannize thereby, here am I ready to suffer death.
And what resistance he made against his L. Emperor, was only by way of
supplication in these terms, We beseech thee, O Augustus, as humble
suppliants; we offer no resistance: we are not in fear, but we fly to
supplication. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
Again, If my patrimony be your mark, enter upon my patrimony, if my body, I
will go and meet my torments. Shall I be dragged to prison or to death? Epist.
lib. 5.
I will take delight in both. Item, in his Oration to Auxentius; I can afflict
my soul with sorrow, I can lament, I can send forth grievous groans: My
weapons against either of both, soldiers or Goths, are tears: A Priest has
none other weapons of defense: I neither can resist, nor ought in any other
manner to make resistance.

Justinian the Emperor in his old aage fell into the heresy of the
Aphthartodocites. Against Justinian, though few they were that favored him in
that heresy, the Bishop of Rome never darted with violence any sentence of
excommunication, interdiction, or deposition.

The Ostrogot Kings in Italy, the Visigot in Spain, the Vandal in Africa were
all addicted to the Arrian impiety, and some of them cruelly persecuted the
true professors. The Visigot and Vandall were no neighbors to Italy. The
Pope thereby had the less cause to fear the stings of those waspes, if they
had been angered. The Pope for all that never had the humor to wrestle or
iustle with any of the said Kings in the cause of deposing them from their
Thrones. But especially the times when the Vandals in Affricke, and the Goths
in Italy by Belisarius and Narses, professors of the Orthodoxe Faith, were
tired with long wars, and at last were utterly defeated in bloody battles,
are to be considered. Then were the times or never, for the Pope to vnsheath
his weapons, and to uncase his arrows of deposition; then were the times to
draw them out of his quiver, and to shoot at all such Arrian heads; then were
the times by dispensations to release their subjects of their oaths, by that
peremptory means to aid and strengthen the Catholic cause: But in that
aage the said weapons were not known to have been hammered in the Pontifical
forge.

Gregory the I. made his boasts, that he was able to ruin the Lombards, (for
many years together sworn enemies to the Bishops of Rome) their state
present, and the hope of all their future prosperity. But he tells us, that
by the fear of God before his eyes and in his heart, he was bridled and
restrained from any such intent; as elsewhere we have observed: In Apol. pro
iuram fidel. His own words lib. 7. Epist. 1.
If I would have meddled with practicing and procuring the death of the
Lombards, the whole nation of the Lombards at this day had been robbed of their
Kings, Dukes, Earls, they had been reduced to the terms of extreme
confusion. He might at least have deposed their King, (if the credit of the L.
Cardinals judgment be current) without polluting or stayning his own
conscience.

What can we term this assertion of the L. Cardinal, but open charging the
most ancient Bishops of Rome with cruelty, when they would not succor the
Church of CHRIST oppressed by tyrants, whose oppression they had power to
repress by deposing the oppressors. Is it credible, that JESUS CHRIST has
given a Commission to S. Peter and his successors for so many aages, without
any power to execute their Commission, or to make any use thereof by practice?
Is it credible, that he has given them a sword to be kept in the scabbard,
without drawing once in a thousand years? Is it credible, that in the times
when Popes were most deboshed, abandoning themselves to all sorts of corrupt
and vicious courses, as is testified by their own flatterers and best affected
servants; is it credible that in those times they began to understand the
virtue and strength of their Commission? For if either fear or lack of power,
was the cause of holding their hands, and voluntary binding of themselves to
the Peace or good behavior: wherefore is not some one Pope at least produced,
who has complained that he was hindered from executing the power that CHRIST
had conferred upon his Pontifical See? Wherefore is not some one of the
ancient and holy Fathers alleged, by whom the Pope has been advised and
exhorted to take courage, to stand upon he vigor and sinews of his Papal
Office, to vnsheath and uncase his bolts of thunder against ungodly Princes,
and grievous enemies to the Church? wherefore living under Christian and
gracious Emperors, have they not made known the reasons, why they were
hindered from drawing the pretended sword; lest long custom of not using the
sword so many aages, might make it so to rust in the scabbard, that when there
should be occasion to use the said sword, it could not be drawn at all; and
lest so long custom of not using the same, should confirm prescription to
their greater prejudice? If weakness be a just let, how is it come to pass,
that Popes have enterprised to depose Philip the Fair, Lewis the XII. and
ELIZABETH my predecessor of happy memory; (to let pass others) in whom
experience has well proved, how great inequality was between their
strengths? Yea, for the most part from thence grow most grievous troubles and
wars, which justly recoile and light upon his own head; as happened to
Gregory the VII. and Boniface the VIII. This no doubt is the reason, wherefore
the Pope never sets in (for fear of such inconveniences) to blast a King with
lightning and thunder of deposition, but when he perceiues the troubled waters
of the Kingdom by some strong faction settled in his Estate; or when the King
is confined and bordered by some Princemore potent, who thirsts after the
prey, and is ever gaping for some occasion to pick a quarrel. The King
standing in such estate, is it not as easy for the Pope to pull him down, as
it is for a man with one hand to thrust down a tottering wall, when the
groundsill is rotten, the studdes vnpind and nodding or bending toward the
ground? But if the King shall bear down and break the faction within the
Realm; if he shall get withal the upper hand of his enemies out of the
Kingdom; then the holy Father presents him with pardons never sued for, never
asked, and in afathers indulgence forsooth, gives him leave still to hold the
Kingdom, that he was not able by all his force to wrest and wring out of his
hand, no more then the club of Hercules out of his fist. How many worthy
Princes, incensed by the Pope, to conspire against Sovereign Lords their
Masters, and by open rebellion to work some change in their Estates, have
miscarried in the action, with loss of life, or honor, or both? For example;
Rodulphus Duke of Sueuia was eg'd on by the Pope, against Henry IIII. of that
name Emperor. How many massacres, how many desolations of Cities and towns,
how many bloody battles ensued thereupon? Let histories be searched, let just
accounts be taken, and beside sieges laid to Cities, it will appear by true
computation, that Henry the IIII. and Frederic the fist, fought above
threescore battles, in defense of their own right against enemies of the
Empire, stirred up to arms by the Pope of Rome. How much Christian blood was
then spilt in these bloody battles, it passes man's wit, pen, or tongue to
express. And to give a little touch unto matters at home; does not his
Holiness understand right well the weakness of Papists in my Kingdom? Does
not his Holmesse neuerthesesse animate my Papists to rebellion, and forbid my
Papists to take the Oath of Allegiance? Does not his Holiness by this means
draw (so much as in him lies) persecution upon the backs of my Papists as
upon rebels, and expose their life as it were upon the open stall, to be sold
at a very easy price? All these examples, either joint or several, are
manifest and evident proofs, that fear to draw mischief and persecution upon
the Church, has not barred the Popes from thundering against Emperors and
Kings, whenever they conceived any hope, by their fulminations to advance
their greatness.

Last of all; I refer the matter to the most possessed with prejudice, even
the very adversaries, whether this doctrine, by which people are trained up in
subjection unto Infidel or heretical Kings, until the subjects be of
sufficient strength to mate their Kings, to expel their Kings, and to depose
them from their Kingdoms, does not incense the Turkish Emperors and other
Infidel Princes, to root out all the Christians that draw in their yoke, as
people that wait only for a fit occasion to rebel, and to take themselves
engaged for obedience to their Lords, only by constraint and servile fear.
Let us therefore now conclude with Ozius, in that famous Epistle speaking to
Constantius an Arrian heretic: Apud Athan^in E^^st. ad solit^^. vitam a^gentes.
As he that by secret practice or open violence would bereave thee of thy
Empire, should violate Gods ordinance: so be thou touched with fear, least,
by usurping authority over Church matters, thou tumble not headlong into some
heinous crime. Where this holy Bishop has not vouchsafed to insert and mention
the L. Cardinals exception; to wit, the right of the Church always excepted
and saved, when she shall be of sufficient strength to shake off the yoke of
Emperors. Neither speaks the same holy Bishop of private persons alone, or men
of some particular condition and calling; but he sets down a general rule
for all degrees, never to impeach Imperial Majesty upon any pretext
whatsoever.

As his Lordships first reason drawn from weakness is exceeding weak: so is
that which the L. Cardinal takes up in the next place: The 2. reas. Page 77.
He tells us there is very great difference between Pagan Emperors, and
Christian Princes: Pagan Emperors who never did homage to Christ, who never
were by their subjects received, with condition to acknowledge perpetual
subjection unto the Empire of Christ; who never were bound by oath and mutual
contract between Prince and subject. Christian Princes who slide back by
Apostasy, degenerate by Arrianisme, or fall away by Mahometisme. Touching the
latter of these two, (as his Lordshippe says) If they shall as it were take an
oath, and make a vow contrary to their first oath and vow made and taken when
they were installed, and contrary to the condition under which they received
the Scepter of their Fathers; if they withal shall turn persecutors of the
Catholic religion; touching these I say, the L. Cardinal holds, that without
question they may be removed from their Kingdoms: He tells us not by whom,
but every where he means by the Pope. Touching Kings deposed by the Pope
under pretense of stupidity, as Childeric; or of matrimonial causes, as Philip
I. or for collating of benefices, as Philip the Fair; not one word: By that
point he easily glideth, and shuffles it up in silence, for fear of distasting
the Pope on the one side, or his auditors on the other.

Now in alleging this reason, his Lordship makes all the world a witness, that
in deposing of Kings, the Pope has no eye of regard to the benefit and
security of the Church: For such Princes as never sucked other milk then that
of Infidelity, and persecution of Religion, are no less noisome and
pernicious vermin to the Church, then if they had sucked of the Churches
breasts. And as for the greatness of the sin or offense, it seems to me
there is very little difference in the matter. For a Prince that never did
swear any religious obedience to Jesus Christ, is bound no less to such
obedience, then if he had taken a solemn oath: As the son that rebelliously
stands up against his father, is in equal degree of sin, whether he has
sworn or not sworn obedience to his father; because he is bound to such
obedience, not by any voluntary contract or covenant, but by the law of
Nature. The commandment of God to kiss the Son, whom the Father has
confirmed and ratified King of Kings, does equally bind all Kings, as well
Pagans as Christians. On the other side, who denies, who doubts, that
Constantius Emperor at his first step or entrance into the Empire, did not
swear and bind himself by solemn vow, to keep the rules and to maintain
the precepts of the Orthodox faith, or that he did not receive his fathers
Empire upon such condition? This notwithstanding, the Bishop of Rome pulled not
Constantius from his Imperial throne, but Constantius removed the Bishop of
Rome from his Papal See. And were it so, that an oath taken by a King at his
consecration, and after violated, is a sufficient cause for the Pope to depose
an Apostate or heretical Prince; then by good consequence the Pope may in like
sort depose a King, who being neither dead in Apostasy, nor sick of Heresy,
does neglect only the due administration of justice to his loyal subjects:
For his oath taken at consecration imports likewise, that he shall minister
justice to his people. A point wherein the holy Father is held short by the L.
Cardinal, who dares prescribe new laws to the Pope, and presumes to limit his
fullness of power, within certain meeres and head-lands, extending the Popes
power only to the deposing of Christian Kings, when they turn Apostats
forsaking the Catholic faith; and not such Princes as never breathed any thing
but pure Paganism, and never served under the colors of Jesus Christ. Mean
while his Lordship forgets, that King Attabaliba was deposed by the Pope from
his Kingdom of Peru, and the said Kingdom was conferred upon the King of
Spain, though the said poor King of Peru, never forsook his heathen
superstition; and though the turning of him out of his terrestrial Kingdom
was no way to convert him unto the faith of Christ. Page 77.
Yea his Lordship a little after tells us himself, that Be the Turks
possession in the conquests that he makes over Christians never so ancient,
yet by no long tract of time whatsoever, can he gain so much as a thumbes
breadth of prescription: that is to say, the Turk for all that is but a
disseisor, one that violently and wilfully keeps an other man from his own,
and by good right may be dispossessed of the same: whereas notwithstanding the
Turkish Emperors never favored nor sauoured Christianity. Let us run over
the examples of Kings whom the Pope has dared and presumed to depose; and
hardly will any one be found, of whom it may be trewly avouched, that he has
taken an oath contrary to his oath of subjection to Jesus Christ, or that he
has wilfully cast himself into Apostaticall defection.

And certes to any man that weighs the matter with due consideration, it will be
found apparently false, that Kings of France have been received of their
subjects at any time, with condition to serve JESUS CHRIST. They were actually
Kings before they came forth to the solemnity of their sacring, before they
used any stipulation or promise to their subjects. For in hereditary kingdoms,
(nothing more certain, nothing more uncontrollable) the Kings death instantly
makes livery and seisin of the Royalty, to his next successor. Nor is it
material to reply, that a King succeeding by right of inheritance, takes an
oath in the person of his predecessor. For every oath is personal, proper to
the person by whom it is taken: and to God no living creature can swear, that
his own son or his heir shall prove an honest man. Well may the father, and
with great solemnity, promise that he will exhort his heir apparent with all
his power and the best of his endeauours, to fear God and to practice piety.
If the fathers oath be agreeable to the duties of godliness, the son is
bound thereby, whether he take an oath, or take none. On the other side, if the
fathers oath come from the puddles of impiety, the son is bound thereby to
go the contrary way. If the fathers oath concern things of indifferent
nature, and such as by the variety or change of times, become either pernicious
or impossible; then it is free for the Kings next successor and heir,
prudently to fit and proportion his Laws unto the times present, and to the
best benefit of the Commonwealth.

When I call these things to mind with some attention, I am out of all doubt,
his Lordship is very much to seek, in the right sense and nature of his Kings
oath taken at his Coronation, to defend the Church, and to persevere in the
Catholic faith: For what is more unlike and less credible then this conceit,
that after Clouis had reigned 15. years in the state of Paganism, and then
received holy Baptism, he should become Christian upon this condition, That in
case he should afterward revolt from the Faith, it should then be in the
power of the Church, to turn him out of his Kingdom? But had any such
conditional stipulation been made by Clouis, in very good earnest and truth;
yet would he never have intended, that his deposing should be the act of the
Roman Bishop, but rather of those (whether Peers or people, or whole body of
the State) by whom he had been advanced to the Kingdom. Let us hear the
truth, and this is the truth: It is far from the customary use in France,
for their Kings to take any such oath, or to use any such stipulation with
their subjects. If any King or Prince wheresoever, does use an oath or solemn
promise in these express terms, Let me lose my Kingdom, or my life, be that
day my last both for life and reign, when I shall first revolt from the
Christian Religion: By these words he calls upon God for vengeance, he uses
imprecation against his own head: but he makes not his Crown to stoop by
this means to any power in the Pope, or in the Church, or in the people.

And touching inscriptions upon coins, of which point his Lordship speaks by
the way; verily the nature of the money or coin (the stamping and minting
whereof is one of the marks of the Prince his dignity and Sovereignty) is not
changed by bearing the letters of Christ's Name on the reuerse or on the front.
Such characters of Christ's Name, are aduertisements and instructions to the
people, that in showing and yielding obedience unto the King, they are obedient
unto Christ; and those Princes likewise, who are so well advised, to have the
most sacred Names inscribed and printed in their coins, do take and
acknowledge Jesus Christ for supreme King of Kings. The said holy characters
are no representation or profession, that any Kings Crown depends upon the
Church, or can be taken away by the Pope. The L. Cardinal indeed so bears us
in hand. But he inuerts the words of Jesus Christ, and wrings them out of the
right joint: For Christ without all ambiguitie and circumlocution, by the image
and inscription of the money, does directly and expressly prove Caesar to
be free from subjection, and entirely Sovereign. Now if such a supreme and
Sovereign Prince, at any time shall bandie and combine against God, and
thereby shall become a rebellious and perfidious Prince; doubtless for such
disloyalty he shall deserve, that God would take from him all hope of life
eternal: and yet hereby neither Pope nor people has reason to be puffed up, in
their power to deprive him of his temporal Kingdom.

The L. Page 76.
Cardinal says besides; The champions of the Popes power to depose Kings, do
expound that commandment of S. Paul, whereby every soul is made subject unto
the superior powers, to be a prouisionall precept or caution accommodated to
the times; and to stand in force, only vntll the Church were grown in
strength unto such a scantling, that it might be in the power of the faithful,
without shaking the pillars of Christian state, to stand in the breach, and
cautelously to provide that none but Christian Princes might be received;
according to the Law in Deuteronomy Thou shall make thee a King from among thy
brethren. The reason whereupon they ground, is this: Because Paul says, It is
a shame for Christians to be judged under unjust Infidels, in mattrs or
business, which they had one against another: For which inconvenience,
Justinian after provided by Law; when he ordained that no Infidel nor Heretic
might be admitted to the administration of justice in the Commonwealth.

In which words of the Cardinal, the word Received, is to be observed
especially and above the rest: For by chopping in that word, he does nimbly
and with a trick of Legier-demain, transform or change the very state of the
question. For the question or issue of the cause, is not about receiving,
establishing, or choosing a Prince; (as in those Nations where the Kingdom
goes by election) but about doing homage to the Prince, when God has settled
him in the Kingdom, and has cast it upon a Prince by hereditary succession:
For that which is writtten, Thou shall make thee a King, does no way concern
and touch the people of France in these days: because the making of their King
has not of long time been tied to their election. The passage therefore in
Deuter. makes nothing to the purpose; no more then does Justinians law: For it
is our free and voluntary confession, that a Christian Prince is to have
special care of the Laws, and to provide that no unbeliever be made Lord
Chiefe-Iustice of the Land, that no Infidel be put in trust with administration
of Justice to the people. But here the issue does not direct us to speak of
Delegates, of subordinate Magistrates, and such as are in Commission from the
Prince, but of the supreme Prince himself, the Sovereign Magistrate ordained
by nature, and confirmed by succession. Our question is, whether such a Prince
can be vnthroned by the Pope, by whom he was not placed in the Throne; and
whether the Pope can despoile such a Prince, of that Royalty which was never
given him by the Pope, under any pretended color and imputation of heresy, of
stupiditie, or infringing the privileges of Monasteries, or transgressing the
Laws and lines of holy Matrimony.

Now that S. Paul's commandment which binds every soul in the bands of
subjection unto the higher powers, is no precept given by way of prouiso, and
only to serve the times, but a standing and a perpetual rule, it is hereby
more then manifest. S. Paul has grounded this commandment upon certain
reasons, not only constant and permanent by their proper nature, but likewise
necessary for every state, condition, and revolution of the times. His reasons;
Because all powers are ordained of God: because resisting of powers is
resisting the ordinance of God: because the Magistrate bears the sword to
execute justice: because obedience and subjection to the Magistrate is
necessary, not only for fear of his wrath, or fear of punishment, but also
for conscience sake. It is therefore a case grounded upon conscience, it is not
a Law devised by humane wisdom; it is not fashionable to the qualities of the
times. Apostolical instructions for the right informing of manners, are not
changeable according to times and seasons. To use the L. Cardinals language,
and to follow his fancy in the matter, is to make way for two pestiferous
mischiefs: First, let it be free and lawful for Christians, to hold the
commanding rules of GOD for prouisionall cautions, and what follows? Men are
led into the broad way of impiety, and the whole Scripture is wiped of all
authority. Then again, for the other mischief: The glorious triumphs of
most blessed Martyrs in their unspeakable torments and sufferings, by the L.
Cardinals position shall be judged unworthy to wear the title and Crown of
Martyrdom. How so? Because (according to his new fiction) they have given
place to the violence and fury of heathen Magistrates, not in obedience to the
necessary and certain Commandment of God, but rather to a prouisionall
direction, acco^modated to the humors of the times. And therefore the L.
Cardinal has used none other clay wherewith to dawbe over his devise, but
plain falsification of holy Scripture: For he makes the Apostle say to the
Corinthians, It is a shame for Christians to be judged under unbelieving
Magistrates; whereas in that whole context of Paul, there is no such matter.
For when the Apostle says, I speak it even to your shame; (...)
he does not say it is a shame for a believer to be judged under an Infidel,
but he makes them ashamed of their ungodly course, and unchristian practice,
that in suing and impleading one another, they laid their actions of contention
in the Courts of unbelieving Judges. The shame was not in bearing that yoke
which God had charged their necks withal, but in devouring and eating up one
an other with Writs of habeas corpus, and with other Processes; as also in
uncovering the shame, in laying open the shameful parts and prankes played by
Christians, before Infidels, to the great scandal of the Church. Here I say
the L. Cardinal is taken in a trick of manifest falsification. If therefore a
King when he salls to play the heretic, deserves to be deposed; why should
not a Cardinal when he falls to play the iuggler with holy Scripture, deserve
to be disrobed?

Mean while the indifferent Reader is to consider, how greatly this doctrine
is prejudicial, and how full of danger, to Christians living under heretical
or Pagan Princes. For make it once known to the Emperor of Turks, let him
once get never so little a smacke of this doctrine; that Christians living
under his Empire do take Gods commandment, for obedience to Princes whom they
count Infidels, to be only a prouisional precept for a time, and wait every
hour for all occasions to shake off the yoke of his bondage; doubtless he
will never spare with all speed to root the whole stock, with all the arms
and branches of Christians out of his dominions. Add hereunto the L. Cardinals
former determination; that possession kept never so long by the Turk in his
Conquests over Christians, gains him not by so long tract of time one inch of
prescription; and it will appear, that his Lordship puts the Turkish Emperor
in mind, and by his instruction leads the said Emperor as it were by the
hand, to have no manner of affiance in his Christian subjects; and withal to
afflict his poor Christians with all sorts of most grievous and cruel
torments. In this regard the poor Christans of Graecia and Syria, must needs
be very little beholden to his Lordship. As for my self, and my Popish
Subjects, to whom I am no less then an heretic forsooth am not I by this
doctrine of the Cardinal, pricked and whetted against my natural inclination,
to turn clemency into rigor; seeing that by his doctrine my subjects are
made to believe, they owe me subjection only by way of prouiso, and with
waiting the occasion to work my utter destruction and final ruin; the
rather, because Turks, miscreants, and heretics are marshalled by the
Cardinal in the same rank; and heretics are counted worse, yea more justly
deposeable, then Turks and Infidels, as irreligious breakers and violaters of
their oath? Who sees not here how great indignity is offered to me a
Christian King, paralleld with Infidels, reputed worse then a Turk, taken for
an usurper of my Kingdoms, reckoned a Prince, to whom subjects owe a forced
obedience by way of provision, until they shall have means to shake off the
yoke, and to bare my temples of the Crown, which never can be pulled from the
sacred Head, but with loss of the head it self?

Touching the wars undertaken by the French, English, and Germans, in their
expedition for Jerusalem, it appears by the issue and event of the said
wars, that God approved them not for honorable. That expedition was a
devise and invention of the Pope, whereby he might come to be infeoffed in the
Kingdoms of Christian Princes. For then all such of the French, English or
Germans, as undertook the Croisade, became the Popes mere vassals. Then all
robbers by the high way side, adulterers, cutthroats, and base bankerupts, were
exempted from the Secular and Civil power, their causes were sped in
Consistorian Courts, so soon as they had gotten the Cross on their cassocks
or coat-armours, and had vowed to serve in the expedition for the Leuant. Then
for the Popes pleasure and at his commandment, whole countries were emptied
of their Nobles and common soldiers. Then they made long marches into the
Leuant: For what purpose? Only to die upon the points of the Saracens pikes,
or by the edge of their barbarous courtelasses, battle-axes, fauchions, and
other weapons, without any benefit and advantage to themselves or others. Then
the Nobles were driven to sell their goodly Manors, and ancient demaines to
the Churchmen, at under prises and low rates; the very root from which a
great part of the Church and Church-mens revenues has sprung and grown to so
great height. Then, to be short, See the Bull of Innoc. 3. at the end of the
Lat. ter. Conc.
his most bountiful Holiness gave to any of the riffe-raffe-ranke, that would
undertake this expedition into the Holy land, a free and full pardon for all
his sins, besides a degree of glory above the vulgar in the Celestial
Paradise. Military virtue, I confess, is commendable and honorable; provided
it be employed for justice, and that generous nobleness of valiant spirits
be not under a color and shadow of piety, fetched over with some casts or
devises of Italian cunning.

Now let us observe the wisdom of the Lord Cardinal through this whole
discourse. His Lordship is pleased in his Oration, to cite certain few
passages of Scripture, culls and picks them out for the most graceful in
show: leaves out of his list whole troops of honorable witnesses, upon whose
testimony, the Popes themselves and their principal adherents do build his
power to depose Kings, and to give order for all Temporal causes. Take a sight
of their best and most honorable witnesses. Peter said to Christ, See here two
swords; and Christ answered, It is sufficient. Christ said to Peter, Put up thy
sword in to thy sheath. God said to Jeremy, Ier. 1.
I have established thee over Nations and Kingdoms. 1. Cor. 2.
Paul said to the Corinthians, The spiritual man discerns all things. Christ
said to his Apostles, Whatsoever ye shall loose upon earth: by which words the
Pope has power forsooth to loose the oath of allegiance. Moses said, In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Upon these passages, Pope
Boniface 8. Extrauag. Vnam Sanctam.
grapling and tugging with Philip the Fair, does build his Temporal power.
Other Popes and Papists avouch the like authorities. Christ said of himself,
All things are given to me of my Father, and all power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth. The Devils said, If thou cast us out, send us into this
herd of swine. Christ said to his Disciples, Ye shall find the colt of an
ass bound, loose it and bring it unto me. By these places the adversaries
prove, that Christ disposed of Temporal matters; and infer thereupon, why
not Christ's Vicar as well as Christ himself. The places and testimonies now
following are very express: Psalm. 45.
In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children: thou shall make them Princes
through all the earth. Item, Jesus Christ not only commanded Peter to feed
his lambs; but said also to Peter, Arise, kill, and eat: the pleasant gloss,
the rare invention of the L. Ioh. 12.
Cardinal Baronius. Christ said to the people, If I were lift up from the
earth, I will draw all things unto me. who lets, what hinders this place from
fitting the Pope? Paul said to the Corinthians, Know ye not that we shall judge
the Angels? how much more then the things that pertain unto this life? A
little after, Have not we power to eat? These are the chief passages, on
which as upon maine arches, the roof of Papal Monarchy, concerning Temporal
causes, has rested for three or four aages past. And yet his Lordship durst
not repose any confidence in their firm standing to bear up the said roof of
Temporal Monarchy, for fear of making his auditors to burst with laughter. A
wise part without question, if his Lordship had not defiled his lips before,
with a more ridiculous argument drawn from the leprosy and dry scab.

Let us now by way of comparison behold Jesus Christ paying tribute unto
Caesar, and the Pope making Caesar to pay him tribute: Jesus Christ persuading
the Jews to pay tribute unto an heathen Emperor, and the Pope dispensing with
subjects for their obedience to Christian Emperors: Jesus Christrefusing to
arbitrate a controversy of inheritance partable between two private parties,
and the Pope thrusting in himself without warrant or Commission to be
absolute Judge in the deposing of Kings: Jesus Christ professing that his
Kingdom is not of this world, and the Pope establishing himself in a terrene
Empire. In like manner the Apostles forsaking all their goods to follow
Christ, and the Pope robbing Christians of their goods; the Apostles persecuted
by Pagan Emperors, and the Pope now setting his foot on the very throat of
Christian Emperors, then proudly treading Imperial Crowns under his feet.
By this comparison, the L. Cardinals allegation of Scripture in favor of his
Master the Pope, is but a kind of puppet-play, to make Jesus Christ a mocking
stock, rather then to satisfy his auditors with any sound precepts and
wholefome instructions. Hereof he seems to give some inckling himself: For
after he has been plentiful in citing authorities of Scripture, and of new
Doctors, which make for the Popes power to depose Kings; at last he comes in
with a fair and open confession, Page 85.
that neither by divine Oracles, nor by honorable antiquity, this
controversy has been yet determined: and so pulls down in a word with one
hand, the frame of work that he had built and set up before with an other;
discovering withal, the reluctation and privy checkes of his own conscience.

There yet remains one objection, the knot whereof the L. Cardinal in a
manner sweateth to untie. His words be these: Page 84.
The champions for the negative fly to the analogy of other proceedings and
practices in the Church: They affirm that private persons, masters or owners
of goods and possessions among the common people, are not deprived of their
goods for Heresy; and consequently that Princes much more should not for the
same crime be deprived of their estates. For answer to this reason, he brings
in the defendants of deposition, speaking after this manner; In the Kingdom of
France the strict execution of laws decreed in Court against Heretics, is
favorably suspended and stopped, for the preservation of peace and public
tranquillity. He says elsewhere; Conniuence is used toward these Heretics
inregard of their multitude, because a notable part of the French Nation and
State is made all of Heretics. I suppose that out of special charity, he
would have those Heretics of his own making, forewarned what courteous use
and entreaty they are to expect; when he affirms that execution of the laws
is but suspended: For indeed suspensions hold but for a time. But in a cause of
that nature and importance, I dare promise my self, that my most honored
brother the King of France, will make use of other counsel: will rather seek
the amity of his neighbor Princes, and the peace of his Kingdom: will bear
in mind the great and faithful service of those, who in matter of religion
dissent from his Majesty, as of the only men that have preserved and saved
the Crown for the King his father, of most glorious memory. I am persuaded my
brother of France will believe, that his liege people pretended by the L.
Cardinal to be heretics, are not half so bad as my Roman Catholic
subjects, who by secret practices undermine my life, serve a foreign
Sovereign, are discharged by his Bulls of their obedience due to me their
natural Sovereign, are bound (by the maxims and rules published and
maintained in favor of the Pope, before this full and famous assembly of the
Estate at Paris; if the said maxims be of any weight and authority) to hold
me for no lawful King, are there taught and instructed, that Paul's
commandemement concerning subjection unto the higher Powers, adverse to their
professed religion, is only a prouisionall precept, framed to the times, and
watching for the opportunity to shake off the yoke. All which
notwithstanding, I deal with such Romane-Catholikes by the rules and ways of
Princely clemency; their heinous and pernicious error, in effect no less then
the capital crime of high treason, I use to call some disease or distemper of
the mind. Last of all, I believe my said brother of France will set down in
his tables, as in record, how little he stands engaged to the L. Cardinal
in this behalf: For those of the reformed Religion profess and proclaim,
that next under God, they owe their preservation and safety to the wisdom
and benignity of their Kings. But now comes the Cardinal, and he seeks to
steal this persuasion out of their hearts: He tells them in open Parliament,
and without any going about bushes, that all their welfare and security
stands in their multitude, and in the fear which others conceive to trouble
the State, by the strict execution of laws against Heretics.

He adds moreover, Note by the way that here the Church of Rome is called a
Sect.
that In case a third Sect should peep out and grow up in France, the
professors thereof should suffer confiscation of their goods, with loss of
life it self; as has been practiced at Geneua against Seruetus, and in
England against Arians. My answer is this, That punishments for heretics,
duly and according to Law convicted, are set down by decrees of the civil
Magistrate, bearing rule in the country where the said heretics inhabit, and
not by any ordinances of the Pope. I say withal, the L. Cardinal has no
reason to match and parallel the reformed Churches with Seruetus and the
Arians: For those heretics were powerfully convicted by Gods word, and
lawfully condemned by the ancient General Councils, where they were permitted
and admitted to plead their own cause in person. But as for the truth
professed by me, and those of the reformed Religion, it was never yet hissed
out of the Schools, nor cast out of any Council, (like some Parliament bills)
where both sides have been heard with like indifferency. Yea, what Council
soever has been offered unto us in these latter times, it has been proposed
with certain presuppositions: as, That his Holiness (being a party in the
cause, and consequently to come under judgment as it were to the bar upon
his trial) shall be the Judge of Assize with Commission of Oyer and
Determiner: it shall be celebrated in a city of no safe access, without safe
conduct or conuoy to come or go at pleasure, and without danger: it shall be
assembled of such persons with free suffrage and voice, as uphold this rule,
(which they have already put in practice against John Hus and Hierome of Prage)
that faith given, and oath taken to an Heretic, must not be observed.

Now then to resume our former matter; If the Pope hitherto has never
presumed, for pretended heresy to confiscate by sentence, either the lands or
the goods of private persons, or common people of the French Nation, wherefore
should he dare to dispossess Kings of their Royal thrones? wherefore takes
he more upon him over Kings, then over private persons; wherefore shall the
sacred heads of Kings be more churlishly, uncivilly, and rigorously handled,
then the hoods of the meanest people? Here the L. Cardinal in stead of a direct
answer, breaks out of the lists, alleging clean from the purpose examples of
heretics punished, not by the Pope, but by the civil Magistrate of the
Country: But Bellarmine speaks to the point with a more free and open heart:
he is absolute and resolute in this opinion, that his Holiness has plenary
power to dispose all Temporal estates and matters in the whole world; I am
confident (says Bellarmine) and I speak it with assurance, Contr. Barclaium,
cap. 27.
that our Lord Jesus Christ in the days of his mortality, had power to
dispose of all Temporal things yea, to strip Sovereign Kings and absolute
Lords of their Kingdoms and Seignories: and without all doubt has granted and
left even the same power unto his Vicar, to make use thereof whenever he
shall think it necessary for the salvation of souls. And so his Lordship
speaks without exception of any thing at all: For who does not know, that
Jesus Christ had power to dispose no less of private men's possessions, then of
whole Realms and Kingdoms at his pleasure, if it had been his pleasure to
display the ensigns of his power? The same fullness of power is likewise in
the Pope. In good time: belike his Holiness is the sole heir of Christ, in
whole and in part. Sess. 9.
The last Lateran Council fineth a Laic that speaks blasphemy, for the first
offense (if he be a gentleman) at 25. ducats, and at 50. for the second. It
presupposes and takes it for granted, that the Church may rifle and ransacke
the purses of private men, and cast lots for their goods. The Council of Trent
diggeth as deep for the same vein of gold and silver. It ordaines; That
Emperors, Kings, Dukes Princes, Sess. 25. cap. 19.
and Lords of cities, castles, and territories holding of the Church, in case
they shall assign any place within their limits or liberties for the duel
between two Christians, shall be deprived of the said city, castle, or place,
where such duel shall be performed, they holding the said place of the Church
by any kind of tenure: that all other Estates held in fee where the like
offense shall be committed, shall forthwith fall and become forfeited to their
immediate and next Lords: that all goods, possessions, and estates, as well of
the combatants themselves, as of their seconds shall be confiscate. This
Council does necessarily presuppose, it lies in the hand and power of the
Church, to dispose of all the lands and estates, held in fee throughout all
Christendom; (because the Church forsooth can take from one, and give unto an
other all estates held in fee whatsoever, as well such as hold of the Church,
as of secular Lords) and to make ordinances for the confiscation of all private
persons goods. By this Canon the Kingdom of Naples has need to look well
unto it self. For one duel it may fall into the Exchecquer of the Roman
Church; because that Kingdom pays a Relief to the Church, as a Royalty or
Seignorie that holds in fee of the said Church. And in France there is not
one Lordship, not one Manor, not one farm which the Pope by this means
cannot shift over to a new Lord. His Lordship therefore had carried himself
and the cause much better, if in stead of seeking such idle shifts, he had by a
more large assertion maintained the Popes power to dispose of private men's
possessions, with no less right and authority then of Kingdoms: For what
color of reason can be given, for making the Pope Lord of the whole, and not
of the parts? for making him Lord of the forest in gross, and not of the
trees in parcel? for making him Lord of the whole house, and not of the
parlour or the dining chamber?

His Lordship alleges yet an other reason, but of no better weight: Between
the power of private owners over their goods, and the power of Kings over their
estates, there is no little difference: For the goods of private persons are
ordained for their owners, and Princes for the benefit of their Commonwealths.
Hear me now answer. If this Cardinal-reason has any force to infer, that a
King may lawfully be deprived of his Kingdom for heresy, but a private person
cannot for the same crime be turned out of his mansion house; then it shall
follow by the same reason, that a Father for the same cause may be deprived of
all power over his children, but a private owner cannot be deprived of his
goods in the like case: because goods are ordained for the benefit and comfort
of their owners, but fathers are ordained for the good and benefit of their
children: But most certain it is, that Kings representing the image of God in
earth and Gods place, have a better and closer seat in their chaires of
Estate, then any private persons have in the saddle of their inheritances and
patrimonies, which are daily seen for slight causes, to flit and to fall into
the hands of new Lords: Whereas a Prince being the Head, cannot be loosed in
the proper joint, nor dismounted; like a cannon when the carriage thereof is
unlocked, without a sore shaking and a most grievous dislocation of all the
members, yea, without subuerting the whole body of the State, whereby private
persons without number are inwrapped together in the same ruin; even as the
lower shrubs and other brush-wood are crushed in pieces altogether by the fall
of a great oak. But suppose his Lordships reason were somewhat ponderous and
solid withal, yet a King (which would not be forgotten) is endowed not only
with the Kingdom, but also with the ancient Desmenes and Crowne-lands, for
which none can be so simple to say, The King was ordained and created King;
which nevertheless he loses when he loses his Crown. Admit again this
reason were of some pith, to make mighty Kings more easily deposeable then
private persons from their patrimonies; yet all this makes nothing for the
deriuing and fetching of deposition from the Popes Consistory. What he never
conferred, by what right or power can he claim to take away?

But see here no doubt a sharp and subtle difference put by the L. Cardinal
between a Kingdom, and the goods of private persons. Goods, as his Lordship
says, are without life: they can be constrained by no force, by no example, by
no inducement of their owners to lose eternal life: Subjects by their Princes
may. Now I am of the contrary belief, That an heretical owner, or master of a
family, has greater power and means withal, to seduce his own servants and
children, then a Prince has to pervert his own subjects; and yet for the
contagion of Heresy, and for corrupt religion, children are not removed from
their parents, nor servants are taken away from their masters. Histories abound
with examples of most flourishing Churches, under a Prince of contrary
religion. And if things without life or soul are with less danger left in an
heretics hands; why then shall not an heretical King with more facility and
less danger keep his Crown, his Royal charge, his lands, his customs, his
imposts, etc? For will any man, except he be out of his wits, affirm these
things to have any life or soul? Or why shall it be counted folly, to leave a
sword in the hand of a mad Bedlam? Is not a sword also without life and soul?
For my part, I should rather be of this mind; that possession of things
without reason, is more dangerous and pernicious in the hands of an evil
master, then the possession of things endued with life and reason: For things
without life lack both reason and judgment, how to exempt and free themselves
from being instruments in evil and wicked actions, from being employed to
ungodly and abominable uses. I will not deny, that an heretical Prince is a
plague, a pernicious and mortal sickness to the souls of his subjects: But
a breach made by one mischief, must not be filled up with a greater
inconvenience: An error must not be shocked and shouldered with disloialtie,
nor heresy with perjury, nor impiety with sedition and armed rebellion
against GOD and the King. GOD, who uses to try and to school his Church, will
never forsake his Church; nor has need to protect his Church by any
proditorious and prodigious practices of perfidious Christians: For he makes
his Church to be like the burning bush: In the midst of the fire and flames
of persecutions, he will provide that she shall not be consumed, because he
stands in the midst of his Church. And suppose there may be some just cause
for the French, to play the rebels against their King; yet will it not follow,
that such rebellious motions are to be raised by the bellows of the Roman
Bishop, to whose Pastoral charge and office it is nothing proper, to
intermeddle in the civil affairs of foreign Kingdoms.

Here is the sum and substance of the L. Cardinals whole discourse, touching
his pretense of the second inconvenience. Which discourse he has closed with
a remarkable confession: to wit, that neither by the authority of holy
Scripture, nor by the the testimony and verdict of the Primitive Church, there
has been any full decision of this question. In regard whereof he falls into
admiration, that Lay People have gone so far in audaciousnesse, as to labor
that a doubtful doctrine might for ever pass current, and be taken for a new
article of faith. What a shame, what a reproach is this? how full of scandal?
for so his Lordship is pleased to cry out. This breaks into the seueralls and
enclosures of the Church: this lets in whole herds of heresies to grase in her
green and sweet pastures. On the other side, without any such Rhetorical
outcries, I simply affirm: It is a reproach, a scandal, a crime of rebellion,
for a subject having his full charge and load of benefits, in the new spring
of his Kings tender aage, his King-fathers blood yet reeking, and upon the
point of an address for a double match with Spain; in so honorable an
assembly, to seek the thraldom of his Kings Crown, to play the captious in
cauilling about causes of his Kings deposing, to give his former life the Lie
with shame enough in his old aage, and to make himself a common byword, under
the name of a Problematicall Martyr; one that offers himself to faggot and
fire, for a point of doctrine but problematically handled, that is,
distrustfully and only by way of doubtful and questionable discourse: yea for
a point of doctrine, in which the French (as he pretends) are permitted to
thwart and cross his Holiness in judgment, provided they speak in it as in a
point, not certain and necessary, but only doubtful and probable.

THE THIRD INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED.
THe third Inconvenience pretended by the L. Page 87.
Cardinal to grow by admitting this Article of the third Estate, is flourished
in these colors: It would breed and bring forth an open and vnauoydeable
schism against his Holiness, and the rest of the whole Ecclesiastical body:
For thereby the doctrine long approved and ratified by the Pope and the rest of
the Church, should now be taxed and condemned of impious and most detestable
consequence; yea the Pope and the Church, even in faith and in points of
salvation, should be reputed and believed to be erroniously persuaded. Hereupon
his Lordship gives himself a large scope of the raines, to frame his elegant
amplifications against schisms and schismatikes.

Now to mount so high, and to fly in such place upon the wings of
amplification for this Inconvenience, what is it else but magnifically to
report and imagine a mischief by many degrees greater then the mischief is?
The L. Cardinal is in a great error, if he make himself believe, that other
nations will make a rent or separation from the communion of the French, because
the French stand to it tooth and nail, that French Crowns are not liable or
obnoxious to Papal deposition; howsoever there is no schism that imports
not separation of communion. The most illustrious Republike of Venice, has
embarked herself in this quarrel against his Holiness, has played her
prize, and carried away the weapons with great honor. Does she,
notwithstanding her triumph in the cause, forbear to participate with all her
neighbors in the same Sacraments? does she live in schism with all the rest
of the Roman Church? No such matter. When the L. Cardinal himself not many
years past, maintained the Kings cause, and stood honorably for the Kings
right against the Popes Temporal usurpations, did he then take other Churches
to be schismatic, or the rotten members of Antichrist? Believe it who list,
I believe my Creed. Nay, his Lordship tells us himself a little after, that
his Holiness gives the French free scope, to maintain either the affirmative
or negative of this question. And will his Holiness hold them schismatikes,
that dissent from his opinion and judgment in a subject or cause esteemed
problematicall? Far be it from his Holiness. The King of Spain, reputed the
Popes right arm, never gave the Pope cause by any act or other declaration,
to conceive that he acknowledged himself deposeable by the Pope for heresy,
or Tyranny, or stupiditie. But being well assured the Pope stands in greater
fear of his arm, then he does of the Popes head and shoulders, he never
troubles his own head about our question. More, when the book of Cardinal
Baronius was come forth, in which book the Kingdom of Naples is descried and
publicly discredited (like false money) touching the quality of a Kingdom,
and attributed to the King of Spain, not as true proprietary thereof, but
only as an Estate held in fee of the Roman Church; the King made no bones to
condemn and to banish the said book out of his dominions. The holy Father was
contented to put up his Catholic sons proceeding to the Cardinals disgrace,
never opened his mouth against the King, never declared or noted the King to be
schismatic. He waits perhaps for some fitter opportunity; when the Kingdom
of Spain groaning under the burdens of intestine dissentions and troubles,
he may without any danger to himself give the Catholic King a Bishops mate.
Yea, the L. Cardinal himself is better seen in the humors and inclinations of
the Christian world, then to be grossly persuaded, that in the Kingdom of
Spain, and in the very heart of Rome it self there be not many, which either
make it but a jest, or else take it in foul scorn, to hear the Popes power
over the Crowns of Kings once named: especially since the Venetian Republike
has put his Holiness to the worse in the same cause, and cast him in Law.

What needed the L. Cardinal then, by casting up such mounts and trenches, by
heaping one amplification upon an other, to make schism look with such a
terrible and hideous aspect? Who knows not how great an offense, how heinous a
crime it is to quarter not JESUS CHRIST'S coat, but his body, which is the
Church? And what needed such terrifying of the Church with ugliness of
schism, whereof there is neither colorable show, nor possibility?

The next ugly monster, after schism, shaped by the L. Cardinal in the third
supposed and pretended inconvenience, is heresy. Page 89.
His Lordship says for the purpose: By this Article we are cast headlong into
a manifest heresy, as binding us to confess, that for many aages past, the
Catholic Church has been banished out of the whole world. For if the
champions of the doctrine contrary to this Article, do hold an impious and a
detestable opinion, repugnant unto Gods word, then doubtless the Pope for so
many hundred years expired, has not been the head of the Church, but an
heretic and the Antichrist. He adds moreover; That the Church long ago has
lost her name of Catholic, and that in France there has no Church flourished,
nor so much as appeared these many and more then many years: for as much as
all the French doctors for many years together, have stood for the contrary
opinion. We can erect and set up no trophey more honorable for heretics in
token of their victory, then to auow that Christ's visible Kingdom is perished
from the face of the earth, and that for so many hundred years there has not
been any Temple of God, nor any spouse of Christ, but every where, and all the
world over, the kingdom of Antichrist, the synagogue of Satan, the spouse of
the devil, has mightily prevailed and borne all the sway. Lastly, what
stronger engines can these heretics wish or desire, for the battering and the
demolishing of transubstantiation, of auricular confession, and other like
towers of our Catholic Religion, then if it should be granted the Church has
decided the said points without any authority? etc.

Me thinks the L. Cardinal in the whole draught and course of these words
does seek not a little to blemish the honor of his Church, and to mark his
religion with a black coal: For the whole frame of his Mother Church is very
easy to be shaken, if by the establishing of this Article she shall come to
final ruin, and shall become the Synagogue of Satan. Likewise, Kings are
brought into a very miserable state and condition, if their Souereigntie shall
not stand, if they shall not be without danger of deposition, but by the
total ruin of the Church, and by holding the Pope, whom they serve, to be
Antichrist. The L. Cardinal himself (let him be well sifted) herein does not
credit his own words: For does not his Lordship tell us plain, that neither
by Divine testimony, nor by any sentence of the ancient Church, the knot of
this controversy has been untied? again, that some of the French, by the
Popes favorable indulgence, are licensed or tolerated to say their mind, to
deliver their opinion of this question, though contrary to the judgment of his
Holiness; provided they hold it only as problematicall, and not as necessary?
What? Can there be any assurance for the Pope, that he is not Antichrist; for
the Church of Rome, that she is not a Synagogue of Satan, when a man's assurance
is grounded upon wavering and wild uncertainties, without Canon of Scripture,
without consent or countenance of antiquity, and in a cause which the Pope by
good leave suffers some to toss with winds of problematicall opinion? It
has been showed before, that by Gods word, whereof small reckoning perhaps is
made, by venerable antiquity, and by the French Church in those times when the
Popes power was mounted aloft, the doctrine which teaches deposing of Kings by
the Pope, has been checked and countermanded. What, did the French in those
days believe the Church was then swallowed up, and no where visible or extant
in the world? No verily; Those that make the Pope of Sovereign authority for
matters of Faith, are not persuaded that in this cause they are bound
absolutely to believe and credit his doctrine. Why so? Because they take it not
for any decree or determination of Faith; but for a point perteining to the
mysteries of State, and a pillar of the Popes Temporal Monarchy; who has not
received any promise from God, that in causes of this nature he shall not
err: For they hold, that error by no means can crawle or scramble up to the
Papal See, so highly mounted; but grant ambition can scale the highest walls,
and climb the loftiest pinacles of the same See. They hold withal, that in
case of so special advantage to the Pope, whereby he is made King of Kings,
and as it were the play master or distributer of Crowns, it is against all
reason that he should sit as Judge, to carue out Kingdoms for his own share.
To be short, let his Lordship be assured that he meets with notorious
blockeheads, more blunt-witted then a whetstone, when they are drawn to
believe by his persuasion, that whosoever believes the Pope has no right nor
power to put Kings beside their Thrones, to give and take away Crowns, are all
excluded and barred out of the heavenly Kingdom.

But now follows a worse matter: For they whom the Cardinal reproachfully
calls heretics, have wrought and won his Lordship (as to me seems) to
plead their cause at the bar, and to betray his own cause to these
heretics: For what is it in his Lordship, but plain playing the
Praeuaricator, when he cries so loud, that by admitting and establishing of
this Article, the doctrine of Cake-incarnation and privy Confession to a
Priest, is utterly subverted? Let us hear his reason, and willingly accept the
truth from his lips. The Articles (as his Lordship grants) of
Transubstantiation, auricular Confession, and the Popes power to depose Kings,
are all grounded alike upon the same authority. Now he has acknowledged the
Article of the Popes power to depose Kings, is not decided by the Scripture,
nor by the ancient Church, but within the compass of certain aages past, by
the authority of Popes and Councils. Then he goes on well, and inferres with
good reason, that in case the point of the Popes power be weakened, then the
other two points must needs be shaken, and easily overthrown: So that he
does confess the monstrous birth of the breaden-God, and the blind Sacrament
or vain fantasy of auricular confession, are no more conveyed into the Church
by pipes from the springs of sacred Scripture, or from the rivers of the
ancient Church, then that other point of the Popes power over Kings and their
Crowns. Very good: For were they indeed derived from either of those two
heads, that is to say, were they grounded upon the foundation of the first or
second authority; then they could never be shaken by the downfall of the
Popes power to depose Kings. I am well assured, that for using so good a
reason, the world will hold his Lordship in suspicion, that he still has
somesmacke of his fathers discipline and instruction, who in times past had the
honor to be a Minister of the holy Gospel.

Howbeit he plays not fair, nor uses sincere dealing in his proceeding
against such as he calls heretics; when he casts in their dish, and bears
them in hand they frowardly wrangle for the inuisibilitie of the Church in
earth: For indeed the matter is nothing so. They freely acknowledge a visible
Church: For howsoever the assembly of Gods elect, does make a body not
discerneable by man's eye; yet we assuredly believe, and gladly profess, there
never wanted a visible Church in the world; yet only visible to such as make a
part of the same. All that are without, see no more but men, they do not see
the said men to be the true Church. We believe moreover of the universal
Church visible, that it is composed of many particular Churches, whereof some
are better fined and more clean from lees and dregs then other: and withal,
we deny the purest Churches to be always the greatest and most visible.

THE FOVRTH AND LAST INCONVENIENCE EXAMINED.
THE Lord Cardinal before he looks into the last Inconvenience, uses a
certain preamble of his own life past, and services done to the Kings, Henry
the III. and IIII. Touching the latter of which two Kings, his Lordship says
in a strain of boasting, after this manner: I, by the grace of God, or the
grace of God by me rather, reduced him to the Catholic religion. I obtained
at Rome his absolution of Pope Clement 8. I reconciled him to the holy See.
Touching the first of these points; I say the time, the occasions, and the
foresaid Kings necessary affairs do sufficiently testify, that he was
induced to change his mind, and to alter his religion, upon the strength of
other manner of arguments then Theological schools, or the persuasions of the
L. Cardinals fluent Rhetoric, do usually afford, or could possibly suggest.
Moreover, who does not know, that in affairs of so high nature and
consequence, resolutions once taken, Princes are to proceed with instructions
by a formal course? As for the Kings absolution, pretended to be purchased of
Clement 8. by the L. Cardinals good service; it had been the part of so great
a Cardinal, for the honor of his King, of the Realm, and of his own place,
to have buried that piece of his notable service in perpetual silence, and in
the dark night of eternal oblivion: For in this matter of reconcilement, it
is not unknown to the world, how shamefully and basely he prostituted the
inviolable dignity of his King, when his Lordship representing the person of
his King, and couching on the ground by way of sufficient penance, was glad (as
I have noted in the Preface to my Apology) to have his venerable shoulders
gracefully saluted with stripes, and reverently worshipped with bastonados of a
Pontificiall cudgel. Which graceful, or disgraceful blemish rather, it
pleased Pope Clement of his rare clemency, to grace yet with a higher degree
of spiritual graces; in giving the L. Cardinal then Bishop of Eureux, a
certain quantity of holy grains, crosses, and medals, or little plates of
silver, or some other metal, to hang about the neck, or to be borne about
against some evil: Which treasures of the Popes grace, whosoever should
graciously and reverently kiss, they should without fail purchase unto
themselves a pardon for one hundred years. These feate and pretty gugawes for
children, were no doubt a special comfort unto the good Kings heart, after his
Majesty had been handsomely basted upon the L. Bishops back. But with what
face can his Lordship brag, that he prevailed with Pope Clement for the Kings
absolution? The late Duke of Neuers, not long before had solicited his Holiness,
with all earnest and humble instance to the same purpose; howsoever, the Kings
affairs then seeming desperate in the Popes eye, he was licensed to depart for
France, without any due and gracious respect unto his errand. But so soon as
the Pope received intelligence, of the Kings fortunes growing to the full, and
the affairs of the League to be in the wane, and the principal cities, the
strongest places of garrison through all France to strike tops and tops
gallant, and to hale the King; then the holy Ghost in good time inspired the
holy Father with a holy desire and tender affection, to receive this poor
wandering sheep again into the flock of Christ, and bosom of holy Church. His
Holiness had reason: For he feared by his obstinate severity to provoke the
patience of the French, and to drive that Nation (as they had many times
threatened before) then to put in execution their ancient design; which was,
to shake off the Pope, and to set up some of their own tribes or kinreds for
Patriarch over the French Church. But let his Lordshippe vouchsafe to search
the secret of his own bosom, and no doubt he will not stick to acknowledge,
that before he stirred one foot out of France, he had good assurance of the
good success and issue of his honorable embassage.

Now the hearers thus prepared by his Preface, the L. Cardinal proceeds in
his purpose; namely to make proof, how this Article of the third Estate,
wherein doubtful and questionable matters are mingled and confounded with
certain and indubitable principles, does so debilitate and weaken the sinews
and virtue of any remedy intended for the danger of Kings, as it makes all
remedies and receipts prescribed for that purpose, to become altogether
unprofitable, and without effect. He yields this reason, (take it forsooth upon
my warrant) a reason full of pith and substance: The only remedy against
parricides, is to thunder the solemn curses of the Church, and the punishments
to be inflicted after death: which points, if they be not grounded upon
infallible authority, will never be settled in men's persuasions with any
certain assurance. Now in the solemn curses of the Church, no man can attain
to the said assurance, if things not denied be mingled with points not
granted, and not consented unto by the Universal Church. By a thing not
denied and not contested, the L. Cardinal means prohibiting and condemning of
King-killing: and by points contested, he means denying of the Popes power to
depose Kings.

In this whole discourse, I find neither pith of argument, nor course of
proof; but only a cast of the L. Cardinals office by way of counsel:
whereunto I make this answer. If there be in this Article of the third Estate
any point, wherein all are not of one mind and the same judgment; in whom
lies all the blame, from whence rises the doubt, but from the Popes and Popish
parasites, by whom the certainty of the said point has bin cunningly removed
and conveyed away, and must be restored again by public authority? Now the
way to restore certainty unto a point, which against reason is called into
doubt and question, is to make it up in one mass, or to tie it up in the same
bundle, with other certain points of the same nature.

Here I am forced to summon the consciences of men, to make some stand or stay
upon this point, and with me to enter into deep consideration, how great and
unvanquishable force is ever found in the truth: For these two questions,
Whether Kings may lawfully be made away by assassins waged and hired for the
act; and Whether the Pope has lawful power to chase Kings out of their
Thrones, are by the L. Cardinals own confession, in so full aspect of
conjunction, that if either be brought under any degree of doubt, the other
also is fetched within the same compass. In which words he directly points as
with a finger to the very true source of the maine mischief, and to the
basilique and liver vein, infected with pestilential blood, inflamed to the
destruction of Basilicall Princes by detestable parricide: For whosoever shall
confidently believe that Popes are not armed with power to depose Kings; will
believe with no less confidence and assurance, it is not lawful by sudden
assaults to fly at their throats. For are not all desperate villains
persuaded, when they are hired to murder Kings, that in doing so damnable a
feate, they do it for a piece of notable and extraordinary service to the
Pope? This maxim therefore is to be held for a principle immovable and
indubitable; that, If subjects desire the life of their Kings to be secured;
they must not yield the Pope one inch of power, to deprive their Kings of their
Thrones and Crowns, by deposing their Kings.

The Lord Cardinal testifies no less himself in these words: If those
monsters of men, and furies of hell, by whom the lifeblood of our two last
Kings was let out, had ever been acquainted with Laws Ecclesiastical, they
might have read themselves adjudged by the Council of Constance to express
damnation. For in these words, the L. Cardinal prefers a bill of indictment
to cast his Holiness; who, upon the commencing of the Leaguers wars, in
stead of giving order for the publishing of the said Ecclesiastical Laws for
the restraining of all parricidicall practices and attempts, fell to the
terror of his fulminations, which not long after were seconded and ratified by
the most audatious and bloody murder of King Henry III. In like manner, the
whole Clergy of France are wrapped up by the L. Cardinals words, and inuolued
in the peril of the said indictment: For in stead of preaching the said
Ecclesiastical Laws, by which all King-killing is inhibited; the Priests
taught, vented, and published nothing but rebellion; and when the people in
great devotion came to power their confessions into the Priests ears; then the
Priests, with a kind of counterbuffe in the second place when their turn was
come, and with greater devotion, powered blood into the ears of the people; out
of which root grew the terror of those cruel wars, and the horrible
parricide of that good King.

But let us here take some near sight of these Ecclesiastical Laws, whereby
subjects are inhibited to kill, or desperately to dispatch their Kings out of
the way. The Lord Cardinal, for full payment of all scores upon this
reckoning, lays down the credit of the Council at Constance, which
nevertheless affoardeth not one myte of true and current payment. The truth
of the history may be taken from this brief relation. John Duke of Burgundy,
procured Lewis Duke of Orleans to be murdered in Paris: To justify and make
good this bloody act, he produced a certain petimaster, one called by the
name of John Petit. This little John caused nine propositions to be given
forth or set up, to be discussed in the famous University of Paris: The
sum of all to this purpose; It is lawful, just, and honorable, for every
subject or private person either by open force and violence, or by deceit and
secret lying in wait, or by some witty stratagem, or by any other way of
fact, to kill a Tyrant practicing against his King, and other higher powers; yea
the King ought in reason, to give him a pension or stipend, that has killed
any person disloyal to his Prince. The words of Petits first proposition be
these: It is lawful for every subject, Gerson.
without any command or commission from the higher powers by all the Laws of
nature, of man, and of God himself, to kill or cause to be killed any Tyrant,
who either by a covetous and greedy desire, or by fraud, by divination upon
casting of Lots, by double and treacherous dealing, does plot or practice
against his Kings corporal health, or the health of his higher powers. In the
third proposition: It is lawful for every subject honorable and meritorious,
to kill the said Tyrant, or cause him to be killed as a Traitor, disloyal and
treacherous to his King. In the sixth proposition: The King is to appoint a
salarie and recompense for him that has killed such a Tyrant, or has caused
him to be killed. These propositions of Johannes Paruus, were condemned by the
Council of Constance, as impious, and tending to the scandal of the Church.
Now then, whereas the said Council no doubt understood the name or word Tyrant
in the same sense, wherein it was taken by Johannes Paruus; certain it is, the
Council was not of any such judgment or mind, to condemn one that should
kill a King or Sovereign Prince; but one that by treason, and without
commandment should kill a subject, rebelling and practicing against his King.
For John Petit had undertaken to justify the making away of the Duke of
Orleans to be a lawful act, and calls that Dukea Tyrant, albeit he was no
Sovereign Prince; as all the above recited words of John Petit do testify,
that he speaks of such a Tyrant, as being in state of subjection, rebelleth
against his free and absolute Prince: So that whosoever shall narrowly search
and look into the mind and meaning of the said Council, shall easily perceive,
that by their decrees the safety of Kings was not confirmed but weakened, not
augmented but diminished; for as much as they inhibited private persons to kill
a Subject, attempting by wicked counsels and practices to make away his King.

But be it granted, the Council of Constance is flat and altogether direct
against King-killers; For I am not unwilling to be persuaded, that had the
question then touched the murdering of Sovereign Princes, the said Council
would have passed a sound and holy decree: But, I say, this granted, what
shield of defense is hereby reached to Kings, to ward or beat off the thrust of
a murderers weapon, and to save or secure their life? seeing the L. Cardinal,
building upon the subtle devise and shift of the Jesuits, has taught us out
of their Schools, that by Kings are understood Kings in esse, not yet fallen
from the supreme degree of Sovereign Royalty: For being once deposed by the
Pope, (say the Jesuits) they are no longer Kings, but are fallen from the
rights of Sovereign dignity; and consequently to make strip and wast of their
blood, is not forsooth to make strip and wast of Royal blood. The Jesuitical
masters, in the file of their words are so supple and so limber, that by
leaving still in their speech some starting hole or other, they are able by the
same, as by a posterne or backdoore, to make an escape.

Mean while the Readers are here to note (for well they may) a trick of
monstrous and most wicked cunning. The L. Cardinal contends for the bridling
and hampering of King-killers by the Laws Ecclesiastical. Now it might be
presumed, that so reverend and learned a Cardinal intending to make use of
Ecclesiastical Laws, by virtue whereof the life of Kings may be secured,
would fill his mouth and garnish the point with divine Oracles, that we might
the more gladly and willingly give him the hearing, when he speaks as one
furnished with sufficient weight and authority of sacred Scripture. But
behold, in stead of the authentical and most ancient word, he propounds the
decree of a lateborne Council at Constance, neither for the Popes tooth, nor
any way coming near the point in controversy. And suppose it were pertinent
unto the purpose, the L. Cardinal bears in his hand a forke of distinction,
with two tines or teeth to bear off, nay to shift off and to avoid the matter
with mere dalliance. The shortest and nearest way (in some sort of respects)
to establish a false opinion, is to charge or set upon it with false and with
ridiculous reasons. The like way to work the overthrow of true doctrine, is to
rest or ground it upon frivolous reasons or authorities of stubble-weight. For
example; if we should thus argue for the immortality of the soul with Plato:
In Phaedone.
The swan sings before her death; ergo, the soul is immortal. Or thus with
certain seduced Christians: The Pope has ordained the word of God to be
authentical: ergo, all credit must be given to divine Scripture. Upon the
spurkies or hooks of such ridiculous arguments and frivolous reasons, the L.
Cardinal hangs the life and safety of Kings.

With like artificial devises he pretends to have the infamous murders, and
apposted cutting of Kings throats in extreme detestation; and yet by deposing
them from their Princely dignities, by degrading them from their supreme and
Sovereign authorities, he brings their sacred heads to the butchers block:
For a King deposed by the Pope, (let no man doubt) will not leave any stone
vnremooued, nor any means and ways unattempted, nor any forces or powers of
men vnleuied or vnhired, to defend himself and his Regal dignity, to
repress and bring under his rebellious people, by the Pope discharged of their
alleagiance. In this perplexity of the public affairs, in these tempestuous
perturbations of the State, with what perils is the King not besieged and
assaulted? His head is exposed to the chances of war; his life a fair mark
to the insidious practices of a thousand traitors; his Royal person obuious
to the dreadful storm of angry fortune, to the deadly malice, to the fatal
and mortal weapons of his enemies. The reason: He is presupposed to be
lawfully and orderly stripped of his Kingdom. Will he yet hold the stern of
his Royal estate? Then is he necessarily taken for a Tyrant, reputed an
usurper, and his life is exposed to the spoil: For the public laws make it
lawful and free, for any private person to enterprise against an usurper of the
Kingdom: Every man, says Tertullian, is a soldier, In reos Maiestatis, (...)
publ^cos hosts omnis hom omiles est. Tertul. apol. cap. 2.
to bear arms against all traitors and public enemies. Take from a King the
title of lawful King, you take from him the warrant of his life, and the
weapons whereby he is maintained in greater security, then by his Royal Guard
armed with swords and halberds, through whose wards and ranks, a desperate
villain will make himself an easy passage, being master of another man's
life, because he is prodigal and careless of his own. Such therefore as
pretend so much pity toward Kings, to abhor the bloody opening of their
liuer-veine, and yet withal, to approve their hoysting out of the Royal
dignity, are just in the vein and humor of those that say, Let us not kill
the King, but let us disarme the King that he may die a violent death: let us
not deprive him of life, but of the means to defend his life: let us not
strangle the King and stop his vital breath, so long as he remains King; O
that were impious, O that were horrible and abominable; but let him be deposed,
and then whosoever shall run him through the body with a weapon up to the
very hilts, shall not bear the guilt of a King-killer. All this must be
understood to be spoken of Kings, who after they are despoiled of Regalitie, by
sentence of deposition given by the Pope, are able to arm themselves, and by
valiant arms do defend their Sovereign rights. But in case the King, blasted
with Roman lightning, and stricken with Papal thunder, shall actually and
speedily be smitten down from his high Throne of Regality, with present loss
of his Kingdom; I believe it is almost impossible for him to warrant his own
life, who was not able to warrant his own Kingdom. Let a cat be thrown from
a high roof to the bottom of a cellour or vault, she lights on her feet,
and runs away without taking any harm. A King is not like a cat, howsoever
a cat may look upon a King: he cannot fall from the lofty pinnacle of Royalty,
to light on his feet upon the hard pauement of a private state, without
crushing all his bones in pieces. It has been the lot of very few Emperors and
Kings, to outliue their Empire: For men ascend to the lofty Throne of Kings,
with a soft and easy pace, by certain steps and degrees; there be no stately
stairs to come down, they tumble head and heels together when they fall. He
that has once griped another Kingdom, thinks himself in little safety, so
long as he shall of his courtesy suffer his disseised predecessor to draw his
breath. And say that some Princes, after their fall from their Thrones, have
escaped both point and edge of the Tyrants weapon; yet have they wandered like
miserable fugitives in foreign countries, or else have been condemned like
captives to perpetual imprisonment at home, a thousand-fold worse and more
lamentable then death it self. Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracusa, from a great
King in Sicilie tur'nd Schoolmaster in Corinth. It was the only calling and
kind of life, that as he thought bearing some resemblance of rule and
government, might recreate his mind, as an image or picture of his former
Sovereignty over men. This Dionysius was the only man (to my knowledge) that
had a humor to laugh after the loss of a Kingdom, and in the state of a
Pedant or governor of children, merrily to jest and to scorn his former state
and condition of a King. In this my Kingdom of England, sundry Kings have
seen the walls as it were of their Princely fortress dismantled, razed, and
beaten down. By name, Edward and Richard, both II. and Henry the VI. all
which Kings were most cruelly murdered in prison. In the reign of Edward III.
by Act of Parliament, Whosoever shall imagine, (that is the very word of the
Statute) or machinate the Kings death, are declared guilty of Rebellion and
high Treason. The learned Judges of the Land, grounding upon this Law of Edward
the third, have ever since reputed and judged them traitors according to Law,
that have dared only to whisper or talk softly between the teeth, of
deposing the King: For they count it a clear case, that no Crown can be taken
from a Kings head, without loss of Head and Crown together, sooner or later.

The L. Cardinal therefore in this most weighty and serious point does merely
dally and flowt after a sort, Page 95.
when he tells us, The Church does not intermeddle with releasing of
subjects, and knocking off their yrons of obedience, but only before the
Ecclesiastical tribunal seat; and that besides this double censure, of
absolution to subjects, and excommunication to the Prince, the Church imposes
none other penalty. Under pretense of which two censures, so far is the
Church (as the L. Cardinal pretends) from consenting that any man so
censured should be touched for his life, that she utterly abborreth all murder
whatsoever; but especially all sudden and vnprepenced murders for fear of
casting away both body and soul; which often in sudden murders go both one
way. It has been made manifest before, that all such proscription and setting
forth of Kings to port-sale, has always for the train thereof, either some
violent and bloody death, or some other mischief more intolerable then death
it self. What are we the better, that parricides of Kings are neither set on,
nor approved by the Church in their abominable actions; when she lays such
plots, and takes such courses, as necessarily do infer the cutting of their
throats? In the next place be it noted, that his Lordship against all reason,
reckons the absoluing of subjects from the oath of alleagiance, in the rank of
penalties awarded and enjoined before the Ecclesiastical tribunal seat: For
this penalty is not Ecclesiastical, but Civil, and consequently not triable
in Ecclesiastical Courts, without usurping upon the Civil Magistrate. But I
wonder with what face the L. Cardinal can say, The Church never consents to
any practice against his life, whom she has once chastised with severe
censures: For can his Lordship be ignorant, what is written by Pope Vrbanus,
Can. Excommunicatorum. Can. exco^. Cause. 23. Quaest. 6.
We take them not in any wise to be man-slayers, who in a certain heat of
zeal toward the Catholic Church their Mother, shall happen to kill an
excommunicate person. More, if the Pope does not approve and like the practice
of King-killing, wherefore has not his Holiness imposed some severe censure
upon the book of Mariana the Jesuit (by whom parricides are commended, nay
highly extolled) when his Holiness has been pleased to take the pains to
censure and call in some other of Mariana's books? Again, wherefore did his
Holiness advise himself to censure the Decree of the Court of Parliament in
Paris against John Chastell? Wherefore did he suffer Garnet and Oldcorne my
powder-miners, both by books and pictures vendible under his nose in Rome, to
be inrowled in the Canon of holy Martyrs? And when he saw two great Kings
murdered one after another, wherefore by some public declaration did not his
Holiness testify to all Christendom, his inward sense and true apprehension
of so great misfortune, as all Europe had just cause to lament on the behalf
of France? Wherefore did not his Holiness publish some Law or Pontificiall
Decree, to provide for the security of Kings in time to come? True it is, that
he censured Becanus his book: But wherefore? That by a captious and slight
censure, he might prevent a more exact and rigorous Decree of the Sorbone
School: For the Popes check to Becanus, was only agenerall censure and
touch, without any particular specification of matter touching the life of
Kings. About some two months after, the said book was printed again, with a
dedication to the Popes Nuntio in Germany; yet without any alteration, save
only of two articles containing the absolute power of the people over Kings.
In recompense and for a counterchecke whereof, three or four articles were
inserted into the said book, touching the Popes power over Kings; articles no
less wicked and injurious to Regal rights; nay more injurious then any of the
other clauses, whereof just cause of exception and complaint had been given
before. If I would collect and heap up examples of ancient Emperors, (as of
Henry IV. whose dead corpse felt the rage and fury of the Pope; or of Frederic
II. against whom the Pope was not ashamed to whet and kindle the Sultane; or of
Queen Elizabeth our Predecessor, of glorious memory, whose life was diverse
times assaulted by privy murderers, expressly dispatched from Rome for that
holy service) if I would gather up other examples of the same stamp, which I
have laid forth in my Apology for the oath of alleagiance; I could make it
more clear then daylight, how far the L. Cardinals words are discrepant
from the truth, where his Lordship out of most rare considence is bold to
auow, Page 97.
That never any Pope went so far, as to give consent or counsel for the
desperate murdering of Princes. That which already has been alleged may
suffice to convince his Lordship: I mean, that his Holiness by deposing of
Kings, does lead them directly to their graves and tombs.

The Cardinal himself seems to take some notice hereof. The Church (as he
speaks) abhors sudden and vnprepensed murders above therest. Page 95.
Does not his Lordship in this phrase of speech acknowledge, that murders
committed by open force, are not so much disauowed or disclaimed by the Church?
A little after he speaks not in the teeth, as before, but with full and open
mouth; that he does not dislike a King once deposed by the Pope, should be
pursued with open war: Whereupon it follows, that in war the King may be
lawfully slain. No doubt a remarkable degree of his Lordships clemency. A
King shall be better entreated and more mildly dealt withal, if he be slain
by the shot of an harquebuse or caleeuer in the field, then if he be stabd by
the stroke or thrust of a knife in his chamber: or if at a siege of some city
he be blown up with a mine, then by a mine made, and a train of gunpowder
laid under his Palace or Parliament house in time of peace. His reason:
Forsooth, because in sudden murders, oftentimes the soul and the body perish
both together. O singular bounty, and rare clemency! prouokers, instigators,
strong puffers and blowers of parricides, in merciful compassion of the soul,
become unmerciful and shameful murderers of the body. This device may well
claim and challenge kindred of Mariana the Jesuits invention: For he likes
not at any hand the poisoning of a Tyrant by his meat or drink; for fear lest
he taking the poison with his own hand, and swallowing or gulping it down in
his meat or drink so taken, should be found felo de se, (as the common Lawyer
speaks) or culpable of his own death. But Mariana likes better, to have a
Tyrant poisoned by his chair, or by his apparel and robes, after the example
of the Mauritanian Kings; that being so poisoned only by sent, or by contact,
he may not be found guilty of selfe-fellonie, and the soul of the poor
Tyrant in her flight out of the body may be innocent. O hel-hounds, O
diabolical wretches, O infernal monsters! Did they only suspect and imagine,
that either in Kings there is any remainder of Kingly courage, or in their
subjects any spark left of ancient liberty; they durst as soon eat their
nails, or tear their own flesh from the bones, as once broach the vessel of
this diabolical device. How long then, how long shall Kings whom the Lord has
called his Anointed, Kings the breathing Images of God upon earth; Kings that
with a wry or frowning look, are able to crush these earth-wormes in pieces;
how long shall they suffer this viperous brood, scotfree and without
punishment, to spit in their faces? how long, the Majesty of GOD in their
person and Royal Majesty, to be so notoriously vilified, so dishonourably
trampled under foot?

The L. Cardinal borads us with a like manifest jest, and notably trifles;
first, distinguishing between Tyrants by administration, and Tyrants by
usurpation; then showing that he by no means does approve those profane and
heathenish Laws, whereby secret practices and conspiracies against a Tyrant by
administration are permitted. His reason; Because after deposition there is a
certain habitude to Royal dignity, and as it were a kind of politic
Character inherent in Kings, by which they are discerned from persons merely
private, or the common sort of people; and the obstacle, crosse-barre, or
sparre once removed and taken out of the way, the said Kings deposed are at
length reinuested and endowed again with lawful use of Royal dignity, and
with lawful administration of the Kingdom. Is it possible that his Lordship
can speak and utter these words according to the inward persuasion of his
heart? I believe it not. For admit a King cast out of his Kingdom were sure to
escape with life; yet being once reduced to a private state of life, after he
has wound or wrought himself out of deadly danger, so far he is from
holding or retayning any remainder of dignity or politic impression, that on
the contrary he falls into greater contempt and misery, then if he had been a
very peasant by birth, and had never held or governed the stern of Royal
estate. What foul is more beautiful then the peacocke? Let her be plumed and
bereft of her feathers; what owl, what iacke-daw more ridiculous, more without
all pleasant fashion? The homely sowter, the infamous catchpol, the base
tincker, the rude artificer, the pack-horseporter, then living in Rome with
liberty, when Valentinian was detained captive by Saporas the Persian King,
was more happy then that Roman Emperor. And in case the L. Cardinal
himself should be so happy (I should say so unfortunate) to be stripped of all
his dignities and Ecclesiastical promotions; would it not redound to his
Lordships wonderful consolation, that in his greatest extremity, in the lowest
of his bareness and nakedness, he still retains a certain habitual right
and character of a Cardinal, whereby to recover the loss of his former
dignities and honors? when he beholds these prints and impressions of his
foresaid honors; would it not make him the more willing and glad, to forsake
the back of his venerable mule, to use his Cardinals foot-cloath no longer,
but ever after like a Cardinal in print and character, to walk on foot?

But let us examine his Lordships consolation of Kings, thrust out of their
kingdoms by the Pope for heresy. The obstacle (as the L. Cardinal speaks)
being taken away; that is to say, when the King shall be reformed; th^^
habitual right and character yet inherent in the person of a King, restores
him to the lawful administration of his Kingdom. I take this to be but a cold
comfort: For here his Lordship does only presuppose, and not prove, that
after a King is thrust out of his Throne, when he shall repent and turn true
Roman Catholic the other by whom he has been cast out, and by force
disseised, will recall him to the Royal seat, and faithfully settle him again
in his ancient right, as one that rejoices for the recovery of such a lost
sheep. But I should rather fear, the new King would press and stand upon
other terms; as a term of years for a trial, whether the repentance of the
King displaced be true and sound to the coare, or counterfeit, dissembled, and
painted holiness; for the words, the sorrowful and heavy looks, the sad and
formal gestures, of men pretending repentance, are not always to be taken,
to be respected, to be credited. Again, I should fear the afflicted King
might be charged and borne down too, that albeit he has renounced his former
heresy, he has stumbled since at an other stone, and run the ship of his
faith against some other rock of new heretical prauitie. Or I should yet
fear, he might be made to believe that heresy makes a deeper impression, and
a character more indeleble in the person, then is the other politic character
of Regal Majesty. Alas, good Kings! in how hard, in how miserable a state do
they stand? Once deposed, and ever barred of repentance: As if the scapes and
errors of Kings, were all sins against the Holy Ghost, or sins unto death,
for which it is not lawful to pray. Falls a pruiate person? he may be set up,
and new established. Falls a King? is a King deposed? his repentance is ever
fruitless, ever unprofitable. Has a private person a train of servants? He
can not be deprived of any one without his priuitie and consent. Has a King
millions of subjects? He may be deprived by the Pope of a third part, when his
Holiness will have them turn Clerics or enter Cloisters, without asking the
King leave: and so of subjects they may be made non-subiects.

But I question yet further. A King falling into heresy, is deposed by the
Pope; his son stands pure Catholic; The Regal seat is empty. Who shall
succeed in the deposed Kings place? Shall a stranger be preferred by the Pope?
That were to do the innocent son egregious and notorious wrong. Shall the
son himself? That were a more injurious part in the son against his
father: For if the son be touched with any fear of God, or moved with any
reverence toward his father, he will diligently and seriously take heed, that
he put not his father by the Kingdom, by whose means he himself is borne to
a Kingdom. Nor will he tread in the steps of Henry the V. Emperor, who by
the Popes instigation, expelled and chased his aaged father out of the
Imperial dignity. Much less will he hearken to the voice and advise of Doctor
Suares the Jesuit, Lib. 6. cap. 4. Si Papa Regem depenat, ab illis tantum
poterit, expells vet interfics, quibus ipse id commiserit.
who, in his book written against my self, a book applauded and approved of
many Doctors, after he has like a Doctor of the chair, pronounced, That a
King deposed by the Pope, cannot be lawfully expelled or killed, but only by
such as the Pope has charged with such execution: falls to add a little
after: If the Pope shall declare a King to be an heretic, and fallen from the
Kingdom, without making further declaration touching execution; that is to
say, without giving express charge unto any to make away the King: then the
lawful successor being a Catholic, has power to do the feate; and if he
shall refuse, or if there shall be none such, then it appertains to the
comminaltie or body of the Kingdom. A most detestable sentence: For in
hereditarie Kingdoms, who is the Kings lawful successor, but his son? The
son then by this doctrine, shall imbrew his hands in his own fathers blood,
so soon as he shall be deposed by the Pope. A matter so much the nearer and
more deeply to be apprehended, because the said most outrageous book flies
like a furious mastiffe directly at my throat, and withal instilleth such
precepts into the tender disposition of my son, as if hereafter he shall
become a Roman Catholic, so soon as the Pope shall give me the lift out of
my Throne, shall bind him forthwith to make effusion of his own fathers blood.
Such is the religion of these reverend Fathers, the pillars of the Pontificiall
Monarchy: In comparison of whose religion and holiness, all the impiety that
ever was among the Infidels, and all the barbarous cruelty that ever was among
the Canibals, may pass henceforth in the Christian world for pure clemency
and humanity. These things ought his Lordship to have pondered, rather then to
babble of habitudes and politic characters, which to the common people are
like the Bergamasque or the wilde-Irish form of speech, and pass their
understanding.

All these things are nothing in a manner, if we compare them with the last
clause, which is the closer, and as it were the vpshot of his Lordships
discourse: For therein he labors to persuade concerning this Article, framed
to bridle the Popes tyrannical power over Kings, if it should receive gracious
entertainment, and general approbation; That it would breed great danger, and
work effects of pernicious consequence unto Kings. The reason: because it
would prove an introduction to schism; and schism would stir up civil
wars, contempt of Kings, distempered inclinations and motions to entrap their
life; and which is worst of all, the fierce wrath of God, inflicting all sorts
of calamities. An admirable paradoxe, and able to strike men stone-blind: that
his Holiness must have power to depose Kings, for the better security and
safeguard of their life; that when their Crowns are made subject unto another
will and pleasure, then they are come to the highest altitude and elevation of
honor; that for the only warrant of their life, their supreme and absolute
greatness must be depressed; that for the longer keeping of their Crowns,
another must pluck the Crown from their heads. As if it should be said, Would
they not be stripped naked by another? the best way is, for themselves to
untruss, for themselves to put off all, and to go naked of their own accord.
Will they keep their Souereigntie in safety for ever? The best way is to let
another have their Sovereign authority and supreme Estate in his power. But I
have been ever of this mind, that when my goods are at no man's command or
disposing but mine own, then they are trewly and certainly mine own. It may be
this error is grown upon me and other Princes for lack of brains: whereupon
it may be feared, or at least coniectured, the Pope means to shave our
crowns, and thrust us into some cloister, there to hold rank in the
brotherhood of good King Childerie. Forasmuch then as my dull capacity does
not serve me to reach or comprehend the pith of this admirable reason, I have
thought good to seek and to use the instruction of old and learned experience,
which teaches no such matter: by name, that civil wars and fearful
perturbations of State in any nation of the world, have at any time grown from
this faithful credulity of subjects, that Popes in right have no power to wrest
and lift Kings out of their dignities and possessions. On the other side, by
establishing the contrary maxims, to yoke and hamper the people with
Pontificiall tyranny, what rebellious troubles and stirs, what extreme
desolations has England been forced to fear and feel, in the Reign of my
Predecessors Henry II. John and Henry III? These be the maxims and
principles, which under the Emperor Henry IV. and Frederic the I. made all
Europe flow with channels and streams of blood, like a river with water,
while the Saracens by their incursions and victories ouerflowed, and in a
manner drowned the honor of the Christian name in the East. These be the
maxims and principles, which made way for the wars of the last League into
France; by which the very bowels of that most famous and flourishing Kingdom
were set on such a combustion, that France her self was brought within two
fingers breadth of bondage to another Nation, and the death of her two last
Kings most villenously and traitorously accomplished. The L. Cardinal then
giving these diabolical maxims for means to secure the life and Estate of
Kings, speaks as if he would give men counsel to dry themselves in the
river, when they come as wet as a water spaniell out of a pond; or to warm
themselves by the light of the Moon, when they are stark-naked, and well near
frozen to death.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE LORD OF PERRON EXAMINED.
AFter the L. Cardinal has stoutly showed the strength of his arm, and the
deep skill of his head in fortification; at last he leaves his lofty
scaffolds, and falls to work nearer the ground, with more easy tools of
humble prayers and gentle exhortations. The sum of the whole is this: He
adiures his auditors never to forge remedies, never so to provide for the
temporal safety of Kings, as thereby to work their final falling from
eternal salvation: never to make any rent or rupture in the unity of the
Church, in this corrupt aage infected with pestilent Heresies, which already
having made so great a breach in the walls of France, will no doubt double
their strength by the dissentions, divisions, and schisms of Catholics. If
this infectious plague shall still increase and grow to a carbuncle, it can by
no means poison Religion, without bringing Kings to their winding sheets and
woeful hearses. The first rowlers of that stone of offense, aimed at no other
mark, then to make an ignominious and lamentable rent in the Church. He
thinks the Deputies of the third Estate, had neither head nor first hand in
contriuing this Article; but holds it rather a new device and subtle
invention, suggested by persons, which being already cut off by their own
practices from the body of the Roman Church, have likewise inueigled and
ensnared some that bear the name of Catholics, with some other Ecclesiastics;
and under a fair pretense and goodly cloak, by name, the service of the King,
have surprised and played upon their simplicity. These men (as the Cardinal
says) do imitate Julian the Apostata, who to bring the Christians to
idolatrous worship of false gods, commanded the idols of Jupiter and Venus to
be intermingled with Imperial statues, and other Images of Christian
Emperors, etc. Then after certain Rhetorical flourishes, his Lordship falls
to prosecute his former course, and cries out of this Article; A monster having
the tail of a fish, as if it came cutting the narrow Seas out of England: For
in full effect it is downright the English oath; saving that indeed the oath of
England runs in a more mild form, and a more moderate strain. And here he
suddenly takes occasion to make some digression: For out of the way, and clean
from the matter, he enters into some purpose of my praise and commendation: He
courteously for sooth is pleased to grace me with knowledge of learning, and
with civil virtues: He seems chiefly to rejoice in his own behalf, and to
give me thanks, that I have done him the honor to enter the lists of
Theological dispute against his Lordship. Howbeit he twitches and carpes at me
withal, as at one that sows seeds of dissension and schism amongst Roman
Catholics: And yet he would seem to qualify the matter, and to make all whole
again, by saying, That in so doing I am persuaded I do no more then my duty
requires. But now (as his Lordship follows the point) it stands neither with
godliness, nor with equity, nor with reason, that Acts made, that Statutes,
Decrees, and Ordinances ratified for the State and Government of England,
should be thrust for binding Laws upon the Kingdom of France: nor that
Catholics, and much less that Ecclesiastics, to the end they may live in
safety, and freely enjoy their privileges or immunities in France, should be
forced to believe, and by oath to seal the same points, which English
Catholics to the end they may purchase liberty only to breath, nay
sorrowfully to sigh rather, are constrained to allow and to aduow besides. And
where as in England There is no small number of Catholics, that lack not
constant and resolute minds to endure all sorts of punishment, rather then to
take that oath of allegiance; will there not be found an other manner of number
in France, armed with no less constancy and Christian resolution? There will,
most honorable Auditors, there will without all doubt: and we all that are of
Episcopal dignity will sooner suffer Martyrdom in the cause. Then out of the
super-abundance and ouerweight of his Lordships goodness, he closely coucheth
and conuayeth a certain distasteful opposition between me and his King; with
praises and thanks to God, that his King is not delighted, and takes no
pleasure to make Martyrs.

All this Artificial and swelling discourse like unto puffe-past, if it be
viewed at a near distance, will be found like a bladder full of wind, without
any soliditie of substantial matter. For the Deputies of the third Estate were
never so void of understanding, to believe that by providing for the life and
safety of their King, they should thrust him headlong into eternal damnation.
Their brains were never so much blasted, so far benumbed, to dream the
soul of their King cannot mount up to heaven, except he be dismounted from his
Princely Throne upon earth, whenever the Pope shall hold up his finger.

And whereas he is bold to pronounce, that heretics of France do make their
benefit and advantage of this division; that speech is grounded upon this
proposition; That professors of the Christian Religion reformed (which is to
say, purged and cleansed of all Popish dregs) are heretics in fact, and ought
so to be reputed in right: Which proposition his Lordship will never soundly
and sufficiently make good, before his Holiness has compiled an other
Gospel, or has forged an other Bible at his Pontificiall anuile. The L.
Cardinal undertook to read me a lecture upon that argument; but ever since
has played Mum-budget, and has put himself to silence, like one at a
Nonplus in his enterprise. There be three years already gone and past, since
his Lordship began to shape some answer to a certain writing dispatched by
me in few days: With forming and reforming, with filing and polishing, with
laboring and licking his answer over and over again, with reiterated
extractions and calcinations, it may be coniectured that all his Lordships
labor and cost is long since evaporated and vanished in the air. Howbeit, as
well the friendly conference of a King, (for I will not call it a contention)
as also the dignity, excellency, and importance of the matter, long since
deserved, and as long since required the publishing of some or other answer.
His Lordships long silence will never be imputed to lack of capacity,
wherewith who knows not how abundantly he is furnished; but rather to well
advised agnition of his own working and building upon a weak foundation.

But let us return unto these heretics, that make so great gain by the
disagreement of Catholics. It is no part of their duty to aim at sowing of
dissentions; but rather to intend and attend their faithful performance of
service to their King. If some be pleased, and others offended, when so good
and loyal duties are sincerely discharged; it is for all good subjects to
grieve and to be sorry, that when they speak for the safety of their King and
honor of the truth, it is their hard hap to leave any at all unsatisfied. But
suppose the said heretics were the Authors of this article preferred by the
third Estate: What need they to conceal their names in that regard? What need
they to disclaim the credit of such a worthy act? Would it not redound to
their perpetual honor, to be the only subjects that kept watch over the
Kings life and Crown, that stood centinell, and walked the rounds for the
preservation of his Princely diadem, when all other had no more touch, no more
feeling thereof then so many stones? And what need the Deputies for the third
Estate, to receive instructions from foreign Kingdoms, concerning a cause of
that nature; when there was no want of domestical examples, and the French
histories were plentiful in that argument? What need they to gape for this
reformed doctrine, to come swimming with a fishes tail out of an Island to the
main continent, when they had before their eyes the murders of two Kings, with
diverse civil wars, and many Arrests of Court, all tending to insinuate and
suggest the introduction of the same remedy? Suggestions are needless from
abroad, when the mischief is felt at home. it seems to me that his Lordship
in smoothing and tickling the Deputies for the third Estate, does no less then
wring and wrong their great sufficiency with contumely and outrageous abuse;
as if they were not furnished with sufficient foresight, and with loyal
affection toward their King, for the preservation of his life and honor, if
the remedy were not beaten into their heads by those of the Religion, reputed
heretics.

Touching my self, ranged by his Lordship in the same rank with sowers of
dissension; I take my God to witness, and my own conscience, that I never
dreamed of any such unchristian project. It has been hitherto my ordinary
course to follow honest counsels, and to walk in open ways. I never wonted
my self to holes and corners, to crafty shifts, but evermore to plain and
open designs. I need not hide mine intentions for fear of any mortal man,
that puffs breath of life out of his nostrils. Nor in any sort do I purpose,
to set Julian the Apostata before mine eyes, as a pattern for me to follow.
Julian of a Christian became a Pagan: I profess the same faith of Christ
still, which I have ever professed: Julian went about his designs with crafty
conueiances; I never with any of his captious and cunning sleights: Julian
forced his subjects to infidelity against I esus Christ; I labor to induce my
subjects unto such terms of loyalty toward my self, as Jesus Christ has
prescribed and taught in his word. But how far I differ from Julian, it is to
be seen more at large in my answer to Bellarmines Epistles written to
Blackwell; from whence the Lord Cardinal borrowing this example, it might well
have beseemed his Lordship to borrow likewise my answer from the same place.

Now as it mooues me nothing at all, to be drawn by his Lordship into
suspicions of this nature and quality: so by the praises, that he rocks me
withal, I will never be lulled asleep. To commend a man for his knowledge,
and withal to take from him the fear of God, is to admire a soldier for his
goodly head of hair or his curled locks, and withal to call him base coward,
faint-hearted and fresh water soldier. Knowledge, wit, and learning in an
heretic, are of none other use and service, but only to make him the more
culpable, and consequently obnoxious to the more grievous punishments. All
virtues turn to vices, when they become the servants of impiety. The
handmaids which the Sovereign Lady Wisdom calls to be of her train in
the 9. Proverb. are moral virtues, and humane sciences; which then become
pernicious, when they run away from their Sovereign Lady-Mistris, and put over
themselves in service to the devil. What difference is between two men, both
alike wanting the knowledge of God; the one furnished with arts and civil
virtues, the other brutishly barbarous and of a deformed life, or of profane
manners? What is the difference between these two? I make this the only
difference: the first goes to hell with a better grace, and falls into
perdition with more facility, then the second: But he becomes exceedingly
wicked, even threefold and fourefold abominable, if he wast his treasure and
stock of civil virtues in persecuting the Church of CHRIST: and if that may
be laid in his dish which was cast in Caesar's teeth, that in plain sobernes
and well-setled temper, he attempts the ruin of the Commonwealth, which from
a drunken sot might receive perhaps a more easy fall. In brief, I scorn all
garlands of praises, which are not ever green; but being dry and withered for
want of sap and radical moisture, do flagge about barbarous Princes brows. I
defy and renounce those praises, which fit me no more then they fit a
Mahumetane King of Marocco. I contest against all praises which grace me with
petie accessories, but rob me of the principal, that one thing necessary;
namely, the fear and knowledge of my GOD: unto whose Majesty alone, I have
devoted my Scepter, my sword, my pen, my whole industry, my whole self,
with all that is mine in whole and in part. I do it, I do it in all humble
acknowledgement of his unspeakable mercy and favor, who has vouchsafed to
deliver me from the erroneous way of this aage, to deliver my Kingdom from the
Popes tyrannical yoke, under which it has lain in times past most grievously
oppressed: My Kingdom where God is now purely served, and called upon in a
tongue which all the vulgar understand: My Kingdom, where the people may now
read the Scriptures without any special privilege from the Apostolic See,
and with no less liberty then the people of Ephesus, of Rome, and of Corinth
did read the holy Epistles, written to their Churches by S. Paul: My Kingdom,
where the people now pay no longer any tribute by the poll for Papal
indulgences, Aliquot annis post, Apostolicae sedis nuncius in Angliam ad
colligendum S. Petri vectigal missus. O nuphri. in vit. Paul. 4. Vide and Math.
Paris.
as they did about an hundred years past, and are no longer compelled to the
mart, for pardons beyond the Seas and mountains, but have them now freely
offered from God, by the doctrine of the Gospel preached at home within their
own several parishes and jurisdictions. If the Churches of my Kingdom, in
the L. Cardinals account, be miserable for these causes and the like; let him
dream on, and talk his pleasure: for my part I will ever auow, that more
worth is our misery then all his felicity. For the rest, it shall by Gods grace
be my daily endeavor and serious care, to pass my days in shaping to my
self such a course of life, that without shameful calumniating of my person,
it shall not rest in the tip of any tongue, to touch my life with just
reprehension or blame. Nor am I so privy to mine own guiltiness, as to
think my state so desperate, so deplorable, as Popes have made their own: For
some of them have been so open-hearted and so tongue-free, to pronounce that
Popes themselves, the key-bearers of Heaven and hell, cannot be saved. Two
Popes, O^up. de vitis Pontisan vit. Mar. 2. does testify, that Marcel. also
after Adr. an the 4. used these words: Non video quo modo qui Incum hunc
artiss^tenent, saluati possint.
reckoned among the best of the whole bunch or pack, namely, Adrian the IV.
and Marcelline the II. have both sung one and the same note; that in their
understanding they could not conceive any reason why, or any means how those
that sway the Popedom can be partakers of salvation; But for my particular,
grounding my faith upon the promises of God contained in the Gospel, I do
confidently and assuredly believe, that repenting me of my sins, and reposing
my whole trust in the merits of JESUS CHRIST, I shall obtain forgiveness of
my sins through his Name. Nor do I fear, that I am now, or shall be
hereafter cast out of the Churches lap and bosom; that I now have or hereafter
shall have no right to the Church as a putrified member thereof, so long as I
do or shall cleave to CHRIST JESUS, the Head of the Church: the appellation and
name whereof, serves in this corrupt aage, as a cloak to cover a thousand new
inventions; and now no longer signifies the assembly of the faithful or such
as believe in JESUS CHRIST according to his word, but a certain glorious
ostentation and temporal Monarchy, whereof the Pope forsooth is the supreme
head.

But if the L. Cardinal by assured and certain knowledge (as perhaps he may
by common fame) did understand the horrible conspiracies that have bin plotted
and contrived, not against my person and life alone, but also against my whole
stock: if he rightly knew and were inly persuaded, of how many foul periuries
and wicked treasons, diverse Ecclesiastical persons have been lawfully
convicted: in stead of charging me with false imputations, that I suffer not my
Catholics to fetch a sigh, or to draw their breath; and that I thrust my
Catholics upon the sharp edge of punishment in every kind; he would, and
might well, rather wonder, how I my self, after so many dangers run, after so
many proditorious snares escaped, do yet fetch my own breath, and yet practice
Princely elemencie toward the said Catholics, notorious tra^sgressors of
divine and humane laws. If the French king in the heart of his kingdom, should
nourish and foster such a nest of stinging hornets and busy wasps, I mean
such a pack of subjects, denying his absolute Sovereignty, as many Roman
Catholics of my Kingdom do mine: It may well be doubted, whether the L.
Cardinal would advise his king still to feather the nest of the said Catholics,
still to keep them warm, still to bear them with an easy and gentle hand: It
may well be doubted, whether his Lordship would extol their constancy, that
would have the courage to sheath up their swords in his Kings bowels, or blow
up his King with gunpowder, into the nether station of the lowest regio^: It
may well be doubted, whether he would endure that Orator, who (like as himself
has done) should stir up others to suffer Martyrdom after such examples, and
to imitate parricides and traitors in their constancy. The scope then of the L.
Cardinal, in striking the sweet strings, and sounding the pleasant notes of
praises, which feign he would fill mine ears withal; is only by his excellent
skill in the music of Oratory, to bewitch the hearts of my subjects, to
infatuate their minds, to settle them in a resolution to deprive me of my life.
The reason: Because the plotters and practisers against my life, are honored
and rewarded with a glorious name of Martyrs: their constancy (what else?) is
admired, when they suffer death for treason. Whereas hitherto during the time of
my whole reign to this day, (I speak it in the word of a King, and truth it
self shall make good the Kings word) no man has lost his life, no man has
endured the Rack, no man has suffered corporal punishment in other kinds,
merely or simply, or in any degree of respect, for his conscience in matter of
religion; but for wicked conspiring against my life, or Estate, or Royal
dignity; or else for some notorious crime, or some obstinate and wilful
disobedience: Of which traitorous and viperous brood, I commanded one to be
hanged by the neck of late in Scotland; a Jesuit of intolerable impudency,
who at his arraignment and public trial, stiffely maintained, that I have
robbed the Pope of his right, and have no manner of right in the possession of
my Kingdom. His Lordship therefore in offering himself to Martyrdom, after
the rare example of Catholics, as he says, suffering all sort of punishment in
my Kingdom, does plainly profess himself a follower of traitors and
parricides. These be the Worthies, these the heroical spirits, these the
honorable Captains and Coronels, whose virtuous parts never sufficiently
magnified and praised, his Lordshippe propounds for imitation to the French
Bishops. O the name of Martyrs, in old times a sacred name! how is it now
derided and scoffed? how is it in these days filthily profaned? O you the
whole quire and holy company of Apostles, who have sealed the truth with your
dearest blood! how much are you disparaged? how unfitly are you paragoned and
matched, when traitors, bloody butchers, and King-killers are made your
assistants, and of the same Quorum; or to speak in milder terms, when you
are coupled with Martyrs that suffer for maintaining the Temporal rites of the
Popes Empire? with Bishops that offer themselves to a Problematicall
Martyrdom, for a point decided neither by the authorities of your
Spirit-inspired pens, nor by the ancient and venerable testimony of the
Primitive Church? for a point which they dare not undertake to teach, otherwise
then by a doubtful, cold, fearful way of discourse, and altogether without
resolution. In good sooth, I take the Cardinal for a personage of a quicker
spirit and clearer sight, (let his Lordship hold me excused) then to persuade
my self, that in these matters his tongue and his heart, his pen and his
inward judgment, have any concord or correspondence one with another: For
being very much against his mind (as he does confess) thrust into the
office of an Advocate to plead this cause; he suffered himself to be carried
(after his engagement) with some heat, to utter some things against his
conscience, murmuring and grumbling the contrary within; and to affirm some
other things with confidence, whereof he had not been otherwise informed,
then only by vain and lying report. Of which rank is that bold assertion of
his Lordship; That many Catholics in England, rather then they would subscribe
to the oath of allegiance in the form thereof, have undergone all sorts of
punishment: For in England (as we have trewly given the whole Christian world
to understand in our Preface to the Apology) there is but one form or kind of
punishment ordained for all sorts of traitors.

Has not his Lordship now graced me with goodly testimonialls of praise and
commendation? Am I not by his praises proclaimed a Tyrant, as it were
inebriated with blood of the Saints, and a famous Enginer of torments for my
Catholics? To this exhortation for the suffering of Martyrdom, in imitation
of my English traitors and parricides, if we shall add; how craftily and
subtly he makes the Kings of England to hold of the Pope by fealty, and
their kingdom in bondage to the Pope by Temporal recognizance; it shall
easily appear, that his holy water of praises wherewith I am so reverently
besprinkled, is a composition extracted out of a dram of honey and a pound of
gall, first steeped in a strong decoction of bitter wormwood, or of the wild
gourd called Coloquintida: For after he has in the beginning of his Oration,
Page. 10.
spoken of Kings that owe fealty to the Pope, and are not Sovereigns in the
highest degree of Temporal supremacy within their Kingdoms; to explain his
mind and meaning the better, he marshals the Kings of England a little after in
the same rank. His words be these; When King John of England, not yet bound in
any temporal recognizance to the Pope, had expelled his Bishops, etc. His
Lordship means, that King John became so bound to the Pope not long after. And
what may this meaning be, but in plain terms and broad speech, to call me
usurper and unlawful King? For the feudatarie, or he that holds a Manor by
fealty, when he does not his homage, with all suit and service that he owes to
the Lord Paramount, does fall from the property of his fee. This reproach of
the L. Cardinals, is seconded with an other of Bellarmines his brother
Cardinal; That Ireland was given to the Kings of England by the Pope. The best
is that his most reverend Lordship has not showed, who it was that gave
Ireland to the Pope.

And touching John King of England, thus in brief stands the whole matter.
Between Henry 2. and the Pope had passed sundry bickerments, about collating
of Ecclesiastical dignities. John the son, after his fathers death,
renews, undertakes, and pursues the same quarrel: Drives certain English
Bishops out of the Kingdom, for defending the Popes insolent usurpation upon
his Royal prerogative, and Regal rights: Shows such Princely courage and
resolution in those times, when all that stood and suffered for the Popes
Temporal pretensions against Kings, were enrowled Martyrs or Confessors. The
Pope takes the matter in foul scorn, and great indignation; shuts the King by
his excommunicatory Bulls out of the Church; stirs up his Barons, for other
causes the Kings heavy friends, to rise in arms; gives the Kingdom of England
(like a masterlesse man turned over to a new master) to Philippus Augustus King
of France; binds Philip to make a conquest of England by the sword, or else no
bargain, or else no gift; promises Philip, in recompense of his travel and
Royal expenses in that conquest, full absolution and a general pardon at
large for all his sins: to be short, cuts King John out so much work, and
makes him keep so many yrons in the fire for his work, that he had none other
way, none other means to pacify the Popes high displeasure, to correct or
qualify the malignitie of the Popes choleric humor, by whom he was then so
entangled in the Popes toils, but by yielding himself to become the Popes
vassal, and his Kingdom feudatary, or to hold by fealty of the Papal See. By
this means his Crown is made tributary, all his people liable to payment of
taxes by the poll for a certain yearly tribute, and he is blessed with a
pardon for all his sins. Whether King John was moved to do this
dishonorable act upon any devotion, or inflamed with any zeal of Religion; or
enforced by the irresistable weapons of necessity, who can be so blind, that
he does not well see and clearly perceive? For to purchase his own freedom
from this bondage to the Pope; what could he be unwilling to do, that was
willing to bring his Kingdom under the yoke of Amirales Murmelinus a
Mahumetan Prince, then King of Granado and Barbaria? The Pope after that, sent
a Legate into England: The King now the Popes vassal, and holding his Crown of
the Pope, like a man that holds his land of another by Knights service, or by
homage and fealty, does fair homage for his Crown to the Popes Legate, and
lays down at his feet a great mass of the purest gold in coin. The
reverend Legate, in token of his Masters Sovereignty, with more then usual
pride falls to kicking and spurning the treasure, no doubt with a pair of most
holy feet: Not only so; but likewise at solemn feasts is easily entreated to
take the Kings chair of Estate. Here I would feign know the Lord Cardinals
opinion; whether these actions of the Pope were just or unjust, lawful or
unlawful, according to right or against all right and reason. If he will say
against right; it is then clear, that against right his Lordship has made way
to this example: if according to right, let him then make it known, from
whence or from whom this power was derived and conveyed to the Pope, whereby
he makes himself Sovereign Lord of Temporalties in that Kingdom, where
neither he nor any of his predecessors ever pretended any right, or laid any
claim to Temporal matters before. Are such prankes to be played by the
Pontificiall Bishop? Is this an act of Holiness, to set a Kingdom on fire by
the flaming brands of sedition? to dismember and quarter a Kingdom with
intestine wars; only to this end, that a King once reduced to the lowest
degree of misery, might be lifted by his Holiness out of his Royal
prerogative, the very soul and life of his Royal Estate? When began this
Papal power? In what aage began the Pope to practice this power? What! have
the ancient Canons, (for the Scripture in this question bears no pawme) have
the Canons of the ancient Church imposed any such satisfaction upon a sinner,
that of a Sovereign and free King, he should become vassal to his ghostly
Father; that he should make himself together with all his people and subjects
tributaries to a Bishop, that shall rifle a whole Nation of their coin, that
shall receive homage of a King, and make a King his vassal? What! Shall not a
sinner be quitted of his faults, except his Pastor turn robber, and one that
goes about to get a booty? except he make his Pastor a Feoffee in his whole
Estate, and suffer himself under a shadow of penance to freeze naked, to be
turned out of all his goods and possessions of inheritance? But be it granted,
admit his Holiness robs one Prince of his rights and revenues, to confer
the same upon another: were it not an high degree of tyranny to finger another
man's estate, and to give that away to a third, which the second has no right,
no lawful authority to give? Well, if the Pope then shall become his own
caruer in the rights of another; if he shall make his own coffers to swell
with another revenues, if he shall deck and array his own back in the
spoils of a sinner, with whom in absolution he makes peace, and takes truce;
what can this be else, but running into further degrees of wickedness and
mischief? what can this be else, but heaping of robbery upon fraud, and
Impiety upon robbery? For by such deceitful, crafty, and cunning practices,
the nature of the Pontificiall See, merely spiritual, is changed into the
Kings-bench-Court, merely temporal: the Bishops chair is changed into a
Monarchs Throne. And not only so; but besides, the sinners repentance is
changed into a snare or pit-fall of cousening deceit; and S. Peter's net is
changed into a casting-net or a flew, to fish for all the wealth of most
flourishing Kingdoms. Moreover, the King (a hard case) is driven by such wiles
and subtilties, to work impossibilities, to act more then is lawful or
within the compass of his power to practice: For the King neither may in
right, nor can by power trans-nature his Crown, impair the Majesty of his
Kingdom, or leave his Royal dignity less free to his heir apparent, or next
successor, then he received the same of his predecessor: Much less, by any
dishonorable capitulations, by any unworthy contracts, degrade his posterity,
bring his people under the grievous burden of tributes and taxes to a foreign
Prince: Least of all, make them tributary to a Priest; unto whom it no way
apperteineth to have any hand in the civil affairs of Kings, or to distaine,
and unhallow their Crowns. And therefore when the Pope dispatched his Nuntio
to Philippus Augustus, requesting the King to auert Lewis his son from laying
any claim to the Kingdom of England; Philip answered the Legate (as we have it
in Matthew. Paris;) No King, no Prince can alienate or give away his Kingdom, but
by consent of his Barons, bound by Knights service to defend the said Kingdom:
and in case the Pope shall stand for the contrary error, his Holiness shall give
to Kingdoms a most pernicious example. By the same Author it is testified,
that King John became odious to his subjects, for such dishonorable and
unworthy inthralling of his Crown, and Kingdom. Therefore the Popes right
pretended to the Crown of England, which is nothing else but a ridiculous
usurpation, has long ago vanished into smoke, and required not so much as
the drawing of one sword to snatch and pull it by violence out of his hands:
For the Popes power lying altogether in a certain wild and wandering conceit
or opinion of men, and being only an imaginary castle in the air, built by
pride, and underpropped by superstition, is very speedily dispersed upon the
first rising and appearing of the truth in her glorious brightness. There is
none so very a dolt or block-head to deny, that in case this right of the Pope
over England, is grounded upon Gods word, then his Holiness may challenge the
like right over all other Kingdoms: because all other Kingdoms, Crowns, and
Scepters are subject alike to Gods word: For what privilege, what charter,
what evidence can France fetch out of the Rolls, or any other treasury of her
monuments or records, to show that she owes less subjection to God then
England? Or was this yoke of bondage then brought upon the English Nation; was
it a prerogative, whereby they might more easily come to the liberty of the
sons of God? Or were the people of England persuaded, that for all their
substance, wealth, and life bestowed on the Pope, his Holiness by way of
exchange returned them better weight and measure of spiritual graces? It is
ridiculous, only to conceive these toys in thought; and yet with such
ridiculous, with such toys in conceit, his Lordship feeds and entertains his
auditors.

From this point he falls to another bowt and fling at his heretics, with
whom he played no fair play before: Page 105.
There is not one Synod of ministers (as he says) which would willingly
subscribe to this Article, whereunto we should be bound to swear. But herein
his Lordship shoots far from the mark. This Article is approved and
preached by the Ministers of my Kingdom: It is likewise preached by those of
France, and if need be (I asssure my self) will be signed by all the
Ministers of the French Church.

The L. Cardinal proceeds, (for he means not so soon to give over these
heretics:) All their Consistortes believe it as their Creed; that if Catholic
Princes at any time shall offer force unto their conscience, then they are
dispensed withal for their oath of alleagiance. Hence are these modifications
and restricitions, tossed so much in their mouths; Provided the King force us
not in our conscience. Hence are these exceptions in the profession of their
faith; Provided the Sovereign power and authority of God, be not in any sort
violated or infringed. I am not able to conceive what engine can be framed of
these materials, for the bearing of Kings out of their eminent seats, by any
lawful authority or power in the Pope: For say, those of the Religion should
be tainted with some like error; how can that be any shelter of excuse for
those of the Romish Church, to undermine or to dig up the Thrones of their
Kings? But in this allegation of the L. Cardinal, there is nothing at all,
which does not iumpe just and accord to a hair with the Article of the third
Estate, and with obedience due to the King: For they do not profess, that in
case the King shall command them to do any act contrary to their conscience,
they would fly at his throat, would make any attempt against his life, would
refuse to pay their taxations, or to defend him in the wars: They make no
profession of deposing the King, or discharging the people from the oath of
allegiance tendered to the King: which is the very point or issue of the matter
in controversy, and the maine mischeife, against which the third Estate has
bin most worthily careful to provide a wholesome remedy by this Article.
There is a world of difference between the terms of disobedience, and of
deposition. It is one thing to disobey the Kings command in matters prohibited
by divine laws, and yet in all other matters to perform full subjection unto
the King. It is another thing of a far higher degree or strain of
disloyalty, to bare the King of his Royal robes, throne, and scepter, and
when he is thus far disgraced, to degrade him and to put him from his degree
and place of a King. If the holy Father should charge the L. Cardinal to do
some act repugnant in his own knowledge to the Law of God, I will religiously,
and according to the rule of charity presume, that his Lordship in this case
would stand out against his Holiness, and notwithstanding would still
acknowledge him to be Pope.

His Lordship yet prosecutes and follows his former purpose: Hence are those
arms which they have oftentimes borne against Kings, when Kings practiced to
take away the liberty of their conscience and Religion. Hence are those
turbulent Commotions and seditions by them raised, as well in the Low-countryes
against the King of Spain, as in Swethland against the Catholic King of
Polonia. Besides, he casts Iunius Brutus, Buchananus, Barclaius, and Gerson
in our teeth. To what end all this? I see not how it can be available to
authorize the deposing of Kings, especially the Popes power to depose. And yet
his Lordship here does outface (by his leave) and bear down the truth: For I
could never yet learn by any good and true intelligence, that in France those
of the Religion took arms at any time against their King: In the first civil
wars they stood only upon their guard: they stood only to their lawful
wards and locks of defense: they armed not, nor took the field before they
were pursued with fire and sword, burnt up and slaughtred. Besides, Religion
was neither the root nor the rynde of those intestine troubles. The true ground
of the quarrel was this: During the minority of King Francis II. the
Protestants of France were a refuge and succor to the Princes of the blood,
when they were kept from the Kings presence, and by the over pouring power of
their enemies, were no better then plain driven and chased from the Court. I
mean, the Grandfather of the King now reigning, and the Grandfather of the
Prince of Conde, when they had no place of safe retreat. In regard of which
worthy and honorable service, it may seem the French King has reason to have
the Protestants in his gracious remembrance. With other commotion or
insurrection, the Protestants are not justly to be charged. But on the
contrary, certain it is that King Henry III. raised and sent forth several
armies against the Protestants, to ruin and root them out of the Kingdom:
howbeit, so soon as they perceived the said King was brought into dangerous
terms, they ran with great speed and special fidelity to the Kings rescue
and succor, in the present danger. Certain it is, that by their good service
the said King was delivered, from a most extreme and imminent peril of his
life in the city of Tours. Certain it is, they never abandoned that Henry 3.
nor his next successor Henry 4. in all the heat of reuolts and rebellions,
raised in the greatest part of the Kingdom by the Pope, and the more part of
the Clergy but stood to the said Kings in all their battles, to bear up the
Crown then tottering and ready to fall. Certain it is, that even the heads
and principalls of those by whom the late King deceased was pursued with all
extremities, at this day do enjoy the fruit of all the good services done to
the King by the said Protestants: And they are now disgraced, kept under,
exposed to public hatred. What, for kindling coals of questions and
controversies about Religion? Forsooth, not so: but because if they might have
equal and indifferent dealing, if credit might be given to their faithful
aduertisements, the Crown of their Kings should be no longer pinned to the
Popes flie-flap; in France there should be no French exempted from subjection
to the French King; causes of benefices or of matrimony, should be no longer
citable and summonable to the Romish Court; and the Kingdom should be no
longer tributarie under the color of annats, the first fruits of Benefices
after the remove or death of the Incumbent, and other like impositions.

But why do I speak so much in the behalf of the French Protestants? The
Lord Cardinal himself quittes them of this blame, when he tells us this
doctrine for the deposing of Kings by the Popes mace or verge, had credit and
authority through all France, until Caluins time. Does not his Lordship
underhand confess by these words, that Kings had been always before Caluins
time, the more dishonored, and the worse served? Item, that Protestants, whom
his Lordship calls heretics, by the light of holy Scripture made the world
then and ever since to see the right of Kings, oppressed so long before? As for
those of the Low Countries, and the subjects of Swethland, I have little to say
of their case, because it is not within ordinary compass, and indeed serves
nothing to the purpose. These Nations, besides the cause of Religion, do stand
upon certain reasons of State, which I will not here take upon me like a Judge
to determine or to sift.

Iunius Brutus, Whom the Lord Cardinal obiecteth, is an author unknown; and
perhaps of purpose patcht up by some Romanist, with a wyly deceit to draw the
reformed Religion into hatred with Christian Princes.

Buchanan I reckon and rank among Poets, not among Divines, classical or
common. If the man has burst out here and there into some terms of excess,
or speech of bad temper; that must be imputed to the violence of his humor,
and heat of his spirit, not in any wise to the rules and conclusions of true
Religion, rightly by him conceived before.

Barclaius alleged by the Cardinal, meddles not with deposing of Kings; but
deals with disavowing them for Kings, when they shall renounce the right of
Royalty, and of their own accord give over the Kingdom. Now he that leaves it
in the Kings choice, either to hold or to give over his Crown, leaves it not
in the Popes power to take away the Kingdom.

Of Gerson obtruded by the Cardinal, we have spoken sufficiently before, Where
it has been showed how Gerson is disguised, masked, and perverted by his
Lordship. In brief, I take not upon me to justify and make good all the
sayings of particular authors: We glory (and well we may) that our religion
affords no rules of rebellion; nor any dispensation to subjects for the oath
of their allegiance; and that none of our Churches give entertainment unto
such monstrous and abominable principles of disloyalty.

If any of the French, otherwise persuaded in former times, Richcrius.
now having altered and changed his judgment, does contend for the Sovereignty
of Kings against Papal usurpation: He doubtless, for winding himself out of
the Laborinth of an error so intricate and pernicious, deserves great honor
and special praise: He is worthy to hold a place of dignity above the L.
Cardinal; who has quitted and betrayed his former judgment, which was holy
and just: Their motions are contrary, their marks are opposite: The one
reclineth from evil to good, the other declineth from good to evil.

At last his Lordship comes to the close of his Oration, and binds up his
whole harangue with a feate wreath of praises, proper to his King. He styles
the King the eldest Son of the Church, a young shoot of the lilly, which King
Solomon in all his Royalty was not able to match. He leads us by the hand
into the pleasant meadows of Histories, there to learn upon the very first
sight and view, That so long so often as the Kings of France embraced union, and
kept good terms of concord with Popes and the Apostolic See; so long as the
spouse of the Church was pastured and fed among the lillies, all sorts of
spiritual and temporal graces abundantly showred upon their Crowns, and upon
their people: On the contrary, when they made any rent or separation from the
most holy See; then the lillies were pricked and almost choked with sharp
thorns; they began to droope, to stoop, and to bear their beautiful heads
down to the very ground, under the strong flawes and gusts of boystrous winds
and tempests.

My answer to this flourishing close and vpshot, shall be no less apert then
apt. It savors not of good and faithful service, to smooth and stroke the
Kings head with a soft hand of oyled speech, and in the mean time to take away
the Crown from his head, and to defile it with dirt. But let us try the cause
by evidence of History, yea by the voice and verdict of experience; to see
whether the glorious beauty of the French lillies has been at any time
blasted, and thereupon has faded, by starting aside, and making separation
from the holy See. Under the reign of King Philip the Fair, France was
blessed with peace and prosperity, notwithstanding some outrageous acts done
against the Papal See, and contumelious crying quittance by King Philip with
the Pope. Lewis 12. in ranged battle defeated the armies of Pope Julius 2. and
his Confederates: proclaimed the said Pope to be fallen from the Popedom:
stamped certain coins and pieces of gold with a dishonorable mot, even to
Rome it self, Rome is Babylon: yet so much was Lewis loved and honored of his
people, that by a peculiar title he was called, the Father of the Country.
Greater blessings of God, greater outward peace and plenty, greater inward
peace with spiritual and celestial treasures, were never heaped upon my Great
Britain, then have been since my Great Britain became Great in the
greatest and chiefest respect of all; to wit, since my Great Britain has
shaken off the Popes yoke; since she has refused to receive and to entertain
the Popes Legates, employed to collect S. Peter's tribute or Peter Pence; since
the Kings of England, my Great Britain, have not been the Popes vassals to
do him homage for their Crown, and have no more felt the lashings, the
scourgings of base and beggarly Monks. Of Holland, Zeland, and Friseland, what
need I speak? yet a word and no more. Were they not a kind of naked and bare
people, of small value, before God lighted the torch of the Gospel, and
advanced it in those Nations? were they not an ill fed and scragged people,
in comparison of the inestimable wealth and prosperity (both in all military
actions and mechanical trades, in traffic as merchants, in marting as men of
war, in long navigations for discovery) to which they are now raised and
mounted by the merciful blessing of God, since the darkness of Popery has
been scattered, and the bright Sun of the Gospel has shined in those
Countries? Behold the Venetian Republique: Has she now less beauty, less
glory, less peace and prosperity, since she lately fell to bicker and contend
with the Pope? since she has wrung out of the Popes hand, the one of his two
swords? since she has plumed and shaked his Temporal dominion? On the
contrary; after the French Kings had honored the Popes, with munificent
graunts and gifts of all the cities and territories, lands and possessions,
which they now hold in Italy, and the ancient Earldom of Auignon in France
for an ouer-plus; were they not rudely recompensed, and homely handled by their
most ungrateful fee-farmers and copyholders? Have not Popes forged a donation
of Constantine, of purpose to blot out all memory of Pepins and Charlemaignes
donation? Have they not vexed and troubled the State? have they not whetted the
sons of Lewis the Courteous against their own Father, whose life was a
pattern and example of innocence? Have they not by their infinite exactions,
robbed and scoured the Kingdom of all their treasure? Were not the Kings of
France, driven to stop their violent courses by the pragmaticall sanction?
Did they not sundry times interdict the Kingdom, degrade the Kings, solicit
the neighbour-Princes to invade and lay hold on the Kingdom, and stir up the
people against the King, whereby a gate was opened to a world of troubles and
parricides? Did not Rauaillac render this reason for his monstrous and horrible
attempt, That King Henry had a design to war with God, because he had a
design to take arms against his Holiness, who is God? This makes me to
wonder, what moved the L. Cardinal to marshall the last civil wars and
motions in France, in the rank of examples of unhappy separation from the
Pope, when the Pope himself was the trumpetor of the same troublesome motions.
If the Pope had been wronged and offended by the French King, or his people,
and the Kingdom of France had been scourged with pestilence, or famine, or
some other calamity by foreign enemies; it might have been taken in
probability, as a vengeance of God for some injury done unto his Vicar: But
his Holiness being the root, the ground, the master-workeman and artificer of
all these mischiefs; how can it be said, that God punishes any injury done
to the Pope? but rather that his Holiness does revenge his own quarrel, and
which is worst of all, when his Holiness has no just cause of quarrel or
offense. Now then; to exhort a Nation (as the L. Cardinal has done) by the
remembrance of former calamities, to curry favor with the Pope, and to hold a
strict union with his Holiness, is no exhortation to bear the Pope any
respect of love, or of reverence, but rather a rubbing of memory, and a calling
to mind of those grievous calamities, whereof the Pope has been the only
occasion. It is also a threatening and obtruding of the Popes terrible
thunderbolts, which never scorched nor parched any skin, (except crauens and
meticulous bodies) and have brought many great showers of blessings upon my
Kingdom.

As for France, if she has enjoyed prosperity in the times of her good
agreement with Popes, it is because the Pope seeks the amity of Princes that
are in prosperity, have the means to curb his pretensions, and to put him to
some plunge. Kings are not in prosperity, because the Pope holds amity with
Kings; but his Holiness uses all devises, and seeks all means to have
amity with Kings, because he sees them flourish and sail with prosperous
winds. The swallow is no cause, but a companion of the spring: the Pope is no
worker of a Kingdoms felicity, but a wooer of kings when they sit in felicities
lap: he is no founder, but a follower of their good fortunes. On the other
side: let a Kingdom fall into some grievous disaster or calamity, let civil
wars boil in the bowels of the Kingdom; civil wars no less dangerous to the
State, then fearful and grievous to the people; who rises sooner then the
Pope, who rusheth sooner into the troubled streams then the Pope, who
thrusts himself sooner into the heat of the quarrel then the Pope, who
runs sooner to raise his gain by the public wrack then the Pope, and all
under color of a heart wounded and bleeding for the salvation of souls? If
the lawful King happen to be foiled, to be oppressed, and thereupon the State
by his fall to get a new master by the Popes practice; then the said new master
must hold the Kingdom as of the Popes free gift, and rule or guide the stern
of the State at his beck, and by his instruction. If the first and right Lord,
in despite of all the Popes fulminations and fireworkes, shall get the
honorable day, and upper hand of his enemies; then the holy Father with a
cheerful and pleasant grace, yea with fatherly gratulation, opens the rich
cabinet of his jewels, I mean the treasury of his indulgences, and falls now
to dandle and cocker the King in his fatherly lap, whose throat if he could, he
would have cut not long before.

This pestilent mischief has now a long time taken root, and is grown to a
great head in the Christian world, through the secret, but just judgment of
God; by whom Christian Kings have beenesmitten with a spirit of dizzinesse:
Christian Kings, who for many aages past have lived in ignorance, without any
sound instruction, without any true sense and right feeling of their own right
and power, whilst under a shadow of Religion and false cloak of piety, their
Kingdoms have been ouer-burdened, yea ouer-borne with tributes, and their
Crowns made to stoop even to miserable bondage. That God in whose hand the
hearts of Kings are poised, and at his pleasure turned as the watercourse;
that mighty God alone, in his good time, is able to rouse them out of so deep
a slumber, and to take order (their drowzy fits once over and shaken off with
heroical spirits) that Popes hereafter shall play no more upon their patience,
nor presume to put bits and snaffles in their noble mouths, to the binding up
of their power with weak scruples, like mighty bulls lead about by little
children with a small twisted thread. To that God, that King of Kings I deuote
my scepter; at his feet in all humblenes I lay down my Crown; to his holy
decrees and commands I will ever be a faithful servant, and in his battles a
faithful champion. To conclude; in this just cause and quarrel, I dare send
the challenge, and will require no second, to maintain as a defendant of
honor, that my brother-Princes and my self, whom God has advanced upon the
Throne of Sovereign Majesty and supreme dignity, do hold the Royal
dignity of his Majesty alone; to whose service, as a most humble homager and
vassal, I consecrate all the glory, honor, splendour, and luster of my earthly
Kingdoms.

A SPEECH, AS IT WAS DELIVERED IN THE UPPER HOUSE OF THE PARLIAMENT TO THE
LORDS SPIRITVALL AND Temporal, and to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
there assembled, ON MONDAY THE XIX. DAY OF MARCH 1603. BEING THE FIRST DAY OF
THE first Parliament.
IT did no sooner please God to lighten his hand, and relent the violence of
his devouring Angel against the poor people of this City, but as soon did I
resolve to call this Parliament, and that for three chief and principal
reasons: The first whereof is, (and which of it self, although there were no
more, is not only a sufficient, but a most full and necessary ground and
reason for conuening of this Assembly) This first reason I say is, That you who
are here presently assembled to represent the Body of this whole Kingdom, and
of all sorts of people within the same, may with your own ears hear, and
that I out of mine own mouth may deliver unto you the assurance of my due
thankefulnes for your so joyful and general applause to the declaring and
receiving of me in this Seat (which GOD by my Birthright and lineall descent
had in the fullness of time provided for me) and that, immediately after it
pleased God to call your late Sovereign of famous memory, full of days, but
fuller of immortal trophes of Honor, out of this transitory life. Not that I
am able to express by words, or utter by eloquence the viue Image of mine
inward thankfulness, but only that out of mine own mouth you may rest assured
to expect that measure of thankefulnes at my hands, which is according to the
infinitenes of your deserts, and to my inclination and ability for requital
of the same. Shall I ever? nay, can I ever be able, or rather so unable in
memory, as to forget your unexpected readiness and alacrity, your ever
memorable resolution, and your most wonderful conjunction and harmony of your
hearts in declaring and embracing me as your undoubted and lawful King and
Governor? Or shall it ever be blotted out of my mind, how at my first entry
into this Kingdom, the people of all sorts rid and ran, nay rather flew to
meet me? their eyes flaming nothing but sparkles of affection, their mouths
and tongues uttering nothing but sounds of joy, their hands, feet, and all the
rest of their members in their gestures discovering a passionate longing, and
earnestness to meet and embrace their new Sovereign. Quid ergo retribuam?
Shall I allow in my self, that which I could never bear with in another? No I
must plainly and freely confess here in all your audiences, that I did ever
naturally so far mislike a tongue to smoothe, and diligent in paying their
creditors with lip payment and verbal thanks, as I ever suspected that sort
of people meant not to pay their debtors in more substantial sort of coin.
And therefore for expressing of my thankfulness, I must resort unto the other
two reasons of my conuening of this Parliament, by them in action to utter my
thankfulness: Both the said reasons having but one ground, which is the
deeds, whereby all the days of my life, I am by Gods grace to express my
said thankfulness toward you, but divided in this, That in the first of these
two, mine actions of thanks, are so inseparably conjoined with my Person, as
they are in a manner become indiuidually annexed to the same: In the other
reason, mine actions are such, as I may either do them, or leave them undone,
although by Gods grace I hope never to be weary of the doing of them.

As to the first: It is the blessings which God has in my Person bestowed upon
you all, wherein I protest, I do more glory at the same for your weal, then
for any particular respect of mine own reputation, or advantage therein.

THe first then of these blessings, blessing to a Christian Commonwealth: for
by Peace abroad with their neighbors the Towns flourish, the Merchants become
rich, the Trade does increase, and the people of all sorts of the Land enjoy
free liberty to exercise themselves in their several vocations without peril
or disturbance. Not that I think this outward Peace so unseparably tied to my
Person, as I dare assuredly promise to my self and to you, the certain
continuance thereof: but thus far I can very well assure you and in the word
of a King promise unto you, That I shall never give the first occasion of the
breach thereof, neither shall I ever be moved for any particular or private
passion of mind to interrupt your public Peace, except I be forced thereunto,
either for reparation of the honor of the Kingdom, or else by necessity for
the weal and preservation of the same: In which case, a secure and honorable
war must be preferred to an vnsecure and dishonorable Peace: yet do I hope
by my experience of the bypast blessings of Peace, which God has so long ever
since my Birth bestowed upon me, that he will not be weary to continue the
same, nor repent him of his grace toward me, transferring that sentence of
King David's upon his bypast victories of war, to mine of Peace, That, that
God who preserved me from the devouring jaws of the Bear and of the Lion, and
delivered them into my hands, shall also now grant me victory over that
uncircumcised Philistine.

But although outward Peace be a great blessing; Henry the seventh, is reunited
and confirmed in me the Union of the two Princely Roses of the two Houses of
LANCASTER and YORK, whereof that King of happy memory was the first Uniter,
as he was also the first ground-layer of the other Peace. The lamentable and
miserable events by the Civil and bloody dissension betwixt these two Houses
was so great and so late, as it need not be renewed unto your memories: which,
as it was first settled and united in him, so is it now reunited and confirmed
in me, being justly and lineally descended, not only of that happy
conjunction, but of both the Branches thereof many times before. But the Union
of these two princely Houses, is nothing comparable to the Union of two ancient
and famous Kingdoms, which is the other inward Peace annexed to my Person.

And here I must crave your patiences for a little space, to give me leave to
discourse more particularly of the benefits that do arise of that Union which
is made in my blood, being a matter that most properly belongs to me to
speak of, as the head wherein that great Body is united. And first, if we were
to look no higher then to natural and Physical reasons, we may easily be
persuaded of the great benefits that by that Union do redound to the whole
Island: for if twenty thousand men be a strong Army, is not the double
thereof, forty thousand, a double the stronger Army? If a Baron enricheth
himself with double as many lands as he had before, is he not double the
greater? Nature teaches us, that Mountains are made of Motes, and that at the
first, Kingdoms being divided, and every particular Town or little County,
as Tyrants or Usurpers could obtain the possession, a Segniorie apart, many of
these little Kingdoms are now in process of time, by the ordinance of God,
joined into great Monarchies, whereby they are become powerful within
themselves to defend themselves from all outward invasions, and their head and
governor thereby enabled to redeem them from foreign assaults, and punish
private transgressions within. Do we not yet remember, that this Kingdom was
divided into seven little Kingdoms, besides Wales? And is it not now the
stronger by their union? And has not the union of Wales to England added a
greater strength thereto? Which though it was a great Principality, was
nothing comparable in greatness and power to the ancient and famous Kingdom
of Scotland. But what should we stick upon any natural appearance, when it is
manifest that God by his Almighty providence has preordained it so to be?
Has not God first united these two Kingdoms both in Language, Religion, and
similitude of manners? Yea, has he not made us all in one Island, compassed
with one Sea, and of it self by nature so indivisible, as almost those that
were borderers themselves on the late Borders, cannot distinguish, nor know, or
discern their own limits? These two Countries being separated neither by Sea,
nor great River, Mountain, nor other strength of nature, but only by little
small brooks, or demolished little walls, so as rather they were divided in
apprehension, then in effect; And now in the end and fullness of time united,
the right and title of both in my Person, alike lineally descended of both the
Crowns, whereby it is now become like a little World within it self, being
entrenched and fortified round about with a natural, and yet admirable strong
pond or ditch, whereby all the former fears of this Nation are now quite cut
off: The other part of the Island being ever before now not only the place of
landing to all strangers, that was to make invasion here, but likewise moved by
the enemies of this State by untimely incursions, to make enforced diuersion
from their Conquests, for defending themselves at home, and keeping sure their
backe-doore, as then it was called, which was the greatest hinderance and let
that ever my Predecessors of this Nation gat in disturbing them from their many
famous and glorious conquests abroad: What God has conjoined then, let no man
separate. I am the Husband, and all the whole Isle is my lawful Wife; I am the
Head, and it is my Body; I am the Shepherd, and it is my flock: I hope
therefore no man will be so unreasonable as to think that I that am a
Christian King under the Gospel, should be a Polygamist and husband to two
wives; that I being the Head, should have a divided and monstrous Body; or that
being the Shepherd to so fair a Flock (whose fold has no wall to hedge it
but the four Seas) should have my Flock parted in two. But as I am assured,
that no honest Subject of whatsoever degree within my whole dominions, is less
glad of this joyful Union then I am; So may the frivolous objection of any
that would be hinderers of this work, which God has in my Person already
established, be easily answered, which can be none, except such as are either
blinded with Ignorance, or else transported with Malice, being unable to live in
a well governed Commonwealth, and only delighting to fish in troubled waters.
For if they would stand upon their reputation and privileges of any of the
Kingdoms, I pray you was not both the Kingdoms Monarchies from the beginning,
and consequently could ever the Body be counted without the Head, which was
ever unseparably joined thereunto? So that as Honor and Privileges of any of
the Kingdoms could not be divided from their Sovereign; So are they now
confounded and joined in my Person, who am equal and alike kindly Head to you
both. When this Kingdom of England was divided into so many little Kingdoms as
I told you before; one of them behooued to eat up another, till they were all
united in one. And yet can Wiltshire or Devonshire, which were of the West
Saxons, although their Kingdom was of longest durance, and did by Conquest
overcome diverse of the rest of the little Kingdoms, make claim to Prioritie
of Place or Honor before Sussex, Essex, or other Shires which were conquered
by them? And have we not the like experience in the Kingdom of France, being
composed of diverse Dutchies, and one after another conquered by the sword? For
even as little brooks lose their names by their running and fall into great
Rivers, and the very name and memory of the great Rivers swallowed up in the
Ocean so by the conjunction of diverse little Kingdoms in one, are all these
private differences and questions swallowed up. And since the success was
happy of the Saxons Kingdoms being conquered by the spear of Bellona; Mars.
How much greater reason have we to expect a happy issue of this greater
Union, which is only fastened and bound up by the wedding Ring of Astrea? Love
and Peace.
And as God has made Scotland the one half of this Isle to enjoy my Birth,
and the first and most imperfect half of my life, and you here to enjoy the
perfect and the last half thereof; so can I not think that any would be so
injurious to me, no not in their thoughts and wishes, as to cut asunder the one
half of me from the other. But in this matter I have far enough insisted,
resting assured that in your hearts and minds you all applaud this my
discourse.

NOw although these blessings before rehearsed of Inward and Outward peace, be
great: yet seeing that in all good things, Issue of my body, whereof some are
here present, for continuance and propagation of that undoubted right which is
in my Person; under whom I doubt not but it will please God to prosper and
continue for many years this Union, and all other blessings of Inward and
outward Peace, which I have brought with me.

But neither Peace outward, Paul says) does Paul plant and Apollo water, if
God give not the increase: For all worldly blessings are but like swift passing
shadows, fading flowers, or chafe blown before the wind, if by the
profession of true Religion, and works according thereunto, God be not moved to
maintain and settle the Thrones of Princes. And although that since mine entry
into this Kingdom, I have both by meeting with diverse of the Ecclesiastical
Estate, and likewise by diverse Proclamations clearly declared my mind in
points of Religion, yet do I not think it amiss in this so solemn an
Audience, I should now take occasion to discover somewhat of the secrets of my
heart in that matter: For I shall never (with Gods grace) be ashamed to make
public profession thereof at all occasions, lest God should be ashamed to
profess and allow me before men and Angels, especially lest that at this time
men might presume further upon the misknowledge of my meaning to trouble this
Parliament of ours then were convenient. At my first coming, although I found
but one Religion, and that which by my self is professed, publicly allowed,
and by the Law maintained: Yet found I another sort of Religion, besides a
private Sect, lurking within the bowels of this Nation. The first is the true
Religion, which by me is professed, and by the Law is established: The second
is the falsely called Catholics, but trewly Papists: The third, which I call a
sect rather then Religion, is the Puritanes and Nouelists, who do not so far
differ from us in points of Religion, as in their confused form of Policy and
Paritie, being ever discontented with the present government, and impatient to
suffer any superiority, which makes their sect unable to be suffered in any well
governed Common wealth. But as for my course toward them, I remit it to my
Proclamations made upon that Subject. And now for the Papists, I must put a
difference betwixt mine own private profession of mine own salvation, and my
politic government of the Realm for the weal and quietness thereof. As for
mine own profession, you have me your Head now amongst you of the same
Religion that the body is of. As I am no stranger to you in blood, no more am I
a stranger to you in Faith, or in the matters concerning the house of God. And
although this my profession be according to mine education, wherein (I thank
God) I sucked the milk of Gods truth, with the milk of my Nurse: yet do I
here protest unto you, that I would never for such a conceit of constancy or
other preiudicate opinion, have so firmly kept my first profession, if I had
not found it agreeable to all reason, and to the rule of my Conscience. But I
was never violent nor unreasonable in my profession: I acknowledge the Roman
Church to be our Mother Church, although defiled with some infirmities and
corruptions, as the Jews were when they crucified Christ: And as I am none
enemy to the life of a sick man, because I would have his body purged of ill
humors; no more am I enemy to their Church, because I would have them reform
their errors, not wishing the down throwing of the Temple, but that it might
be purged and cleansed from corruption: otherwise how can they wish us to
enter, if their house be not first made clean? But as I would be loather to
dispense in the least point of mine own Conscience for any worldly respect,
then the foolishest Precisian of them all; so would I be as sorry to straight
the politic Government of the bodies and minds of all my Subjects to my
private opinions: Nay, my mind was ever so free from persecution, or thralling
of my Subjects in matters of Conscience, as I hope that those of that
profession within this Kingdom have a proof since my coming, that I was so
far from increasing their burdens with Rehoboam, as I have so much as either
time, occasion, or law could permit, lightened them. And even now at this time
have I been careful to reuise and consider deeply upon the Laws made against
them, that some ouerture may be proponed to the present Parliament for clearing
these Laws by reason (which is the soul of the Law) in case they have been in
times past further, or more rigorously extended by Judges, then the meaning of
the Law was, or might tend to the hurt as well of the innocent as of guilty
persons. And as to the persons of my Subjects which are of that profession, I
must divide them into two ranks, Clerickes and Layickes; for the part of the
Layicks, certainly I ever thought them far more excusable then the other
sort, because that sort of Religion contains such an ignorant, doubtful, and
implicit kind of faith in the Layickes grounded upon their Church, as except
they do generally believe whatsoever their Teachers please to affirm, they
cannot be thought guilty of these particular points of heresies and
corruptions, which their Teachers do so wilfully profess. And again I must
subdiuide the same Layickes into two ranks, that is, either quiet and well
minded men, peaceable Subjects, who either being old, have retained their first
drunken in liquor upon a certain shamefastness to be thought curious or
changeable: Or being young men, through evil education have never been nursed
or brought up, but upon such venim in place of wholesome nutriment. And that
sort of people I would be sorry to punish their bodies for the error of their
minds, the reformation whereof must only come of God and the true Spirit. But
the other rank of Layicks, who either through Curiosity, affectation of
Novelty, or coffeehouse in their private humors, have changed their coats,
only to be factious stirrers of Sedition, and Perturbers of the common wealth,
their backwardness in their Religion gives a ground to me the Magistrate, to
take the better heed to their proceeding, and to correct their obstinacy. But
for the part of the Clerickes, I must directly say and affirm, that as long as
they maintain one special point of their doctrine, and another point of their
practice, they are no way sufferable to remain in this Kingdom. Their point
of doctrine is that arrogant and ambitious Supremacy of their Head the Pope,
whereby he not only claims to be Spiritual head of all Christians, but also
to have an Imperial civil power over all Kings and Emperors, dethroning and
decrowning Princes with his foot as pleases him, and dispensing and disposing
of all Kingdoms and Empires at his appetite. The other point which they
observe in continual practice, is the assassinates and murders of Kings,
thinking it no sin, but rather a matter of salvation, to do all actions of
rebellion and hostility against their natural Sovereign Lord, if he be once
cursed, his subjects discharged of their fidelity, and his Kingdom given a
prey by that three crowned Monarch, or rather Monster their Head. And in this
point, I have no occasion to speak further here, saving that I could wish from
my heart, that it would please God to make me one of the members of such a
general Christian union in Religion, as laying wilfulness aside on both
hands, we might meet in the midst, which is the Center and perfection of
all things. For if they would leave, and be ashamed of such new and gross
Corruptions of theirs, as themselves cannot maintain, nor deny to be worthy
of reformation, I would for mine own part be content to meet them in the
midway, so that all novelties might be renounced on either side. For as my
faith is the True, Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic faith, grounded upon the
Scriptures and express word of God: so will I ever yield all reverence to
antiquity in the points of Ecclesiastical policy; and by that means shall I
ever with Gods grace keep my self from either being an heretic in Faith, or
schismatic in matters of Policy. But of one thing would I have the Papists
of this Land to be admonished, That they presume not so much upon my Lenity
(because I would be loath to be thought a Persecuter) as thereupon to think it
lawful for them daily to increase their number and strength in this Kingdom,
whereby if not in my time, at least in the time of my posterity, they might be
in hope to erect their Religion again. No, let them assure themselves, that as
I am a friend to their persons if they be good subjects: so am I a vowed
enemy, and do denounce mortal war to their errors: And that as I would be
sorry to be driven by their ill behavior from the protection and conservation
of their bodies and lives, So will I never cease as far as I can, to tread
down their errors and wrong opinions. For I could not permit the increase and
growing of their Religion, without first betraying of my self, and mine own
conscience: Secondly, this whole Isle, as well the part I am come from, as the
part I remain in, in betraying their Liberties, and reducing them to the
former slavish yoke, which both had casten off, before I came amongst them: And
thirdly, the liberty of the Crown in my posterity, which I should leave
again under a new slavery, having found i^ left free to me by my Predecessors.
And therefore would I wish all good Subjects that are deceived with that
corruption, first if they find any beginning of instinction in themselves of
knowledge and love to the Truth, to foster the same by all lawful means, and
to beware of quenching the spirit that works within them; And if they can
find as yet no motion tending that way, to be studious to read and confer
with learned men, and to use all such means as may further their Resolution,
assuring themselves, that as long as they are disconformable in Religion from
us, they cannot be but half my Subjects, be able to do but half service,
and I to want the best half of them, which is their souls. And here have I
occasion to speak to you my Lords the Bishops: For as you, my Lord of Durham,
said very learnedly to day in your Sermon, Correction without instruction, is
but a Tyranny: So ought you, and all the Clergy under you, to be more
careful, vigilant, and diligent then you have been, to win Souls to God,
as well by your exemplary life, as doctrine. And since you see how careful they
are, sparing neither labor, pains, nor extreme peril of their persons to
divert, (the Devil is so busy a Bishop) ye should be the more careful and
wakefull in your charges. Follow the rule prescribed you by S. Paul, Be
careful to exhort and to instruct in season, and out of season: and where you
have been any way sluggish before, now waken your selves up again with a new
diligence in this point, remitting the success to God, who calling them either
at the second, third, tenth or twelfth hour, as they are alike welcome to him,
so shall they be to me his Lieutenant here.

The third reason of my conuening of you at this time, The third reason of
assembling the Parliament.
which contains such actions of my thankfulness toward you, as I may either
do, or leave undone, yet shall with Gods grace ever press to perform all the
days of my life: It consists in these two points; In making of Laws at
certain times, which is only at such times as this in Parliament; or in the
careful execution thereof at all other times. As for the making of them, I
will thus far faithfully promise unto you, That I will ever prefer the
weal of the body, and of the whole Commonwealth, in making of good Laws and
constitutions, to any particular or private ends of mine, thinking ever the
wealth and weal of the Commonwealth to be my greatest weal and worldly
felicity: A point wherein a lawful King does directly differ from a Tyrant.
But at this time I am only thus far to forewarne you in that point, That you
beware to seek the making of too many Laws, for two especial reasons: First,
because In corruptissima Republica plurimae leges; and the execution of good
Laws is far more profitable in a Commonwealth, then to burden men's memories
with the making of too many of them. And next, because the making of too many
Laws in one Parliament, will bring in confusion, for lack of leisure wisely
to deliberate before you conclude: For the Bishop said well to day, That to
Deliberation would a large time be given, but to Execution a greater
promptness was required. As for the execution of good Laws, it has been very
wisely and honorably foreseen and ordered by my predecessors in this
Kingdom, in planting such a number of Judges, and all sorts of Magistrates in
convenient places for the execution of the same: And therefore must I now turn
me to you that are Judges and Magistrates under me, as mine Eyes and Ears in
this case. I can say none otherwise to you, then as Ezekias the good King of
Judah said to their Judges, Remember that the Thrones that you fit on are Gods,
and neither yours nor mine: And that as you must be answerable to me, so must
both you and I be answerable to GOD, for the due execution of our Offices. That
place is no place for you to utter your affections in, you must not there hate
your foe nor love your friend, fear the offense of the greater party or pity
the misery of the meaner; ye must be blind and not see distinctions of
persons, handlesse, not to receive bribes; but keep that just temper and
mid-course in all your proceedings, that like a just balance ye may neither
sway to the right nor left hand. Three principal qualities are required in
you; Knowledge, Courage, and Sincerity: that you may discern with knowledge,
execute with courage, and do both in upright sincerity. And as for my part, I
do vow and protest here in the presence of God, and of this honorable
Audience, I never shall be weary, nor omit no occasion, wherein I may show my
carfulness of the execution of good Laws. And as I wish you that are Judges
not to be weary in your Office in doing of it; so shall I never be weary, with
Gods grace, to take account of you, which is properly my calling.

And thus having told you the three causes of my conuening of this Parliament,
all three tending only to utter my thankfulness, but in diverse forms, the
first by word, the other two by action; I do confess that when I have done
and performed all that in this Speech I have promised, Inutilis seruus sum:
Inutile, because the meaning of the word Inutilis in that place of Scripture is
understood, that in doing all that service which we can to God, it is but our
due, and we do nothing to God but that which we are bound to do. And in
like manner, when I have done all that I can for you, I do nothing but that
which I am bound to do, and am accomptable to God upon the contrary: For I do
acknowledge, that the special and greatest point of difference that is betwixt
a rightful King and an usurping Tyrant is in this; That whereas the proud and
ambitious Tyrant does think his Kingdom and people are only ordained for
satisfaction of his desires and unreasonable appetites; The righteous and just
King does by the contrary acknowledge himself to be ordained for the
procuring of the wealth and prosperity of his people, and that his greatest
and principal worldly felicity must consift in their prosperity. If you be
rich I cannot be poor, if you be happy I cannot but be fortunate, and I
protest that your welfare shall ever be my greatest care and contentment: And
that I am a Servant it is most true, that as I am Head and Governor of all the
people in my Dominion who are my natural vassals and Subjects, considering
them in numbers and distinct Ranks; So if we will take the whole People as
one body and Mass, then as the Head is ordained for the body and not the Body
for the Head; so must a righteous King know himself to be ordained for his
people, and not his people for him: For although a King and people be Relata;
yet can he be no King if he want people and Subjects. But there be many people
in the world that lack a Head, wherefore I will never be ashamed to confess
it my principal Honor to be the great Servant of the Commonwealth, and ever
think the prosperity thereof to be my greatest felicity, as I have already
said.

But as it was the whole Body of this Kingdom, with an uniform assent and
harmony, as I told you in the beginning of my Speech, which did so far
oblige me in good will and thankfulness of requital by their alacrity and
readiness in declaring and receiving me to that place which God had provided
for me, and not any particular persons: (for then it had not been the body) So
is my thankfulness due to the whole State. For even as in matter of faults,
Quod a multis peccatur, impune peccatur: Even so in the matter of virtuous and
good deeds, what is done by the willing consent and harmony of the whole
body, no particular person can justly claim thanks as proper to him for the
same. And therefore I must here make a little Apology for my self, in that I
could not satisfy the particular humors of every person, that looked for some
advancement or reward at my hand since my entry into this Kingdom. Three
kind of things were craved of me: Advancement to honor, Preferment to place
of Credit about my Person, and Reward in matters of land or profit. If I had
bestowed Honor upon all, no man could have been advanced to Honor: for the
degrees of Honor do consist in perferring some above their fellows. If every
man had the like access to my Privy or Bedchamber, then no man could have it,
because it cannot contain all. And if I had bestowed Lands and Rewards upon
every man, the fountain of my liberality would be so exhausted and dried, as
I would lack means to be liberal to any man. And yet was I not so sparing,
but I may without vaunting affirm that I have enlarged my favor in all the
three degrees, toward as many and more then ever King of England did in so
short a space: No, I rather crave your pardon that I have been so bountiful:
for if the means of the Crown be wasted, I behooved then to have recourse to
you my Subjects, and be burdensome to you, which I would be lothest to be of
any King alive. For as it is true, that as I have already said, it was a whole
Body which did deserve so well at my hand, and not every particular person of
the people: yet were there some who by reason of their Office, credit with the
people or otherwise, took occasion both before, and at the time of my coming
amongst you, to give proof of their love and affection toward me. Not that I
am any way in doubt, that if other of my Subjects had been in their places,
and had had the like occasion, but they would have uttered the like good
effects, (so general and so great were the love and affection of you all
toward me:) But yet this having been performed by some special persons, I
could not without unthankfulness but requite them accordingly. And therefore
had I just occasion to advance some in Honor, some to places of service about
me, and by rewarding to enable some who had deserved well of me, and were not
otherwise able to maintain the ranks I thought them capable of, and others
who although they had not particularly deserved before, yet I found them
capable and worthy of place of preferment and credit, and not able to sustain
those places for which I thought them fit, without my help. Two especial
causes moved me to be so open handed: whereof the one was reasonable and
honorable; but the other I will not be ashamed to confess unto you,
proceeded of mine own infirmity. That which was just and honorable, was:
That being so far beholding to the body of the whole State, I thought I could
not refuse to let run some small brooks out of the fountain of my
thankfulness to the whole, for refreshing of particular persons that were
members of that multitude. The other which proceeded out of mine own
infirmity, was the multitude and importunity of Suitors. But although reason
come by infusion in a manner, yet experience grows with time and labor: And
therefore do I not doubt, but experience in time coming will both teach the
particular Subjects of this Kingdom, not to be so importune and indiscreet in
craving: And me not to be so easily and lightly moved, in granting that which
may be harmefull to my Estate, and consequently to the whole Kingdom.

And thus having at length declared unto you my mind in all the points, for
the which I called this Parliament: My conclusion shall only now be to excuse
my self, in case you have not found such Eloquence in my Speech, as
peradventure you might have looked for at my hands. I might, if I list, allege
the great weight of my Affairs and my continual business and distraction,
that I could never have leisure to think upon what I was to speak, before I
came to the place where I was to speak: And I might also allege that my first
sight of this so famous and Honorable an Assembly, might likewise breed some
impediment. But leaving these excuses, I will plainly and freely in my manner
tell you the true cause of it, which is; That it becomes a King, in my
opinion, to use no other Eloquence then plainness and sincerity. By
plainness I mean, that his Speeches should be so clear and void of all
ambiguitie, that they may not be thrown, nor rent asunder in contrary senses
like the old Oracles of the Pagan gods. And by sincerity, I understand that
uprightness and honesty which ought to be in a Kings whole Speeches and
actions: That as far as a King is in Honor erected above any of his
Subjects, so far should he strive in sincerity to be above them all, and
that his tongue should be ever the true Messenger of his heart: and this sort
of Eloquence may you ever assuredly look for at my hands.

A SPEECH IN THE PARLIAMENT HOUSE, AS NEAR THE VERY WORDS AS COVLD BE GATHERED
at the instant.
MY Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and you the Knights and Burgesses of this
Parliament, It was far from my thoughts till very lately before my coming to
this place, that this Subject should have been ministered unto me, whereupon I
am now to speak. But now it so falls out, That whereas in the preceding
Session of this Parliament, the principal occasion of my Speech was, to thank
and congratulate all you of this House, and in you, all the whole Commonwealth
(as being the representative body of the State) for your so willing, and loving
receiving and embracing of me in that place, which GOD and Nature by descent
of blood, had in his own time provided for me: So now my Subject is, to speak
of a far greater Thanksgiving then before I gave to you, being to a far
greater person, which is to GOD, for the great and miraculous Delivery he has
at this time granted to me, and to you all, and consequently to the whole body
of this Estate.

I must therefore begin with this old and most approved Sentence of Divinity,
Misericordia Dei supra omnia opera eius. For Almighty God did not furnish so
great matter to his glory by the Creation of this great World, as he did by the
Redemption of the same. Neither did his generation of the little world in our
old and first Adam, so much set forth the praises of God in his Justice and
Mercy, as did our Regeneration in the last and second Adam.

And now I must crave a little pardon of you. That since Kings are in the word
of GOD it self called Gods, as being his Lieutenants and Vicegerents on earth,
and so adorned and furnished with some sparkles of the Divinity; to compare
some of the works of GOD the great KING, toward the whole and general world,
to some of his works toward me, and this little world of my Dominions,
compassed and severed by the Sea from the rest of the earth. For As GOD for the
just punishment of the first great sins in the original world, when the
sons of GOD went in to the daughters of men, and the cup of their iniquities
of all sorts was filled, and heaped up to the full, did by a general deluge
and ouerflowing of waters, baptize the world to a general destruction, and not
to a general purgation (only excepted NOAH and his family, who did repent and
believe the threatenings of GODS judgment:) So now when the world shall wax
old as a garment, and that all the impieties and sins that can be devised
against both the first and second Table, have and shall be committed to the
full measure; GOD is to punish the world the second time by fire, to the
general destruction and not purgation thereof: Although as was done in the
former to NOAH and his family by the waters; So shall all we that believe be
likewise purged, and not destroyed by the fire. In the like sort, I say, I may
justly compare these two great and fearful Domes-dayes, wherewith GOD
threatened to destroy me and all you of this little world that have interest in
me. For although I confess, as all mankind, so chiefly Kings, as being in the
higher places like the high Trees, or stayest Mountains, and steepest Rocks,
are most subject to the daily tempests of innumerable dangers; and I amongst
all other Kings have ever been subject unto them, not only ever since my
birth, but even as I may justly say, before my birth: and while I was yet in my
mothers belly: yet have I been exposed to two more special and greater dangers
then all the rest.

The first of them, in the Kingdom where I was borne, and passed the first
part of my life: And the last of them here, which is the greatest. In the
former I should have been baptized in blood, and in my destruction not only
the Kingdom wherein I then was, but ye also by your future interest, should
have tasted of my ruin: Yet it pleased GOD to deliver me, as it were from the
very brinke of death, from the point of the dagger, and so to purge me by my
thankful acknowledgement of so great a benefit. But in this, which did so
lately fall out, and which was a destruction prepared not for me alone, but for
you all that are here present, and wherein no rank, aage, nor sex should have
been spared; This was not a crying sin of blood, as the former, but it may
well be called a roaring, nay a thundering sin of fire and brimstone, from
the which GOD has so miraculously delivered us all. What I can speak of this,
I know not: Nay rather, what can I not speak of it? And therefore I must for
horror say with the Poet, Vox faucibus haeret.

In this great and horrible attempt, Three miraculous events be to be observed
in the Attempt.
whereof the like was never either heard or read, I observe three wonderful,
or rather miraculous events.

FIrst, in the cruelty of the Plot it self, The crucltie of the Plot.
wherein cannot be enough admired the horrible and fearful cruelty of their
device, which was not only for the destruction of my Person, nor of my Wife
and posterity only, but of the whole body of the State in general; wherein
should neither have been spared, or distinction made of young nor of old, of
great nor of small, of man nor of woman: The whole Nobility, the whole
reverend Clergy, Bishops, and most part of the good Preachers, the most part
of the Knights and Gentry; yea, and if that any in this Society were
favorers of their profession, they should all have gone one way: The whole
Judges of the land, with the most of the Lawyers, and the whole Clerks: And as
the wretch himself which is in the Tower, does confess, it was purposely
devised by them, and concluded to be done in this house; That where the cruel
Laws (as they say) were made against their Religion, both place and persons
should all be destroyed and blown up at once. Three ways how mankind may come
to death.
And then consider therewithal the cruel form of that practice: for by three
different sorts in general may mankind be put to death.

The first, by other men, and reasonable creatures, which is least cruel: By
Man.
for then both defense of men against men may be expected, and likewise who
knows what pity God may stir up in the hearts of the Actors at the very
instant? besides the many ways and means, whereby men may escape in such a
present fury.

And the second way more cruel then that, By unreasonable creatures.
is by Animal and unreasonable creatures: for as they have less pity then
men, so is it a greater horror and more unnatural for men to deal with them:
But yet with them both resistance may avail, and also some pity may be had,
as was in the Lions, in whose den Daniel was thrown; or that thankful
Lion, that had the Roman in his mercy.

But the third, which is most cruel and unmerciful of all, By insensible
things.
is the destruction by insensible and inanimate things, and amongst them all,
the most cruel are the two Elements of Water and Fire; and of those two, the
fire mostraging and merciless.

SEcondly, The small ground the Conspirators had to move them.
how wonderful it is when you shall think upon the small, or rather no
ground, whereupon the practisers were entised to invent this Tragedy. For if
these Conspirators had only been bankrupt persons, or discontented upon
occasion of any disgraces done unto them; this might have seemed to have been
but a work of revenge. But for my own part, as Iscarcely ever knew any of
them, so cannot they allege so much as a pretended cause of grief: And the
wretch himself in hands does confess, That there was no cause moving him or
them, but merely and only Religion. And specially that christian men, at least
so called, Englishmen, borne within the Country, and one of the specials of
them my sworn Servant in an Honorable place, should practice the destruction
of their King, his Posterity, their Country and all: Wherein their following
obstinacy is so joined to their former malice, as the fellow himself that is
in hand, cannot be moved to discover any signs or notes of repentance, except
only that he does not yet stand to auow, that he repents for not being able
to perform his intent.

THirdly, Miraculous event, the discovery.
the discovery hereof is not a little wonderful, which would be thought the
more miraculous by you all, if you were as well acquainted with my natural
disposition, as those are who be near about me: For as I ever did hold
Suspicion to be the sickness of a Tyrant, so was I so far upon the other
extremity, as I rather contemned all aduertisements, or apprehensions of
practices. And yet now at this time was I so far contrary to my self, as
when the Letter was showed to me by my Secretary, wherein a general obscure
advertisement was given of some dangerous blow at this time, I did upon the
instant interpret and apprehend some dark phrases therein, contrary to the
ordinary Grammar construction of them, (and in an other sort then I am sure any
Divine, or Lawyer in any University would have taken them) to be meant by this
horrible form of blowing us up all by Powder; And thereupon ordered that
search to be made, whereby the matter was discovered, and the man apprehended:
whereas if I had apprehended or interpreted it to any other sort of danger, no
worldly provision or prevention could have made us escape our utter destruction.

And in that also was there a wonderful providence of God, that when the party
himself was taken, he was but new come out of his house from working, having
his Fireworke for kindling ready in his pocket, wherewith as he confesses, if
he had been taken but immediately before when he was in the House, he was
resolved to have blown up himself with his Takers.

One thing for mine own part have I cause to thank GOD in, That if GOD for
our sins had suffered their wicked intents to have prevailed, it should never
have been spoken nor written in aages succeeding, that I had died ingloriously
in an Alehouse, a Stews, or such vile place, but mine end should have been
with the most Honorable and best company, and in that most Honorable and
fittest place for a King to be in, for doing the turns most proper to his
Office. And the more have We all cause to thank and magnify GOD for this his
merciful Delivery; And specially I for my part, that he has given me yet once
leave, whatsoever should come of me hereafter, to assemble you in this
Honorable place; And here in this place, where our general destruction should
have been, to magnify and praise him for Our general delivery: That I may
justly now say of mine Enemies and yours, as David does often say in the
Psalm, Inciderunt in foueam quam fecerunt. And since Scipio an Ethnic, led
only by the light of Nature, That day when he was accused by the Tribunes of
the people of Rome for mispending and wasting in his Punick wars the Cities
Treasure, even upon the sudden brake out with that diuersion of them from that
matter, calling them to remembrance how that day, was the day of the year,
wherein God had given them so great a victory against Hannibal, and therefore
it was fitter for them all, leaving other matters, to run to the Temple to
praise God for that so great delivery, which the people did all follow with one
applause: How much more cause have we that are Christians to bestow this time
in this place for Thanksgiving to God for his great Mercy, though we had had
no other errant of assembling here at this time? wherein if I have spoken more
like a Divine then would seem to belong to this place, the matter it self
must plead for mine excuse: For being here commen to thank God for a divine
work of his Mercy, how can I speak of this deliverance of us from so hellish
a practice, so well as in language of Divinity, which is the direct opposite
to so damnable an intention? And therefore may I justly end this purpose, as I
did begin it with this Sentence, The Mercy of God is above all his works.

It rests now that I should shortly inform you what is to be done hereafter
upon the occasion of this horrible and strange accident. As for your part that
are my faithful and loving Subjects of all degrees, I know that your hearts
are so burnt up with zeal in this errant, and your tongues so ready to utter
your duetifull affections, and your hands and feet so bent to concur in the
execution thereof, (for which as I need not to spur you, so can I not but
praise you for the same:) As it may very well be possible that the zeal of
your hearts shall make some of you in your speeches rashly to blame such as may
be innocent of this attempt; But upon the other part I wish you to consider,
That I would be sorry that any being innocent of this practice, either
domestical or foreign, should receive blame or harm for the same. For
although it cannot be denied, That it was the only blind superstition of
their errors in Religion, that led them to this desperate device; yet does it
not follow, That all professing that Romish religion were guilty of the same.
For as it is true, That no other sect of heretics, not excepting Turk, Jew,
nor Pagan, no not even those of Calicute, who adore the devil, did ever
maintain by the grounds of their religion, That it was lawful, or rather
meritorious (as the Romish Catholics call it) to murder Princes or people
for quarrel of Religion. And although particular men of all professions of
Religion have been some Thieves, some Murderers, some Traitors, yet ever when
they came to their end and just punishment, they confessed their fault to be
in their nature, and not in their profession, (These Romish Catholics only
excepted:) Yet it is true on the other side, that many honest men blinded
peradventure with some opinions of Popery, as if they be not sound in the
questions of the Real presence, or in the number of the Sacraments, or some
such Schoolequestion: yet do they either not know, or at least not believe all
the true grounds of Popery, which is in deed The mystery of iniquity. And
therefore do we justly confess, that many Papists, especially our
forefathers, laying their only trust upon CHRIST and his Merits at their last
breath, may be, and often times are saved; detesting in that point, and
thinking the crucltie of Puritanes worthy of fire, that will admit no salvation
to any Papist. I therefore thus do conclude this point, That as upon the one
part many honest men, seduced with some errors of Popery, may yet remain good
and faithful Subjects: So upon the other part, none of those that trewly know
and believe the whole grounds, and School conclusions of their doctrine, can
ever prove either good Christians, or faithful Subjects. And for the part of
foreign Princes and States, I may so much the more acquit them, and their
Ministers of their knowledge and consent to any such villainy, as I may justly
say, that in that point I better know all Christian Kings by my self, That no
King nor Prince of Honor will ever abase himself so much, as to think a good
thought of so base and dishonorable a Treachery, wishing you therefore, that
as God has given me an happy Peace and Amity, with all other Christian
Princes my neighbors (as was even now very gravely told you by my L.
Chancellor) that so you will reverently judge and speak of them in this case.
And for my part I would wish with those ancient Philosophers, that there were a
Crystal window in my breast, wherein all my people might see the secretest
thoughts of my heart, for then might you all see no alteration in my mind for
this accident, further then in these two points. The first, Caution and
wariness in government, to discover and search out the mysteries of this
wickedness as far as may be: The other, after due trial, Severity of
punishment upon those that shall be found guilty of so detestable and unheard
of villainy. And now in this matter if I have troubled your ears with an
abrupt speech, undigested in any good method or order; you have to consider
that an abrupt, and unadvised speech does best become in the relation of so
abrupt and unorderly an accident.

And although I have ordained the proroguing of this Parliament until after
Christmas upon two necessary respects: whereof the first is, that neither I nor
my Council can have leisure at this time both to take order for the
Apprehension and trial of these Conspiratours, and also to wait upon the daily
affairs of the Parliament, as the Council must do: And the other reason is,
the necessity at this time of diverse of your presences in your Shires that
have Charges and Commandments there. For as these wretches thought to have
blown up in a manner the whole world of this Island, every man being now commen
up here, either for public causes of Parliament, or else for their own
private causes in Law, or otherwise: So these Rebels that now wander through
the Country, could never have gotten so fit a time of safety in their
passage, or whatsoever unlawful Actions, as now when the Country by the
foresaid occasions is in a manner left desolate, and waste unto them. Besides
that, it may be that I shall desire you at your next Session, to take upon you
the Judgment of this Crime: For as so extraordinary a Fact deserves
extraordinary Judgment, So can there not I think (following even their own
Rule) be a fitter Judgment for them, then that they should be measured with
the same measure wherewith they thought to measure us: And that the same place
and persons, whom they thought to destroy, should be the just auengers of their
so unnatural a Parricide: Yet not knowing that I will have occasion to meet
with you my self in this place at the beginning of the next Session of this
Paliament, (because if it had not been for delivering of the Articles agreed
upon by the Commissioners of the Union, which was thought most convenient to be
done in my presence, where both Head and Members of the Parliament were met
together, my presence had not otherwise been requisite here at this time.) I
have therefore thought good for conclusion of this Meeting, to discourse to you
somewhat anent the true nature and definition of a Parliament, which I will
remit to your memories till your next sitting down, that you may then make use
of it as occasion shall be ministered.

For albeit it be true, that at the first Session of my first Parliament, which
was not long after mine Entry into this Kingdom, It could not become me to in
orme you of any thing belonging to Law or State here: (for all knowledge must
either be infused or acquired, and seeing the former sort thereof is now with
Prophecy ceased in the world, it could not be possible for me at my first
Entry here, before Experience had taught it me, to be able to understand the
particular mysteries of this State:) yet now that I have reigned almost three
years amongst you, and have been careful to observe those things that belong
to the office of a King, albeit that Time be but a short time for experience in
others, yet in a King may it be thought a reasonable long time, especially in
me, who, although I be but in a manner a new King here, yet have been long
acquainted with the office of a King in such another Kingdom, as does nearest
of all others agree with the Laws and customs of this State. Remitting to
your consideration to judge of that which has been concluded by the
Commissioners of the Union, wherein I am at this time to signify unto you,
That as I can bear witness to the foresaid Commissioners, that they have not
agreed nor concluded therein any thing, wherein they have not foreseen as well
the weal and commodity of the one Country, as of the other; So can they all
bear me record, that I was so far from pressing them to agree to any thing,
which might bring with it any prejudice to this people; as by the contrary I
did ever admonish them, never to conclude upon any such Union, as might carry
hurt or grudge with it to either of the said Nations: for the leaving of any
such thing, could not but be the greatest hinderance that might be to such an
Action, which God by the laws of Nature had provided to be in his own time,
and has now in effect perfected in my Person, to which purpose my Lord
Chancellor has better spoken, then I am able to relate.

And as to the nature of this high Court of Parliament, It is nothing else but
the Kings great Council, which the King does assemble either upon occasion of
interpreting, or abrogating old Laws, or making of new, according as ill
manners shall deserve, or for the public punishment of notorious evil doers,
or the praise and reward of the virtuous and well deseruers; wherein these
four things are to be considered.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

And fourthly,

As for the thing it self, It is composed of a Head and a Body: The Head is
the King, the Body are the members of the Parliament. This Body again is
subdivided into two parts; The Upper and Lower House: The Upper compounded
partly of Nobility, Temporal men, who are heritable Counselors to the high
Court of Parliament by the honor of their Creation and Lands: And partly of
Bishops, Spiritual men, who are likewise by the virtue of their place and
dignity Councillors, Life Renters, or Ad vitam of this Court. The other House
is composed of Knights for the Shire; and Gentry, and Burgesses for the Towns.
But because the number would be infinite for all the Gentlemen and Burgesses to
be present at every Parliament, Therefore a certain number is selected and
chosen out of that great Body, serving only for that Parliament, where their
persons are the representation of that Body.

Now the matters whereof they are to treat ought therefore to be general, and
rather of such matters as cannot well be performed without the assembling of
that general Body, and no more of these generals neither, then necessity shall
require: for as in Corruptissima Republica sunt plurimae leges: So does the
life and strength of the Law consist not in heaping up infinite and confused
numbers of Laws, but in the right interpretation and good execution of good
and wholesome Laws. If this be so then, neither is this a place on the one
side for every rash and harebrained fellow to propone new Laws of his own
invention: nay rather I could wish these busy heads to remember that Law of
the Lacedaemonians, That whosoever came to propone a new Law to the people,
behooued publicly to present himself with a rope about his neck, that in
case the Law were not allowed, he should be hanged therewith. So wary should
men be of proponing Novelties, but most of all not to propone any bitter or
seditious Laws, which can produce nothing but grudges and coffeehouse
between the Prince and his people. Nor yet is it on the other side a
convenient place for private men under the color of general Laws, to propone
nothing but their own particular gain, either to the hurt of their private
neighbors, or to the hurt of the whole State in general, which many times
under fair and pleasing Titles, are smoothly passed over, and so by stealth
procure without consideration, that the private meaning of them tends to
nothing but either to the wrecke of a particular party, or else under color
of public benefit to pill the poor people, and serve as it were for a
general Impost upon them for filling the purses of some private persons.

And as to the end for which the Parliament is ordained, being only for the
advancement of Gods glory, and the establishment and wealth of the King and his
people: It is no place then for particular men to utter there their private
conceits, nor for satisfaction of their curiosities, and least of all to make
show of their eloquence by tyning the time with long studied and eloquent
Orations: No, the reverence of God, their King, and their Country being well
settled in their hearts, will make them ashamed of such toys, and remember that
they are there as sworn Councillors to their King, to give their best advise
for the furtherance of his Service, and the flourishing Weal of his Estate.

And lastly, if you will rightly consider the means and ways how to bring all
your labors to a good end, you must remember, That you are here assembled by
your lawful King to give him your best aduises, in the matters proposed by him
unto you, being of that nature, which I have already told, wherein you are
gravely to deliberate, and upon your consciences plainly to determine how
far those things propounded do agree with the weal, both of your King and
of your Country, whose weals cannot be separated. And as for my self, the
world shall ever bear me witness, That I never shall propone any thing unto
you, which shall not as well tend to the weal public, as to any benefit for
me: So shall I never oppone my self to that, which may tend to the good of the
Commonwealth, for the which I am ordained, as I have often said. And as you
are to give your advise in such things as shall by your King be proposed: So is
it on your part your duties to propone any thing that you can after mature
deliberation judge to be needful, either for these ends already spoken of, or
otherwise for the discovery of any latent evil in the Kingdom, which
peradventure may not have commen to the Kings ear. If this then ought to be
your grave manner of proceeding in this place, Men should be ashamed to make
show of the quickness of their wits here, either in taunting, scoffing, or
detracting the Prince or State in any point, or yet in breaking jests upon
their fellows, for which the Ordinaries or Alehouses are fitter places, then
this Honorable and high Court of Parliament.

In conclusion then since you are to break up, for the reasons I have already
told you, I wish such of you as have any charges in your Countries, to hasten
you home for the repressing of the insolences of these Rebels, and
apprehension of their persons, wherein as I heartily pray to the Almighty for
your prosperous success: So do I not doubt, but we shall shortly hear the
good news of the same; And that you shall have an happy return, and meeting
here to all our comforts.

Here the Lord Chancellor spoke touching the proroguing of the Parliament: And
having done, his Majesty rose again, and said, SInce it pleased God to grant
me two such notable Deliueries upon one day of the week, which was Tuesday,
and likewise one day of the Month, which was the fifth; Thereby to teach me,
That as it was the same devil that still persecuted me; So it was one and the
same GOD that still mightily delivered me: I thought it therefore not amiss,
That the one and twentieth day of January, which fell to be upon Tuesday,
should be the day of meeting of this next Session of Parliament, hoping and
assuring my self, that the same GOD, who has now granted me and you all so
notable and gracious a delivery, shall prosper all our affairs at that next
Session, and bring them to an happy conclusion. And now I consider GOD has
well provided it, that the ending of this Parliament has been so long
continued: For as for my own part, I never had any other intention, but only
to seek so far my weal, and prosperity, as might coniunctly stand with the
flourishing State of the whole Commonwealth, as I have often told you; So on
the other part I confess, if I had been in your places at the beginning of
this Parliament, (which was so soon after mine entry into this Kingdom,
wherein ye could not possibly have so perfect a knowledge of mine inclination,
as experience since has taught you,) I could not but have suspected, and
mis-interpreted diverse things, In the trying whereof, now I hope, by your
experience of my behavior and form of government, you are well enough
cleared, and resolved.

A SPEECH TO BOTH THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, DELIVERED IN THE GREAT CHAMBER AT
WHITE HALL, THE LAST DAY OF March 1607.
MY Lords of the higher House, and you Knights and Burgesses of the Lower
house, All men at the beginning of a Feast bring forth good Wine first, and
after, worse. This was the saying of the Governor of the Feast at Cana in
Galile, where CHRIST wrought his first miracle by changing water into Wine. But
in this case now whereof I am to speak unto you, I must follow that Governors
rule, and not CHRIST'S example, in giving you the worst and sowrest Wine last.
For all the time of this long Session of the Parliament you have been so fed
and cloyed, (specially you of the Lower house) with such banquets, and choice
of delicate speeches, and your ears so seasoned with the sweetness of long
precogitate Orations; as this my Speech now in the breaking up of this
Assembly, cannot but appear unto your taste as the worst Wine proposed in the
end of the Banquet, since I am only to deliver now unto you matter without
curious form, substance without ceremony, truth in all sincerity. Yet
considering the Person that speaks, the parties to whom I speak, the matter
whereof I mean to speak; it fits better to utter matter, rather then words,
in regard of the greatness of my place who am to speak to you, the gravity
of you the Auditorie, which is the high Court of Parliament; the weight of the
matter, which concerns the security and establishment of this whole Empire,
and little world. Studied Orations and much eloquence upon little matter is fit
for the Universities, where not the Subject which is spoken of, but the trial
of his wit that speaks, is most commendable: but on the contrary, in all
great Councels or Parliaments, fewest words with most matter does become
best, where the dispatch of the great errands in hand, and not the praise of
the person is most to be looked unto: like the garment of a chaste woman, who
is only set forth by her natural beauty, which is properly her own: other
deckings are but ensigns of an harlot that flies with borrowed feathers. And
besides the conueniencie, I am forced hereunto by necessity, my place calling
me to action, and not leaving me to the liberty of contemplation, having
always my thoughts busied with the public care of you all, where every one
of you having but himself, and his own private to think of, are at more
leisure to make studied speeches. And therefore the matter which I deliver you
confusedly as in a sack, I leave it to you when you are in your chambers, and
have better leisure then I can have, to rank them in order, every one in their
own place.

Thus much by way of Preface. But I proceed to the matter: Whereof I might say
with S. Paul, I could speak in as many tongues as you all, but I had rather
speak three words to edification, then talk all day without understanding.
In vain (says the Psalmist) does the builder build the house, or the
watchman watch the City, unless the Lord give his blessing thereunto. And in
the New Testament S. Paul says, That he may plant, Apollo may water, but it
is GOD only that must give the increase. This I speak, because of the long
time which has benespent about the Treaty of the Union. For my self, I
protest unto you all, When I first propounded the Union, I then thought there
could have been no more question of it, then of your declaration and
acknowledgement of my right unto this Crown, and that as two Twins, they
would have grown up together. The error was my mistaking; I knew mine own
end, but not others fears: But now finding many crossings, long disputations,
strange questions, and nothing done; I must needs think it proceeds either of
mistaking of the errand, or else from some jealousy of me the Propounder, that
you so add delay unto delay, searching out as it were the very bowels of
Curiosity, and conclude nothing. Neither can I condemn you for being yet in
some jealousy of my intention in this matter, having not yet had so great
experience of my behavior and inclination in these few years past, as you may
peradventure have in a longer time hereafter, and not having occasion to
consult daily with my self, and hear mine own opinion in all those
particulars which are debated among you.

But here I pray you now mistake me not at the first, when as I seem to find
fault with your delays and curiosity, as if I would have you to resolve in an
hours time, that which will take a months aduisement: for you all know, that
Rex est lex loquens; And you have often heard me say, That the Kings will and
intention being the speaking Law, ought to be Luce clarius: and I hope you of
the Lower house have the proof of this my clearenesse by a Bil sent you down
from the Upper house within these few days, or rather few hours: wherein may
very well appear unto you the care I have to put my Subjects in good security
of their possessions for all posterities to come. And therefore that you may
clearly understand my meaning in that point, I do freely confess, you had
reason to advise at leisure upon so great a cause: for great matters do cuer
require great deliberation before they be well concluded. Deliberandum est diu
quod statuendum est semel. Consultations must proceed lento pede, but the
execution of a sentence upon the resolution would be speedy. If you will go
on, it matters not though you go with leaden feet, so you make still some
progress, and that there be no let or needless delay, and do not Nodum in
scirpo quaerere. I am ever for the Medium in every thing. Between foolish
rashness and extreme length, there is a middle way. Search all that is
reasonable, but omit that which is idle, curious and unnecessary; otherwise
there can never be a resolution or end in any good work.

And now from the general I will descend to particulars, and will only for the
ease of your memories divide the matter that I am to speak of, into four
heads, by opening unto you, First, what I crave: Secondly, in what manner I
desire it: Thirdly, what commodities will ensue to both the Kingdoms by it:
Fourthly, what the supposed inconueniencie may be that gives impediments
thereunto.

For the first, what I crave, I protest before GOD who knows my heart, and to
you my people before whom it were a shame to lie, that I claim nothing but
with acknowledgement of my Bond to you; that as ye owe to me subjection and
obedience: So my Sovereignty obliges me to yield to you love, government and
protection: Neither did I ever wish any happiness to my self, which was not
conjoined with the happiness of my people. I desire a perfect Union of Laws
and persons, and such a Naturalizing as may make one body of both Kingdoms
under me your King, That I and my posterity (if it so please God) may rule
over you to the worlds end; Such an Union as was of the Scots and Pictes in
Scotland, and of the Heptarchie here in England. And for Scotland I auow such
an Union, as if you had got it by Conquest, but such a Conquest as may be
cemented by love, the only sure bond of subjection or friendship: that as
there is over both but vnus Rex, so there may be in both but vnus Grex and vna
Lex: For no more possible is it for one King to govern two Countries
Contiguous, the one a great, the other a less, a richer and a poorer, the
greater drawing like an Adamant the lesser to the Commodities thereof, then for
one head to govern two bodies, or one man to be husband of two wives, whereof
Christ himself said, Ab initio non fuit sic.

But in the general Union you must observe two things: for I will discover my
thoughts plainly unto you; I study clearenes, not eloquence, And therefore with
the old Philosopers, I would heartily wish my breast were a transparent glass
for you all to see through, that you might look into my heart, and then would
you be satisfied of my meaning. For when I speak of a perfect Union, I mean
not confusion of all things: you must not take from Scotland those particular
Privileges that may stand as well with this Union, as in England many
particular customs in particular Shires, (as the Customs of Kent, and the
Royalties of the County Palatine of Chester) do with the Common Law of the
Kingdom: for every particular Shire almost, and much more every County, have
some particular customs that are as it were naturally most fit for that
people. But I mean of such a general Union of Laws as may reduce the whole
Island, that as they live already under one Monarch, so they may all be
governed by one Law: For I must needs confess by that little experience I have
had since my coming hither, and I think I am able to prove it, that the
grounds of the Common Law of England, are the best of any Law in the world,
either Civil or Municipall, and the fittest for this people. But as every Law
would be clear and full, so the obscurity in some points of this our written
Law, and want of fullness in others, the variation of Cases and men's
curiosity, breeding every day new questions, has enforced the Judges to judge
in many Cases here, by Cases and presidents, wherein I hope Lawyers themselves
will not deny but that there must be a great uncertainty, and I am sure all
the rest of you that are Gentlemen of other professions were long ago weary
of it, if you could have had it amended: For where there is variety and
uncertainty although a just Judge may do rightly, yet an ill Judge may take
advantage to do wrong; and then are all honest men that succeed him, tied in
a manner to his unjust and partial conclusions. Wherefore, leave not the Law to
the pleasure of the Judge, but let your Laws be looked into: for I desire not
the abolishing of the Laws, but only the clearing and the sweeping off the
rust of them, and that by Parliament our Laws might be cleared and made known
to all the Subjects. Yea rather it were less hurt, that all the approved Cases
were set down and allowed by Parliament for standing Laws in all time to
come: For although some of them peradventure may be unjust as set down by
corrupt Judges; yet better it is to have a certain Law with some spots in it,
nor live under such an uncertain and arbitrarie Law, since as the proverb is,
It is less harm to suffer an inconvenience then a mischief. And now may you
have fair occasion of amending and polishing your Laws, when Scotland is to
be united with you under them for who can blame Scotland to say, If you will
take away our own Laws, I pray you give us a better and cleerer in place
thereof.

But this is not possible to be done without a fit preparation. He that
builds a Ship, must first provide the timber; and as Christ himself said, No
man will build an house, but he will first provide the materials: nor a wise
King will not make war against another, without he first makeprouision of
money: and all great works must have their preparation: and that was my end in
causing the Instrument of the Union to be made. Union is a marriage: would he
not be thought absurd that for furthering of a marriage between two friends of
his, would make his first motion to have the two parties be laid in bed
together, and perform the other turns of marriage? must there not precede the
mutual sight and acquaintance of the parties one with another, the conditions
of the contract, and Ioincture to be talked of and agreed upon by their
friends, and such other things as in order ought to go before the ending of
such a work? The union is an eternal agreement and reconciliation of many
long bloody wars that have been between these two ancient Kingdoms. Is it
the readiest way to agree a private quarrel between two, to bring them at the
first to shake hands, and as it were kiss other, and lie under one roof or
rather in one bed together, before that first the ground of their quarrel be
communed upon, their minds mitigated, their affections prepared, and all other
circumstances first used, that ought to be used to proceed to such a final
agreement? Every honest man desires a perfect Union, but they that say so, and
admit no preparation thereto, have mel in ore, fell in cord. If after your so
long talk of Union in all this long Session of Parliament, ye rise without
agreeing upon any particular; what will the neighbor Princes judge, whose eyes
are all fixed upon the conclusion of this Action, but that the King is refused
in his desire, whereby the Nation should be taxed, and the King disgraced? And
what an ill preparation is it for the minds of Scotland toward the Union, when
they shall hear that ill is spoken of their whole Nation, but nothing is done
nor advanced in the matter of the Union it self? But this I am glad was but
the fault of one, and one is no number: yet have your neighbors of Scotland
this advantage of you, that none of them have spoken ill of you (nor shall as
long as I am King) in Parliament, or any such public place of Iuditature.
Consider therefore well, if the minds of Scotland had not need to be well
prepared to persuade their mutual consent, seeing you here have all the great
advantage by the Union. Is not here the personal residence of the King, his
whole Court and family? Is not here the seat of Justice, and the fountain of
Government? must they not be subjected to the Laws of England, and so with
time become but as Cumberland and Northumberland, and those other remote and
Northern Shires? you are to be the husband, they the wife: you conquerours,
they as conquered, though not by the sword, but by the sweet and sure bond of
love. Besides that, they as other Northern Countries will beseldome seen and
saluted by their King, and that as it were but in a posting or hunting journey.

How little cause then they may have of such a change of so ancient a Monarchy
into the case of private Shires, judge rightly herein. And that you may be the
more upright Judges, suppose your selves the Patients of whom such sentence
should be given. But what preparation is it which I crave? only such as by the
entrance may show something is done, yet more is intended. There is a conceit
entertained, and a double jealousy possesses many, wherein I am misiudged.

First, that this Union will be the Crisis to the overthrow of England, and
setting up of Scotland: England will then be overwhelmed by the swarming of
the Scots, who if the Union were effected, would reign and rule all.

The second is, my profuse liberality to the Scottish men more then the
English, and that with this Union all things shall be given to them, and you
turned out of all: To you shall be left the sweat and labor, to them shall
be given the fruit and sweet; and that my forbearance is but till this Union
may be gained. How agreeable this is to the truth, Judge you; And that not by
my words, but by my Actions. Do I crave the Union without exceptions? do I
not offer to bind my self and to reserve to you, as in the Instrument, all
places of Judicature? do I intend any thing which stands not with the equal
good of both Nations? I could then have done it, and not spoken of it: For all
men of understanding must agree, that I might dispose without assent of
Parliament, Offices of Judicature, and others, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal: But herein I did voluntarily offer by my Letters from Royston to the
Commissioners, to bind my Prerogative.

Some think that I will draw the Scottish Nation hither, talking idly of
transporting of Trees out of a barren ground into a better, and of lean
cattle out of bad pasture into a more fertile soil. Can any man displant you,
unless you will? or can any man think that Scotland is so strong to pull you
out of your houses? or do you not think I know England has more people,
Scotland more wast ground? So that there is roumth in Scotland rather to plant
your idle people that swarm in London streets, and other Towns, and disburden
you of them, then to bring more unto you; And in cases of Justice, if I be
partial to either side, let my own mouth condemn me, as unworthy to be your
King.

I appeal to your selves, if in favor or Justice I have been partial: Nay,
my intention was ever, you should then have most cause to praise my discretion,
when you saw I had most power. If hitherto I have done nothing to your
prejudice, much less mean I hereafter. If when I might have done it without
any breach of promise; Think so of me, that much less I will do it, when a
Law is to restrain me. I owe no more to the Scottish men then to the English.
I was borne there, and sworn here, and now reign over both. Such particular
persons of the Scottish Nation, as might claim any extraordinary merit at my
hands, I have already reasonably rewarded, and I can assure you that there is
none left, whom for I mean extraordinary to strain my self further, then in
such ordinary benefit as I may equally bestow without mine own great hurt,
upon any Subject of either Nation; In which case no Kings hands can ever
befully closed. To both I owe Justice and protection, which with Gods grace I
shall ever equally balance.

For my Liberality, I have told you of it heretofore: my three first years
were to me as a Christmas, I could not then be miserable: should I have been
ouersparing to them? they might have thought Joseph had forgotten his brethren,
or that the King had been drunk with his new Kingdom. But Suites go not now
so cheap as they were wont, neither are there so many fees taken in the Hamper
and Pettibagge for the great Seal as has been. And if I did respect the
English when I came first, of whom I was received with joy, and came as in a
hunting journey, what might the Scottish have justly said, if I had not in some
measure dealt bountifully with them that so long had served me, so far
adventured themselves with me, and been so faithful to me. I have given you
now four years proof since my coming, and what I might have done more to
have raised the Scottish nation you all know, and the longer I live, the less
cause have I to be acquainted with them, and so the less hope of extraordinary
favor toward them: For since my coming from them I do not already know the
one half of them by face, most of the youth being now risen up to be men, who
were but children when I was there, and more are borne since my coming thence.

Now for my lands and revenues of my Crown which you may think I have
diminished, They are not yet so far diminished, but that I think no prince
of Christendom has fairer possessions to his Crown then yet I have: and in
token of my care to preserve the same to my posterity for ever, the intaile of
my lands to the Crown has been long ago offered unto you: and that it is
not yet done, is not my fault as you know. My Treasurer here knows my care,
and has already in part declared it, and if I did not hope to treble my
Revenue more then I have empaired it, I should never rest quietly in my bed.
But notwithstanding my coming to the Crown, with that extraordinary applause
which you all know, and that I had two Nations to be the objects of my
liberality, which never any Prince had here before; will you compare my gifts
out of mine inheritance with some Princes here that had only this Nation to
respect, and whose whole time of reign was little longer then mine has been
already? It will be found that their gifts have far surpassed mine, albeit as
I have already said, they had nothing so great cause of using their liberality.

For the manner of the Union presently desired, It stands in 3. parts: Secondly
The first, taking away of hostile Laws: for since there can be now no Wars
betwixt you, is it not reason hostile Laws should cease? For, desiciente causa
desicit effectas. The King of England now cannot have wars with the King of
Scotland, therefore this fails of it self. The second is community of
Commerce. I am no stranger unto you: for you all know I came from the loins of
your ancient Kings. They of Scotland be my Subjects as you are. But how can I
be natural Liege Lord to you both, and you strangers one to the other? Shall
they which be of one alleagance with you, be no better respected of you, nor
freer amongst you, then Frenchmen and Spaniards? Since I am Sovereign over
both, you as Subjects to one King, it must needs follow that you converse and
have Commerce together. There is a rumor of some ill dealings that should be
used by the Commissioners, Merchants of Scotland. They be here in England, and
shall remain till your next meeting, and abide trial, to prove themselves
either honest men or knaves.

For the third point, Postnati, your own Lawyers and Judges at my first
coming to this Crown, informed me, there was a difference between the Ante
and the Post nati of each Kingdom, which caused me to publish a Proclamation,
that the Post nati were Naturalized (Ipso facto) by my Accession to this
Crown. I do not deny but Judges may err as men, and therefore I do not
press you here to swear to all their reasons. I only urge at this time the
conueniencie for both Kingdoms, neither pressing you to judge nor to be
judged. But remember also it is as possible and likely your own Lawyers may
err as the Judges: Therefore as I wish you to proceed herein so far as may
tend to the weal of both Nations; So would I have you on the other part to
beware to disgrace either my Proclamations or the Judges, who when the
Parliament is done, have power to try your lands and lives, for so you may
disgrace both your King and your Laws. For the doing of any act that may
procure less reverence to the Judges, cannot but breed a looseness in the
Government, and a disgrace to the whole Nation. The reason that most mooues
me for ought I have yet heard, that there cannot but be a difference between
the Ante nati and the Post nati, and that in the favor of the last, is that
they must be nearer unto you being borne under the present Government and
common Allegiance: but in point of conueniencie, there is no question but the
Post nati are more to be respected: For if you would have a perfect and
perpetual Union, that cannot be in the Ante nati, who are but few in
comparison of those that shall be in all aages succeeding, and cannot live
long. But in the Post nati shall the Union be continued and live ever aage
after aage, which wanting a difference cannot but leave a perpetual mark of
separation in the work of the Union: as also that argument of jealousy will
be so far removed in the case of the Post nati which are to reap the
benefit in all succeeding aages, as by the contrary there will then rise
Pharaos which never knew Joseph. The Kings my Successors, who being borne and
bred here, can never have more occasion of acquaintance with the Scottish
Nation in general, then any other English King that was before my time. Be
not therefore abused with the flattering speeches of such as would have the
Ante nati preferred, alleging their merit in my Service, and such other
reasons which indeed are but Sophismes: For, my rewarding out of my
Liberality of any particular men, has nothing ado with the general act of
the Union, which must not regard the deserts of private persons, but the
general weal and conioyning of the Nations. Besides that, the actual
Naturalizing, which is the only point that is in your hands, is already
granted to by your selves to the most part of such particular persons as can
have any use of it here: and if any other well deserving men were to sue for
it hereafter, I doubt not but there would never be question moved among you
for the granting of it. And therefore it is most evident, that such discoursers
have mel in ore, fell in cord, as I said before; carrying an outward appearance
of love to the Union, but indeed a contrary resolution in their hearts. And as
for limitations and restrictions, such as shall by me be agreed upon to be
reasonable and necessary after you have fully debated upon them, you may assure
your selves I will with indifferency grant what is requisite without partial
respect of Scotland. I am, as I have often said, borne and sworn King over
both Kingdoms; only this far let me entreat you, in debating the point at
your next meeting, That ye be as ready to resolve doubts as to move them, and
to be satisfied when doubts are cleared.

And as for Commodities that come by the Union of these Kingdoms, they are
great and evident; Peace, Plenty, Love, free Intercourse and common Society
of two great Nations. All foreign Kings that have sent their Ambassadors to
congratulate with me since my coming, have saluted me as Monarch of the whole
Isle, and with much more respect of my greatness, then if I were King alone of
one of these Realms: and with what comfort do your selves behold Irish,
Scottish, Welsh, and English, diverse in Nation, yet all walking as Subjects and
servants within my Court, and all living under the allegiance of your King,
besides the honor and luster that the increase of gallant men in the Court of
diverse Nations carries in the eyes of all strangers that repair hither? Those
confining places which were the Borders of the two Kingdoms, where heretofore
much blood was shed, and many of your ancestors lost their lives; yea, that
lay waste and desolate, and were habitations but for runnagates, are now become
the Navel or Vmbilick of both Kingdoms, planted and peopled with Civility
and riches: their Churches begin to be planted, their doors stand now open,
they fear neither robbing nor spoiling: and where there was nothing before
heard nor seen in those parts but bloodshed, oppressions, complaints and
outcries, they now live every man peaceably under his own figgetree, and all
their former cries and complaints turned only into prayers to God for their
King, under whom they enjoy such ease and happy quietness. The Marches beyond
and on this side Twede, are as fruitful and as peaceable as most parts of
England: If after all this there shall be a Scissure, what inconvenience will
follow, judge you.

And as for the inconveniences that are feared on Englands part, It is
alleged, that the Scots are a populous Nation, they shall be harbored in our
nests, they shall be planted and flourish in our good Soil, they shall eat
our commons bare, and make us lean: These are foolish and idle surmises. That
which you possess, they are not to enjoy; by Law they cannot, nor by my
partiality they shall not: for set apart conscience and honor, (which if I
should set apart indeed, I had rather wish my self to be set apart and out
of all being) can any man conclude either out of common reason or good policy,
that I will prefer those which perhaps I shall never see, or but by post for
a month, before those with whom I must always dwell? Can they conquer or
overcome you with swarms of people, as the Goths and the Vandals did Italy?
Surely the world knows they are nothing so populous as you are: and although
they have had the honor and good fortune never to be conquered, yet were they
ever but upon the defensive part, and may in a part thank their hills and
inaccessible passages that preserved them from an utter overthrow at the hands
of all that pretended to conquer them. Or are they so very poor and miserable
in their own habitations, that necessity should force them all to make
incursions among you?

And for my part, when I have two Nations under my government, can you imagine
I will respect the lesser, and neglect the greater? would I not think it a
less evil and hazard to me that the plague were at Northampton or Barwicke,
then at London, so near Westminster, the Seat of my habitation, and of my wife
and children? will not a man be more careful to quench the fire taken in his
nearest neighbors house, then if a whole Town were a fire far from him? You
know that I am careful to preserve the woods and game through all England,
nay, through all the Isle: yet none of you doubts, but that I would be more
offended with any disorder in the Forest of Waltham, for stealing of a Stagge
there, which lies as it were under my nose, and in a manerioyneth with my
garden, then with cutting of timber, or stealing of a Dear in any Forest of
the North parts of Yorkshire or the Bishopric. Think you that I will
prefer them that be absent, less powerful, and farther off to do me good
or hurt, before you, with whom my security and living must be, and where I
desire to plant my posterity? If I might by any such favors raise my self to
a greatness, it might be probable: All I cannot draw, and to lose a whole
state here to please a few there, were madness. I need speak no more of this
with protestations. Speak but of wit, it is not likely: and to doubt of my
intention in this, were more then deuilish.

For mine own part, I offer more then I receive, and conueniencie I prefer
before law, in this point. For, three parts, wherein I might hurt this Nation,
by partiality to the Scots, you know do absolutely lie in my hands and power:
for either in disposition of rents, or whatsoever benefit, or in the preferring
of them to any dignity or office, civil or Ecclesiastical, or in calling
them to the Parliament, it does all fully and only lie within the compass of
my Prerogative, which are the parts wherein the Scottish men can receive either
benefit or preferment by the Union, and wherein for the care I have of this
people, I am content to bind my self with some reasonable restrictions.

As for the fourth part, the Naturalizing, which only lies in your hands; It
is the point wherein they receive least benefit of any: for in that they can
obtain nothing, but what they buy by their purse, or acquire by the self same
means that you do. And as for the point of naturalizing, which is the point
thought so fit, and so precisely belonging to Parliament; not to speak of the
Common law, wherein as yet I can profess no great knowledge, but in the Civil
law wherein I am a little better versed, and which in the point of Conjunction
of Nations should bear a great sway, it being the Law of Nations; I will
maintain two principles in it, which no learned and grave Ciuilian will deny,
as being clearly to be proved, both out of the text it self in many places,
and also out of the best approved Doctors and interpreters of that law; The
one, that it is a special point of the Kings own Prerogative, to make Aliens
Citizens, and donare Ciuitate; The other, that in any case wherein the Law is
thought not to be clear (as some of your selves do doubt, that in this case
of the postnati, the Law of England does not clearly determine) then in such a
question wherein no positive Law is resolute, Rexest Iudex, for he is Lex
loquens, and is to supply the Law, where the Law wants, and if many famous
histories be to be believed, they give the example for mainteining of this Law
in the persons of the Kings of England and France especially, whose special
Prerogative they allege it to be. But this I speak only as knowing what
belongs to a King, although in this case I press no further then that which
may agree with your loves, and stand with the weal and conueniencie of both
Nations.

And whereas some may think this Union will bring prejudice to some Towns and
Corporations within England; It may be, a Merchant or two of Bristow, or
Yarmouth, may have an hundred pounds less in his pack: But if the Empire
gain, and become the greater, it is no matter: You see one Corporation is ever
against another, and no private Company can be set up, but with some loss to
another.

For the supposed inconveniences rising from Scotland, they are three. Fourth.
First, that there is an evil affection in the Scottish Nation to the Union.
Next, the Union is incompatible between two such Nations. Thirdly, that the
gain is small or none. If this be so, to what end do we talk of an Union? For
proof of the first point, there is alleged an auersenesse in the Scottish
Nation expressed in the Instrument, both in the preface and body of their Act;
In the preface, where they declare, That they will remain an absolute and free
Monarchy; And in the body of the Act, where they make an exception of the
ancient fundamental Laws of that Kingdom. And first for the general of
their auersenes, All the maine current in your Lower House ran this whole
Session of Parliament with that opinion, That Scotland was so greedy of this
Union, and apprehended that they should receive so much benefit by it, as they
cared not for the strictness of any conditions, so they might attain to the
substance* And yet you now say, they are backwards and auerse from the Union.
This is a direct contradiction In adiecto: For how can they both be beggars and
backwards, in one and the self same thing, at the same time?

But for answer to the particulars, It is an old School point, Eius est
explicare, cuius est condere. You cannot interpret their Laws, nor they yours;
I that made them with their assent, can best expound them.

And first I confess, that the English Parliaments are so long, and the
Scottish so short, that a mean between them would do well: For the
shortness of their continuing together, was the cause of their hasty
mistaking, by setting these words of exception of fundamental Laws in the
body of the Act, which they only did in pressing to imitate word by word the
English Instrument, wherein the same words be contained in your Preface. And
as to their meaning and interpretation of that word, I will not only deliver
it unto you out of mine own conceit, but as it was delivered unto me by the
best Lawyers of Scotland, both Counselors and other Lawyers, who were at the
making thereof in Scotland, and were Commissioners here for performance of the
same.

Their meaning in the word of Fundamental Laws, you shall perceive more fully
hereafter, when I handle the objection of the difference of Laws: For they
intend thereby only those Laws whereby confusion is avoided, and their Kings
descent maintained, and the heritage of the succession and Monarchy, which
has been a Kingdom, to which I am in descent, three hundredth years before
CHRIST: Not meaning it as you do, of their Common Law, for they have none, but
that which is called IVS REGIS: and their desire of continuing a free
Monarchy, was only meant, That all such particular Privileges (whereof I
spoke before) should not be so confounded, as for want either of Magistrate,
Law, or Order, they might fall in such a confusion, as to become like a naked
Province, without Law or liberty under this Kingdom. I hope you mean not I
should set Garrisons over them, as the Spaniards do over Sicily and Naples, or
govern them by Commissioners, which are seldom found succeedingly all wise
and honest men.

This I must say for Scotland, and I may trewly vaunt it; Here I sit and
govern it with my Pen, I write and it is done, and by a Clearke of the
Council I govern Scotland now, which others could not do by the sword. And
for their auersensse in their heart against the Union, It is true indeed, I
protest they did never crave this Union of me, nor sought it either in private,
or the State by letters, nor ever once did any of that Nation press me
forward or wish me to accelerate that business. But on the other part, they
offered always to obey me when it should come to them, and all honest men
that desire my greatness have been thus minded, for the personal reverence
and regard they bear unto my Perion, and any of my reasonable and just desires.

I know there are many Piggots amongst them, I mean a number of seditious and
discontented particular persons, as must be in all Commonwealths, that where
they dare, may peradventure talk lewdly enough: but no Scottish man ever spoke
dishonourably of England in Parliament. For here must I note unto you the
difference of the two Parliaments in these two Kingdoms; for there they must
not speak without the Chauncellors leave, and if any man do propound or utter
any seditious or uncomely speeches, he is straight interrupted and silenced by
the Chauncellors authority: where as here, the liberty for any man to speak
what he list, and as long as he list, was the only cause he was not
interrupted.

It has bin objected, that there is a great Antipathy of the Laws and
Customs of these two Nations. It is much mistaken: for Scotland has no Common
Law as here, but the Law they have is of three sorts.

All the Law of Scotland for Tenures, Wards and Liueries, Seigniories and
Lands, are drawn out of the Chauncerie of England, and for matters of equity
and in many things else, differs from you but in certain terms: James the
first, bred here in England, brought the Laws thither in a written hand. The
second is Statute laws, which be their Acts of Parliament, wherein they have
power as you, to make and altar Laws: and those may be looked into by you, for
I hope you shall be no more strangers to that Nation. And the principal work
of this Union will be, to reconcile the Statute Laws of both Kingdoms. The
third is the Civil Law: James the fifth brought it out of France by
establishing the Session there, according to the form of the Court of
Parliament of France, which he had seen in the time of his being there: who
occupy there the place of Civil! udges in all matters of Plee or
controversy, yet not to govern absolutely by the Civil Law as in France.
For if a man plead that the Law of the Nation is otherwise, it is a bar to
the Civil, and a good Chauncellor or President, will oftentimes repel and put
to silence an Argument that the Lawyers bring out of the Civil Law, where they
have a clear solution in their own Law. So as the Civil Law in Scotland is
admitted in no other cases, but to supply such cases wherein the Municipall Law
is defective. Then may you see it is not so hard a matter as is thought, to
reduce that Country to be united with you under this Law, which neither are
subject to the Civil Law, nor yet have any old Common Law of their own, but
such as in effect is borrowed from yours. And for their Statute Laws in
Parliament, you may alter and change them as often as occasion shall require, as
you do here. It has likewise been objected as an other impediment, that in
the Parliament of Scotland the King has not anegatiue voice, but must pass
all the Laws agreed on by the Lords and Commons. Of this I can best resolve
you: for I am the eldest Parliament man in Scotland, and have sit in more
Parliaments then any of my Predecessors. I can assure you, that the form of
Parliament there, is nothing inclined to popularitie. About a twenty days or
such a time before the Parliament, Proclamation is made throughout the
Kingdom, to deliver in to the Kings Clearke of Register (whom you here call
the Master of the Rolls) all Bills to be exhibited that Session before a
certain day. Then are they brought unto the King, and perused and considered
by him, and only such as I allow of are put into the Chancellors hands to
be propounded to the Parliament, and none others; And if any man in Parliament
speak of any other matter then is in this form first allowed by me, The
Chancellor tells him there is no such Bill allowed by the King.

Besides, when they have passed them for laws, they are presented unto me, and
I with my Scepter put into my hand by the Chancellor, must say, I ratify and
approve all things done in this present Parliament. And if there be any thing
that I dislike, they raze it out before. If this may be called a negative
voice, then I have one I am sure in that Parliament.

The last impediment is the French liberties: which is thought so great, as
except the Scots farsake France, England cannot be united to them. If the
Scottish Nation would be so unwilling to leave them as is said, it would not
lie in their hands: For the League was never made between the people, as is
mistaken, but betwixt the Princes only and their Crowns. The beginning was by
a Message from a King of France, Charlemaine I take it (but I cannot
certainly remember) unto a King of Scotland, for a League defensive and
offensive between us and them against England, France being at that time in
Wars with England.

The like at that time was then desired by England against France, who also
sent their Ambassadors to Scotland. At the first, the Disputation was long
maintained in favor of England, that they being our nearest Neighbors joined
in one continent, and a strong and powerful Nation, it was more fit for the
weal and security of the State of Scotland, to be in League and Amity with
them, then with a Country, though never so strong, yet divided by Sea from us:
especially Englandlying betwixt us and them, where we might be sure of a
sudden mischief, but behooued to abide the hazard of wind and weather, and
other accidents that might hinder our relief.

But after, when the contrary part of the Argument was maintained: wherein
allegation was made, that England ever sought to conquer Scotland, and
therefore in regard of their pretended interest in the Kingdoome, would never
keep any sound Amity with them longer, then they saw their advantage; whereas
France lying more remote and clayming no interest in the Kingdom, would
therefore be found a more constant and faithful friend: It was unhappily
concluded in favor of the last party, through which occasion Scotland gate
many mischiefs after: And it is by the very tenor thereof ordered, to be
renewed and confirmed from King to King successively, which accordingly was
ever performed by the mediation of their Ambassadors, and therefore merely
personal, and so was it renewed in the Queen my mothers time, only between
the two Kings, and not by assent of Parliament or conuention of the three
Estates, which it could never have wanted if it had been a League between the
people. And in my time when it came to be ratified, because it appeared to be
in odium tertii, it was by me left unrenewed or confirmed as a thing
incompatible to my Person, in consideration of my Title to this Crown. Some
Privileges indeed in the Merchants favor for point of Commerce, were renewed
and confirmed in my time: wherein for my part of it, there was scarce three
Counselors more then my Secretary, to whose place it belonged, that meddled
in that matter.

It is true, that it behooued to be enterteined, as they call it, in the Court
of Parliament of Paris: but that only serves for publication, and not to give
it Authority: That Parliament (as you know) being but a Judicial Seat of
Judges and Lawyers, and nothing agreeing with the definition or office of our
Parliaments in this Isle. And therefore that any fruits or Privileges
possessed by the League with France is able now to remain in Scotland, is
impossible: For ye may be sure, that the French King stays only upon the
sight of the ending of this Union, to cut it off himself. Otherwise when this
great work were at an end, I would be forced for the general care I owe to
all my Subjects, to crave of France like Privileges to them all as Scotland
already enioyes, seeing the personal friendship remains as great between us
as between our Progenitors; and all my Subjects must be alike dear unto me:
which either he will never grant, and so all will fall to the ground; or else
it will turn to the benefit of the whole Island: and so the Scottish
Privileges cannot hold longer then my League with France lasts.

And for another Argument to prove that this league is only between the
Kings, and not between the people: They which have Pensions, or are privy
Intelligence giuers in France without my leave, are in no better case by the
Law of Scotland, then if they were Pensioners to Spain.

As for the Scottish Guard in France, the beginning thereof was, when an Earl
of Boghan was sent in aid of the French with ten thousand men, and there
being made Constable, and having obtained a victory, was murdered with the
most of the Scottish Army. In recompense whereof, and for a future security
to the Scottish Nation, the Scottish Guard was ordained to have the privilege
and prerogative before all other Guards in guarding the Kings person.

And as for the last point of this subdiuision concerning the gain that
England may make by this Union, I think no wise nor honest man will ask any
such question. For who is so ignorant, that does not know the gain will be
great? Do you not gain by the Union of Wales? And is not Scotland greater
then Wales? Shall not your Dominions be increased of Lands, Seas, and persons
added to your greatness? And are not your Lands and Seas adjoining? For who
can set down the limits of the Borders, but as a Mathematical line or Idaea?
Then will that back door be shut, and those ports of Ianus be for ever
closed: you shall have them that were your enemies to molest you, a sure back
to defend you: their bodies shall be your aides, and they must be partners in
all your quarrels: Two snow-balls put together, make one the greater: Two
houses joined, make one the larger: two Castle walls made in one, makes one as
thick and strong as both. And do you not see in the Low countries how
available the English and the Scottish are being joined together? This is a
point so plain, as no man that has wit or honesty, but must acknowledge it
feelingly.

And where it is objected that the Scottishmen are not tied to the service of
the King in the wars above forty days; It is an ignorant mistaking. For the
truth is, That in respect the Kings of Scotland did not so abound in Treasure
and money to take up an Army under pay, as the Kings of England did; Therefore
was the Scottish Army wont to be raised only by Proclamation, upon the
penalty of their breach of allegiance; So as they were all forced to come to
the War like Snailes who carry their house about with them; Every Nobleman
and Gentleman bringing with him their Tents, money, provision for their house,
victuals of all sorts, and all other necessaries, the King supplying them of
nothing: Necessity thereupon enforcing a warning to be given by the
Proclamation of the space of their attendance, without which they could not
make their provision accordingly, especially as long as they were within the
bounds of Scotland, where it was not lawful for them to help themselves by
the spoil or wasting of the Country. But neither is there any Law Prescribing
precisely such a certain number of days, nor yet is it without the limits of
the Kings power to keep them together, as many more days as he list, to
renew his Proclamations from time to time some reasonable number of days,
before the expiring of the former, they being ever bound to serve and wait
upon him, though it were an hundredth year if need were.

Now to conclude, I am glad of this occasion, that I might Liberare animam
meam; You are now to recede: when you meet again, remember I pray you, the
truth and sincerity of my meaning, which in seeking Union, is only to advance
the greatness of your Empire seated here in England; And yet with such caution
I wish it, as may stand with the weal of both States. What is now desired,
has often before been sought when it could not be obtained: To refuse it now
then, were double iniquity. Strengthen your own felicity, London must be
the Seat of your King, and Scotland joined to this kingdom by a Golden
conquest, but cymented with love, (as I said before) which within will make you
strong against all Civil and intestine Rebellion, as without we will be
compassed and guarded with our walls of brass. Judge me charitably, since in
this I seek your equal good, that so both of you might be made fearful to
your Enemies, powerful in your selves, and available to your friends. Study
therefore hereafter to make a good Conclusion, avoid all delays, cut off all
vain questions, that your King may have his lawful desire, and be not
disgraced in his just ends. And for your security in such reasonable points
of restrictions, whereunto I am to agree, ye need never doubt of my
inclination: For I will not say any thing which I will not promise, nor promise
any thing which I will notsweare; What I swear I will sign, and what I sign,
I shall with GODS grace ever perform.

A SPEECH TO THE LORDS AND COMMONS OF THE PARLIAMENT AT WHITE HALL, ON
WEDNESDAY THE XXI. OF MARCH. ANNO 1609.
WE being now in the midst of this season appointed for penitence and prayer,
it has so fallen out, that these two last days have been spent in a far
other sort of exercise, I mean in Eucharisticke Sacrifice, and gratulation of
thanks, presented unto me by both the parts of this body of Parliament: and
therefore to make up the number of three, (which is the number of Trinity, and
perfection) I have thought good to make this the third Day, to be spent in this
exercise.

As ye made me a fair Present indeed in presenting your thanks and loving
duties unto me: So have I now called you here, to recompense you again with
a great and a rare Present, which is a fair and a Crystal Mirror; Not such a
Mirror wherein you may see your own faces, or shadows; but such a Mirror, or
Crystal, as through the transparantnesse thereof, you may see the heart of
your King. The Philosophers wish, That every man's breast were a Crystal,
where-through his heart might be seen, is vulgarly known, and I touched it in
one of my former Speeches unto you: But though that were impossible in the
general, yet will I now perform this for my part, That as it is a true Axiom
in Divinity, That Cor Regis is in manu Domini, So will I now set Cor Regis in
oculis populi. I know that I can say nothing at this time, whereof some of you
that are here, have not at one time or other, heard me say the like already:
Yet as corporal food nourishes and mainteineth the body, so does
Reminiscentia nourish and maintain memory.

I Will reduce to three general and maine grounds, the principal things that
have been agitated in this Parliament, and whereof I will now speak.

First, the Arrand for which you were called by me; And that was, for
supporting of my state, and necessities.

The second is, that which the people are to move unto the King: To represent
unto him such things, whereby the Subjects are vexed, or wherein the state of
the Common wealth is to be redressed: And that is the thing which you call
grieuances.

The third ground that has been handled amongst you, and not only in talk
amongst you in the Parliament, but even in many other peoples mouths, as well
within, as without the Parliament, is of a higher nature then any of the former
(though it be but an Incident?) and the reason is, because it concerns a
higher point; And this is a doubt, which has been in the heads of some, of my
Intention in two things.

First, whether I was resolved in the general, to continue still my government
according to the ancient form of this State, and the Laws of this Kingdom:
Or if I had an intention not to limit my self within those bounds, but to
alter the same when I thought convenient, by the absolute power of a King.

The other branch is anent the Common Law, which some had a conceit I disliked,
and (in respect that I was borne where another form of Law was established)
that I would have wished the Civil Law to have been put in place of the Common
Law for government of this people. And the complaint made amongst you of a
book written by doctor Cowell, was a part of the occasion of this incident:
But as touching my censure of that book, I made it already to be delivered
unto you by the Treasurer here sitting, which he did out of my own directions
and notes; and what he said in my name, that had he directly from me: But what
he spoke of himself therein without my direction, I shall always make good;
for you may be sure I will be loath to make so honest a man a liar, or deceive
your expectations: always within very few days my Edict shall come forth
anent that matter, which shall fully discover my meaning.

There was never any reason to move men to think, that I could like of such
grounds: For there are two qualities principally, or rather priuations that
make Kings subject to flattery; Credulity and Ignorance; and I hope none of
them can be justly objected to me: For if Alexander the great, for all his
learning, had been wise in that point to have considered the state of his own
natural body and disposition, he would never have thought him self a god.
And now to the matter. As it is a Christan duty in every man, Reddere rationem
fidei, and not to be ashamed to give an account of his profession before men,
and Angels, as often as occasion shall require: So did I ever hold it a
necessity of honor in a just and wise King, though not to give an account to
his people of his actions, yet clearly to deliver his heart and intention unto
them upon every occasion. But I must inuert my order, and begin first with that
incident which was last in my division (though highest of nature) and so go
backward.

THe State of MONARCHY is the supremest thing upon earth: For Kings are not
only GODS Lieutenants upon earth, and sit upon GODS throne, but even by GOD
himself they are called Gods. There be three principal similitudes that
illustrate the state of MONARCHY: One taken out of the word of GOD; and the
two other out of the grounds of Policy and Philosophy. In the Scriptures
Kings are called Gods, and so their power after a certain relation compared to
the Divine power. Kings are also compared to Fathers of families: for a King is
trewly Parens patriae, the politic father of his people. And lastly, Kings
are compared to the head of this Microcosme of the body of man.

Kings are justly called Gods, for that they exercise a manner or resemblance
of Divine power upon earth: For if you will consider the Attributes to God, you
shall see how they agree in the person of a King. God has power to create, or
destroy, make, or unmake at his pleasure, to give life, or send death, to judge
all, and to be judged nor accomptable to none: To raise low things, and to
make high things low at his pleasure, and to God are both soul and body due.
And the like power have Kings: they make and unmake their subjects: they have
power of raising, and casting down: of life, and of death: Judges over all
their subjects, and in all causes, and yet accomptable to none but God only.
They have power to exalt low things, and abase high things, and make of their
subjects like men at the Chesse; A pawn to take a Bishop or a Knight, and to
cry up, or down any of their subjects, as they do their money. And to the King
is due both the affection of the soul, and the service of the body of his
subjects: And therefore that reverend Bishop here amongst you, though I hear
that by diverse he was mistaken or not well understood, yet did he preach both
learnedly and trewly annent this point concerning the power of a King: For what
he spoke of a Kings power in Abstracto, is most true in Divinity: For to
Emperors, or Kings that are Monarchs, their Subjects bodies and goods are due
for their defense and maintenance. But if I had been in his place, I would only
have added two words, which would have cleared all: For after I had told as a
Divine, what was due by the Subjects to their Kings in general, I would then
have concluded as an Englishman, showing this people, That as in general all
Subjects were bound to relieve their King; So to exhort them, that as we lived
in a settled state of a Kingdom which was governed by his own fundamental
Laws and Orders, that according thereunto, they were now (being assembled for
this purpose in Parliament) to consider how to help such a King as now they
had; And that according to the ancient form, and order established in this
Kingdom: putting so, a difference between the general power of a King in
Divinity, and the settled and established State of this Crown, and Kingdom.
And I am sure that the Bishop meant to have done the same, if he had not been
straited by time, which in respect of the greatness of the presence preaching
before me, and such an Auditory, he durst not presume upon.

As for the Father of a family, they had of old under the Law of Nature
Patriam potestatem, which was Potestatem vitae and necis, over their children
or family, (I mean such Fathers of families as were the lineall heirs of
those families whereof Kings did originally come:) For Kings had their first
original from them, who planted and spread themselves in Colonies through the
world. Now a Father may dispose of his Inheritance to his children, at his
pleasure: yea, even disinherite the eldest upon just occasions, and prefer
the youngest, according to his liking; make them beggars, or rich at his
pleasure; restrain, or banish out of his presence, as he finds them give
cause of offense, or restore them in favor again with the penitent sinner: So
may the King deal with his Subjects.

And lastly, as for the head of the natural body, the head has the power of
directing all the members of the body to that use which the judgment in the
head thinks most convenient. It may apply sharp cures, or cut off corrupt
members, let blood in what proportion it thinks fit, and as the body may
spare, but yet is all this power ordained by God Ad aedificationem, non ad
destructionem. For although God have power as well of destruction, as of
creation or maintenance; yet will it not agree with the wisdom of God, to
exercise his power in the destruction of nature, and ouerturning the whole
frame of things, since his creatures were made, that his glory might thereby be
the better expressed: So were he a foolish father that would disinherite or
destroy his children without a cause, or leave off the careful education of
them; And it were an idle head that would in place of physic so poison or
phlebotomize the body as might breed a dangerous distemper or destruction
thereof.

But now in these our times we are to distinguish between the state of Kings
in their first original, and between the state of settled Kings and Monarchs,
that do at this time govern in civil Kingdoms: For even as God, during the
time of the old Testament, spoke by Oracles, and wrought by Miracles; yet how
soon it pleased him to setle a Church which was bought, and redeemed by the
blood of his only Son Christ, then was there a cessation of both; He ever
after governing his people and Church within the limits of his reueiledwill. So
in the first original of Kings, whereof some had their beginning by Conquest,
and some by election of the people, their wills at that time served for Law;
Yet how soon Kingdoms began to be settled in civility and policy, then did
Kings set down their minds by Laws, which are properly made by the King
only; but at the rogation of the people, the Kings grant being obtained
thereunto. And so the King became to be Lex loquens, after a sort, binding
himself by a double oath to the observation of the fundamental Laws of his
kingdom: Tacitly, as by being a King, and so bound to protect as well the
people, as the Laws of his Kingdom; And Expressly, by his oath at his
Coronation: So as every just King in a settled Kingdom is bound to observe that
paction made to his people by his Laws, in framing his government agreeable
thereunto, according to that paction which God made with Noe after the deluge,
Hereafter Seed-time, and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, and Day
and Night shall not cease, so long as the earth remains. And therefore a King
governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a
Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according to his Laws. In which case
the Kings conscience may speak unto him, as the poor widow said to Philip of
Macedon; Either govern according to your Law, Aut ne Rexsis. And though no
Christian man ought to allow any rebellion of people against their Prince, yet
does God never leave Kings unpunished when they transgress these limits: For
in that same Psalm where God says to Kings, Vos Dij estis, he immediately
thereafter concludes, But ye shall die like men. The higher we are placed, the
greater shall our fall be. Vt casus sic dolor: the taller the trees be, the
more in danger of the wind; and the tempest beats sorest upon the highest
mountains. Therefore all Kings that are not tyrants, or perjured, will be glad
to bound themselves within the limits of their Laws; and they that persuade
them the contrary, are vipers, and pests, both against them and the
Commonwealth. For it is a great difference between a Kings government in a
settled State, and what Kings in their original power might do in Indiuiduo
vago. As for my part, I thank God, I have ever given good proof, that I never
had intention to the contrary: And I am sure to go to my grave with that
reputation and comfort, that never King was in all his time more careful to
have his Laws duly observed, and himself to govern thereafter, then I.

I conclude then this point touching the power of Kings, with this Axiom of
Divinity, That as to dispute what God may do, is Blasphemy; but quid vult
Deus, that Divines may lawfully, and do ordinarily dispute and discuss; for
to dispute A Posse ad Esse is both against Logic and Divinity: So is it
sedition in Subjects, to dispute what a King may do in the height of his power:
But just Kings will ever be willing to declare what they will do, if they will not
incur the curse of God. I will not be content that my power be disputed upon:
but I shall ever be willing to make the reason appear of all my doings, and
rule my actions according to my Laws.

The other branch of this incident is concerning the Common Law, being
conceived by some, that I contemned it, and preferred the Civil Law thereunto.
As I have already said, Kings Actions (even in the secretest places) are as the
actions of those that are set upon the Stages, or on the tops of houses: and I
hope never to speak that in private, which I shall not auow in public, and
Print it if need be, (as I said in my BASILICON DORON.) For it is true, that
within these few days I spoke freely my mind touching the Common Law in my
Privy Chamber, at the time of my dinner, which is come to all your ears; and
the same was likewise related unto you by my Treasurer, and now I will again
repeat and confirm the same my self unto you. First, as a King I have least
cause of any man to dislike the Common Law: For no Law can be more favorable
and aduantagious for a King, and extends further his Prerogative, then it
does: And for a King of England to despile the Common Law, it is to neglect
his own Crown. It is true, that I do greatly esteem the Civil Law, the
profession thereof serving more for general learning and being most necessary
for matters of Treaty with all foreign Nations: And I think that if it
should be taken away, it would make an entry to Barbarism in this Kingdom,
and would blemish the honor of England: For it is in a manner LEX GENTIVM, and
maintains Intercourse with all forreme Nations: but I only allow it to have
course here, according to those limits of Jurisdiction, which the Common Law it
self does allow it: And therefore though it be not fit for the general
government of the people here; it does not follow, it should be extinct, no
more, then because the Latin tongue is not the Mother or Radical Language of
any Nation in the world at this time, that therefore the English tongue should
only now be learned in this Kingdom, which were to bring in Barbarism. My
meaning therefore is not, to prefer the Civil Law before the Common Law; but
only that it should not be extinguished, and yet so bounded, (I mean to such
Courts and Causes) as have been in ancient use; As the Ecclesiastical Courts,
Court of Admiraltie, Court of Requests, and such like, reserving ever to the
Common Law to meddle with the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, either
concerning the Kings Prerogative, or the possessions of Subjects, in any
questions, either between the King, and any of them, or amongst themselves, in
the points of Meum and tuum. For it is true, that there is no Kingdom in the
world, not only Scotland, but not France, nor Spain, nor any other Kingdom
governed merely by the Civil Law, but every one of them has their own
municipall Laws agreeable to their Customs, as this Kingdom has the Common
Law: Nay, I am so far from disallowing the Common Law, as I protest, that if
it were in my hand to choose a new Law for this Kingdom, I would not only
prefer it before any other National Law, but even before the very Judicial
Law of Moses: and yet I speak no blasphemy in preferring it for conueniencie
to this Kingdom, and at this time, to the very Law of God: For God governed
his selected people by these three Laws, Ceremonial, Moral, and Judicial:
The Judicial, being only fit for a certain people, and a certain time,
which could not serve for the general of all other people and times. As for
example, If the Law of hanging for Theft, were turned here to restitution of
treble or quadruple, as it was in the Law of Moses, what would become of all
the middle Shires, and all the Irishrie and Highlanders? But the maine point
is, That if the fundamental Laws of any Kingdom should be altered, who
should discern what is Meum and tuum, or how should a King govern? It would
be like the Gregorian Calender, which destroys the old, and yet does this new
trouble all the debts and Accounts of Traffiques and Merchandises: Nay by that
account I can never tell mine own aage; for now is my Birthday removed by
the space often days nearer me then it was before the change. But upon the
other part, though I have in one point preferred our Common Law, concerning our
use to the very Law of GOD; yet in another respect I must say, both our Law and
all Laws else are far inferior to that Judicial Law of GOD; for no book
nor Law is perfect nor free from corruption, except only the book and Law of
GOD. And therefore I could wish some three things specially to be purged and
cleared in the Common Law; but always by the advice of Parliament: For the
King with his Parliament here are absolute, (as I understand) in making or
forming of any sort of Laws.

First I could wish that it were written in our vulgar Language: for now it is
in an old, mixed, and corrupt Language, only understood by Lawyers: whereas
every Subject ought to understand the Law under which he lives: For since it is
our plea against the Papists, that the language in GODS Service ought not to be
in an unknown tongue, according to the rule in the Law of Moses, That the Law
should be written in the fringes of the Priests garment, and should be
publicly read in the ears of all the people: so me thinks ought our Law to
be made as plain as can be to the people, that the excuse of ignorance may be
taken from them, for conforming themselves thereunto.

Next, our Common Law has not a settled Text in all Cases, being chiefly
grounded either upon old Customs, or else upon the Reports and Cases of
Judges, which ye call Responsa Prudentum. The like whereof is in all other
Laws: for they are much ruled by Presidents (save only in Denmark and
Norway, where the letter of the Law resolves all doubts without any trouble to
the Judge,) But though it be true, that no Text of Law can be so certain,
wherein the circumstances will not make a variation in the Case, (for in this
aage, men's wits increase so much by civility, that the circumstances of every
particular case varies so much from the general Text of Law, as in the Civil
Law it self, there are therefore so many Doctors that comment upon the Text,
and never a one almost agrees with another; Otherwise there needed no Judges,
but the bare letter of the Law.) Yet could I wish that some more certainty
were set down in this case by Parliament: for since the very Reports
themselves are not always so binding, but that diverse times Judges do
disclaim them, and recede from the judgment of their predecessors; it were
good, that upon a mature deliberation, the exposition of the Law were set down
by Act of Parliament, and such reports therein confirmed, as were thought fit
to serve for Law in all times hereafter, and so the people should not depend
upon the bare opinions of Judges, and uncertain Reports.

And lastly, there be in the Common Law diverse contrary Reports, and
Presidents: and this corruption does likewise concern the Statutes and Acts
of Parliament, in respect there are diverse cross and cuffing Statutes, and
some so penned, as they may be taken in diverse, yea contrary senses. And
therefore would I wish both those Statutes and Reports, as well in the
Parliament as Common Law, to be once maturely reuiewed, and reconciled; And
that not only all contrarieties should be scraped out of our Books, but even
that such penal Statutes as were made, but for the use of the time (from
breach whereof no man can be free) which do not now agree with the condition
of this our time, might likewise beleft out of our books, which under a
tyrannous or auaritious King could not be endured. And this reformation might
(me thinks) be made a worthy work, and well deserves a Parliament to be set
of purpose for it.

I know now that being upon this point of the Common Law, you look to hear my
opinion concerning Prohibitions; and I am not ignorant that I have been thought
to be an enemy to all Prohibitions, and an utter stayer of them: But I will
shortly now inform you what has been my course in proceeding therein. It is
true that in respect of diverse honorable Courts, and Jurisdictions planted in
this Kingdom, I have often wished that every Court had his own true limit,
and jurisdiction clearly set down, and certainly known; which if it be
exceeded by any of them, or that any of them encroch one upon another, then I
grant that a Prohibition in that case is to go out of the Kings Bench, but
chiefliest out of the Chancery; for other Benches I am not yet so well resolved
of their Jurisdiction in that point. And for my part, I was never against
Prohibitions of this nature, nor the true use of them, which is indeed to keep
every River within his own banks and channels. But when I saw the swelling and
ouerflowing of Prohibitions in a far greater abundance then ever before,
every Court striving to bring in most moulture to their own Mill, by
multitudes of Causes, which is a disease very natural to all Courts and
Jurisdictions in the world; Then dealt I with this Cause, and that at two
several times, once in the midst of Winter, and again in the midst of the
next following Summer; At every of which times I spent three whole days in
that labor. And then after a large hearing, I told them as Christ said
concerning Marriage, Ab initio non fuit sic. For as God conteins the Sea within
his own bounds and marches (as it is in the Psalms,) So is it my office to
make every Court contain himself within his own limits; And therefore I gave
admonitions to both sides: To the other Courts, that they should be careful
hereafter every of them, to contain themselves within the bounds of their own
Jurisdictions; and to the Courts of Common Law, that they should not be so
forward, and prodigal in multiplying their Prohibitions. Two cautions I willed
them to observe in granting their Prohibitions: First, that they should be
granted in a right and lawful form: And next, that they should not grant
them, but upon a just and reasonable cause. As to the form, it was, That none
should be granted by any one particular Judge, or in time of Vacation, or in
any other place, but openly in Court. And to this the Judges themselves gave
their willing assent. And as to the Cause, That they should not be granted upon
every slight furmise, or information of the party, but always that a due and
grave examination should first precede. Otherwise if Prohibitions should
rashly, and headily be granted, then no man is the more secure of his own,
though he has gotten a Sentence with him: For as good have no Law, or
Sentence, as to have no execution thereof. A poor Minister with much labor
and expense, having exhausted his poor means, and being forced to forbear
his study, and to become non resident from his flock, obtaines a Sentence,
and then when he loookes to enjoy the fruits thereof, he is defrauded of all
by a Prohibition, according to the parable of Christ, That night when he
thinks himself most happy, shall his soul be taken from him: And so is he
tortured like Tantalus, who when he has the Apple at his mouth, and that he is
gaping and opening his mouth to receive it, then must it be pulled from him by
a Prohibition, and he not suffered to taste thereof. So as to conclude this
point, I put a difference between the true use of Prohibitions, and the
superabounding abuse thereof: for as a thing which is good, ought not therefore
be abused; so ought not the lawful use of a good thing be forborne, because
of the abuse thereof.

NOw the second general ground whereof I am to speak, concerns the matter of
Grieuances: There are two special causes of the peoples presenting Grieuances
to their King in time of Parliament. First, for that the King cannot at other
times be so well informed of all the Grieuances of his people, as in time of
Parliament, which is the representative body of the whole Realm. Secondly, the
Parliament is the highest Court of Justice, and therefore the fittest place
where diverse natures of Grieuances may have their proper remedy, by the
establishment of good and wholesome Laws. But though my Speech was before
directed to the whole Body of Parliament; yet in this case I must address my
Speech in special to you of the Lower House.

I am now then to recommend unto your considerations the matter and manner of
your handling and presenting of Grieuances. As for the manner, though I will
not deny, but that ye, representing the Body of the people, may as it were
both opportune and inopportune (I mean either in Parliament as a Body, or out
of Parliament as private men) present your Grieuances unto me; yet would I
have you to use this caution in your behavior in this point: which is, that
your Grieuances be not as it were greedily sought out by you, or taken up in
the streets (as one said) thereby to show a willingness that you would have a
show made, that there are many abuses in the government, and many causes of
complaint: but that according to your first institution, ye should only meddle
with such Grieuances, as your selves do know had need of reformation, or had
informations thereof in your countries for which you serve, and not so to
multiply them, as might make it noised amongst the people, that all things in
the government were amiss and out of frame: For even at the beginning of this
very Session of Parliament, the general name of Grieuances being mentioned
among you, such a conceit came in the heads of many, that you had a desire to
multiply and make a great muster of them, as every one exhibited what his
particular spleen stirred him unto. Indeed there fell out an accident upon
this occasion, for which I have reason to thank you of the Lower house, I
mean for your fire work; wherein I confess you did Honor to me, and right
to your selves: For having one afternoon found many Grieuances closely
presented in papers, and so all thrust up in a sack together, (rather like
Pasquils, then any lawful Complaints) far against your own Orders, and
diverse of them proceeding from grudging and murmuring spirits; you, upon the
hearing read two or three of the first lines of diverse of them, were not
content with a public consent to condemn them, and to discharge any further
reading of them, but you also made a public bonefire of them. In this, I say,
you showed your care and jealousy of my Honor, and I sent you thanks for it
by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, a member of your own House, who by your
appointment, that same night acquainted me with your proceedings; And by him
also I promised at that time, that you should hear more of my thanks for the
same at the first occasion; And now I tell you it my self, that you may know
how kindly I take your duetifull behavior in this case. But since this was a
good effect of an evil cause, I must not omit also to admonish you upon the
other part, to take a course amongst your selves, to prevent the like accident
in all times hereafter: otherwise the Lower house may become a place for
Pasquils, and at another time such Grieuances may be cast in amongst you, as
may contain Treason or scandal against Me, or my Posterity. Therefore in this
case, look over your ancient Orders, and follow them, and suffer not hereafter
any petitions or Grieuances to be delivered obscurely or in the dark, but
openly and auowedly in your Public house, and there to be presented to the
Speaker. And as to the matter of your Grieuances, I wish you here now to
understand me rightly. And because I see many writing and noting, I will crave
your pardons, to hold you a little longer by speaking the more distinctly, for
fear of mistaking.

First then, I am not to find fault that you inform your selves of the
particular just Grieuances of the people; Nay, I must tell you, ye can neither
be just nor faithful to me, or to your Countries that trust and employ you, if
you do it not: For true Plaints proceed not from the persons employed, but
from the Body represented, which is the people. And it may very well be, that
many Directions and Commissions justly given forth by me, may be abused in the
Execution thereof, upon the people: and yet I never to receive information,
except it come by your means, at such a time as this is; (as in the case of
Stephen Procter.) But I would wish you to be careful to avoid three things in
the matter of Grieuances.

First, that you do not meddle with the maine points of Government; that is my
craft: tractent fabrilia sabri; to meddle with that, were to lesson me: I am
now an old King; for six and thirty years have I governed in Scotland
personally, and now have I accomplished my app^enticeship of seven years
here; and seven years is a great time for a Kings experience in Government:
Therefore there would not be too many Phormios to teach Hannibal: I must not
be taught my Office.

Secondly, I would not have you meddle with such ancient Rights of mine, as I
have received from my Predecessors, possessing them, More Maiorum: such things
I would be sorry should be accounted for Grieuances. All novelties are
dangerous as well in a politic as in a natural Body: And therefore I would
be loath to be quarrelled in my ancient Rights and possessions: for that were to
judge me unworthy of that which my Predecessors had, and left me.

And lastly, I pray you beware to exhibit for Grieuance any thing that is
established by a settled Law, and whereunto (as you have already had a proof)
you know I will never give a plausible answer: For it is an undutiful part in
Subjects to press their King, wherein they know beforehand he will refuse
them. Now, if any Law or Statute be not convenient, let it be amended by
Parliament, but in the mean time term it not a Grieuance: for to be grieved
with the Law, is to be grieved with the King, who is sworn to be the Patron
and mainteiner thereof. But as all men are flesh, and may err in the execution
of Laws; So may ye justly make a Grieuance of any abuse of the Law,
distinguishing wisely between the faults of the person, and the thing it
self. As for example, Complaints may be made unto you of the high
Commissioners: If so be, try the abuse, and spare not to complain upon it,
but say not there shall be no Commission, For that were to abridge the power
that is in me: and I will plainly tell you. That something I have with my
self resolved annent that point, which I mean ever to keep, except I see
other great cause which is, That in regard the high Commission is o^ so high a
nature, from which there is no appellation to any other Court, I have thought
good to restrain it only to the two Archbishops, where before it was common
amongst a great part of the Bishops in England. This Law I have set to my
self, and therefore you may be assured, that I will never find fault with any
man, nor think him the more Puritan, that will complain to me out of
Parliament, as well as in Parliament, of any error in execution thereof, so that
he prove it; Otherwise it were but a calumny. Only I would be loath that
any man should grieve at the Commission it self, as I have already said. Ye
have heard (I am sure) of the pains I took both in the causes of the
Admiralty, and of the Prohibitions: If any man therefore will bring me any just
complaints upon any matters of so high a nature as this is, ye may assure your
selves that I will not spare my labor in hearing it. In faith you never had a
more painful King, or that will be readier in his person to determine causes
that are fit for his hearing. And when ever any of you shall make experience of
me in this point, ye may be sure never to want access, nor ye shall never come
wrong to me, in, or out of Parliament.

And now to conclude this purpose of Grieuances, I have one general grieuance
to commend unto you, and that in the behalf of the Countries from whence ye
come. And this is, to pray you to beware that your Grieuances savor not of
particular men's thoughts, but of the general griefs rising out of the minds
of the people, and not out of the humor of the propounder. And therefore I
would wish you to take heed carefully, and consider of the party that
propounds the grieuance: for ye may (if ye list) easily discern whether it be
his own passion, or the peoples grief, that makes him to speak: for many a
man will in your house propound a Grieuance out of his own humor, because
(peradventure) he accounts highly of that matter: and yet the country that
imployes him, may perhaps either be of a contrary mind, or (at least) little
care for it. As for example, I assure you, I can very well smell between a
Petition that mooues from a general Grieuance, or such a one as comes from the
spleen of some particular person, either against Ecclesiastical government in
general, or the person of any one Noble man, or Commissioner in particular.

ANd now the third point remains to be spoken of; which is the cause of my
calling of this Parliament. And in this I have done but as I use to do in all
my life, which is to leave mine own errand hindmost.

It may be you did wonder that I did not speak unto you publicly at the
beginning of this Session of Parliament, to tell you the cause of your calling,
as I did (if I be rightly remembered) in every Session before. But the truth
is, that because I call you at this time for my particular Errand, I thought it
fitter to be opened unto you by my Treasurer, who is my public and most
principal Officer in matters of that nature, then that I should do it my
self: for I confess I am less naturally eloquent, and have greater cause to
distrust mine elocution in matters of this nature, then in any other thing. I
have made my Treasurer already to give you a very clear and true account both
of my having and expenses: A favor I confess, that Kings do seldom bestow
upon their Subjects, in making them so particularly acquainted with their
state. If I had not more then cause, you may be sure I would be loath to trouble
you: But what he has affirmed in this, upon the honor of a Gentleman, (whom
you never had cause to distrust for his honesty,) that do I now confirm and
auow to be true in the word and honor of a King; And therein you are bound to
believe me. Duty I may justly claim of you as my Subjects; and one of the
branches of duty which Subjects owe to their Sovereign, is Supply: but in
what quantity, and at what time, that must come of your loves. I am not now
therefore to dispute of a Kings power, but to tell you what I may justly crave,
and expect with your good wills. I was ever against all extremes; and in this
case I will likewise wish you to avoid them on both sides. For if you fail in
the one, I might have great cause to blame you as Parliament men, being called
by me for my Errands: And if you fall into the other extreme, by supply of my
necessities without respective care to avoid oppression or partiality in the
Levy, both I and the Country will have cause to blame you.

When I think upon the composition of this body of Parliament, I do well
consider that the Upper house is composed of the Seculer Nobility, who are
hereditary Lords of Parliament; and of Bishops, that are live Renter Barons of
the same: And therefore what is given by the Upper house, is given only from
the true body of that House; and out of their own purposes that do give it;
whereas the Lower house is but the representative body of the Commons, and so
what you give, you give it as well for others, as for your selves: and therefore
you have the more reason to eschew both the extremes. On the one part, ye may
the more easily be liberal, since it comes not all from your selves; and yet
upon the other part, if ye give more then is fit for good and loving Subjects
to yield upon such necessary occasions, ye abuse the King, and hurt the
people; And such a gift I will never accept: For in such a case you might
deceive a King, in giving your flattering consent to that which you know might
move the people generally to grudge and murmr at it, and so should the King
find himself deceived in his Caloule, and the people likewise grieved in their
hearts; the love and possession of which (I protest) I did, and ever will
account the greatest earthly security (next the favor of GOD) to any wise or
just King. For though it was vainly said by one of your House, That ye had
need to beware, that by giving me too much, your throats were not in danger of
cutting at your coming home: yet may ye assure your selves, that I will ever
be loathe to press you to do that which may wrong the people, and make you
justly to bear the blame thereof. But that ye may the better be acquainted
with my inclination, I will appeal to a number of my Privy Council here
present, if that before the calling of this Parliament, and when I found that
the necessity of my estate required so great a supply, they found me more
desirous to obtain that which I was forced to seek, then careful that the
people might yield me a supply in so great a measure as my necessities
required, without their too great loss. And you all that are Parliament men,
and here present of both Houses can bear me witness, if ever I burdened or
employed any of you for any particular Subsidies, or sums by name, further
then my laying open the particular necessities of my state, or yet if ever I
spoke to any Privy Counselor, or any of my learned Council, to labor
voices for me to this end; I ever detested the hunting for Emendicata
Suffragia. A King that will rule and govern justly, must have regard to
Conscience, Honor and Judgment, in all his great Actions, (as your self M.
Speaker remembered the other day.) And therefore ye may assure your selves, That
I ever limitall my great Actions within that compass. But as upon the one
side, I do not desire you should yield to that extreme, in giving me more
then (as I said formerly) upon such necessary occasions are fit for good and
loving Subjects to yield; For that were to give me a purse with a knife: So on
the other side, I hope you will not make vain pretenses of wants, out of
causeless apprehensions, or idle excuses, neither cloak your own humors
(when your selves are unwilling) by alleging the poverty of the people. For
although I will be no less just, as a King, to such persons, then any other:
(For my Justice with Gods grace, shall be alike open to all) yet ye must think I
have no reason to thank them, or gratify them with any suits or matters of
grace, when their errand shall come in my way; And yet no man can say, that
ever I quarrelled any man for refusing me a Subsidy, if he did it in a
moderate fashion, and with good reasons. For him that denies a good Law, I will
not spare to quarrel: But for granting or denying money, it is but an effect
of love: And therefore for the point of my necessities, I only desire that I
be not refused in that which of duty I ought to have: For I know if it were
propounded in the general amongst you, whether the Kings wants ought to be
relieved or not, there is not one of you, that would make question of it. And
though in a sort this may seem to be my particular; yet it can not be divided
from the general good of the Common wealth; For the King that is Parens
Patriae, tells you of his wants. Nay, Patria ipsa by him speaks unto you. For
if the King want, the State wants, and therefore the strengthening of the King
is the preservation and the standing of the State; And woe be to him that
diuides the weal of the King from the weal of the Kingdom. And as that King
is miserable (how rich soever he be) that raines over a poor people, (for the
hearts and riches of the people, are the Kings greatest treasure;) So is that
Kingdom not able to subsist, how rich and potent soever the people be, if
their King wants means to mainaine his State: for the means of your King are
the sinews of the kingdom both in war and peace: for in peace I must
minister justice unto you, and in war I must defend you by Arms: but neither
of these can I do without sufficient means, which must come from your Aid and
Supply. I confess it is far against my nature to be burdensome to my
people: for it cannot but grieve me to crave of others, that was borne to be
begged of. It is true, I crave more then ever King of England did; but I have
far greater and iuster cause and reason to crave, then ever King of England
had. And though my Treasurer has at length declared the reasons unto you of my
necessities, and of a large supply that he craved for the same, wherein he
omitted no arguments that can be used for that purpose; yet will I my self now
shortly remember you some of the weightiest reasons that come in my head, to
prove the equity of my demand.

First, ye all know, that by the accession of more Crowns, which in my Person
I have brought unto you, my charge must be the greater in all reason: For the
greater your King be, both in his dominion and number of Subjects, he cannot
but be forced thereby to be at the more charge, and it is the more your honor,
so to have it.

Next, that posterity and issue which it has pleased God to send me for your
use, cannot but bring necessarily with it a greater proportion of charge. You
all know that the late Queen of famous memory (notwithstanding her orbitie)
had much given unto her, and more then ever any of her predecessors had before
her.

Thirdly, the time of creation of my Son does now draw near, which I choose
for the greater honor to be done in this time of Parliament. As for him I say
no more; the sight of himself here speaks for him.

Fourthly, it is true I have spent much; but yet if I had spared any of those
things, which caused a great part of my expense, I should have dishonored the
kingdom, my self, and the late Queen. Should I have spared the funeral of
the late Queen? or the solemnity of mine and my wives entry into this
Kingdom, in some honorable sort? or should I have spared our entry into
London, or our Coronation? And when most of the Monarchs, and great Princes in
Christendom sent their Ambassadors to congratulate my coming hither, and
some of them came in person, was I not bound, both for my own honor, and the
honor of the Kingdom, to give them good entertainment? But in case it might
be objected by some, that it is only upon occasions of war, that Kings
obtain great Supplies from their Subjects: notwithstanding my interne Peace, I
am yet in a kind of war, which if it be without, the more is your safety:
For (as the Treasurer told you at large) I am now forced both in respects of
State, and my promise, and for the general cause of Religion, to send a Supply
of forces to Cleues, and how long that occasion may last, or what greater
supply the necessity of that Errand may draw me unto, no man can yet tell.
Besides that, although I have put down that form of warlike keeping of
Barwicke; yet are all those commanders my pensioners that were the late
Queens soldiers. And I hope I sustain a pretty Seminary of Soldiers in my
Forts within this Kingdom, besides the two cautionary Towns in the
Low Countries, Flushing and Brill. And as for Ireland, ye all know how
uncertain my charges are ever there, that people being so easily stirred,
partly through their barbaritie, and want of civility, and partly through
their corruption in Religion to break forth in rebellions. Ye know, how
unlooked for a Rebellion brake forth there the last year, which could not but
put me to extraordinary charges. Besides I do maintain there continually an
Army, which is a goodly Seminary of expert and old Soldiers. And I dare
never suffer the same to be diminished, till this Plantation take effect, which
(no doubt) is the greatest moate that ever came in the Rebels eyes: and it is
to be looked for, that if ever they will be able to make any stir, they will
press at it by all means, for the preventing and discouraging this
Plantation. Now it is true, that besides all these honorable and necessary
occasions of my charge, I have spent much in liberality: but yet I hope you
will consider, that what I have given, has been given amongst you; and so what
comes in from you, goes out again amongst you. But it may be thought that I
have given much amongst Scottishmen. Indeed if I had not been liberal in
rewarding some of my old servants of that Nation, ye could never have had
reason to expect my thankfulness toward any of you that are more lately
become my Subjects, if I had been ingrate to the old: And yet ye will find,
that I have dealt twice as much amongst English men as I have done to
Scottishmen. And therefore he that in your House was not ashamed to affirm,
that the silver and gold did so abound in Edinburgh, was very far mistaken;
but I wish him no worse punishment, then that he should only live upon such
profit of the money there. But I hope you will never mislike me for my
liberality, since I can look very few of you this day in the face, that have
not made suits to me, at least for some thing, either of honor or profit. It
is true, a Kings liberality must never be dried up altogether: for then he can
never maintain nor oblige his servants and well deserving Subjects: But that
vastness of my expense is past, which I used the first two or three years
after my coming hither: And, as I often used to say, that Christmas and open
tide is ended: For at my first coming here, partly ignorance of this State
(which no man can acquire but by time and experience) and partly the form of
my coming being so honorable and miraculous, enforced me to extend my
liberality so much the more at the beginning. Ye saw I made Knights then by
hundreths, and Barons in great numbers: but I hope you find I do not so now,
nor mind not to do so hereafter. For to conclude this point anent expenses, I
hold that a Kings expense must always be honorable, though not wastefull,
and the charges of your King in maintaining those ancient honorable forms of
living that the former Kings of England my Predecessors have done, and his
living to be ruled according to the proportion of his greatness, is as well
for the honor of your Kingdom, as of your King. Now this cannot be supplied
out of the air or liquid elements, but must come from the people. And for
removing of that diffidence which men may have, that I mind not to live in any
wastefull sort hereafter, will you but look upon my self and my posterity;
and if there were no more but that, it will teach you that if I were but a
natural man, I must needs be careful of my expenses: For as for my own
person, I hope none that knows me well, can think me but as little inclined
to any prodigal humors of unnecessary things, as any other reasonable man of
a far meaner estate. Therefore since (as I have said) I cannot be helped but
from the people; I assure my self that you will well allow me such measure of
Supply, as the people may bear, and support him with more Honorable means
then others have had, that (as I may say without vaunting) has brought you
more Honor then ever you had: For I hope there are no good Subjects either
within, or out of the Parliament House, that would not be content for setting
straight once and settling the Honorable State of their King, to spare so much
every one of them out of their purses, which peradventure they would in one
night throw away at Dice or Cards, or bestow upon a horse for their fancies,
that might break his neck or his leg the next morning: Nay I am sure every
good Subject would rather choose to live more sparingly upon his own, then that
his Kings State should be in want.

For conclusion then of this purpose, I wish you now to put a speedy end to
your business. Freeness in giving graceth the gift, Bis dat, qui cito dat;
The longer I want help, the greater will my debt still rise: and so must I
look for the greater helps. And now I would pray you to turn your eyes with
me from home, and look upon foreign States. Consider that the eyes of all
foreign States are upon this affair, and in expectation what the success
thereof will be; And what can they think, if ye depart without relieuing me
in that proportion that may make me able to maintain my State, but that either
ye are unwilling to help me, thinking me unworthy thereof, or at least that
my State is so desperate, as it cannot be repaired, and so that the Parliament
parts in disgrace with the King, and the King in distaste with the Parliament,
which cannot but weaken my reputation both at home and abroad? For of this you
may be assured, that foreign Princes care the more one for an other, if they
may have reason to expect that they may be able to do them good or harm in
Retribution. And ye know, that if a King fall to be contemned with his
neighbors, that cannot but bring an oppression and war by them upon him, and
then will it be too late to support the King, when the cure is almost
desperate. Things foreseen and prevented, are ever easliest remedied: And
therefore I would advise you now so to settle your business, as ye may not
take in hand so many things at once, as may both cross my errand, and every
one of them cross another. Ye remember the French Proverb, Qui trop
embrasse, rien estreint; We are not in this Parliament to make our Testament,
as if we should never meet again, and that all things that were to be done
in any Parliament, were to be done at this time: and yet for filling up of your
vacant hours, I will recommend to your consideration such nature of things, as
are to be specially thought upon in these times. First I will begin at GOD:
for the beginning with him makes all other actions to be blessed: And this I
mean by the cause of Religion. Next I will speak of some things that concern
the Commonwealth. And thirdly, matters of Pleasure and ornament to the
Kingdom.

As for Religion, we have all great cause to take heed unto it; Papists are
waxed as proud at this time as ever they were, which makes many to think they
have some new plotin hand. And although the poorest sort of them be (God be
thanked) much decreased, yet does the greater sort of them daily increase,
especially among the foeminine Sex; nay they are waxed so proud, that some
say, no man dare present them, nor Judges meddle with them, they are so backed
and vpholden by diverse great Courtiers. It is a surer and better way to remove
the materials of fire before they be kindled, then to quench the fire when
once it is kindled.

Nam leuius laedit quicquid praeuidimus ante. I do not mean by this to move
you to make stronger Laws then are already made, but see those Laws may be
well executed that are in force; otherwise they cannot but fall into contempt
and become rustie. I never found, that blood and too much severity did good in
matters of Religion: for, besides that it is a sure rule in Divinity, that God
never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed, natural reason may
even persuade us, and daily experience proves it true, That when men are
severely persecuted for Religion, the gallantnesse of many men's spirits, and
the wilfulnes of their humors, rather then the justness of the cause, makes
them to take a pride boldy to endure any torments, or death it self, to gain
thereby the reputatiom of Martyrdom, though but in a false shadow.

Some doubts have been conceived anent the using of the Oath of Allegiance,
and that part of the Act which ordaines the taking thereof, is thought so
obscure, that no man can tell who ought to be pressed therewith. For I my
self, when upon a time I called the Judges before me at their going to their
Circuits, I moved this question unto them; wherein, as I thought they could
not resolutely answer me: And therefore if there be any scruple touching the
ministering of it, I would wish it now to be cleared. And since I have with my
own pen brought the Popes quarrel upon me, and proclaimed public defiance
to Babylon in maintaining it; should it now sleep, and should I seem (as it
were) to steal from it again?

As for Recusants, let them be all duly presented without exception: for in
times past there has been too great a conniuence, and forbearing of them,
especially of great men's wives, and their kin and followers. None ought to be
spared from being brought under the danger of Law, and then it is my part to
use mercy, as I think convenient. To wink at faults, and not to suffer them
to be discovered, is no Honor, nor Mercy in a King, neither is he ever
thanked for it; It only argues his dullness: But to forgive faults after they
are confessed, or tried, is Mercy. And now I must turn me in this case to
you, my Lords the Bishops, and even exhort you earnestly, to be more careful,
then you have been, that your Officers may more duly present Recusants, then
heretofore they have done, without exception of persons; That althought it must
be the work of GOD that must make their minds to be altered, yet at least by
this course they may be stayed from increasing, or insulting upon us.

And that ye all may know the truth of my heart in this case, I divide all my
Subjects that are Papists, into two ranks: either old Papists, that were so
brought up in times of Popery, like old Queen Mary Priests, and those, that
though they be younger in years, yet have never drunk in other milk, but
been still nusled in that blindness: Or else such as do become Apostats;
having once been of our Profession, and have forsaken the truth, either upon
discontent, or practice, or else upon a light vain humor of Novelty, making
no more scruple to seek out new forms of Religion, then if it were but a new
form of Garment, or a new cut or courtsey after the French fashion.

For the former sort, I pity them; but if they be good and quiet Subjects, I
hate not their persons; and if I were a private man, I could well keep a
civil friendship and conversation with some of them: But as for those
Apostates, who, I know, must be greatest haters of their own Sect, I confess
I can never show any favorable countenance toward them, and they may all of
them be sure without exception, that they shall never find any more favor of
me, further then I must needs in Justice afford them. And these would I have
the Law to strike seuereliest upon, and you carefullest to discover. Ye know
there has been great stir kept for begging Concealements these years past;
and I pray you, let me beg this concealment both of the Bishops, and
Judges, That Papists be no longer concealed.

Next, as concerning the Common wealth, I do specially recommend unto you the
framing of some new Statute for preservation of woods. In the end of the last
Session of Parliament, ye had a Bill amongst you of that subject; but because
you found some faults therein, you cast out the whole Bil: But I could have
rather wished that ye had either mended it, or made a new one; For to cast out
the whole Bill because of some faults, was even as if a man, that had a new
garment brought him, would choose rather to go naked, then have his garment made
fit for him: But on my conscience, I cannot imagine why you should so lightly
have esteemed a thing, so necessary for the Common wealth, if it were not out
of a little frowardness amongst you at that time, that what I then recommended
earnestly unto you, it was the worse liked of. The maintenance of woods is a
thing so necessary for this Kingdom, as it cannot stand, nor be a Kingdom
without it: For it concerns you both in your Esse, Been esse, and in
pleasures. Your Esse: for without it you want the use of one of the most
necessary Elements (which is Fire and fuel to dress your meat with; for
neither can the people live in these cold Countries, if they want fire
altogether, nor yet can you dress your meat without it; and I think you will
ill live like the Cannibals upon raw flesh: for the education of this people is
far from that. As to your been esse; The decay of woods will necessarily
bring the decay of Shipping, which both is the security of this Kingdom, since
God has by nature made the Sea to be the wall of this Island; and the rather
now, since God has united it all in my Person and Crown; As also by the decay
of Shipping will you loose both all your foreign commodities that are fit for
this country, and the venting of our own, which is the loss of Trade, that
is a maine pillar of this kingdom. And as for Pleasure, ye know my delight in
Hunting and Hawking, and many of your selves are of the same mind; and all
this must needs decay, by the decay of Woods: Ye have reason therefore to
provide a good Law upon this Subject.

Now as to the last point concerning matters of Pleasure, it consists in the
preserving of Game, which is now almost utterly destroyed through all the
Kingdom. And if you offer not now a better Law for this, then was made in the
last Session of Parliament, I will never thank you for it: For as for your Law
anent Partridge and Phesant, you have given leave to every man how poor a
Farmour that ever he be, to take and destroy them in his own ground how he
list. But I pray you, how can the Game be maintained, if Gentlemen that have
great Lordships shall breed and preserve them there, and so soon as ever they
shall but fly over the hedge and light in a poor fellows Close, they shall
all be destroyed? Surely I know no remedy for preserving the Game that breeds
in my grounds, except I cast a roof over all the ground, or else put veruels
to the Partridges feet with my Arms upon them, as my Hawks have: otherwise I
know not how they shall be known to be the Kings Partridges, when they light
in a Farmours Close.

And by your Law against stealing of Dear or Conies, after a long discourse
and prohibition of stealing them, you conclude in the end with a restriction,
that all this punishment shall be understood to be used against them that
steal the Game in the night: Which has much encouraged all the looser sort of
people, that it is no fault to steal Dear, so they do it not like thieves in
the night. As was that Law of the Lacedaemonians against theft, that did not
forbid theft, but only taught them to do it cunningly, and without
discovery: Whereupon a foolish boy suffered a Fox to gnaw his heart through
his breast. And this doctrine is like that Lesson of the Cannon Law, Si non
cast, tamen caute. I know you think that I speak partially in this case
like a Hunter; But there is never a one of you that hears me, that cares the
least for the sport, for preservation of the Game, but he would be as glad to
have a pastie of Venison if you might get it, as the best Hunter would: And if
the Game be not preserved, you can eat no Venison. As for Partridge and
Phesant, I do not deny that Gentlemen should have their sport, and specially
upon their own ground. But first I do not think such Game and pleasures
should be free to base people. And next I would even wish that Gentlemen should
use it in a Gentlemanlike fashion, and not with Nets, or Gunnes, or such other
vngentlemanlike fashions that serve but for utter destruction of all Game, nor
yet to kill them at unseasonable times, as to kill the Phesant and Partridges
when they are no bigger then Mice, when as for every one their Hawks kill, ten
will be destroyed with their Dogs and Horse feet; besides the great and
intolerable harm they do to Corn in that season.

And now in the end of all this faschious Speech, I must conclude like a Gray
Friar, in speaking for my self at last. At the beginning of this Session of
Parliament, when the Treasourer opened my necessities unto you, then my Purse
only labored; But now that word is spread both at home and abroad of the
demands I have made unto you; my Reputation labors aswellas my Purse: For
if you part without the repairing of my State in some reasonable sort, what can
the world think, but that the evil will my Subjects bear unto me, has bred
a refuse? And ye can never part so, without apprehending that I am distasted
with your behavior, and yet to be in fear of my displeasure. But I assure and
promise my self far otherwise.

THus have I now performed my promise, in presenting unto you the Crystal of
your Kings heart.

Ye know that principally by three ways ye may wrong a Mirror.

Frst, I pray you, look not upon my Mirror with a false light: which ye do,
if ye mistake, or mis-vnderstand my Speech, and so alter the sense thereof.

But secondly, I pray you beware to soil it with a foul breath, and unclean
hands: I mean, that ye pervert not my words by any corrupt affections,
turning them to an ill meaning, like one, who when he hears the tolling of a
Bell, fancies to himself, that it speaks those words which are most in his
mind.

And lastly, (which is worst of all) beware to let it fall or break; (for
glass is brittle) which ye do, if ye lightly esteem it, and by contemning
it, conform not your selves to my persuasions.

To conclude then: As all these three days of Iubile have fallen in the midst
of this season of penitence, wherein you have presented your thanks to me, and
I the like again to you: So do I wish and hope, that the end of this
Parliament will be such, as we may all have cause (both I your Head, and ye
the Body) to join in Eucharisticke Thanks and Praises unto God, for our so
good and happy an end.

A SPEECH IN THE STAR CHAMBER, THE XX. OF JUNE. ANNO 1616.
GIVE THY IVDGEMENTS TO THE KING, O GOD, AND THY RIGHTEOUSNESS TO THE KINGS
SON.

These be the first words of one of the Psalms of the Kingly Prophet David,
whereof the literal sense runs upon him, and his son Solomon, and the
mystical sense upon GOD and CHRIST his eternal Son: but they are both so
wouen together, as some parts are, and can only be properly applied unto GOD
and CHRIST, and other parts unto David and Solomon, as this Verse, Give thy
Judgments to the King, O God, and thy Righteousness to the Kings Son,
cannot be properly spoken of any, but of David and his son; because it is
said, Give thy Judgments, etc. Now God cannot give to himself. In another
part of the same Psalm, where it is said, that Righteousness shall flourish,
and abundance of Peace, as long as the Moon endures, it signifies eternity,
and cannot be properly applied but to GOD and CHRIST: But both senses, as well
literal as mystical, serve to Kings for imitation, and especially to
Christian Kings: for Kings sit in the Throne of GOD, and they themselves are
called Gods.

And therefore all good Kings in their government, must imitate GOD and his
Christ, in being just and righteous; David and Solomon, in being godly and
wise: To be wise, is understood, able to discern, able to judge others: To be
godly is, that the fountain be pure whence the streams proceed: for what
auailes it though all his works be godly, if they proceed not from godliness:
To be righteous, is to a man's self: To be just, is toward others. But
Justice in a King auailes not, unless it be with a clean heart: for except he
be Righteous as well as Just, he is no good King; and whatsoever justice he
does; except he does it for Justice sake, and out of the pureness of his
own heart, neither from private ends, vainglory, or any other by-respects of
his own, all such Justice is unrighteousness, and no true Justice. From this
imitation of GOD and CHRIST, in whose Throne we sit, the government of all
Commonwealths, and especially Monarchies, has been from the beginning settled
and established. Kings are properly Judges, and Judgment properly belongs to
them from GOD: for Kings sit in the Throne of GOD, and thence all Judgment is
derived.

In all well settled Monarchies, where Law is established formerly and orderly,
there Judgment is deferred from the King to his subordinate Magistrates; not
that the King takes it from himself, but gives it unto them: So it comes not
to them Privative, but cumulatiue, as the Shoolemen speak. The ground is
ancient, ever sithence that Counsel which Iethro gave to Moses: for after that
Moses had governed a long time, in his own person, the burden grew so great,
having none to help him, as his father in law coming to visit him, found him
so cumbred with ministering of Justice, that neither the people were satisfied,
nor he well able to perform it; Therefore by his advice, Judges were deputed
for easier questions, and the greater and more profound were left to Moses: And
according to this establishment; all Kings that have had a formal government,
especially Christian Kings in all aages have governed their people, though
after a diverse manner.

This Deputation is after one manner in France, after another here, and even my
own Kingdoms differ in this point of government: for Scotland differs both
from France and England herein; but all agree in this, (I speak of such
Kingdoms or States where the formalitie of Law has place) that the King that
sits in Gods Throne, only deputes subalterne Judges, and he deputes not one
but a number (for no one subalterne Judges mouth makes Law) and their office is
to interpret Law, and administer Justice. But as to the number of them, the
form of government, the manner of interpretation, the distinction of Benches,
the diversity of Courts; these vary according to the variety of government,
and institution of diverse Kings: So this ground I lay, that the seat of
Judgment is properly Gods, and Kings are Gods Vicegerents; and by Kings Judges
are deputed under them, to bear the burden of government, according to the
first example of Moses by the advice of Iethro, and sithence practiced by David
and Solomon, the wisest Kings that ever were; which is in this Psalm so
interlaced, that as the first verse cannot be applied properly but to David and
Solomon, in the words, Give thy Judgments to the King, etc. So the other place
in the same Psalm, Righteousness shall flourish, and abundance of peace shall
remain as long as the Moon endures, properly signifies the eternity of
CHRIST. This I speak, to show what a near conjunction there is between God
and the King upward, and the King and his Judges downwards: for the same
conjunction that is between God and the King upward; the same conjunction is
between the King and his Judges downwards.

As Kings borrow their power from God, so Judges from Kings: And as Kings are
to account to God, so Judges unto God and Kings; and both Kings and Judges by
imitation, have two qualities from God and his Christ, and two qualities from
David and his Solomon: Judgment and Righteousness, from God and Christ:
Godliness and Wisdom from David and Solomon. And as no King can discharge
his account to God, unless he make conscience not to alter, but to declare and
establish the will of God: So Judges cannot discharge their accounts to Kings,
unless they take the like care, not to take upon them to make Law, but joined
together after a deliberate consultation, to declare what the Law is; For as
Kings are subject unto Gods Law, so they to man's Law. It is the Kings Office to
protect and settle the true interpretation of the Law of God within his
Dominions: And it is the Judges Office to interpret the Law of the King,
whereto themselves are also subject.

Having now performed this ancient Proverb, A Jove principium; which though
it was spoken by a Pagan, yet it is good and holy: I am now to come to my
particular Errand, for which I am here this day; wherein I must handle two
parts: First, the reason why I have not these fourteen years, sithence my
Coronation until now, satisfied a great many of my loving subjects, who I know
have had a great expectation, and as it were a longing, like them that are with
child, to hear me speak in this place, where my Predecessors have often
sitten, and especially King Henry the seventh, from whom, as diverse ways
before, I am lineally descended, and that doubly to this Crown; and as I am
nearest descended of him, so do I desire to follow him in his best actions.

The next part is the reason, Why I am now come: The cause that made me
abstain, was this: When I came into England, although I was an old King, past
middle aage, and practiced in government ever sithence I was twelve years
old; yet being here a stranger in government, though not in blood, because
my breeding was in another Kingdom; I resolved therefore with Pythagoras to
keep silence seven years, and learn my self the Laws of this Kingdom,
before I would take upon me to teach them unto others: When this Apprentiship
was ended, then another impediment came, which was in the choice of that cause,
that should first bring me hither. I expected some great cause to make my first
entry upon: For I thought that having abstained so long, it should be a worthy
matter that should bring me hither. Now every cause must be great or small: In
small causes I thought it disgraceful to come, having been so long absent: In
great causes, they must be either betwixt the King and some of his Subjects, or
betwixt Subject and Subject.

In a cause where my self was concerned, I was loath to come, because men
should not think I did come for my own private, either Prerogative or profit;
or for any other by-respect: And in that case I will always abide the trial
of men and Angels, never to have had any particular end, in that which is the
Maine of all things, Justice.

In a great cause also between party and party, great in respect either of
the question, or value of the thing, my coming might seem, as it were
obliquely, to be in favor of one party, and for that cause this Counselor,
or that Courtier might be thought to move me to come hither; And a mean cause
was not worthy of me, especially for my first entrance: So lack of choice in
both respects kept me off till now: And now having passed a double
apprentiship of twice seven years, I am come hither to speak unto you. And
next as to the reasons of my coming at this time, they are these.

I have observed in the time of my whole Reign here, and my double
Apprentiship, diverse things fallen out in the Iudicatures here at Westminster
Hall, that I thought required and urged a reformation at my hands; whereupon I
resolved with my self, that I could not more fitly begin a reformation, then
here to make an open declaration of my meaning. I remember Christ's saying, My
sheep hear my voice, and so I assure my self, my people will most willingly
hear the voice of me, their own Shepherd and King; whereupon I took this
occasion in mine own person here in this Seat of Judgment, not iudicially,
but declaratorily and openly to give those directions, which, at other times,
by piece-meale, I have delivered to some of you in diverse less public places;
but now will put it up in all your audience, where I hope it shall be trewly
carried, and cannot be mistaken, as it might have been when it was spoken more
privately: I will for order sake take me to the method of the number of
Three, the number of perfection, and upon that number distribute all I have to
declare to you.

FIrst, I am to give a charge to my self: for a King, or Judge under a King,
that first gives not a good charge to himself, will never be able to give a
good charge to his inferiors; for as I have said, Good rivers cannot flow but
from good springs; if the fountain be impure, so must the rivers be.

Secondly, to the Judges: And thirdly, to the Auditory, and the rest of the
inferior ministers of Justice.

First, I protest to you all, in all your audience, here sitting in the seat
of Justice, belonging unto GOD, and now by right fallen unto me, that I have
resolved, as Confirmation in Maioritie follows Baptism in minority; so now
after many years, to renew my promise and Oath made at my Coronation
concerning Justice, and the promise therein for maintenance of the Law of the
Land. And I protest in GODS presence, my care has ever been to keep my
conscience clear in all the points of my Oath, taken at my Coronation, so
far as humane frailty may permit me, or my knowledge inform me, I speak
in point of Justice and Law; For Religion, I hope I am reasonably well known
already: I mean therefore of Law and Justice; and for Law, I mean the Common
Law of the Land, according to which the King gouernes, and by which the people
are governed. For the Common Law, you can all bear me witness, I never
pressed alteration of it in Parliament; but on the contrary, when I endeavored
most an Union real, as was already in my person, my desire was to conform the
Laws of Scotland to the Law of England, and not the Law of England to the Law
of Scotland; and so the prophecy to be true of my wise Grandfather Henry the
seventh, who foretold that the lesser Kingdom by marriage, would follow the
greater, and not the greater the lesser; And therefore married his eldest
daughter Margaret to James the fourth, my great Grandfather.

It was a foolish Querke of some Judges, who held that the Parliament of
England, could not unite Scotland and England by the name of Great Britain,
but that it would make an alteration of the Laws, though I am since come to
that knowledge, that an Act of Parliament can do greater wonders: And that
old wise man the Treasourer Burghley was wont to say, He knew not what an Act
of Parliament could not do in England; For my intention was always to effect
union by uniting Scotland to England, and not England to Scotland: For I ever
meant, being ever resolved, that this Law should continue in this Kingdom, and
two things moved me thereunto; One is, that in matter of Policy and State,
you shall never see any thing anciently and maturely established, but by
Innovation or alteration it is worse then it was, I mean not by purging of it
from corruptions, and restoring it to the ancient integrity; Another reason
was, I was sworn to maintain the Law of the Land, and therefore I had been
perjured if I had altered it; And this I speak to root out the conceit and
misapprehension, if it be in any heart, that I would change, damnifie, vilify
or suppress the Law of this Land: GOD is my Judge I never meant it; And this
confirmation I make before you all.

To this I join the point of Justice, which I call Vnicuique suum tribuere.
All my Council, and Judges dead and alive, can, and could bear me witness,
how impartial I have been in declaring of Law. And where it has concerned
me in my own inheritance, I have as willingly submitted my interest to the
Law, as any my Subjects could do; and it becomes me so to do, to give
example to others: much less then will I be partial to others, where I am not
to my self. And so resolve your selves, Justice with me may be moderated in
point of clemency: for no Justice can be without mercy. But in matters of
Justice to give every man his own, to be blind without eyes of partiality;
This is my full resolution.

I used to say when I was in Scotland, if any man moved me to delay Justice,
that it was against the Office of a King so to do; But when any made suite to
hasten Justice, I told them I had rather grant forty of these suits, then one
of the other: This was always my custom and shall be ever, with Gods leave.

Now what I have spoken of Law and Justice, I mean by the Law kept in her
own bounds: For I understand the inheritance of the King, and Subjects in this
land, must be determined by the Common Law, etc; and that is, by the Law set
down in our forefathers time, expounded by learned men diverse times after in
the declaratory Comments, called Responsa Prudentum; Or else by Statute Law set
down by Act of Parliament, as occasion serves: By this I do not seclude all
other Laws of England; but this is the Law of inheritance in this Kingdom.

There is another Law, of all Laws free and supreme, which is GODS LAW: And
by this all Common and municipall Laws must be governed: And except they have
dependence upon this Law, they are unjust and unlawful.

When I speak of that Law, I only give this touch, That that Law in this
Kingdom has been too much neglected, and Churchmen too much had in contempt;
I must speak truth, Great men, Lords, Judges, and people of all degrees from
the highest to the lowest, have too much contemned them: And God will not
bless us in our own Laws, if we do not reverence and obey GODS LAW; which
cannot be, except the interpreters of it be respected and reverenced.

And it is a sign of the latter days drawing on; even the contempt of the
Church, and of the Governors and Teachers thereof now in the Church of
ENGLAND, which I say in my Conscience, of any Church that ever I read or knew
of, present or past, is most pure, and nearest the Primitive and Apostolical
Church in Doctrine and Discipline, and is sureliest founded upon the word of
God, of any Church in Christendom.

Next unto this Law is the Law of Nations, which God forbid should be barred,
and that for two causes: One, because it is a Law to satisfy Strangers, which
will not so well hold themselves satisfied with other municipall Laws:
Another, to satisfy our own Subjects in matters of Piracie, Marriage, Wills,
and things of like nature: That Law I divide into Civil and Canon; And this Law
has been so much encroched upon, sithence my coming to the Crown, and so had
in contempt, that young men are discouraged from studying, and the rest weary
of their lives that do profess it, and would be glad to seek any other craft.

So, speaking of the Common Law, I mean the Common Law kept within her own
limits, and not derogating from these other Laws, which by longer custom have
been rooted here; first, the Law of GOD and his Church; and next, the Law
Civil and Canon, which in many cases cannot be wanting.

To conclude this charge which I give my self, I profess to maintain all the
points of mine Oath, especially in Laws, and of Laws, especially the Common
Law.

And as to maintain it, so to purge it; for else it cannot be maintained: and
especially to purge it from two corruptions, Incertaintie and Novelty:
Incertaintie is found in the Law it self, wherein I will be painful to
clear it to the people; and this is properly to be done in Parliament by
advice of the Judges.

The other corruption is introduced by the Judges themselves, by Nicities that
are used, where it may be said, Ab initio non fuit sic.

Nothing in the world is more likely to be permanent to our eyes then iron or
steel, yet the rust corrupts it, if it be not kept clean: which shows,
nothing is permanent here in this world, if it be not purged; So I cannot
discharge my conscience in maintaining the Laws, if I keep them not clean
from corruption.

And now that I may be like the Pastor, that first takes the Sacrament
himself, and then gives it to the people: So I have first taken my own charge
upon me, before I give you your Charge, lest it might be said, Turpe est
doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

NOw my Lords the Judges for your parts, the Charge I have to give you,
consists likewise in three parts.

First in general, that you do Justice uprightly, as you shall answer to GOD
and me: For as I have only GOD to answer to, and to expect punishment at his
hands, if I offend; So you are to answer both to GOD and to me, and expect
punishment at GODS hands and mine, if you be found in fault.

Secondly, to do Justice indifferently between Subject and Subject, between
King and Subject, without delay, partiality, fear or bribery, with stout and
upright hearts, with clean and vncorrupt hands.

When I bid you do Justice boldly, yet I bid you do it fearfully; fearfully
in this, to utter your own conceits, and not the true meaning of the Law: And
remember you are no makers of Law, but Interpretours of Law, according to the
true sense thereof; for your Office is Ius dicere, and not Ius dare: And that
you are so far from making Law, that even in the higher house of Parliament,
you have no voice in making of a Law, but only to give your advice when you are
required.

And though the Laws be in many places obscure, and not so well known to the
multitude as to you; and that there are many parts that come not into ordinary
practice, which are known to you, because you can find out the reason thereof
by books and presidents; yet know this, that your interpretations must be
always subject to common sense and reason.

For I will never trust any Interpretation, that agrees not with my common
sense and reason, and true Logic: for Ratio est anima Legis in all humane
Laws, without exception; it must not be Sophistry or strains of wit that
must interpret, but either clear Law, or solid reason.

But in Countries where the formalitie of Law has no place, as in Denmark,
which I may trewly report, as having my self been an eyewitness thereof;
all their State is governed only by a written Law; there is no Advocate or
Proctour admitted to plead, only the parties themselves plead their own
cause, and then a man stands up and reads the Law, and there is an end, for the
very Law-booke it self is their only Judge. Happy were all Kingdoms if they
could be so: But here, curious wits, various conceits, different actions, and
variety of examples breed questions in Law: And therefore when you hear the
questions if they be plain, there is a plain way in it self; if they be such
as are not plain (for men's inventions daily abound) then are you to interpret
according to common sense, and draw a good and certain Minor of natural
reason, out of the Mayor of direct Law, and thereupon to make a right and true
Conclusion.

For though the Common Law be a mystery and skill best known unto your selves,
yet if your interpretation be such, as other men which have Logic and common
sense understand not the reason, I will never trust such an Interpretation.

Remember also you are Judges, and not a Judge; and divided into Benches, which
shows that what you do, that you should do with advice and deliberation,
not hastily and rashly, before you well study the case, and confer together;
debating it duly, not giving single opinions, per emendicata suffragia; and so
to give your Judgment, as you will answer to God and me.

Now having spoken of your Office in general, I am next to come to the limits
wherein you are to bound yourselues, which likewise are three. First, Incroach
not upon the Prerogative of the Crown: If there fall out a question that
concerns my Prerogative or mystery of State, deal not with it, till you
consult with the King or his Council, or both: for they are transcendent
matters, and must not be sliberely carried with ouer-rash wilfulness; for so
may you wound the King through the sides of a private person: and this I
commend unto your special care, as some of you of late have done very well, to
blunt the sharp edge and vain popular humor of some Lawyers at the Bar,
that think they are not eloquent and bold spirited enough, except they meddle
with the Kings Prerogative: But do not you suffer this; for certainly if this
liberty be suffered, the Kings Prerogative, the Crown, and I, shall be as
much wounded by their pleading, as if you resolved what they disputed: That
which concerns the mystery of the Kings power, is not lawful to be disputed;
for that is to wade into the weakness of Princes, and to take away the
mystical reverence, that belongs unto them that sit in the Throne of God.

Secondly, That you keep yourselues within your own Benches, not to invade
other Jurisdictions, which is unfit, and an unlawful thing; In this I must
enlarge my self. Besides the Courts of Common Law, there is the Court of
Requests; the Admiraltie Court; the Court of the President and Council of
Walls, the President and Council of the North; High Commission Courts, every
Bishop in his own Court.

These Courts ought to keep their own limits and bounds of their Commission
and Instructions, according to the ancient Presidents: And like as I declare
that my pleasure is, that every of these shall keep their own limits and
bounds; So the Courts of Common Law are not to encroach upon them, no more
then it is my pleasure that they should encroach upon the Common Law. And this
is a thing Regal and proper to a King, to keep every Court within his own
bounds.

In Westminster Hall there are four Courts: Two that handle causes Civil,
which are the Common Pleas, and the Exchequer: Two that determine causes
Criminal, which are the King's Bench, and the Star Chamber, where now I sit.
The Common Pleas is a part and branch of the King's Bench; for it was first all
one Court; and then the Common Pleas being extracted, it was called
Common Pleas; because it meddled with the Pleas of Private persons, and that
which remained, the King's Bench. The other of the Courts for civil Causes, is
the Exchequer, which was ordained for the Kings Reuenew: That is the principal
Institution of that Court, and ought to be their chief study; and as other
things come orderly thither by occasion of the former, they may be handled, and
Justice there administered.

Keep you therefore all in your own bounds, and for my part, I desire you to
give me no more right in my private Prerogative, then you give to any Subject;
and therein I will be acquiescent: As for the absolute Prerogative of the
Crown, that is no Subject for the tongue of a Lawyer, nor is lawful to be
disputed.

It is Athiesme and blasphemy to dispute what God can do: good Christians
content themselves with his will revealed in his word. so, it is presumption
and high contempt in a Subject, to dispute what a King can do, or say that a
King cannot do this, or that; but rest in that which is the Kings revealed
will in his Law.

The King's Bench is the principal Court for criminal causes, and in some
respects it deals with Civil causes.

Then is there a Chancerie Court; this is a Court of Equity, and has power to
deal likewise in Civil causes: It is called the dispenser of the Kings
Conscience, following always the intention of Law and Justice; not altering
the Law, not making that black which other Courts made white, nor e conuerso;
But in this it exceeds other Courts, mixing Mercy with Justice, where other
Courts proceed only according to the strict rules of Law: And where the rigor
of the Law in many cases will undo a Subject, there the Chancerie tempers the
Law with equity, and so mixeth Mercy with Justice, as it preserues men from
destruction.

And thus (as before I told you) is the Kings Throne established by Mercy and
Justice.

The Chancerie is vndependant of any other Court, and is only under the King:
There it is written Test meipso; from that Court there is no Appeal. And as I
am bound in my Conscience to maintain every Courts Jurisdiction, so especially
this, and not suffer it to sustain wrong; yet so to maintain it, as to keep
it within the own limits, and free from corruption. My Chancellor that now
is, I found him Keeper of the Seal, the same place in substance, although I
gave him the Style of Chancellor, and God has kept him in it till now; and I
pray God he may hold it long; and so I hope he will. He will bear me
witness, I never gave him other warrant, then to go on in his Court according
to Presidents, warranted by Law in the time of the best governing Kings, and
most learned Chancellours: These were the limits I gave unto him; beyond the
same limits he has promised me he will never go.

And as he has promised me to take no other Jurisdiction to himself, so is it
my promise ever to maintain this Jurisdiction in that Court: Therefore I
speak this to vindicate that Court from misconceipt and contempt.

It is the duty of Judges to punish those that seek to deprave the
proceedings of any the Kings Courts, and not to encourage them any way: And I
must confess I thought it an odious and inept speech, and it grieved me very
much, that it should be said in Westminster Hall, that a Praemunire lay against
the Court of the Chancery and Officers there: How can the King grant a
Praemunire against himself?

It was a foolish, inept, and presumptuous attempt, and fitter for the time of
some unworthy King: understand me aright; I mean not, the Chancerie should
exceed his limite; but on the other part; the King only is to correct it, and
none else: And therefore I was greatly abused in that attempt: For if any was
wronged there, the complaint should have come to me. None of you but will
confess you have a King of reasonable understanding, and willing to reform;
why then should you spare to complain to me, that being the high way, and not
go the other way, and backe-way, in contempt of our Authority?

And therefore sitting here in a seat of Judgment, I declare and command,
that no man hereafter presume to sue a Praemunire against the Chancery; which I
may the more easily do, because no Praemunire can be sued but at my Suit: And
I may justly bar my self at mine own pleasure.

As all inundations come with ouerflowing the banks, and never come without
great inconvenience, and are thought prodigious by Astrologers in things to
come: So is this ouerflowing the banks of your Jurisdiction in it self
inconvenient, and may prove prodigious to the State.

Remember therefore, that hereafter you keep within your limits and
Jurisdictions. It is a special point of my Office to procure and command, that
amongst Courts there be a concordance, and musical accord; and it is your
parts to obey, and see this kept: And, as you are to observe the ancient Laws
and customs of England; so are you to keep your selves within the bound of
direct Law, or Presidents; and of those, not every snatched President, carped
now here, now there, as it were running by the way; but such as have never
been controuerted, but by the contrary, approved by common usage, in times of
best Kings, and by most learned Judges.

The Star Chamber Court has been likewise shaken of late, and the last year
it had received a sore blow, if it had not been assisted and carried by a few
voices; The very name of Star Chamber, seems to procure a reverence to the
Court.

I will not play the Critic to descant on the name; It has a name from
heaven, a Star placed in it; and a Star is a glorious creature, and seated
in a glorious place, next unto the Angels. The Star Chamber is also glorious
in substance: for in the composition, it is of four sorts of persons: The
first two are Privy Counselors and Judges, the one by wisdom in matters of
State; the other, by learning in matters of Law, to direct and order all things
both according to Law and State: The other two sorts are Peers of the Realm,
and Bishops: The Peers are there by reason of their greatness, to give
authority to that Court: The Bishops because of their learning in Divinity,
and the interest they have in the good government of the Church: And so, both
the learning of both Divine and humane Law, and experience and practice in
Government, are conjoined together in the proceedings of this Court.

There is no Kingdom but has a Court of Equity, either by it self, as is
here in England, or else mixed, and incorporate in their Office that are
Judges in the Law, as it is in Scotland: But the order of England is much more
perfect, where they are divided. And as in case of Equity, where the Law
determines not clearly, there the Chancerie does determine, having Equity
belonging to it, which does belong to no other Court: So the Star Chamber
has that belonging to it, which belongs to no other Court: For in this Court
Attempts are punishable, where other Courts punish only facts; And also where
the Law punishes facts easily, as in case of Riots or Combats, there the
Star Chamber punishes in a higher degree; And also all combinations of
practices and conspiracies; And if the King be dishonored or contemned in his
Prerogative, it belongs most properly to the Peers and Judges of this Court
to punish it: So then this Court being instituted for so great causes, it is
great reason it should have great honor.

Remember now how I have taught you brotherly love one toward another: For you
know well, that as you are Judges, you are all brethren, and your Courts are
sisters. I pray you therefore, labor to keep that sweet harmony, which is
amongst those sisters the Muses. What greater misery can there be to the Law,
then contempt of the Law? and what readier way to contempt, then when questions
come, what shall be determined in this Court, and what in that? Whereupon two
evils do arise; The one, that men come not now to Courts of justice, to hear
matters of right pleaded, and Decrees given accordingly, but only out of a
curiosity, to hear questions of the Jurisdictions of Courts disputed, and to
see the event, what Court is like to prevail above the other; And the other
is, that the Pleas are turned from Court to Court in an endless circular
motion, as upon Ixions wheel: And this was the reason why I found just fault
with that multitude of Prohibitions: For when a poor Minister had with long
labor, and great expense of charge and time, gotten a sentence for his Tithes,
then comes a Prohibition, and turns him round from Court to Court, and so
makes his cause immortal and endless: for by this uncertainty of
Jurisdiction amongst Courts, causes are scourged from Court to Court, and this
makes the fruit of Suits like Tantalus fruit, still near the Suitors lips,
but can never come to taste it. And this in deed is a great delay of Justice,
and makes causes endless: Therefore the only way to avoid this, is for you to
keep your own bounds, and nourish not the people in contempt of other Courts,
but teach them reverence to Courts in your public speeches, both in your
Benches, and in your Circuits; so shall you bring them to a reverence, both of
GOD, and of the King.

Keep therefore your own limits toward the King, toward other Courts, and
toward other Laws, bounding your selves within your own Law, and make not
new Law. Remember, as I said before, that you are Judges, to declare, and not
to make Law: For when you make a Decree never heard of before, you are
Law-giuers, and not Lawtellers.

I have labored to gather some Articles, like an Index expurgatorius, of
novelties new crept into the Law, and I have it ready to be considered of:
Look to Plowdens Cases, and your old Responsa prudentum; if you find it not
there, then (ab initio non fuit sic) I must say with CHRIST, Away with the new
polygamie, and maintain the ancient Law pure and undefiled, as it was before.

TO the Auditory I have but little to say, yet that little will not be ill
bestowed to be said at this time.

Since I have now renewed and confirmed my resolution to maintain my Oath, the
Law and Justice of the Land; So do I expect, that you my Subjects do submit
your selves as you ought, to the observance of that Law.

And as I have divided the two former parts of my Charge; So will I divide this
your submission into three parts, for orderly divisions and method, cause
things better to be remembered.

First in general, that you give due reverence to the Law; and this general
diuides it self into three.

First, not to sue, but upon just cause.

Secondly, being sued, and Judgment passed against you, Acquiesce in the
Judgment, and do not tumultuate against it; and take example from me, whom
you have heard here protest, that when ever any Decree shall be given against
me in my private right, between me and a Subject, I will as humbly acquiesce
as the meanest man in the Land. Imitate me in this, for in every Plea there are
two parties, and Judgment can be but for one, and against the other; so one
must always be displeased.

Thirdly, do not complain and importune me against Judgments; for I hold
this Paradoxe to be a good rule in Government, that it is better for a King to
maintain an unjust Decree, then to question every Decree and Judgment, after
the giving of a sentence, for then Suites shall never have end: Therefore as
you come gaping to the Law for Justice, so be satisfied and contented when
Judgment is past against you, and trouble not me; but if you find briberie
or corruption, then come boldly: but when I say boldly, beware of coming to
complain, except you be very sure to prove the justice of your cause:
Otherwise look for Lex Talionis to be executed upon you; for your accusing of
an upright Judge, deserves double punishment, in that you seek to lay infamy
upon a worthy person of that reverent calling.

And be not tild on with your own Lawyers tales, that say the cause is just for
their own gain; but believe the Judges that have no hire but of me.

Secondly, in your Pleas, presume not to meddle with things against the Kings
Prerogative, or Honor: Some Gentlemen of late have been too bold this ways;
If you use it, the Judges will punish you; and if they suffer it, I must punish
both them and you. Plead not upon new Puritanicall strains, that make all
things popular; but keep you within the ancient Limits of Pleas.

Thirdly, make not many changes from Court to Court: for he that changes
Courts, shows to mistrust the justness of the cause. Go to the right place,
and the Court that is proper for your cause; change not thence, and submit your
selves to the Judgment given there.

Thus having finished the Charge to my self, the Judges and the Auditorie, I
am to crave your pardon if I have forgotten any thing, or been enforced to
break my Method; for you must remember, I come not hither with a written
Sermon: I have no Books to read it out of, and a long speech, manifold
business, and a little leisure may well plead pardon for any fault of
memory; and trewly I know not if I have forgotten any thing or not.

And now have I delivered, First my excuse, why I came not till now: Next, the
reasons why I came now: Thirdly, my charge, and that to my self, to you my
Lords the Judges, and to the Auditory.

I have also an ordinary charge that I use to deliver to the Judges before my
Council, when they go their Circuits; and seeing I am come to this place, you
shall have that also, and so I will make the old saying true, Comb seldom,
combesore, I mean by my long deteining you at this time, which will be so
much the more profitable in this Auditorie; because a number of the Auditorie
will be informed here, who may relate it to their fellow Justices in the
country.

My Lords the Judges, you know very well, that as you are Judges with me when
you sit here; so are you Judges under me, and my Substitutes in the Circuits,
where you are Judges Itinerant to do Justice to my people.

It is an ancient and laudable custom in this Kingdom, that the Judges go
through the Kingdom in Circuits, easing the people thereby of great charges,
who must otherwise come from all the remote parts of the Kingdom to
Westminster Hall, for the finding out and punishing of offenses past, and
preventing the occasion or offenses that may arise.

I can give you no other charge in effect, but only to remember you again of
the same in substance which I delivered to you this time Twelue-moneth.

First, Remember that when you go your Circuits, you go not only to
punish-and prevent offenses, but you are to take care for the good government
in general of the parts where you travel, as well as to do Justice in
particular betwixt party and party, in causes criminal and civil.

You have charges to give to Justices of peace, that they do their duties
when you are absent, as well as present: Take an account of them, and report
their service to me at your return.

As none of you will hold it sufficient to give a charge, except in taking the
account, you find the fruit of it: So I say to you, it will not be sufficient
for you, to hear my charge, if at your return you bring not an account to the
harvest of my sowing, which cannot be done in general, but in making to me a
particular report what you have done.

For, a King has two Offices.

First, to direct things to be done:

Secondly, to take an account how they are fulfilled; for what is it the better
for me to direct as an Angel, if I take not account of your doings.

I know not whether misunderstanding, or slacknesse bred this, that I had no
account but in general, of that I gave you in particular in charge the last
year: Therefore I now charge you again, that at your next return, you
repair to my Chancellor, and bring your accounts to him in writing, of those
things which in particular I have given you in charge: And then when I have
seen your accounts, as occasion shall serve, it may be I will call for some
of you, to be informed of the state of that part of the country where your
Circuit lay.

Of these two parts of your service, I know the ordinary Legal part of Nisi
prius is the more profitable to you: But the other part of Justice is more
necessary for my service. Therefore as CHRIST said to the Pharisees, Hoc agite,
as the most principal: yet I will say, Et illud non omittite: which, that you
may the better do, I have allowed you a day more in your Circuits, then my
Predecessors have done.

And this you shall find, that even as a King, (let him be never so godly,
wise, righteous, and just) yet if the subalterne Magistrates do not their
parts under him, the Kingdom must needs suffer: So let the Judges be never
so careful and industrious, if the Justices of Peace under them, put not to
their helping hands, in vain is all your labor: For they are the Kings eyes
and ears in the country. It was an ancient custom, that all the Judges both
immediately before their going to their Circuits, and immediately upon their
return, repaired to the Lord Chancellor of England, both to receive what
directions it should please the King by his mouth to give unto them; as also to
give him an account of their labors, who was to acquaint the King therewith:
And this good ancient custom has likewise been too much slacked of late; And
therefore first of all, I am to exhort and command you, that you be careful to
give a good account to me and my Chancellor, of the duties performed by all
Justices of Peace in your Circuits: Which government by Justices, is so
laudable and so highly esteemed by me, that I have made Scotland to be
governed by Justices and Constables, as England is. And let not Gentlemen be
ashamed of this Place; for it is a place of high Honor, and great reputation,
to be made a Minister of the Kings Justice, in service of the Commonwealth.

Of these there are two sorts, as there is of all Companies, especially where
there is a great number; that is, good and bad Justices: For the good, you are
to inform me of them, that I may know them, thank them, and reward them, as
occasion serves: For I hold a good Justice of Peace in his Country, to do me
as good service, as he that waits upon me in my Privy Chamber, and as ready
will I be to reward him; For I account him as capable of any Honor, Office, or
preferment about my Person, or for any place of Council or State, as well as
any Courteour that is near about me, or any that have deserved well of me in
foreign employments: Yea, I esteem the service done me by a good Justice of
Peace, three hundred miles, yea six hundred miles out of my sight, as well as
the service done me in my presence: For as God has given me large limits, so
must I be careful that my providence may reach to the farthest parts of them:
And as Law cannot be honored, except Honor be given to Judges: so without due
respect to Justices of Peace, what regard will be had of the service?

Therefore let none be ashamed of this Office, or be discouraged in being a
Justice of Peace, if he serve worthily in it.

The Chancellor under me, makes Justices, and puts them out; but neither I,
nor he can tell what they are: Therefore we must be informed by you Judges,
who can only tell, who do well, and who do ill; without which, how can the
good be cherished and maintained, and the rest put out? The good Justices are
careful to attend the service of the King and country, for thanks only of
the King, and love to their country, and for no other respect.

The bad are either idle Slowbellies, that abide always at home, given to a
life of ease and delight, liker Ladies then men; and think it is enough to
contemplate Justice, when as Virtus in action consistit: contemplative Justice
is no justice, and contemplative Justices are fit to be put out.

Another sort of Justices are busybodies, and will have all men dance after
their pipe, and follow their greatness, or else will not be content; A sort of
men, Qui seprimos omnium esse putant, nec sunt tamen: these proud spirits must
know, that the country is ordained to obey and follow GOD and the King, and
not them.

Another sort are they, that go seldom to the Kings service, but when it is
to help some of their kindred or alliance; So as when they come, it is to
help their friends, or hurt their enemies, making Justice to serve for a
shadow to Faction, and tumultuating the country.

Another sort are Gentlemen of great worth in their own conceit, and cannot be
content with the present form of Government, but must have a kind of liberty
in the people, and must be gracious Lords, and Redeemers of their liberty; and
in every cause that concerns Prerogative, give a snatch against a Monarchy,
through their Puritanicall itching after Popularitie: Some of them have showed
themselves too bold of late in the lower house of Parliament: And when all is
done, if there were not a King, they would be less cared for then other men.

And now having spoken of the qualities of the Justices of Peace; I am next to
speak of their number. As I ever held the midway in all things to be the way
of Virtue, in eschewing both extremities: So do I in this: for upon the one
part, a multitude of Justices of Peace in the country more then is necessary,
breeds but confusion: for although it be an old Proverb, that Many hands make
light work; yet too many make slight work; and too great a number of Justices
of Peace, will make the business of the country to be the more neglected,
every one trusting to another, so as nothing shall be well done; besides the
breeding of great corruption: for where there is a great number, it can hardly
be, but some will be corrupted. And upon the other part, too few Justices of
Peace, will not be able to undergo the burden of the service; And therefore I
would neither have too few, nor too many, but as many in every country, as
may, according to the proportion of that country, be necessary for the
performing of the service there, and no more.

As to the Charge you are to give to the Justices, I can but repeat what
formerly I have told you; yet in so good a business, Lectio lecta placet,
decies repetita placebit. And as I began with fulfilling the Proverb, A Jove
principium; so will I begin this Charge you are to give to the Justices with
Church Matters: for GOD will bless every good business the better, that he
and his Church have the precedence. That which I am now to speak, is anent
Recusants and Papists. You never returned from any Circuit, but by your account
made unto me, I both conceived great comfort and great grief: Comfort, when I
heard a number of Recusants in some Circuits to be diminished: Grief to my
heart and soul, when I heard a number of Recusants to be in other Circuits
increased.

I protest unto you, nothing in the earth can grieve me so much, as men's
falling away from Religion in my days; And nothing so much joys me, as when
that Religion increases under me. GOD is my witness, I speak nothing for
vainglory; but speak it again; My heart is grieved when I hear Recusants
increase: Therefore I wish you Judges, to take it to heart, as I do, and
prevent it as you can; and make me known to my people, as I am.

There are three sorts of Recusants: The first are they that for themselves
will be no Recusants, but their wives and their families are; and they
themselves do come to Church, but once or twice in a year, enforced by Law,
or for fashion sake; These may be formal to the Law, but more false to GOD
then the other sort.

The second sort are they that are Recusants and have their conscience
misse-led, and therefore refuse to come to Church, but otherwise live as
peaceable Subjects.

The third sort are practicing Recusants: These force all their servants to be
Recusants with them; they will suffer none of their Tenants, but they must be
Recusants; and their neighbors if they live by them in peace, must be
Recusants also.

These you may find out as a fox by the foul smell, a great way round about
his hole; This is a high pride and presumption, that they for whose souls I
must answer to GOD, and who enjoy their lives and liberties under me, will
not only be Recusants themselves, but infect and draw others after them.

As I have said in Parliament house, I can love the person of a Papist, being
otherwise a good man and honestly bred, never having known any other Religion:
but the person of an Apostate Papist, I hate. And surely for those
Polypragmaticke Papists, I would you would study out some severe punishment
for them: for they keep not infection in their own hearts only, but also
infect others our good Subjects. And that which I say for Recusants, the same I
say for Priests: I confess I am loath to hang a Priest only for Religion
sake, and saying Mass; but if he refuse the Oath of Alleagiance (which, let
the Pope and all the devils in Hell say what they will) yet (as you find by my
book and by diverse others, is merely Civil) those that so refuse the Oath,
and are Polypragmaticke Recusants; I leave them to the Law; it is no
persecution, but good Justice.

And those Priests also, that out of my Grace and Mercy have been let go out
of prisons, and banished, upon condition not to return; ask me no questions
touching these, quit me of them, and let me not hear of them: And to them I
join those that break prison; for such Priests as the prison will not hold,
it is a plain sign nothing will hold them but a halter: Such are no Martyrs
that refuse to suffer for their conscience. Paul, notwithstanding the doors
were open, would not come forth: And Peter came not out of the prison till led
by the Angel of God: But these will go forth though with the angel of the
Devil.

I have given order to my Lord of Canterbury, and my Lord of London for the
distinction, etc. of the degrees of Priests; and when I have an account from
them, then will I give you another charge concerning them.

Another thing that offends the Realm, is abundance of Alehouses; and
therefore to avoid the giving occasion of evil, and to take away the root, and
punish the example of vice, I would have the infamous Ale houses pulled down,
and a command to all Justices of Peace that this be done.

I may complain of Alehouses, for receipt of Stealers of my Dear; but the
country may complain for stealing their horses, oxen, and sheep; for murder,
cutting of purses, and such like offenses; for these are their haunts.
Devouring beasts, as Lions and Bears, will not be where they have no dens
nor covert; So there would be no thieves, if they had not their receipts, and
these Alehouses as their dens.

Another sort, are a kind of Alehouses, which are houses of haunt and receipt
for debaushed rogues and vagabonds, and idle sturdie fellows; and these are
not properly Alehouses, but base victuallers, such as have nothing else to
live by, but keeping houses of receipt for such kind of customers. I have
discovered a strange pack of late, That within ten or twelve miles of
London, there are ten or twelve persons that live in spite of me, going with
Pistols, and walking up and down from harbor to harbor killing my Dear, and
so shift from hold to hold, that they cannot be apprehended.

For Rogues, you have many good Acts of Parliament: Edward the sixth, though he
were a child, yet for this, he in his time gave better order then many Kings
did in their aage: You must take order for these Beggars and Rogues; for they
so swarm in every place, that a man cannot go in the streets, nor in the
high ways, norany where for them.

Look to your houses of Correction, and remember that in the chief Justice
Pophams time, there was not a wandering beggar to be found in all
Somersetshire, being his native country.

Have a care also to suppress the building of Cottages upon Commons, which are
as bad as Alehouses, and the dwellers in them do commonly steal Dear,
Conies, sheep, oxen, horses; break houses, and do all manner of villainies. It
is true, some ill Justices make gain of these base things: take an account of
the Justices of Peace, that they may know they do these things against the
will of the King.

I am likewise to commend unto you a thing very necessary, Highwayes and
Bridges; because no Commonweal can be without passage: I protest, that as my
heart does joy in the erection of Schools and Hospitals, which have been
more in my time, then in many aages of my predecessors; so it grieves me, and
it is wonderful to see the decay of charity in this; how scant men are in
contributing toward the amendment of Highways and Bridges: Therefore take a
care of this, for that is done to day with a penie, that will not be done
hereafter with an hundred pounds, and that will be mended now in a day, which
hereafter will not be mended in a year; and that in a year, which will not
be done in our time, as we may see by Paul's Steeple.

Another thing to be cared for, is, the new Buildings here about the City of
London; concerning which my Proclamations have gone forth, and by the chief
Justice here, and his Predecessor Popham, it has been resolved to be a
general nusans to the whole Kingdom: And this is that, which is like the
Spleen in the body, which in measure as it ouergrowes, the body wastes. For is
it possible but the Country must diminish, if London do so increase, and all
sorts of people do come to London? and where does this increase appear? not
in the heart of the City, but in the suburbs; not giving wealth or profit to
the City, but bringing misery and surcharge both to City and Court; causing
dearth and scarsitie through the great provision of victuals and fuel, that
must be for such a multitude of people: And these buildings serve likewise to
harbor the worst sort of people, as Alehouses and Cottages do. I remember,
that before Christmas was Twelue-moneth I made a Proclamation for this cause,
That all Gentlemen of quality should depart to their own countries and
houses, to maintain Hospitality amongst their neighbors; which was
equiuocally taken by some, as that it was meant only for that Christmas: But
my will and meaning was, and here I declare that my meaning was, that it should
always continue.

One of the greatest causes of all Gentlemen's desire, that have no calling or
errand, to dwell in London, is apparently the pride of the women: For if they
be wives, then their husbands; and if they be maids, then their fathers must
bring them up to London; because the new fashion is to be had no where but in
London: and here, if they be unmarried, they mar their marriages, and if they
be married, they loose their reputations, and rob their husbands purses. It is
the fashion of Italy, especially of Naples, (which is one of the richest parts
of it) that all the Gentry dwell in the principal Towns, and so the whole
country is empty: Even so now in England, all the country is gotten into
London; so as with time, England will only be London, and the whole country
be left waste: For as we now do imitate the French fashion, in fashion of
Clothes, and Lackeys to follow every man; So have we got up the Italian
fashion, in living miserably in our houses, and dwelling all in the City: but
let us in Gods Name leave these idle foreign toys, and keep the old fashion
of England: For it was wont to be the honor and reputation of the English
Nobility and Gentry, to live in the country, and keep hospitality; for
which we were famous above all the countries in the world; which we may the
better do, having a soil abundantly fertile to live in.

And now out of my own mouth I declare unto you, (which being in this place,
is equal to a Proclamation, which I intend likewise shortly hereafter to have
publicly proclaimed,) that the Courtiers, Citizens, and Lawyers, and those
that belong unto them, and others as have Pleas in Term time, are only
necessary persons to remain about this City; others must get them into the
Country; For beside the having of the country desolate, when the Gentry
dwell thus in London, diverse other mischiefs arise upon it: First, if
insurrections should fall out (as was lately seen by the Leuellers gathering
together) what order can be taken with it, when the country is unfurnished of
Gentlemen to take order with it? Next, the poor want relief for fault of the
Gentlemen's hospitality at home: Thirdly, my service is neglected, and the good
government of the country for lack of the principal Gentlemen's presence,
that should perform it: And lastly, the Gentlemen lose their own thrift, for
lack of their own presence, in seeing to their own business at home.
Therefore as every fish lives in his own place, some in the fresh, some in the
salt, some in the mud: so let every one live in his own place, some at Court,
some in the City, some in the Country; specially at Festival times, as
Christmas and Easter, and the rest.

And for the decrease of new Buildings here, I would have the builders
restrained, and committed to prison; and if the builders cannot be found, then
the workmen to be imprisoned; and not this only, but likewise the buildings
to be cast down; I mean such buildings as may be overthrown without
inconvenience, and therefore that to be done by order and direction.

There may be many other abuses that I know not of; take you care my Lords the
Judges of these, and of all other; for it is your part to look unto them. I
hear say, robbery begins to abound more then heretofore, and that some of you
are too merciful; I pray you remember, that mercy is the Kings, not yours, and
you are to do Justice where true cause is: And take this for a rule of
Policy, That what vice most abounds in a Commonwealth, that must be most
severely punished, for that is true government.

And now I will conclude my Speech with GOD, as I began. First, that in all
your behauiours, as well in your Circuits as in your Benches, you give due
reverence to GOD, I mean, let not the Church nor Churchmen be disgraced in
your Charges, nor Papists nor Puritanes countenanced: Countenance and encourage
the good Churchmen, and teach the people by your example to reverence them:
for, if they be good, they are worthy of double honor for their Office sake;
if they be faulty, it is not your place to admonish them; they have another
Forum to answer to for their misbehauiour.

Next, procure reverence to the King and the Law, inform my people trewly of
me, how zealous I am for Religion, how I desire Law may be maintained and
flourish; that every Court should have his own Jurisdiction; that every
Subject should submit himself to Law; So may you live a happy people under a
just KING, freely enjoying the fruit of PEACE and JUSTICE, as such a people
should do.

Now I confess, it is but a Tandem aliquando, as they say in the Schools,
that I am come hither: Yet though this be the first, it shall not, with the
grace of GOD, be the last time of my coming, now my choice is taken away; for
having once been here, a meaner occasion may bring me again: And I hope I
have ever carried my self so, and by GODS grace ever will, as none will ever
suspect, that my coming here will be to any partial end; for I will ever be
careful in point of Justice, to keep my self unspotted all the days of my
life. And upon this my general protestation, I hope the world will know, that
I came hither this day to maintain the Law, and do Justice according to my
Oath.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY ROBERT BARKER, AND JOHN BILL, PRINTERS TO THE KINGS
MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

ANNO DOM. 1616.

Cum Priuilegio.


