IR
DIEV ET MON DROIT.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.
royal blazon or coat of arms

HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE.
royal blazon or coat of arms

THE PEACEMAKER: OR, GREAT BRITAINS BLESSING.

Framed For the continuance of that mighty Happiness wherein this Kingdom
excells many Empires.

Showing the Idleness of a Quarrelling Reputation, wherein consists neither
MANHOOD nor WISDOM.

Necessary for all Magistrates, Officers of PEACE, Masters of Families, for
the confirmation of Youth, and for all his Majesty's most true and faithful
Subjects: To the general avoiding of all Contention, and Bloud-shedding.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS PVRFOOT: An. Dom: 1618.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE.
royal blazon or coat of arms
To all Our truelouing, and Peace-embracing SVBIECTS.
THE Glory of all Virtues, is Action; the Crown of all Acts, Perfection; the
perfection of all things, Peace and Union. It is the Riches of our Beings, the
Reward of our Sufferings, the Music on our Deathbeds: Never had so great a
Treasure, so poor a purchaser, for man has the offer of it. The God of peace
sent it, the Lamb of peace brought it, the Spirit of peace confirmde it, and
We still seek to practice it. With what power then may the good purpose of
this work arrive at the hearts of all faithful Christians? and with what
cheerfulness and freenes ought it to be embrast of all our loving Subjects,
having so many Glorious seals of Honor, Power and Virtue to strengthen it, all
that is required of Us from you, is a faithful and hearty welcome, and that
bestowd upon man's best and dearest Friend, either in Life or Death. For peace
that has been a stranger to you, is now become a sister, a Dear and Natural
sister; and to your Holiest loves we recommend her.

THE PEACEMAKER.
The Book it self in glory of its name, is proud to tell from whence the
subject came.
PEACE be to you; I greet you in the blessing of a God, the salutation of an
Apostle, and the Motto of a King: My Subject has her being in Heaven, her
Theory in holy Writ, and her practique in England, Insula pacis. The Land of
Peace, under the King of Peace.

Like Noah's Dove, she was sent out to seek a resting place, to see if the
whole world were not yet covered with the perpetual deluge of Blood and
Enmity, and only here she found the Olive Leaf; Hitherto has she been Pilotto
the Arc, and here it first touched shore: here now it has remained full
Fifteen years, I am proud to report it.

Rejoice O England with thine espoused Scotland, and let thy handmaid Ireland
joy with thee. Let all thy servant Islands be glad, yea, let in strangers to
behold and taste thy blessings.

The disturbed French, seek succor with thee, the troubled Dutch fly to thy
confines, the Italian leaves his hotter clymate; These and many more all seek
shelter under the sweet shadow of thine Olive Branches.

O London, blessed Mrs. of this happy Britain, build new thy Gates there is
peace entering at them. The God of peace has sent this peace of God, o ever
love her, that she may never leave thee, salute her, and inuit her. Let
White Hall (fit emblem for her purity) be her chief Palace, and let it say,
Ades almasalus.

Peace and Contention lie here on earth, as trading Factors for life and death.

Who desires not to have traffic with life? who (weary of life) but would die
to live?

Peace is the passage from life to life, come then to the factory of peace,
thou that desire to have life: behold the substitue of peace on earth,
displaying the flag of peace, Beati pacifici.

Let Contention enjoy (without joy) large Empires; here we enjoy (with all
joy) our happy Sanctuary. It was borne with him, he brought it with him, after
Five and Thirty years increase, and here has multiplied it to Fifty with us:
o blessed Iubile, let it be celebrated with all joy and cheerfulness, and all
sing, Beati Pacifici.

And are not the labors blessed with the worke-man? England and Scotland,
(though not malicious enemies, yet churlish Neighbors) are reconciled. Feast,
love, live, and dye together, are indeed no more neither what they were, but a
new thing betwixt them, more firm and near in their loving Union, then ever
divided in their hearty unkindness; and now both say, with one tongue, Beati
Pacifici.

Ireland, that rebellious Outlaw, that so many years cried blood and death
(filling her Marrish grounds with massacres, affording many preys of
slaughtered bodies to her ravenous Wolves, and in their wombes keeping the
brutish obsequies) would know no Lord, but grew more stubborn in her
chastisement, till this white ensign was displayed; then she came running
with this hallowed text in her mouth, Beati Pacifici.

Spain, that great and long-lasting opposite, betwixt whom and England, the
Ocean ran with blood not many years before, nor ever truc'd her crimson
effusion: their Marcha^ts on either side traffiqu't in blood, their Indian
Ingotts brought home in blood, (a commerce too cruel for Christian Kingdoms)
yet now shake hands in friendly amity, and speak our blessing with us, Beati
pacifici.

Nay, what christian Kingdom that knows the blessing of peace, has not
desired and tasted this our blessing from us? Come they not hither as to the
Fountain from whence it springs? Here sits Solomon, and hither come the
Tribes for Judgments: Oh happy Moderator, blessed Father, not father of thy
Country alone, but Father of all thy neighbor Countries about thee. Spain,
and her withstanding Provinces (long bruised on both sides) thou have set at
peace, turning their bloody Leaguers, to leagues of friendship: do not those
children now live to bless thee, (who had else been buried in their Parents
wombes?) and say Beati pacifici.

Denmark and Sueuia, Sueuia and Poland, Cleue and Brandenburg: have not these
and many more come to this Oracle of Peace, and received their doomes from it?
If the members of a natural body, by concord assist one another; if the
politic members of a kingdom help one another, and by it support it self;
why shall not the Monarchall bodies of many Kingdoms, be one mutual
Christendom? if still they sing this blessed lesson taught them, Beati
pacifici.

Let England then, (the seat of our Solomon) rejoice in her happy government,
yea, her government of governments; and she that can set peace with others, let
her (at least) enjoy it her self: let us love peace, and be at peace in love.
We live in Beth-salem the house of Peace, then let us ever sing this song of
peace, Beati pacifici.

Detraction snarles, and tempts fair Peace to show the plenty of her fruits,
and how they grow.
SEd vbi fructus? Detractio^ to Peace.
Where are all these rich and oppulent blessings that this tender white robbed
Peace has brought with her? Aetas parentum peior auis etc. Our Grandfathers
(for the most part) were honester men then our Fathers, our Fathers better then
we, and our Children are like enough to be worse then our selves. Does Peace
keep a Palace where Charity may warm herself?

Shame murmurer, Peace answer.
had thou rather with the forgetful Israelites, go back to the Fleshpots
of Egypt (bought with blows and burdens,) then eat Manna in the way to Canaan.

Do thou thirst here? it is for want of Sacrifice to him that should refresh
thee then.

Thy Grandfather prayed for this that thou enioyest, and though he had it not
himself, yet prepared it as a blessing on thee. The Sun that daily shines on
thee, thou letst it pass with a careless and neglectiue eye; but were it hid
from thee, the change of a Moon, thou would then welcome it, with all
alacrity and cheerfulness.

Were blows more bountiful to thee? Did blood yield thee benefit? War
afford thee wealth? Did thou make that thine own by violence, which was
another by right? It may be, the Handmaid was fruitful, and the Mistres
barraine; But Sarah has now brought forth, and in her seed are the blessings
come.

Hagar is despised, Peace has conceived, and smiling Isaac has left us
Jacob, a new Israel, a Prince of God, a man that has preuayld with God to
plant his peace with us.

The trading Merchant finds it, who daily plowes the Sea, and as daily reapes
the harvest of his labors. What wants England that the world can enrich her
with? Tire sends in her Purples; India her Spices; Afric her gold; Muscouie
her costly skins of beasts; All her neighbor Countries their best traffic,
and all purchased by frie^dly commerce, not (as before) by savage cruelty.

The fear less trades and handicraft men sing away their laborsal day (having
no note drowned with either noise of Dromme or Cannon) and sleep with peace at
night.

The frolic Countryman, opens the fruitful Earth, and crops his plenty from
her fertile bosom: Nay, even his toyling beasts are trapt with bells, who taste
(in their labors) the harmony of peace, with their awful governors.

The Magistrate, constantly draws his sword of Justice on offenders, not
ore-awed by party-headed contentions.

The Kingdoms beauty, the Nobility, who were wont to be strangers in their
native country, leading the ranks of blood and death against their enemies,
have now no enemy, but keep their practice amongst themselves, to pastime with
( Nonne haec meminisse voluptas?) And now (more sweet and holy) are Pillars at
home, that were enforced to be prodigies abroad; all being (by a heavenly
Metamorphosis) transhaped to become the becoming branches of the great Olive
Tree of Peace. And does not Charity dwell here with Peace? o blind detraction.
Has not in foretimes, unwilling necessity, erected two Hospitals? and now most
free and willing Charity, has (in augmentation of her glory) raised Twenty
Almeshouses; yea, so many for one, and give her true testimony.

Nay, has she not done the great wonder? built some Churches, repaird many, and
still her hand is dealing? Is not the sum of all, Religion, established by
her? Are not the Flesh-eating fires quenched, and our Faggots converted to
gentler uses? O, but those Corne-fields must never be without some Tares,
until the general Harvest: Israel must not at once, destroy all the
Inhabitants of the land of promise, but by little and little, least they boast
and say, it was our strength, and not the Lords hand that did it.

Nor shall our peace (in her young Plantation) enjoy so full and perfect a
tranquillity, but that there will be with us contentious Cananites, seditious
Iebusites, crafty Gibeonites, drunken Amorties, and arrogant Anakims.

Envy shall stand between, and hold two Brothers of either hand of her;
Sectarists and Schismatiques shall break the peace of God, wound the mother of
peace (the Church) and bind together false Brotherhoods, to dissipate the unity
and bonds of peace.

Law shall wrangle with her; Ebrietie and drink shall strike her, Pride and
Ambition shall seek to overthrow her: yea, even her oily and most dangerous
enemy Hypocrisy, shall get within to strangle her, yet still shall she stand,
and reign, and conquer. Inuidiam pax prosternet, she shall mount to Heaven,
and throw her enemies as low as Hell, where peace shall never come.

Envy shall gnaw her own entrails, Schism shall perish, Law shall be silent,
Drunkenness shall burst it self, Pride shall be humbled in her own habitatio^,
and hollow-harted Hypocrisy, shall find no peace. Vbi Deoru^ numen
praetenditur sceleribus, Flamin. Consul.
subit animu^ timor. Where the Majesty of God, is made a color for mischief,
a fear comes into that breast: his peace shall be tremblings, and doubts, and
horrors; his heart shall then faint, that told him before like hart-stealing
Absolon in his Fathers gates, thy cause was good, Ezech. 13. 10.
when it was not so. Or like the false and foolish Prophets, that told the
people it was pax, pax, peace, peace, when it was no peace.

The walls were daubd with vntemperd mortar, and they shall fall, yet still
shall Truth have Peace, and the Peacemaker shall preserve the truth; They shall
dwell together, and live together. The heavenly Soldiers have sung it, the
Father has sent it, the Son has brought it, the blessed Dove shall preserve
it; ever comfort us with it, our Anointed has received it, we do enjoy it,
and see it plentiful in Israel.

Peace takes a view of such as do molest, and kindle most unquiet in her
breast.
PVt up the Bel-bearer first, then all the flock will follow: Pride has lost
her place, or comes behind for her greaterstate, it is Drunkenness that leads now;
and mark the Heard that troop after her. Lust follows close, Contention at
her sleeue. Emulation on the other side; Envy keeps the sent like a Bloodhound;
Revenge and Murder come coupled together.

The smaller headed Beasts are unseen yet, as Breach of Freindship, vnlocking
hearty secrets, Slander, Oaths, and Blasphemies, fearful Inuocations, (all
which, custom has driven so far distant from the Souls eye, as the Moon
from the ocular sight whose body ouerbulks the Earths large Center, yet seems
as little as her Figure taken on the tavern sign, where these brutish orgies
are celebrated) abuse of Time, Riot, Prodigallity, and lineall succeeding
poverty; All these are peace's professed Enemies, her domestique foes, who
unless this fore-battel be repulst and suppressed in the first assault, the rest
will follow, though to their own perdition.

Non ignota refero, these are no wonders with us, there may be Monsters among
the^, but too familiar with our acquaintance, examine the Ring leader,
Drunkenness is no stranger in the world, she came in with the Earths first
general Curse, and he that escaped that Inundation of Waters, tasted the Deluge
of Wine. Shame fell on him, and his Curse to posterity; Noah tasted one, and
Cham felt the other, Lot had his portion in her: There Drunkenness begat
Incest (an unnatural Issue of a brutish Mother) and her succession, two wicked
Generations; Moab and Ammon. Drunkenness played the part of a Heads-man with
Holofernes, stooping his neck to the weak arm of a Woman, and he that stopped
the Waters of Bethulia from others, had so much of his own Wine as made him
senseless of either Wine or Water ever after.

Alexander (inter epulas) clitum charissimum transfodit, the friend has
sprinkled his Wine-bolles with the dear blood of his friend: Oh brutish
Sacrifice! Oh Man vnman'd! Oh absent Man! where (out of thy self) do thou
remain, while this Fiend possesses thee? But why do we seek Antiquities for
proof of a practice so present with us? Had Israel any sin that England has
mist? Was Noah drunk, one of the Arc, and one of the eight reeling there? it
is eight to one, that seven of eight do stagger here (if not the whole Vessel.)
It was a shame to one then, but custom has made it no shame for all now. Did
Lot commit Incest with his own daughters? Could we not wish Drunkenness to
excuse us now? Does not Lust (her hellish handmaid) challenge this Weapon hers?
The example was too soon found, and yet too late to remember: Oh, would that
had been the first, and that we might never know a second. Nec linguam nec
manum continet ebrius, how many bosomed counsels have been vomited out of the
mouth of a Drunkard, though to the ruin and destruction of his former friend?
Oh Insania voluntaria! Oh wilful Madness of Man, to depresse and quench out
all thy faculties of Reason with this puddle Drunkenness! Thou (that armed in
thine own Lordly Fortitudes) can reach the Stars, measure the Earths large
Globe, search and understand the Seas profound Abyss; yet in this sottish
Ignorance, can not find the depth of thine own stomach. The Jews old
Proverb has carried his full sense quite through Christendom; Homets Ben
Iin. Wine must needs acknowledge it self the Parent of Vinegar; meaning, that
a good Father may have a different and saucy Son: But we have from him the
Daughter of a worse hair, this common Strumpet Drunkenness, whom almost all
sorts do sleep with: not Vinum egrum, but aegrotum, is our Issue, a sick and
unwholesome Harlot; yet has spread her self into large Offsprings, in most
lineall and natural Children, as Lust, Envy, Revenge, Murder, etc. all
impious and turbulent Peace-breakers.

Oh Peace! shall we not fear thy longer abode with us, if we embrace thee with
no better love? How many loving friends have broke that Diamond of Amity
(whose pieces once disseuered, can never be reconciled) for the embrace of a
lascivious Curtizan, whose arms are like the Iron Idol, that crustht the
cursed Sacrifices in pieces?

Envy! Oh what does that vlcus animae amongst us? That Aetna in a Man, that
continually burns it self, intus and extra, within and without, that (like
the Cantharides) found feeding on the fairest and flourishing Roses, so Envy
is ever opposed against the most Sweet, Noble, Flourishing, and Peaceful
Blossoms. Were she as rare as the Comparison, I could call her Phoenix, and
wish, that this day she would burn her self, and leave her ashes Issuelesse.

Revenge! Whence have we borrowed thee? Oh Salmoneus Terror, shall we play with
Thunder and Lightning, and follow thy precipitated Fate? Shall we snatch the
Sword (the peculiar Sword) from the Almighty hand? Have we received wrongs on
Earth? Consider then, if we have done no wrongs to Heaven. If we stand guilty
there (as, Quis non?) Do we then revenge? No; we stand disobedient and
repugnant to our own just punishments: We have a milder Sister given in her
stead, Justice, the Arbitrer of our Injuries: but Vengeance is Gods alone;
which no man ought to take in hand, but as delivered from his hand; nor so to
imitate his Majesty and Greatness, that does it not but by Authority, and in
the way and path of his Goodness.

Murder! Oh Cain-created Sin! Cursed Catastrophe of all the rest! This is
Summum opus: Here is the full point and end of the Labor; all the precedent
Travelers are here at home; the end hazzarding the endless end: Fearful
Spectacle! Here is capital Sacrilege; the Temple of a holy Spirit robbed and
ruined: Here is Treason in the highest degree; the Workmanship and Image of the
Creator defaced; unhappy Passive, but more, and most of all, unhappy Active!
Thou that do Murder, do first deface him in thy self; then, in thy
Brother. God is the God of Peace, of Mercy, Meekness, Long Suffering, and
Loving Kindness: All these have thou expulsed from thy self, and lost thy
shape with them; there is neither Peace, Mercy, Meekness, Sufferance, nor
Love in thee. Then in thy Brother thou destroyest them: His Blood is Vox
Clamans; and he is enforced in Death, from the many mouths of his Wounds, to
cry out for Revenge. But is Heaven far off, and will not that move us? Look
upon the Deed then with Natural Pity (or a Conscience which is as inseparable
as thy Soul, that shall not leave thee living:) Behold a Brother weeping over
his Brother; a distraughted Mother tearing her hair, and rending her heart,
for her Child's loss; a Friend (with Tears) embalming his dear Friends Body;
a rauing Father, ready to send his Soul after his Son; yea, perhaps his
only Son, his Name and Posterity destroyed with him. Then Brothers,
Friends, Mothers, Fathers, all their Curses to be thrown on thee. Are Heaven
and Earth both dull motives to thee? O beware the third place; let Hell
affright thee, and let thy conscience describe it to thee.

I return to that which I would wish thee never to pass, and then thou can
not come to the unblessed discovery of it: and it is Paths (before recited)
that lead thee to it ( Peace:) stay and abide with her, and thou shall never
know her Enemies, Gods Enemies, and thine own Enemies: Let them that seek
Peace, find Peace, enjoy Peace, and have their Souls laid up in Eternal Peace.

Of Wise men I discourse, by Injuries never shaken; What Reputation is, I show,
a thing so long mistaken.
IN this small Particle consists the ground of all Quarrels whatsoever, either
by suspecting false things, or by aggravating small things. Now how far these
two are from the ways of a Wise man, and how ill becoming, Reason makes
manifest: for Suspicion and Aggrauation are the Offsprings of Passion, and a
Wise man is free from Passion.

Nor can there be a greater argument of defect, and despair of merit in man,
then Suspicion; and mark her Nutriment, what strange food Passion has
provided for it: It feeds upon false things; for indeed, true things are not
to be suspected: and how just the punishment meets with the offense; in erring
from the Truth, it has Falsehood for a reward. But in peiora ruunt omnia, the
worse Devil is behind.

The Aggrauation of small things, when a spark shall grow to a flaming Beacon,
a Word to a Wound, the Lie to a Life; when every man will be the Master of his
own Revenge, presuming to give Law to themselves, and in rage, to right their
own wrongs: At which time, the Sword is extorted out of the hand of
Magistracy, contrary to the sacred Ordinance of the Almighty.

Now the wise and understanding man is not subject or exposed to any of these
Injuries whatsoever; neither cares he, how many darts of Malice or Contumely
are shot against him, since he knows, that he cannot be pierced: Even as there
are certain hard Stones which Iron cannot enter; and the Adamant will neither
be cut, filed, nor beaten to powder, but abateth the edge of those Instruments
that are applied unto it; And as there are certain things which cannot be
consumed with fire, but continue their hardness and habitude amidst the
flames; And as the Rocks, that are fixed in the heart of the Sea, break the
Waves, and retain no impression of the Storms that have assailed them; so the
heart of a wise man is solid, and has gathered such invincible force, that he
stands as secure from Injury, as those insensible Substances I made mention
of. Not that Injuries are not offered him, but that he admits them not; so
highly raised above all the attaints of worldly wrongs, that all their
violences shall be frustrate, before a wise man be offended. Even as Arrows, or
Bullets, that are shot into the Air, mount higher then our sight, but they
fall back again, without touching Heaven: And as Celestial things are not
subject to humane hands; and they that ouer-turne Temples, do no way hurt the
Godhead to whom they are consecrated; So, whatsoever Injuries are attempted
against a wise man, return without effect, and are to him but as Cold or Heat,
Rain or Hail, the Weather of the World.

And for words of Contumely, it is held so small, and so slight an injury,
as no wise man complains, or reuengeth himself for it: therefore, neither do
the Laws themselves prefixe any penalty thereunto, not imagining that they
would ever be burdensome. Quis enim phrenetico Medicus irascitur? For what
Physician is angry with a Lunatike person? Who will interpret a sick man's
reproaches to the worst, that is vexed of a Fever? Why, the same affection has a
wise man toward all men, as the Physician has toward his sick Patients; not
offended to hear their outrages, he looks upon them, as upon intemperate
sick men; therefore is not angry with them, if during their sickness they
have been so bold, as to speak injuriously against him. And as he sets light
by all their words of honor; so torments he himself as little with all their
despite and insolences. For he that is displeased for an injury that is done
him, will likewise be glad to be honored at his hands that did it; which a wise
man is free from. For he that reuenges a Contumely, honors him that did it, in
taking it so much to heart, and respecting it.

Art thou angry with thy Superior? Alas, Death is at hand, which shall make us
equals. Do thou wish him, with whom thou art displeased, any more then
Death? Although thou attemptest nothing against him, he shall be sure of that;
thou losest thy labor then, in offering to do that, which will be done
without thee.

We laugh, says the wisest of Philosophers, in beholding the Conflict of the
Bull and Bear, when they are tied one to another; which after they have tired
one another; the Butcher attends for them both, to drive them to the
Slaughterhouse. The like do we. We challenge him that is coupled with us,
Brother, or Friend, we charge him on every side: mean while, both the
conqueror and conquered, are near unto their ruin. Rather let us finish that
little remainder of our life in quiet and peace, that our end may be a Pleasure
to no man.

Thou wishest a man's death! and there is always but a little difference
betwixt the day of thy desire, and the affliction of the Sufferer.

Whilst we are therefore amongst men, let us embrace Humanity; be dreadful
and dangerous to no man; let us contemn Injuries and Contumelies; for but
looking back, we may behold Death presently attend us.

Pisistratus, that lived a Tyrant in Athens, being for his cruelty mocked and
reproved by a druuken man, answered, That he was no more angry with him, then
if a blindfold fellow, having his eyes bound up, should run upon him.

Another said to his friend, I prithee chastise my servant with stroks, because
I am angry, intimating thus much, That a servant ought not to fall into his
power, that is not master of himself.

But now the compounding of Quarrels is grown to a Trade: And as a most
worthy Father of Law and Equity speaks, there be some Council learned of
Duells, that teach young Gentlemen, when they are beforehand, and when
behind-hand, and thereby incense and incite them to the Duel, and make an Art
of it: the spur and incitement, false and erroneous imagination of Honor and
Credit, when most commonly those golden hopes end in a Halter.

That Folly and Vainglory should cast so thick a mist before the eye of
Gentry! to fix their aim and only end-vpon Reputation, and end most
lamentably without it; nay, farthest from it: first, to hazard the eternal
death of their Souls, and the suruiuing Bodies, to die the death of a
Cutpurse.

A miserable effect, and most horrid resolution, when young men, full of
towardness and hope, such as the Poets call Aurorae filij, the Sons of the
Morning, in whom the sweet expectation and comfort of their friends consists,
shall be cast away and ruined for ever in so vain a business.

But much more is it to be deplored, when so much Noble and Gentle blood shall
be spilt upon such Follies; which adventured in honorable Service, were able to
make the fortune of a Day, and to change the fortune of a Kingdom.

It is evident then, how desperate an evil this is, which troubles Peace,
disfurnishes War, brings sudden calamity upon private Men, Peril upon the
State, and Contempt upon the Law.

They pretend above all things to regard Honor, yet chiefly seek the
dishonor of God and of Justice; and which is worse then Madness in those men,
that aduenturing to leave this life in Anger, presume to press into the next,
to the Supper of the Lamb, which is all Peace and Love, without Peace, Love,
or Charity. O that Gentlemen would learn to esteem themselves at a just
price, how dearly they are bought, how most precious their Redemption!

The root of this Offense is stubborn; for it despises Death, which is the
utmost of all Temporal punishments, and had need of the Severity used in
France; where the Manslayers, though Gentlemen of great Quality, are hanged
with their Wounds bleeding, lest a natural Death should prevent the example of
Justice.

This punctualitie of Reputation, is no better then a Bewitching Sorcerie, that
inchaunts the spirits of young men, like the Smoke of fashion, that Witch
Tobacco, which has quite blown away the Smoke of Hospitality, and turned
the Chimneyes of their Forefathers, into the Noses of their Children. And by
all Computation (if Computation may be kept for Folly) I think the Vapor of
the one, and the Vainglory of the other, came into England much upon a
voyage, and has kept as close together, as the Report follows the Powder.

For when, but in the laternesse of these times, has so much private and
domestique Blood been shed? Like the three Jewish Brothers, in that perplexed
History of Jerusalem; who wanting Enemies, still flew upon themselves. So
these malicious, unthankful Spirits, fattened with the abundant Blessings of
a mellifluous Peace, disgorge themselves upon their Christian Brothers; like
those that surfeit upon too much Honey.

And well may this Vainglory, or opinion of Reputation, be called a
Satanicall Illusion, and Apparition of Honor, against Religion, Law, Moral
Virtue, and against all the honorable Presidents and Examples of the best
Times, and valiantest Nations. For hereby have Gentlemen lost the true
knowledge and understanding of Fortitude and Valor. For true Fortitude
distinguishes of the grounds of Quarrels, whether they be just; and not only
so, but whether they be worthy; and sets a better value upon men's lives, then
to bestow them idly; which are not so to be trifled away, but offered up and
sacrificed to honorable Services, public Merits, good Causes, and Noble
Adventures.

And behold here thy Folly; thou attemptest a way, freely to lose thy Soul
eternally, but not thy Reputation. Fool that thou art, in offering to save
that, which indeed is nothing, thou losest all! For Reputation is but another
man's Opinion, and Opinion is no substance for thee to consist of. For how can
thou consist of a thing that is without thee? Which may be any man's at an
instant, as well as thine; and when thou have it, it is but a breath: And of
what certainetie or permanence is it, when they must die that give it thee?

Perhaps, because some have said, that Fame has a perpetuity; thou hastenst
to lose thy Soul, to provide for thy Name: How much thou deceiuest thy self?
Why, it is no more then the Echo of a glory: For as an Echo no longer
resounds, then it is fed with a voice, no longer does Fame sound forth man's
Praises, then it is supplied and cherished with deseruings: For when thy noise
ceases in it self, it will quickly cease the noise of thee. How ever, at the
farthest, a general Dissolution will come, when Fame, that is next to nothing
now, shall have no being then at all.

Happy is then the wise and understanding Spirit: for though he be injured, he
can lose nothing thereby, neither his Fame, nor Reputation; for a wise man
entertaines nothing that is subject to loss. Fortune takes nothing but what
she has given; she gives not Virtue, nor Wisdom; therefore cannot take that
away.

The more thou think upon Reputation, the farther off thou art from all
contention, unless custom in Ignorance, or wilfulness in Nature, make thee
throw an abuse upon the Word. For what is Reputation, but Consideration? A
diligent weighing, considering, and reuoluing in the mind? And that is quite
opposite to Rashness: Truth will shame thee, if thou confess not so much.

There can be then no Reputation in Rashness, that is manifest: And what are
Quarrels, but the fruits of Rashness? There can be then no Reputation in
Quarrels

And as it is Consideration, it were dreadful to think, that any man, in the
state of his best counsel and aduisednesse, should attempt to destroy the
Image of his Creator, in the life of his Christian Brother. And therefore
divinely have our humane Laws bent their hate and punishments against the
abhorred Act, committed in cold blood; which is as wilful an opposition
against man's life (considering what he does) as Blasphemy against the Word of
Truth; the Conscience knowing it offends of set purpose (the only sin against
the Holy Ghost.) And as the body of every true Christian is said to be the
Temple of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 3. 16. What does the accursed Manslayer, but
in the blood of his Brother, destroys the Temple, as the Blasphemer wounds the
Lord of the Temple?

Behold then, not without a face of Horror, the miserable condition the Sons
of this Age run into. All they venture for, is to bring the bloudinesse of
their Action into the compass of Honor (as if Honor consisted in
destruction.) Now what impossibility follows that labor, even the weakest
may conjecture. For Honor is the Rumor of a beautiful and virtuous Action,
which redoundeth from our Souls to the view of the World, and by Reflection
into our selves, bringing to us a Testimony of that which others believe of
us: which turns to a great peace, and contentment of mind; Blessings which
were never yet found in a Bloudshedder, let his cause be never so glorious. And
where there is no Peace, all other benefits have a cessation. It is the only
health of thy Soul; and that once lost, thy soul sickens immediately, even to
death, and can no more taste or relish a Joy after, then a sick man's Pallet
his Nutriment.

Is not this then a delusion of Honor? Nay, can there be any thing more
delusiue? Alas, when it is at the greatest height of humane glory, it is of a
small and slender efficacy, uncertain, a stranger, and as it were separated
in the Air from him that is honored: For it does not only, not enter into
him, nor is inward and essential unto him, but it does not so much as touch
him. A poor and miserable purchase at the best, for so great and eternal a
hazard!

Flatter not thy Soul then to her everlasting ruin, in thinking Reputation
consists in Bloudshedding. Sanguis clamat, as the Almighty speaks in the
Letter of his own Law; Blood cries, and with a louder voice, to Heaven, then
thy Fame can sound on Earth, Rumors, ten thousand tongues, are hoarse to
that: they compass but some Nooke, or Angle of the World; the other reaches
from the Field to Heaven.

The voice of thy Brothers Blood cries unto me from the Earth, Genesis 4. 10. And
no sooner the Cry comes, but the Curse follows, in the very next words: Now
therefore thou art cursed from the Earth, which has opened her mouth to
receive thy Brothers Blood from thy hand. And immediately in the next, AV
agabond and a Runnagate shall thou be on the Earth. Which shows the horror of
the guilty Conscience, which after the deed done, would feign fly from it
self: A distraction which follows all the Children of Wrath unto this day.

Well may peace then have the excellency of her glorious name advanced above
all Titles and Inscriptions: And so much the rather, in that it pleases the
Almighty Creator himself, to be called the God of Peace, and the Author, 1.
Cor. 14. 33. Nay, Love it self, delighting in the Name. 1. John 4. 16. GOD is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. And 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Now the very God of Peace sanctify you throughout, etc. Christ
the Savior of the World, the Lamb of Peace. John 11. 29. Behold, the Lamb of
God, which takes away the sins of the World. There is Peace made in taking
sin away, which is the only fuel of Wrath. And Ephesians. 2. 14. Christ is our
Peace, which has made of both, one, and has broken the stop of the partition
wall.

Moreover, the heavenly Soldiers, at the Birth of Christ, praising God, said:
Glory be to God, in the high Heavens, and Peace in earth, and toward men, good
will.

And as his most blessed Nativity was the Fountain of Peace, there wanted not
the fruits that sprang from that sacred Fountain in his departure, John 14.
27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Let not your heart be
troubled, nor fear. Let not your heart, speaking to many, because all his
ought to be of one heart, which is a work of Peace.

And not leaving, but in the same Evangelist, 16. 17. I will pray my Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.
Intimating thereby, the eternal Peace of Soul and Conscience, by the coming
of the Holy Ghost: calling him in the words immediately following, Even the
Spirit of Truth, whom the Father will send in my Name, 26. he comes all Peace,
and in the name of Peace, of Christ our Savior.

And to add more glory to the Name of Peace, behold how the incomprehensible
Godhead desires to be comprehended, all into Unity, Trinity in Unity: Which
shows, that Unity is the Conseruer, Sustainer, and Comprehender of all
things, both in Heaven and Earth.

Thou therefore, that in the madness of thy blood, attemptest to destroy
Unity, thou seek to destroy that which Heaven and Earth is sustained by.
Most miserable of Creatures, thy Soul has but one Supporter, and in the
tempest of thy fury thou ouerturnest that and all.

Peace enters here in Arms, and overthrows, By force of her own strength,
her strongest Foes.
ANd first behold her contending with her most honorable enemy, even he that
with better authority may slay his ten thousand; then any other his
thousand; I his hundred, yea, one single life: Either the haughty Challenge,
the curious Duel, or the bloudthirstie Revenge, to wit, War it self:
sometimes a principal Arrow, shot from the heavenly Bow of Justice, a forced
Arbiter betwixt different Kingdoms, and often proves the dear Moderator. Yet
this great Soldier, with all his Attributes of Fame and Honor, falls far
short of our high-throned Empress, Peace.

Mark how the Philosopher has ordered this Battle, and given the Colonies,
to both these great Commanders, Pacem cum omnibus habebis bellum cum vitijs.
Have Peace with all the world, only war with thy sins. Melior, and tutior
est, certa pax, quam incerta victoria: for more safe and noble is a certain
Peace, then a doubtful Victory, with all his Honors attending.

But let us believe no cowardly Philosophers: let him that in his hand holds
both, and from his hand sends both, be the Judge betwixt us.

When was War sent as a Blessing, or Peace as a punishment? Let his Judges
judge our cause, Judge. 5. verse. 8. They chose new gods, then was War in the
Gates. Here is an Offense, and here is a Punishment, Idolatry, and War.

Again, They turue to the Lord, and the Land had Peace forty years. Here is
Penitence, and here is the Blessing, Serving God, and Peace.

If then the General of Blood and Death, even War it self be a Prodigy, a
Curse, and not a Blessing, What shall his base Imitator be? What Honor shall
the Challenger lay challenge to? What blood shall the Revenger dare to shead?
or what Fame shall the Schoolmaster of Duels atchieue, with all his
vainglorious and punctual Orders of firsts and seconds; lengths of weapons,
distances of place, heights of grounds, equalities of wind and Sun? O wicked
Ashkelon and her Suburbs, let them be taken, and destroyed together. Why do
we quarrel? What is the end of the fairest War? to enjoy Peace: See how the
Servant labors for the Mistress, and foolish they that enjoy their
Inheritance, yet know it not: Thriftlesse Gamesters to play for their own
Money.

Is thy Night quiet, and sweet with Peace? Embrace her in the Day, and keep
her continually: If thou lett'st blood into thy bosom in the Day, Peace will
not stay with thee at night: Peace wears no parti-colored Coat, no mixed
Scarlet and White, but White in her Purity, nor fat, nor blood, must be eaten
in the Peace Offering, Leuiticus 3. Now ascend Abarim, and climb up to the
Mountain of Nebo, and see some part of the Land of Promise, whither this
blessed Peace shall lead thee, if she be thy conduct: but be sure to look
upwards, and then thou can not fear the depth beneath thee.

Behold the Father, the God of Peace; the Son, the Lamb of Peace; the
blessed Spirit, the Dove of Peace; the Angels, Servants, and Ministers to this
power of Peace; Infinites and all rejoicing at one souls entrance into Peace.

Behold the new Jerusalem, Kiriath-salem, the City of Peace; that which was
Militant, and troubled in the Wilderness (the Church) behold it there
triumphant in ever blessed Peace. That Peace which as it is vn-intelligible, so
is it most unutterable.

Then, if we desire to be Inhabitants in this Land of Promise and Peace,
observe our entrance. We have yet two Mountains to pass over Jordan by,
Geresim and Ebal; and the twelve Tribes placed on each side, both to bless or
curse us.

EBAL. Here we have our choice; and we are ever going on, in this Passage.

O let us pass by Geresim the Mount of Blessings, the right Hand, and the
right Hill.

Turn thy back to Ebal, but let none of her Curses fall upon thee.

GERESIM. Pride. Humility. Malice. Mercy. Ambition. Charity. Schismatic
contentions. Faith. Revenge. Peace. Impiety. Piety.

Be thou strong or weak, thou may with more ease bear six on thy right
hand, then one on thy left.

Pride is a great weight, able to overthrow the strongest man. Malice, a
ponderous Load, turning thy sleeps to unquiet slumbers, and even there
haunting thee in restless Dreams. Ambition, a Mountain it self, to sink
thee. Schism, a Spirit, and Conscience-troubler. Revenge, an Impostume of
Blood; which broken once, strangles thee with thine own Corruption. Impiety,
a Cloud and Mist of Darkness, turning thee from thy way.

When as on the other side, how light and easily may thou bear about thee
Humility? How sweet a Companion is Mercy? How loving a Fellowship is
Charity? How sure a Friend is Faith? How nourshing a Cordial is Peace? How
bright a Lamp is Piety? And then, how glorious a Reward is Eternity, and
Peace in Eternity?

Now let us bind our selves to the Peace, put in Security for our Good
Behauious. Let our Souls be bound for our Bodies, our Bodies for our Souls,
and let each come in at the General Sessions, to save his Bail; where we
shall find a merciful Judge. If there we can answer, we have not broke his
Peace, our Bonds shall be cancelled. As we have kept the Peace, we shall be
rewarded with Peace, and kept in Eternal Peace. Amen.

FINIS.

