DAEMONOLOGIE, IN FORM of a Dialogue, Divided into three Books.

IN MY DEFENSE GOD ME DEFEND.


EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert Walde-graue Printer to the Kings Majesty. An.
1597.

Cum Privilegio Regio.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
THE fearful aboundinge at this time in this country, of these detestable
slaves of the Devil, the Witches or enchaunters, has moved me (beloved
reader) to dispatch in post, this following treatise of mine, not in any wise
(as I protest) to serve for a show of my learning and ingine, but only (moved
of conscience) to preasse thereby, so far as I can, to resolve the doubting
hearts of many; both that such assaults of Satan are most certainly practiced,
and that the instruments thereof, merits most severly to be punished: against
the damnable opinions of two principally in our age, whereof the one called SCOT
an Englishman, is not ashamed in public print to deny, that there can be such a
thing as Witchcraft: and so mainteines the old error of the Sadducees, in
denying of spirits. The other called VVIERVS, a German Physician, sets out a
public apology for all these craftes-folkes, whereby, procuring for their
impunitie, he plainly bewrayes himself to have been one of that profession.
And for to make this treatise the more pleasant and facill, I have put it in
form of a Dialogue, which I have divided into three books: The first speaking
of Magie in general, and Necromancie in special. The second of Sorcerie and
Witchcraft: and the third, conteines a discourse of all these kinds of
spirits, and Specter that appears and trobles persons: together with a
conclusion of the wholwork. My intention in this labor, is only to prove two
things, as I have already said: the one, that such devilish arts have been
and are. The other, what exact trial and severe punishment they merit: and
therefore reason I, what kind of things are possible to be performed in these
arts, and by what natural causes they may be, not that I touch every
particular thing of the Devils power, for that were infinite: but only, to
speak scholasticklie, (since this can not be spoken in our language) I reason
upon genus leaving species, and differentia to be comprehended therein. As for
example, speaking of the power of Magiciens, in the first book and sixth
Chapter: I say, that they can suddenly cause be brought unto them, all kinds
of dainty dishes, by their familiar spirit: Since as a thief he delights to
steal, and as a spirit, he can subtillie and suddenly enough transport the
same. Now under this genus, may be comprehended al particulars, depending
thereupon; Such as the bringing Wine out of a Wall, (as we have heard often to
have been practiced) and such others; which particulars, are sufficiently
proved by the reasons of the general. And such like in the second book of
Witchcraft in special, and fifth Chap. I say and prove by diverse arguments,
that Witches can, by the power of their Master, cure or cast on disseases: Now
by these same reasones, that proves their power by the Devil of disseases in
general, is as well proved their power in special: as of weakening the nature
of some men, to make them unable for women: and making it to abound in others,
more then the ordinary course of nature would permit. And such like in all
other particular sicknesses; But one thing I will pray thee to observe in all
these places, where I reason upon the devils power, which is the different ends
and scopes, that God as the first cause, and the Devil as his instrument and
second cause shootes at in all these actiones of the Devil, (as Gods hangman:)
For where the deuilles intention in them is ever to perish, either the soul or
the body, or both of them, that he is so permitted to deal with: God by the
contrary, draws ever out of that evil glory to himself, either by the
wrack of the wicked in his justice, or by the trial of the patient, and
amendment of the faithful, being wakened up with that rod of correction.
Having thus declared unto thee then, my full intention in this Treatise, thou will easelie excuse, I doubt not, as well my pretermitting, to declare the whole
particular rites and secrets of these unlawful arts: as also their infinite
and wounderfull practices, as being neither of them pertinent to my purpose:
the reason whereof, is given in the hinder end of the first Chapter of the
third book: and who likes to be curious in these things, he may read, if he
will here of their practices, BODINVS Daemonomanie, collected with greater
diligence, then written with judgment, together with their confessions, that
have been at this time apprehened. If he would know what has been the opinion
of the Auncientes, concerning their power: he shall see it well descrybed by
HYPERIVS, and HEMMINGIVS, two late German writers: Besides innumerable other
neoterick Theologues, that writes largely upon that subject: And if he would
know what are the particular rites, and curiosities of these black arts (which
is both unnecessary and perilous,) he will find it in the fourth book of
CORNELIUS Agrippa, and in VVIERVS, whomof I spak. And so wishing my pains in
this Treatise (beloved Reader) to be effectual, in arming al them that reads
the same, against these above mentioned erroures, and recommending my good will
to thy friendly acceptance, I bid thee heartily farewell.

JAMES Rx.

DAEMONOLOGIE, IN FORM of ane Dialogue FIRST BOOK.
ARGUMENT,
The exord of the whole. The description of Magie in special.

CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
Proven by the Scripture, that these unlawful arts in genere, have been and
may be put in practice.

PHILOMATHES and EPISTEMON reason the matter. PHILOMATHES. I AM surely very
glad to have met with you this day, for I am of opinion, that ye can better
resolve me of some thing, whereof I stand in great doubt, nor any other
whom-with I could have met.


EPI. In what I can, that ye like to speir at me, I will willingly and freely
tell my opinion, and if I prove it not sufficiently, I am heartely content that
a better reason carry it away then.


PHI. What think ye of these strange news, which now only furnishes
purpose to al men at their meeting: I mean of these Witches?


EPI. Surely they are wonderful: And I think so clear and plain confessions
in that purpose, have never fallen out in any age or country.


PHI. No question if they be true, but thereof the Doctors doubts.


EPI. What part of it doubt ye of?


PHI. Even of all, for ought I can yet perceive: and namely, that there is
such a thing as Witchcraft or Witches, and I would pray you to resolve me
thereof if ye may: for I have reasoned with sundry in that matter, and yet
could never be satisfied therein.


EPI. I shall with good will do the best I can: But I think it the
difficiller, since ye deny the thing it self in general: for as it is said
in the logic schools, Contra negantem principia non est disputandum. Always
for that part, that witchcraft, and Witches have been, and are, the former part
is clearelie proved by the Scriptures, and the last by daily experience and
confessions.


PHI. I know ye will allege me Saules Pythonisse: but that as appears will
not make much for you.


EPI. Not only that place, but diverse others: But I marvel why that should not
make much for me?


PHI. The reasones are these, first ye may consider, that Saul being troubled
in spirit, and having 1. Sam. 28.
fasted long before, as the text testifies, and being come to a woman that was
bruted to have such knowledge, and that to inquire so important news, he having
so guilty a conscience for his heinous offenses, and specially, for that same
unlawful curiosity, and horrible defection: and then the woman crying out upon
the sudden in great admiration, for the uncouth sicht that she alleged to
have seen discovering him to be the King, though disguysed, and denied by him
before: it was no wounder I say, that his senses being thus distracted, he
could not perceive her faining of her voice, he being himself in an other
chalmer, and seeing nothing. Next what could be, or was raised? The spirit of
Samuel? Profane and against all Theology: the Devil in his likeness? as
vnappeirant, that either God would permit him to come in the shape of his
Saints (for then could never the Prophets in those days have been sure, what
Spirit spoke to them in their visiones) or then that he could foretell what
was to come there after; for Prophecy proceeds only of GOD: and the Devil
has no knowledge of things to come.


EPI. Yet if ye will mark the words of the text, ye will find clearly,
that Saul saw that apparition: for giving you that Saul was in an other
Chalmer; at the making of the circles and conjurationes, needeful for that
purpose (as none of that craft will permit any vthers to behold at that time)
yet it is evident by the text, that how sone that once that unclean spirit was
fully risen, she called in upon Saul. For it is said in the text, that Saul
knew him to be Samuel, which could not have been, by the hearing tell only of
an old man with an mantil, since there was many mo old men dead in Israel nor
Samuel: And the common weid of that whole Country was mantils. As to the next,
that it was not the spirit of Samuel, I grant: In the proving whereof ye need
not to insist, since all Christians of whatso-ever Religion agrees upon that:
and none but either mere ignorants, or Necromanciers or Witches doubts
thereof. And that the Devil is permitted at som-times to put himself in the
liknes of the Saints, it is plain in the Scriptures, where 2. Cor. 11. 14.
it is said, that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light.
Neither could that bring any inconvenient with the visiones of the Prophets,
since it is most certain, that God will not permit him so to deceive his own:
but only such, as first wilfully deceiues them-selves, by running unto him,
whom God then suffers to fall in their own snares, and justly permittes them
to be illuded with great efficacy of deceit, because they would not believe the
truth (as Paul says). And as to the diuelles foretelling of things to come,
it is true that he knows not all things future, but yet that he knows part,
the Tragical event of this history declares it, (which the wit of woman could
never have fore-spoken) not that he has any prescience, which is only proper
to God: or yet knows any thing by loking upon God, as in a mirror (as the
good Angels do) he being for ever debarred from the favorable presence and
countenance of his creator, but only by one of these two means, either as
being worldly wise, and taught by an continual experience, ever since the
creation, judges by likelie-hood of things to come, according to the like that
has passed before, and the natural causes, in respect of the vicissitude of
all things worldly: Or else by Gods employing of him in a turn, and so
foreseen thereof: as appears to have bin in this, whereof we find the very
like in Micheas propheticque discourse to King 1. King, 22.
Achab. But to prove this my first proposition, that there can be such a thing
as witchcraft, and witches, there are many mo places in the Scriptures then
this (as I said before). As first in the law of God, it is Exodus 22.
plainly prohibited: But certain it is, that the Law of God speaks nothing
in vain, nether does it lay curses, or injoyne punishments upon shadows,
condemning that to be il, which is not in essence or being as we call it.
Secondly it is plain, where Exodus 7 and 8. 1. Sam. 15.
wicked Pharaohs wisemen imitated ane number of Moses miracles, to harden the
tyrants heart there by. Thirdly, said not Samuel to Saull, that disobedience
is as the sin of Witchcraft? To compare to a thing that were not, it were
too too absurd. Fourthlie, was not Simon Magus, a man of that craft? And Acts.
^. Acts 16
fiftlie, what was she that had the spirit of Python? beside innumerable other
places that were irkesom to recite.


CHAP. II.
ARGV.
What kind of sin the practizers of these unlawful arts committes. The
division of these arts. And what are the means that allures any to practice
them.

PHILOMATHES. BUT I think it very strange, that God should permit any
man-kynde (since they bear his own Image) to fall in so gross and filthy a
defection.


EPI. Although man in his Creation was made to the Image of the Creator, yet
through his Genesis 1.
fall having once lost it, it is but restored again in a part by grace only
to the elect: So all the rest falling away from God, are given over in the
hands of the Devil that enemy, to bear his Image: and being once so given
over, the greatest and the grossest impiety, is the pleasantest, and most
delytefull unto them.


PHI. But may it not suffice him to have indirectly the rule, and procure the
perdition of so many souls by alluring them to vices, and to the following of
their own appetites, suppose he abuse not so many simple souls, in making them
directly acknowledge him for their master.


EPI. No surely, for he uses every man, whom of he has the rule, according
to their complexion and knowledge: And so whom he finds most simple, he
plaineliest discovers himself unto them. For he being the enemy of man's
Salvation, uses all the means he can to entrappe them so far in his snares,
as it may be unable to them thereafter (suppose they would) to rid themselves
out of the same.


PHI. Then this sin is a sin against the holy Ghost.


EPI. It is in some, but not in all.


PHI. How that? Are not all these that runs directly to the Devil in one
Categorie.


EPI. God forbid, for the sin against the holy Ghost has two branches: The
one a falling back from the whole service of GOD, and a refusal of all his
precepts. The other is the doing of the first with knowledge, knowing that
they do wrong against their own conscience, and the testimony of the holy
Spirit, having once had a taste of the sweetness Heb. 5. 10.
of Gods mercies. Now in the first of these two, all sorts of Necromancers,
Enchanters or Witches, ar comprehended: but in the last, none but such as erres
with this knowledge that I have spoken of.


PHI Then it appears that there are more sorts nor one, that are directly
professors of his service: and if so be, I pray you tell me how many, and what
are they?


EPI. There are principally two sorts, whereunto all the parts of that
unhappy art are redacted; whereof the one is called Magie or Necromancie, the
other Sorcerie or Witchcraft.


PHI. What I pray you? and how many are the means, whereby the Devil allures
persons in any of these snares?


EPI. Even by these three passiones that are within our selves: Curiosity in
great ingines: thrist of revenge, for some tortes deeply apprehended: or
greedy appetite of gear, caused through great poverty. As to the first of
these, Curiosity, it is only the inticement of Magiciens, or Necromanciers:
and the other two are the allureres of the Sorecrers, or Witches, for that old
and crafty Serpent, being a spirit, he easily spies our affections, and so
conformes himself thereto, to deceive us to our wrack.


CHAP. III
ARGV.
The significations and Etymologies of the words of Magie and Necromancie. The
difference betuixt Necromancie and Witchcraft: What are the entressis, and
beginninges, that brings any to the knowledge thereof.

PHILOMATHES. I Would gladly first hear, what thing is it that ye call Magie
or Necromancie.


EPI. This word Magie in the Persian tongue, importes as much as to be ane
contemplator or Interpretour of Divine and heavenly sciences: which being
first used amongs the Chaldees, through their ignorance of the true divinity,
was esteemed and reputed amongst them, as a principal virtue: And therefore,
was named vnjustlie with an honorable style, which name the Greeks imitated,
generally importing all these kinds of unlawful arts. And this word
Necromancie is a Greek word, compounded of (...) and (...), which is to say,
the Prophecy by the dead. This last name is given, to this black and unlawful
science by the figure Synecdoche, because it is a principal part of that art,
to serve them selves with dead carcages in their diuinations.


PHI. What difference is there betwixt this art, and Witchcraft.


EPI. Surely, the difference vulgar put betwixt them, is verrie merry, and
in a manner true; for they say, that the Witches ar servantes only, and slaves
to the Devil; but the Necromanciers are his masters and commanders.


PHI. How can that be true, yt any men being specially adicted to his service,
can be his co^manders?


EPI. Yea, they may be: but it is only secundum quid: For it is not by any
power that they can have over him, but ex pacto allanerlie: whereby he oblices
himself in some trifles to them, that he may on the other part obtain the
fruition of their body and soul, which is the only thing he huntes for.


PHI. An very in-aequitable contract forsooth: But I pray you discourse unto
me, what is the effect and secreets of that art?


EPI. That is over large an field ye give me: yet I shall do good will, the
most summarlie that I can, to run through the principal points thereof. As
there are two sorts of folks, that may be entysed to this art, to wit,
learned or unlearned: so is there two means, which are the first steerers up
and feeders of their curiosity, thereby to make them to give themselves over
to the same: Which two means, I call the Devils school, and his rudimentes.
The learned have their curiosity wakened up; and fed by that which I call
his school: this is the Astrology judiciar. For diverse men having attained to
a great perfection in learning, and yet remaining over bare (alas) of the
spirit of regeneration and fruits thereof: finding all natural things common,
as well to the stupide pedants as unto them, they assaie to vendicate unto them
a greater name, by not only knowing the course of things heavenly, but
likewise to clim to the knowledge of things to come thereby. Which, at the
first face appearing lawful unto them, in respect the ground thereof seems to
proceed of natural causes only: they are so allured thereby, that finding
their practice to prove true in sundry things, they study to know the cause
thereof: and so mounting from degree to degree, upon the slipperie and
uncertain scale of curiosity; they are at last entised, that where lawful
arts or sciences fails, to satisfy their restles minds, even to seek to
that black and unlawful science of Magie. Where, finding at the first, that
such diverse forms of circles and conjurations rightly joined thereunto, will
raise such diverse forms of spirits, to resolve them of their doubts: and
attributing the doing thereof, to the power inseparably tied, or inherent in
the circles: and many words of God, confusedly wrapped in; they blindlie
glory of themselves, as if they had by their quicknes of ingine, made a
conquest of Plutoes dominion, and were become Emperors over the Stygian
habitacles. Where, in the mean time (miserable wretches) they are become in
very deed, bond-slaues to their mortal enemy: and their knowledge, for all
that they presume thereof, is nothing increased, except in knowing evil, and
the horrors of Hell for punishment thereof, as Adams Genesis 3.
was by the eating of the forbidden tree.


CHAP. IIII
ARGV.
The Description of the Rudiments and School, which are the entresses to the
art of Magie: And in special the differences betwixt Astronomy and
Astrology: Division of Astrology in diverse parts.

PHILOMATHES. But I pray you likewise forget not to tell what are the Deuilles
rudimentes.


EPI. His rudimentes, I call first in general, all that which is called
vulgarly the virtue of word, herb, and stone: which is used by unlawful
charms, without natural causes. As likewise all kind of practicques,
freites, or other like extraordinary actiones, which cannot abide the true
toutche of natural reason.


PHI. I would have you to make that playner, by some particular examples; for
your proposition is very general.


EPI. I mean either by such kind of Charms as commonly dafte wives uses,
for healing of forspoken goods, for preserving them from evil eyes, by
knitting roun trees, or sundriest kind of herbs, to the hair or tails of
the goods: By curing the Worm, by stemming of blood, by healing of
Horse-crookes, by turning of the riddle, or doing of such like innumerable
things by words, without applying any thing, meet to the part offended, as
Mediciners do; Or else by staying married folks, to have naturally ado with
other, (by knitting so many knottes upon a point at the time of their marriage)
And suchlike things, which men uses to practice in their merrinesse: For fra
unlearned men (being naturally curious, and lacking the true knowledge of God)
finds these practices to prove true, as sundry of them will do, by the
power of the Devil for deceauing men, and not by any inherent virtue in these
vain words and freites; and being desirous to win a reputation to
themselves in suchlike turns, they either (if they be of the shamefaster
sort) seek to be learned by some that are experimented in that Art, (not
knowing it to be evil at the first) or else being of the grosser sort, runs
directly to the Devil for ambition or desire of gain, and plainly
contractes with him thereupon.


PHI. But me thinks these means which ye call the School and rudimentes of
the Devil, are things lawful, and have been approved for such in all times
and ages: As in special, this science of Astrology, which is one of the
special members of the Mathematicques.


EPI. There are two things which the learned have observed from the beginning,
in the science of the Heavenly Creatures, the Planets, Stars, and such like:
The one is their course and ordinary motiones, which for that cause is called
Astronomia: Which word is a compound of (...) and (...) that is to say, the law
of the Stars: And this art indeed is one of the members of the
Mathematicques, and not only lawful, but most necessary and commendable. The
other is called Astrologia, being compounded of (...) and (...) which is to
say, the word, and preaching of the stars: Which is divided in two parts:
The first by knowing thereby the powers of simples, and sickenesses, the course
of the seasons and the weather, being ruled by their influence; which part
depending upon the former, although it be not of it self a part of
Mathematicques: yet it is not unlawful, being moderatlie used, suppose not so
necessary and commendable as the former. The second part is to trust so much
to their influences, as thereby to foretell what commonweals shall flourish
or decay: what persons shall be fortunate or unfortunate: what side shall
win in any battle: What man shall obtain victory at singular combat:
What way, and of what age shall men die: What horse shall win at
matche-running; and diverse such like incredible things, wherein Cardanus,
Cornelius Agrippa, and diverse others have more curiously then profitably
written at large. Of this root last spoken of, springs innumerable branches;
such as the knowledge by the natiuities; the Cheiromancie, Geomantie,
Hydromantie, Arithmantie, Physiognomie: and a thousand others: which were much
practiced, and holden in great reverence by the Gentles of old. And this last
part of Astrology whereof I have spoken, which is the root of their branches,
was called by them pars fortunae. This part now is utterly unlawful to be
trusted in, or practiced amongst christians, as leaning to no ground of natural
reason: and it is this part which I called before the devils schole.


PHI. But yet many of the learned are of the contrary opinion.


EPI. I grant, yet I could give my reasons to fortify and maintain my
opinion, if to enter into this disputation it would not draw me quite off the
ground of our discourse; besides the mis-spending of the whole day thereupon:
One word only I will answer to them, and that in the Scriptures (which must be
an infallible ground to all true Christians) That in the Prophet Jeremy it is
plainly forbidden, to Ierem. 1^.
believe or hearken unto them that Prophecies and fore-speakes by the course of
the Planets and Stars.


CHAP. V.
ARGV.
How far the using of Charms is lawful or unlawful: The description of the
forms of Circkles and Coniurationes. And what causes the Magicianes
themselves to weary thereof.

PHILOMATHES. WELL, Ye have said far enough in that argument. But how prove ye
now that these charms or unnatural practicques are unlawful: For so, many
honest and merry men and women have publicly practiced some of them, that I
think if ye would accuse them al of Witchcraft, ye would affirm more nor ye
will be believed in.


EPI. I see if you had taken good tent (to the nature of that word, whereby I
named it,) ye would not have been in this doubt, nor mistaken me, so far as
ye have done: For although, as none can be scholars in a schole, and not be
subject to the master thereof: so none can study and put in practice (for
study the alone, and knowledge, is more perilous nor offensive; and it is the
practice only that makes the greatness of the offense.) The cirkles and art of
Magie, without committing an horrible defection from God: And yet as they that
reads and learnes their rudiments, are not the more subject to any
schoolmasters, if it please not their parents to put them to the school
thereafter; So they who ignorantly proves these practicques, which I call the
deuilles rudiments, unknowing them to be baits, casten out by him, for
trapping such as God will permit to fall in his hands: This kind of folks I
say, no doubt, ar to be judged the best of, in respect they use no invocation
nor help of him (by their knowledge at least) in these turns, and so have
never entered themselves in Satan's service; Yet to speak truly for my own
part (I speak but for my self) I desire not to make so near riding: For in
my opinion our enemy is over crafty, and we over weak (except the greater
grace of God) to assay such hazards, wherein he preases to trap us.


PHI. Ye have reason forsooth; for as the common Proverb says: They that
suppe keile with the Devil, have need of long spoones. But now I pray you
go forward in the describing of this art of Magie.


EPI. Fra they be come once unto this perfection in evil, in having any
knowledge (whether learned or unlearned) of this black art: they then begin
to be weary of the raising of their Master, by conjured circkles; being both
so difficile and perilous, and so comes plainly to a contract with him,
wherein is specially contained forms and effects.


PHI. But I pray you or ever you go further, discourse me somewhat of their
circkles and conjurationes; And what should be the cause of their wearying
thereof: For it should seem that that form should be less fearful yet,
than the direct haunting and society, with that foul and unclean Spirit.


EPI. I think ye take me to be a Witch my self, or at the least would feign
swear your self prentise to that craft: Always as I may, I shall shortly
satisfy you, in that kind of conjurations, which are contained in such
books, which I call the Deuilles School: There are four principal parts;
the persons of the conjurers; the action of the conjuration; the words and
rites used to that effect; and the Spirits that are conjured. Ye must first
remember to lay the ground, that I told you before: which is, that it is no
power inherent in the circles, or in the holiness of the names of God
blasphemouslie used: nor in whatsoever rites or ceremonies at that time used,
that either can raise any infernal spirit, or yet limitat him perforce within
or without these circles. For it is he only, the father of all lies, who
having first of all prescribed that form of doing, feining himself to be
commanded and restreined thereby, will be loath to pass the bounds of these
injunctiones; as well thereby to make them glory in the impiring over him (as I
said before:) As likewise to make himself so to be trusted in these little
things, that he may have the better commodity thereafter, to deceive them in
the end with a trick once for all; I mean the everlasting perdition of their
soul and body. Then laying this ground, as I have said, these conjurationes
must have few or mo in number of the persons conjurers (always passing the
singular number) according to the quality of the circle, and form of
apparition. Two principal things cannot well in that errand be wanted:
holie-water (whereby the Devil mockes the Papists) and some present of a
living thing unto him. There are likewise certain seasons, days and hours,
that they observe in this purpose: These things being all ready, and prepared,
circles are made triangular, quadrangular, round, double or single, according
to the form of apparition that they crave. But to speak of the diverse forms
of the circles, of the innumerable characters and crosses that are within and
without, and out through the same, of the diverse forms of apparitiones; that
that crafty spirit illudes them with, and of all such particulars in that
action, I remit it to ouer-manie that have busied their heads in describing of
the same; as being but curious, and altogether unprofitable. And this far
only I touch, that when the conjured Spirit appears, which will not be while
after many circumstances, long prayers, and much muttring and murmuring of the
conjurers; like a Papist priest, dispatching a hunting Mass: how sone I say,
he appears, if they have missed one jot of all their rites; or if any of
their feet once slyd over the circle through terror of his fearful
apparition, he pays himself at that time in his own hand, of that due debt
which they ought him; and other-wise would have delayed longer to have paid
him: I mean he carries them with him body and soul. If this be not now a
just cause to make them weary of these forms of conjuration, I leave it to
you to judge upon; considering the long-somenesse of the labor, the precise
keeping of days and hours (as I have said) The terriblenesse of apparition,
and the present perrell that they stand in, in missing the least circumstance
or freite, that they ought to observe: And on the other part, the Devil is
glad to move them to a plain and square dealing with him as I said before.


CHAP. VI
ARGV.
The Deuilles contract with the Magicians: The division thereof in two parts:
What is the difference betuixt Gods miracles and the Devils.

PHILOMATHES. Indeed there is cause enough, but rather to leave him at all,
then to run more plainly to him, if they were wise he dealt with. But go
forward now I pray you to these turns, fra they become once deacons in this
craft.


EPI. From time that they once plainly begin to contract with him: The effect
of their contract consistes in two things; in forms and effects, as I began
to tell already, were it not ye interrupted me (for although the contract be
mutual; I speak first of that part, wherein the Devil oblishes himself to
them) by forms, I mean in what shape or fashion he shall come unto them, when
they call upon him. And by effects, I understand, in what special sorts of
services he binds himself to be subject unto them. The quality of these
forms and effects, is less or greater, according to the skill and art of the
Magician. For as to the forms, to some of the baser sort of them he oblishes
him self to appear at their calling upon him, by such a proper name which he
shows unto them, either in likeness of a dog, a Catte, an Ape, or suchlike
other beast; or else to answer by a voice only. The effects are to answer to
such demands, as concerns curing of disseases, their own particular menagery:
or such other base things as they require of him. But to the most curious
sort, in the forms he will oblish him self, to enter in a dead body, and
there out of to give such answers, of the event of battles, of matters
concerning the estate of commonwelths, and such like other great questions:
yea, to some he will be a continual attender, in form of a Page: He will
permit himself to be conjured, for the space of so many years, either in a
tablet or a ring, or such like thing, which they may easily carry about with
them: He gives them power to sell such wares to others, whereof some will be
dearer, and some better cheap; according to the lying or true speaking of the
Spirit that is conjured therein. Not but that in very deed, all Devils must
be liars; but so they abuse the simplicity of these wretches, that becomes
their scholars, that they make them believe, that at the fall of Lucifer, some
Spirits fell in the air, some in the fire, some in the water, some in the
land: In which Elements they still remain. Whereupon they build, that such
as fell in the fire, or in the air, are truer then they, who fell in the water
or in the land, which is al but meare trattles, and forged be the author of al
deceit. For they fell not be weight, as a solid substance, to stick in any one
part: But the principal part of their fall, consisting in quality, by the
falling from the grace of God wherein they were created, they continued still
thereafter, and shall do while the latter day, in wandering through the world,
as Gods hang-men, to execute such turns as he employes them in. And when any
of them are not occupied in that, return they must to their prison in hell (as
it is plain in the miracle that CHRIST wrought at Gennezareth) Mat. 8.
therein at the latter day to be all enclosed for ever: and as they deceive
their scholars in this, so do they, in imprinting in them the opinion that
there are so many Princes, Dukes, and Kings amongst them, every one
commanding fewer or mo Legions, and impyring in diverse arts, and quarters of
the earth. For though that I will not deny that there be a form of ordour
amongst the Angels in Heaven, and consequently, was amongst them before their
fall; yet, either that they bruike the same sensine; or that God will permit us
to know by damned Devils, such heavenly mysteries of his, which he would not
reveal to us neither by Scripture nor Prophets, I think no Christian will
once think it. But by the contrary of all such mysteries, as he has closed
up with his seal of secrecy; it becomes us to be contented with an humble
ignorance, they being things not necessary for our salvation. But to return
to the purpose, as these forms, wherein Satan oblishes himself to the
greatest of the Magicians, are wounderfull curious; so are the effects
correspondent unto the same: For he will oblish himself to teach them arts
and sciences, which he may easelie do, being so learned a knave as he is: To
carry them news from any part of the world, which the agilitie of a
Spirit may easelie perform: to reveal to them the secrets of any persons,
so being they be once spoken, for the thought none knows but GOD; except so
far as ye may guess by their countenance, as one who is doubtleslie learned
enough in the Physiognomie: Yea, he will make his scholars to creep in
credit with Princes, by foretelling them many great things; part true,
part false: For if all were false, he would tyne credit at all hands; but
always doubtsome, as his Oracles were. And he will also make them to please
Princes, by fair banquets and dainty dishes, carried in short space fra the
farthest part of the world. For no man doubts but he is a thief, and his
agilitie (as I spoke before) makes him to come such speed. Suchlike, he will
guard his scholars with fair armies of horsemen and foote-men in appearance,
castles and fortes: Which all are but impressiones in the air, easelie
gathered by a spirit, drawing so near to that substance himself: As in like
manner he will learn them many juglarie tricks at Cards, dice, and such
like, to deceive men's senses thereby: and such innumerable false practicques;
which are prouen by ouer*manie in this age: As they who ar acquainted with that
Italian called SCOTO yet living, can report. And yet are all these things but
deluding of the senses, and no ways true in substance, as were the false
miracles wrought by King Pharaoes Magicians, for counterfeiting Moses: For
that is the difference betuixt Gods miracles and the Devils, God is a creator,
what he makes appear in miracle, it is so in effect. As Moses rod being
casten down, was no doubt turned in a natural Serpent: where as the Devil (as
Gods Ape) counterfetting that by his Magicians, maid their wandes to appear
so, only to men's outward senses: as kythed in effect by their being
devoured by the other. For it is no wonder, that the Devil may delude our
senses, since we see by common proof, that simple juglars will make an
hundredth things seem both to our eyes and ears otherways then they are. Now
as to the Magicians part of the contract, it is in a word that thing, which I
said before, the Devil hunts for in all men.


PHI. Surely ye have said much to me in this art, if all that ye have said be
as true as wounderfull.


EPI. For the truth in these actiones, it will be easelie confirmed, to any
that pleases to take pain upon the reading of diverse authenticque histories,
and the inquiring of daily experiences. And as for the truth of their
possibility, that they may be, and in what manner, I trust I have alleged
nothing whereunto I have not joined such probable reasons, as I leave to your
discretion, to way and considder: One word only I omitted; concerning the
form of making of this contract, which is either written with the Magicians
own blood: or else being agreed upon (in terms his schole-master) touches him
in some part, though peradventure no mark remain: as it does with all
Witches.


CHAP. VII.
ARGV.
The reason why the art of Magie is unlawful, What punishment they merit: And
who may be accounted guilty of that crime.

PHILOMATHES. SVRELIE Ye have made this art to appear very monstrous and
detestable. But what I pray you shall be said to such as mainteines this art to
be lawful, for as evil as you have made it?


EPI. I say, they savor of the pan them selves, or at least little better,
And yet I would be glad to hear their reasons.


PHI. There are two principally, that ever I heard used; beside that which is
founded upon the common Proverb (that the Necromancers commands the Devil,
which ye have already refuted) The one is grounded upon a received custom: The
other upon an authority, which some thinks infallible. Upon custom, we see
that diverse Christian Princes and Magistrates severe punishers of Witches,
will not only ouer-see Magicians to live within their dominions; but even
sometimes delight to see them prove some of their practicques. The other
reason is, that Moses being brought up (as it is expreslie said in the
Scriptures) in all the sciences of the Egyptians; whereof no doubt, this was
one of the principalles. And he notwithstanding of this art, pleasing God, as
he did, consequently that art professed by so godly a man, could not be
unlawful.


EPI. As to the first of your reasones, grounded upon custom: I say, an evil
custom can never be accepted for a good law, for the over great ignorance of
the word in some Princes and Magistrates, and the contempt thereof in others,
moves them to sin heavelie against their office in that point. As to the
other reasone, which seems to be of greater weight, if it were formed in a
Syllogism; it behooued to be in many terms, and full of fallacies (to speak
in terms of Logicque) for first, that that general proposition; affirming
Moses to be taught in all the sciences of the Egyptians, should conclude that
he was taught in Magie, I see no necessity. For we must understand that the
spirit of God there, speaking of sciences, understands them that are lawful;
for except they be lawful, they are but abusiue called sciences, and are but
ignorances indeed: Nam homo pictus, non est homo. Secondly, giving that he
had been taught in it, there is great difference* betwixt knowledge and
practicing of a thing (as I said before) For God knows all things, being
always good, and of our sin and our infirmity proceeds our ignorance.
Thirdly, giving that he had both studied and practiced the same (which is more
nor monstrous to be believed by any Christian) yet we know well enough, that
before that ever the spirit of God began to call Moses, he was fled out of
Egypt, being forty years of age, for the slaughter of an Egyptian, and in
his good-father Iethroes land, first called at the fiery bushe, having
remained there other forty years in exile: so that suppose he had been the
wickeddest man in the world before, he then became a changed and regenerat
man, and very little of old Moses remained in him. Abraham was an Idolater in
Vr of Chaldaea, before he was called: And Paul being called Saul, was a most
sharp persecutor of the Saints of God, while that name was changed.


PHI. What punishment then think ye merits these Magicians and Necromancers?


EPI. The like no doubt, that Sorcerers and Witches merits; and rather so much
greater, as their error proceeds of the greater knowledge, and so draws nerer
to the sin against the holy Ghost. And as I say of them, so say I the like of
all such as consults, enquires, entertaines, and ouersees them, which is seen
by the miserable ends of many that asks council of them: For the Devil has
never better tidings to tell to any, then he told to Saul: neither is it
lawful to use so unlawful instruments, were it never for so good a purpose:
for that axiom in Theology is most certain and infallible: Nunquam faciendum
estmalum vt bonum Ast 3.
inde eueniat.


THE SECOND BOOK OF DAEmonologie
ARGUMENT.
The description of Sorcerie and Witchcraft in special.

CHAP. I.
ARGV.
Proved by the Scripture, that such a thing can be: And the reasones refuted of
all such as would call it but an imagination and Melancholicque humor.

PHILOMATHES. NOW Since ye have satisfied me now so fully, concerning Magie
or Necromancie I will pray you to do the like in Sorcerie or Witchcraft.


EPI. That field is likewise very large: and althought in the mouths and
pens of many, yet few knows the truth thereof, so well as they believe
themselves, as I shall so shortly as I can, make you (God willing) as easelie
to perceive.


PHI. But I pray you before ye go further, let me interrupt you here with a
short digression: which is, that many can scarcely believe that there is such
a thing as Witchcraft. Whose reasons I will shortly allege unto you, that ye
may satisfy me as well in that, as ye have done in the rest. For first,
whereas the Scripture seems to prove Witchcraft to be, by diverse examples,
and specially by sundry of the same, which ye have alleged; it is thought by
some, that these places speaks of Magicians and Necromancers only, and not of
Witches. As in special, these wise men of Pharaohs, that counterfeited Moses
miracles, were Magicians say they, and not Witches: As likewise that Pythonisse
that Saul consulted with: And so was Simon Magus in the new Testament, as that
very style importes. Secondly, where ye would oppone the daily practicque,
and confession of so many, that is thought likewise to be but very
melancholicque imaginations of simple rauing creatures. Thirdly, if Witches had
such power of Witching of folks to death, (as they say they have) there had
been none left alive long sense in the world, but they: at the least, no good
or godly person of whatsoever estate, could have escaped their deuilrie.


EPI. Your three reasons as I take, ar grounded the first of them negative upon
the Scripture: The second affirmative upon Physic: And the third upon the
certain proof of experience. As to your first, it it most true indeed, that
all these wise men of Pharaoh were Magicians of art: As likewise it appears
well that the Pythonisse, with whom Saul consulted, was of that same profession:
and so was Simon Magus. But ye omitted to speak of the Law of God, wherein
are all Magicians* Divines, Enchanters, Sorcerers, Witches, and whatsouer of
that kind that consultes with the Devil, plainly prohibited, and alike
threatened against. And besides that, she who had the Spirit of Python, in the
Acts, Act. 16.
whose Spirit was put to silence by the Apostle, could be no other thing but
a very Sorcerer or Witch, if ye admit the vulgar distinction, to be in a
manner true, whereof I spoke in the beginning of our conference. For that spirit
whereby she conquested such gain to her Master, was not at her raising or
commanding, as she pleased to appoint, but spoke by her tongue, as well
publicly, as privately: Whereby she seemed to draw nearer to the sort of
Demoniakes or possessed, if that conjunction betwixt them, had not been of her
own consent: as it appeared by her, not being tormented therewith: And by her
conquesting of such gain to her masters (as I have already said.) As to your
second reason grounded upon Physic, in attributing their confessiones or
apprehensiones, to a natural melancholicque humor: Any that pleases
Physicallie to consider upon the natural humor of melancholy, according to
all the Physicians, that ever writ thereupon, they sall find that that will be
over short a cloak to cover their knavery with: For as the humor of Melancholy
in the self is black, heavy and terrene, so are the symptoms thereof, in
any persons that are subject thereunto, leannes, palenes, desire of solitude:
and if they come to the highest degree thereof, mere folly and Many: where as
by the contrary, a great number of them that ever have been convict or
confessors of Witchcraft, as may be presently seen by many that have at this
time confessed: they are by the contrary, I say, some of them rich and
worldly-wise, some of them fat or corpulent in their bodies, and most part of
them altogether given over to the pleasures of the flesh, continual haunting of
company, and all kind of merrines, both lawful and unlawful, which are
things directly contrary to the symptoms of Melancholy, whereof I spoke, and
further experience day lie proves how loath they are to confess without
torture, which witnesses their guiltines, where by the contrary, the
Melancholicques never spares to bewray themselves, by their continual
discourses, feeding thereby their humor in that which they think no crime. As
to your third reason, it scarcely merits an answer. For if the devil their
master were not bridled, as the scriptures teaches us, suppose there were no
men nor women to be his instruments, he could find ways enough without any
help of others to wrack al mankind: whereunto he employes his whole study,
and goes about like a roaring Lion (as PETER says) to that effect, but 1.
Pet. 5.
the limits of his power were set down before the foundations of the world
were laid, which he has not power in the least jote to transgress. But beside
all this, there is over great a certainty to prove that they are, by the daily
experience of the harms that they do, both to men, and whatsoever thing men
possesses, whom God will permit them to be the instruments, so to trouble or
visit, as in my discourse of that art, ye shall hear clearelie proved.


CHAP. II
ARGV.
The Etymology and signification of that word of Sorcerie. The first entresse
and prentishippe of them that gives themselves to that craft.

PHILOMATHES. COme on then I pray you, and return where ye left.


EPI. This word of Sorcerie is a Latin word, which is taken from casting of
the lot, and therefore he that uses it, is called Sortiarius a sort. As to
the word of Witchcraft, it is nothing but a proper name given in our language.
The cause wherefore they were called sortiarij, proceeded of their practicques
seeming to come of lot or chance: Such as the turning of the riddle: the
knowing of the form of prayers, or such like tokens: If a person deceased
would live or dye. And in general, that name was given them for using of such
charms, and freites, as that Craft teaches them. Many points of their craft
and practicques are common betuixt the Magicians and them: for they serve both
one Master, althought in diverse fashions. And as I divided the Necromancers,
into two sorts, learned and unlearned; so must I deny them in other two, rich
and of better account, poor and of basser degree. These two degrees now of
persons, that practices this craft, answers to the passions in them, which (I
told you before) the Devil used as means to intyse them to his service, for
such of them as are in great misery and poverty, he allures to follow him, by
promising unto them great riches, and worldly commodity. Such as though
rich, yet burns in a desperate desire of revenge, he allures them by
promises, to get their turn satisfied to their hearts contentment. It is to be
noted now, that that old and crafty enemy of ours, assailes none, though
touched with any of these two extremities, except he first find an entresse
reddy for him, either by the great ignorance of the person he deals with,
joined with an evil life, or else by their carelesnes and contempt of God: And
finding them in an utter despair, for one of these two former causes that I
have spoken of; he prepares the way by feeding them craftily in their humor,
and filling them further and further with despair, while he find the time
proper to discover himself unto them. At which time, either upon their walking
solitary in the fields, or else lying pansing in their bed; but always
without the company of any other, he either by a voice, or in likeness of a
man inquires of them, what troubles them: and promises them, a sudden and
certain way of remedy, upon condition on the other part, that they follow
his advise; and do such things as he will require of them: Their minds being
prepared before hand, as I have already spoken, they easelie agreed unto that
demand of his: And syne settes another tryist, where they may meet again. At
which time, before he proceed any further with them, he first persuades them
to addict themselves to his service: which being easily obtained, he then
discouers what he is unto them: makes them to renunce their God and Baptism
directly, and gives them his mark upon some secreit place of their body,
which remains soar unhealed, while his next meeting with them, and thereafter
ever insensible, how soever it be nipped or pricked by any, as is daily
proved, to give them a proof thereby, that as in that doing, he could hurt
and heal them; so all their ill and well doing thereafter, must depend upon
him. And besides that, the intolerable dolor that they feel in that place,
where he has marked them, serves to waken them, and not to let them rest,
while their next meeting again: fearing least otherways they might either
forget him, being as new Prentises, and not well enough founded yet, in that
fiendlie folly: or else remembering of that horrible promise they made him, at
their last meeting, they might skunner at the same, and preasse to call it
back. At their third meeting, he makes a show to be careful to perform his
promises, either by teaching them ways how to get themselves revenged, if
they be of that sort: Or else by teaching them lessons, how by most vilde and
unlawful means, they may obtain gain, and worldly commodity, if they be
of the other sort.


CHAP. III.
ARGV.
The Witches actiones divided in two parts. The actiones proper to their own
persons. Their actiones toward others. The form of their conuentiones, and
adoring of their Master.

PHILOMATHES. YE have said now enough of their initiating in that ordour. It
restes then that ye discourse upon their practices, fra they be passed
Prentises: for I would feign hear what is possible to them to perform in
very deed. Although they serve a common Master with the Necromancers, (as I
have before said) yet serve they him in an other form. For as the means are
diverse, which allures them to these unlawful arts of serving of the Devil;
so by diverse ways use they their practices, answering to these means, which
first the Devil, used as instruments in them; though altending to one end: To
wit, the enlargeing of Satan's tyranny, and crossing of the propagation of the
Kingdom of CHRIST, so far as lies in the possibility, either of the one or
other sort, or of the Devil their Master. For where the Magicians, as allured
by curiosity, in the most part of their practices, seeks principally the
satisfying of the same, and to win to themselves a popular honor and
estimation: These Witches on the other part, being intised either for the
desire of revenge, or of wordly riches, their whole practices are either to
hurt men and their gudes, or what they possess, for satisfying of their
cruel minds in the former, or else by the wrack in quhatsoeuer sort, of
any whom God will permit them to have power off, to satisfy their greedy
desire in the last point.


EPI. In two parts their actiones may be divided; the actiones of their own
persons, and the actiones proceeding from them toward any other. And this
division being well understood, will easily resolve you, what is possible to
them to do. For although all that they confess is no lie upon their part,
yet doubtlesly in my opinion, a part of it is not indeed, according as they
take it to be: And in this I mean by the actiones of their own persons. For
as I said before, speaking of Magic that the Devil illudes the senses of these
scholars of his, in many things, so say I the like of these Witches.


PHI. Then I pray you, first to speak of that part of their own persons, and
syne ye may come next to their actiones toward others.


EPI. To the effect that they may perform such services of their false Master,
as he employes them in, the devil as Gods Ape, counterfeites in his servants
this service and form of adoration, that God prescribed and made his servants
to practice. For as the servants of GOD, publicly uses to conveene for
serving of him, so makes he them in great numbers to conveene (though publicly
they dare not) for his service. As none conueenes to the adoration and
worshipping of God, except they be marked with his seal, the Sacrament of
Baptism: So none serves Satan, and conueenes to the adoring of him, that are
not marked with that mark, whereof I already spoke. As the Minister sent by God,
teaches plainly at the time of their public conuentions, how to serve him in
spirit and truth: so that unclean spirit, in his own person teaches his
Disciples, at the time of their conueening, how to work all kind of
mischief: And craves count of all their horrible and detestable proceedinges
passed, for advancement of his service. Yea, that he may the more viuelie
counterfeit and scorn God, he often times makes his slaves to conveene in these
verrie places, which are destinat and ordained for the conveening of the
servantes of God (I mean by Churches) But this far, which I have yet said, I
not only take it to be true in their opiniones, but even so to be indeed.
For the form that he used in counterfeiting God amongst the Gentiles, makes me
so to think: As God spoke by his Oracles, spoke he not so by his? As GOD had
as well bloody Sacrifices, as others without blood, had not he the like? As God
had Churches sanctified to his service, with Altars, Priests, Sacrifices,
Ceremonies and Prayers; had he not the like polluted to his service? As God
gave responses by Vrim and Thummim, gave he not his responses by the intralls
of beasts, by the singing of Fowls, and by their actiones in the air? As God
by visiones, dreams, and extases reueiled what was to come, and what was his
will unto his servants; used he not the like means to forwarne his slaves of
things to come? Yea, even as God loved cleannes, hated vice, and impuritie, and
appointed punishments therefore: used he not the like (though falselie I
grant, and but in eschewing the less inconvenient, to draw them upon a
greater) yet dissimuled he not I say, so far as to appoint his Priests to
keep their bodies clean and undefiled, before their asking responses of him?
And feyned he not God to be a protector of every virtue, and a just revenger
of the contrary? This reason then moves me, that as he is that same Devil;
and as crafty now as he was then; so will he not spare as pertelie in these
actiones that I have spoken of, concerning the witches persons: But further,
Witches often times confesses not only his conueening in the Church with them,
but his occupying of the Pulpit: Yea, their form of adoration, to be the
kissing of his hinder parts. Which though it seem ridiculous, yet may it
likewise be true, seeing we read that in Calicute, he appearing in form of a
Goate-bucke, has publicly that vn-honest homage done unto him, by every one
of the people: So ambitious is he, and greedy of honor (which procured his
fall) that he will even imitate God in that part, where it is said, that
Moses could see but the hinder parts of God, for Exo. 33*
the brightness of his glory: And yet that speech is spoken but (...)


CHAP. IIII.
ARGV.
What are the ways possible, whereby the witches may transport themselves to
places far distant. And what ar impossible and mere illusiones of Satan. And
the reasons thereof.

PHILOMATHES. But by what way say they or think ye it possible that they can
com to these unlawful co^uentio^s?


EPI. There is the thing which I esteem their senses to be deluded in, and
though they lie not in confessing of it, because they think it to be true, yet
not to be so in substance or effect: for they say, that by diverse means they
may conueene, either to the adoring of their Master, or to the putting in
practice any service of his, committed unto their charge: one way is natural,
which is natural riding, going or sailing, at what hour their Master comes and
aduertises them. And this way may be easelie believed: an other way is somewhat
more strange: and yet is it possible to be true: which is by being carried by
the force of the Spirit which is their conducter, either above the earth or
above the Sea swiftly, to the place where they are to meet: which I am
persuaded to be likewaies possible, in respect that as Habakkuk was carried by
the Angel in that form, to the den where Daniell lay; so think I,
Apocrypha of ^^ll and the Dragon.
the Devil will be reddie to imitate God, as well in that as in other things:
which is much more possible to him to do, being a Spirit, then to a mighty
wind, being but a natural meteore, to transporte from one place to an other a
solid body, as is commonly and daily seen in practice: But in this violent
form they cannot be carried, but a short bounds, agreeing with the space
that they may retain their breath: for if it were longer, their breath could
not remain vnextinguished, their body being carried in such a violent and
forceable manner, as be example: If one fall off an small height, his life is
but in perrell, according to the hard or soft lighting: But if one fall from
an high and stay rock, his breath will be forcibly banished from the body,
before he can win to the earth, as is often seen by experience. And in this
transporting they say themselves, that they are invisible to any other, except
amongst themselves; which may also be possible in my opinion. For if the devil
may form what kind of impressiones he pleases in the air, as I have said
before, speaking of Magie, why may he not far easilier thicken and obscure so
the air, that is next about them by contracting it strait together, that the
beams of any other man's eyes, cannot pearce through the same, to see them? But
the third way of their coming to their conuentions, is, that where in I think
them deluded: for some of them says, that being transformed in the likeness
of a little beast or soul, they will come and pearce through whatsoever house
or Church, though all ordinary passages be closed, by whatsoever open, the
air may enter in at. And some says* that their bodies lying still as in an
ecstasy, their spirits will be ravished out of their bodies, and carried to ^^^ll
places. And for verefying thereof* will give evident tokens, as well by witnesses
that have seen their body lying senseles in the mean time, as by naming
persons, whomwith they met, and giving tokens quhat purpose was amongst
them, whom otherways they could not have known: for this form of journeing,
they affirm to use most, when they are transported from one Country to
another.


PHI. Surely I long to hear your own opinion of this: For they are like old
wives trattles about the fire. The reasons that moves me to think that these
are mere illusiones, ar these. First for them that are transformed in likeness
of beasts or fowls, can enter through so narrow passages, although I may
easelie believe that the Devil could by his woorkemanshippe upon the air,
make them appear to be in such forms, either to themselves or to others. Yet
how he can contract a solid body within so little room, I think it is
directly contrary to it self, for to be made so little, and yet not
diminished: To be so straightly drawn together, and yet feel no pain; I
think it is so contrary to the quality of a natural body, and so like to
the little transubstantiat god in the Papists Mass, that I can never believe
it. So to have aquantitie, is so proper to a solid body, that as all
Philosophers concludes, it cannot be any more without one, then a spirit can
have one. For when PETER came out of the prison, and the doors all locked: It
was not by Act. 12.
any contracting of his body in so little room: but by the giving place of
the door, though un espied by the Gaylors. And yet is there no comparison; when
this is done, betuixt the power of God, and of the Devil. As to their form of
ecstasy and spiritual transporting, it is certain the souls going out of the
body, is the only difinition of natural death: and who are once dead, God
forbid we should think that it should lie in the power of all the Devils in
Hell, to restore them to their life again: Although he can put his own
spirit in a dead body, which the Necromancers commonly practice, as ye have
hard. For that is the office properly belonging to God; and besides that, the
soul once parting from the body, cannot wander any longer in the world, but
to the own resting place must it go immediately, abiding the conjunction of
the body again, at the latter day. And what CHRIST or the Prophets did
miraculouslie in this case, it cannot in no Christian man's opinion be maid
common with the Devil. As for any tokens that they give for proouing of this,
it is very possible to the Devils craft, to persuade them to these means. For
he being a spirit, may he not so rauishe their thoughts, and dull their
senses, that their body lying as dead, he may object to their spirits as it
were in a dream, and (as the Poets write of Morpheus) represente such forms
of persons, of places, and other circumstances, as he pleases to illude them
with? Yea, that he may deceive them with the greater efficacy, may he not at
that same instant, by fellow angels of his, illude such other persons so in
that same fashion, whom with he makes them to believe that they met; that
all their reports and tokens, though severally examined, may every one agree
with an other. And that whatsoever actiones, either in hurting men or beasts:
or whatsoever other thing that they falselie imagine, at that time to have
done, may by himself or his marrowes, at that same time be done indeed; so as
if they would give for a token of their being ravished at the death of such a
person within so short space thereafter, whom they believe to have poisoned,
or witched at that instante, might he not at that same hour, have smitten
that same person by the permission of GOD, to the farther deceiving of them,
and to move others to believe them? And this is surely the likeliest way, and
most according to reason, which my judgment can find out in this, and
whatsoever other unnatural points of their confession. And by these means
shall we saill surely, betuixt Charybdis and Scylla, in eschewing the not
believing of them altogether on the one part, least that draw us to the error
that there is no Witches: and on the other part in believing of it, make us to
eschew the falling into innumerable absurdities, both monstruouslie against all
Theology divine, and Philosophy human.


CHAP. V
ARGV.
Witches actiones toward others. Why there are more women of that craft nor
men? What things are possible to them to effectuate by the power of their
master. The reasons thereof. What is the surest remedy of the harms done by
them.

PHILOMATHES. FOrsooth your opinion in this, seems to carry most reason with
it, and sense ye have ended, then the actions belonging properly to their own
persons: say forward now to their actiones used toward others.


EPI. In their actiones used toward others, three things ought to be
considered: First the manner of their consulting thereupon: Next their part as
instruments: And last their masters part, who puts the same in execution. As
to their consultationes thereupon, they use them oftest in the Churches, where
they conveene for adoring: at what time their master enquiring at them what
they would be at: every one of them propones unto him, what wicked turn they
would have done, either for obteining of riches, or for revenging them upon
any whom they have malice at: who granting their demand, as no doubt
willingly he will, since it is to do evil, he teaches them the means, whereby
they may do the same. As for little trifling turns that women have ado with,
he causes them to joint dead corpses, and to make powders thereof, mixing such
other things there amongst, as he gives unto them.


PHI. But before ye go further, permit me I pray you to interrupt you one
word, which ye have put me in memory of, by speaking of Women. What can be
the cause that there are twenty women given to that craft, where there is one
man?


EPI. The reason is easy, for as that sex is frailer then man is, so is it
easier to be intrapped in these gross snares of the Devil, as was over well
proved to be true, by the Serpents deceiving of Eua at the beginning, which
makes him the homelier with that sex sensine.


PHI. Return now where ye left.


EPI. To some others at these times he teaches, how to make Pictures of wax
or clay: That by the rosting thereof, the persons that they bear the name of,
may be continually melted or dried away by continual sickness. To some he
gives such stones or poulders, as will help to cure or cast on diseases: And
to some he teaches kinds of uncouth poisons, which Mediciners understands
not (for he is far cunningner then man in the knowledge of all the occult
proprieties of nature) not that any of these means which he teaches them
(except the poisons which are composed of things natural) can of them selves
help any thing to these turns, that they are employed in, but only being
Gods Ape, as well in that, as in all other things. Even as God by his
Sacraments which are earthly of themselves works a heavenly effect, though
no ways by any cooperation in them: And as CHRIST by clay and spettle wrought
together, opened the eyes of the blind man, suppose John. 9.
there was no virtue in that which he outwardly applied, so the Devil will
have his out-warde means to be shows as it were of his doing, which has no
part of cooperation in his turns with him, how far that ever the ignorantes
be abused in the contrary. And as to the effects of these two former parts,
to wit, the consultationes and the outward means, they are so wounderfull as I
dare not allege any of them, without joining a sufficient reason of the
possibility thereof. For leaving all the small trifles among wives, and to
speak of the principal points of their craft. For the common trifles
thereof, they can do without converting well enough by themselves: These
principal points I say are these: They can make men or women to love or hate
other, which may be very possible to the Devil to effectuat, seeing he being a
subtle spirit, knows well enough how to persuade the corrupted affection of
them whom God will permit him so to deal with: They can lay the sickness of
one upon an other, which likewise is very possible unto him: For since by Gods
permission, he laid sickness upon JOB, why may he not far easilier lay it
upon any other: For as an old practisian, he knows well enough what humor
domines most in any of us, and as a spirit he can subtillie walken up the
same, making it peccant, or to abound, as he thinks meet for troubling of
us, when God will so permit him. And for the taking off of it, no doubt he will
be glad to reliue such of present pain, as he may think by these means to
persuade to be catched in his everlasting snares and fetters. They can
be-witch and take the life of men or women, by rosting of the Pictures, as I
spoke of before, which likewise is very possible to their Master to perform,
for although, (as I said before) that instrumente of wax have no virtue in
that turn doing, yet may he not very well even by that same measure that his
conjured slaves meltes that wax at the fire, may he not I say at these same
times, subtilie as a spirit so weaken and scatter the spirits of life of the
patient, as may make him on the one part, for faintness to sweat out the
humor of his body: And on the other part, for the not concurrence of these
spirits, which causes his digestion, so debilitat his stomak, that his humor
radical continually, sweating out on the one part, and no new good suck being
put in the place thereof, for lack of digestion on the other, he at last shall
vanish away, even as his picture will do at the fire. And that knauish and
cunning woorkeman, by troubling him only at some times, makes a proportion so
near betuixt the woorking of the one and the other, that both shall end as it
were at one time. They can raise storms and tempests in the air, either upon
Sea or land, though not universally, but in such a particular place and
prescribed bounds, as God will permit them so to trouble: Which likewise is
very easy to be discerned from any other natural tempests that are
meteores, in respect of the sudden and violent raising thereof, together with
the short enduring of the same. And this is likewise very possible to their
master to do, he having such affinity with the air as being a spirit, and
having such power of the forming and moving thereof, as ye have heard me
already declare: For in the Scripture, that style of the Prince of the air
Ephesians. 2
is given unto him. They can make folks to be com phrenticque or Maniacque,
which likewise is very possible to their master to do, sense they are but
natural sicknesses: and so he may lay on these kinds, as well as any others.
They can make spirits either to follow and trouble persons, or haunt certain
houses, and affraie oftentimes the inhabitants: as has been known to be done
by our Witches at this time. And likewise they can make some to be possessed
with spirits, and so to become very Daemoniacques: and this last sort is
very possible likewise to the Devil their Master to do, since he may easily
send his own angels to trouble in what form he pleases, any whom God will
permit him so to use.


PHI. But will God permit these wicked instruments by the power of the Devil
their master, to trouble by any of these means, any that believes in him?


EPI. No doubt, for there are three kind of folks whom God will permit so to
be tempted or troubled; the wicked for their horrible sins, to punish them in
the like measure; The godly that are sleeping in any great sins or
infirmities and weakness in faith, to waken them up the faster by such an
uncouth form: and even some of the best, that their patience may be tried
before the world, as JOBS was. For why may not God use any kind of
extraordinary punishment, when it pleases him; as well as the ordinary rods
of sickness or other adversities.


PHI. Who then may be free from these Deuilish practices?


EPI. No man ought to presume so far as to promise any impunitie to himself:
for God has before all beginninges preordinated as well the particular sorts
of Plagues as of benefits for every man, which in the own time he ordaines
them to be visited with, and yet ought we not to be the more affrayde for that,
of any thing that the Devil and his wicked instruments can do against us: For
we daily fight against the Devil in a hundredth other ways: And therefore as
a valiant Captain, affraies no more being at the combat, nor stays from his
purpose for the rummishing shot of a Cannon, nor the small clack of a Pistolet:
suppose he be not certain what may light upon him; Even so ought we boldly to
go forward in fighting against the Devil withoutanie greater terror, for
these his rarest weapons, nor for the ordinary whereof we have daily the
proof.


PHI. Is it not lawful then by the help of some other Witch to cure the
disease that is casten on by that craft?


EPI. No ways lawful: For I gave you the reason thereof in that axiom of
Theology, which was the last words I spoke of Magie


PHI. How then may these diseases be lawfully cured?


EPI. Only by earnest prayer to GOD, by amendment of their lives, and by
sharp persewing every one, according to his calling of these instruments of
Satan, whose punishment to the death will be a salutarie sacrifice for the
patient. And this is not only the lawful way, but likewise the most sure: For
by the Devils means, can never the Devil Mark. 3
be casten out, as Christ says. And when such a cure is used, it may well
serve for a short time, but at the last, it will doubtleslie tend to the utter
perdition of the patient, both in body and soul.


CHAP. VI.
ARGV.
What sort of folks are least or most subject to receive harm by Witchcraft.
What power they have to harm the Magistrate, and upon what respects they have
any power in prison: And to what end may or will the Devil appear to them
therein. Upon what respects the Devil appeires in sundry shapes to sundry of
them at any time

PHILOMATHES. But who dare take upon him to punish them, if no man can be sure
to be free from their unnatural inuasiones?


EPI. We ought not the more of that restrain from virtue, that the way whereby
we climb thereunto be straight and perrilous. But besides that, as there is no
kind of persons so subject to receive harm of them, as these that are of
infirm and weak faith (which is the best buckler against such inuasiones:) so
have they so small power over none, as over such as zealouslie and earnestly
persewes them, without sparing for any worldly respect.


PHI. Then they are like the Pest, which smites these sickarest, that flies it
farthest, and apprehends deepliest the perrell thereof.


EPI. It is even so with them: For neither is it able to them to use any false
cure upon a patient, except the patient first believe in their power, and so
hazard the tinsell of his own soul, nor yet can they have less power to
hurt any, nor such as contemnes most their doings, so being it comes of
faith, and not of any vain arrogancy in themselves.


PHI. But what is their power against the Magistrate?


EPI. Less or greater, according as he deals with them. For if he be
slothful toward them, God is very able to make them instruments to waken
and punish his sloth. But if he be the contrary, he according to the just law
of God, and allowable law of all Nationes, will be diligent in examining and
punishing of them: GOD will not permit their master to trouble or hinder so
good a work.


PHI. But fra they be once in hands and firmance, have they any further power
in their craft?


EPI. That is according to the form of their detention. If they be but
apprehended and detained by any private person, upon other private respects,
their power no doubt either in escaping, or in doing hurt, is no less nor
ever it was before. But if on the other part, their apprehending and detention
be by the lawful Magistrate, upon the just respects of their guiltiness in
that craft, their power is then no greater then before that ever they meddled
with their master. For where God begins justly to strike by his lawful
Lieutennentes, it is not in the Deuilles power to defraude or bereave him of
the office, or effect of his powerful and revenging Scepter.


PHI. But will never their master come to visit them, fra they be once
apprehended and put in firmance?


EPI. That is according to the estaite that these miserable wretches are in:
For if they be obstinate in still denying, he will not spare, when he finds
time to speak with them, either if he find them in any comfort, to fill them
more and more with the vain hope of some manner of relief: or else if he
find them in a deep despair, by all means to augment the same, and to
persuade them by some extraordinary means to put themselves down, which
very commonly they do. But if they be penitent and confess, God will not
permit him to trouble them any more with his presence and allurementes.


PHI It is not good using his counsel I see then. But I would earnestly know
when he appears to them in Prison, what forms uses he then to take?


EPI. Diverse forms, even as he uses to do at other times unto them. For as I
told you, speking of Magie, he appears to that kind of craftes-men ordinarily
in an form, according as they agree upon it amongst themselves: Or if they be
but prentises, according to the quality of their circles or conjurationes: Yet
to these capped creatures, he appears as he pleases, and as he finds meetest
for their humors. For even at their public conuentiones, he appears to diverse
of them in diverse forms, as we have found by the difference of their
confessiones in that point: For he deluding them with vain impressiones in the
air, makes himself to seem more terrible to the grosser sort, that they
may thereby be moved to fear and reverence him the more: And les monstrous
and vncouthlike again to the craftier sort, least otherways they might
stir and skunner at his ugliness.


PHI. How can he then be felt, as they confess they have done him, if his
body be but of air?


EPI. I hear little of that amongst their confessiones, yet may he make
himself palpable, either by assuming any dead body, and using the ministry
thereof, or else by deluding as well their sense of feeling as seeing; which is
not impossible to him to do, since all our senses, as we are so weak, and
even by ordinary sicknesses will be often times deluded.


PHI. But I would speere one word further yet, concerning his appearing to
them in prison, which is this. May any other that chances to be present at that
time in the prison, see him as well as they.


EPI. Sometimes they will, and sometimes not, as it pleases God.


CHAP. VII.
ARGV.
Two forms of the devils visible conuersing in the earth, with the reasones
wherefore the one of them was communest in the time of Papistrie: And the other
sensine. Those that denies the power of the Devil, denies the power of God,
and are guilty of the error of the Sadduces.

PHILOMATHES. Has the Devil then power to appear to any other, except to
such as are his sworn disciples: especially since al Oracles, and such like
kinds of illusiones were taken away and abolished by the cumming of CHRIST?


EPI. Although it be true indeed, that the brightness of the Gospel at his
cumming, scaled the clouds of all these gross errors in the Gentilisme: yet
that these abusing spirits, ceases not sensine at sometimes to appear, daily
experience teaches us. Indeed this difference is to be marked betwixt the
forms of Satan's conuersing visiblie in the world. For of two different forms
thereof, the one of them by the spreading of the Euangell, and conquest of the
white horse, in the sixth Chapter of the Revelation, is much hindered and become
rarer there through. This his appearing to any Christians, troubling of them
outwardly, or possessing of them constraynedly. The other of them is become
communer and more used sensine, I mean by their unlawful arts, whereupon our
whole purpose has been. This we find by experience in this I Will to be true.
For as we know, more Ghostes and spirits were seen, nor tongue can tell, in
the time of blind Papistrie in these Countries, where now by the contrary, a
man shall scarcely all his time here once of such things. And yet were these
unlawful arts far rarer at that time: and never were so much hard of, nor
so rife as they are now.


PHI. What should be the cause of that?


EPI. The diverse nature of our sins procures at the Justice of God, diverse
sorts of punishments answering thereunto. And therefore as in the time of
Papistrie, our fathers erring grossly, and through ignorance, that mist of
errors ouershaddowed the Devil to walk the more familiarlie amongst them:
And as it were by barnelie and affraying terroures, to mock and accuse their
barnelie erroures. By the contrary, we now being sound of Religion, and in
our life rebelling to our profession, God justly by that sin of rebellion,
as Samuel calls it, accuses our life so wilfully fighting against our
profession.


PHI. Since ye are entered now to speak of the appearing of spirits: I would
be glad to hear your opinion in that matter. For many denies that any such
spirits can appear in these days as I have said.


EPI. Doubtleslie who denies the power of the Devil, would likewise deny
the power of God, if they could for shame. For since the Devil is the very
contrary opposite to God, there can be no better way to know God, then by the
contrary; as by the ones power (though a creature) to admire the power of the
great Creator: by the falsehood of the one to considder the truth of the other,
by the injustice of the one, to considder the Justice of the other: And by the
cruelty of the one, to considder the mercifulness of the other: And so forth
in all the rest of the essence of God, and qualities of the Devil. But I fear
indeed, there be over many Sadduces in this world, that denies all kinds of
spirits: For convicting of whose error, there is cause enough if there were
no more, that God should permit at sometimes spirits visiblie to kyith.


THE THIRD BOOK OF DAEmonologie
ARGUMENT.
The description of all these kinds of Spirits that troubles men or women.
The conclusion of the whole Dialogue.

CHAP. I.
ARGV.
The division of spirits in four principal kinds. The description of the
first kind of them, called Spectra and vmbrae mortuorum. What is the best way
to be free of their trouble.

PHILOMATHES. I Pray you now then go forward in telling what ye think
fabulous, or may be trowed in that case.


EPI. That kind of the Devils conuersing in the earth, may be divided in four
different kinds, whereby he affrayeth and troubles the bodies of men: For of
the abusing of the soul, I have spoken already. The first is, where spirits
troubles some houses or solitary places: The second, where spirits follows
upon certain persons, and at diverse hours troubles them: The third, when
they enter within them and possess them: The fourth is these kind of spirits
that are called vulgarly the Fayrie. Of the three former kinds, ye hard
already, how they may artificially be made by Witchcraft to trouble folk:
Now it restes to speak of their natural coming as it were, and not raised by
Witchcraft. But generally I must for-warne you of one thing before I enter in
this purpose: that is, that although in my discourseing of them, I deuyde them
in diverse kinds, ye must notwithstanding there of note my Phrase of speaking
in that: For doubtleslie they are in effect, but all one kind of spirits, who
for abusing the more of mankind, takes on these sundry shapes, and uses
diverse forms of out-ward actiones, as if some were of nature better then
other. Now I return to my purpose: As to the first kind of these spirits,
that were called by the ancients by diverse names, according as their actions
were. For if they were spirits that haunted some houses, by appearing in
diverse and horrible forms, and making great dinne: they were called Lemures
or Spectra. If they appeared in likeness of any defunct to some friends of
his, they were called vmbrae mortuorum: And so innumerable styles they got,
according to their actiones, as I have said already. As we see by experience,
how many styles they have given them in our language in the like manner: Of the
appearing of these spirits, we are certified by the Scriptures, where the
Prophet ESAIAS 13. and Esaias. 13 Iere. 50
34. cap. threatening the destruction of JERUSALEM: declares, that it shall not
only be wracked, but shall become so great a solitude, as it shall be the
habitackle of Howlettes, and of ZIIM and IIM, which are the proper Hebrewe
names for these Spirits. The cause why they haunte solitary places, it is by
reason, that they may affraie and brangle the more the faith of such as them
alone hauntes such places. For our nature is such, as in companies we are not
so soon moved to any such kind of fear, as being solitare, which the
Denill knowing well enough, he will not therefore assail us but when we are
weak: And besides that, GOD will not permit him so to dishonor the societies
and companies of Christians, as in public times and places to walk visiblie
amongst them. On the other part, when he troubles certain houses that are
dwelt in, it is a sure token either of gross ignorance, or of some gross and
slanderous sins amongst the inhabitants thereof: which God by that
extraordinary rod punishes.


PHI. But by what way or passage can these Spirits enter in these houses,
seeing they allege that they will enter, Door and Window being steiked?


EPI. They will choose the passage for their entresse, according to the form
that they are in at that time. For if they have assumed a dead body,
whereinto they lodge themselves, they can easily enough open without dinne any
Door or Window, and enter in thereat. And if they enter as a spirit only,
any place where the air may come in at, is large enough an entry for them:
For as I said before, a spirit can occupy no quantity.


PHI. And will God then permit these wicked spirits to trouble the rest of a
dead body, before the resurrection thereof? Or if he will so, I think it
should be of the reprobate only.


EPI. What more is the rest troubled of a dead body, when the Devil carries
it out of the Grave to serve his turn for a space, nor when the Witches takes
it up and joyntes it, or when as Swine wortes up the graves? The rest of them
that the Scripture speaks of, is not meaned by a local remaining continually
in one place, but by their resting from their trauelles and miseries of this
world, while their latter conjunction again with the soul at that time to
receive full glory in both. And that the Devil may use as well the ministry
of the bodies of the faithful in these cases, as of the vn-faithfull, there is
no inconvenient; for his haunting with their bodies after they are dead, can
no-waies defyle them: In respect of the souls absence. And for any dishonor
it can be unto them, by what reason can it be greater, then the hanging,
heading, or many such shameful deaths, that good men will suffer? for there is
nothing in the bodies of the faithful, more worthy of honor, or freer from
corruption by nature, nor in these of the unfaithful, while time they be purged
and glorified in the latter day, as is daily seen by the vilde diseases and
corruptions, that the bodies of the faithful are subject unto, as ye will see
clearelie proved, when I speak of the possessed and Daemoniacques.


PHI. Yet there are sundry that affirms to have haunted such places, where
these spirits are alleged to be: And could never hear nor see any thing.


EPI. I think well: For that is only reserved to the secreete knowledge of
God, whom he will permit to see such things, and whom not.


PHI. But where these spirits hauntes and troubles any houses, what is the
best way to banishe them?


EPI. By two means may only the remeid of such things be procured: The one
is ardent prayer to God, both of these persons that are troubled with them,
and of that Church whereof they are. The other is the purging of themselves by
amend meant of life from such sins, as have procured that extraordinary
plague.


PHI. And what means then these kinds of spirits, when they appear in the
shadow of a person newly dead, or to die, to his friends?


EPI. When they appear upon that occasion, they are called Wraithes in our
language. Amongst the Gentiles the Devil used that much, to make them believe
that it was some good spirit that appeared to them then, either to forewarne
them of the death of their friend; or else to discover unto them, the will of
the defunct, or what was the way of his slauchter, as is written in the book
of the histories Prodigious. And this way he easelie deceived the Gentiles,
because they knew not God: And to that same effect is it, that he now appears
in that man^er to some ignorant Christians. For he dare not so illude any that
knows that, neither can the spirit of the defunct return to his friend, or
yet an Angel use such forms.


PHI. And are not our war-woolfes one sort of these spirits also, that hauntes
and troubles some houses or dwelling places?


EPI. There has indeed been an old opinion of such like things; For by the
Greeks they were called (...) which signifies men-woolfes. But to tell you
simply my opinion in this, if any such thing has been, I take it to have
proceeded but of a natural super-abundance of Melancholy, which as we read,
that it has made some think themselves Pitchers, and some horses, and some
one kind of beast or other: So suppose I that it has so viciat the
imagination and memory of some, as per lucida interualla, it has so highly
occupied them, that they have thought themselves verrie Woolfes indeed at
these times: and so have counterfeited their actiones in goeing on their hands
and feet, preassing to devour women and barnes, fighting and snatching with
all the town dogs, and in using such like other brutish actiones, and so to
become beasts by a strong apprehension, as Nebucad-netzar was seven years:
but as ^an. 4.
to their having and hyding of their hard and schellie sluiches, I take that to
be but eiked, by uncertain report, the author of all lies.


CHAP. II.
ARGV.
The description of the next two kinds of Spirits, whereof the one follows
outwardly, the other possesses inwardly the persons that they trouble. That
since all Prophecies and visiones are now ceased, all spirits that appears
in these forms are evil.

PHILOMATHES. COme forward now to the rest of these kinds of spirits.


EPI. As to the next two kinds, that is, either these that outwardly troubles
and follows some persons, or else inwardly possesses them: I will conjoyne
them in one, because as well the causes ar alike in the persons that they are
permitted to trouble: as also the ways whereby they may be remedied and cured.


PHI. What kind of persons are they that uses to be so troubled?


EPI. Two kinds in special: Either such as being guilty of grievous
offenses, God punishes by that horrible kind of scourdge, or else being
persons of the best nature peradventure, that ye shall find in all the
Country about them, GOD permittes them to be troubled in that sort, for the
trial of their patience, and wakening up of their zeal, for admonishing of
the beholders, not to trust over much in themselves, since they are made of no
better stuff, and peradventure blotted with no smaller sins (as CHRIST
said, speaking of them upon whom the Tower of Sylo fell:) And for giving
likewise to the spectatators, Luc. 1
matter to praise GOD, that they meriting no better, are yet spared from being
corrected in that fearful form.


PHI. These are good reasones for the part of GOD, which apparantlie mooues
him so to permit the Devil to trouble such persons. But since the Devil has
ever a contrary respect in all the actiones that GOD employes him in: which
is I pray you the end and mark he shoots at in this turn?


EPI. It is to obtain one of two things thereby, if he may: The one is the
tinsell of their life, by inducing them to such perrilous places at such time
as he either follows or possesses them, which may procure the same: And such
like, so far as GOD will permit him, by tormenting them to weaken their
body, and cast them in incurable diseases. The other thing* that he preases
to obtain by troubling of them, is the tinsell of their soul, by intising
them to mistruste and blaspheme God: Either for the intollerablenesse of their
torments, as he assayed to have done with JOB; or else for his promising unto
them to ^^b. 1.
leave the troubling of them, in case they would so do, as is known by
experience at this same time by the confession of a young one that was so
troubled.


PHI. Since ye have spoken now of both these kinds of spirits comprehending
them in one: I must now go back again in speering some questions of every
one of these kinds in special. And first for these that follows certain
persons, ye know that there are two sorts of them: One sort that troubles
and torments the persons that they haunt with: An other sort that are
serviceable unto them in all kind of their necessaries, and omittes never to
forwarne them of any sudden perrell that they are to be in. And so in this
case, I would understand whither both these sorts be but wicked and damned
spirits: Or if the last sort be rather Angels, (as should appear by their
actiones) sent by God to assist such as he specially favors. For it is
written in the Scriptures, that God sendes Legions of Angels to guarde and
watch over his (...)n. 32. ^Kin. 6 ^al. 34.
elect.


EPI. I know well enough where fra that error which ye allege has proceeded:
For it was the ignorant Gentiles that were the fountain thereof. Who for that
they knew not God, they forged in their own imaginationes, every man to be
still accompanied with two spirits, whereof they called the one genius bonus,
the other genius malus: the Greeks called them (...) and (...): whereof the
former they said, persuaded him to all the good he did: the other entised him
to all the evil. But praised be God we that are christians, and walks not
amongst the Cymmerian conjectures of man, knows well enough, that it is the
good spirit of God only, who is the fountain of all goodness, that perswads us
to the thinking or doing of any good: and that it is our corrupted flesh and
Satan, that intiseth us to the contrary. And yet the Devil for confirming in
the heads of ignorant Christians, that error first maintained among the
Gentiles, he whiles among the first kind of spirits that I speak of, appeared
in time of Papistrie and blindness, and haunted diverse houses, without doing
any evil, but doing as it were necessary turns up and down the house: and
this spirit they called Brownie in our language, who appeared like a rough-man:
yea, some were so blinded, as to believe that their house was all the sonsier,
as they called it, that such spirits resorted there.


PHI. But since the Devils intention in all his actions, is ever to do evil,
what evil was there in that form of doing, since their actions outwardly were
good.


EPI Was it not evil enough to deceive simple ignorantes, in making them to
take him for an Angel of light, and so to account of Gods enemy, as of their
particular friend: where by the contrary, all we that are Christians, ought
assuredly to know that since the coming of Christ in the flesh, and
establishing of his Church by the Apostles, all miracles, visions, prophecies,
and appearances of Angels or good spirits are ceased. Which served only for
the first sowing of faith, and planting of the Church. Where now the Church
being established, and the white Horse whereof I spoke before, having made his
conqueste, the Law and Prophets are thought sufficient to serve us, or make us
inexcusable, as (...)uk. 16.
Christ says in his parable of Lazarus and the rich man.


CHAP. III.
ARGV.
The description of a particular sort of that kind of following spirits,
called Incubi and Succubi: And what is the reason wherefore these kinds of
spirits hauntes most the Northern and barbarous parts of the world.

PHILOMATHES. THE next question that I would speere, is likewise concerning
this first of these two kinds of spirits that ye have conjoined: and it is
this; ye know how it is commonly written and reported, that amongst the rest
of the sorts of spirits that follows certain persons, there is one more
monstrous nor all the rest: in respect as it is alleged, they converse
naturally with them whom they trouble and hauntes with: and therefore I would
know in two things your opinion herein: First if such a thing can be: and
next if it be: whether there be a difference of sexes amongst these spirits or
not.


EPI. That abominable kind of the Devils abusing of men or women, was called
of old, Incubi and Succubi, according to the difference of the sexes that they
conuersed with. By two means this great kind of abuse might possibly be
performed: The one, when the Devil only as a spirit, and stealing out the
sperme of a dead body, abuses them that way, they not graithlie seeing any
shape or feeling any thing, but that which he so conuayes in that part: As we
read of a Monastery of Nuns which were burnt for their being that way
abused. The other mean is when he borrowes a dead body and so visiblie, and
as it seems unto them naturally as a man converses with them. But it is to be
noted, that in whatsoever way he uses it, that sperme seems intollerably cold
to the person abused. For if he steal out the nature of a quick person, it
cannot be so quickly carried, but it will both tine the strength and heat by
the way, which it could never have had for lack of agitation, which in the
time of procreation is the procurer and wakener up of these two natural
qualities. And if he occupying the dead body as his lodging expel the same
out thereof in the dew time, it must likewise be cold by the participation
with the qualities of the dead body whereout of it comes. And whereas ye
inquire if these spirits be divided in sexes or not, I think the rules of
Philosophy may easelie resolve a man of the contrary: For it is a sure
principle of that art, that nothing can be divided in sexes, except such
living bodies as must have a natural seed to genere by. But we know spirits
has no seed proper to themselves, nor yet can they gender one with an other.


PHI. How is it then that they say sundry monsters have been gotten by that
way.


EPI. These tales are nothing but Aniles fabulae. For that they have no nature
of their own, I have showed you already. And that the cold nature of a dead
body, can work nothing in generation, it is more nor plain, as being
already dead of it self as well as the rest of the body is, wanting the
natural heat, and such other natural operation, as is necessary for
woorking that effect, and in case such a thing were possible (which were
allutterly against all the rules of nature) it would bread no monster, but
only such a natural offspring, as would have cummed betuixt that man or woman
and that other abused person, in-case they both being alive had had a do with
other. For the Deuilles part therein, is but the naked carrying or expelling
of that substance: And so it could not participate with no quality of the
same. Indeed, it is possible to the craft of the Devil to make a woman's
belly to swel after he has that way abused her, which he may do, either by
steiring up her own humor, or by herbs, as we see beggars daily do. And when
the time of her delivery should come to make her thoil great doloures, like
unto that natural course, and then subtillie to slip in the Mid-wiues
hands, stocks, stones, or some monstrous barn brought from some other
place, but this is more reported and gessed at by others, nor believed by me.


PHI. But what is the cause that this kind of abuse is thought to be most
common in such wild parts of the world, as Lap-land, and Fin-land, or in our
North Isles of Orknay and Schet-land.


EPI. Because where the Devil finds greatest ignorance and barbaritie, there
assayles he grosseliest, as I gave you the reason wherefore there was more
Witches of women kind nor men.


PHI. Can any be so unhappy as to give their willing consent to the Deuilles
vilde abusing them in this form.


EPI. Yea, some of the Witches have confessed, that he has persuaded them to
give their willing consent thereunto, that he may thereby have them feltred the
sikarer in his snares; But as the other compelled sort is to be pitied and
prayed for, so is this most highly to be punished and detested.


PHI. It is not the thing which we call the Mare, which takes folks sleeping in
their bedds, a kind of these spirits, whereof year speaking?


EPI. No, that is but a natural sickness, which the Mediciners has given that
name of Incubus unto ab incubando, because it being a thick fleume, falling
into our breast upon the heart, while we are sleeping, intercludes so our
vital spirits, and takes all power from us, as maks us think that there were
some unnatural burden or spirit, lying upon us and holding us down.


CHAP. IIII.
ARGV.
The description of the Daemoniackes and possessed. By what reason the Papists
may have power to cure them.

PHILOMATHES. WELL, I have told you now all my doubts, and ye have satisfied me
therein, concerning the first of these two kinds of spirits that ye have
conjoined. Now I am to inquire only two things at you concerning the last
kind, I mean the Daemoniackes. The first is, whereby shall these possessed
folks be discerned fra them that are trubled with a natural Frenzy or Many.
The next is, how can it be that they can be remedied by the Papists Church,
whom we counting as Hereticques, it should appear that one Devil should not
cast out an other, for then would his kingdom be divided in Mat. 12 Mark. 3
it self, as CHRIST said.


EPI. As to your first question; there are diverse symptoms, whereby that
heavy trouble may be discerned from a natural sickness, and specially
three, omitting the diverse vain signs that the Papists attributes unto it:
Such as the raging at holy water, their fleeing a back from the Croce, their
not abiding the hearing of God named, and innumerable such like vain things
that were alike fashious and feckles to recite. But to come to these three
symptoms then, whereof I spoke, I account the one of them to be the incredible
strength of the possessed creature, which will far exceed the strength of
six of the wightest and wodest of any other men that are not so troubled. The
next is the boldning up so far of the patients breast and belly, with such an
unnatural sturring and vehement agitation within them: And such an ironie
hardness of his sinnowes so stiffelie bended out, that it were not possible to
prick out as it were the skin of any other person so far: so mightily works
the Devil in all the members and senses of his body, he being locallie within
the same, suppose of his soul and affectiones thereof, he have no more power
then of any other man's. The last is, the speaking of sundry languages, which
the patient is known by them that were acquainte with him never to have
learned, and that with an uncouth and hollow voice, and all the time of his
speaking, a greater motion being in his breast then in his mouth. But fra this
last symptom is excepted such, as are altogether in the time of their
possessing bereft of al their senses being possessed with a dumme and blind
spirit, whereof Christ releiued one, in the 12. of Matthew. And as to your next
demand, it is first to be doubted if the Papists or any not professing the
the only true Religion, can relieve any of that trouble. And next, in-case
they can, upon what respects it is possible unto them. As to the former upon
two reasons, it is grounded: first that it is known so many of them to be
counterfite, which wyle the Clergy inuentes for confirming of their rotten
Religion. The next is, that by experience we find that few, who are possessed
indeed, are fully cured by them: but rather the Devil is content to release
the bodelie hurting of them, for a short space, thereby to obtain the
perpetual hurt of the souls of so many that by these false miracles may be
induced or confirmed in the profession of that erroneous Religion: even as I
told you before that he does in the false cures, or casting off of diseases by
Witches. As to the other part of the argument in-case they can, which rather
(with reverence of the learned thinking otherways) I am induced to believe, by
reason of the faithful report that men sound of religion, have made according
to their sight thereof, I think if so be, I say these may be the respects,
whereupon the Papists may have that power. CHRIST gave a commission and power
to his Apostles to cast out Deuilles, which they according thereunto put in
execution: The rules he bad them observe in that action, was fasting and
prayer: and the action it self to be done in his name. This power of theirs
proceeded not then of any virtue in them, but only in him who directed them.
As was clearly proved by Judas his having as great power in that commission,
as any of the rest. It is easy then to be understand that the casting out of
Deuilles, is by the virtue of fasting and prayer, and in-calling of the name of
God, suppose many imperfectiones be in the person that is the instrumente, as
CHRIST him self teaches us Mat. 7.
of the power that false Prophets fall have to cast out Devils. It is no
wounder then, these respects of this action being considered, that it may be
possible to the Papists, though erring in sundry points of Religion to
accomplish this, if they use the right form prescribed by CHRIST herein. For
what the worse is that action that they err in other things, more then their
Baptism is the worse that they err in the other Sacrament, and have eiked
many vain freittes to the Baptism it self.


PHI. Surely it is no little wonder that God should permit the bodies of any
of the faithful to be so dishonored, as to be a dwelling place to that
unclean spirit.


EPI. There is it which I told right now, would prove and strengthen my
argument of the devils entering in the dead bodies of the faithful. For if he
is permitted to enter in their living bodies, even when they are joined with
the soul: how much more will God permit him to enter in their dead carions,
which is no more man, but the filthy and corruptible caise of man. For as
CHRIST says, It is Mark. 7.
not any thing that enters within man that defiles him, but only that which
proceeds and comes out of him.


CHAP. V.
ARGV.
The description of the fourth kind of Spirits called the Phairie: What is
possible therein, and what is but illusiones. How far this Dialogue entreates
of all these things, and to what end.

PHILOMATHES. NOW I pray you come on to that fourth kind of spirits.


EPI. That fourth kind of spirits, which by the Gentiles was called Diana,
and her wandering court, and amongst us was called the Phairie (as I told you)
or our good neighbors, was one of the sorts of illusiones that was rifest in
the time of Papistrie: for although it was holden odious to Prophecy by the
devil, yet whom these kind of Spirits carried away, and informed, they
were thought to be sonsiest and of best life. To speak of the many vain
trattles founded upon that illusion: How there was a King and Queen of
Phairie, of such a jolly court and train as they had, how they had a teynd, and
duty, as it were, of all goods: how they naturally rode and went, eat and
drank, and did all other actiones like natural men and women: I think it
liker VIRGILS Campi Elysij, nor any thing that ought to be believed by
Christians, except in general, that as I spoke sundry times before, the devil
illuded the senses of sundry simple creatures, in making them believe that they
saw and hard such things as were nothing so indeed.


PHI. But how can it be then, that sundry Witches have gone to death with that
confession, that they have been transported with the Phairie to such a hill,
which opening, they went in, and there saw a fair Queen, who being now
lighter, gave them a stone that had sundry virtues, which at sundry times
has been produced in judgment?


EPI. I say that, even as I said before of that imaginar rauishing of the
spirit forth of the body. For may not the devil object to their fantasy,
their senses being dulled, and as it were a sleep, such hills and houses
within them, such glistering courts and trains, and whatsoever such like
wherewith he pleases to delude them. And in the mean time their bodies being
senseless, to convey in their hand any stone or such like thing, which he
makes them to imagine to have received in such a place.


PHI. But what say ye to their foretelling the death of sundry persons,
whom they allege to have seen in these places? That is, a sooth-dreame (as
they say) since they see it walking.


EPI. I think that either they have not been sharply enough examined, that
gave so blunt a reason for their Prophecy, or otherways, I think it likewise
as possible that the Devil may prophecy to them when he deceiues their
imaginationes in that sort, as well as when he plainly speaks unto them at
other times for their prophesying, is but by a kind of vision, as it were,
wherein he commonly counterfeits God among the Ethnicks, as I told you before.


PHI. I would know now whether these kinds of spirits may only appear to
Witches, or if they may also appear to any other.


EPI. They may do to both, to the innocent sort, either to affraie them, or to
seem to be a better sort of folks nor unclean spirits are, and to the
Witches, to be a color of safety for them, that ignorant Magistrates may not
punish them for it, as I told even now. But as the one sort, for being
perforce troubled with them ought to be pitied, so ought the other sort (who
may be discerned by their taking upon them to Prophecy by them,) That sort
I say, ought as severely to be punished as any other Witches, and rather the
more, that that they go dissemblingly to work.


PHI. And what makes the spirits have so different names from others.


EPI. Even the knauerie of that same devil; who as he illudes the Necromancers
with innumerable feyned names for him and angels, as in special, making Satan,
Beelzebub, and Lucifer, to be three sundry spirits, where we find the two
former, but diverse names given to the Prince of all the rebelling angels by the
Scripture. As by CHRIST, the Prince of all the Deuilles is called, Beelzebub in
that place, which I alleged against the power of any hereticques to cast out
Devils. By JOHN in the Revelation, the old tempter is called, Satan the Prince
of all the evil angels. And the last, to wit, Lucifer, is but by allegory
taken from the day Star (so named in diverse places of the Scriptures) because
of his excellency (I mean the Prince of them) in his creation before his
fall. Even so I say he deceaues the Witches, by attributing to himself diverse
names: as if every diverse shape that he trans forms himself in, were a diverse
kind of spirit.


PHI. But I have hard many more strange tales of this Phairie, nor ye have yet
told me.


EPI. As well I do in that, as I did in all the rest of my discourse. For
because the ground of this conference of ours, proceeded of your speering at me
at our meeting, if there was such a thing as Witches or spirits: And if they
had any power: I therefore have framed my whole discourse, only to prove that
such things are and may be, by such number of examples as I show to be possible
by reason: and keeps me from dipping any further in playing the part of a
Dictionarie, to tell what ever I have read or hard in that purpose, which both
would exceed faith, and rather would seem to teach such unlawful arts, nor
to disallow and condemn them, as it is the duty of all Christians to do.


CHAP. VI.
ARGV.
Of the trial and punishment of Witches. What sort of accusation ought to be
admitted against them. What is the cause of the increasing so far of their
number in this age.

PHILOMATHES. THEN To make an end of our conference, since I see it draws
late, what form of punishment think ye merits these Magicians and Witches?
For I see that ye account them to be all alike guilty?


EPI. They ought to be put to death according to the Law of God, the civil and
imperial law, and municipall law of all Christian nations.


PHI. But what kind of death I pray you?


EPI. It is commonly used by fire, but that is an indifferent thing to be used
in every cuntrie, according to the Law or custom thereof.


PHI. But ought no sex, age nor rank to be exempted?


EPI. None at al (being so used by the lawful Magistrate) for it is the highest
point of Idolatry, wherein no exception is admitted by the law of God.


PHI. Then bairnes may not be spared?


EPI. Yea, not a hair the less of my conclusion. For they are not that
capable of reason as to practice such things. And for any being in company and
not reueiling thereof, their less and ignorant age will no doubt excuse them.


PHI. I see ye condemn them all that are of the counsel of such crafts.


EPI. No doubt, for as I said, speaking of Magie, the consulters, trusters in,
ouer-seers, interteiners or sturrers up of these craftes-folkes, are equally
guilty with themselves that are the practisers.


PHI. Whether may the Prince then, or supreme Magistrate, spare or ouer-see
any that are guilty of that craft? upon some great respects known to him?


EPI. The Prince or Magistrate for further trials cause, may continue the
punishing of them such a certain space as he thinks convenient: But in the
end to spare the life, and not to strike when God bids strike, and so severely
punish in so odious a fault and treason against God, it is not only unlawful,
but doubtless no less sin in that Magistrate, nor it was in SAVLES sparing
of AGAG. And so comparable 1. Sam. 15.
to the sin of Witchcraft it self, as SAMVELL alleged at that time.


PHI. Surely then, I think since this crime ought to be so severely punished.
Judges ought to beware to condemn any, but such as they are sure are guilty,
neither should the clattering report of a carling serve in so weighty a case.


EPI. Judges ought indeed to beware whom they condemue: For it is as great a
crime (as SOLOMON Pro. 17.
says,) To condemn the innocent, as to let the guilty escape free; neither
ought the report of any one infamous person, be admitted for a sufficient
proof, which can stand of no law.


PHI. And what may a number then of guilty persons confessions, woork against
one that is accused?


EPI. The assise must serve for interpretour of our law in that respect. But in
my opinion, since in a matter of treason against the Prince, barnes or wives, or
never so diffamed persons, may of our law serve for sufficient witnesses and
proofs. I think surely that by a far greater reason, such witnesses may be
sufficient in matters of high treason against God: For who but Witches can be
proves, and so witnesses of the doings of Witches.


PHI. Indeed, I trow they will be loath to put any honest man upon their
counsel. But what if they accuse folk to have been present at their Imaginar
conuentiones in the spirit, when their bodies lies senseless, as ye have said.


EPI. I think they are not a hair the less guilty: For the Devil durst
never have borrowed their shadow or similitude to that turn, if their consent
had not been at it: And the consent in these turns is death of the law.


PHI. Then SAMVEL was a Witch: For the Devil resembled his shape, and played
his person in giving response to SAVLE.


EPI. SAMVEL was dead as well before that; and so none could slander him with
meddling in that unlawful art. For the cause why, as I take it, that God will
not permit Satan to use the shapes or similitudes of any innocent persons at
such unlawful times, is that God will not permit that any innocent persons
shall be slandered with that vile defection: for then the devil would find ways
anew, to calumniate the best. And this we have in proof by them that are
carried with the Phairie, who never see the shadows of any in that court,
but of them that thereafter are tried to have been brethren and sisters of that
craft. And this was likewise proved by the confession of a young Less,
troubled with spirits, laid on her by Witchcraft. That although she saw the
shapes of diverse men and women troubling her, and naming the persons whom
these shadows represents: yet never one of them are found to be innocent, but
al clearly tried to be most guilty, and the most part of them confessing the
same. And besides that, I think it has been seldom hard tell of, that any
whom persons guilty of that crime accused, as having known them to be their
marrowes by eyesight, and not by hearsay, but such as were so accused of
Witchcraft, could not be clearly tried upon them, were at the least publicly
known to be of a very evil life and reputation: so jealous is God I say, of
the fame of them that are innocent in such causes. And besides that, there are
two other good helps that may be used for their trial: the one is the finding
of their mark, and the trying the insensiblenes thereof. The other is their
fleeting on the water: for as in a secret murder, if the dead carcass be at
any time thereafter handled by the murderer, it wilgush out of blood, as if
the blud were crying to the heaven for revenge of the murderer, God having
appointed that secret super-naturall sign, for trial of that secret
unnatural crime, so it appears that God has appointed (for a super-naturall
sign of the monstrous impiety of the Witches) that the water shall refuse to
receive them in her bosom, that have shaken off them the sacred Water of
Baptism, and wilfully refused the benefit thereof: No not so much as their
eyes are able to shed tears (thretten and torture them as ye please) while
first they repent (God not permitting them to dissemble their obstinacy in so
horrible a crime) albeit the women kind especially, be able other-waies to
shed tears at every light occasion when they will, yea, although it were
dissemblingly like the Crocodiles.


PHI. Well, we have made this conference to last as long as leisure would
permit: And to conclude then, since I am to take my leave of you, I pray God to
purge this Cuntrie of these diuellishe practices: for they were never so rife
in these parts, as they are now.


EPI. I pray God that so be to. But the causes ar over manifest, that makes
them to be so rife. For the great wickedness of the people on the one part,
procures this horrible defection, whereby God justly punishes sin, by a
greater iniquity. And on the other part, the consummation of the world, and
our deliverance drawing near, makes Satan to rage the more in his
instruments, knowing Rev 12.
his kingdom to be so near an end. And so farewell for this time.


FINIS.

