Flores Regij. OR, PROVERBES AND APHORISMS, DIVINE AND MORAL. As they were at
several times upon sundry occasions, Spoken by his Most Excellent MAJESTY,
JAMES, of famous Memory King of Great-Brittaine.

Collected by J. L. S.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Ben: Fisher. 1627.

Flores Regij. PROVERBES AND APHORISMS, DIVINE AND MORAL.
1. WORDS are not the difference of good men and bad, for every man speaks,
therefore how noble a thing is Virtue; when no man dares profess any thing.

2. I love not one that will never be Angry: For as he that is without
Sorrow, is without Gladness: so he that is without Anger, is without Love.

3. There are Degrees of men in respect of one another, in respect of GOD all
are equal, all are to use like Duty, like Reverence, toward him: All are
alike beggars at Gods door.

4. We are departed noe further from the Church of Rome, then they from their
first JESUS.

5. Give me the heart of a Man, and out of that all other his deeds shall be
acceptable.

6. In Clothes, I would have a fashion should choose a man, and not a man the
fashion.

7. It is one of the miseries of Man, that when he is full of days, and near
his end, that then he should Love life most.

8. It has like operation, to make Women Learned, as to make Foxes tame, which
teaches them only to steal more cunningly. The possibility is not equal,
for where it does one good it does twenty harm.

9. Parents may forbid their Children an unfit match, but they may not force
their consent to a fit.

10. No Country can be called Rich wherein there is War; As in the
Low Countries, there is much money, but the Soldiers have it in Pay from the
Governors, the Boores have it for victuals of the Soldiers, the Governors
have it from them again in taxes: So there is no Center, no Honor.

11. No man gains by War, but he that has not wherewith to Live in Peace.

12. God accepts the intent before the deed, for if a Man do Justice because
he would be Counted just, and not for Gods glory, not because he stands
answerable to GOD, if he do otherwise, or if he punish a man rightly, but
withal satisfy his own malice; both these are abominable: if he give Alms
only for his reputation sake, this is a wicked Deed, because there is Nullum
medium, whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

13. No man shall do ill, that thinks ere he undertakes, what the end will
be, not what his passion would have it to be.

14. Time is the essence of many Laws, so that a King may do well at diverse
times, both in making and abrogating the same Law.

15. I should think it a sign that GOD loves me not, if I should kill a man
by chance, I would most unwillingly do that ill, which it lies not in my power
to amend.

16. I do not think the greatest Clerks are nearest Heaven, much of their
knowledge is superfluous; For BELLARMINE makes 400. questions of Faith, and not
ten of them which touches our Salvation to understand.

17. Many have attempted to make Glass malleable, and so Gold artificial, but
both in vain; for GOD does ever cross the invention of Man, least he should
rejoice in his own work.

18. The persons of all men are to be alike. Equal to us, and our Hate or
Love, should only go according to their Virtues or Vices. These bonds of
kindred should only command us in all Civil duties, but not our judgments.
And particular injuries should only make us hate that particular deed, but
not the Doer in general.

19. Men of high understanding as they do many things above the Common
strain: So they often fall into greater errors, then those of meaner
Capacity, which in all their Actions, will rather do nothing faulty, then
any thing extraordinary being of a temper better mixed then the former.

20. The Devil always auoydes the mean, and waits upon extremities; So has
he sought to divide the world betwixt Athisme, and Superstition.

21. All extremities come round to one end, the simple obedience of the Papist,
and the no obedience of the Puritaine, the one breeds Confusion, the other,
Ignorance and Security.

22. The end of the Law, is to punish sin when it is Committed, But to keep
it from being Committed it cannot; As the Pope which thinks by allowing
Fornication to avoid Adultery.

23. The wisdom of a King is chiefly seen in the election of his Officers,
as in places which require a peculiar sufficiency, not to choose them that he
affects most, but to use every man according to his proper fitnes.

24. Virtue is easier then Vice, for the essential difference betwixt Vice and
Virtue, is Truth and Falsehood: And it is easier and less pains to tell truth
then a lie: And for vices of the senses, Custom is all in all; for to one that
has lived honestly, it is as much pain to Commit sin, as for another to
abstain

25. It is likely that the people will imitate the King in good, but it is sure
they will follow him in ill.

26. I have been often deceived, yet will I never leave to trust; neither
shall the falsehood of some, make me think there is none honest.

27. All that ever writ of CHRIST, said, he was an honest man, they had so
much natural sight as to see his Civil goodness, but they wanted the
supernatural to perceive his Godhead.

28. The same sentence with diverse Relations may be both Holy and Devilish.

29. I wonder not so much that Women paint themselves, as that when they are
painted men can Love them.

30. Of all the numbers of men, that have been slain in the War, not the
tenth part have been fighting but flying.

31. PARSONS erres in his resolution, in making the difficulty of our
Salvation, to lie in the hardness to find Gods mercy; when indeed, it consists
only in the right seeking of it; for then the other is sure.

32. God has distributed his benefits so equally, that there is no Country
which excels not all other in some thing, so that as it borrows so it
lends: So in men, there is no one excels so in one thing, but has need
of another wit in some other; From these two proceeds all Traffic and
Society.

33. The Art of Phisicions is very imperfect, for I doubt not but for every
Disease, there is in Nature a several simple, if they could find it out: So
that their Compounds do rather show their ignorance, then their knowledge.

34. The Devil where he cannot have the whole, seeks ever to get one part of
the Soul, either the Will or the Understanding, which he may come easiest by;
as in Protestants the the Will, in Papists the Understanding: A learned Papist
and an ignorant, are of two Religions.

35. The Papists Religion is like HOMERS Illiades of the seige of Troy, or
VIRGILS Aeneods of the beginning of Rome, both of them had a foundation of
truth, so had the Papists the Bible: But they have all added so much, that the
first Truth is almost lost.

36. GOD never fails of his word, but where he threateneth ill to Man, as in
punishing Niniuie, but always performs where he promises good, that, or
better, as he promised to ABRAHAM and his seed, everlasting earthly
blessedness, and in stead of that, gave them Heavenly.

37. Not only the Deliverance of the Jews, till they came to the Land of
Promise, but even their Daily preservation was miraculous: for, there was never
any noted Plague in Jerusalem, though it stood in a hot Climate, which had it
been, would have endangered the whole Nation, it being to assemble thither
twice every year of necessity.

38. Men are often in arguing, carried by the force of words further a sunder,
then their question was at first, like two Ships going out of the same haven,
their Iournies end is many times whole Countries distant.

39. Cowardice is the mother of Cruelty; It was only Fear, that made Tyrants
put so many to death, to secure themselves.

40. That fashion among the Romans of killing themselves, was falsely called
Fortitude, for, it was only to prevent the power of Fortune; when indeed,
Virtue lies within quite out of her reach. Nor can any man be overcome but of
himself: And so most truly were they, when they fled to Death for a refuge
against Death.

41. It is easier to reclaim a man from any Heresy, then to Convert an
Athiest to the Truth: For to believe, is the first Degree Common to all
Religions: And an Athiest is to be brought so far, before he come to choosing.

42. All Gods miracles are above Nature, but never against Nature, for that
were to destroy his own work, which he cannot do, but he may excel it:
therefore the miracle of the Papists Trans substantiation being against Nature,
is false.

43. Types are the Images of the mind, which God allowed the Jews to keep
them from Images of the sense, and to show them, that his worship was to be in
Spirit and Truth.

44. The Church at Rome, fell at first from her purity into Infirmities, then
into Corruptions, then into Errors; and lastly, into abominations. GOD still
punishing Sin with sin.

45. Most Heresies have proceeded, from mingling Philosophy with Religion;
from that and policy, have all the Papist errors risen: when CHRIST tells
them, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

46. We cannot conceive Eternity but by Faith, we cannot understand what GOD
is; and of that ignorance comes all sin, for surely if we knew him, we
would not offend him.

47. Men as often fall out about small things as great, because after the first
contradiction, they mainetaine themselves not the thing.

48. Before CHRIST came, it was enough for the Fathers to believe only, since
they must believe and understand both.

49. Those Princes, which seek to secure themselves by blood; shall find,
that the more they kill, the more they have needs to kill.

50. The Church is to be believed, in the interpretation of the Scripture, but
not directly against it; for when it differs from that, it is no longer the
Church.

51. There are three kinds of Wisdoms that use to be in Kings, A sanctified
Wisdom, A Wisdom which oftentimes strains it self to a less evil, so to
avoid a greater, and a Wisdom of falsehood; the first, is both lawful and
necessary; the second, is lawful, but not necessary; the third, neither.

52. All Gouernements howsoever in their Constitutions, in their practice tend
to a Monarchy; And wheresoever the better sort of the people bear rule, there
is always some one that resembles a King amongst them: yea? though in the
State of Venice, the Duke is but as it were a dead name; yet were it
impossible, that their Commonwealth should long uphold it self, without him.

53. The preservation of the Bible, is miraculous, that it should remain pure,
and intyre, after it had passed the hands of Infidels which sought to destroy
it, of Heritiques which sought to pervert it, to their own advantage.

54. No indifferent gesture, is so seldom dome done without sin, as
laughing; for, it is commonly raised upon things to be pitied; And therefore
Man only can laugh, and he only can sin.

55. GOD made one part of Man of earth, the basest element, to teach him
Humility, his Soul proceeded from the bosom of himself, to teach him
Goodness: So that if he look downward, nothing is viler: if he cast his eyes
to Heaven, he is of a matter more excellent then the Angels; the former part,
was a type of ADAM; the second, of CHRIST, which gives life to that, which was
dead in it self.

56. Much money makes a Country poor, for it sets a dearer price upon every
thing.

57. At what time the Gospel did flourish, all kind of Learning did even
abound, and upon the decay thereof, there came always a veil of darkness upon
the face of the earth: The reason is a part of Religion, but Error and
Superstition, is the safer by Ignorance.

58. A lie of error, is a fault of Credulity, not of falsehood; But a
presumptuous lie, is that which a man makes, as GOD made the world of nothing.

59. All Gods Actions are for our good, either Spiritually, or Temporally
although we cannot comprehend them at every time.

60. There is not that thing upon the earth, (that well examined) yields not
somewhat worthy of knowledge; That Divine Ar^izan that made them, never
fashioned any thing unprofitably, nor ever set forth any of his workemanshippe
without some inward Virtue.

61. The gifts of the mind are not easily obtained, you must practice them
with great pain, and difficulty, and good reason; for it were pity such
pretiousnes, might be had for the taking.

62. It must needs show the Papists Religion to be ill, that they would plant
it by Liberty and War; whereas the true Catholic Religion, rose by Fasting
and Prayer.

63. Whatsoever is spent in earthly vanities, they either dye before us, or
shortly follow after us, for all pleasures that are sensual, and have not
reference to the maine end of man's Creation, (which is the service of GOD) are
vain and of no importance, but mere foolerie.

64. When GOD destinates a man to do good, he makes every opportunity and
occasion (though it seem never so harsh in man's eyes) to turn to his good and
GODS glory; But when GOD leaves man to himself, he makes more oportunities
then he finds, and without occasion takes occasion to work his own ruin to
his own shame.

65. It is good to propound a man Fame, Greatness, Honor, and Estimation, for
wading to find these, he may happily meet with Honesty, Temporance,
Fortitude and Patience, And many times they that will not undergo Actions for
Virtues sake, will for Ambition.

66. An ill name may be free from Dishonestie, but not from some folly; we
should not only be free from sin, but from suspicion, for it is not enough
to be well Lived, but well reported, and oftentimes weighty matters are
as much carried by reputation as substance.

67. Misfortunes are not acceptable in any kind, yet those are endured with
most ease, that come rather by destiny, then by deserving.

68. In expense it is good to be neither pinching nor prodigal, yet if means
allow it, rather thought a little profuse then too sparing, but the best way
is, to make ability (which must always be measured, by the just Rule of our
proper Revenue) our compass, to sail, and line, to walk by, And for
extraordinary expenses, we must limit them by the worth of the occasion, for
in matters that return not, we may be more magnificent.

69. He is not worthy to Command others, that cannot govern his own
affections and unreasonable appetites.

70. No text of Law can be so certain; wherein, the circumstances will not
make a variation.

71. Justice should be blind, and friendlesse, it is not by it, that, those
that are in authority, should Reward their friends, or Cross their enemies.

72. Though outward Peace be a great blessing, yet it is far inferior to
Peace within, as Civil wars are more cruel and unnatural then wars
abroad.

73. All Virtues turn to Vices, when they become the servants of impiety.

74. All Complainers be naturally given to exagerate their own griefs and
multiplyes thereupon, As Papists do in England.

75. As a thing which is good ought not therefore to be abused, so ought not
the Lawfulnes of a good thing be forborne, because of the abuse thereof.

76. Every Man ought to discern wisely and truly of every Virtue and Vice,
according to the true qualities thereof, and not according to the vain
conceits of men.

77. Indifferent things if they be necessary, as food, sleep, and such like,
in the qualities or form of using the^, may smell of Virtue or Vice, and be
great furtherers to any of them.

78. If our whole life were divided into four parts, three of them would be
found to be consumed, on Meat, Drink, Sleep, and unnecessary employments.

79. There is great Difference betwixt Justice and Equity, for Justice by the
Law, gives every Man his own, and Equity in things Arbitriall, that which is
meetest for him.

80. Drunkenness is a beastly Vice, and has this property, that it is one of
those Vices that increases with age.

81. Medecin has that Virtue, that it never leaves a Man in that state
wherein it finds him.

82. We should press to win GOD by importunity; if we obtain not at the
first, and if we be not heard, should think, that that which we seek is
not for our good.

83. A small sin wilfully committed, is far more grievous before GOD, then
a greater committed in a sudden passion, when Conscience is a sleep.

84. The thing only which without intermission, we are bidden to do, is to
Pray: For as for other things they have their own time, but Prayer is never
out of season.

85. We should not be like the Puritaines in our prayers, who speak to GOD
as to their fellows: and sit at CHRIST'S table, as with their Companions, Let
us join reverence with the sweet confidence we have in GODS Love.

86. Bread without the staff of bread, which is Gods blessing, is no bread;
For without this, even although it be in our mouths, we shall die for Hunger,
like the miserable rich man, that in his greatest abundance of all things, dyed
for want.

87. We pray in vain, GOD to save us, from temptation, if at every occasion
we run unto it: Like one who voluntarily sticks in the dirt, and cries for
help from those that pass by.

88. How can we paint Gods face, when MOSES, the man that ever was most
familiar with GOD, never saw but his back parts.

89. Put case, the Cross had a Virtue of doing miracles; as PETER'S shadow had,
yet does it not follow, that it is lawful to worship it, which PETER would
never accept of.

90. If the Pope may err a as Man, but not as a Pope, I would know why the
Pope does not instruct or reform the Man, or wherefore the Man does not
require the Popes instructions.

91. They are fools, who because it is said, Examine your selves, and come,
will not communicate till they be as they think perfect; forgetting that
CHRIST came into the world, not for the healthful but sick, and that we come
unto that Table, to be refreshed with that Spiritual food, bringing nothing
with us but a purpose to amend.

92. Many do deceive themselves, in saying, they care not for the Father or
Mothers Curse (so they deserve it not;) But beware, you must not inuert the
order of Nature, in judging your Superiors, chiefly in your own particular;
For ever, the blessing or curse of the Parents, has a Profitique power joined
with it.

93. Beware of swearing and lying, though but in jest; For oaths, are but an
use, use and a sin clothed with no delight or gain: and therefore, the more
inexcusable even before men.

94. The Devil never assailes a man, except he find him either void of
knowledge, or of the fear of GOD.

95. If a Man shall once take upon him, to call that light, which GOD calls
heavy, that sin Venial, which GOD calls Grievous, measuring any one sin by
the measures of his lust and appetite, and not of his Conscience, what shall
let him to do with the next, that his affections stir him to, the like
reason serving for all, and so go forward till he place his whole corrupted
affections in (GODS) room.

96. As none can be Scholars in a School, and not be subject to the Master
thereof, so none can study or put in practice the Circles and art of Magic,
without Committing any horrible dosection from GOD.

97. Treasurers and Vshers, are Commonly hated in Court; because of necessity,
they must give Denialls and Disgraces.

98. The Honor of a King, stands in the multitude of the People, and his
strength and safety, in the Love of his Subjects.

99. They are not fit for the Court, that are either obstinate in Opinion, or
discourteous in Carriage, wherefore, the noble mind is most fit; For they are
always more courteous, to take things in good part, then the baser sort.

100. Every age breeds some exorbitant Spirits, who turn the edge of their
own sufficiency, upon whatsoever they can Devour in their ambitious
apprehensions, seeking rather a great then a good Fame, and holding it the
chiefest Honor to be thought the wonder of their times, which if they attain
unto, is but in the Condition of Monsters, that are generally much admired, but
more abhorred.

101. Friendship is of that nature, as it always desires to be entertained
with mutual good offices, therefore we must not suffer it to grow cold, for
coldness is a Degree of Deadnes.

102. They that are to make demands or requests to their Friends, must regard
how the same may stand with the safety of their Friends, that their motions
and requests may stand with their honor and surety to accord unto it.

103. The cause of Assembling all Parliaments, are two, for Laws, or Money;
The one being the sinews of Peace, the other of War.

104. Good purposes, as well in Princes as private Men, have many hinderers;
therefore, when the Commodity or Discommodities of taking or refusing are once
thoroughly weighed, a speedy resolution is the best to cut off such
inconveniences, that delay of time commonly brings.

105. As the Natural body is delighted in Change, so is also the Politic
body greedy of Alteration.

106. As a whole man meanly able, may do as much as a half man better able;
So an inferior wit bent and Conversant upon one subject, shall many times with
patience and meditation, dissolve and undo many of those knots and doubts,
which a greater wit (distracted with many matters) would rather Cut in two,
then unknit.

107. Such as are bent to hold with the Difficulties of effecting any thing,
are Commonly against it.

108. Many neglect the wisdom to mainetaine themselves, that GOD has bestowed
upon them, and so worthily suffer by their own folly.

109. In Civil Actions he is the greater and deeper Politic, that can make
other men the instruments of his will and ends, and yet never acquaint them
with his purpose; So as they shall do it, and yet not know what they do;
Then he that imparteth his meaning to those that he imployeth.

110. GOD made Angels pure minds bodylesse, Beasts bodies mindelesse, but Man
both body and mind the Horizon between both.

111. Errors by mistaking should not be too rigorously censured, but errors
that be wilful, should not be spared.

112. The duty of a Magistrate, consists in three especial points, in
Ruling, Teaching, and Judging, that he be Wise to Govern, Virtuous to give
Example, and Impartial to Judge.

113. It is not fit that any thing should succeed well with the wicked, for it
is a punishment of his fault.

114. As it is a principle of Nature, that Putrefaction is more contagious
before maturitie then after, so it is a position of Moral Philosophy, that
men abandoned to vice, do not so much corrupt manners, as those that are half
good and half evil.

115. The end of man's Creation is not for the slaughter nor education of Arms,
to make men castawayes.

116. Virtuous Men will use their education military, as wisemen do their
weapons, for ornament amongst their Friends, against their Enemies for Defense.

117. Those Actions that are intended for Opinion, are carried with more
ceremony, then ordinary.

118. Dolus versatur in generalibus, Generals dwell too much in the air;
therefore, he that will not be deceived must descend to particulers.

119. When IVPITER speaks, he uses to Join Thunder to it; So a King should
not speak, except he maintain it by Action.

120. CHRIST recommends unto us, the wisdom of Serpents, not thereby to
Deceive or betray others, but to arm our selves against the Deceit and treason
of Hypocrites.

121. There is a Heaven and a Hell, Praemium and Paena, for the Elect and the
Reprobate; but how many other rooms there be, we are not on Gods Counsel.

122. Prayer, is one of the worthiest Actions we do; for we speak with GOD,
and as it were enter in a reasoning with him, it brings down GOD from Heaven,
and makes him to grant our will, and dwell with us and we with him Eternally.

123. Of Temporal goods, we should pray only for those that are necessary,
for our being; or at least wel-being, and not for those things, that are for
Luxury and Superfluity; for such, are commonly baits to sin: But if GOD
grant us also these, we should be thankful, and soberly use them according to
our calling.

124. It was never found, that blood and too much severity, did good in
matters of Religion; GOD never Loving to plant the Church by violence and
bloodshed.

125. The whole Scripture, chiefly contains two things, a Command, and a
Prohibition, to do such things, and to abstain from the contrary; it is our
Duty to obey in both.

126. It becomes every Officer and Commander, to know what belongs to his
place, and not to encroach upon his Superiors, so shall good order be best kept
in a great Family.

127. In two Degrees stands the whole service of GOD by Man, interior upward
by Prayer, exterior or downward by Works flowing ther-from, before the world.

128. He that nourishes a faction between his servants in his own family,
does nothing else, but help to set his own house on fire.

129. Although a wicked King is sent by GOD for a Curse to his people, and
plague for their sins; yet, it is not lawful for them to shake off that
Curse at their own pleasures, that GOD has laid upon them.

130. The safest guard a King can have, is the Love of his subjects, his
greatest honor, their prosperity.

131. As Law is to a well governed Common wealth, so are good orders in
household government, without which, no household can stand.

132. Heaven is governed by order, and all good Angels there; nay, Hell it
self, could not well subsist without some order: and the very Devils are
divided into Legions, and have their Captains; how can any Society then upon
earth, subsist without order or Degrees.

133. Though MOSES were instructed, inspired, and Conducted, by Almighty GOD
himself: yet, he refused not the good Council of IETHRO for the manner of his
government, which also Almighty GOD allowed in him.

134. It is a certain rule in all dark Prophesies, that they are never
clearly understood til they be accomplished.

135. Many respects may Lawfully let in Admission, that will not be sufficient
causes of Deprivation.

136. No wise man can think him a fit man to Counsel him, or to govern under
him, that cannot govern himself, and his own Family; and therefore,
BASILIVS advised his Son to take such Counselors, who had given proof and
experience of their wisdom in the good Conduct and Direction of their own
affairs.

137. Emulation is the bait of Virtue, for looking into the sweetness of the
Reward, men undertakes takes the Labor.

138. It is less difficult for persons of indifferent estates, to make their
choice of Friends, then for Great men; yet, only safe to Poverty; For there
he must be in Love with himself, or nothing.

139. Better it is that matters be not stirred at all, then after they be once
a foot and in motion, to give the Truth leave to lie gasping and sprangling
under the violence of a Foreign faction.

140. Sometimes there is as good use, to be made of dishonest, as honest
Friends; for Poisons are as necessary as wholesome Simples, if they be in a
hand able to prepare them.

141. Suggestions are needless from abroad, when the mischief is felt at home.

142. Although particular men of all profession of Religion, have been some
thieves, some murderers, some traitors; yet ever, when they came to their end
and just punishment, they confessed their fault to be in their Nature, and not
in their profession; the Roman Catholics only excepted.

143. The friends of a private Fortune, are less dangerous; in greater, there
is more gain, and so more loss: He that stands without, stands naked, and
subject to every storm: who underpropped so long safe; but no sooner loosened,
but ruined.

144. To answer an improbable imagination, is to fight against a vanishing
shadow.

145. It is a true saying, that alleged kindness upon noble minds, does ever
work much.

146. Too much suspicion begets treachery, and an obstinate Belief is
dangerous folly.

147. For a little money, a man may have more from the Pope, then ever GOD
promised by his grace to grant; a remission of all sins past and to come.

148. Present crosses, are but preparatiues to them we may feel.

149. Let no man think that he may frame and make his wife as he pleases,
that ued SOLOMON, the wisest King that ever was.

150. Although we are not stocks nor stones, not to feel Calamities; yet, we
should not suffer the feeling of them, so to overrule and astonish our reason,
as it may stay us from taking the best resolution, and using thereof for
remedy that can be found out.

151. Age is venerable, not in respect of the appearance, but in respect of the
annexion; because, Wisdom commonly accompanies such a presence.

152. The Devils are like the Pest, which smites those surest, which flies it
furthest and apprehends deepliest the peril thereof.

153. ALEXANDER was not thanked and commended for Conquering the World, but for
doing it before Thirty years old.

154. It is the greatest decay to Youth, either not to endure good advice, or
not to believe it, until their peril and overthrow make them see it to their
shame.

155. It is no power inherent in the Circles, or in the holiness of names of
GOD used blasphemously, nor in whatsoever rites or ceremonies, that either can
raise any infernal Spirit, or limit him perforce, within or without such and
such Circles; but it is the craft of the Devil, the father of lies, who having
first of all prescribed that form of doing, faining himself to be commanded,
and restrained thereby, will be loath to pass the bounds of those injunctions.

156. Continual experience proves, that Idleness, is ever the greatest spur
to Lechery.

157. Man being Compounded of all the four Complexions (whose father are the
Elements) although there be a mixture of them all in all the parts of the
Body, yet must the diverse parts of this Microcosme or little world of ours, be
diversely more inclined, some to one some to another complexion, according to
the diversity of their uses: that of those Discords a perfect harmony may be
made up, for the maintenance of the whole body.

158. He is said rightly to serve his Country, whose body executes what his
wisdom plotteth.

159. Common affability is commendable and not to be misliked, so it reserve
the state of the party; otherwise, it is not Humility but Baseness.

160. Sauces, are more like medicines then meat, and they serve only for
pleasing of the taste: and not for satisfying of the necessity of nature.

161. We owe all men Salutation and a cappe, but not familiarity; For, except
we be sure, their worthiness deserves it, we betray our selves.

162. Whatsoever GOD does by a Medium, must know an end; what immediately,
belongs to eternity.

163. The Slaunderer, and he that desires to hear lies, are whelps of a
litter; the one has a Devil in his tongue, and the other in his ears.

164. Fortune has no power over Wisdom, but of sensuality, and of lives that
swim and Nauigate without the loadstone of discretion and judgment.

165. The disposition of wicked men are perverse, Coaction must force them to
goodness, and Correction restrain them from wickedness.

166. Man's happiness does rest in the managing of his own time, so that every
man may be blessed and rich in perfection, if his own dissoluteness, and
unthriftiness, incurres not the contrary.

167. All qualities without the direction of Virtue; profit not, but overthrow
their possessors.

168. When the mouth of LAZARUS was shut, his soars spoke for him; so when we
cannot use our hands in defense of our Country, we should lift them up for our
Princes protection.

169. If he be to be pitied, that bestows half his patrimony in
Hobbie-horses; the^ much more they, who having but a little time dedicate half
to Sleep and Idleness.

170. As Troubles come for exercise of Virtue, and increase of Merit, so
Affliction sends many to prayer and fasting, and few men seldom do well,
except necessity enforce them; for Hunger and Poverty makes men industrious,
and the Laws make them good.

171. As the servants of GOD are known by Humility and Charity, so the
servants of the Devil are known by Pride and Cruelty.

172. The Confession of our sins do no less honor GOD, then his glory is
blemished by Commission.

173. Suspicion is no where so conversant and powerful as among Princes, unto
whom to say rightly, it rightly belongs: For howsoever they are, they have
enemies; if Good, envious, if Evil, some that lay hold upon that occasion;
yea, even their friends are doubtful, not being easy to be discerned, whether
lovers of themselves or of their Fortunes.

174. To pray to the Lord with the lips for any Corporal benefit, and yet to
have the heart fixed in confidence of any natural means, is a kind of
spiritutuall Adultery.

175. He that is not a Philosopher, gouerns by guess, and will prove a
dangerous statesman, for when uncontrolled affections meet with high Fortune,
they commonly begin Tyranny and Oppression.

176. The difference between the godly and ungodly, is, that GOD does visit
the ungodly by punishments, names of Plagues, Curses, and Destructions, as the
Plague of Egypt, the Curse of CAINE, the Destruction of Sodom; but the
righteous, when he does visit them, his punishments, corrections, chastisements
and rods, which proceed from Instruction not Destruction, to purge them, not
to destroy them.

177. It is not sufficient for him, that already has enough to defend him from
Baseness and want, only to eat, and drink, and make an even reckoning at
the years end: for, that is baser then baseness, no? Let him do his Country
service, and purchase honor to his House; for we are not in the world for
fruition, but for Action.

178. There is no difference between common Lovers, and common Whores, they
both flatter, and make the name of Love their Bauds, to serve their particular
pleasures.

179. As Man's nature is not only to strive against a present smart, but to
revenge a passed injury; So we see, that Malice has a longer life then
either Lioue or Thankfulness has: For, as always we take more care, to put
off pain, then to enjoy pleasure, because, the one has intermission, and with
the other we are satisfied; So it is in the smart of injuries, and the memory
of good turns; Wrongs are written in marble, Benefits are sometimes
acknowledged, requited rarely.

180. Almesdeeds merit nothing at Gods hands, yet they make him our debtor
according to his gracious promise.

181. Presumption is ever apt to draw comfort, from the vast ocean of
appetite; But Discretion, from the sweet springs of opportunity.

182. He Counsels best, that preferres the cause of GOD, before any
particular.

183. Where Good-men are afraid, to call a Vice by the proper name, it is a
sign that the vice is common, and that great persons (who^ it is not safe to
anger) are infected therewith.

184. He that knows not the true grounds of an evil cannot help it but by
change, which is a Dangerous guide of a Common wealth.

185. Conscience, not grounded on knowledge, is either an ignorant Fantasy,
or an arrogant Vanity; in one extremity the Papists err, in the other the
Anabaptists.

186. Correction withour instruction, is mere Tyranny.

187. GOD which is the great Lawmaker, by his Laws preuents sins; to the
end, that punishments may be inflicted on it justly, as to avoid Idolatry, he
forbids making of Images; He that cannot live Chaste let him Marry, etc.

188. False Miracles and lying news, are the food of Superstition, which by
credulity Deludes ignorant people.

189. GOD who calls his Elect unto himself, to make them enjoy Heaven, compels
none to make defection from himself: Nam perditio tua, ex te Israel.

190. Time the Mother, will bring forth Verity her Daughter, in due season to
perfection.

191. Riches are desired of wise men, only to keep them from baseness, and
to exercise Charity.

192. A good Pastor is the Physician of the Soul, and ought to apply his
Doctrine according to the tenderness or hardness of the Conscience, for want
of which Discretion, some mons zeal has done hurt.

193. It is a point of wisdom to maintain the Truth with as little
Disputation as may be, loast a good Cause be marred with ill handling.

194. The best Laws are made out of those good Customs, whereunto the people
is naturally inclined.

195. Gross and brutish errors, are sooner reformed, then meaner escapes, for
so much as the one cannot be defended without Impudency, whereas the other
admits some Color for excuse.

196. It is not lawful to use unlawful instruments, were it never for so good
a purpose; for that Axiom in Divinity is most certain and infallible, Non
est faciendum malum, ^vt bonum inde eueniet.

197. Valor is overcome by weakness, but being too much prized, it turns
to unbridled fury.

198. To bestow benefits of the Bad makes them worse, and vilifieth the
reward of the Virtuous.

199. Clemency is a Divine instinct, and works Supernatural effects.

200. By the Devils means, Devils can nouer be cast out; and therefore they
are fools, who to cure a Disease cast on by a Witch, seek the help of some
other Witch, whereas Prayer and amendment of life is the only Cure.

*

FINIS.

