Hierons last Fare-vvell. A SERMON PREACHED AT MODBVRY in DEVON, at the
Funeral of that Reverend and faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Master SAMVEL
HIERON, sometimes Preacher there.

By I. B.

JOB 1.9. Does Job serve God for naught?

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for William Butler, and are to be sold at
his shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1618.

TO THE MVCH HONORED LADY, AND MY VERY GOOD FRIEND, THE LADY MARGARET HELE, of
WINBVRY in DEVON.
MADAME, its well known, that Apologies are, (for the most) of small praise,
or profit; being but either excuses of precedent evil effects; or future bad
accidents likely to follow: yet seeing necessity is put upon me; I must say
somewhat, though, to use the Apostles phrase, I speak like a Fool. Your
Ladyship cannot be ignorant, how Satan and his instruments, in all Ages have
endeavored to hinder both the liberty, and dignity of the Word, that it might
not run and be glorified. Hence sprang these bitter speeches: Is not this the
Carpenter, the son of Mary? Can any good thing come out of Nazaret? Is Saul
among the Prophets? How know these unlettered men the Scriptures? When went the
Spirit of God from me, to thee? Is not this Sect spoke evil against
euery-where? Was not John said to have a Devil? Paul reputed a pestilent
fellow? and Jesus Christ the righteous a notorious sinner? One cries out, He
deceives the People: another, He is an enemy to Caesar: a third, And has he
not spoke blasphemy? And, let these men alone, all the world will follow them.
And as it has been, so it is: for as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses: so
do many in our days, resist the truth. And mark their cunning, laboring to
bring the Prophets, and Preachers to be contemned; that the doctrine might not
take effect, and be entertained. Who then must stand in this gap, role away
this stone, and prevent this evil, stop those wide mouths, pluck the venom
from under their tongues, and be able to keep in grace, the Word of Grace, but
you and such as be of your Worth, Rank, and Profession? Therefore I have made
the more bold, to prefixe your Ladyships name, in the front of this my weak
and pale Infant; as a special remedy, to make all his enemies, at the very
sight thereof to fall backward; their tongues to cleave to the roofes of their
mouths, and their very hearts to tremble: so that none dares stretch forth a
hand, or bend his brow, to hinder him in his pretended journey, until he have
past in peace, and saluted his dearest friends. More reasons might be added,
for to excuse this my boldness. The great love you ever bare to him, for whose
sake it was conceived: Your personal presence at its birth: And was it not he
that fetched me from the Fountain, co^ducted me from thence to your Country,
counted me worthy, and ever gave me countenance until his change? Why then
(though most unworthy work in respect of its worth) yet shall it not find
favor at your hands for his sake? Let him doubt that list, I will not: except
change of time give iuster occasion. And thus commending you to the protection
of him that rules all in all things, these my first fruits to your Patronage,
with my self to your service and censure I humbly take my leave: From my
study at Plymouth: ever remaining

Yours to his poor power to be commanded, Io. B.

To the Reader.
READER, This report has been published: that the abundance of Sermons (by
some, and of some) preached, and printed, have brought both the Word of God,
and his Ordinance to be contemned; either, through the insufficiency of the
Authors, or, the corruption of Readers, and Auditors. For when the Word is not
divided aright, men of the best apprehension will not, cannot, give
approbation. And on the other hand, such as cannot discern betwixt good and
evil, sit at home, with a printed paper, dreaming that will suffice to get
faith for salvation: and so absent themselves from the more powerful means in
the public Congregation. Do thou expect my reply? Shall I take in hand to
give thee satisfaction? No: for if I can but clear my self from being the
just cause of the one (the which (likely) will be hard) Let him that list, and
can better judge, resolve the other. Now if it be demanded of thee, that knew
us both; why by me, for him, (whose shoo-latchet, I was not worthy to unloose)
this Sermon was first preached; then printed: take one answer for all: which
is, that a kind of necessity was the cause, both of the one, and the other. If
thou judge this dark: Consider, that God does not always render (and why may
not man then sometimes conceal?) a reason of his proceedings. For the work it
self, what shall I say? but as Naomi to her Daughters at their departure: It
grieueth me much for your sakes, that I could conceive no better: yet as Peter
said to the Cripple, such as I have, such have I given. I deny not but thou
may find words, phrase, matter, and method, that may not content thee: what
then? why, try all and keep that which is good, for he that offends not in
tongue, is a perfect man: but where is he?

In my opinion I have seen this evil under the Sun: Men in hearing, and
reading, if they dislike any thing either in speech, or person, like little
children, that have many things in their hands they like well, yet if their
Parents do but either add or detract one, contrary to their minds, throw all
away in displeasure. Wherefore let me learn thee this lesson, Get a sound
mind, that thou may be able to judge betwixt the person, and his speech,
doctrine, and doctrine. For it is the perfection of a man in his calling, to
know the worth of a commodity, though set to sale by the poorest person; and
the baseness of that which is bad, though proffered, and proclaimed for good,
by the hands of Princes: so is it for a Christian to discern the true Word,
from the false, whether it come from him that wears the coursest rags, or
Kinglyest raiment. This is to judge righteous Judgment. Furthermore, for
doctrine, some may be Corn, other Chafe; therefore thou art to separate the
precious from the vile, by the fan of thy understanding, and having winnowed it
well, treasure it up as good grain in the Garner of thy Memory. This is to
have a man's wit rightly exercised, when in the multiplicity of opinions, Truth
is elected, error rejected. And thus wishing thee no worse, then willingly I
would receive from thee my self, I cease and rest:

The same thou take me for toward God, and thy self: in truth (I hope)
though not in measure. Io. B.

HIERONS last Farewell. A SERMON PREACHED AT MODBVRY IN DEVON, at the Funeral
of that Reverend and faithful Servant of Idesus Christ, M. SAMVEL HIERON.
2. TIMOTH. 4.7. I have fought a good fight.


THese words may have a double consideration; either Relatiuely, or absolutely:
Relatiuely, having dependence on the precedent verses, and so they seem to be
a motive cause, or argument to move Timothy, to go on in the constant and
sincere Preaching, and professing of the Gospel. Absolutely, and so they are a
testimony, or confession, which the Apostle gives of himself. Now
confessions be of two kinds; voluntary or violent; and this is of the first
sort, being free and without any coaction, or co^pulsion uttered. In the words
we may observe two things: First, the person confessing; Secondly, the thing
confessed. The person confessing, may be considered in time past, or time
future. The thing that he confessed, is laid down first generally, then
specially. Generally, that he had fought. Specially, that (he had not only
fought, but) he had fought a good fight. If Paul had said, I have fought, and
stayed there, how many might truly have took up the same speech, and with the
young man in the Gospel replied: All this have I done from my youth upward? But
if a good fight be added, the answer of the Apostles to their Lord, concerning
the five Loaves and few Fishes, may (by way of allusion) seem to be of force;
What are they among so many? Many fight, few a good fight. In brief, the cause
in these words, is argued by the effect; and the effect, by the kind or
quality, bounty or goodness.

Now would you have the true sense? Shall I open the plain meaning? This it
is, for the party; he may have a manifold consideration. First, for his name,
it was twofold, Saul, and Paul: for his nature, corrupt, sanctified: for his
Profession, both the Righteousness of the Law, and the Gospel: for his
Function, a Pharise, and an Apostle: for his conversation, a destroyer of the
Saints, and a builder of them: A Murderer, and a Martyr: This is the work of
God, and ought to be maruailous in our eyes. Thus can the Creator of time
alter the creature in time, though Time of it self change nothing.

For the word fight:] understand that fights are either Corporal, Ephesians. 6.12.
or Spiritual, with flesh and blood: or principalities and powers, the latter
here meant.

For goodness:] that may be twofold; Natural, or Moral: Natural is also
double. First, the Essence of things, by which I understand, matter, and form,
for whatsoever in the beginning was created, of these two principles was
constituted: yea, the very Angels themselves, though some otherwise judge. For,
are they not perfect effects? Why then must they not have all the four causes?
Again, they are finite, therefore terminated in their Essence: If terminated
in their Essence; then by matter and form; for what else does terminate
things? And there is nothing without Limits of Essence save only God, the first
efficient of all things, being one most simple and pure act.

The second natural good, may be said to be the end; that is, the fitness,
and aptitude of a thing to accomplish that for the which it was first framed,
and we are to know this, that the end, and goodness of a thing, are one and
the same. As for example, we say that is a good Ship, that is fitted to sail
well, a good Knife, made to cut well, or a good Pen, that has in it self an
aptitude to write well. Now Sailing, Cutting, Writing, are their ends; and if
they have in them a power, or ability to accomplish these ends, they may be
said to be good, else not, in this second sense, Genesis 1. vlt.
Thus in the beginning, were all things made good, and very good. Good for
Essence, for end; And a thing may remain good for it Matter, or Substance; but
not for it quality, or end. Satan is still a good substance; for his material
substance remains; But he wants this second goodness, to do the will of
God: he neither now has power, or will to accomplish that end, for the which
he at the first was formed. A fine Watch may catch a fall, all the Wheels by
it may be struck out of order, yet is it good still, for the matter of it: An
Instrument, may be good for substance, yet, make no sweet or pleasant Music,
because the strings are not rightly set and tuned; so is the condition now with
Satan; And of man also; for until the Lord tune the iarring strings of man's
heart fit, and frame every Wheel of the Soul, his best Music is not
pleasing to God, and all his Course, and Motion, does but run to discontent
his Maker: for Adam our father, clyming so high into the Tree of Life, and
eating of the forbidden fruit, caught such a fall, (with whom (being in his
Loins) we fell also) that all the Strings, and Wheels of Soul and Body,
were struck quite out of tune and order.

Now for a Moral good, it may also have a twofold denomination: First, the
act, or secondly, the consequent of the act. That may (I take it) be called a
moral, or divine act, that is guided by the moral and divine precept, as that
may be called a Grammatical art, that is ruled or done by the art or precept
of Grammar. Mich. 6.8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; namely, to do Justice, to love
Mercy, to humble thy self, and to walk with thy God. And this must needs be
good, because the rule is good that guides the action. For every thing is so
far good, as it is answerable to its rule: And Divinity is the only rule of
all Moral and Divine goodness; so far as a man both in the integrity of
his nature, and the conversation of life answers to this rule, he is so much
and no more nearer to all perfection of goodness. Adam was very good by
Creation, but he never was absolutely good by action: Because his actions were
not guided by the Law of God; the only rule of all spiritual goodness.

The consequent or succeeding good that follows the Moral act, I understand
to be, the blessing which the Lord has promised to confer, and bestow upon
all such as love him and obey his Commandments; And in this sense, Psalm. 73.
vlt.
It was good for David to draw near unto God. Psalm. 37.37.
For the end of the just man, (whatsoever his present condition be) shall be
blessed.

In a word, this is the sum, the true sense. I Paul, who once was a proud
Pharise, called Rabbi, in great estimation with the High Priests, breathing out
threatenings against the Saints, persecuting them to strange Cities, making
havoc of the true Church, causing some to blaspheme, persuaded that I ought
to do many contrary things against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth; yet now
being extraordinarily converted, by his powerful voice from Heaven, and being
appointed, and called, to be his Apostle: One that saw the Lord Jesus in the
flesh, had the Gospel by Revelation, freed from the spirit of Error, power to
work Miracles, skill in all Languages, and whose Commission was to preach
through the World; have fought, that is, powerfully and plainly preached the
glad tidings of Peace, gone on also through good report, and evil report,
bonds, imprisonment, and innumerable evils, in the sincere professing of the
same, from the very time of my Conversion to this present: I would have thee
my Son to know this fight, this my course is good, for act, for end, and
profitable every manner of way. And furthermore, let this then, my example, of
Valor, and Resolution, who am thy friend, thy Father, who am now to take my
last farewell, whose face till that last day, thou must see no more, imbolden,
encourage, quicken, and stir thee up to walk, preach and profess, until
thy changing come also. This is that one thing I only would, this is that one
thing thou oughtst and only should.

And thus, you seeing the plain meaning of this parcel of Scripture, many
things may be observed for our instruction: And first, from the Relation with
the other, we note, that,

must be imitated of Timothies in preaching, professing. The best patterns are
best worthy our practice. Hence it is that Christ left us an example, John.
13.15. 1. Pet. 2.21. 1. Cor. 11.1. Phil. 3.17.
that we might tread in his steps, And walk (that is, preach and profess) as
you have us for an example, and as we follow Christ.

Romans 15.4.
Because that this is one reason why the lives of good men, are left recorded in
Scripture, For whatsoever is written, is written for our Learning: And what a
cloud of Witnesses has the Lord to this end committed to eternal memory in
the Holy Letters?

Heb. 12.1.
Again, if we do not this, nature it self will condemn us: the very
creatures will rise up against us: who being young and weak, imitate their
Seniors and Superiors; No bangling Kite, but with a high flyer will mend his
pitch; and shall not we, being Eagles Birds, and borne from above, soar on
high, having so many forerunners, and excellent patterns set before us?

Papists, that deny the people the Book of God: so that they cannot tell how
Paul preached, for matter, or manner, how he behaved himself, either as
Preacher or Professor of the Gospel. Yea, and it meets with many in our days,
that be within us, that though they be Timothies, young Plants, yet they will
not learn of Paul, either by precept or example: This smells of Pride, or
Ignorance, or Idleness, or all.

Paul's manner of preaching and living: and then to walk in his steps. Oh that
we would be wise, and not be too proud in our own conceit! then should we
be strong when we are weak, and find Gods Wisdom manifested through our
foolishness. Could we imitate the best patterns, we should live with credit,
and dye with comfort.



A man's final estate is not to be judged by the beginning, but by the end. 1.
Cor. 6.9. Titus 3.3. 2. Chron. 33.11, 12.


Paul began strangely, yet dyed a Martyr, and though his first days were bad,
yet his latter being better, he fought a good fight.

O that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm. 73.17. James 5.11.
then they would think of their latter end: then I understood their end: you
have heard of the patience of Job, and of his end.

Saul, and Judas, and Alexander, may begin well, and yet prove Persecutors,
resisting the Truth much in the end: And as a man (good only in appearance) may
of a truth become naught: so may a bad man become very good. The Sun may
rise clear, and set under a cloud, 1. Cor. 6.11.
shine bright in the morning, yet lowre in the evening: so may it be with the
sons of men?





Demas, in thy last days; have a care to end in the Spirit: for we must sail
to the shore, run to the end, and strike the Battle through, if we will be
landed safe, win the Prize, and be crowned. Revel. 2.10.


by a forced kind of necessity) with the Prodigal, to return to their
Father: and with Onesimus to their Master? And truly we never make the right
use of Gods Mercy, Romans 2.4.
until his bountifulness lead and allure us to true Repentance.

And now to come more directly to the words: we might handle them two ways,
considering Paul as a Preacher in his particular Charge, or as a Professor, in
his general Calling; but because it is true of him in both, we will the rather
insist of the latter; to wit, how that all men are considered generally (as
Christians) Fighters: yea, and in their particular ranckes, and calling also.
So that the point hence will not to any seem hard, which is,

That the faithful are Fighters, every Christian is a Soldier.

What though there be many that go unarmed, strike not one stroke, refuse
their Master, and throw away the Spiritual Weapons, for this Combat appointed?
yet the point is plain, and the proof of it is at hand. Did not the Lord of
old set Enmity, tell us of a Combat, Genesis 3.15. and 32.24.
and that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head? This Battle
must be of force; this Field is to be fought: for the purpose of God shall
stand. And what did the Wrestling of Israel prefigure, but this Fight? Yea
Christ plays upon Earth, and has his delights with the sons of men. Pro.
8.31. 1. Cor. 16.13.
Are not we commaded to stand fast, to quit us like men, and be strong? And
what means all this; 1. Tim. 6.12.
if the faithful were not Fighters? Fight the good Fight of Faith? I fight not
as one that beats the Air: 1. Cor. 9.26. Phil. 1.29.
We wrestle: You have the same Fight, that you hear to be in me, and saw in
me. And the Author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 10.32.
That they, after they had received Light, had a great Fight in affliction.
Mark, after Light was received, the Combat followed; for it is in spiritual
things, as in natural. First, before it thunder, we see a Light, then hear
the crack or noise, and after come great showers of wet and water: so God (as
at the Creation) says, Let there be light, in the time of our Regeneration;
after, we find a strange working in the Soul, a Quarrel, a Wound, and then
comes the sweet dew from Heaven to help us, to heal us. Will you see the
reasons of this? shall arguments further confirm it?

Heb. 2.10.
a Chiefetaine, or Captain? And shall he have no followers? must he want his
Soldiers? No, for if the one be, the other is. The Father presupposes a
Child, the Shepherd a Flock, the cause his effect, the shadow a body, and so
does a Captain Soldiers; Soldiers a Combat: for these are Relative
Arguments, and the one depends necessarily on the other.

Ephesians. 6.13.
are we not bidden to take to us, the whole or complete Armor of God? If
David take his Sling, Peter his Sword, Jonathan his Bow, Sampson his Iawbone,
and Shamgar his Goad, is it not for an end? Why then, to fight: for the Enemies
are in Arms, the Philistims be in the Field; Goliath is vaunting, and daring
to Battle; and the Combat prepared.

Canaanites camp in the Valleys? Are not the Aramites, and Arabians in the
Mountains? What shall I say? The sons of Anakim are not all slain; though
their father sleep. And these foes be, either foreign, or nearer home:
within us, or without us: without us, first, Satan: secondly, all his
Soldiers: within us, first, corruption: secondly, death.

And first for Satan, The first enemy.
was he not a Murderer from the beginning? does he not daily go about, Like
a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour? Is not this that Red Dragon, that colors and
choaketh himself with the blood of the Saints? Do you think that this Herod
is dead? Will Time alter his nature? or will the death of many satisfy him?
No, he grows worse, and worse; and having the lesser time to quarrel, Revel.
12.12.
the greater woe shall be to the Inhabitants of the Earth. We are commanded to
resist the Devil. James 4.7.
Then shall he not oppose? Was Adam, the first, Job, the Just, Paul the Prince
of the Apostles, and Jesus Christ the Righteous tempted wounded, Matthew. 4.
buffetted, and moved from place to place by him? and do thou think to
escape his hot, his fiery Darts? Let Israel go out of Egypt, to serve his
God; this Pharaoh will be up in Arms, and pursue: Let the Babe Jesus be
borne; The Infants shall be beheaded: Let a little corn and good seed be
sown in the furrows of the Soul; This envious man will be casting in Tares:
or else he shall have his Kingdom weakened, his Scepter removed, and not so
large a Crop of Cockle, at the time of Harvest.

The second enemy.
Again, his friends will also be our foes, and dare us Iehu but cry, Who is on
my side, who? multitudes will follow him: this Ahab has his hundreds of false
prophets: this Serpent has brood of his own bowels, that like the Want, or
Mole, can swim the Sea, creep under the Earth, transform themselves into
Angels of Light, and be ready to blow up Prince and Nobles, with fire and
Gunpowder. He has Caine to kill: Ismael, to scoff: Rabshakeh to rail,
especially, if they be entreated to speak in another Language. At a word, he
has Sanballats; Tobiahs Siluer-smiths, Copper-smiths, and of all kinds of
Callings, to set up his Kingdom. Esau cried out, he was undone: David, Woe is
me: and why? for they dwelt amongst a people of polluted lips, and that
abhorred peace. Their throats were an open Sepulcher: their Tongues like
Razours, hot as the coals of Juniper, the poison of Aspes under their lips,
and their mouths full of cursing and bitterness; Romans 3.
their feet swift to shead blood, destruction and calamity in their ways,
and no fear of God before their eyes. Ierem. 20.10.
Jeremiah complained, that his Mother had brought him forth, a man of
Contention; he heard the railing of many, all his familiars watched for his
halting; saying, It may be that he is deceived; so shall we prevail against
him, and execute our vengeance, upon him. John 8.4.
For these being of their Father the Devil, his work they will do: though
they go at the last to ruin and destruction with him. And thus much for our
foreign foes, that seem the further from us: Our homebred, and more
dangerous adversaries follow, being two also.

And the one of them is corruption, so called, The third enemy.
because that he rotteth, and corrupts, as much as in him is, his contrary.
This old man will send out whole swarms of lusts, to destroy the new. Hence
we are bidden, as Strangers, 1. Pet. 2 11.
and Pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts, that fight against the Soul.
This prick, or stab was sent to buffet Paul, and never could he be rid of it,
2. Cor. 12.7.
till death. It is called a prick in the flesh: by which I understand,
(omitting all other interpretations) the very act, or motion of the
unregenerate part, often called flesh, who, by his contrary lusting, hinders
a man in the performance of all good duties. Gal. 5.17.
And the reasons of this interpretation, are two; first, in all probability
that which Paul complains the most against elsewhere, is that, that he most
praid against in this place, and it was the body of death; the Law in his
flesh, Romans 7.23.
rebelling against the Law of his mind, and leading him captive unto the Law
of sin, which was in his members.

Secondly, thus I also reason, that which does most molest, and trouble all
Gods Children, is it that did the most trouble Paul, (Paul as a Christian.) But
this prick, the act of corruption, the stab of the old man, does most molest
all Gods Children, Ergo Paul, why? Ask an experienced Professor, what does the
most trouble him in any good duty? his answer will be, In Prayer, wandering
thoughts, carrying the mind from God; so that like a man, who makes a round
Circle, fetching a circumference, we never come near him, but in the first
word (Our) and last word (Amen) as the two points, in the very period of the
Motion, and the Circles perfection. Also, let a man speak, or preach the Word
of God, how is a good man grieved that this prick buffets him, striking his
head awry, that he aims not at the right end, or mark? weakening the spirit,
that his speech wants Salt to season it, Grace to powder it, causing the poor
Soul (when she comes to her self) and viewes her wandering, to cry out, What
have I done? so that I had the rather apply it to many, then one particular
sin, or act.







Kings 8.30. with 2. Chron. 6.21.

viz. how grace and corruption, subject. I answer, First, that they may have a
double consideration, not only as adjuncts, but also as owners of the same
subject, in which they are, and to which they adhere; as two men in the same
Boat, may diversely be considered, for they are but adjuncts to the Boat in one
sense, and in another, it may be an adiunct to either of them. The one laying
title to it, says it is his, and he will go Eastward: The other denies that,
and says it is his, and he will carry it Westward. Thus the arguments being
altered, and the one rowing one way, and the other another, comes the Combat.

So Grace like an Owner, says, that he has a true title to the man (for God
has put him into possession) and would carry him to Heaven. Corruption
denies that; (for says he) I have been owner longer then thee; therefore he
is mine, and shall to Hell-ward; and hence from their contrary lusting, may
grow a quarrel.

Again, though they be contraries, yet they may be

The second internal Enemy is Death, The fourth enemy.
against whom we are to war, and combat; as this foe came first into the
World, so must he go the last out of it; 1. Cor. 15.26.
For the last Enemy to be destroyed is Death. This close Adversary comes
stealing upon us at unawares, and gives us a deadly wound with his sting; And
every man must have about and battle with him, before he enter into Heaven:
except a few that shall be living at the last Day, yet their change may be
called a kind of Combat: and strange is this to think: for although this
Warrior, with David, has slain his ten thousand, yet he never has enough.

And whatsoever the great Gallants of our days, in their hot blood, and height
of their valor, may imagine; yet the very sight of this foe, will make the
stoutest, and strongest of their hearts to tremble. PHARAOH, but hearing, (yet
he was a King) that he was come near his home, could then cry, Let Israel
be gone, and serve his God, when all other judgments would not work
effectually with him. Let Nabal that drunken Fool, be come to his wits, and
sober, the tidings of such a Messenger to fetch him, will make him as cold as a
stone, and his live heart to dye within him. But yet here is comfort for a
Christian; for Christ, their Captain, has bruised this Serpents head,
deprived him of his sting, and removed that bitter and poisoned water from
under his tongue: he has changed his nature, put the glorious veil of the
Gospel over his ugly countenance, through which, they that with the eye of
Faith behold him, though they may fear at the first, as Moses, to touch his
Rod, yet at the last, they shall have boldness, and embrace him.

Revel. 2.10.
He that ouer-commeth, must be clothed in white: And such as fight manfully
under their Captain, shall have the Garland of Life. So that you see, that the
faithful are fighters: for they have a Lord General: Secondly, Weapons and
Armor: Thirdly, Enemies without them, and within them; without them, Satan,
and his Soldiers: within them, Corruption, Death. And last, which is not the
least, no Combat, no Crown: And from this point thus proved, many profitable
Corrolaries spring, and like streams, from their fountain, do flow.

of the vulgar, that think Heaven may be had, without war, and garments,
tumbling in blood: these Dreamers imagine, that the Devil (to use the Worlds
Proverb) is dead, or that he has no power to prevail against them; defying,
spitting, and scorning, yet alas, they are took captive of him at his will,
and with Simon Magus, in the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. They
dream, that they are borne to a Kingdom, and cannot miss of the Crown; and
where is their ground? why, Gods eternal Election. O, say such, If I be
ordained to life, then shall I be saved: if predestined to death; why it is
in vain to fight, for I must be damned; But these must learn, if they have a
lust to do it; That Gods Decree excludes not, but includes the means, that
lead to the end. Jobs days are numbered, Job. 14.5.
his bounds he cannot pass: What? shall he therefore neither eat, drink,
sleep, or use lawful recreation? Acts 27.
Not a hair shall fall from the heads of all the men in the Ship, for the
Angel of God has said it: shall Paul therefore let it sink or swim? no, if
these abide not in the same; ye cannot be safe.

Therefore, be it known, that if God have chosen thee before eternity, thou
must be created, called, Romans 8.30.
justified, sanctified, and fight manfully, before thou be saved Lay thy hand
now upon thy mouth, some out no more such mud, cast far this filth from thee,
and learn at the length, lest it prove too late, That the faithful are
fighters, and all Christians be Soldiers. It is true that the Lord knows
who are his, his foundation remains sure: yet every one that desires to be
sealed, saved, must depart from iniquity: for as he has his seal, 2. Tim.
2.19.
we must have ours.

into the Kingdom of God, or go to the Church, and public Congregation: And
too many there be, that judge the one as easy as the other, making in their
shallow conclusion, the like equal proportion.

To what end then is it, that we are bidden to strive, work, prove, resist,
stand fast, fight, quit you like men, let no man take away your Crown? If it
were so easy a matter, shall we think that Satan will not resist, tempt, and
cast his fiery and fierce Darts at us, if we war against him? Will not the
beasts of Ephesus yell, roar, and devour such as do awake them out of the
sleep of sin? Who will, that is wise, imagine, that corruption will not
sprawle, like Esau? kick with the heel, and cuffe us on the face, as the High
Priest bid Paul? and is it possible to live in Meshek, and Kedar, and not to
be opposed? breathe in the Air, and feed on the Creatures, and not to be
mortal? Away then with this fond conceit; for they that thus err in vanity,
vanity shall be their change. These Sleepers Crown shall, like Saul's Spear,
be stolen from them; their best hopes shall make them one day ashamed, their
candle must be put out, and their house, like the Spyders Web, perish: for he
that does not overcome, shall not be crowned; Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force.

Laish, a lazy people: some have the eye of the mind put out, and like Saul
at his Conversion go, they know not whither; others like Mephibosheth, and
Adonibezech, are lame both of feet, and fingers: some as Samson, when they be
to fight, want their weapons, and so like puling boys, put the finger in the
eye, and fall a weeping.

Alas, alas, how many take Caine, for his Keeper, the Wolf, for the
Sheep, and in stead of the true Shepherd, an Hireling! They believe every
report, give credit to each person, and so like the foolish Birds, be ensnared.
Satan leads some blind-folded, as the Prophet did the people unto Samaria, 2.
Kings 6.19, 20
unto the land of darkness, before their eyes be opened, and their Enemies be
discerned; only hears the dissimilitude; the one found favor, the other shall
not be freed.

Jail, and he not make hue and cry after him? shall the Sinner be put into the
endless River of Gods running Mercies; and shall not the Devil angle for him?
Will not the Prince awake, when the Subjects are at war with him? And
therefore the more that thou art tempted by the Devil, the more cause thou
have to gather comfort: for after remission of sin, is placed, Lead us not
into temptation. Again, does the World hate thee, count thee, with Paul, a
Play-sellow, run with Caine, and seek to kill thee? Why, know, she loves
her own, cries peace unto them she affects, and always lulleth them in
her soft and lined lap.

God would have a wicked one in the Arc, that the Church and Truth might never
be without opposition. Christ has said, that in the World we shall have many
persecutions: the Servant is not greater then his Master: and if they have done
this to a green Tree, always fruitful, what will they do to a dry that is
barren and seldom bears? Therefore never be daunted: Satan's seed will
sting, although it cannot kill; it will be like Dan, and the Adder biting us by
the heel: but be thou of good comfort, The elder shall serve the younger: for
Christ has overcome the World. John 16. vlt.


And what if we find a strange change in our selves, causing us cry with
Rebeccah, (when the Twins strove in her womb) Why am I thus? or with Jeremiah,
Is any man's sorrow like to my sorrow? Or with Manoah, We shall die: for have we
not seen the Lord? Yet all this is ground of great joy, matter of exceeding
mirth; for salvation is come unto thy house. I know that young Conuerts, in the
pangs of regeneration, wonder to see such an alteration in themselves,
imagining, that never any person has found comfort in that condition. But use
thou the means, and thy fear shall be expelled, thy spirit healed, thy
corruption weakened; and thou, at the last, Psalm. 116.7.
shall either be able to say with David, Now, Soul, return unto thy rest: or
else with Paul, at the last, thou shall hear that pleasant, and still voice,
rowning thee in the ear, 2. Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee: for my power is made manifest in weakness.
And be thou assured, until Satan rage, the Flesh prick, the World persecute,
and Death terrify, thou wast never a Christian Soldier, entered into the lists
of the fight, and in possibility of heaven; Revel. 17.14.
For they that are of the Lambs part, are called, and faithful, and chosen,
and therefore, must undergo in some degree, what the Forerunner, and
Finisher of their Faith has suffered. Let Satan tempt me; corruption like a
body lade me; the World deride me; Death look grim upon me; Then will I say, I
either am, or shall be a Christian Soldier.

Luke 14.31.
and consider of our ability, lest we, seeming to begin in the Spirit, end
in the Flesh. We must take heed, that we do not rush into the battle,
without mature deliberation, but well weigh with whom, and about what we have
to deal. Many have seemed resolute at the first, that have run away at the
last, and so all their labor has been lost. Young Christians are like young
Soldiers, strike hard for awhile, lay on lode, and anon retire. We see in
experience, that some Gallants standing on the shore, and seeing a ship under
sail, the flags spread, hearing the allarum of the Drum, sound of the Trumpet,
and report of the Pieces, lanch out valiantly: But when they, through the smell
of the Pumpe, or tempest and storms of the Sea, have been tossed to and fro,
tumbled out of their Cabin, and Sea-sicke exceedingly; vow, that if they once
come to land, they will be for ever after wiser: And the very same, for want of
consideration, befalls many, that begin this spiritual combat. We must
begin the battle; as men go into the water to bathe, not too hot, nor too
cold: for extremes in all things are full of danger.

Our loins must be girded about with Verity: Ephesians. 6.13.
the plate of Justice upon our breasts: the Gospel of peace must cover our
feet; above all, we must take the shield of Faith, See Goutch on this place.
the helmet of Hope, and the sword of the Spirit. Who will run into the battle
unarmed? What man is so mad, but will have his weapons with him? else, would
we not count such a person desperate? Put on therefore the complete Armor of
the Lord: And pray all manner of prayer: for prayer like oil, and exercise,
keeps the furniture, and weapons from rusting. And take these rules for thy
further direction.

1. First, know thou thy particular place and standing: learn in what part of
the battle thou art to war You take too much upon you, you Moses and Aaron.
For almost all will either be Captains, or Coronels, or they will none of the
Crown, recoile, like an ouercharged Cannon, and not fight one stroke in the
combat.

David pray for the Spirit of life and power? How does he press it upon
others, Be strong, etc? For to what end is it to have weapons, to know his
standing, if he want strength to wield them, and wound the Adversary?
Weakness must be removed, or willingness will be to no purpose. We must
strive therefore for the Spirit of power, as well as for a sound mind.
Knowledge may guide us, but strength must support our selves, and wound others.

Ephesians. 5.15.
Be wise, etc. Wisdom must not be forgotten. Paul, an old beaten Soldier
cries often out, Col. 1.9.
Walk wisely: Be filled with all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Want
of skill is a great want in a man of any calling, and much to be desired in
this; for our Adversaries are very politic, and so must we be, if we would
prevail. Put a sword into a man's hand that has will without skill, and he
will either smite flat-way, or wound his friend, for his adversary. Therefore
(I say) Get wisdom, get understanding: for when these enter into thy heart,
they shall preserve thee. Paul was admirable in this; read but the Acts, and
you shall see, he killed more by policy, then prowess: yet like Simeon and
Leui, these must go together to slay our Sychemites.

Hebr. 12.1.
He that warreth, intangleth not himself with the things of this life, that
he may please his Master. Love of earthly things out of us, and corruption
cherished within us, 2. Tim. 2.4.
may not be suffered to a resolute spiritual Soldier. Deuteronomy. 20.8.
As GOD would not have faint-hearted persons to fight, no more can he endure
such whose affections are at home, Deuteronomy. 24.5.
with wife, goods, etc. when his person is in the field.

Iudes Planets, wandering. Christian Soldiers should not need, like spirits,
to be coniured in their Circles. Put on the right armor: David cannot walk in
Saul's, he must not overcome with such carnal weapons; no, no, they must be
spiritual, that will wound, and kill our Goliath, the Philistim; and when thou
have done this, labor for skill, strive for strength: for the one would fight,
but without the other cannot, the other can and will, but if he be not guided,
hurt will follow.

That a Christians fight is a good fight. I may say of it, as Solomon speaks
of wisdom; The merchandise thereof is better then silver, and the gain
thereof greater then gold; It is more precious then pearls, and all things
that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto it. Harken what testimony
this old beaten Soldier still gives of it. 1. Tim. 1.18.
It was prophesied of Timothy, that he should fight a good fight. And he like a
grand Captain, 1. Tim. 6.12.
or great Commander, charge him to fight this good fight of faith: in these
his words the same thing is meant. Hos. 2.7.
And what says the Camp elsewhere? I will go and return to my first
Captain; for when I fought under his Banner* it was better with me, then now.
David (or some other worthy Warrior) disputed the case, it seems: whether it
was better to fight the battles of the World, or of the Lord? But at the
length, he makes this resolute conclusion: Psalm. 73. vlt.
Its good for me to draw near unto God.

Truly (Beloved) it never goes so well with a Christian Soldier, as when he
is taking of the Lambs part, warring against the Dragon and his followers, and
manfully fighting the battles of his Lord. And it may be called good, either
in respect of the fight, or the effects that follow the very act, or the
consequents that succeed, and ensue, the combat being ended.

Reasons.
For first: Did not Elohim, who created all things of nothing, garnished the
heavens, framed the crooked Serpent, gathers the winds into his fist,
spanneth the great Globe with his hand, and that says to the proud waves,
Hither shall thou come, and no farther, appoint the same? And how can this God
do any thing that is not good? If he appoint the field, we need not to fear
but it is a lawful, Genesis 3.15.
and good fight.

2. Again, who is the Lord General, and Leader of this Army? Is it not
Christ Jesus, God-Man? We may say of him, (and more too) as the people did of
David, that he is worth a thousand thousand of us all. Who ever understood
this, but with admiration? Surely he never sinned, yet fought this fight:
therefore it cannot but be good and very good. Revel. 17.14.


3. The Spirit also does summon these Soldiers, and conducteth them into the
field, Matthew. 4.1.
he leads into every truth; for he is Truth it self. And what comfort may
this yield every Christian Soldier, that he has such a Guider, and Conducter
unto the combat!

4. The new man, and firstborn, the part regenerate, is the Fighter. These
are all of the free-womans seed, Gal. 5.17.
and have the mark of Christ their Captain in their foreheads: and these
Soldiers cannot sin. 1. John 3.9.


5. The weapons for this combat, prepared, and appointed, they are not carnal,
but spiritual, mighty, from God, and able to ouer-throw the strongest holds
of Satan, either within us, or without us. 2. Cor. 10.4.
These weapons are like the sword of Saul, and bow of Jonathan, that never
returned empty: he that strikes with these, always kills his foe, and wins
the field.

6. And last of all; is it not for their own right, Luke 12.32.
that they thus war? Judge. 11.24.
I remember what Iphtah said to the King of the children of Ammon: Would not
thou possess that which Chemosh thy god gives thee to possess? So, shall not
we fight for that, which our GOD has commanded us to fight for? And if it was
warrantable for him to do the one, of a truth its good for us to do the
other: And thus you see, in regard of the act, or fight it self* it is good,
and none dares (except he would make God, Christ, the holy Ghost, the new Man,
the Spiritual weapons, and heavens privileges, to be sins, and sinners) deny
it.

Gal. 6.17.
Paul's wounds that he received in this hot skirmish, are more honor to him,
then if he had been adorned with all the ornaments of Nature and the World.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed, Pro. 10.7.
and every faithful Soldier shall be had in everlasting remembrance; their
names shall flourish on earth, Psalm. 112.6.
and be forever engraven in heaven.

1. Tim. 4.8.
And it is profitable every manner of way: for it has the promises of this
life, and the life to come. And is not that a matter of great worth, 1. Pet.
1.4.
of infinite moment? They are called great and precious promises: for first,
they bring food and raiment, fit and convenient. Secondly, the curse by Christ
our Captain is removed, the infection is took away.

Our father Adam steeped all our bread in such a liquor, Revel. 10.10.
as without this fight, it will be like John's little book, though sweet in
the mouth, yet bitter in the belly. Exodus 18.25.
And our drink, like the waters of Marah, if this tree alter not the taste,
rather kill, then cure us.

1. Pet. 1.8.
3. We shall have inward peace, that passes all understanding. A thing often
spoke of, but seldom felt by experience; this joy is unutterable, glorious.

Psalm. 91.11, 12.
4. The good Angels shall pitch their Tents about us, preserve us in their
hands: so that we shall not see death, or dash our foot against a stone,
until we have finished our course, and our best hopes be crowned, never
making ashamed: Romans 8.28.
For all things shall work together (mark that, not apart) for good, to them
that love God, and are chosen of his purpose to this combat. 1. Tim. 4.8.
Besides, this fight has the promises of the world to come, and they be many.

1. First, death shall be to such, advantage, better then the day wherein they
were borne: Eccles. 7.3.
for Christ our General has took away her sting, 1. Cor. 15.55.
like a Droane she may fear us with her humming, but not hurt us.

2. The souls, at the separation, by the Angels shall be apprehended, Luke
16.22.
and instantly carried into heaven, either for our safety and comfort, or in
that the souls are ignorant of that journey. God could (we deny not)
immediately bring them thither, but he will not: for his Angels are, Hebr. 1.
vlt.
and must be ministering Spirits, for the good of those elect Soldiers.

3. They, then shall rest from their labors, sing glory to the Lamb, Revel.
14.17.
and with a rauishing and spiritual longing, expect the final end of this
combat, and perfection of all things.

4. In the day appointed, when this quarrel shall be ended, (for it shall be
finished, 1. These. 4.6.
(to allude lawfully to an unlawful recreation) when the last of these
men-souldiers are borne, and borne again) then shall the Soul descend from
Heaven into the Grave, be infused into the same body, where in former time
she had her habitation: But it shall be far more glorious, 1. Cor. 15.
for it shall be without all corruption, spot, or wrinkle: It shall be
Spiritual, having power to ascend, or descend, Phil. 3. vlt.
immortal, and abiding glorious for ever: For Christ shall change our vile
bodies, and make them like to his glorious body, by that power whereby he is
able to subdue



matter, and by its own form inform it; And then the water contracteth its
form into its own matter; and so in the end, having much form, and little
matter, it seems then to fly away from its opposite.

Therefore this is but a childish cavil; for Elements are not annihilated, or
wholly transmutated, so that the same body may rise. What if they were? What,
Is any thing impossible to God? Shall we so think? God forbid, so be it as
it do not (and this does not) contradict his nature.



Adam: Then must the second Adam remove it, (understand of the Elect only) or
he should not recover what the first lost: And some hold, that the very bodies
of the Reprobate shall be made more excellent, that they may undergo the
greater torment; 1. John 3.1, 2.
but certainly the Elect shall be satisfied with Christ's glorious Image.





Take a Pecke of Meal; Lay leaven of it, it will be greater in quantity, not
in essence or matter.

Again, God can make that deformed mass, a well formed man, yet add no
matter; as we see a Bell mist in the casting, of the selfsame matter may be
made perfect.

So God, the great Bel-founder of all the World, shall take out the Soul for a
time, and cast the body anew, in the Furnace of the Earth, after put them
together; and then Aarons Bells in the Sanctuary never rang so sweet a peale,
as these Bells shall, in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, for ever, and ever.

5. Fifthly, then shall not only all their wounds and skars be cured, but they
shall tread the Prince of the World, Satan, and all their Enemies, under foot,
yea, Romans 16.20.
they shall see their foes suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, for troubling
them in their flight to Heaven. That spiritual Pharaoh, with his huge Host,
2. These. 1.8, 9.
shall be swallowed up by the Red Sea of endless destruction, without all hope
of recovery.

6. Lastly, they have a promise that their Habitation, shall be Heaven; their
Companions, Christ and his Angels, 1. These. 4.17. Psalm. 16. vlt.
all Fellow Soldiers; their joy full, and for ever. What a place is this,
where all have fullness of joy, fullness with constancy, and constancy with
fullness for all eternity?

If these things now were laid all together, truly understood, seriously
thought upon, and without doubting believed, who would not, or could not
affirm the proposition for a truth, that a Christians fight is a good fight?
good for act, for ever, for both. The uses in their order now follow.

tongue can speak, or heart fully conceive the riches of this spoil, man, or
Angel.

Suppose, that thou have rich attire, but it is infected; dainty diet, but
poisoned; many things, but all in the end shall work for evil; what a misery
is this? Yet this is the estate of Satan's Soldiers. Besides this, he deals
with his Followers, as the Philistims by Samson, takes away their strength,
pulls out their eyes, makes them draw in bonds and fetters, and if he rejoice
in any thing, it is in their bloodshed and endless destruction.

But we will leave them, and pity them, hoping in time they may take the
Lambs part, and fight this good Combat.

Psalm. 4.6.
Who will show us any good? as if then had they found it, they would follow it.
Why, this is that good thing so many have groped after; wherefore be ye of
good courage, strike hard, stand fast, and be strong. If thou be out of heart,
think what an honor it is to be slain in this field, and that all thy wounds
again shall be cured, yea the sooner thou art killed, thou shall be crowned;
for by death we overcome, get the victory.

When I consider how the children of Babel, the Papists, do spill their blood
like water, on the ground, for their Antichrist, Lord, think I then; what
should we do, that are the sons of Bethel, for our Christ, that has bin
slain himself, to deliver us from the sting of the first, and wound of the
second death! But (alas) these Meditations come not but like Strangers, to our
minds, and what cold, and short entertainment have they! And this the reason,
that we are so loath to leap, or lanch out, shrink at the sight of a Ship, cry
out at the crack of a Cannon, and tremble at the report of the narrow mouthed
Piece: We (beloved) have not resisted unto blood; God has given us better
days; fire and faggot have been kept afar, and what a shame is it then,
that we are so weak, faint, halting, and ready upon the least assault, to be
turned out of the way? And therefore if any be giddie-headed in this combat,
like a man running through a swift water, or stream; let him look over to the
shore of Heaven, see what a pleasant landing there is, and thousands of Angels
to give him entertainment: have thou respect with Moses, to the recompense of
reward: think of a better Resurrection, and with thy forerunner set before the
eye of thy Soul, that glory prepared for thee. What if thy body fall in the
Wilderness of this World? The Lord has it in his keeping; Rise again it
shall; therefore be steadfast, immooueable, abundant always in the Work of the
Lord, 1. Cor. 11. vlt.
seeing that you know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

And when our fellow soldiers fall by us, let us think that our Captain is
also a Surgion, a Physician, and will one day cure all our wounds, and then
shall we for ever remain together. Paul would have all his fellow soldiers in
this case, to comfort one another with these words, 1 Thessalonians. 4. vlt.

Christ, or Belial. Awake therefore, thou that sleep; stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light; all convenient furniture, Ephesians. 5.14.

Paul, who was an Apostle, and excellent in the Church, but not for me.



1. First, thou have the same Captain.

2. Secondly, the same pay; for the promises are not made to any person, for
his greatness, and learning sake: but as he is a Christian, and for his
goodness: Therefore, Paul in the next verse following my Text, to take away
this doubt, adds, that a Crown of Righteousness is by the righteous Judge
laid up, not for himself only, but for all them also that fight, and love his
appearing.

3. We escape many wounds that he had, as Circumcision: this made Zipora call
her Husband, Bloody Husband, Gal 6.
Exodus 4.25. How often was he whipped? bare in his body the marks of the
Lord Jesus? which lashes, and stripes, we have escaped. And no doubt but they
set it on for the hatred they bore him, and as does appear, by that
impression, and skarres, that were to be seen in him.

4. He fought with beasts at Ephesus. Some think, after the custom of that
Country, he was cast unto them: but howeuer, the Fight was fierce, and tart
to flesh and blood.

5. We war a shorter time (for the most part) then he did; and this is some
privilege, though it were but rest for a day, or hour; and to the spoil so
much the sooner.

We care not how short a time we serve for our freedom, how speedily we have
ended, and dispatched our daily business.

And is not a favor, in a short time, to win the Field, and possess the
Heaven?

6. He often fought alone, and had many Adversaries; for he confessed that at his
being at Rome (where then was Peter) all men forsook him, 2. Tim. 4.16.
not one to assist him. And a greater grief must it needs be to him; for
company in suffering is comfortable: And there is a woe pronounced to him, that
is (thus) left alone.

7. And last of all, his trial was so hot, his foes so fierce, that he
resisted unto blood. What should I more say? For if we would seriously ponder
of these things, we could not but gather life and spirit, and like Iehu, march
on furiously: or, Deborah, valiantly. But we, many of us, have the prize in
our hands, yet (alas) we want hearts.

Well (beloved) I can tell you this, that when death approaches, and judgment
through her, as through a window looks us in the face; then this fight will
be found to be of worth, and a greater good, then all the glory, and pomp of
the world. But if Paul's pattern, the goodness of the fight, and the
privileges, that we above many of our Brethren, in time past, and at this
present partake of, will not move us to fight, and fight resolutely; let us
then set before us the fearful wrath, and dreadful vengeance, that is
prepared for such as never began this fight, or if they have, yet endure not to
the end.

And let that also awake us with Samson, when the Philistims were upon him, and
cause each of us to fly for his life: For necessity sometimes makes the faint
and fearefull-hearted Soldier, valiant.

Consider therefore what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in
these things. Amen.

wear weapons, go armed; but never teach, or train them up under whom, or
how to fight, the more is the pity. But now be ye better advised; make thy
sons of Gods Family, of Christ's Camp, of the number of the Faithful: so
shall thou be a loving Father, and tender Mother. Otherwise, thou have but
made him by nature, the Slave and Soldier of Satan, child of perdition. And
what an honor will it be to Parents at that last Day of appearing, when they
can say to this great Captain, Heb. 2.13.
as he himself to his Lord General, Here am I, and the Soldiers that thou
have given me? For know, that yet a very little while, Heb. 10.37.
and he that will come, shall come, and will not tarry.

Paul says, Paul has fought a good fight; observe, That it is not a sin
simply, to speak the best of ones self.

2. That a Murderer, may dye a Martyr; a Persecuter, an Apostle; in a word, a
great Sinner, a rare Saint. Here we see, that a bloody Persecuter, dyed Christ's
resolute Soldier: and the same may befall in our days* Again note,

3. That Gods Saints on earth, have no abiding City. Paul must depart; his
fight is fought, his course is finished, calling things that are not, as though
(already) they were.

4. That a well-led life yields comfort at the day of death. For Paul speaks
this with rejoicing.

5. That a good man in his life, wishes the Church might flourish after his
death. This was the cause why Paul so pressed Timothy to preach, he being ready
to depart.

6. That certainty of perseverance may be had, being rightly sought for.
Besides others that I omit.

And now all that I have to say, seeing we are fighters, and one of our
Worthies fallen, is this, Let us be the more watchful over our selves, and the
closer knit together.

Let us go up as one man, having our affections united, like the Leuiathans
skales, that no sword can either pierce them, or divide them. For a Kingdom
divided against it self, cannot stand: and the divisions of Ruben will but
make great thoughts of heart.

And because the eye that now sees me (in this place) may see me no more; and
the ear that now hears me (out of this place) may hear me no more; my last
speech to you (my Brethren) shall be that charge Joseph gave to his brethren at
their parting: Genesis 45.24.
Fall not out, neither be stirred (one against another) by the way. Amen.

FINIS.

