A view of all THE RIGHT Honorable the Lord Mayors of this Honorable City of
London. With the personages, and also such chief occasions as happened in
eue^y several mayors time, as also their charitable gifts are set down, and
the places of their burials.

Beginning at the first year of her majesty's happy reign, and continued unto
this present year 1601. by W. I. of London Printer.

Printed at London for William Iaggard and Thomas Pauyer and are to be sold at
his house in Cornhill, at the sign of the Cat and two Parats. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir William Ryder Lord Mayor of this Honorable City
of London.
RIght Honorable, I find in common experience that every Author fitteth the
patronage of his long labor, unto some personage of esteem: and in knitting
up his resolution, presumes upon the favor of such a one, as in his long
debated conceit, best understands the subject whereon he labors: Even so
I, being h attened forth by other men's good haps, have only made choice of your
honor, under whose favor I hope to be protected: and finding it my duty
(considring the honor it has pleased God to bestow upon you) to rest my labor
upon so worthy a rock. The causes moving me to this work might be many, but
especially four. First, the examples of good justice done by your
predecessors. Secondly, the christian and charitable patterns left for after
ages, by their examples. Thirdly, how many poor in this city and elsewhere
are relieved to the worlds end, by their liberalities and godly provisions. And
fourthly but principally (Right Honorable that which no good subject will
object against) the great mercy of God, in blessing this little land with so
precious a Prince, in whose reign may be told to after ages, that never any
one age heard before, that 43. Lord Mayors of this City, have seen 43. years
all in peace, under so gracious a Sovereign: In peace one yea^e to take place,
and in that great blessing (Peace) the next year to resign again (God long
preserve that root from whence such blossoms spring.) I had thought to have
put it out naked, but being better advised, I have in duty (being a poor
Citizen) presented your Honor with the first fruit of my labor, praying pardon
at your kind hands for my rash and rude presumption upon your patience, if I
shall any way offend. I have in this collection dealt as faithfully toward
every particular personage, as I find recorded, and (I trust) given no cause of
offense to any good knight, either living or deceased. Thus finishing my task
in your year of government, I shall daily pray to God for your Honors good
success.

Your Honors in all duty, William Iaggard.



An. reg. 1. Sir Thomas Lee Mercer. 1558

THis sir Thomas Lee (or Leigh) governed this worthy City of London, in the
year 1558. He was not long in this authority, but God sent us our gracious
and Noble queen Elizabeth to reign and govern over this happy land. At the
solemnization of her Majesty's Coronation, it pleased her highness to make
this lord Mayor Butler for that high feast, and gave unto him a cup of gold
for his dilligent pains and discharge of his high office. Also in this year
the citizens of London had a muster before the queen at Greenewich of 1400.
men, all furnished and set forth by the several companies of the city of
London. Sir Thomas Lee lies buried in the Mercers chapel.

Sheriffs. John Hlase. Richard Champion.



An. reg. 2 Sir Will. Huet Clothworker. 1559

SIr William Huet was next that had the government and was lord Mayor of this
famous City. He was the first mayor of the Worshipful Company of the
Clothworkers, he was very charitable and a very good commonwealth man. In this
year on michealmasse eeuen was published a proclamation concerning base coin,
(called the third fall of base money, and for it came new coin of fine
silver. He having but one daughter, married with may. Edward Osborne (being
his man) and after Lord mayor of this city, who erected in remembrance of his
said master and father, a pretty monument, in the church of saint martin
Orgar, where he was buried the 25. of January 1566.

Sheriffs. Thomas Lodge. Roger martin.



An. reg. 3. Sir Will. Chester Draper. 1560

IN this year 1560. Sir William Chester was elected and chosen Lord Mayor of
this City, no matter worthy note haopened throughout this year, concerning
this City, save only about the month of April, there was one whipped for
taking upon him a false Christ, and after his punishment confessed that Christ
was in heaven. This year upon the fourth of June between the hours of four
and five after noone, Paul's steeple was set on fire by lightning, so terrible,
that in four hours, the steeple with the roofes of the church were consumed.
This knight lived after this place of honor some years, and lies buried in
saint Edmunds church in Lumbard street.

Sheriffs. Christopher Draper. Thomas Row.



An. reg. 4. Sir Will. Harper Merchantaylor. 1561

SIr William Harper Lord Mayor of this city of London, showed many good works
of christianity, amongst many virtues, he erected a free school in the
ancient town of Bedford, (in which town he was borne. This year her Majesty
by proclamation restored unto all her loving subjects diverse small pieces of
money, from six pence to three farthinges. Also this year was made ready and
set forward her Majesty's forces for the recovery of the town of New haven,
which was by Gods assistance effected and got by the English. Many excellent
deeds of charity proceeded from this good knight, which are not yet gathered,
he was buried in Lumbard street, at saint Mary Wolnoth.

Sheriffs. Alexander Avenon. Humfrey Baskervile



An. reg. 5 Sir Thomas Lodge Grocer. 1562

THis year sir Thomas Lodge was Lord Mayor, in whose year the English men
returned from Newhauen, at the coming home of which companies, there arose a
great plague, especially within this city, and as M. Stow records, there
died of all diseases within this city the liberties and outparishes 23660. Of
the plague, 20136. By reason hereof no term was kept at Michaelmasse. Also
there was a great Earthquake in England, and a great tempest about London,
whereby much hurt happened about Charing-crosse. This Knight has no other
matters recorded of his time, what deeds he did in this city or in his
company, as yet I find not. He lies in Aldermary church.

Sheriffs. William Allin. Richard Champion.



An. reg. 6 Sir John White Grocer. 1563

IN this year 1563. was sir John White Lord Mayor of this Honorable city but
by reason the pestilence was not yet clear, he was forced to leave the
accustomed manner of taking his Oath at Westminster, and received it at the
utmost gate of the Tower of London, neither was there any feast at the
Guildhal. Hyllary term was kept in Hartford Castle. The Armorers through suit
made to this Lord Mayor, got a Watch granted upon saint Peter's eeven. It was
also enacted by a common council, that if any Citizen were forced to sell his
household stuff, he should have it cried by a Belman, and then sold by a common
out crier appointed for that purpose. He was not buried in London.

Sheriffs. Edward Banks. Rowland Heyward.



An. reg. 7. Sir Richard Mallary Mercer. 1564

SIr Richard Mallary was according to ancient custom by the common consent of
this city elected and chosen Lord Mayor for this year, in whose time I find
little recorded. In this year was the great Frost, being very sharp and
extreme, and continued many days, insomuch as the Thames was so frozen up.
that from London bridge to Westminster, diverse courtyers shot at pricks upon
the ice. It continued till the third of January, and then came so swift a thaw,
that within two days the ice was so clean consumed, as if no such frost had
happened, but in the farewell thereof it bare down Owse bridge, and did much
hurt. The Watch was this year continued on saint Peter's eeuen, Nothing can I
say further of this knight as yet, He lies buried in the Mercers chapel.

Sheriffs. Edward Iackman. Lyonell Ducket.



An. reg. 8. Sir Rich. Champion Draper. 1565

THis year sir Richard Champion was Lord Mayor of London, who showed himself
very dilligent and careful in the discharge of the trust to him committed, He
lived but a short time after this his high office, some three years ^t his
death he left a very christian and charitable token of remembrance to all after
ages, for as in his life time he relieved the poor, so he has ordained a
weekly stipend to be bestowed upon the poor of the parish of S. Dunstans in
the East, where he lies under a very fair monument erected, In his time was
purchased by the City, certain houses in Cornhill, amounting to the sum of
532. pounds, or thereabout, and deliucred to sir Thomas Gresham, who builded
the same at his own charge, and on the 7. of June laid with his own hands,
the first stone.

Sheriffs. John Rivers. James Hawes.



An. reg. 9. Christo. Draper Ironmonger. 1566

IN this year 1566. was sir Christopher Draper by common custom chosen and
appointed Lord Mayor of this city, the which place he discharged with great
gravity, and lived many years a Worshipful knight and Justice in this cyttye,
I find nothing as yet of his almes^deedes, but as they come to hand, they shall
be inserted. This year there died within the compass of ten months seven
several Aldermen, which has not been seen before or since that time. On
mydsommer even at night this year, was the like standing watch, as had bin on
saint Peter's even the year before past. This Knight has no monument erected,
but lies buried in a vanlt at saint Dunstons in the East, without any further
remembrance of any thing.

Sheriffs. Rich. Lambert died Ambrose Nycholas John Langley.



An. reg. 10. Sir Roger Martin Mercer. 1567

SIr Roger Martin was now Lord Mayor of this city, who discharged the same
very gravely and as the place required, His bringing up was not very great, but
by his discreet carriage and good dealing, became in time a great merchant in
this city and of great wealth, He was very courteous, and of a very pleasant
and ieasting spirit, He was so well taken amongst men, that he was chosen an
Alderman first, after called to be sheriff of London, and in his due place
mayor, this knight married a Grecian dame, and lies buried in the parish
church of saint Antolines, under a very fair monument erected, This year
there happened such scarsitie of fodder and hay, that in diverse places the same
was sold by wail^^ for five pence the stone. No further can as yet be set down
of this knight.

Sheriffs. Thomas Ramsey. William Bond.



An. reg. 11. Sir Tho. Row Merchantaylor. 1568

THis year sir Thomas Row was Lord Mayor, He did many works of charity amongst
which he compassed nigh one acre of ground near Bedlem with a brick wall, to
bury the dead of all such parishes as had not convenient burial, He also
erected a gallary at Paul's Cross, for gentlewomen to stand in to hear the
sermons, At his decease he gave unto the Merchantaylors a hundred li^ in money
for the use of eight poor men, using clothworking or making of garments to use
for two years for ever, He also gave lands for the use of ten poor and
impotent men past labor, free of the Clothworkers, carpenters, tylers,
plays^erers and Armorers, that is four pound a man for ever, He was buried at
Hackney under a very fair monument in that church erected.

Sheriffs. John Oleph. Robert Harding. James Bacon.



An. reg. 12. Sir Alex. Avenon Ironmonger. 1509

IN this year of sir Alexander Auenon knight, and at this time Lord Mayor of
this city of London, there was no accustomed feast kept at the Guildhall, by
reason that the pestilence had now again caught hold in furious manner with in
this city, but he held the custom of going to Westminster by water, and there
had his charge delivered. The rebellion in the North this year was very
tedious, and many forces were conveyed thither to suppress and bring under the
violent outrage of those Rebels, being the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland. Of this knight as yet no further mention can be made, concerning
either his place or any almes^deedes toward the relief of the needy, because
no certain notice is found thereof, He was buried at saint Peter's in cheap,
but no monument.

Sheriffs. Henry Becher. William Dane.



An. reg. 13. Sir Row. Heyward Clothworker. 1570

SIr Rowland Heyward was Lord Mayor for this year 1570. and lived after till
the year 1590. the just compass of twenty years, and then was the second
time Lord Mayor, he lived some thirty years, Alderman, knight and Justice, in
this famous city, and at the time of his death, the ancientest upon that
worthy bench. He was a man of a very grave, wise, and courageous stomach, as
might be well observed of him in his last time of government, He was well
beloved of many good men and women. In his first year, her Majesty,
accompanied with her Nobles, came to sir Thomas Gressams, and at her return
named the Bursse, and called it the royal Exchange, He died in great credit,
the 5 of December. 93. appointing two worthy citizens his executors, they erected
for him a fair monument.

Sheriffs. Frances Barnham William Box.



An. reg. 14. Sir Wilam Allin Mercer. 157^

THis year sir William Allin was called to this high place, by the whole
consent and custom of this city, He was a man of no greater birth then a
Citizen of this cytty, and borne without Byshopsgate, He had so tender a
feeling of the many necessities of the poor, that he would buy wood from the
carte and distribute it with his own hands, Besides he would walk often
through the said parish, and such poor as stood in need he gave relief unto,
and at his death gave a weekly portion of bread to the poor of the same parish
upon every sabbath day for ever, and was buried in the parish church wherein
he was christened. This year the citizens trained three times a week, the
number of 3000. and on May day mustred before the Queens Majesty at Greenwich.

Sheriffs. Henry Mylles. John Branch.



An. reg. 15 Sir Lyonell Dvcket Mercer. 1572

IN this year of onr Lord abouesaid, the choice of the lord mayor of this
cittye, was appointed to the government and charge of sir Lyoneli Ducket, who
so be haued himself in this high place, that he gained unto himself great
credit all the rest of his days, It should also appear by circumstance, that
he had a desire to raise the needy poor, by leaving a taste of his bounty
behind him, bestowing largely upon the poor of the parish of Buckland in
Barkshire, in which place he rested him, and gave a farewell to London, and in
that town and parish ended his days, and there lies buried. Many bi^ matters
happned in his year, but nothing concerning himself or this city, can I
find as yet of certainty, but if any true notes come to hand, they shall be
joined hereunto.

Sheriffs. Rychard Pype. Nicholas Wodroffe.



An. reg. 16. Sir John Ryuers Grocer. 1573

THis year sir John Ryvers being free of the company of the Grocers, followed
the ancient solemnity, went to Westminster by water and received his charge,
and held a solemn feast at the Guildhall, He discharged the trust to him
committed with great gravity, care and diligence, and yet in this year there
arose a dearth both in corn and other victuals without any just cause to be
gathered, for wheat was sold in London for three shillinges the bushel, and
yet before the Christmas following it rose up to seven shillings the bushel,
and then all manner of victual was inhansed to greater prices, nothing have I
yet more to say of this knight, neither that he was buried in London, This
year by reason of a great and unaccustomed tempest, the boy was drowned at
Dowgate.

Sheriffs. James Harvey Thomas Pullison



An. reg. 17 Sir Iam. Hawes Clothworker. 1574

SIr James Hawes was this year called upon and was Lord Mayor of this
Honorable Cytty of London. This Mayor kept no feast at the Guildhall, and yet
there was great preparation made for the same feast, as in former years it had
bin accustomed, but dined at his own house, accompanied with the rest of the
Aldermen his brethren, and the companies dined in their several Halles.
Michaelmasse term which was adiourned by proclamation, began at Westminster
the 6. of November. This year wheat and other grain, fell from 7. shillings
to 3. ^^^llinges, as in the year before. More of this knight I cannot set
down, he was buried in Abchurch, but no monument erected. Also this year
happened many strange accidents, as may more at large be read in the Chronicles.

Sheriffs. Thomas Blanke. Antho. Gammage.



An. reg. 18. Sir Amrose Nycholas Salter. 1575

SIr Ambrose Nycholas was by common consent, called in this year of our Lord
to the rule and government of this city, who effected the same in great
gravity and circumspect diligence, He kept no feast likewise at the guildhall
but kept the custom in going to Westminster by water, and dined at his own
house, as for the companies they dined in their several halles. This knight
did many ways relieve and comfort the poor, and lived some few years a
worthy knight and Justice of the city, and lies buried under a very fair
monument at S. Mildreds church in Bredstreet, nothing further can be showed
concerning this knight as yet, This year Captain Frobisher set forth his
first voyage to Cathay for gold, and brought one of the people of that country
home with him.

Sheriffs. Edward Osborne Wolstan Dyxy



An. reg. 19 Sir John Landley goldsmith. 157^

IN this year sir John Landley came to the government of this city, and
discharged the trust to him committed with great care and diligence. In his
year the Tower of London bridge was taken down a new foundation being drawn
sir John being Mayor did take upon him the laying of the first stone of this
foundation upon the 28 of August, in the presence of both the sheriffs, and
t'woe of the masters of the Bridgehouse, At his death he should have bin
buried at saint Laurences, but in breaking up the vault, one I Will of the church
was in great d^unger of falling, and therefore was buried in the mayors
chapel near Guildhall. This year happened the sudden damp^ at the Syses
held at Oxford, whereof so many worthy Justices and other people died suddenly.

Sheriffs. William Kempton. George Barn.



An. reg. 20 Sir Tho. Ramsey Grocer. 1577

THis sir Thomas Ramsey Lord Mayor for this year with the godly dame Mary his
wife, gave the feesimple of the yearly value of 243. pounds unto Christ's
Hospital in London, to Peterhouse in Cambridge yearelye 40. li. to 4
scholars, and two fellows there. More x. li yearly to the poor of S.
Bartholomewes, and ten pound yearly to poor prisoners, this to be continued
for ever, the remainder to the poor children of Christ's hospital, these gitfs
are much augmented by the good Lady. He continually relieved the poor. He gave
much toward the helping forward of young men retaylors of his company, he was
a very careful maiestrate, and walked in the fear of God, was well beloved, He
lived 79. years, he lies in Saint Mary Wolnoth in Lumbard street.

Sheriffs. Nicholas Backhouse. Fraunces Bowyer.



An. reg. 21. Sir Richard Pype Draper. 1578

THis year sir Richard Pype being free of the worshipful company of the
Drapers, had the sword and government of this city committed to his charge, in
his year, about the xxii. of January, about seven a clock at night, the
Nobility of this land, and this Mayor with his brethren the Aldermen, received
John Cassimere landing at the Tower wharffe, and with torchlight brought him to
the house of sir Thomas Gresham in Byshopsgatestreet. Also the new tower upon
London bridge whereon the heads of traitors stand, the foundation being laid
the year before, was fully finished in the month of August. Other accidents
fell forth this year, but nothing touching the mayor, as yet I find, neither
that he was buried in London,

Sheriffs. George Bond. Thomas Starkey.



An. reg. 22 Sir Nych. wodroffe Habrdasher 1579

IN this year of our Lord, sir Nycholas Wodroffe using the ancient custom,
took his charge at Westminster, and his feast in the Guildhall, he discharged
the trust to him committed, with great care and diligence, and lived some few
years after a Justice of this city, I find no notes of his bounty as yet,
but if any happen to hand hereafter, they shall be added, neither where he died
or was buried, I cannot set down. This year happened the great Earth quake,
both here in London, and also generally throughout all England, except some
part of the North, by which great hurt happened about London, it continued in
London but a moment, but in some places it was felt three several times, Many
strange accidents happened this year, as may be found at large in the
Chronicles.

Sheriffs. Martin Calthorpe. John Heart.



An. reg. 23. Sir John Branch Draper. 1580

SIr John Branch was called this year to be Lord Mayor, and lived after he
had discharged this office some years. At his departure out of this life, he
appointed by his Will many goodly Legacies, gifts, and remembrances to be
done, amongst all which he remembered the poor of the parish wherein he was an
inhabitant, and gave unto the said poor a sum of money, to be distributed at
the discretion of the churchwardens and other the governors of that parish,
also he lies buried in Abchurch, under a very fair monument erected by his
Lady, and other of his kindred. This year came into England many of the Peers
of France, accompanied with a great train, and then was made ready the
banqueting house also the Nobles of this land made great triumph before her
Majesty.

Sheriffs. Ralph Woodcocke. John Allat.



An. reg. 24. Sir James Harvey Ironmonger. 1581

THis year of our Lord God sir James Haruey was according to ancient
solemnity elected and chosen Lord Mayor of this City, and passed thorough this
charge like a wise, grave, and discreet maiestrate, he lived some after
years, but insomuch as he has a monument erected in the parish church of
saint Dyonise in Fanchurchstreat, and not yet finished through the default of
some who were put in trust to finish the said monument, I cannot set down such
apt notes as might have there have bin found, This year Mounfieur the French
kings brother, came into England, and was honorably received, both of the
Nobles of the land, and this Lord Mayor, and the rest of the Aldermen his
brethren. And after some few months returned out of this land in great honor.

Sheriffs. Richard Martyn. William Web.



An. reg. 25 Sir Tho. blanke Haberdasher 1582

IN this year sir Thomas Blanke was Lord Mayor of this Honorable City, this
mayor was borne and brought up in this City, and used the trade of
merchandise, he was accounted very religious in observing Gods word, he was
also accounted very just and upright in all his dealings, and a great
maintainer of hospitality, to the poor he was a father and great comforter,
he was so well beloved and esteemed amongst both rich and poor, insomuch that
he was called by this name (The Good Knight) he lived the age of 74. years,
and died the 28. of October 1588. and lies under a very fair monument at
saint Mary Hill. In his year the Term was removed to the Castle of Hertford.
Also the standart at Leaden Hall for thames water was in his time erected.

Sheriffs. William Roe. John Haydon. Cuthbert Buckle.



An. reg. 25. Sir Edw. Osborne Clothworker. 1583

THis year of our Lord sir Edward Osborne was elected Lord Mayor of this
City, what country man he was, or of what parentage I find not, but as an
apprentise he serned sir William Huet before remembered, using merchandise into
France, Spain, the straights, and other where, and after the end of his
service, married his said masters daughter (having no other child) whereby his
state was greatly raised, This knight erected an everlasting monument in
remembrance of his said master, and father in Law, but none has so requited
his kindness, for he lies buried in saint Dyonise church in Fanchurch street,
but has no monument, nor further remembrance, as yet can be found, except in
his company^ I may hereafter come to more perfect remembrances.

Sheriffs. William Marsham. John Spencer.



An. reg. 27 Sir Tho. Pullison Draper. 1584

IN this year sir Thomas Pullison served this place of Honor, and discharged
the same which grave and discreet maiestracy, the same knight yet lives, but
upon occasions gave up, and lives private. In his year her Majesty (after her
progress) returned to her house at saint James, where the Citizens of London,
to the number of 200. on horse, in velvet cotes and chains of gold, and a
thousand on foot, with every man a torch to give light, they received her
joyfully, and on the 24. day of the same month, her Majesty with her Nobles
rode to the parliament house. Also this year the Citizens by commandment,
mustered to the number of 4000. at Mile ^end and elsewhere, and on the x. of
May skirmished before her Majesty at Greenwich, who gave them great thanks.

Sheriffs. Steven Slany. Henry Byllingsly.



An. reg. 28 Sir Wolstan Dyxy Skynner. 1585

SIr Wolstan Dyxy being this year Lord Mayor, showed himself a worthy and
upright maiestrate, and as he bare himself in his life and authority, so when
God took him from the world, he left many remembrances of his charitable and
godly deeds. As first, he gave a portion of land to his company to their use
for ever, Also for certain Divine Lectvres to be read in a place appointed he
has given a yearly annuity. More he gave bountifully to the poor of his
parish, apointing a yearly sum to be distributed amongst them, by the hands
of the company of the Skinners. This year was the second Lottery for Armor,
also the 14 Traitors were executed. This knight has as yet no monument
erected, but is buried in saint Mychaels at Bashingshaw.

Sheriffs. Anthony Ratcliffe. Henry Prannell.



An. reg. 29 Sir George Barn Haberdasher 1586

SIr George Barn was this year Lord Mayor, and lived after the discharge of
that place a gentle knight and well reputed Justice of this fair city, the
day of his entering, Ludgate being new finished was opened, for the Council to
pass thorough to the Guildhall to dinner. This knight was the first aduenturer
to Barbary, Roushia and Genua, he was always accounted a great furtherer of a
common wealth, hated covetousness, was glad to hear that young men prospered,
he always set forward the poor man's cause. This mayor with his brethren in
scarlet, and diverse Nobles of the land, with the number of 80. grave Citizens
in velvet cotes and chains of gold, with sound of trumpet made declaration
of sentence against the Queen of Scots, he was buried at s. Bartho. at the
Exchange.

Sheriffs. Robert House. William Elkin.



An. reg. 30 Sir George Bond. 1587

IN this year of our Lord this cities charge was given to this knight. Much
troble was attempted against this land this year, All parts of the land was
provided and put in readiness to make resistance against the proud Spaniard,
who came hither with full resolution to captiuate this nation. Also her
majesty attended by her Nobility, passed forth to the camp lying at Tylbury,
where she in person viewed every several rank, to the great joy of all her
subjects. Also after, it had pleased God to discomfite the enemy, this Lord
mayor and Aldermen with the Companies of this city, assembled at Paul's
Cross, where was made a learned thanksgiving by M. Nowe^, for the great
deliuerye against the Spaniardes. This knight lies in the Mercers chapel,
having no monument.

Sheriffs. Thomas Skinner John Catcher



An. reg. 31 Sir Martin Calthorpe Draper. 1588

THis year sir Martin Calthorpe was Lord Mayor of this city. In this year
the xvii. of November was appointed holliday, and the citizens were assembled
at Paul's cross. Also in this mayors time, her Majesty attended by all the
states of this land, came in great royalty from somerset house to paule^, and
at temple bar, this Mayor and the rest of the Aldermen received her majesty,
delivering up al authority to her that gave it, and she delivered back to this
Mayor her royal scepter, who bare the same before her, each several company
standing on both sides the way, from Fleetstreat to paul's, and returned back
by torchlight. After a little space this mayor, aldermen, and grave commoners
received her again to westminster, he died in his mayoralty, and is buried at
saint Mary Hill.

Sheriffs. Hugh Ofley. Rich. Saltingstall.



An. reg. 31 Sir Richard Martin Goldsmith. 1589

SIr Richard Martin, (by occasion of the death of sir Martin Calthorpe) came at
an unaccustomed time of the year to this government, namely the third day of
May, in which month there was a general fifteen gathered thoroughout London
for the cleasing of the Fleet ditch. Also this worthy knight being invited to
the Seargeants feast then held in the new Temple Hall (having certain aldermen
his brethren in company) at the Temple gate this Lord Mayor was by certain young
Gentlemen of that house, denied entrance with his sword borne up before him,
upon which discourteous demeanor made, he returned back to his own house and
did not dine with them. This knight lives, has bin twice Lord mayor he is a
well-beloved Justice, and the ancientest on that worthy bench.

Sheriffs. Hugh Ofley. Rich. Saltingstall.



An. reg. 32 Sir John Heart groce. 1589

THis year of our Lord, sir John Heart was Lord Mayor of this Honorable City.
This year the Citizens were often frighted with fire, first a great fire
happened on Fishstreet hill, burning the house down to the ground, some two
days after, another house over against the first, again, not passing 4 days
distant, another house and some people were burnt on the backeside of the first
house. Also this year were great tempest of wind. Also, in the month of
September, there happened a great disorder at Lincolnes Inn, betwixt prentises
and the gentlemen of that house, so that some blood was shed, and would have
grown more dangerous, had not the same by this wise maiestrate bin appeased.
He lives a good knight, and an upright and grave Justice in this city.

Sheriffs. Richard Gurney. Steven Some.



An. reg. 33. Sir John Allat Fishmonger. 1590

IN this year sir John Allat by consent and custom was Lord Mayor of this
city, he was also Mayor of the Queens staple, he deceased in the month of
september next following his entrance, and then sir Rowland Heyward Clothworker
served out that year, being about six weeks. this year passed a very hard
year with the poor, for bread corn, flesh, and whitmeates, al grew to an
exceeding dear rate, and yet there was enough for money. Hacket this year was
executed in Cheapeside for many traitorous vsages of the Queens picture, and
being moved to ask God and the Queen forgiveness, he fell to rauing against
her majesty, and began a most blasphemous speech against God, this knight lies
^n a parish church in Friday streat having a pretty monument erected.

Sheriffs. Nycholas Mosley. Robert Brook.



An. reg. 34. Sir William Web Salter. 1591

IN this year of our Lord sir William Web keeping the usual solemnity and
custom went to Westminster and received his charge, this knight discharged the
place in great credit, and lived some few years a well accounted Justice, at
the place of his burial, being saint Dunstans in the East, I find no monument,
but that he was buried in a vault, which is altogether reserved for the better
sort, neither as yet find any notes of his bounty. This year died sir
Christopher Hatton Lord Chauncellor. Also this year by reason of a mighty
strong West wind, the Thames was left so bare of water, by forcing out the
fresh, and keeping back the salt water, that men in diverse places, might go two
hundred paces over, and then fling a stone to the land.

Sheriffs. William Rider. Bennet Barnham.



An. reg. 35 Sir wiliam Roe Ironmonger. 1592

THis Lord Mayor rode from the Guildhall to the Tower, and there took his
Oath, being accompanied with the Aldermen, the Livery and Batchelers of the
Ironmongers, and the livery of the Haberdashers and no more, all these dined at
the Lord Mayors house, and at the halles of these two companies, all this was
done by the appointment of the Council, to avoid infect^^^ of the plague.
Mychaelmasse term was carried to Hertford. Also Bartholomew fair was not
kept at London, all to avoid the great concourse of people that might have been
gathered together, whereby the infection would have increased. This Mayor dyed
in his Mayoralty, some 3. or 4. days before the end of his honor, and lies
buried at saint Laurences, but has no monument erected.

Sheriffs. John Garrard. Robert Tailor.



An. reg. 36 Sir Cuthbert Buckle Vintner. 1593

SIr Cuthbert Buckle had his oath given him at the tower, as the Mayor the year
before him, because the plague increased very extremely, he himself deceased
in the month of July, and sir Richard Martin was now the second time L. Mayor,
In this year died William Ellin Alderman, and a (...) benefactor unto this
city, there died also sir Rowland Heyward, and sir Wolstan Dyxye. Also the
whole number of people buried this year in the city and suburbs 17893. Of
the plague 10675. After in this year the Citizens made ready six ships and
two Galleys, with men, munition, and victuals for three months to her
Majesty's use. More was granted to her Majesty's use, by a common council 450.
men on foot all likewise set out at the charges of the citizens by way of a
fifteen.

Sheriffs. Paul B^^ning. Peter Hautyn.



An. reg. 37 Sir John Spencer Clothworker. 1^94

IN this year of our Lord, sir John Spencer was chosen Lord Mayor of this
Honorable city, he received his honor and charge at We^tminster, and his
feast at the Guildhall. In this year as M. John Stow records, corner of to
an excessive great price, and not only corn, but all manner victuals, by
reason of transportation. Also this year diverse were punished for abusing the
market people, in selling away th^^ goods at what under price they thought
good, More this year was a great riot committed on the Tower hill, this Lord
Mayor rode thithe^ accompanied with his officers to clear the hill, where his
swordbearer was stricken down, sore wounded, and his swo^d wrung out of his hand
by the lieutenants man, but being again recovered, this Lord Mayor made
proclamation of peace.

Sheriffs. John Lee. Thomas Bennet.



An. reg. 38 Sir stephen Slany skinner. 159^

SIr Stephen Slany had this year committed to his charge. At this time it was
thought necessary for two marshals to be appointed for the purging and clensing
this city from vagarent persons. Also this year the Lord Mayor and aldermen
were fetched from the sermon at Paul's Cross, and forthwith upon precept from
the Council pressed a thousand men, which was done by 8. a clock the same
night, but the next day by the afternoon they were all discharged, then
suddenly on Easter day, every man in his parish church being ready to receive
the comunion, the Aldermen with their officers shut the church doors, till
they had gathered again the 1000. men, which were going to Dover to aid
Callice, but the French had lost it. This knight lives a worthy justice of
this city.

Sheriffs. Thomas Low. Leonard Halliday.



An. reg. 39. Sir Tho. Skinner Clothwor. 1596

THis sir Thomas Skinner being chosen Mayor for this year, and seeing the
great distress of breadcorne to grow so unmerciful dear, that the faces of
the poor did manifest their want, this Mayor in a feeling compassion, pity
and care, provided that breadcorne should be brought from Danske, and other
the East countries by our Merchants, who had freely given them both custom and
stowage, and also to make their own price, so that his great care brought with
it this good, that corn was to be had for money. In this year was great
triumph for the preservation of her Majesty. He lived but a while in his
honor, and died the 30 of December. and lies buried in Milkestreat. He was of a
stout stomach, very merciful and upright and whose death was much bewailed of
the poor.

Sheriffs. Richard Goddard. John Wats.



An. reg. 39 Sir Henry Bilignsly Haberda. 1596

SIr Henry Billingsly by reason of the death of the other Mayor, was elected
and chosen to serve the rest of the year in this place of honor, who being
chief Customer for her Majesty, upon twelfe ce^e sat in the custom house with
the sword lying before him on the table, and on the xi. of January he took his
Oath at the Tower of London, this happened by reason that sir Thomas Skinner
lived but about some two months in that office. The great dearth was not yet
abated, for the spring fell out very cold, and also great provision was made to
sea, where by victuals kept a very high price, yet in the month of August, the
prices of grain something abated, wheat from xiii. s. to x. and Rye from 9. to
6. and so to 3. s 2 d. but it after rose again. He lives a Justice and chief
customer to her Majesty.

Sheriffs. Richard Goddard. John Wats.



An. reg. 40 Sir Rich. Saltonston skinner. 1597

IN this year of our Lord, this Lord Mayor was by common consent and custom
elected, and served this place to him committed in great quiet and peace, In
this year began the reading of Lectures of the several sciences in sir Thomas
Greshams college by him founded in Bishopsgatestreat. Also this year began
the Parliament at Westminster in October, whereas through the mighty recourse of
people, diverse were crushed and smouldred to death, preasing betwixt White hall
and the college church, to see her majesty and Nobility riding in their robes
to the said parliament, sir thomas Garrard and his men making way before them
Also this year was great frosts, this knight is lately deceased, so that as
yet I have not gathered true notes together.

Sheriffs. Henry Roe. John More.



An. reg. 41. Sir stephen Some Grocer. 1598

THis year the government of this city was committed to this knight, In his
time he roused up a great corruption long before lying hid, to the great
damage of people, (namely false waightes and measures, used in buying and
selling) whereby great good may ensue to this city, if the eye of Justice take
some view thereof now and then. Also in his time was raised a great muster of
men in this city of 6000. of which, three thousand were householders only, the
other three thousand all subsidy men picked forth of every ward, to guard the
Queens person, all which companies mustred at Mileend in gallant manner (this
Mayor himself coming into the field, giving great thanks to the citizens
for their great forwardness. He lives a worthy Justice, and a man of
courageous stomach.

Sheriffs. Edmond Holmdon. Robert Hampson.



An. reg. 42 Sir Nych. Mosly Clothworker 1599

SIr Nycholas Mosley was for this year Lord Mayor of London, whose passage in
his government is fresh in the memory of every man, This knight so behaved
himself in this place of honor, and used such care and conscience
therewithal, as well might please the best minded, His care was great and very
dilligent in seeing into the markets, that they might not exact upon the
buyers, Also he had ever a special eye to Bakers, to hold them to their
assizes, whereby the poor man might have his penniworth, Again toward
Victualers, by reason that they are grown many and bad, whose measure is in
general without all conscience. Also great abuse in seacoles, he to his power
did cause to be amended, setting the cittyes arms upon every cart that ought
to carry true measure too and fro.

Sheriffs. Rychard Wild. Roger Clarke.



An. reg. 43. Sir Will Ryder Haberdasher. 1600

THis present year of our Lord, the government of this City by the full
consent and ancient custom of our Citizens, was committed to sir Willyam
Ryder, now Lord Mayor of this Honorable cittye of London. Of whose worthiness
in his place every eye may witness, whose care in maintenance of the good of
this city, shows it self daily by his great pains taking, in reformation
of an old and long corruption rooted amongst men, in abusing the true use of
weight and measure, and that his cares herein may be the better remembered, he
has ordained in every market place, common scales and waights, wherein all men
may find out fraud and deceit with the author thereof, Also his dilligent eye
for his princes service has bin quick and worthy the trust to him committed.

Sheriffs. Thomas Cambell. William Craven.


