AN EXPOSITION OF THE SECOND Epistle of the Apostle Paul to Timothy, the first
Chapter. WHEREIN 1 The text is Logically into it is parts resolved, 2 The words
plainly explicated. 3 A familiar Metaphrase annexed. 4 The several Doctrines
thence arising deduced. and largely cofirmed. 1. by Precept. 2. by Example. 3.
by Reasons.
All which is accompanied with familiar and delightful similitudes, for the
better alluting the drouping affections to embrace the truth; and the froward
will to obey it. Lastly as the matter requires: there is used, definitions,
distributions, subdiuisions, trialls, motives, and directions, all which be of
great use in their proper order. By JOHN BARLOVV sometime Minister of the word
at Plimmouth, but now resident at Halifax in Yorkshire.

LONDON. Printed by. ^. D. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop
at the 3. Golden Lions in Cornehill, near the Royal Exchange. 1624.

decorative title page, a compartment with a column on each side

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr LEONARD PVMROY MAYOR OF Plymmouth, with the
worshipful Magistrates his brethren; and to all who bear Office in that
Corporation, I. B. wishes Grace, Mercy, Peace.
Worthy Sirs, and much respected friends, the truth is, that if I would follow
the fashion* of the world, you should then receive a large commendation. For,
sure I am, many a man having narrower footing, has leaped far; a smaller
bottom spun a long thread; and of less matter erected a stately building. But
I, to shun the appearance of flatt^ry, silence the carping adversary; and
that, another day, my hand might not cry my heart mercy, will turn my praises
of you, into prayers for you, and exhortations to you, that, as you have
begun well; so you may never wax weary, or proud in so doing. You are
styled Gods, able by your example to bring good or evil into fashion: the
government of the inferior lies upon your shoulder. Wherefore, do justice;
and take heed of quitting the guilty, and condemning the innocent. But let
judgment run down as the waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. In
this Amos. 5. 24.
sea there must be no ebbing nor flowing: the banks at every season, are to be
full, swelling over. Neither is this stream to be stayed for a moment, or
turned another way. If it should, iniquity in the mean time would take her
place: and whosoever draws, and drinks of that puddle, shall dye the death.
Moreover, you may not mix it, the mudde of injustice with the pure fountain
of righteousness: for, that will hinder the current from sliding through the
channels of Judicature, so clearly and speedily, as the Judge of all the world
expects, commands. And, that this wels mouth may not be stopped, this
stream stayed; or, by any unclean carkase cast into it, putrified; but run
strongly, purely, and spring for ever: in your elections remember lethroes
counsel to Moses, Choose you Exodus 18. 20. 21. 22. 1 Cor 5. 6.
out able men, fearing God, leuers of the truth, and hating covetousness, though
to be an inferior officer. Will not a little leaven, leaven the whole lump?
And tell me, when is the river, troubled? at any time? but when the mud is
raised upward, and the clear water falls downward? Let the righteous rule,
there will be rest: but if the wicked bear sway, troubles shall come. Who will
put a sword into a mad man's hand? will he not bear it for naught? engender
strife, and conceive mischief? Depresse the profane 23.
puddle, exalt the clear water: then shall God be with you, and all the people
also go home to their place in peace. I speak Io 13. 10.
the truth, I dare not flatter; you are clean (may I not add) but not all?
Its a rare society, that consists of none but Saints, a singular body without
all blemish; and may we, can we find a corporation, that has no unsound
member in it? Will you credit me? have you but one such? I could wish there
were none at all. I accuse no man's person: Every one must fall or stand unto
his own master, and the wrath of man does not accomplish the justice of James.
1. 20. Reu. 22. 11.
God. Wherefore, he who is righteous, let him be righteous still; and if any be
filthy, let him wash 2 Kin. 5. 13.
and be clean. And, not to weary you with words; here you have at the last,
what some of you long since desired at my hands, viz. the first lectures at my
coming to you, I preached among you. Now may the wise see, what the world has
carped at, and the Preacher full often bin blamed for; as if the earth had not
been able to have borne his words, nor he for the bitterness of his spirit
worthy to set a foot in Gods sanctuary. I confess my corn may be mixed with
chafe, my coin have some slips; and my zeal not altogether according to
knowledge; yet, my desire in Preaching and printing these Sermons, was and is,
that sin might be mortified, holiness vivified, God our master after the best
manner served, and both speaker and hearer at the last day saved.

Here you have only the beginning, but if the Lord will you may see, and
receive the end of my labors with you. Truly, I shall greatly rejoice, if my
weak endeavors prove, in the least measure, to you or any other profitable;
and that they may, assure your selves, my prayer according to my power, to him,
shall not be wanting, who is only able to give a blessing. And thus commending
you to God, I take my leave; and will during life, always rest

From Halifax in Yorkshire, August, 19, 1624. Yours in what he can to do you
service: I B.

The Epistle to the Reader.
FRiendly Reader; it were but labor in vain to tell thee, why I made choice
of this Epistle rather than another to to treat of. For are not all Preachers
sowers? So that if they break up any little close, within the large pale that
boundeth Gods great demaine, the holy letters, they cannot miss it, but keep
their compass. Neither is it to any purpose to declare unto thee, why these
lines are now put to public light. For, is not all the grain in Gods garner,
good? fit for the market, and to be set to sale? For, to omit many reasons,
this is the very truth; that as Prognosticators usually write Almanackes, to
and for that Climate wherein they be resident; so have I made election of this
portion, and now especially penned it, for that place, where and amongst whom
the Lord for a few years by the hand of his providence cast me. Wherefore I
will the rather inform thee of my method, in this succeeding treatise, the
which, is this and thus.

In the first place (may it please thee to view it) thou shall find the text
Logically into its parts resoluod; next the words plainly explicated, then a
familiar Metaphrase, as we apprehend the sense, annexed: And last of all, the
several doctrines arising thence, deduced. And because ordinarily a deduct is
to be drawn, not from one simple, but two Arguments at the least, as the Rev.
10. 2,
the Angel is said to set one foot on the sea, another on the shore, we have
(one being in our text) for the better rise, borrowed a second from far. But,
vsuall^, either from the scope, and the connection; the words generally united,
not particularly abstracted, the doctrines be collected. And for the heads, we
have set them down with little or not amplification at all. For, to me (I am
sure) and to the Corrector, Printer, and Reader, (I judge) it would, (had we
done otherwise,) have been more painful, chargeable, and not much profitable.
But we have confirmed them at large: First, By Precept: Secondly, Example:
Thirdly, Reasons: and last of all, we have mixed our whole discourse, with
familiar and delightful similitudes; for the better alluring out of the
drouping affections, and the inclining of the froward will, both to embrace the
truth, and put it in speedy execution. By Precept, understand some proposition
equivalent to the doctrine propounded. By Example, that which has in it the
force of a command. For, the act is concr^^e with the precept, and cannot
except notionally be abstracted. For, every good action effected, has its rule
by which it is guided. And by Reason, conceive a third argument, in producing
whereof, the point in hand is more strongly confirmed. For, as when two colors
are controuerted, we fetch a light, hold that betwixt them, by which the better
is the better discerned by the eye of the body: So, When truth is in suspense,
in the producing of a third Argument, the which we call a reason; and disposing
it with the doctrine in form of a Syllogism, its the more conspicuous to the
eye of our understanding. And the reason we use Reasons, is in that we are to
deal with men who have reason, but want faith. And until the judgment be
soundly convinced, the Will will not be thoroughly reformed. For, as the needle
guides and makes way for the thread; so does the act of the faculty of the
understanding, direct the act of the faculty of the Will. And we have used
similitudes for diverse reasons. 1. For, they have great force to convince the
judgment. 2. They allure the affections. 3. They better the memory. And 4.
They bring many things to speedy remembrance we had long forgot. As the
shooemaker with his skin, draws on a close shoe; the huswife with corn,
calls the chickens from under the wings of their damme; and the Dittie brings
to mind the matter and author on it: so will a similitude draw doctrines into
men's shallow understanding, call out the dead affections, and bring the truth
to remembrance, committed to memory long agone. And this one thing would I
wish the man of God to take knowledge of, and to have respect of, both in
writing of books, and preaching of Sermons, first thoroughly to inform the
judgment, and then soundly to seek to reform the Will. Lay load on that
above all. For, with more ease may a man p^ynt out the truth to thousands, than
persuade hundreds to practice it. For, the faculty of the Will, is the most
corrupt of all other* and the Will is an unwilling agent to go to work.
Similitudes therefore here be of good use, and application must soundly set it
on. Furthermore, we have, as the matter handled would afford, used definitions
distributions, subdiuisions, trialls, motives and directions: all which be of
great use in their proper order.

Finally, to our power, we have endeavored to comfort the feeble-minded,
strengthen the weak, raise up the declined christian, and pull down the proud
mind of man, break his flinty heart, and convert him to God, by a close
searching and insinuating application.

And Gentle Reader, if any phrase in this treatise, seem tart unto thee, when
we come to press a point; why, I must give thee to understand, that our people
are not like other people. For, it is well known, that, in all seafaring and
haven towns (of which ours is not the least in our kingdom) there is such a
concourse of all kinds of people from other countries, as daily inhabitants;
that we have men, as of war and worth, resolution and religion, fearing God,
honoring the king, (the number whereof the good Lord increase an hundred times
so many as they be, that the ears and eyes of all the world may hear and see
them:) so have we sin and sinners of all sorts.

With us (if any where) thou may find old mother Ignorance, clothed with
the robes of the blackness of darkness; having two unnatural (but, to her,
natural) twins in her lap, Profanesse and Superstition: and this is her
daily Ditty; I sit as a Queen, I am no Rev. 18. 7*
widow, I shall see no mourning, neither (let Preachers prate what they
please) will I ever be removed. And we have too, aged father Pride, clothed in
Purple, and fine linen; who being drunk with wealth, as Lot, with wine, has
lien with his daughter Covetousness, committed incest, and she is delivered of
a monster, the which some call foxe-fur'd, Scarlet-robde, but I, merciless,
remediless Usury. This Ostrich can eat and digest any kind of metal,
especially money. This Canniball, like a pickrell in a pond, or sharke in the
sea, the lesser fishes, deuoures the poorer sort, with a plausible, invisible
consumption. The greatest Clerks (now fie!) in our Kingdom, may, seven times
more, spit this strumpet in the face, yet she has a whores forehead, and will
not be ashamed.

Meager and Pale-face't envy has his roost with us. He looks like a Ghost
wrapped in a winding sheet, or peeping out of a coffin: for, with the hot
pursuit of spotless purity, innocent piety, he has so fret his flesh, and
worn his spirits, that he is fallen into a neuer-tobe-cured deadly
consumption. This insatiable cormorant, feeds on the tenderest corpse, drinks
the purest blood, and still cries for more, as Rachel did for children, or else
he will dye. And as risibilitie is an inseparable adiunct to a reasonable
creature: so is damning drunkenness to these Cinque Ports. Therefore, we are
sure of this guest. Sometimes, we have met him staggering in the streets, with
long locks, red eyes, wounds in his face, and a stinking breath flying from
his mouth; and his attire, with spuing, falling, and tumbling in the mire,
polluted from his felt to his foot. Many times he lies speechless, yet when he
speaks, its the very language of Hell.

This Chemist, by a virtuall power and daily habit, can turn bodies into
barrels, men into beasts; and then, as the Devils possessing the swine, carried
them headlong into the river: so does this Devil soul or body wherein he
rests, into the gulf of that sea, whose streams are fire and brimstone. We
have now and then disorder put in, who lying wind) or rather wine) bound,
falls to wooing and wedding. He comes, as Satan said of himself from
compassing the earth to and fro; and Job. 1. 7.
he marryes, not till death (according to the iniunction of God and man) but a
fair wind them depart. What shall I more say? We have raging malice, and
blind turbulent zeal, hanging like a Meteor betwixt heaven and earth, that, as
an ill-couch't fire w^rke, lets fly at all.

But hitherto we have spoken in the abstract; we will now a little touch the
concrete.

We have had with a cross wind set sometimes on our shores, the vulgar
Atheist, who says in his heart, there is no God: and if in speech he profess
him, yet in practice he denies him. The proud treacherous purblind Papist, just
of that brotherhood (its to be feared) who erring from the true way stumbled on
treason, and brake their necks at Tiburne. Yet these spread their good deeds,
as the Heavens over the North Pole, and hang their salvation, like the earth,
upon nothing. The Hominisied, Godified Familist, who holds himself, if once
full come, to be as perfect as Adam his father was in Paradise. And we say so
too, but then he must be considered, as he was after his fall, not before it.
The mutable newfangled Anabaptist, who will wear no weapons, have all things
common; yet wrangles with his brethren, whether he is to be baptized on the
head or heels; for (a worthy reason) Christ, its said, washed his Disciples
with water on the feet. The strict precise Separatist, censuring his equals,
speaking ill of them in authority, whose unjust rent from our congregations,
like the divisions of Ruben, have Judge. 5. 15.
made great thoughts of heart. And, to conclude, (for I am too prolixe,) we
have had the c^mmon Protestants, who lead their lives in Folio (especially at
that neuer-to-be-forgotten golden voyage, wherein S^ W. R.
so many went they knew not whither) who carried themselves, as if their
tongues had been pieces, their breath Gunpowder, the opening of the mouths,
the giving of fire with the match, and their oaths piercing Bullets to have
wounded their adversaries; sometimes filching and fighting, whose swords, like
Ioabs, would drop out on the least occasion; (...) stepping from shore to
ship, would drink soule-slaying healths, every carowse being seconded with the
report of a Cannon, as if powder and shot had been only appointed to have
beat the air, scare Crows, make old folk to start, and Cattle to run a
gadding. We have seen, (and shall again) the Dutch drinking, and our English
for company take their shares with them, until they began to sle-ecke en-de
sny, that is stabbe and slash, that their blood and bowels run about their
heels. If this, then was thus, as it was indeed, shall not the men of God draw
forth the arrows of Gods vengeance, set them in the noch, and with an angry
countenance, let them rattle amidst the congregation? whet the two edged sword
of the word, make it sharp and keen, to the hewing of the body of sin, and
the shredding of such siewes of corruption asunder? As the Prophet said, Is
this 2 Kin. 5. 26.
a time to take bribes? so may I: Is this a people amongst whom to cry peace,
peace? No verily. Wherefore, good Reader, out of thy ingenuous disposition,
bear with my rude, rough, and vnc^uth style. And thus I commend thee to God,
these labors to thine and the worlds light, with my self to thy favorable
censure, and faithful prayers: yet not without a settled resolution (if the
Lord will) to proceed further in the publishing the remainder of this Epistle.

Thine in the Lord Jesus. I. B.

The principal heads handled, in this Chapter.
verse 1.
Doctrines page. PReachers are to maintain the dignity of their persons. 8
How a good name may be gotten. 9 2. Great sinners may become Saints. 9 Cautions
to be used that grace be not abused. 11 3. Any relation to Christ is of great
importance. 12 4. The lawfulness of our calling is to be justified. 13 Trials
if we be lawfully called to preach the Gospel. 15 5. Promotion comes from
the Lord. 15 6. Spiritual life is procured by the Gospel. 16 7. Salvation
obtained through Christ Jesus. 17

Verse 2.
Doctrines. page. 1. Persons of good hopes are chiefly to be instructed. 23 2.
There is a spiritual kindred in the world. 24 3. Preachers are chiefly to
affect, whom they have begot or confirmed in the faith. 25 4. Salutations are
not for complement but piety. 26 The kinds of salutations. 26 Who are to be
saluted. 27 A twofold limitation to be observed. 27 Whether we my salute him we
know not. 27 5. The grace of God greatly to be wished for. 27 How grace may be
got. 28 6. Mercy much to be desired. 29 7. Peace a principal thing to be
sought for. 30 8. Men without grace have no true and sound peace. 31 9. The
degrees of affection cannot be covered. 32 10. None more need of mercy than
ministers. 33 10. God is a father; and how many ways. 34 12. All Spiritual
blessings come from God the father. 36 13. Christ Jesus is a Lord. 37 14. All
Christians are fellow servants. 38 15. Doctrines deduced not handled. 39

Verse. 3.
Doctrines. page. 1. Good men are thankful. 42 Thankfulness defined. 43
Thankfulness distributed. 44 Impediments of thankfulness. 45 Helps to true
thankfulness. 46 2. Carnal friends will become foes, if a man embrace the
Gospel 47 3. Against all opposition we are to maintain the truth of our
profession. 48 4. Its an honor for man to serve God. 49 5. A Christians course
is laborious. 50 What is required in the service of God. 52 How God may be
known of us. 53 What the law and Gospel require. 54 Wherein spiritual power
is exercised. 54 6. The Church had the same faith before the coming of Christ,
which now it has after him. 56 7. The name of the righteous shall be had in
remembrance. 57 8. The service of God is then commendable, when it is
accompanied with a pure conscience. 58 Conscience in general defined. 59
Corrolaries from the definition deduced. 59 Conscience distributed. 61 What a
good conscience is. 62 What an evil conscience is. 62 A good conscience is
legal or evangelical. 63 What a legal good conscience is. 63 How it is
distributed into complete or incomplete. 63 A complete legal good conscience
defined. 63 How many things concur to a complete legal good conscience. 64
What follows from thence. 64 An Evangelical good conscience what it is. 68
What needful to the making up of it. 68 How it differs from a legal. 69 What
necessary to procure it. 70 It is never separated from the legal in a
Christian. 72 The effects of conscience. 74 Its application. 74 Consciences
charge. 80 9. Faithful men are frequent in prayer. 85 Prayer described. 87
Calling upon God distributed. 87 In calling upon God we must use the tongue,
and why. 87 Also the heart, and why. 88 How to procure the spirit. 94 What is
to be done before prayer. 97 What in prayer. 98 Helps to avoid wandering
thoughts in prayer. 99 Helps to pray with feruencie. 100 What is to be done
after prayer. 101 Prayer is a difficult duty. 101 Motives to prayer. 102 10.
Preachers in special to be prayed for. 103 11. Whom we affect, we will pray
for. 104 12. As in the day, so the faithful pray in the night season. 105 13.
The time of trouble is a time of prayer. 106 14. Though preaching may, yet
prayer cannot be prevented. 106

Verse. 4.
Doctrines. page. 1. Personal presence to be preferred before writing. 109 2.
One faithful man couets the fellowship of another. 111 3. The best men have a
propension to weeping. 112 When, and for what we are to weep. 113 Motives to
shed tears. 114 4. The signs of affection not to be forgotten. 115 5. In all
our proceeding we are to propound some profitable end. 116 What ends to be
propounded in the use of Gods ordinances. 115 6. There is joy to be found in
the course of a christian. 116 Objections against this doctrine, answered. 116
A doubt concerning the kinds of joy, resolved. 119 7. The strong Christian may
receive increase of joy from his weaker brethren. 121

Verse. 5.
Doctrines. page. 1. Faith unfeigned is the best inbabitant. 125 Faith defined.
126 The definition explicated. 126 Two degrees of faith. 129 Properties of
faith in general: strong or weak. 129 Properties of a great faith. 130
Properties of a weak faith. 131 Hindrances of faith in the preacher. 131 Lets
of faith in the people. 132 Motives to faith. 132 2. Our profession is to be in
sincerity. 133 Properties of an hypocrit. 134 3. Where true faith takes
possession, it dwells for ever. 135 Where faith is seated. 136 Whether faith
remain for ever. 137 Several objections about that cleared. 138 4. Weakness of
sex hinders not soundness of faith. 140 5. Faithful parents will endeavor to
make faithful children. 141 Children to be taught young, and why. 142 6.
Faithful wives may have faithless husbands. 143 How to choose a good husband.
144 Signs of a gracious person. 146 A doubtful question concerning marriage
resolved. 145 7. Onfained faith cannot be had; but it will be heard of. 146 8.
Faith works like effects in several subjects. 149 Who have faith unfeigned.
152 9. The approbation of Gods people is to be respected. 153 How a good report
may be procured. 154 10. The infidelity of a father preuents not faith in his
children. 154 How an unbelieving husband may be discerned. 155 11. Succession
of faith is the best succession. 155 Who might be saved in the time of Popery.
156

Verse. 6.
Doctrines. page. 1. Children are to tread in the steps of their religious
parents. 159 2. Good men stand in need of a memento. -- 159 3. The graces of
the spirit are of a fiery quality. 160 4. The gifts of God are to be stirred
up within us. 162 What quenches the grace of God in us. 163 Helps to stir
up grace in us: Public Private
164 5. Imposition of hands in the ordination of Ministers may warrantably be
used. 166 Cautions in the imposition of hands. 167 6. Great care to be had in
the ordination of Ministers. 167 7. The ordinances of God profitable, if
rightly practiced. 168 In the use of Gods ordinances we are to observe how he
deals with us. 170 Observations collected not prosecuted. 172

Verse. 7.
Doctrines. page. 1. The duties of our callings not to be neglected. 176 2.
Grown Christians freed from slavish fear. 177 3. Freedom from slavish fear
no small favor. 177 4. Wisdom to be observed in provoking others to good
duties. 179 5. Gods people have the spirit of power. 180 How the spirit of
power may be procured. 182 6. The children of God have the spirit of love. 183
Love defined. 183 Corrolaries from the definition. 185 7. Gods children love
God. 186 Trials of the love of God. 186 Motives to love God. 188 8. The
children of God love one another. 189 Motives to love one another. 193
Directions for love. 194 9. Christians have sound minds. 194 A sound mind
defined. 196 A distribution. 196 All the intellectual virtues defined. 197 The
object of a sound mind. 198 Man's messengers. 1. Loquentia: 2. Eloquentia. 198
Conclusions from the former discourse. 199 10. Moderation of affection required
in a Christian. 201 Rules for moderation. 202 An objection answered. 203 A
double caution. 204 Sundry doctrines collected, but briefly handled. 205

Verse. 8.
Doctrines. page. 1. Doctrine, reason and use is a warrantable kind of
preaching. 209 Why the Scripture is writ as an history. 209 Directions in the
deduction and application of doctrines. 210 2. No man is to be ashamed of, but
to bear witness unto the Gospel. 210 What preachers be ashamed of the Gospel.
211 What people are ashamed of the Gospel. 211 Cautions in quotations. 211
Motives to bear witness to the Gospel. 212 What needful for a good
witness. 213 3. Great men's proceedings are not always according to equity.
213 4. With what measure we mete to others, the very same may befall our
selves. 214 5. We are not to be ashamed of them, who suffer for the Gospel.
215 6. Corporal bondage preuents not spiritual freedom. 216 7. We that
profess the Gospel are patiently to suffer affliction that attends it. 216 8.
The Gospel preached or professed always persecuted. 217 9. The Lord
proportioneth the sufferings of his servants according to their power. 218
Power distributed. 220 10. Power from God supports in affliction. 220

Verse. 9.
Doctrines page. 1. Digressions in preaching warrantable. 223 Cautions to be
observed. 223 2. When good men name God; they make mention of some mercy of
his. 224 3. He that would not faint in affliction, must have an eye to his
salvation. 224 4. God author of man's salvation. 226 5. The salvation of the
faithful is certain and not doubtful. 227 Reasons rendered why Solomon was
saved. 230 Why the Papists hold he is condemned. 230 Why God might suffer, so
excellent a man to fall so fearefullie. 230 6. The salvation of man is a rare
and great blessing. 232 7. One Christian rejoices in another salvation. 235
8. Certainty of salvation may be had, if rightly sought for. 235 Causes of
doubting. 235 9. Effectual vocation accompanies salvation. 236 What time the
Lord ordinarily calls. 237 How he calls. 238 Why are not all called alike.
239 Aged persons rarely called and why. 238 Conclusions from the precedent
discourse. 242 Effects of effectual calling. 244 Wherein he that is called
has experience. 244 10. The calling of the faithful is an holy calling. 246
Whether Preachers not called can call others: 246 11. Man not saved for his
works sake. 248 Why good works are to be done. 249 What needful to a good
work. 249 12. Men will have some kind of works. 249 13. Gods free favor the
first cause of man's felicity. 250 An objection answered. 251 14. The calling
of the elect is according to Gods purpose. 251 Sundry doctrines deduced but not
handled. 252

Verse. 10.
Doctrines. page. 1. Gods purpose in his appointed time shall come to pass.
254 2. Gods gracious visitation to be observed. 257 3. The Church more glorious
since the coming of Christ than before. 258 An objection answered. 260 4.
Christ's appearing in the law and Gospel, glorious. 263 5. Jesus Christ our
only Savior. -- 265 6. Death by Christ is destroyed. 267 In what sense it may
be said that Christ suffered the second death. 268 How we may destroy death.
269 How Christ's death killes death in us. 270 Whether God could or not have
saved man without a satisfaction. 272 How finite man may be said to suffer
infinite torments. 273 7. All spiritual life is procured by Christ Jesus. 273
8. To preach the same things again is warrantable. 273 Acaution. 274 9. The
office of Christ chiefly consists in the abolishing of death and procuring of
life. 274 Rules to know if death be removed from us. 275 Trialls if we have
life by Christ Jesus. 276 Motives to get spiritual life. 277 10. Life
spiritual is eternal. 278 Helps to life spiritual. 280 11. Though all grace
come by Christ, yet not without the means of the Gospel. 280 Doctrines. Page.

Verse. 11.
1. The Godly take delight to dwell and discourse of holy things. 283 2. The
Gospel principally to be preached. 284 3. The dignity of our calling to be
maintained. 285 4. Preachers be cryers. 287 Cautions for cryers. 288 Rules for
auditors. 289 5. The word preached a principal means whereby sinners are
converted. 289 How reading may be said to be preaching. 290 Whether preaching
is to be preferred above praying. 291 Sundry objections answered. 291 6. When
God will call a people; he raises up fit instruments for that purpose. 293
Paul sent, principally to Preach to the Gentiles. 294 8. Prayers made in faith
are not always granted at the first. 295

Verse. 12.
Doctrines. Page. 1. The goodness of an action, cannot free the doer, from
affliction. 299 2. Neither learning, wisdom, piety, or external privilege,
can prescrue a man, from persecution and affliction. 302 3. Good men suffer
many things. 303 4. A resolute Christian is not ashamed of the Gospel. 305
Helps to endure shame. 306 5. The example of others sufferings should move us
to suffer also. 306 6. As the wicked have pretended causes to afflict the
faithful; so have they good grounds not to be ashamed of their sufferings. 307
7. It is an experimental knowledge that will make the men of God resolute in
good courses. 308 Rules to procure experimental knowledge. 309 8. Knowledge of
God precedeth faith in him. 311 How God is to be Known of us. 314 Rules to
know God. 315 9. It is the duty of a Christian to settle his soul in the
certainty of his salvation. 316 Signs of presumption. 317 Hindrances of the
souls settling. 318 10. The best way to secure the soul, is to commit it into
the hands of God. 318 Helps to commit the soul to God. 319 What times
especially the soul is to be committed into the hands of God. 319 11. God is a
God of power 321 His power defined. 321 Two kinds of impossibilities that God
cannot do. 321 Particulars mentioned of the first sort. 321 And instances of
the other kind. 322 The power of God distributed. 324 Differences of this
power. 324 A subdiuision of his external power. 325 Actual power has two
parts. 325 From all which many conclusions, especially against our adversaries
the Papists and others. 326 Rules to get experience of Gods power. 327 12. As
power, so will may be attributed to the Lord. 328 Gods will defined and
explicated. 329 Gods will several ways distinguished. 331 Many Corrolaries,
from the former propositions. 333 13. Faith has distinct degrees. 335 14. The
greatest faith may grow. 336 How faith and infidelity are inseparable. 337
Helps of faith to the distressed christian. 337

Verse. 13.
Doctrines. page. 1. Persuasion, and disswasion are to be accompanied with
direction. 343 2. The best way to maintain purity in religion is to have a
pattern. 343 Adam had the law writ in his heart at the creation. 343 Adam
broke the moral law. 344 The law was writ in Moses time. 345 3. All men guided
by one and the same pattern. 346 An objection answered. 347 Rules to direct us
in our callings; general, particular. 349 Brief notes on the Decalogue. 351
When the Sabbath begins. -- 353 Why the Sabbath was changed. -- 355 4. The
pattern of a christian is to consist of words. 355 5. The words must be sound
words. 356 Whether words may be used not found in Scripture. 356 6. Apostles
are only to prescribe patterns. 357 7. By faith and love, the pattern of
sound words is preserved. 358 Properties of love. 358 What is done in faith.
360 What in love. 360 Why faith is put before love. 360 Why both together. 361
Several doctrines collected, but not prosecuted. 360

Verse. 14.
Doctrines. page. 1. The graces of Gods spirit are good and worthy things. 363
2. Grace being got, is to be preserved. -- 366 3. Spiritual gifts are in
danger of losing. -- 367 How far a man may fall from his former grace. -- 369
Signs of falling from former grace. -- 369 4. The faithful are the temples of
Gods spirit. -- 371 How may the spirit be said to dwell in man, being infinite,
man finite. 371 In what manner the spirit may be said to dwell in the
reprobate. 371 Signs if the spirit dwell in us. 373 5. Where the spirit takes
possession, he dwells for ever. 374 How Satan may be said to reenter being once
cast out. 374 The spirit dwells in a new heart, the which has many properties.
376 In what manner the heart is made new. 376 6. The Spirit of God is an holy
spirit. 378 Why he is, or may be called holy. 378 How the spirit may be
procured. 379 7. The graces of the spirit are preserved by the spirit. 379

Verse. 15.
Doctrines. page. 1. We are to put the faithful in mind of others falling
away. 381 2. To fall from our former profession is a great sin and foul
offense. 382 Helps against reuolting. 383 Causes of reuolting 1. inward. 2.
outward. 385 3. Men of great note in the Church may sometimes fall away. 384 4.
God does propertion man's shame, according to the offense. 386 5. Great wicked
men usually fall by couples. 388 6. Many may fall away together. 388 Whether
all that fell away, of Asia, never returned. 389

Verse. 16.
Doctrines. page. 1. One good man's example is to be preferred before a
multitude of wicked men. 392 2. In the time of persecution few have bin found
faithful. 393 3. A good governor may procure a blessing upon the whole
family. 394 How a godly family may be known to be so. 397 4. Love is of a
spreading nature. 398. How far love spreads. 400 5. The mercy of God is to
be wished especially, for our friends. 401 6. Want may befall Gods dearest
children. 402 7. The faithful are not once but often to be relieved. 403 8.
Gods children are a thankful kind of people. -- 404 9. Good men have been
used like malefactors. 405 10. Not to be ashamed of the faithful in
affliction, is a true sign of a sound Christian. 405

Verse. 17.
Doctrines. Page. 1. When the faithful are afflicted, then they are to be
refreshed. 407 An objection answered. 409 Whether Ministers may visit them that
be sick of the plague. 409 If Ministers may live in a corrupt air. 409 2. The
faithful are to be sought for. 409 How they may be known to be such. 419 3.
Whom or what we affect truly we will seek dil gently. 410 4. They that seek
shall find. 412 Rules to be observed in seeking. 413 5. Rome heathen was better
then, than Rome christian now. 414 Viz. When Paul was there, prisoner.

Verse. 18.
Doctrines. Page. 1. There is a time, when the world shall be judged. 418 If
Angels move the Orbs. 418 2. The day of judgment great and wonderful. 424 3.
Christ our Lord shall judge the world. 427 Motives to prepare for the day of
judgment. 429 4. The best man is not to rely on his own merits, but Gods
mercy at the day of judgment. 430 Sundry of the Papists objections answered.
430 Why God commands good works. 431 Good works cannot merit, and why. 431
For what causes the Lord rewards the works of the faithful. 432 5. A good
man's mind is often carried to think on the day of judgment. 433. 6. Prayer is
to be grounded on Gods promises. 435 How Moses and Paul's prayer, can stand with
this doctrine resolved. 436 Helps for prayer. -- 437 7. When we want,
wherewith to requite our friends, we are to pray for them. 438 8. Special
friends in a particular manner are to be prayed for. 438 9. Merciful men shall
obtain mercy. -- 440 Rules in showing mercy to be observed. 440 10. They that
show mercy in an evil day, shall find mercy in an evil day. 440 Why Paul
prays for mercy, at that day, rather than another time. 441 11. In famous
cities it sometimes goes hardly with Gods Saints. 442 12. The worthiest
Christian may be relieved of a meaner person; for soul and body. 443 13. A
good man thinks nothing too dear for the Preachers of the Gospel. -- 443
Lets of liberality to Ministers. -- 444 14. In the greatest straites the Lord
remembers them who suffer for his cause and Gospel. 445

Many other points and passages, for brevity, we have omitted.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE SECOND EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE St PAVL TO TIMOTHY.
THE Epistles of the Apostles were directed either to Churches in general, as
the Romans, Corinthians; or persons in particular, as, Titus, Gaius. And they
were private men, as Philemon; or public, as this Timotheus, who was a
Minister of the Gospel, and (as some maintain) the first elect Bishop of the
Church at Ephesus.

Now, for the more Methodicall proceeding in this our intended progress, two
things necessarily are to be considered, observed. 1. The scope or end, which
our Apostle in penning this Epistle aimed at, intended. 2. The many weighty
Motives or Arguments, he produces to have his purpose accomplished, thoroughly
effected.

True it is that as amongst various causes, there is one prime and first
efficient, the which is God; so amids several ends, one principal and
transcendent, which is his glory. For, as Alpha and Omega, are the initiall and
final letters of the whole alphabet; so is God, first and last, beginning and
end of every creature. Taking therefore, as granted, that the choicest and
chiefest mark our Apostle eyed, aimed at, was the glory of God, as doubtless
it was; the subordinate shall be related, annexed, the which in this Epistle
are* comprehended, included.

1. He exhorts Timothy, to cherish, stir up, and increase the gifts of God
in him, and to be strong in the grace, which is in Christ Jesus. 2. To walk
uprightly, sincerely, and not to divert from the express pattern of sound
words, which he had received, learned. 3. To do the work of an Evangelist,
Preach the Gospel, in season, out of season; and to be faithful, and
painful in the execution of his function. 4. With patience and resolution to
bear the cross, suffer affliction, and not to be ashamed of the testimony of
the Lord Jesus. 5. He foretells him of perilous times; premonisheth him of
evil workers, in general, and gives him a caveat, to beware of Alexander the
Copper-smith, who had withstood his Preaching much, in particular. 6. Finally,
he desires him to come unto him, and bring Mark, as also his Cloak, Books,
and Parchments with him. These be the inferior, and secondary ends of Paul's
penning this Epistle.

The arguments, whereby the Apostle would induce Timotheus to discharge, and
perform the forenamed particulars, are many, some whereof shall be mentioned.
1. because he was descended of faithful and religious Parents. 2. From the
good opinion the Apostle conceived of him. 3. In that he was well and rarely
qualified. 4. Forasmuch as his calling was holy, and salvation certain. 5. He
would allure him by his own example, being an Apostle, and a man of greater
note and dignity. 6. And also from the shame, which befell revolters, and the
honor, that redounded to Onesiphorus, who persevered in well-doing. All these
are contained in the first Chapter: the rest shall be omitted, except, when in
this Discourse, special occasion is offered, that they should be produced,
rolated.

In the two first Verses of this Chapter, you have the Preface, The Analysis of
the whole Chapter.
or Inscription; in the rest which follow, part of the matter, or body of this
Epistle. In the Preface is contained a double description, and a salutation:
The former is of the Pen man, the latter of the person, to whom he writes. The
salutation is laid down, as by the matter of it, what he wishes, so by the
persons, who are to accomplish it; and the one is God the Father, the other,
Christ Jesus our Lord.

In the third Verse, where the body of this Epistle begins, we have the
Apostles carriage, and that toward God, and his son Timothy. Concerning God,
he acknowledges, that, he did serve him; for extent, from his elders; for
manner, with a pure Conscience. Now for his behavior to Timothy, he
confesses, that, he did thank God for him, and also make mention of him in
his prayers; for constancy, without ceasing; for time, night and day.

The Apostle further declares the earnest desire he had, to see Timothy,
being induced from the end, the increase of his own joy, and by a twofold
motive in respect of Timothy, the one was the remembrance of his tears, the
other from the unfeigned faith he conceived to be in him. verse. 4. 5.

In the sixth Verse, Paul puts Timotheus in mind, to stir up the gift, which
was in him, where he makes mention of the efficient cause thereof, God, and
the isntrumental, which was the imposition of hands; urging him to do so,
from a twofold reason; the former, in that he was freed from the spirit of
fear; the latter, having received the spirit of power, etc. verse. 7.

Moreover, in the next Verse, he dehorteth his son, from being ashamed, and
that first, of the Gospel of Christ, and secondly, of him, his prisoner. Also
he exhorts him to suffer afflictions; for kind, such as accompany the
Gospel; for measure, according to the power he had from God. Both of which
also he presses from the forenamed grounds in ver. 7. And likewise from the
certainty of his salvation, and the holiness of his vocation, verse. 9. Of
which favors he remoueth a false cause, his own works, and sets down the
true; the fountain, Gods mercy, the conduit of conveighing it, Christ Jesus;
affirming further* that, it was purposed and given in Christ, before the world
began, but now manifested by his bright appearing. And by the way, he
describes our Savior Christ, from two notable effects, viz. the abolition of
death, and the reduction of life; adding the mean, whereby they are applied to
us, and that is, through the Gospel. verse. 10. Concerning which Gospel, Paul
testifies two things; the one, that he was appointed to preach it; the other,
and that unto the Gentiles; verse. 11. Then he proceeds to declare, first, his
intertainment for so doing, he suffered afflictions. 2. His carriage, that, he
was not ashamed. Where he annexeth a double ground of his resolution; the
former flowing from an experience of God; the latter, from a confidence, he
would keep that he had committed to him. verse. 12.

In the succeeding Verses, Paul exhorts Timothy to a twofold duty, first,
to hold fast the form of sound words, he had received of him, which would
direct, and preserve him as from error in doctrine, so from sin in his
conversation; the second to keep safe the good things committed to him;
prescribing him the way, which is by the assistance of the holy Ghost, in him.
verse. 13. 14.

The Apostle having finished the former exhortations, complains he was
forsaken, and that generally, of all Asia; particularly, he nominateth two
eminent persons, Phygellus, and Hermogenes. For the truth whereof, he appealeth
to his son Timothy. verse. 15.

In the conclusion of this Chapter, verse. 16. 17. 18. He mentions a good man,
one Onesiphorus, whom he prays for, with his whole household. That which he
petitioneth for them, is mercy; the time when, is the day of judgment. The
motives, whereby he was induced thus to do, are taken, from the kindnesses
Onesiphorus had showed him. At Rome he refreshed him, not ashamed of his
chain. And, at Ephesus, he also had ministered unto him, many things, as
Timothy knew very well. Thus you fee the distinct Heads, in this Chapter,
unfolded, discovered.

VERSE. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to the
promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus.
IN these words, the Penman of this Epistle The Logical resolution.
is described, and that, 1. by his name. Paul. 2. by his office, an Apostle,
amplified by the person who sent him, Jesus Christ. 3. By the ground or
lawfulness of coming to it, the will of God. 4. By the end of his commission,
which is to Preach the promise of life. The which life is explicated, from whom
it proceeds, and that is Christ Jesus.

Paul] We must here note* that the Pen-mans name was also The Theological
exposition.
Saul, as well as Paul; that many men are of many and different opinions, why
he had both, and yet in all his Epistles, makes but mention of the one.
Briefly, (to omit all others) he was a Citizen of two Provinces, of the Jews,
by birth, and of the Romans by prerogative, and therefore was named Saul,
being an Hebrew of the Hebrews; Paul, being a Roman, of the Romans: and he
now called to be a Preacher, especially, to the Gentiles, reserues that name,
which was most familiar to them, best accepted of them.

An Apostle] The word in the Greek tongue, is used either as an Adjective, or
a Substantive, and that, generally, for any one sent; but more particularly,
for a legate of Christ, having 2 Cor. 5. ^0.
a peculiar charge to Preach the Gospel. And many be the properties and
privileges of Christ's, beyond any other Apostles. For, 1. they saw the son
of God manifested in the flesh. 2. They were immediately called to their office
by him. 3. Extraordinarily fitted with gifts, to execute their function. 4.
They spoke all languages. 5. Had power to work Miracles. 6. Write, as they
were carried of the spirit; and last of all, their commission was to Preach
through the world.

Of Jesus Christ] Jesus comes of an Hebrew word, which signifies to make safe,
and imports as much as a Savior. Now Saviors are either principal or
isntrumental. Jesus, as he is God, is the Savior of all men; as God-man, and
Mediator, 1. Tim 4. 10.
specially of them who believe. This notation was given him, by the hand of an
Angel, Thou shall call his name Jesus; for, he shall save his people from
their sins. Mat. 1. 22.


Christ] This word springs of a Greek root, that signifies to anoint, so
that Jesus Christ in our English dialect, is, as if we should say, An anointed
Savior. Of Christ's there be two kinds, true or false. Of the former sort,
they be either Mat. 24. 24
typical or real Now, this Christ is true, real, not false, not typical.
And it may be, he assumed both an Hebrew and a Greek name, closely to teach,
he was Savior both of Jews and Gentiles. For, under these words are his
offices comprehended. He was anointed in respect of his Manhood, not the
Godhead. For, that is holiness it self, and cannot admit of any ambiene, or
created unction.

By the will of God] Here the Apostle lays down the true ground of his
calling; partly, to stop the mouths of his carping adversaries: partly, to
remove false causes, as Symonie, and the like, and partly, that his doctrine
might be accompanied with the greater majesty, making way for acceptance.

Here observe, that, Will is ascribed to God the Father, as Mat. 6. 20. Prove 8.
22. 1. Cor. 1. 24. Luke 1. 35.
Wisdom elsewhere to God the Son, and Power to God the holy Ghost. Will is
the beginner of the act; Wisdom the disposer, and Power the effecter. The
first person wills, the second disposes, the third effects. Thus, distinct
actions are appropriated to the distinct persons in the Deity. And the reason
is, in that, the Father works from himself (having none in order to precede
him:) the Son from the Father (being in order, after him:) and the holy Ghost
from both (both being in order before him.) And hence it is, that Election is
given so often in Scriptures, to the Father, Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1
Cor. 6. 11. 2 These. 2. 13.
Redemption to the Son, and Sanctification to the holy Ghost: though all
external acts, which pass upon the creatures, by the three persons, may be
said to be indivisible, as the work Genesis 2. 26.
of creation. Where, by the way, we gather a strong argument, against the
Arminians, who would have redemption, and sanctification to precede election,
as if the Sons work, and the holy Ghosts, in order went before the Fathers.

According] I take it, that in this sentence, is declared the end of Paul's
Apostleship, to wit, to preach the Gospel; and that, not in any newly
invented, or opposite manner, but proportionable and just after the form, and
effigies of that good, true, and warrantable pattern; for, he who did reach
otherwise, was to be accursed. Gal. 1. 9.


Promise] Here the Apostle opposes the Gospel, and the Law, not that the
observation of the Law, would not have given life, or was without a promise,
but, because, that man, since his fall, is dead, and cannot keep it;
therefore, he is to fetch life, from another fountain, viz. the gospel, which
is, in brief, called the Promise of life.

Of life]. There is a fourefold life, at the least, to be found, in the
creatures; 1. a life of vegetation, as in herbs, and plants, 2. a life of
sense, as in birds and beasts. 3. of reason, as in man and Angels. 4. a life of
grace (called the life of God. Ephesians. 4. 8.) only to be found in good Angels,
and such men, as are borne again; and this is that life, which is here
promised, by the Apostle preached, and principally to be desired.

Which is in Christ Iesus]. Christ is the fountain of this spring, the root
of this tree, and the very first beginner of this spiritual life, and motion.
For, without him, we are dead, can do nothing. Ioh. 15. 5.


I Paul, (also called Saul, because I was a Citizen of two The Metaphrase.
Provinces, of the Jews by birth, and Romans by prerogative, yet being
principally sent to be a Preacher to the Gentiles, have reserved the one, cast
off the other, as being more familiar to them, better accepted of them, an
Apostle and legate, not of any private person, but of Christ Jesus, the holy
one, and anointed of the Lord, sole Savior of the faithful, having a true and
lawful calling, not of man, nor by man, but of, by, and for the Lord, being
sent to no other end, but to preach the lif^ of grace and glory, which is only
through the free promise of God in Christ, to be obtained.) I (I say) do
ingenuously confess, without all mental reservation, or subtle ev^sion, my
self to be the Author, Penman of this Epistle, being chiefly induced to
prefixe my name, declare my office, show the ground of my calling, and the
object and end of my function, to silence such as might carpe at my Doctrine,
that the Church in all succeeding ages, as well as for the present season, might
receive it, as free from all error, and the truth of God; and that my person,
preaching, and writing might not be contemned, but as they ought, esteemed,
regarded.

And now let us proceed to gather such Doctrines, as arise Doctrines deduced.
out of these words, thus resolved, plainly expounded.

Seeing the Penman reserues that name, which is most accepted, and best
received of the people, as also annexeth that title, whereby the excellency of
his office is demonstrated, we note, that, Preachers are to maintain the
dignity of their Doct. 1.
persons.

This has been the care of all the Prophets in old time, and Apostles in
these latter days. If it were not so, what means all this? Am not I an
Apostle, am not I free? have not 1 Cor. 9. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
I seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Are not you my work in the Lord?

Because a good name is as a precious ointment, above great Reas. 1. Eccles. 7.
1. Prove. 22. 1.
riches, and more than the choicest silver, and gold to be regarded: It will
rejoice the heart, cheer the dead spirit, and prolong a man's days, whereas
the contrary is a curse, and to be avoided.

Otherwise, if Ministers be ill reported of, their doctrine Reas. 2.
(be it never so sound, or sovereign for the soul) it will be despised,
rejected. If the vessel be counted unsweet, who will, with alacrity, taste of
the liquor? And men judge the fruit according to the trees report.

Let Ministers, then, have an eye to this duty. Too too many Use 1.
are careless in this thing; and that's the cause, why they Preach so much, and
profit little; and who ever saw good done by such a man, as was contemned in
his name, and person? The Word will not speed, if the Preacher be despised.

And for procuring a good report; 1. be diligent in the discharge How a good
name may be got.
of thy duty, avoid idleness in thy calling. 2. Again, take heed, thou be not
justly accused of that, which thou have severely censured in others. 3. Speak
not evil of others; for, with what measure we meet, it shall be measured to
us again. Could we cover others infirmities, they would do the like for us.
4. And in conclusion, seek the glory of God 1 Samuel 2. 30. Prove. 10. 7.
in thy proceedings; for, they who honor God* shall be honored of him, whereas
they, who seek themselves shall be abased.

The people also must take heed, how they detract from Use 2.
the credit of their Pastors. Its a foul fault of some, and to be reformed,
who are always prying into, and raking up the infirmities of their Preachers;
cover thou their faults, pass by their wants, and seek their dignity, for
thine own good, and thy brethrens. Nature, by a secret instinct will defend
the head, with the loss of the hand, and will we not cover our baldness with
a Periwigge? Why, the Preacher is the head of the people, and therefore to be
respected; and its an old Axiom, Do my-Prophets no harm. Psalm. 105. 15.

Again, where Paul is called an Apostle, who in former times, was a persecuter
of the Lords people, we observe, that:

Young sinners may prove old Saints; great offenders, godly persons; Doct. 2.
persecutors of the truth and people, zealous Preachers; Church-founders. For,
is not Saul now among the Apostles, who sometime made havocke of the Saints?
Did he not do many things, against the name of Jesus of Nazaret, and persecute
this way and word, which he now maintains, unto the death? Others, who have
done the same, yet have prooved the same, godly livers, excellent persons? 2.
Chron. 33. 12. etc. Luke 8. 2. Tit. 3. 3. 1. Cor. 6. 11.

And this comes to pass, by the finger of God. He knows how to do it,
has power to do it, and if he Reas: 1.
will, who can resist him? He who made the instrument, cannot he amend it? so,
he who first formed man, shall he want ability to reform him? no, he is in
heaven, and does whatsoever he will. Satan may resist, but all in vain; Isa.
46. 10.
man's will may oppose, but all to no purpose; for, his power is infinite,
theirs finite.

And is there not a possibility for such a subject to be reformed? Man is
capable of grace, if it be infused. His essence Reas. 2.
is not destroyed, but his faculties disordered, so that being once turned,
like a wheel, that goes backward, he will (Gods finger being once present)
easily be carried the same course, as at the creation.

This doctrine should encourage men to use the means, Use 1.
without wearines, whereby sinners are converred. We must instruct them, who
be contrarie-minded, prooving if God at any time, will bring them out of the
snares of the Devil, to 2. Tim. 2. 25.
amendment of life. Why should we despair of any person? judge him finally,
or repute him a reprobate? Was not this man, with whom we have to deal, as
unlikely to have proved an Apostle, an holy liver, as any thou know? He who
had seen Paul with the High Priest, and met him with letters trudging to
Damascus, would have little thought he would another day have sealed the
Gospel with his blood. Let the means be used, and refer the success to
God. The prodigal may come to himself, and return to his Father at the last.
Onesimus may be begot in his wandering, prove profitable to, and abide with his
master, for ever, after. Phile. 10. etc.


This Doctrine is of use also, for such as have misspent Use 2.
their former time, followed the evil fashions of the world, and given their
members, as so many servants, to work wickedness, with greediness. If they
find in themselves a settled resolution, to leave their former courses, and
with a purpose of heart, to cleave unto the Lord, its a truth that Satan will
tempt such, and tell them that now it is in vain, to return from their wonted
ways, former wickedness, and alter their crooked paths: But they must not
give credit to his false suggestions, and subtillillusions; for, if they do,
they be undone. Be of good comfort: For, thy former evil course shall not
make thee miscarry, if thy present resolution be to be reformed in all things.
For, as bad, lewd, profane, as thy self, have become godly persons, excellent
people. Let this then be a means to comfort thee, when thy spirit is wounded,
or thou by Satan to utter desperation art tempted.

Yet, caution, must here be had, that this comfortable Cautions to be used,
that grace be not abused.
doctrine be not abused. First, take heed, that thou do not learn hereby to
defer thy repentance, to extenuate thy sin, or to apply it to all times,
and persons. For, this were a sin, with an high hand, and in so doing thou
should aggrauate thine in^quitie, and turn the mercy, bounty, and
long-suffering of the Lord into wantonness, abuse his patience, and justly
incur greater condemnation. We must not sin, because grace does abound,
but rather, in the consideration thereof, be led to repentance. Secondly, as
thou desire to partake of the like grace and favor, which others have done;
strive thou to be equally qualified, as such persons have been. The choicest
rece^pts are applied to the sickest, weakest. The mercy of God is physic
only for the wounded spirit. Wherefore set this example before the eye of thy
soul, in the greatest temptation, hardest conflict, and when thy faith, in the
remembrance of thy former crooked courses, the most seems to fail thee: for
then it may stand thee in stead, otherwi^e not.

I could also gather from these words: That, diverse names may, for just and
lawful uses, be undertaken.

That, our own names, and hand is necessary to be annexed to our writings:
but I omit these, and proceed further.

Of Jesus Christ:] What did the Apostle most rejoice in? from what did he
deduce arguments to maintain his dignity? from his Tribe, kindred,
Pharisaicall profession, or any carnal, and earthly privilege? in no wise:
but from that he was now the servant of Christ, and put into office under him,
whence may be collected, that: Any union, relation, Doct. 3.
or contract, in and with Christ, is of great importance.

As Paul does magnify his place and person, in regard of his master Christ: so
may we, in all other respects, whereby we are conjoined, and knit by any band
unto him. What greater honor to the weaker sex, than to be the mother of Luke
1. 43. 48.
our Lord? What dignity, is this, to frail man, that he passed by the Angels,
and assumed his nature? What privilege Heb. 2. 16.
of more price; than to be bone of his bone, and flesh Ephesians. 5. 30.
of his flesh? to be a branch of such a root, a member of such a head, and an
Ambassador of so unmatchable a Monarch? 1 Cor. 9. 1. 1 Timothy 1. 12. Romans 16. 1.

Why, Is not Christ Jesus God-man, the only Son of Reas. 1.
the Father, and the beginning of all creatures? Surely, the nearer we approach
in nature, union, or action, to the creator, the nearer are we to all
perfection, and blessedness, that Heb. 1. 14.
can befall a creature.

Again, Are we in his service? We shall be preserved, Reas. 2.
assisted, well rewarded: Be we united to him? We shall never be rent asunder,
but abide with him, and in him for ever. Is he our first kinsman, and husband?
What honor to this? What profit comparable? For thereby God is become our
Father, heaven our inheritance, and salvation eternal, our yearly ioynture.

Here are reprehended many in our days, who care not Use 1.
a whit, for matters of that nature: reputing it no reputation, to have
relation, union, and communion with Christ Jesus: these show plainly, that they
be carnal, and savor not the things, which be of God. What boasting will some
use of their pedigree, and blood? Yet never dream of affinity with Christ, or
the new birth. Extol themselves, that they or theirs, are matched in such or
such a house? yet have no care at all to be graffed into Christ's stock, the
Lords family: as of this sort there be millions, so they be all miserable.

This must teach us, who have any relation with Christ, Use 2.
highly to esteem it, and greatly to rejoice in it. Think it no small thing
to be an off^cer in his house, a labourer in his V^neyard, and a member of his
body: for this is true nobility, inconceivable dignity, and the direct path
to eternal felicity. Paul a Preacher of Jesus Christ, is a name of greater
price, and praise, than all humane titles, and times ad^u^cts (though in their
nature good) in all the world.

And here we are instructed from this point, how to attain Use 3.
unto great dignity: we and our children must get some office under Christ;
principally endeavor to be united by faith, and affection unto him: but alas,
men scorn the Ministry, the name Preacher is a word of derision in the
Parish: and Parents cry out, What? Make my son a Priest? I will never do it.
Well, the calling is of great honor with God, though despised of these beastly
men: And the days 1 Samuel 1. vlt.
have been, when to dedicate a son to the Ministerial function, was counted
a great grace in the Parents, honor to the person: but in all contempt, and
bitter derision, let the Minister and true Christian, know; that, his Master
thought it no shame, to become a Preacher. Heb. 2. 3. And Solomon higher
esteemed the dignity of a Preacher than a King. Eccles. 1. 1.

By the will of God] The Apostle, in this phrase, declares the ground, way,
and lawfulness of his calling; as if he had sa^d, I ran not before I was
moved, I came not of mine own mind by men or by money, in at the window, or the
like: but the prime and chief cause, was the will and good pleasure of God,
whence arises this instruction, that, (...)

It is necessary for such as preach the Word, to justify their lawful Doct. 4.
calling there unto from God.

What Paul did as a Preacher, we ought to do also. Timotheus knew from whom
Paul received his calling: and he add^th this, for the respect he had to future
times, and persons. John the Baptist did this, and Christ himself, having Mar.
2. 19. Matthew. 3 3.
to deal with the Pharisees: and Reason will confirm it*

Otherwise, they can have no assurance of protection from Reas: 1.
God by his Angels; they must keep their limits, and but preserve us in our
ways: they dare not attend us, if we run Psalm. 91. 11. Mat. 4. 6.
a crooked path. Satan, understood this well, therefore falsely alleged the
Scripture, leaving out, [ in all thy ways.] And what became of the young
Prophet, that wandered? Was he not destroyed? 1 King. 13. 22.


And the certainty of our calling from God, will make Reas. 2.
us bold in the execution of our function, and in the hottest opposition to say
with Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I flee? Nehem. 6 11. Luke 13. 32.
Or with our Master, Go, tell that Fox, that I will heal, to d^y, and
tomorrow, and the next day, I shall be perfected. Absalom bids his servants,
sinite, kill, fear not, but be bold, and 2 Samuel 13. 28.
play the men; Why? For he had commanded them. This needs no application.

Again, then may we expect a blessing of our indevours, Reas. 3. 1 Samuel 1. 2.
15.
otherwise not. He that will run, before the Lord bids him go, may speed,
like him, that brought tidings to David, that his son was slain: and his
Sermons prove to himself like the Letters that Vriah carried. What if Israel be
not 2 Samuel 11. 14.
gathered? yet thy reward is with the Lord. If the Master bid the servant cast
seed in a barren soil, what if he have no Isa. 49. 4.
good crop at harvest? Its not the servants fault: he did his duty; and would
have been glad, the ground had been better, the crop greater; but he relyeth
on the command of his Master, not the success in using the means: so must
Ministers also.

And last of all, assurance that a man is sent of God, will Reas. 4.
give him to believe, that he shall never want a word to comfort others in due
season: such a man may certainly expect a supply of gifts from the Lord. We
have some, that like Ruth after Boos reapers, gleane here and there, and pull
an ear from the sheaues of others; yet much ado to make one loaf in many
days, to feed the flock of God: And what is the cause? Sure, God never sent
them to sow; for, if he had, they should have been supplied with seed.

Does not this doctrine reprove those, that take upon them Use 1.
this high calling, without any assurance they be sent of God? Some Preach,
that are neither sent of God, nor man, as the Anabaptists: others of man, but
not of God; these are Ieroboams Apostles: a third pretend, they are sent of
God, but not of man; (like some new vpstart spirits, I pass to nominate,)
which if it were true, their calling were Apostolical: but, who shall one day
pay these their wages? The Lord, but in wrath.

Let Ministers then look to this: it stands them in hand: Use 2.
so shall they have protection by the good Angels, boldness to reprove sin,
and not to be scared like boys, with the humming of Bees, and Flies: a supply
of grace on each new occasion; and their labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. 1 Cor. 15. vlt.

And men may know, by these marks: 1. If in some measure, Trials; if we be
truly called to Preach the Gospel. Isa. 6. 8. Romans 9. 2. 3. Ephesians. 4. 12. Ier.
23. 32,
they be fitted with gifts. 2. If they find in themselves a ready and willing
mind. 3. If they be approved and thrust forth by grave, learned, and religious
persons; of great note, and government in the Church. 4. When they aim at the
gathering of the Saints, the edification of the body of Christ, the glory of
him, that sent them, and not at some sinister and private ends; as praise,
promotion, or the like. 5. If the Lord in some measure bless their endeavors.
This 1 Cor. 9. 2.
last is not the least; but as a Signet to seal the truth of their calling.
And I could note further from these words: that,

Promotion to high places comes from the Lord. Note. Doct. 5.


Preferment comes not from the East, nor from the West: Little did Paul think,
either of his sudden conversion, or advancement to this honorable function, a
few hours before he was called; this is the work of God, and ought to be
marveilous in our eyes. Psalm. 75. 6. Mat. 21. 42.

Learn hence, to envy no man that is advanced: for that Uses. 1.
were to resist the will of God. And let this direct thee to 2.
praise God, if above many, thou be promoted. And it must 3.
teach all men, to be content, with their present condition, and not to repine:
for the will of God depends on no other, and is the Rule of all truth and
goodness.

To Preach:] according to the promise of life:] I add, to Preach, and that (I
trust) without wrong to the Text: for the end of his Apostleship, was to Preach
the promise of life, the glad tidings of salvation: out of these words, I
gather this Conclusion: that,

Eternal life is not to be had in the precepts of the Law, but Doct. 6.
from the promises of the Gospel.

The life of grace, and glory is, since Adams fall, derived Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 2.
vlt. And 3. 21.
to man, by another mean: the old way in this respect is not the best way: we
must find out, (and walk too) in the new way, which is the everlasting way.
And thus it comes to pass.

Because the precepts of the Law exacts a perfect righteousness, Reas. 1.
both in regard of man's entire nature, and the whole conversation; for, cursed
is every one, that continues Gal. 3. 10.
not in all things of the law to do them: now if the Lord should mark what is
amiss, within us, and that proceeds daily from us, who were able to abide
it? Not we, Christ only excepted; so that we must flee to the promise for
life, and cast off the precept in this respect.

Besides this, there is another reason rendered by the Apostle, Reas. 2.
which is, that if justification, and (consequently salvation) had been
obtained by the Law, then Christ had dyed Gal. 2. vlt.
gratis, in vain, for nothing. Indeed the Law is able to give life: for Christ
was saved by it, but we are weak, and not able to fulfill it. And though the
law be said to be of no strength, it is in this respect; that like a just Judge
to an offender, Romans 8. 3.
it gives a true testimony, not able to set man at liberty, who is a
transgressor.

Confutation, springs from this root, of the Papists; who Use 1.
tie salvation, rather to the law, and works, than to Christ, and the Gospel.

Reprehension too, proceeds from the same ground, against Use 2.
the ignorant Protestants; who being demanded, how they hope to be saved?
Reply, either by their good deeds, or honest meaning; this is natural
Papistrie: yet good works are in no sort to be omitted. For they be the true
evidences of faith, as child of a father: the high way to heaven, though not
the principal and immediate cause of reigning; these may be said to bring
life, as the nurse to the child: faith, as the mother.

And from hence every one that longs after life, must Use 3.
1. deny his own works. 2. Learn to be acquainted with the promises, and to
discern them from the precepts. 3. Labor for faith to apply them; for
knowledge, except mixed with faith, profits nothing. Heb. 4. 2.

This may also direct Ministers, how to teach their people Use 4.
a principal point of Catechism; as also to work faith in them, that they
may believe: not that the law is to be omitted: for that reuealeth sins,
breaks the heart, sets before the eye of the soul, Gods irresistible
judgment, and directs the way that leads to justification, and salvation;
yet in a differing manner from the Gospel. Its our Schoolmasters to Christ.
Gal. 3. 24.


Might we not hence observe further, that the principal end of Preaching, is
to bring men to life and salvation?

By the foolishness of Preaching, it pleases God to save such as 1 Cor. 1. 21.
believe.

Then are they far wide, that look for life, without a Preacher: Why do
they not expect children without generation? a crop of corn without sowing?

Again, we note, out of the word [ according:] that,

There is one method, or true manner, (or at least matter) of teaching to be
practiced of the Preachers: for every Art is guided by its own rule, precepts,
object.

Which is in Christ Jesus:] In Christ, that is, from him, or by him: Whence let
it be noted: that,

No life or salvation is to be expected, but in and through Christ Doct. 7.
Jesus.

Whether we respect the life of motion, sense, reason, or salvation: all is
conveyed to man, from him: he is the way, the truth, and the life. John 14. 6.
Ioh. 10. 10. and 17. 12. Act. 3. 15.

For he created all things as he was God; without him was Reas. 1.
made nothing that was made: He is the beginning of all creatures; Col. 3. 15.
therefore called, the Lord of life. Act. 3. 15.

He also as God preserves the essence, and being of the Reas. 2.
creature. 1. In giving nourishment, fit, and convenient. 2. and in blessing
the means, without both which, the life of man, like a lamp that lacks
oil, is extinguished: for man lives not by bread only, but by every word,
that proce^deth out of the mouth of God. Mat. 4. 4.

Furthermore, life and salvation come from Christ, as he Reas. 3.
is our Surety, and Savior. 1. For by his death he has destroyed death: O
death: Where is thy sting? 2. By his life he 1 Cor 15. 55. and v. 22. 23.
has purchased our life; as by the offense of one man, came death; so by the
obedience of Christ came life. 3. All the promises 2 Cor. 1. 20*
meet in Christ, and are yea and amen in him: as all the lines do in the point
of a Center. 4. He sends his word and spirit, for to quicken us; being dead,
before that time in sins Ephesians. 2. 1.
and trespasses: In a word, by his death we dye with him, and through his
Resurrection, and Ascension, we shall rise out Romans 5. 10.
of the grave, and ascend and live for ever with him. From this point do many
profitable Uses spring.

First, learn hence that the life of a Christian is no base being, Use 1.
or moving, but the sweetest life of all; and equalleth, if not excels that
life of Adam in the Garden; because it flows from a more pure fountain;
springs from a more honorable head; and is purchased with a far greater
price. Do we not esteem Wine by the Grape? fruit by the tree? Oil by the
Olive? And people by their pedigree? Its called the life of God; for God gave
it at the Creation; Christ Ephesians. 4. 18.
redeemed it by his Passion; and its the nearest to that life, the Lord
himself lives and delights in: its a royal life; for it exceeds (this
life) all other what ever. There Is not a greater dissimilitude, betwixt the life
of a natural man and a beast, than there is betwixt this, and the life of
reason.

And its a durable life, certain, and abides for ever: and Use 2.
can it be otherwise, coming from Christ? Let the root live, the branches will
not wither; the spring flow, the rivers will be full; and whilst the head is
not hurt, well fare the members. Indeed this tree was once dead, but now he is
alive, Rev. 1. 18.
and shall dye no more, death has no longer power over him. They therefore
that are graffed into this stock, shall never taste of the second death. For
out of their branches shall flow Io. 7. 37.
rivers of the waters of life. And as Moses with his rod struck the rock,
whence issued water to refresh the people; so God with the law of his justice,
struck Christ the rock, out of whose side comes the water of life, to save
all his members.

Besides, it also follows from the same ground, that it is Use 3.
a secret and hidden life: hid in Gods bosom, long before it was manifested:
hid in the Promise, hid in the Sacrifices, and Ceremonies; hid from the eyes of
the world, hid from him that has it: for the greatest and best part of it is
said to be hid with Christ in God, that is, in heaven. Col. 3. 3. For God and
heaven are often put one for the other in Scripture. And it may be said truly,
to be a hidden life; so few seek it, or find it; and yet if they do, they
know it not. Hence those that live it, are counted, as signs and wonders in
Israel. Isa. 58. 18. But what marvel, since Christ was not Isa. 52. vlt. And
53. 7.
known by it: his image despised, his person (in carnal eyes) deformed? They
then, that cannot discern the Sun, how should they perceive a Star, a
Candle?

Moreover, Is our life from Christ? Let us then that are Use 4.
partakers of it, return him praise, for so great a blessing: divide not this
treasure; ascribe nothing to thy own self, or others, its the root that
bears us, not we the root: life is a Romans 11.
great blessing; this life the blessing of blessings; then let us never be
weary in magnifying the Lord for such a favor: nay, seeing it comes from
Christ, let us return it again unto him, seeking his glory, as he has done
our good. If we beget children, do we not expect, they should spend their
lives, for the profit of us their Parents? As the Sea, therefore sends forth
many rivers; but they return all again into her bosom; so seeing our life
comes from Christ, let it flow back to the praise of his Majesty: and the
rather we may be induced hereto, because this is the only way, to have life,
and to escape death for all eternity.

And here may all of us learn instruction, seeing our life Use 5.
is from Christ Jesus: are we weak, and feeble in our minds? Run we to to
him, and pray we, Lord quicken me. Be our children dead in sin? Bring them
before Christ, desire him to raise them to life: imitate the poor (that lived,
when he lived amongst them) in the use of the means: still have an eye to this
Physician: otherwise, our Patients will not be cured: this is that Sun, that
with his warm beams enliueth all the creatures; if he be absent, we are all
but dead* men, rotten branches.

And to shut up this point, we are to learn here to be Use 6.
careful, that we offend not this Lord of life, and incur his displeasure;
for if we do, we shall dye the second, the eternal death. Simple Politicians
be they that consider not, how all the keys to convey life and death hang on
his finger: Will we not tremble to hear treason? For its death. And shall we
then crucify again the Author of our salvation; and rend his flesh in our
teeth, and tongues, like the veil of the Temple, from the top to the bottom?
take heed of this: for he that lights our Candle, can easily put it out.

And this shall suffice to have spoken of the Penman of this Epistle, for the
present: now in the next Verse, is the person mentioned; to whom Paul in
particular directed his Writings.

VERSE. 2. To Timotheus my beloved son: grace, mercy, peace, from God the
Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord.
IN these words are two things contained: a description, The Logical
resolution.
and a salutation in the form of a prayer: the person, to whom Paul sent this
Epistle, is described: 1. By his name, Timotheus: 2. By a word of relation,
son: 3. By an adiunct, beloved. In the salutation (being laid down
prayer-wise) observe, what he wishes, and from whom: the matter what, is. 1.
Grace. 2. Mercy. 3. Peace: the persons from whom, be, 1. God. 2. Jesus Christ:
and both are amplified by a word of relation: God, the Father; Christ, our Lord.

To Timothy:] This word imports, as much, as the honor The Theological
exposition.
of God, or precious to God: his Father was a Grecian: and his Mother a
Iewesse, who believed in God. Acts 16. 2. What he was in name he was in nature;
he honored God, was precious to God.

My beloved son:] Son is a word of relation, and does always presuppose a
father, who gave him his being: and it is diversely taken. 1. For persons. Psalm.
79. 11. 2. for lambs, branches, bullets, arrows, sparks, or almost any other
thing, the which proceeds from a cause. Genes. 49. 22. Psalm. 79. 11. and 80.
16. and 89. 23. and 1^4. 4. and 147. 8. Job. 5. 7.

Now the reasons, why Paul calls him son, may be these* 1. Because he had
either begot him, or at the least, confirmed him by the Gospel. 2. Because he
loved him as a son; and he Paul like a Father. 3. In that he was young, and
Paul old. 4. And in regard, he was so like minded to the Apostle: (from the
first reason (I take it) came the name of Godfather, because they had begotten
them to God.) And he adds Beloved, to distinguish him from others: for he was
beloved of God; of the good people, and of Paul also, in a special manner.

Grace, mercy, and peace.] To omit to speak of all the acceptations of grace,
let us know, that it is took, chiefly two ways. 1. For Gods free favor: 2.
For the gifts flowing from the same: the first, (though I exclude not the
latter) is here meant.

Mercy:] To omit, how many ways it is accepted* by Mercy here is meant, a
loving inclination of God to his people, being in misery: or for an effect of
his grace: or the effects of that loving inclination: mercy seems to proceed
from grace, and all other blessings whatsoever: for by the grace of God, each
one may truly say: I am, that I am.

Peace:] It also in Scripture has a large extent, but ordinarily is received
for outward rest and quiet: and inward tranquillity of the mind: this latter is
to be received; though the other not absolutely to be rejected. And what if we
should understand grace, as it is in God? Mercy, as manifested to miserable
man? And peace, as the effect, which proceeds from both? Yet how ever it be,
this is most safe to hold, that Paul wished Timotheus all good, spiritual,
corporal; temporal, eternal; without him, and within him.

From God the Father:] In these words, the Apostle manifests to us, from
whom, and in what order, grace, mercy, and peace is derived to us.

By God, is meant, the first person in the Trinity: and he is called the
Father, because as from the fountain, all things proceed from him: for by an
unutterable, yet natural generation, he begat the Son from all eternity:
He is also a Father by Creation, Adoption, Preservation. Again, the word
Father, is attributed to the whole Deity, in general, and the distinct
persons in particular. Isa. 9. 6. Ier. 23. 6.

And Jesus Christ our Lord:] We have once heard, for all, what Jesus and Christ
signifies: yet here is another title annexed to our Messiah; Lord, in the
Hebrew tongue, is a supporter, stay, or base. In Greek, it signifies one that
has authority over a thing, or person, being a word of relation.

It is a truth that I have writ diverse times unto Churches The Metaphrase.
in general, and public and private persons in particular; wished them all
blessings, that might make either for their comfort, and peace, here on earth:
or the perfection of glory in the kingdom of heaven: But now I have Penned
this Epistle principally, for thy benefit, who art my beloved son; and that,
not without reason have I writ unto thee, or do thus style thee: for thou art
a man that have been trained up in the holy Scripture, of a child: well
reported of, by many of the faithful; one of great hopes in the Church; being
a Minister of the Word, and none more than thy self like-minaed unto me. And
why then should I for bear to direct an Epistle unto thee; or entitle thee my
son? For have not I also confirmed thee, by instruction? Loved thee, with
entire affection? Am not I thine ancient in years? And we like father and
child aim at one end, make the same scope, of all our proceedings? And I do
further unfeignedly wish thee; whatsoever may make for thy good in this, or
glory, in the world to come from the first fountain of all grace, and spring
of all true peace; God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord.

To Timothy:] Whereas Paul in this place, writes to Doctrines deduced.
Timotheus, a young man, well reported of, and of great hopes, we observe, that,

Such persons as are likely to prove good and excellent instruments Doct. 1.
in the Church, are principally, to be instructed, and encouraged.

We will water that plant most, hedge about it, and prune it, which is
likeliest to bring forth much and good Exodus 2. 2. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9
fruit: the beast of best hopes, shall be put in the best pasture; the other
turned to run in the common field, and barrenest ground.

And why not? for such will, if God give good success Reas. 1.
to a man's indevours, prove instruments most profitable: and are not those
principally to be respected, instructed?

Besides, Satan will labor to make them of his kingdom, Reas. 2.
above all others: he will pick the finest wits to do wickedly: hence it is,
for the most part, that our Jesuits be such deepe-headed, sound-witted persons;
not many comparable to them.

This reproues the carelessenesse of many in our days; Use 1.
who altogether neglect this duty: have we not some, that rather, set the best
wits, to the meanest, basest, or no calling at all? certainly the Papist shall
rise up in judgment, against these: for they are more careful to practice
this, for Antichrist, and his, then we for Christ, and his kingdom.

Let us all, chiefly parents, put this point in practice, and imitate Paul and
David herein: consider who is likeliest to Use 2.
do good, the best service one day; and labor that they may be sanctified:
season them with instruction; learn them the holy Scriptures of children; that
is to do well and wisely.

Let it be further noted, where Paul calls him son, who was not his son by
natural propagation; but rather in that he had begot him to, or confirmed him
in the doctrine of the Gospel, that,

As there is a natural, so there is a spiritual generation, and kindred in the
world. Doct. 2.


Some be of the flesh: others borne of the spirit: Mat. 12. vlt. Romans 9. 3. Io:
3. 6.

For be there not spiritual and carnal fathers in the world? Reas. 1.
Ezekiel. 16. 20. 1. Cor. 4. 15.

But Christ forbids to call any man on the earth Father. Object.


Resol.
Christ condemns overruling fathers, such as were some masters, James. 3. 1.
Again, we cannot have two contrary fathers, that command contrary things. 3.
Christ would have them principally to esteem God to be their Father: in
conclusion, he would have such called Fathers, as beget sons to God: not like
the Pharisees and Papists, who beget children in Babylon, and spiritual
whoredom, and offer them to Molech: their sons are the feed of Satan,
murderers and liars from the beginning.

Also do we not read of spiritual seed? John 3. 9? of Reas. 2.
a spiritual conception, Gal: 4. 19. why then there must needs be a spiritual
kindred in the world.

This reproues the gross ignorance of many in our Use 1.
days, who never take knowledge of this truth, yet they are well enough
acquainted with their kindred in the flesh. But it meets especially, with
those blacke-mouthed persons, who can scoff, and fleere, and say, there goes a
brother or sister in the Lord: Is not this to make a mock of the truth of God?
to kick against the prick? and to incur the just judgment of God? does not
the holy Ghost call them holy Brethren? sons of the most High? O times! O
manners! H^b. 3. 1.

Here we are taught to discern betwixt men that differ: Use 2.
to seek out our spiritual kindred, and to make much of such: every profane
person, will be acquainted with their lewd consorts, and damnable crew. But
especially let us examine, and prove our selves, whether we be borne again:
otherwise it had been good, we had never been borne at all: and by these
notes, try thy self.

First, Have thou conceived aright in the womb of thy understanding? what
judgment have thou to see into the mysteries of salvation? Secondly, do
thou bear Christ in thy heart, by unfeigned affection? can thou say, I love
the Lord, above all things in earth or heaven? Thirdly, art thou troubled to
bring him forth, and travellest of him in thy will? is this spiritual delivery
thy chiefest care? Fourthly, and do thou manifest to the world, that thou
have brought forth this babe in thy life, and conversation, by doing of
justice, loving of mercy, humbling thy self, and walking Mich. 6. 8.
with thy God? why then thou need not to fear; but that thou art of the
free-womans seed, and princely line of the most High.

But if those things be not to be found in thee, and to proceed from thee;
thou art the child of wrath, and thy present condition is fearful: for if
Christ be not conceived in the understanding, framed and borne in the heart,
travailed of in the will, and brought forth in the form of a well-mended life;
thou art but Satan's slave, and not the Lords adopted son.

My beloved son:] Observe also out of these words, that: Preachers are to
affect those especially, whom they have begot Doct. 3.
or confirmed in the faith.

They are to pity all, pray for all, none excepted: but, such as are their
spiritual children, are to have the chiefest seat in their affection: hence
does Paul write so largely, to the Corinthians, so long a letter to the
Galathians: and Peter a first and second Epistle to the converted Jews.

For such be the seal of their ministry: 2. Such will the Reas. 1.
most re-affect them: 3. Such have the very image of God 2.
imprinted on them: and lastly, does not every cause naturally 3.
cleave unto its proper and peculiar effect? in a word, 4.
such are their joy, their crown, or should be.

Let this check them, who say, they have spiritual issue, Use 1.
and cannot endure them, care not for them, are ashamed of them: whom should
they affect? countenance? or rejoice in? if in any of their flock, much more
in those, that are of the household of faith.

This must direct Preachers to have an ^ye, how the Use 2.
word works; who are called, or edified; that they may know, how to put a
difference, betwixt them of their flock: whom to encourage, respect, and
embrace in a peculiar manner: for one of these, is worth a thousand of the
other, if a minister make these sorry, who shall make him glad? and if he
disaffect them, who are to be beloved of him?

Grace, mercy and peace:] Here is to be noted, the salutation, in form of a
prayer, and the order in it: from the words in general, we collect this
Doctrine, that,

Salutations are not for complement, but piety. Doct. 4.


They are to be used in a religious manner, and not cursorilie: and they be of
two kinds: first, with a kiss, Romans 16. 16. secondly, or by word, and that,
either spoken, The Lord be with you: Ruth: 2. 4. or written, the salutation of
me Paul, 2 These. 3. 7.
with mine own hand.

For be they not testimonies of our love, and affection? Reas: 1.
do we not thereby declare the disposition of our mind? yea the very Heathen
to this end have used them.

And again, are they not in form of a prayer? do we Reas. 2.
not wish well to our friends, in the use of them? and may not the Lord add a
blessing to our friends, in the right performance of them? who dares deny it?

Two sorts of persons by this point are reproved: First, Use 1.
such as never use them: Secondly, those that only take them up for complement
or villainy; as the great, (that I say not graceless) gallants of our times:
or like Judas, that in pretense of friendship, make it a cover to do
mischief. Mat. 26. 48.

But let us put this in practice, according to the example, Use 2
and pattern of our Apostle, and say with the Angel to Gedeon: the Lord is
with thee, thou valiant man. Judge. 6. 12.

But may we salute all men? Quest. Ans.


There is a twofold limitation: the one in regard of time, the other of
person: for time, we may omit them in matters that require expedition. 2 King.
4. 29. When we be in have. Luke 10. 4. For person, if there come any to us,
that brings not the doctrine of Christ, We may not bid him, God speed. 2 Ioh.
10. Romans 16. 17.

What if we do not know them, may we then salute Quest.
them?

Yes; and if they be not worthy, the blessing shall return Ans.
to our selves. Mat. 10. 13.

Make we then, more conscience of this duty: for assuredly if it be used, in
an holy and reverend manner; if we have an eye to the Lord, and speak
affectionately from our hearts; and wish a blessing to those we salute, the
Lord will grant our desires, for the good of us, that salute; and of them, that
be saluted, as experience does manifestly declare: and thus come we to the
matter of the salutation.

Grace, mercy, peace.] Grace, being placed first in order, we gather thence:
that,

The grace of God, above all things, is to be wished for. Doct. 5.


Hence it is, that the Apostles, usually begin and conclude their Epistles,
with wishing of them, grace, and mercy: and all good Ministers, their Sermons
in the same manner.

For he that is assured of Gods favor, may then think Reas. 1.
upon all his attributes; as his omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotence, yea,
of his justice, with comfort.

Then may we conclude, that all things shall work together Reas. 2.
for our good. Romans 8. 28. For if grace be within us, who, or what can be
against us?

This condemns the custom of many, who seldom, Use 1.
(if ever) wish and desire the grace of God, for themselves and others: yet, of
all things, it is the most excellent, necessary. For what are goods without
grace, but fuel to burn up thy soul? What would a stately building, a fair
possession, Herds of Cattle, or heaps of gold and silver profit thee or
thine; and in the mean time, want the free favor of God? He that has much
for many years, but is not rich in God, shall dye a fool. Luke 1^. 12.

Above all things, then, let us seek the grace, and favor Use 2. Psalm. 4.
of God. Pray we, with the Prophet, Lord, lift up thy countenance upon me: for
the gain thereof is better than gold: and all that thou can desire, is not
to be compared unto it: grace gives life, pacifies the heart, conquers the
world, quenches the darts of the devil: of weak, it makes strong, drives
away despair, cheareth the mind, provokes to all good; it brings
comfortable tidings; and is never proud, or weary of well-doing. What shall I
more say? It iustifies, saves, raises the dead; and carries the soul and
body into the presence of God, and the spirits of just and perfect men.
Wherein differs man from beasts, or man from man, yea Angel from Angel, but
in the quality of grace? For grace is the very essential form of a creature.
And that thou may partake of it, do as follows. How grace may be got.


First, Hear the Word, search the Scriptures, read good 1.
Books, receive the Sacraments, pray, confer: for these be as so many
Conduits, whereby the Creator conveyeth grace, into the soul of the creature.

Secondly, avoyde pride, for God gives grace to the humble, 2.
sends the rich, in their own conceit, empty away: full vessels cannot
receive this precious liquor. Iam. 4. 6.

Thirdly, the spirit must not be quenched, despighted, grieved, 3.
nor resisted: good motions are to be entertained, cherished: so, like a little
spark, they will increase to a great flame, Heb. 10. 28. Isaiah. 30. 21.

Finally, get into the covenant of grace: for as the Mercyseat 4.
was no larger than the Arc; so the grace of God, extends no further than the
covenant. Exodus 25. 10. 17. To neglect these helps, is to sin, that grace
may abound: or at the least, to turn the good means of grace into
wantonness. Iud. 4.

Mercy:] Hence collect we: that,

As grace, so mercy, is a special thing, to be desired. Doct. 6.


Understand by mercy, a sensible apprehension of Gods sacred affection: or a
loving inclination, flowing from his free grace, and favor; than which, what
more desirable?

For, by mercy, we are allured to perform every good duty, Reas. 1.
toward God, and toward man: For he, who has tasted of mercy, will love God,
believe in him; and mourn, that he has offended him; and be merciful to
others, as God has been merciful to him.

And is it not mercy, that frees from all misery? Never was 2.
man miserable, who had it, blessed without it.

Hence may we check the great carelessness, and worldly Use 1.
mindedness of many, who wish, and seek for any thing soever, than the mercy
of God: Some desire pleasure* others profit, the most preferment, and the face
of man: but not one of a thousand, in the first place, the mercy of God.

But, beloved, let us be of another mind: strive we to have Use 2.
this liquor shed abroad in our hearts; to have a sensible feeling of his
tender mercy, and sacred affection: so shall we eat our bread with gladness,
and drink our drink with a cheerful heart; be merciful, as our heavenly
Father is merciful to us, unto our kindred and acquaintance: the want of this
causes deadnes of affection; doubting in the promise; and rebellious
disobedience, both to God and man: for, wicked men, are always merciless men;
because that none can exhibitie that to another, the which he has not first
received himself; for as mercy is derived unto us, we accordingly derive it,
to our brethren: and now, we proceeede to speak of Peace.

Peace:] Hence we also observe: that,

As grace, and mercy; so peace, is a principal thing, to be sought Doct. 7.
for.

Take peace in what sense you please, and it will be worth the having: Peace
every where is commended, and commanded.

1. For the peace of God, it passes all understanding. 2. Peace Reas. 1.
with man, is no small favor; this made the face of Esau to Jacob, look like
an Angel. 3. In the days of Peace, we may go out, build houses, plant
vineyards, thrive and prosper. 4. How soundly may we sleep, awake with joy,
and run into the Sanctuary, when this double garment, of external and
internal peace do cover our beds: and round about, beset, and guard our
persons? None know the worth of it, but such as sometime have wanted it, and
been at war with God, and the creatures.

Away then with the courses of some, who would be counted Use 1.
Christians, that think not of it, care not for it: but of far greater blame
are they worthy, that seek to set enmity, between God and man; neighbor,
and neighbor. Do these seek after peace? Do they wish it? Or rather do
they not shut it out of place, and person, and set open the gates of war, and
strife, at all times, every where? These desire to swim, and fish in troubled
waters; and of their father the devil are they; for his work, they delight to
do.

But let all the sons of peace, pray for it, entertain it, and Use 2.
make it, their only companion. Its of great worth, every way profitable. What
creature covets not peace? Ioyeth not in it? And shall not the reasonable,
desire it, strive for it? To live, and not to have peace with man, is
uncomfortable: but to be at war, with thy Conscience, is most miserable: its
better not to be, than not to have rest, and peace. Why could not David build
the Lords house: Why? He wanted outward peace: Why was Cain so netled in soul?
Why? He had not inward peace: Why are so many millions miserable? Why? They are
not at peace, with God: and does not experience tell us, that times of trouble
hinder Traffic? Let us all then, cry with the Prophet, for our Jerusalem;
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Psalm. 122. 7.
palaces: Seek to the God of peace, for all kinds of peace. Salute we our
friends, as Paul did his; Grace, mercy, and peace be with you: Say we to the
house, wherein we set a foot, Peace be unto thee: and if it be not worthy,
thou shall not lose thy labor; for it shall return to thy self. And thus
much of this Point.

From the order of these words, somewhat may, further, be observed: as that,

Men without grace, have no true, or sound peace. Doct. 8.


They have a sound of fear in their ears, quake at the shaking of a leaf,
tremble at the least terrible tidings, and like the raging Sea, cast up mire
and mudde. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Levit. 27. 36. Isa.
57. vlt.

Let the cause be removed, and the effect will cease: where fire is wanting,
heat will not be had: and though some seem to be ever at peace; yet they are
never at peace.

For they are fallen, from the Creator God; and its union Reas. 1.
with the Creator, which gives rest to the creature: if the foundation be not
firm, the building will reele and totter. 2. And have they faith? No; How then
should such purchase and procure peace? For only justification by faith,
(since the fall of man,) bringes sound and settled peace. 3. And as they want
faith, so they have no hope whereon to lean, that their souls may find
peace. 4. Add to all this, a guilty and naughty Conscience, and how should
they partake, and be possessed of true-inward peace? Genesis 4. 14.

Dream not then, that all is peace, that seems so: for what Use 1.
peace can a profane person have within him, that wants faith and grace?
Nay, how ever he carry the matter, he is at war within himself. The wounded
Dear, runs, and skips, and leapes; yet the Arrow or Bullet stinges, pains,
torments at the very heart, and before long will cause a fall, a death. So
under a cheerful look, the soul may be sorrowful: and all that laugh in the
face, are not at peace within.

Who then is he, that would have true and sound peace? Use 2.
Let him strive, for mercy, and grace: for as the shadow the body, heat the
fire, these follow the one the other. Many imagine they have it, yet are foully
deluded, deceived. I deny not, but the wicked may have a peace; but its not
worth the naming, for it runs not from a clear fountain: it springs not
from a sweet root: and therefore one drop of this we have in hand, is worth a
thousand of that; as a little rosewater, a whole glasse-full of mudde. 2. It is
not constant neither, but often interrupted: every thunder clap will cause such
to quake, to tremble: and at the last, they shall certainly be consumed. O that
men were wise, to gather grace; so should they have peace at their latter end;
and in the mean while be like Mount Sion, immovable! Grant that such may
have outward troubles, yet they shall have inward peace, that passes all
understanding. And now we proceed to another Point.

Where, Paul in all his former Epistles, names but grace and peace; and
writing to Timotheus, whom he loved so dearly, adds mercy in his
Salutation, we note: that,

The degree of affection, cannot be covered. Doct. 9.


As the truth, so the measure of love will show it self; and and not in words
only, but likewise in action. Do we not see this in Jacob toward Rachel?
Joseph to Benjamin? Jonathan to David? And the people to Jonathan? Genesis 33. 2.
and 43. vlt. 1 Samuel 20. 2. etc.

For the disposition of the heart over-ruleth the outward Reas. 1.
members, and like a strong stream moves all the wheels according to its
motion. 2. As he that loves would declare 2.
the truth of it; so would he its degree: for by the first, he is re-beloved;
but by the second, in a greater manner: the manifestation of affection, breeds
affection, as it is apprehended* whether we respect truth or measure.

This argues, that the love of many, as Lot said of Zoar, Use 1.
is but a little one; so weak a spring, can have no deep fountain: so small
branches, no great virtue in the root, and so feeble a flame, no abundance of
fuel: for causes produce effects proportionable to their internal power; do
they not?

Try then, as the truth, so, the measure of thine own, and Use 2.
thy friends affection, by the outward effects: he that loves much, will
declare it, by many prayers, sundry actions: this did Mary to Christ, Christ to
the people. Benjamin must have better attire, a double portion, if Joseph
respect him above his brethren. Shall Jonathan dye? He shall not die, if the
hearts of Saul's subjects cleave unto him. If Jesus love Lazarus, he will weep,
groan in spirit, and cry with a powerful voice, Lazarus come forth: for,
undoubtedly, such as the heat is within, will be the burning without; much
love, much manifestation of it, in words, in action.

Or (it may be) Paul adds mercy, to grace and peace; because that Timotheus
was a Minister: for the like he does to Titus, and omits it in all other his
salutations, to the Churches, and people in general; to teach us: that,

Ministers, of all men, stand in need of mercy. Doct. 10.


And that not only, in respect of themselves, but in regard of their place,
and calling. To whom was this command chiefly exhibited; Be merciful, as your
heavenly Father, is merciful, but to the men of God? Or why did Elisha pray,
Let thy spirit be doubled upon me, but to confirm the truth of this Doctrine?
2 King. 2. 9. Luke 6. 36.

For they are in Gods room, resemble his Majesty; and Reas. 1.
therefore have the more need of mercy, in abundance.

Again; they are daily exercised, about men, in the greatest Reas. 2.
depth of misery; and therefore store of mercy is necessary for such: where
much is to be used, much is required.

This doctrines use is scarce dreamed of; or if it be, but little Use 1.
practiced. Who, that is a Preacher, from the forenamed grounds, seeks to be
rich in mercy! Alas, we consider not, how we resemble God; What misery the
most are in; and hence it follows, that Ministers many times are the most
mercilessemen.

This must teach Preachers a lesson worth the learning; Use 2.
namely, to exceed all men in grace, and mercy, as Saul did the common people
by the head and shoulders: for do they not resemble God? Are they not the
Wells, where miserable sinners are to fill their empty souls with the water
of mercy? Does not each Ambassador strive to resemble his Lord, who sends him?
If the Preachers pit be dry, how can we expect any in the common ditch? Are not
the Priests lips to preserve knowledge? And shall their hearts be empty of the
spirit? These have rather need of a double portion. I have heard of a fire
kindled in a town, that took hold of every house, and passed by the
Preachers: I would not have it so, in regard of the spirit: for how ever the
former, was accounted a mercy, sure I am, this latter is an heavy judgment;
for all men should run, as the poor to the great men's houses, to kindle
their turffe, at the Preachers Altar. Where others strive for double honor,
double maintenance: labor thou for double holiness, double mercy: thus to do,
is to do wisely, and but thy duty neither.

From God the Father:] In this phrase, two things concerning Doct. 11.
God may be observed: first, that,

He is a Father.

God may be styled a Father; either essentially, or personally. Do ye so reward
him, O ye foolish people and unwise, is he not your Father? This may be
understood essentially: Deuteronomy. 32. 6. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 31.
knows that I lie not; here it is to be accepted personally. Again, he is
either a Father in general, or in special: in general, as he is the Creator,
and conserver of all creatures: hence he is called the Father of spirits. Heb.
12. 9. Of Angels. Job. 1. 16. Of men; have we not all one Father? Mala. 2. 10.
And in special, he is a Father; and that of Christ, or of the faithful: 1. Of
Christ, as he is the Word, and begot from all eternity: the Lord possessed me
in the beginning of his way, before his works of old: I was set up from
everlasting or ever the earth was: Pro. 8. 22. 23. 2. Of Christ by personal
union: Thou art my son, I, to day, begot thee. Psalm. 2. 7. Acts 13. 33. And
of the faithful, he is likewise a Father, in special: 1. By regeneration: Of
h^s own good will be gate he us, by the Word of truth: I am. 1. 18. Or, 2. By
adoption: Now are we the sons of God, and have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Father, Father. Romans 8. 15. 1 Ioh. 3. 2.

And have the faithful God for their Father in a peculiar Use 1.
manner? Then, in the first place, we may take knowledge of their dignity.
David could say, Think ye, that it is a small 1 Samuel 18. 22.
thing, to be son in-Law to a King? Was that such a privilege? Then what is
this? O that the faithful knew their own worth* Let the faithless fume,
chafe, and swell, till they burst; yet one of these is worth a thousand of
them: the world is not worthy of such: for is not the righteous better than his
neighbor? How read thou? Pro. 12. 26.

Let the faithful learn hence, to know the God of their Use 2. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9
Fathers, and to serve him, with a perfect heart, and a willing mind: will not
a son honor his Father? Must we respect the person of man? And shall not we
regard the glory of God, who is our Father? How if we neglect him? Can we be
excused? Does not he expect it? Deserve it? And is it not our duty to do it?
Give we him then his deserved titles, make we mention, of his many mercies:
secke we his glory, learn we his will, and do it: for, not every one that
cries, Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of the Mat. 7. 2^.
Father which is in heaven, shall be blessed. As he is our Father in special;
so let us honor him in a singular manner: the rule of creation requires it,
much more of re-creation, and adoption.

Again; Art thou a faithful person? Then look up to Use 3.
God thy Father; expect a worthy portion, at his hands. Can they that are
evil, give to their children, good things; Luke 11. 13.
and shall not your heavenly Father, give to you, the things, whereof ye have
need? Be not then in doubt, but believe: cry not, What shall I eat? drink? or
wherewith shall I be Mat. 6. 32.
clothed? For he knows whereof thou have need; and will relieve thee: Fathers
lay up for their children, not children 2 Cor. 12. 14.
for their Fathers, do they not? What shall I more say, but as Ioab to Amnon?
Why art thou so sad? And why is thy 2 Samuel 13. 4. etc.
countenance cast down? Art thou not the Kings son? Ask what thou will, and
he shall give it thee.

The profane of our times may hence learn, to take heed, Use 4.
how they wrong the faithful. God is wise in heart, and mighty in power; Who
ever waxed fierce against them, and has Job. 9. 4.
prospered: for their sakes, He has destroyed great Kings, and mighty; Sehon
King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Psalm. 136. 19. 20. Exodus 14. 25.
Bas^an: He can pluck off thy Charet-wheeles; strike thee in the hinder parts
cause thy heart to fail thee for fear, and in a moment, fetch thy soul from
thee: better were it for thee to have a Millstone hanged about thy neck, and
thou to be cast into the bottom of the Sea, than to offend the least of these
faithful ones: they are dear in his sight, tender to him, as the apple of his
eye. Can a Father put up the unjust wrongs of his loving children? The husband
of his chaste, and dutiful wife? In no wise; then take he^d to thy self: for
if thou fight against the faithful; thou do injury to Gods sons; and his
dearest Spouse, who one day will, in wrath, take vengeance on thee; and grind
thee to powder.

From God the Father:] Having handled the title of God, we come to speak of
the second thing appropriated to him, the which is: that,

All spiritual lessings flow from God the Father. Doct. 12.


Every good gift, and every perfect giving is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights. Iam. 1. 17. Whence had the Apostles and Prophets
that heavenly treasure, wherewith, they were enriched, if not from God? Silver
has his Job. 28. 2.
vein, Gold his mine Iron is taken out of the earth, and Brass is molt^n out
of the Stone: but grace, mercy, and peace are not to be found in the land of
the living: nature says, it is not to be found in me; wealth and honor cries,
nor in me.

Came it from nature; then should all men partake of it, Reas: 1.
none excepted: for she communicates to all her offspring the like gifts;
though not in degree and measure.

Neither is it purchased by pence, or follows the flux of Reas. ^.
royal dignities: for then should Kings, Nobles, rich and great men, be the
only subjects of it; who in truth, very rarely possess it. See 1. Cor. 1. 26.

I will not insist here to confute the Romanists, but leave Use 1.
them to stand or fall, to their own Master: but first, learn we hence, whom
to praise for grace, and mercy, and every good gift, that we enjoy; say not,
mine own hand has procured me this treasure; least thou be found a liar
against God: for what have thou, that thou have not received? One 1 Cor. 4. 7.
cause, why we are so proud, and ungrateful, is, want of consideration: how
that, what we are, by the free favor of God, we are that which we are. Good
Jacob ascribes his two bands to proceed from the mercy of God: Read his
confession, Genesis 33. 11.

And secondly, this may direct us, whither to run for Use 2.
grace, and mercy, and peace: go not to man, or Angel, but to the Lord: else
may thou return, like the foolish Virgins, with thy vessels empty: Take the
counsel David gave his son Solomon, on his deathbed: Know God; for, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. 12.
greatness, and power, and riches, and honor (I add) and all things are in
his hands: And now we proceed.

And Christ Jesus our Lord:] Out of this phrase, we observe: first, that,

Christ Jesus is a Lord. Doct. 13 (...)


Jehovah said unto my Lord; Sit at my right hand: and ye call me Lord and
Master, and ye do well, for so ^em. Psalm. 1 10. 1. Ioh. 13. 3.

And he is Lord, two ways; either as he is Elohim, God; or Emanuel, God, with
us. As he is God: 1. By creation, for he is the beginning of every creature;
all things were made by him; and without him, was not made any thing, that was
made. Ioh. 1. 3. And secondly, by providence: The Father works hither to, and
I work. Ioh. 5. 17. As God with us, he is Lord also: 1. By purchase, for he
Word became flesh: so that by a communication of properties we are said to be
purchased, by the blood of God: Act. 2^. ^^. 2. By marriage; He is the
bridegroom, the head, and husband Ioh. 3. 29. Ephesians. 5. 23.
of his Church: and therefore Lord over it: 3. By dignity, he is our elder
brother, and in ancient time such governed, and had a double portion. Deuteronomy. 17.
15. and 21. 17. 4. By donation; for God the Father, has put all things into
his hand, and given him all power, in heaven and in Mat. 28 18. Ephesians. 1. 22.
earth.

And is Christ Jesus thus many ways, our Lord? 1. We Use 1.
must know him; for what madness greater, than to be ignorant, and not
acquainted with our Master? Who can with any comfort serve an unknown Lord?
Certainly, they that know not Christ, are Satan's slaves, and none of his
servants.

Also we must learn his will; and what he requires at Use 2.
our hands; for otherwise, we cannot do it: such servants cannot please him.
Many stand on their good, and honest meaning: but without knowledge, the mind
is not good. Prove. 19. 2.

And when we understand it and him, we must endeavor Use 3. 2 Pet. 2. 20.
to do his commands; for it were better not to have known his will; the^ after
we have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment given unto us, of our
Lord; such shall be beaten with many stripes: God shall come in flaming fire,
to render vengeance, on all them, that know him not, and obey not the Gospel
of Christ: 2. These. 1. 8.

Finally, We are to depend on him, for food, for wages, Use 4.
for raiment convenient; and in all dangers, to flee unto him, for succor,
both in life, and death: and we may do thus, with hope and boldness, when we
know him, and his will; seek his glory, make his enemies ours; obeying all his
commands* for we are never made strait in him; but first we are made strait in
our own bowels.

And we nay hence gather also: that,

All Chrisians are fellow servants. Doct. 14.


Paul and Timotheus; Prince and people; men and women; Jew and Gentile. Deuteronomy.
17. 20. Acts, 10. 35. Gal. 3. 28.

1. For has not one God created them? Mala. 1. 10. Reas: 1.
2. Are they not purchased by the same price? 1 Cor. 6. 20. 3. Have they not
all one and the same command? Ex. 20. 3. 4. Is not the promise made alike to
them all? Gala. 3. vlt.
We must not then severely censure one another; for who Use 1.
art thou that condemnest another man's servant? he stands, or falls to his
own Master. James his exhortation is here to take place; Be not many Masters:
that is, many censuring, and commanding Masters: I^m. 3. 1.

Neither may we have one another in too great estimation, Use 2.
giving that worship to the servant, which is due to the Master: what says the
Angel to John? See thou do it not; for am not I thy fellow servants? Rev. 22.
9.

Care must be had, that we make not unjust laws, to bind Use 3.
the Consciences of our brethren; this were Pharisaicall, and not to be obeyed,
if pressed: servants must not Lord it: but know, that they have a Master in
heaven, with whom there is no respect of persons. Mat. 23. 4. Ephesians. 6. 9.

In one word, there must be no iarres and contentions amongst Use 4. Luke 2. 14.
us: its our Masters charge, Live in peace: if an house be divided, it cannot
stand: and if we devour one another, we shall be devoured. Wherefore, be of
one tongue, and of one heart: live in peace, and the God of peace, shall be
with you. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

Out of the word, Our, might many points be deduced: as that,

1. Christ Jesus has a plurality of servants. Doct. 15. Doct. 16. Doct. 17.
Doct. 18.
2. True faith applies the promise in particular. 3. Christ is a Lord,
indifferently, to all the faithful. 4. We are to acknowledge the privileges
of our fellow servants.
In conclusion, as this sentence depends on the former words, we collect, that:

No grace, mercy, or peace, can be had from God the Father, Doct. 19.
but in and through Christ Jesus.

The Father is the fountain, Christ, the spring: and the reason is, because
God is just, and none but Christ can satisfy him. He it is, that must roll
away the stone from the Wels mouth* (...) Adam dammed it up: He and none but
he, can open the sealed fountain.

This discovers the misery of Turk, Jew, and all who know not, or deny the
Lord Jesus: and we must learn hence, ^o^seeke and sue to God in his name, and
none other. Acts 4. 12* And ^^therto of this second Verse: Now follows the
third.

VERSE. 3. I think God* whom I serve from mine elders, with pure Conscience,
that without c^asing, I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day^
THIS Verse, and the two following, depend The Logical resolution.
one upon another* and though they be not a plain exhortation, yet they
closely contain in them* the seeds of such a duty: as may easily be conceived.

In this we may consider a three fold Confession.

The first is, that the Apostle gave thanks; which duty is amplified by the
Object of it, God.

The second, that he also served this God: and that,

1. For time; from his elders.

2. Again for the manner; with pure Conscience.

Thirdly, he acknowledges, that he prayed; wherein,

1. He remembered Timotheus: 2. Without ceasing. 3. And that, night and day: by
this Paul declares to Timothy his affection, and desire he has of his welfare.

I thank God*] Somereade, I have thanks for God* but The Theological
exposition.
that may not be admitted: for Paul did it, and deferred not this action. In
these words are three things: 1. The action, thankesgiving* 2. The person, I:
and 3. To whom thanks were (...) The Lord.

Whom I serve from m^re elders, with pure Conscience:] The Apostle adds these
words, because he was accounted by the Jews to be an Apostata, and a revolter
from the truth, and a dissembling person.

By elders, is meant, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Some read progenitors,
ancestors, fathers, as though he spoke of his natural Parents.

With pure Conscience:] That is, unfeignedly, sincerely, and without hypocrisy.

That without ^^asing:] These words have a double reading; as if which Paul
prayed, he also pray sed God for Tim^thie; or thus, I than^^ God, that I do
pray for d^ee, etc. Without ceasing, is constantly, ordinarily.

I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers:] Prayer is manifold; mental,
vocal, conceived, read: in verse, in prose: public, private, simple,
compound, and the like. It is likely, these were private, not public prayers:
for Paul would avoyde all ostentation, and just cause of exception: also at
this time he was a prisoner.

Remembrance:] Remembrance has in it, four things: apprehension reposition,
retention, and production; a notion, or thing is* by the external or internal
sense presented to the eye of reason; she perceiue^ it, that is apprehension;
then it is committed unto memory, as a place of conservation; that is
reposition; afterward kept ^here in safe^ie; that is retention* and lastly, when
occasion^s given its called ou^ again; and that is production. A man takes a
sha^t in his A Simile.
hand, puts it in his ^^ver, retains it there for a t^^e and when he would
recreate himself, pu^s it forth again; this is a plain Embl^me of
Remembrance.

Night and day:] Lailah in Hebrew is for night; and it signifies rest,
quietness, stillness; because men were to take their ^ase, and sleep in that
time; which is from the Sunne-setting unto the Sunne-rising.

Day:] In Hebrew* jom; of the stir* tumu^^, and business, that is in it; the
time, from the Sunrising to its-setting, is called day: or from Sunne-setting
to its-setting, in the same horizon: whence a day is distributed into natural,
or artificial: day is taken for hight; and night, for darkness; and are
applied to our spiritual estate. 1 Cor. 3. 13. Ephesians. 5. 13. 1 These. 5. 5.

I would not have thee, my son Timothy, once to imagine, The Metaphrase.
but that, what I write unto thee, is out of love: for I unfeignedly give
thanks to God, whom, (whatsoever others may report, and believe of me) I have
served in truth, and integrity; and not declined, or done any thing of malice,
or set purpose, since I had understanding; yea, from my progenitors, and
elders, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of the believing Jews. And be
thou assured, that as I pray night and day; so in my requests to God, I, in a
peculiar and special manner, remember to make mention of thee, and thine
affairs always in the Lord.

I thank God:] Note hence: that, Doct. 1.


A good man exercises himself in thankesgiving.

He does not only crave future, but returns praise for former favors: hence
it is, that David, Deborah, Moses, and many more have penned Psalms of this
subject. Exodus 15. Psalm. 106. Judge. 5. Rev. 19. 1. 2. and Psalm. 96. per totum.

For they know themselves to be unworthy of the least Reas. 1.
benefit; and receive all things without desert of their own. I am lesser than
all thy mercies, and all thy truth. Genesis 32. 10.

And its a good thing to praise the Lord; no duty more Reas. 2.
acceptable to him; for therein we acknowledge every good and perfect gift to
come from him, and so glorify his name. Psalm. 91. 1. Iam. 1. 17.

Also its the best time spent, that is spent in this duty: for Reas. 3.
therein we resemble the Saints, and Angels in heaven; who continually say,
Glory be to God, and praise to the Lamb, that sits on the throne for
evermore: and hence it follows, that the more grateful, the more gracious is
the person. Rev. 19.

Moreover, is it not a mean to receive more and greater Reas. 4.
favors? What lost the Leper in returning back to Christ? Or the blind man in
acknowledging his kindness? And who will not be liberal to a grateful
person? Ioh. 9. Luke 17.

Thankfulness, is a voluntary retribution of one good thing Thankfulness
defined.
for another.

First, I say it is a retribution; what shall I render, or retribute to the
Lord? Psalm. 116. 12. for first, it always presupposes a benefit received:
secondly, or else it were a giving, rather then a thanksgiving.

Secondly, And it must be voluntary, not coacted: it must be a free
will-offering: Ezra 2. 68. first for the giver and receiver (in this) are to be
like minded: freely ye have Mat. 10. 8.
received, freely give: again God respects the affection of the action, more
then the thing given; for a wicked man may do the one, but not the other; he
loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9. 7.

Thirdly, The matter or thing rendered must be good: first, we may not render
evil for evil, much less, evil, for good: secondly, again, justice
requires it; and the very law of nature, to do as we would be done unto. Who
is he that would be content to receive evil for good? or what proportion is
there betwixt them? are they not the greatest opposites?

Fourthly, The last thing in this definition is, that we must render good
things for good things; for though we may do good for evil, yet we must not
give thanks for evil: first, for it is naught in it own nature: secondly,
and that were folly in us; and might move the author of it, either to scoff
at us, or harden him in a course of evil doing.

But it may be objected, that Gods children have given Object.
thanks for afflictions, and they are evil.

True, they have done so; yet not simply for afflictions; Resol.
but first, as they be tokens of Gods love: for if we were without
corrections, whereof all are partakers, then were we bastards and not sons:
Heb. 12. 8. Secondly, the Lord will cause them to work for the good of his;
and in that they are to thank him for them: else not, Romans 8. 28. Psalm. 119.
21.

Observe further, that good things are either exhibited or promised; so that we
are to praise God, for his promises, as for performances: first, for they are
good things: secondly, they shall all be accomplished in a convenient season;
and this duty have the Saints also practiced: Luk: 1. 46. Tim: 4: 8.

Thankfulness is either conceived, or manifested: conceived Thankfulness
distributed.
in will, and resolution: manifested in word or deed. The first kind is hid
from man, yet known to God, and is the cause of the other that follows, and
(in some sense) the least degree of thankfulness: for what is in the heart,
will (upon just occasion) break forth into speech; yea, (if there be ability)
into action also: as in erecting of schools, hospitals; building of churches,
colleges; maintaining of ministers; receiving of the poor, and the like.

Again, thankfulness is either sincere or hypocritical, what one does in
truth; another may in appearance: as we read of the Pharisee, who stopped into
the Temple with a Lord, I thank thee: etc. Luke 18. 11.

This checkes the current of our times, which is always Use 1.
craving; but never restoring: many pray, yet do not pay; For what are
thanks, but pence* God sels his favor for? we have not only nine, but nintie
times nine, who never Luke 17. 17.
return praise for their cleansing: many, (and its good) entreat others to
pray for them; yet, (which were better) never find time, to desire men to give
thanks for them.

How many favors have we received? how many precious promises are unto us
exhibited, whereof we take no knowledge? Is not this the sign of an
ungrateful mind? I had almost said, of a graceless heart?

But to leave such* let us study, and practice this duty; Use 2.
and say with that good man; What shall we render to the Lord Psalm. 116. 12.
Psalm. 148. 1. etc.
for all his benefits? He would call upon all creatures to praise him in their
kind. No surer sign of sound grace than to be frequent in this action:
doubtless, a grateful heart has set times to praise God, as to pray unto
him; they think no hours better spent, than in thus doing: O, how will such
rejoice, when they find their hearts enlarged, and their lips opened to praise
God? Such a day to them, is of more worth than a thousand others: but because
to do this, is no easy matter; remove we the impediments, that hinder; use
the helps that further this action; and they be such as these following.

1. When as we think, that our own hands have procured Impediments of
thankfulness.
us our abundance. Is not this Babell, which I built, by the might of my power?
When as except the Lord build the house, man labors in vain: When men do not
know, that all comes from God, they will sacrifice to their own nets. Deuteronomy. 8.
17. Dan. 4. 30. Psalm. 127. 1. Hab. 1. 16.

2. A second is, vnmindfulnesse of Gods mercies: he that forgets a kindness
done, it is all one for the present, as if he never received any: whence
springs these speeches; truly, I had thanked you, but it was out of my mind;
I had quite forgot; I pray you pardon me.

3. A third, is discontent; when this rules in the heart, no thanks is to be
had; a contented mind, is always a thankful mind. Whence it comes to
pass, that proud men, covetous men, or ambitious men are ungrateful men. The
bird will not prune and sing, till she have took a stand, that gives her full
content. When we can say with Jacob, Genesis 33. 11.
We have all things; then we will give thanks for all things.

4. And not to mention any more, ignorance of our misery, (were we deprived of
present favors) is a great block in the way: what were a man, if he were
stripped of his clothes? and turned without food, but a day or two into the
fields? Should we but lodge one night in Egypt, England would be a good
Country: were we in such a famine, as was in Samaria, that the Mother must
famish, or eat the fruit of her 2 King. 6. 28.
own womb; then food would be worth thankesgiving. But we have lost our taste,
(and that's the reason we cry, give me my will as Rachell did sons, or else we
die?) being still Genesis 30. 1.
petitioning, never repaying. We are like the earth, that receives many bodies;
but without a miracle wrought, will not yield up one: so must God pull thanks
by violence out of our hearts, if he will have any. Helps to true
thankfulness.

To consider that the Lord has chosen thee, whereas he 1.
has rejected thousands before the world was: and to what? to inherit a
Kingdom. David though no small thing, to be sonne-in-law to a King* 1 Samuel 18.
23.

Secondly, take knowledge of the Lords dealing with thee, 2.
in giving thee a being of nothing; and that in a comely manner: are all
creatures men and women? Have all at their birth, that be, eyes to see, tongues
to speak, etc? Why wast thou not borne dumb, or blind?

Thirdly, Look back, and see, what the Lord has done for 3.
thee since thy birth: how comes it to pass, that thou art now alive? Why was
not thy body long ago turned into small dust? Art thou not made of the same
mould? Do thou not feed on the same food? and breath in the same air? The
consideration of these things, like a loadstone, should move us to lift up our
hearts to God.

Fourthly, Think of thy present condition; have thou food 4.
and raiment in abundance? Why do others want it: who feeds thee with this
Mannah, that so many of thy brethren never tasted of? Who brought thee into
these large pastures, and causes thy cup to flow over? But let me come nearer
thee Psalm. 23. 5.
yet; art thou in the liberty of Gods sons? Have thou the saving graces
peculiar to the Lords chosen? Has the spirit sealed thee a Quittance, for the
pardon of all thy sins? and assured thee of salvation? Why? Is this the lot
of all the seed of Adam? Does every man enjoy the like portion? And are these
common favors? Wast thou ever wounded in spirit? Then who healed, and helped
thee? Did sin ever press thee to the pit of hell? How, or by what means wast
thou eased? Beloved, I have but given you a taste of the unsearchable, and
invaluable gifts, the Lord has imparted upon you: wherefore take words of
thankfulness to your Hosea. 14. 2.
selves, and say with the Prophet; My soul praise the Lord; Psalm. 103. 1.
and all that is within me, magnify his holy name: yea let this always be thy
vow; I will praise the Lord while I live; for he has done wonderful things
for my soul: but if all this will not move us, to be more mindful of, and
careful to discharge this duty; I can say no more save this: I pray God, that
the time may not come, when want shall cause thee to promise any thing, and yet
the Lord in mercy will give thee nothing.

Whom I serve from mine elders, with pure Conscience:] These words are inserted
by the Apostle, to maintain his dignity, against the scandal of such as
reputed him to be an Apostata, and fallen from his profession; whence arises
this Doctrine: that,

Carnal friends, will become foes, if a man embrace the Gospel. Doct. 2.


He that in sincerity will set himself to serve God, shall have his former
friends, to be his greatest enemies: so long as Paul was a proud Pharisee, his
brethren and acquaintance highly esteemed him: but after he became an Apostle,
they reputed him a plaguey fellow; one not worthy to live: thus Act^. 22. 22.
did the Papists deal with Luther: so true is the speech of Christ; That a
man's enemies, shall be they of his own house. Luke 12. 53. Acts. ^3. 14. and
26. 5. etc.

For in so doing, he condemns his former courses, and Reas. 1.
consequently them that profess them; this is to give testimony that their
estate is miserable, and that cannot of wicked men be endured. Ioh. 7. 7. This
has made the Papists cry out, What are all our forefathers damned? because we
tread not in their footsteps of error, ignorance.

Because then, they will cast off their society, and take part Reas. 2.
with the pious; and that stirs and works strangely, when men will not
run with them to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4.
or be in league, as in times past.

Learn then, you that have embraced the Gospel, not to Use* 1.
^^a^vaile, if carnal friends be now your greatest adversaries; for so it has
been, and will continue in future ages; for you are not of the world,
therefore the world hates you: as she lulleth her own in her lap: so she
casts out them the Lord receives.

Let such also as resolve to be truly religious, and to cast Use 2.
off their former courses, and companions, prepare to undergo many taunts, and
injuries; he that fears the tongues of such, shall never be a resolute
Christian soldier: whilst the bird is in the egg, the Kite cares not for
her; but, if once she be disclosed, grow fledged, and fly abroad, beware of
devouring.

And where Paul maintains his own cause; from his example, we may learn:
that,

The truth of our profession, is to be maintained against all opposition. Doct.
3.


Did not Elijah this against Ahab, and his four hundred false Prophets? This
did the Apostles in many places: and Christ himself, when as was given just
occasion: see 1 King. 18. 18. Act. 5. 29. Mark. 2. 10. Gal. 1. 8. 2 Pet. 3. 2.
3, 4. etc.

Why? Its the best thing we have; and what of greater Reas. 1.
worth in all the world? Its our bread, and meat, life, and living.

And so doing, we approve of the truth of our profession, Reas. 2.
and the uprightness of our hearts; yea, it may be of force, either to
convert, or abate the rigor of our carping adversaries. Acts. 16. 39.

Let this condemn the timorousness, and imbecillitie of Use 1.
the most in our days, who have no hearts to maintain what they profess.
What would such do, if it came to fire and faggot, that are dumb in these
days, at the truths opposition? Fie, fie; Never was this duty less regarded.
I wonder, for whom, or for what, men keep their resolution? Is not this worthy
of it?

Take we then knowledge of this: and let purse, speech, Use 2.
and person defend the truth in all contrary opposition. Buy the truth; and
through covetousness or fearfulness, sell it not: for this is to set thy
soul to sale to thine enemy, Satan; for he that loses the one, cannot soue
the other: Let not the devils old scandals skare thee: who more opposed than
the best, from the beginning? was Christ free? would thou then?

These words are also a commendation to the Apostle* and uttered to maintain
his reputation and dignity: whence it may be observed: that,

Its an honor for man to be the servant of God. Doct. 4.


What matter of more moment? Work of greater worth? or thing equal to it?
Moses, the Lords servant, is a title great and good enough; these are the
servants of the most high God, was no small commendation: Mala. 4. 4. Acts. 16.
17.

For what is God? Is he not the first cause of all things? Reas. 1.
And supreme governor of the world? The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? And
is it no honor, immediately to attend upon him? Is it a small honor to be next
to our Sovereign? What then shall it be, to be so unto God?

He that serves God, may better his estate in so doing; Reas. 2.
yea were he an Angel: therefore it is no base, but an honorable thing.

His actions shall be guided by the golden Rule, and silver Reas. 3.
Precept of his Word; and such as the one is, the other is to be accounted; for
if the Rule be excellent, the thing ruled by it is so too, of necessity.

And it is honor in this: for all the creatures shall be their Reas. 4.
attendants, and subject to them. Satan shall not dare in his livery, like a
Serieant to arrest them; and the good Angels Psalm. ^1. 11.
shall preserve them; and pitch their tents about them, till they take
possession of heaven.

Away then, with that to be abhorred Proverb; What Use 1.
profit in serving the Almighty? What honor in an holy life? Let men think
what they will; holiness to God, is an honor unto man: and never was man
dishonored, who in sincerity served this Master.

Here let the Lords servants, though poor and base in other Use 2.
respects, yet rejoice in this, that they serve the Lord. For this is to be of
the true line, Princely blood, and noblest family. He that can truly say, I
serve God, gives himself the greatest title of dignity.

This should move all men, poor especially, to become Use 3.
the Lords servants: for this is, the only way to honor, and all promotion. O,
that men did think so, then fewer words would win them from the world, to
attend on this never to be praysed-enough Master.

And this point should move Parents, to make their sons Use 4.
the Lords servants: We esteem it a wonderful honor, (and so it is indeed)
if we have a child, that attends on his Prince, and returns to his
Country, being clothed in silk and satin, and having one of the Kings rich
coats upon his back; what should we then esteem it, to have a son clothed
with the righteousness of Christ? and enriched with all the saving graces of
the spirit? Angels attending on him, and a Kingdom prepared for him? Is this
nothing? Then labor for it, for your selves; for your children.

I serve.] Out of the word serve: I observe; that,

A Christians course is not idle, but laborious. Doct. 5.


Service is laborious; a religious course is service; therefore laborious. Name
what you will in religion, and it requires labor, diligence. Are we not
commanded to enquire, seek, knock, work, and create? It is as it were a new
creation. Ier. 6. 16. Mat. 6. 33. and 7. 7. Phil. 2. 12.

Because its a difficult thing to get faith, keep faith, or to Reas. 1.
live by faith: faith comes not by nature; it grows not in every man's heart;
neither is it (as some judge) so easily to be had; he that will have it, must
have a broken heart, rent by the Law: for as a man does not plant Trees on
rockie mountains; no more does the Lord sow this seed in stony and hard
hearts: he that will possess it, must attend diligently Pro. 8. 34.
at the posts of Gods house: for it comes first, and is begot by hearing of
the Word Preached; and then prayer Romans 10. 17.
and the Sacraments will conserve it, increase it. Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief: and, Lord increase our faith. But its Mark. 9. 24. Luke 17. 5.
a pretty piece of service, to live by faith, when all reason fails us; then
to cast our selves upon the Lord, and to depend upon his bare promise (as I may
say) is a work of wonderful difficulty: have not the best of Gods servants
Psalm. 7^. 2.
staggered, and almost fainted in this piece of service? Some cry, tush, I
never doubted; I will never be moved: Well, to such I say nothing; for though
they brag, they believe every thing; yet, I know, that if I should tell them
their estates, they will not believe that one thing.

And as it is a hard task to get faith, keep faith, and live Reas. 2.
by faith: so it is no less labor to get a sound knowledge of the Precepts,
to keep it, and practice it. Paul knew the Law of God, but what a stir had
he to obey it? And if we must cry and call for knowledge, seek and search for
her, Prove. 2. 4.
as for silver oar in the earth bowels; will it be a matter of less moment to
put it in practice? No, no. The understanding, like a needle, will pierce
through, and into the Precept, when the will, like a knottie, and ill-twisted
thread, comes churlishly after. Its hard to find out a narrow and untrodden
path; but more difficult to walk in it; and not either to be weary or wander:
the Uses follow.

And seeing a religious course is not idle, but laborious; Use 1.
what shall we say of such as take no pains at all, in service of that nature?
How few know their Master, or his will? And then how can such serve him? Who
inquireth and cries after the understanding of the rules of this great Art; by
which this work of religion is to be squared? Have we not more shuffling of
cards, than searching the Scriptures? Playing, than praying? Feasting, than
religious fasting? Running after goods, but fleeing from all grace and
goodness? Some will not set a foot within the Lords vineyard, gather one grape
of sound knowledge, or an ear of understanding: if they do, this is their
service, We have been at service And if they kneel down, lift up their
hands, and stay till the worship of God be ended; though their minds wander,
their hearts be at home, and they return never the wiser, (I ween the worser:)
yet, they doubt not, but God on their part is well served; and for his part
very well pleased. Why should not these men be thus deluded, who know they do
little, if any thing in Gods service, and yet hope to be rewarded?

And is to serve God, laborious? We must then be of Use 2.
good courage, gather strength, and quit us like men; he that has an hard
task, will proportion his power according to the toil. The longer the ground
has lien fallow, the stronger must be the Teame to tear it in sunder; and the
farther we take a journey, the more pence must we put in our purse: so the
more difficult this duty is, the more must we look about us, arm our selves,
and be prepared for the well performance of it.

And for the better discharge thereof, we must labor for What is required in
the service of God.
two things; the one is Knowledge, the other, Strength: for, these are
absolutely necessary, for the doing of any action; the one to direct us; the
other to enable us, in this duty. The object of this knowledge is double: 1.
God: 2. His will. These must be rightly understood. For, 1. If we know not God,
we cannot love him* 2. or trust in him. 3. Fear him: 4. humble our selves
before him; all which are needful, for that man, that would make God his
Master. We must love him, or else we cannot serve him; for love sets a man on
working, as in the example of Jacob; yea love (says the Apostle) constreines 2
Cor. 5. 14.
us: but if we know not God, we cannot love him; the affections work
according as the eye of Reason presents her Objects.

And, How can we believe in him, of whom we have not heard? Romans 10. 14.
Faith cannot be without knowledge; therefore, knowledge is often put for the
same. Who will serve a Master himself, Ioh 17. 3.
or bind his son apprentice to such a person, whose ability or fidelity he
is ignorant of? Again, if we fear not God; we will not serve him; and if we
know him not, we will not fear him. Have not some mis-tooke a Piece for a
Pipe, and so have been murdered in stead of mirth? So, men not knowing the
Lord, have played so much with his mercy, that they have been destroyed by
his justice.

And Humility also, must be had, or man cannot serve God, for God gives grace
to the humble: but without understanding Iam. 4. 6. Note.
of him, no throwing of our selves down before him; for man is of an haughty
spirit, loath to stoop; and besides, until he know God, he knows nothing
above himself; therefore will never be humbled.

And a general knowledge will not serve; but we must know him truly and
certainly.

Some may object, that God only knows himself; Object.
dwelling in that light which none can attain unto. 1. Tim. 6. 16.

What for that? Can we know nothing of him? Yes, we Ans. How GOD may be known
of us.
may (with Moses) see his back-partes; his sufficiency, and efficiencie. His
sufficiency is that whereby he is able to do all things; and it consists
in his essence, and subsistence. His essence is that absolute first being, and
independent of any other thing whatsoever. And from this, it does follow, that,
He is not compounded of any matter, and form; but, is one most pure and mere
act. Now because as he is act we cannot understand him, especially with one
act (for our understanding is finite,) (he invisible, and infinite,) therefore
he takes to himself, and makes himself known unto us, by many attributes;
which attributes be nothing else, but that one and mere act, diversely
apprehended; as, What he is, Who he is: He is a spirit invisible, immortal,
infinite, omnipotent, omniscient, and the like.

And, we must be able to understand the subsistences; which are nothing else,
but, that one most pure essence, with his relative properties. The subsistences
are the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. The relative property of
the Father is to beget; therefore he is the first in order. The Sons relative
property is, to be begotten, and not to beget; and he is the second person in
order, because he is from the Father alone. The holy Ghost is the person
proceeding from the Father and the Son; and therefore the third person in
order; so that we must understand, that God is one essence in three persons:
thus much for his sufficiency.

And, for his efficiencie, what is that? But, that whereby he works all
things, and all in all things; either in respect of creation, or providence.
Act. 17. 28. Romans 11. vlt. This may suffice to have spoken for the knowledge of
God.

The second thing that we ought to know, is, What the Lord requires of us; for
how can we do it, if we do not know it? Or suppose, we should do what he
wills, yet what comfort can we have in this service, or action? If a servant
shall plow, sow, and harrow a plot of ground, without his Masters will and
direction; what content could he have in working? What hope of reward, after he
had finished his labor? Would not fear rather possess him, seeing the ground
might have been as profitable for pasture? When we know our Masters will, we
may with boldness and cheerfulness go about it.

And this his will is contained in the Law, and the Gospel; What the Law
requires.
and is there to be found out with searching. The Law requires two things: 1.
That we have no corruption inherent in our person: 2. That we transgress not
or divert from it, in our conversation; this is the justice and command, the
Law lays on us, and exacts at our hands. The Gospel also binds What the
Gospel requires.
us to our task: 1. That we have Faith: 2. That we believe in God, through
Christ, for justification: 3. That we cleanse our selves from the filthiness of
the flesh and spirit: 4. And lastly, that we live without spot, and blameless,
keeping our hearts upright with God; our outward actions honest before, and
with man; for, the Gospel wills no less inward or outward holiness, than the
Law does. For the Gospel and Christ, Mat. 5. 17.
came to establish the Law; that is, to assure us it is still of force, and to
give us ability another way to keep it.

Again, as we have heard, that we must have knowledge of God and his will,
before we can serve him; so in the next place, we must have ability, or we
cannot do his will. A sick or weak man may know his Masters pleasure, but
cannot do it; for strength with health must enable him. So, we know many
things, but what of that, if we want power to perform them? And we must get
power: 1. To believe: Wherein Power is exercised.
2. To obey.

Again, We are to know, that faith is exercised about a double Object, God and
his Word: And in his Word; the promise and the threate. We are to give credit,
that all the threats of God are true, and shall be accomplished in us in
particular, if we break the condition; as well as believe all the promises,
and appropriate them to our selves, who are made in Christ Jesus. And in both
these the best man fails for want of ability to believe them. Our faith may
be said to be a kind of obedience, not in getting, but principally in living by
it. And as Judgment is used in Invention, being a distinct part of the Art of
Logic; yet Invention does precede Judgment in nature: so obedience is used in
faith; and faith in obedience, though faith may seem to go before it; for, He
that comes to God, must believe that he is; and (then) a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: Heb. 11. 16. So that by power to believe (I mean) that
God is, that his Word is truth, both in the threatenings and promises; and shall
be accomplished accordingly, as we keep the conditions. And by obedience, I
do understand, a conscionable care to believe threat and promise, as well as to
obey the precept; for, to believe is to obey; and to live by faith may be
called the obedience of the Gospel. 2 These. 1. 8.

Many have some care in somethings to obey the Precept, but never regard to
live by faith: and if they can say, they believe in Christ Jesus, then, they
think, all is sure, and their duty discharged; as though a man must never use
his hand, but in holding fruit in it, and not in applying it to the mouth:
assuredly, faith has a work in every action, that we perform; and that not
only in assuring us the thing is lawful we do; but in persuading the Lord
will perform his promise to us, when we have kept the covenant with him.

And understand this, that if we could believe more, we should obey more; for
all life* motion, and spiritual action comes from faith; as all natural acts
are said to proceed from the form.

If then these things were looked into, who dares de^ie; that a Christians
course is leborious, painful, and requires great diligence on their parts,
that will serve the Lord? For, knowledge of God and of his will must be had;
and faith and obedience too in him, and his word, both in the threats and
promises, as well as in the Precepts; else no good servants.

From mine elders:] It may here be demanded, if Paul served God, with a pure
Conscience before his Conversion? I think it may be understood of both; for so
far forth as the Letter of the Law directed, he was obedient, living after
Acts. 26. 4. 5.
the most strict sect of a Pharisee; and what he did against the 2 Timothy 1. 13.
Saints, was through, ignorance; wherefore, the Lord had the rather mercy on
him: but it is principally meant after his Conversion. For, the Pharisees, of
which number he himself was, understood the Law, according to the Letter,
neither could he away with the Gospel, till the Lord in a wonderful manner
had compassion ( Acts 9.) on him.

The Doctrine, that we gather hence, understanding by Elders, the ancient
Patriarchs, and believing Jews, is, that: The Church before Christ had the
same faith, which now it has Doct. 6.
after his coming.

Did they not all eat the same spiritual meat? And all drink of the same
spiritual drink? For, they drank of that rock which followed them; and that
rock was Christ. It differed nothing in truth, but in degree; as a child, and
an aged person. 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4.

Else God should be changeable; but there is no variablenes, Reas: ^.
nor shadow of turning with him. Iam. 1. 17.

And were it not thus, man should be saved after a diverse Reas. 2.
manner, which may not be admitted.

And did not Christ, and his Apostles, confirm their Reas. 3.
doctrine by Moses, and the Prophets?

This confuteth the Maniches, who hold, that an evil Use 1.
God writ the old Testament, and a good the New: but one God was the Author of
them both; and what was darkely included in the former, is more clearly
manifested in the latter.

And this may confirm the salvation of our forefathers, Use 2.
who kept the faith; and to doubt no more of them than of our selves. The
Papists bring in this place, for their Parents; whereunto, we reply: 1. That
they were not believers: 2. They are degenerate and fallen from the ancient
faith: 3. There was a Prophecy of a general Apostasy; and so their Elders
are by the stream of time corrupted: 4. And the antiquity of a few, or 500.
years, is not sufficient.

From mine Elders.] That, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: whence it arises: that,

The name of the righteous shall be had in remembrance. Doct. 7.


What though the names of the wicked rot? Shall not the memory of the just be
blessed? Yes, it shall grow up and flourish from generation to generation.
Prove. 10. 7. Psalm. 112. 6.

For, God will honor them, that honor him. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Reas. 1. Reas. 2.


Also, one good man will perpetuate the name of another unto their succeeding
posterity, and tell it to his children.

Furthermore, such leave noble and worthy Monuments Reas. 3.
behind them, either by doing or suffering; which spread their fame into all
quarters, and future generations.

And, the wicked may have an hand in this action; for Reas. 4.
some of them, may think well of such, and register their names; others as
Pilate (by Gods over-ruling-hand) may write the truth, which shall stand for
ever.

Do they not then labor in vain, who seek to blot out Use 1.
the memorial of the just, with taunts, scoffs, and reproaches, as men do
the engraving upon Tombs with their foul shoes? Let them do their worst,
spet their venom, weaue a deceitful web; yet shall they never effect their
purpose; for, What is written, shall be written, maugre all their malice: the
names of the wicked are written in the earth, each foot shall scatter them: but
for the righteous, they are engraven in stone, with a pen of iron, and for ever
shall flourish.

Here may a man take direction, that will lead him to true Use 2.
honor eternal; do justice, love mercy, walk uprightly, serve in truth of
heart the Lord God of thy Fathers, and thy same shall ever remain; build
Bethel, pull down Babel, and thy name shall be everlasting. Who would have his
name to rot? His memorial perish? Not any; then serve God from thy elders with
a pure Conscience. Many like Nimrod seek a name, but, they in not taking the
right way, lose both it, and themselves. What person so poor, if religious,
but is had in everlasting remembrance? And who so great, if ungodly, but are
either forgot, or their names continued to their everlasting shame? For when
men, by indirect means, seek praise, they lose it: and purchase perpetual
reproach.

With pure Conscience:] Here is laid down the manner, how Paul served God:
whence, the collection is: that,

The service of God is then commendable, when it is accompanied Doct. 8.
with a pure Conscience.

These two like Naomi and Ruth must run together. What taste, without salt, in
the white of an egg? What praise in that service that wants sincerity? And
who ever in merchandising lost so much credit, as Himeneus and Philetus, that
made shipwreck of faith, and a good Conscience? The Hebrews still put heart
for conscience; having no particular word for it; and so does the Evangelist;
so that a pure heart, and a pure conscience, are equivalent terms: Prove. 15.
15. 1 Ioh. 3. 20. Isa. 38. 3. Job. 27. 4. 5. Acts. 24. 16. Heb. 13. 18.

For otherwise the life were led either in close hypocrisy, Reas. 1.
or open profaneness; and can that deserve praise, which has no similitude
with God? Nay, he condemns that which has not some likeness with himself,
whether person or action.

And will not a pure Conscience adorn our profession? Reas. 2.
Give a comely gloss to our conversation? Red, Purple, and Scarlet, add not
more gloss to a piece of fine cloth, than this purity does to the life of a
Christian.

It will silence our enemies, rejoice our friends, gain good report Reas. 3.
of all persons: and what a commendation was this to Christ, when the Prince of
this world came, and found no impuritie in him? Ioh. 14. 30.

Lastly, A life attended with this companion, will yield Reas. 4.
comfort in distress, afford boldness in danger, give hope in death, plead
for its own at the last day, prevail, and conduct him safe into the heaven of
heavens.

Now, because a good Conscience is little known, less regarded, we will first
declare what it is in general; secondly set down the kinds of it; thirdly,
show its office or inseparable companions; and finally make application: yet,
by the way, we will deduce some Corrolaries, the which may seem to flow from
the fountain of each distinct definition.

Conscience is a seeing of an act with the Rule.

In this definition are two things: first, the genus of it, Conscience defined.
which I call a seeing: secondly, the form, in these words, of an act with the
rule. Neither let any quarrel with the word seeing: 1. For what is the eye
without the act of the soul, but a dead insensible organt? 2. Grant it to be a
Metaphor, or Tropicall speech; yet is not Rhetoric a general Art, and may be
every where?

And it is a seeing of an act with the rule: For as conscience is a seeing, so
is it a seeing of a double Object at one instant time. The very Etymology of
the word both Greek and Latin, signifies so much. Here note, that there must
be first science of a rule, secondly of an act done; the which two being
applied, and the eye of the understanding beholding them together make up the
full form of Conscience: for if either of these be wanting or separated, it
cannot properly be called Conscience. For science is of one simple object,
Conscience of two laid together, and then with one act of the intellect
apprehended jointly; whence (likely) it borrows the name Conscience, which is
as much as a joint knowledge, or seeing together of the rule and the act. And
from this definition it will follow.

That Conscience is not (as some hold) a faculty of the I. Corrolaries deduced.
soul, but rather (as the Schoolmen defend) an act of the understandings
faculty: the which may be further confirmed by these reasons. 1. Every
faculty is created; Conscience is not created, therefore no faculty. Were it
created, then should Adam have a good or bad conscience before he had done
either good or evil, which may not be admitted. True it is, that Adam was
endued with science; so that if he had applied the frame of his person, to the
rule by which he was first formed, in that it may be said, he had a good
Conscience: for there was an equal proportion betwixt them: but until he had
performed some act, it cannot be affirmed of him, that he had any conscience at
all: yet science he had; for, he clearly understood the Rule, being written in
his heart at the Creation, by which his actions were to be guided. 2. No
faculty does quit or condemn; Conscience does qui^ or condemn, therefore no
faculty. We never read that God does accuse or excuse a man or Angel for the
mere having of a faculty; but for the abusing or well-vsing of it. If by
faculty they understand (by a Metonimie) the cause for the effect (as it
seems to me they do,) then we are all of one and the same mind.

Also, we gather this second consequence, that unreasonable II.
creatures, as birds and beasts, fowls and fishes, have no conscience; because
they have no rule given of God to guide their actions; neither (if they had)
any act of reason to apprehend it; although a kind of knowledge may be
attributed to them.

And here we may learn, that taking conscience in a large III.
acception, it may be found in any Art, as well as in Divinity: for each Art
has its Precepts, and may have his Praxis; Whence it will follow, that as
there is science, so also there may be conscience. When a Boy writes after a
Coppie, and takes a view of his work, how it answers the pattern, this is a
kind of conscience.

Finally, we conclude hence, that in lusorie Lots, there can IIII.
be no conscience; and the reason is, because there is no rule to guide the
act; now, no science of the rule, no conscience. This should teach men to use
them upon extraordinary occasions, or not at all; and then the example of the
godly may be their warrant. For, how can a man justify an act, that has not a
rule to guide it? or how can there be conscience, where science precedes not?
For, Simples in order precede Compounds, as is obvious in Logic, the act of
reason, as also in the work of Creation.

Hitherto, we have spoken of Conscience in general, which is nothing else but
a seeing together, or more plainly a seeing of the act with the rule; and thus
we proceed to its distribution.

Conscience is good or evil. Conscience distributed.


As the definitions, so the distributions of Conscience are many; yet may they
all be reduced to these two heads. For as every Ax^^me or Rule is true or
false: so is each man's conscience good or evil. Some say, there is a
Conscience good, but not quiet; quiet, but not good; good and quiet; and
neither good nor quiet: Yet all these are but two and no more Consciences. For
rest and trouble are not essential, but accidental unto Conscience. A bad
Conscience, as we see in Judas and Saul, may now be troubled, anon quieted:
and this false out from varying the Object of the intellect, or want of the act
and rules application; and so may a good Conscience be attended with the same
companions, as in David and Peter. And this may arise from the late commission
of some sin, the weakness of faith, a jealous suspicion, which men have of
their spiritual estate, or the Lords withdrawing for a time his comfortable
aspect and presence from his children; and yet this Conscience is but one and
the same. Note further, that a wicked man may have knowledge of a true rule,
and act according thereunto; so that the apprehension of his well-doing may
breed peace. But when he casts his eye upon his many swervings from Gods
Precepts (except his Conscience be seared through the Lords just judgment, and
his habitual faylings) he cannot be at rest. In like sort, the best person in
many things ^ransgresseth the Law of his God, in so much that when he
considers his many errors, he is greatly disquieted; so that to speak
truly, and properly, trouble is an effect of an ill Conscience peace of a good
one; and these contrary effects though to be found in one and the same person;
yet do they spring from diverse repugnant principles, and not from the self
same causes.

A good Conscience is a seeing of an act according with the A good Conscience,
What it is.
rule.

And here, we are to observe, that in a good Conscience these particulars are
required: 1. A man must have knowledge of some rule: 2. The rule must be sound,
and infallible: 3. He is to perform an act in every respect answerable to the
truth of the rule: And 4. he must apply the act to the rule, the which being
done, the seeing of their agreement is a good Conscience. Moses made all things
according to the pattern, the which when he beheld, he had a good conscience;
for there was a proportion and correspondency betwixt the frame of his work,
and the pattern GOD gave him.

An evil Conscience is a seeing of an act disaccording with the An evil
Conscience, What it i^.
rule.

Suppose a man to have understanding of a true and perfect rule; yet if his act
should not be answerable, but in some part divert from it, so far as it wants
proportion or similitude to the foresaid rule, so far he has a bad
Conscience, or evil seeing together; and hence will follow the kinds or
degrees of an evil Conscience. 1. For, the more sound knowledge, and the less
sincere obedience, the worse is that Conscience; and from hence might spring
the name of an erroneous Conscience; because the actions swerue from the rule.
2. From obedience, without a certain apprehension of some precedent Precept,
arises the term of a blind Conscience, though properly it cannot be called
Conscience. 3. And from this definition, we see that there may be some good in
a bad Conscience. For knowledge of the rule is good; acts are good; but as they
err from the rule by which they are to be guided, they are evil; and in
regard such Consciences have a threat denounced against them. Yea the sight of
sweruing from the rule may be good; because it may be a means of reformation
in future season.

A good Conscience is Legal or Evangelicall. A good Conscience divided.


The rule, whereby man at his Creation was to be guided, was the Law; the which
had he obeyed, he might have purchased a good Legal Conscience: now since his
Apostasy and fall, the Lord has given him a new Commandem^^ for his
recoverie, being observed* which is the Gospel; and thus you may Kenn^ the
ground of this distribution. As for the law natural, the remnants whereof
remained in the heart of the Gentiles; and the law moral, engraven in Tables
of stone, and given to the Jews, is the same for substance, being but a
distribution from the subjects; yet they differ i^ these particulars. 1. The
one is perfect, the other not; for much of it in time is obliterate, and worn
out of man's heart; whereas that written by Gods own finger is complete. The
one is got by reading, hearing, study, etc. The other comes by generation, and
imprinted in man's mind from the very wombs; and, as Ri^^bilitie, is
inseparable adiunct to him; and this is the true cause, why all men covet a
kind of Religion, and perform some works that are commendable, warrantable.
For matter, therefore, these two are the same, as a remnant with the whole
piece, or some few Pr^c^pts with the whole of that Art.

A Legal good Conscience is a seeing of an act according to the What a Legal
good Conscience is.
rule of the Law.

He who understands any one Precept of the Decalogue, and gives obedience
thereto, may be said to have a Legal good Conscience. This we see affirmed of
the Gentil^s; who walked but according to the small relics of the law, which
remained in their hearts. Romans 2. 14. 15.

A Legal good Conscience* is either Complete, o^ Incomplete. A legal good
Conscience distributed.


This distribution may not be omitted, being of great use. For its one thing to
have a Legal good Conscience, another to have a complete Legal good
Conscience* the which we will define, that so the difference may appear.

A complete Legal good Conscience is a seeing of all acts according A complete
Legal good Conscience defined.
with the rules of the Law.

But Conscience, that, as a Boy the Bird in his hand, we may not lose thee,
while we are talking of thee; we will declare* how many ingredients concur
for thy confection, whether a complete Legal, or Evangelicall: But first for
Legal.

1. Knowledge must here be had as the ringleader. Light was the first good
thing the Lord made at the Creation, and saw to be good; so is Knowledge in
this worthy frame of a good Conscience. Ignorance, like the body of Amasa the
passengers, stops the way of this Work; or as darkness in the beginning did
light in the structure of nature, that it cannot be effected. Blind sir John's
neither have, nor can make others have a pure Conscience; the rule must be
exactly understood, all the particulars thereof distinctly learned, or else men
will have at the best but blind Consciences. For, why is Conscience called
blind, except in this, that people act without knowledge of the rule? This
caused the Prophet so often, so earnestly to pray, Lord open mine eyes, teach
Psalm. 119. 18. etc.
me the way of thy statutes, hide not thy Commandments fromme: Solomon to cry,
Get knowledge, get understanding, forget Prove. 4 5. And 30. 2. 3.
not: Agur to confess, he was more foolish than any man, being ignorant of
holy things; and Paul, the elect vessel and chief Patron of a good
Conscience, to esteem of all things as dross and dung for the excellent
Knowledge of the Law and Phil. 3. 10.
the Gospel. For without this ingredient, Conscience is naught, stark naught.
For, how can a man act according to the rule, that is ignorant of it? And is
not damnation threatened to them who live in blindness? read and see; wherefore
2 These. 1. 8.
if thy science be dark, how dark is thy Conscience?

2. After Knowledge must follow Obedience. These two in a good Conscience
cannot be separated: the first makes science, the second Conscience. For, what
is knowledge of the rule without obedience, but a pattern without a building?
a cipher without a figure, which stands for nothing? Hence Acts. 24. 16.
it is that our Apostle did lay his policy, bend his forces, and exercise
himself to keep a good Conscience, a Conscience without tripping, without
stumbling. Men must learn the Word, and then fall to work according to its
directions, apply the acts and Precepts, ^^ew them ^oth at once with the eye of
reason, and then, as God did all the creatures, they shall see their
Consciences good and very good. All the springs and brooks of our actions,
speeches, resolutions, and cogitations, must run by the bank and channel of
Gods Precepts; neither may we suffer the least riveret of our thoughts to be
dreined another way. We must with proud scorn, neglect the counsels of flesh
and blood, and attend to the commissions of our maker, not daring to be idle,
or to attempt any thing without his warrant, for else as Himeneus, and
Philetus, we shall make shipwreck of faith and a good Conscience. Who has
more science than the Devils? and yet none a worser Conscience. Walk therefore
after this Canon, and thou shall have for thy companion a good Conscience. And
this obedience must have a two fold concomitant: 1. Generality. 2. Constancy.

1. Universal knowledge must be seconded with universal Companions of
obedience. Psalm. 119. 6. Heb. 13. 1^.
obedience; had not David respect to all the Commandments? Did not the Author
to the Hebrews with his fellow-brethren, desire in all things to live
honestly? Or else men should have but half and imperfect Consciences. Does not
every Artist strive to understand all the Precepts in his Art? Put them in
practice, that the frame may be perfect and complete? Not one tittle in the
rule but is of force: each branch must have a place in this building. A good
appetite covets to taste of every dish: a sound sense to smell all kind of
flowers; and to participate of what goodness is in the creatures. We must eat
all this Book, drink every drop of this water, else we shall have but
partial Consciences. We may not separate what God coupleth, be our own
Carvers in this feast; but f^ed fully, liberally. An Herod will do many
things, but he that is anointed of the Lord will perform all; for else he
shall have but a maimed Conscience. Painters will not omit a finger in the
picture* M^sicians a chrochet; nor Grammarians a syllable, a letter, a comma.
So must our obedience to the rule be general, universal. All this Mercy seat
must b^ covered with Gold, no part left unwashed. Think ye on this, who boast
so much of good meanings, honest hearts, and works of supererogation; and then
you may confess with shame, that you come far short of the pattern, and
have but the remnants of a good Conscience.

2. The second concomitant for the making up of this edifice is continuance,
constancy. We must endure always in all things, not be weary in well-doing:
for cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written; and the
threat was, Gal. 3. 10.
at what time thou shall ^ate, in dying thou shall die. Some hold, Genesis 2. 17.
that Adam did no moral act, before he fell; because he must have nothing
toward his debt; all must be discharged by Christ the sureties skore. And
(say they) had he done one good theological act, he had then pleased God
infinitely, and so could he never have been displeased; for Gods complacentia
is himself. Sure I am he never persevered in general obedience; and therefore
wanted a necessary companion of a complete good Conscience. For as we are tied
to know all, obey all the particular rules of this worthy art; so are we to
perpetual obedience. We must be faithful to Rev. 2. 10.
death, or else possess no crow^e of life. We are sure, that perseverance in
all things will ^ake up, and preferue a good Conscience. And when God would
have confirmed Adam, had he obeyed the Law universally, is not to me revealed.

By this Discourse, you may see what a Legal good Conscience requires: to
wit, a distinct and universal knowledge of every branch of the Law. Secondly,
general and constant obedience to all the Precepts. For, he who is ignorant of
the least tittle, or transgresses in one particular, by omitting what the Law
commands, or committing what it prohibiteth, is guilty of all* and so
consequently has not Iam. 2. 10.
a complete Legal good Conscience; because it is, (as you have heard) a feeing
of all our actions according with the rules of the Law; Whence follow these
Conclusions.

1. A double error in the Romanists, who hold that men may have a complete
Legal good Conscience, and consequently, be justified by their own works.
But can any man (since Adams fall) understand the whole Law?. Or if he could,
give general and constant obedience to every Precept? Is there any that
sins not in some thing? May not the best cry with David; Who can understand
his ^rrours* Psalm. 19. 12.
and if thou, Lord* should mark what is done am^sse, were any Psalm. 143. 2.
able to appear in judgment, answer one for a thousand* And if they cannot
thus say, and thus do, (as in truth they cannot) is not their Doctrine false,
and to be rejected? Also, do they not withold the Bible from the common
people? Which, when they do^ so, how can they procure a Legal good Conscience?
For, whatsoever action is not guided by a rule, is evil before God: and have
you not heard, that knowledge ^ust precede obedience? and is absolutely
necessary for the obtaining of a good Conscience?

2. That not any since the fall of Man (Christ excepted) ever had a complete
Legal good Conscience. For, the best know but in part, and their obedience
(for the most) comes 1 Cor. 13. 9.
short of their knowledge. Christ (indeed) understood the whole will of his
Father, fulfilled all righteousness: no corruption Mat. 3. 15.
was in him, nor any sin ever proceeded from him: so that he, and none but he
(except we should include the blessed Angels) ever had a complete Legal good
Conscience; for his person and actions in every respect were proportionable and
correspondent to the whole Law; he failed not in the least tittle.

3. Hence we may clear the Lord from all injustice, in the condemnation of so
many millions of men and women: for, do they know his will? Perfectly obey it?
Have they never erred in judgment? or gone astray in their conversation? If
they have done both, may he not then in his justice condemn them? If any want
this forenamed Conscience, the Lord may in his just judgment inflict eternal
torment upon them. For, have they not lost his Image? Run they not daily on
his skore? Let us then rather admire his mercy, than quarrel with his
justice, that we all were not long agone consumed.

4. Finally, we conclude hence, that the safest and securest way for us, is to
deny our Legal good consciences, and strive to obtain the Evangelicall, that
we may be justified, saved. This is the true and only way, neither have we a
better. For though the law be of power to give life; yet we are ignorant,
weak, and not able to fulfill it; if we were, then Christ dyed in vain Now,
what an Evangelicall good conscience is; we will paint forth, what concurres to
the making up of it; wherein it differs from the Legal; what must be done to
procure it; and how an Evangelicall and Legal are not to be separated in a
Christian.

1. For the first.

An Evangelicall good Conscience is a seeing of an act according An Evangelical
good conscience, what it is.
with the rule of the Gospel.

For the better understanding of this, know, O ye sons of Adam, that God,
when he had created man, gave him a Law written in his heart, the which had he
perfectly obeyed, he should have stood for ever. But he falling from the rule
of gubernation, fell also from conservation, and so became, (with all his
posterity) hable to death; neither is there any ability remaining in him to
recover his former condition. For, knowledge is obliterated, the will weakened,
at the least perverted, and each wheel of soul and body exorbitated, turned
out of his way: only, so much light he has left him (like one of Jobs
messengers,) as to tell him, that his Josse is great, and condition miserable.
But, mark the mercy of God, who has given spoiled man another rule, whereby
he might purchase a good Conscience, procure as great an estate, and much
better; and that is the doctrine of the Gospel.

2. In the second place:

To the making up of an Evangelicall good Conscience, these particulars are
necessary. 1. Knowledge of the Gospel; else why should Paul so highly prize
it? So much covet it? And does not our Savior Christ, place eternal life in
the Ioh. 17. 3.
having of it? 2. Obedience is necessary also; for, the Gospel requires that,
as well as the Law: these two may not be disioyned; so that thus far, a
Legal and an Evangelicall good Conscience accord for, whatsoever is in the
genus, is in the species; though, the species may include more in it, than is
to be found in the genus. Grant we that animal is the genus of man and beast;
yet, man has more in him than animal has, to wit, reason: notwithstanding
animal communicates his whole nature to both the species.

3. In the third place, let us see the differences.

1. The first is in the ground of obedience; for that in Adam, before his
apostasy, proceeded from the image of God, wherein he was created; but in us
under the Gospel, it springs from faith* that these two differ is evident; but
how, is not easily discerned; and who did ever affirm that they were one and
the same? For, does not the former come by Creation, the latter by Regeneration.

2. There is a real difference in regard of the act; for, the Law runs on
this wise, Do and live: the Gospel thus, Believe and live. And though to
believe in the Gospel, be a kind of obedience, because God so commandes; yet
the holy Ghost in the Scripture makes a distinction betwixt them. And
doubtless the head Christ, obeyed the Law after another manner, than we his
members do the Gospel.

3. The third difference is the Object, about which the act is conversant; for,
the Law gives particular Precepts how to direct all our actions. The Gospel
is as a staff, or stay, whereon the act rests and cleaves unto. Hence is
this phrase so frequent in the Gospel, Believe in me: and Ioh. 9. 35. Act. 16.
31.
they that believe in, or on the son of God, etc. So that the Law gives rules
for the acts direction; the Gospel for its supportation.

4. Moreover, a complete Legal good Conscience requires many acts to the
perfecting of it: for, if one commanded be omitted, or the contrary committed,
Conscience is spoiled, shipwrackt. Now, an Evangelicall requires but one only
to the making of it complete. For, one act of believing will unite to Christ;
by which union, man is made partaker of the all-sufficient obedience of Christ,
which is the sole and absolute object matter of an Evangelical good conscience.
For, as one act of Adam brake the whole decalogue; so one act of faith in
Christ will perfectly fulfill it. Where note, that the habit of faith, neither
its act without its object, makes an Evangelicall good conscience, and
consequently iustifies not. For the whole obedience of Christ is it, that
satisfies the justice of the law; the which, when we by faith are conjoined to
him, is made all ours; and so are we quit from the rigor of the law, by the
satisfaction of Christ our furetie, and that by one only act of faith in him,
which is the condition on our parts to be performed, for the purchasing of an
Evangelicall good conscience. Was not the brazen serpent a prototype of Christ?
and would it cure any, without the act of the eye fixed on it? Also, would not
one act of looking on it, heal him that was stung with many serpents, in that
wilderness? so the act of faith separated from Christ cures none, and one act of
credence in him, as he is our surety, will, (though our sins be great and
many,) make us sound, perfect, and help us against all, our maladies.

4. In the fourth place, for the procuring of an Evangelicall conscience, we
must have,

1. Knowledge; and that, both of the Law and Gospel. For, he that understands
not the Laws precepts, and what it requires, can neither see his sin, or be
constrained to run unto the Gospel for relief in the time of need. And
though our Father Adam before his fall; had he observed the rules of the law,
might have procured a, legal good conscience, without any understanding of the
Gospel; yet it is otherwise with us. For, we must see our debt, before we can
have a mind either by our selves or any other, to discharge it; and without
knowledge of the law this will not be effected. And the Gospel must also be
learned of us. For, it is the new covenant, the law of liberty to set us free,
who are in spiritual bondage. And as knowledge of the law was necessary for
Adam, that he might obey and live: so is it of the Gospel, that we might
believe and live. Observe here, that a more exact knowledge, especially of the
three persons in the Godhead; of their relative properties, and peculiar
operations is required of us, since the fall than before it. For, though we
dare not deny to Adam, the certain understanding of the Trinity, yet, in the
perfect knowledge of God simply considered, and of his will, in the obedience
whereof, he might have obtained a legal good conscience. But, now we are to
go a step further for our restoration: because, man being fallen, we are to
conceive, how God the father is primarily offended, how the Son assumed our
nature to make an atonement for us to him; and how the holy Ghost does apply
the redemption purchased by Christ Jesus. For in these and the like particulars
consists the whole subject of the Gospel; and therefore of absolute
necessity, in some degree to be understood, and learned of us. For, this is
eternal life to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ; and no man can
say John 17. 3. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
that Christ is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

The second ingredient for the completion of an Evangelicall good conscience,
is faith; not that poor depraved faith, which may be found in apostata men and
devils, who are said to believe and tremble, but that which vi^ifieth,
justifies, Iam. 2. 19.
purifieth, conquereth and saves. For, the holy image of God wherein man at
the first was created, is not more needful to the acquiring of a legal good
conscience, then this faith we speak of, is necessary for the accomplishing
of an Evangelicall. For what will it profit a man to have knowledge of the law
and Gospel? to be endued with such and so much faith, as to give credit to the
truth of the precepts, promises, threats, and to want that personal, peculiar,
proper faith, whereby Christ is applied in particular with all his benefits? so
that without this spirit of faith, an Evangelicall good conscience cannot be
made complete. And here you may clearly behold, that there is a distinct kind
of faith, as there is of knowledge, but the first without the second auailes
nothing to our purpose. For, of certain, Adam had a faith, which did enable
him to believe the truth of the Law, as also the accomplishment of the promises
and threats upon the observation, or breach of the same: But how these two
differ, to discern is some difficulty. The Romanists affirm, that there is
but one kind of faith in men and devils: and the reason why some are saved,
others perish, is because the one have charity, the other not: But here they
get it mist. For, this faith we have in hand is of another kind, having the
Gospel to work it, and Christ Jesus the chief object of it. Some may then
say, that a good Christian has a double faith. True, yet the former not
accompanied with the latter, is not sufficient. It may further be demanded,
what then becomes of the first, when the second is wrought in us? Answ: What if
we say, it remains? Does that hinder us? May not both stand together? For, as
the knowledge of the Gospel shoulders not out the former knowledge of the Law;
so does not this new faith the old, as I may style it: Grant it should; yet,
of it self, it has force to do what the other can, and more too. Insomuch,
that if we should maintain, that as purer spirits are renewed in the natural
body, the more gross are purged out: so, as this latter is increased, the
former is decreased; there could be no danger.

In the last place, we come to demonstrate, how that a Legal and an
Evangelicall good Conscience are not to be separated in him that shall be
saved. For, he who has the latter, has the former. But observe this, that a
Legal good Conscience is either personal or imputative; and both these
accompany every member of Christ Jesus. For, Christ's obedience to the Law is
wholly imputed to every true believer; so that, he has a Legal imputative
Conscience. When Adam, of whom we were members, brake the rule of the Law, his
disobedience being imputed to us, we had a Legal bad Conscience: so, Christ's
obedience, we being made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, being also
imputed to us, Ephesians, 5. 30.
we may a^ truly be said to have a Legal good Conscience. Whence, observe by
the way, these two Conclusions: First, that, It is the righteousness of the
Law which is the object matter of an Evangelicall good Conscience. Thus I prove
it. The obedience of Christ is the object matter of an Evangelicall good
Conscience; the obedience of Christ is the righteousness of the Law;
therefore, the righteousness of the Law is the object matter of an
Evangelicall good Conscience. The second Conclusion is, That every Believer is
as truly righteous as Christ Jesus. The reason is, in that his obedience is
our obedience, being by faith applied. So that in this sense; we are able to
answer the strict and full justice of the Law. But this we do further affirm,
that he who has an Evangelicall good Conscience, has also a personal Legal
good Conscience, though not perfect and complete. For, the Scripture ordinarily
coupleth them together. See Psalm. 32. 2. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Romans 8. 1. And there be
Reason^ to confirm the Axiom. 1. For does not the Father require it? We must
be holy, as he is holy. 2. Did not Christ recover what Adam lost? Came he not
to establish the Law? Did he not redeem us, that we might serve him in
righteousness and true bolinesse? Shall not the head be imitated of its
members? Shall the fountain be pure, and the strea^es corrupt? The root
sweet, and the branches bitter? 3. And without holiness shall any see the Lord?
4. Is it not the way, or rather an essential part of true happiness? And how
can a man without it try the truth of his sanctification? Show forth the
virtues of him that has called him? Employ well his Talent? Beautify his
profession? Put to silence his enemies? or make his election sure?

But not to entangle any in a snare; though our Evangelicall good Conscience be
perfect; our personal Legal is not. For, inherent holiness being but in
part, our obedience to the ^ules of the Law cannot be absolutely (...) yet as
the one increases, the other is daily better ^^; and in the kingdom of
heaven, when the image of God is wholly restored, then shall the elect fully
and perfectly obey ^^e rules of righteousness, and holiness, as Adam might
have done before his Apostasy. For Christ and (...) and (...) ^^^ good (...)
the Father; every act shall be proportionable to its rule; and is not that to
keep a good Conscience? This may serve to stop the mouths of our barking
adversaries, who cry out, that we Preach a doctrine of liberty, how men may be
saved without good works, when as the contrary is it we defend and practice.
For, faith in Christ is never severed from obedience to the Law, no more than
leuitie and gravity from air and water. And thus we make a Progress to
speak of the office or effects of Conscience, according to our former Method
propounded.

1. There is amongst Divines a great stir of the effects The attendants of
conscience. 1. How it excuses or accuses.
of Conscience; but may I herein show mine opinion, it is thus. Conscience, I
confess, is a cause of accusation, and excusation; but how? Not of it self
alone, as a solitary cause, but by reason of a kind of belief which does
attend it. First I am resolved by some internal principle, that I should do
justice; Next, I have a rule given me to direct me therein. Thirdly, observe
that this rule has a double concomitant; 1. A promise of reward, if I obey it.
2. A threat of revenge, if I transgress it: All this I know and believe. Now,
when I would cast up my spiritual account, and see my present condition, then,
resolves Will, the beginner of this work, to try it on this manner.

She stirs up the memory, and calls to mind all the good and evil, she has
omitted or committed; then she applies all these acts of omission and
commission, to the rule forenamed and remembered; and having done so, the
understanding takes a strict and exact view of their agreement or disagreement.
Now, if there be a just proportion betwixt the acts and the rule, then there is
excusation, the effect of a good Conscience. For, Faith rests on the promise,
for reward from the Lawgiver. But if there be a disagreement, then follows
accusation, the attendant of a bad Conscience. For, belief gives credit to the
threat, and expects a penalty. And thus you see how a good Conscience
excuses, a bad accuses, by reason of faith being interposed. Neither need we
to doubt, but the Gentile, had a kind of faith, the which produced these
effects. Romans 2. 15.

The King of great Britain gives a just law, for the well governing of his
subjects, promising a reward to them that observe it, threatening a penalty to
them that transgress it. I my self, being one of the number, hear,
understand, and believe it. Well; a day is appointed when my obedience must be
tried. The Law is read, and I give ear unto it. If now my actions answer the
Kings command, I am not afraid; my Conscience does excuse me? Why? For, I
believe he will judge me according to my works. But if they disagree from his
Precept, then I fear, and my Conscience does accuse me, because I give credit
that answerable to the threat, I must be rewarded. But, suppose I were ignorant
of my Princes pleasure; or knowing it, did not yet credit it, should I then
have excusation or accusation? Not: and the reason is, in that I want faith to
believe the promise or threat, which are of force to accuse or excuse being
credited. Let us apply it. God the King of all the world, has given man a Law
(writ without him, or within him, that skils not) to govern his actions; he
also has passed his unchangeable Word, that the observers of it shall live,
the transgressors dye: All this I give credit to. Now, when I apply mine
actions to the Law, and they are proportionable to it, then my Conscience
excuses me; for, here is a good seeing together. Notwithstanding all this,
Faith must credit the promise, and threat, for producing of these effects; and
is in truth the first and remote cause, though Conscience be the second and
nearer, of accusation and excusation. When the hand does amiss, we use to say,
can ye not see? Yet it is not the eyes fault: And so in this we do the like,
appropriating that unto Conscience, the which properly and immediately springs
from faith. And tell me, why does the Devil tremble? Is it not from faith? Why
are the profane fearful? Is it not from faith? Why is a good Christian
cheerful? Why? He has kept the pattern, and has faith: and why do we
sometimes doubt, sometimes believe? But from partial obedience, and an
imperfect faith? Yet as we have said; Conscience does accuse and excuse, cause
joy and fear, as the Precepts of Grammar the boys Latin; but not without
faith. And I pray you, would a Scholar care at all, whether his Latin
answered the rule or no, had he not faith to believe the truth of it and his
Masters promise and threat? And thus you see our opinion, let the learned judge.

2. The second effect accompanying a good Conscience, is Joy: joy, I say,
unspeakable, unutterable. David's Harp was nothing to this; yet made full
pleasant Music. A good Conscience will make the heart to leap, the face to
shine, fill the breasts with milk, and the bones with Marrow. Its Prove. 15.
15. Judge. 9. 13.
a great, a continual feast; Irke Wine, it cheareth the spirit of God and man.
Let Saul want it; his kingdom will augment his fear. Naball may make a feast
like a King; Belshazzar carowse in Bowls; but having not this dish; their
thoughts will trouble them, and their hearts, in the midst of all their
mirth, dye within them. This, this, is the ground of all true and solid joy;
the best music will it make, that ever was heard. What caused Job to laugh at
death? Peter to sing in prison? Paul to comfort himself in the angry
Adriaticke Sea? And Stevens face to shine like an Angel, when the stones came
flying about his ears? Any thing but a good Conscience? The gallants of these
days may seem the only merry men; but without this, they are all base,
wretched, miserable.

3. Shall we think, that Conscience goes alone? or with one single attendant
or two? as Jacob to Padan-Aram; Jonathan with his Armor-bearer, or Nehemiah to
view the walls of Jerusalem? No, no, Joy is on its right hand, and contentation
runs with it. Cast a world into the heart of man, he is not satisfied, when
as Paul not having a penny shall rest contented. If thou can but see the face
of a good Conscience, in the closet of thy soul, engraven on the Tables of
thine heart, thou may cry with old Israel, when he saw Joseph his son
alive, I have enough; or with Mephibosheth, when the King returned safe, let
the Zibaes of the world take all. For, Conscience is a rich Treasure, a Cabinet
full of precious Pearls, a costly banquet. I say, that Bread nourishes,
Drink refreshes, but a good Conscience is all in all.

4. Does not Conscience also walk with Hope? and give good evidence for time
to come? Its like a rich Merchant, who keeps Factors in a far Country, and
foreign Land: Does it not send hope to trade and barter in the India of
heaven, from whence she returns with comfortable tidings, and supporteth
Conscience, until all things be had in perfect vision? Were it not for this,
the heart would burst, and good men's spirits fail them for fear. Hope will
still be whispering Conscience in the ear, bid it be of good comfort, and not
faint; for, the time of its visitation is at hand. Truly, a Consciencelesse
man is a hopeless man, and he that wants that, shall perish.

5. Also, Conscience is always armed and attended with courage, boldness. And
is not that worthy the right hand of fellowship? A man of Conscience dares
stand before Princes, plead his own cause, and force Faelix a bribing Judge to
tremble. What made the Prophet to give King Ahab the lie? The Apostle to call
the high Priest, painted wall? And John to tell Herod, he was an Adulterer? But
the force that flows from a good Conscience? He that has a good Conscience,
may quench the fiery darts of Satan, conquer the King of fear, and shake off
all terrible tidings. Keep it, and it will keep thee safe, amidst ten
thousand dangers. Sail thou in this ship and it will land thee in safety,
when, they that want it shall split the bark of their souls upon the rock of
condemnation.

6. Conscience as thou have worthy attendants in this thy Pilgrimage on earth;
so thy reward shall be great in heaven. For, thou shall have thy seat in the
noble house of the soul, till the day of judgment. Peace, shall be thy
portion, which passes all understanding; and afterward thou shall dwell with
Angels, with Christ, with God the Father, where is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore; thou shall never die, never whither; no rust shall eat
thee, nor moth consume thee; thou shall see no sorrow; thou shall hear no
complaint, neither be afraid of the least evil success. Thou shall judge the
quick and the dead; acquit the innocent, condemn the guilty, and do little
less than a petty God; in one word, thou shall do more and have more than
can be told by man or by Angel; all that be good before God shall commend
thee, preserve thee, or rather thou them, for ever and ever. And now in the
last place, let us make application.

Then is not that life base, that is led without it? A miserable Use 1.
service is that, which is begun, continued, and finished without a good
conscience; being accompanied with lying, swearing, dissembling and deceiving;
is it not? they that thus live are worse then beasts, and no creature (the
devil excepted) more wretched. Be thou then assured, that such a life is
odious to God, hateful to his Saints, and an undoubted forerunner of the
second death. He that lays the foundation of his service with ignorance,
infidelity, and disobedience, in the fiery trial, shall be blown up, when
the match of Gods vindicatiue justice shall lay hold on this black powder, how
shall that man be able to stand? We may muzzle the mouth of our conscience,
not suffer it to speak: and deal with it, as an unjust Landlord with his
poor tenant, when he in some just cause is to give evidence against him, put
it to silence by an over ruling command; but when Christ shall come to
judgment, and take part with conscience, then shall it speak freely, boldly,
truly, as ever did faithful witness at the bar, having the chief Judge
for his friend. How will a Judas look at that day, who was so pitifully
dejected before the Pharisees, whom he took for his friends, and expected
comfort from them? How will the Drunkard stagger and reele, (not with wine,
but) with the fume of a bad conscience? What face can the hypocrite hold up,
that has dissembled all his life long? where shall the unjust, the fornicator,
adulterer, liar, with all the wicked and ungodly appear? I am sure of this,
that though such, and a thousand more have blind, erroneous and cauterized
consciences, burned with an hot iron, for the present, yet at that general
assize, being lanced with the sharp edged knife of Gods revenging hand, they
shall all bleed freshly, and to death eternal. This kind of men may look
big, set the best side out, eat, drink, and be merry; but I shall never
believe, that their hearts laugh with their faces. O matchless miscreants of
all mischief, sons of blood, and slaves of perdition; you may sooner
separate your souls from your bodies, then conscience from your souls, or
damnation from either. Go then your ways, laugh and be fat, play and dance,
sing to the Tabret and Harp, put death, judgment, and hell far from you;
tread under foot the blood of the new covenant, crucify again the Lord of
life, make a mock of sin, and shipwreck your own consciences; yet know,
that God one day will call you to account, and dash out your brains with the
heel of his vengeance.

In the next place, seeing this is so, let us in the fear of Use 2.
God get knowledge, and mix our service to God and man with sincerity; walk
according to the rule, do nothing without a precept, have a true pattern for
all our proceedings and run to the Law and to the Testimony of the Gospel;
obey the one and believe the other; so shall we have good and pure consciences;
one whereof, though the world may fume and chafe, is worth more than ten
thousands of gold and silver. What can be of greater price? what should we
prefer above it? O conscience, whereunto shall I compare thee? who, or what
is like unto thee? Is not knowledge good? obedience better? and art not thou of
these two simples compounded? There is no evil in thee; thou art all good and
very good. There are four things Pro. 30. ^9. 30.
comely, stately in their going; a Lion the strongest among beasts, and
tunneth not away from any; a Gray hound; an he* Goa^e; and a King against whom
there is norising up; but he that has a complete good conscience, surmounts
them all. But, conscience, least I should eclipse and obscure thy same, when I
would speak and spread it, I will therefore give thee thy charge, a large
commission.

Conscience, that thou may execute thine office thoroughly, Conscience his
Charge.
speak thou in the language of Canaan, be thou mighty in the Scriptures; and
that thou may not build Babel, and pull down Bethel, let every man have thy
sentence in his mothers tongue. Go to and fro, through the world, pass by no
City, Burrow, Village, Hall, House, nor Cottage; but let them hear thy voice
sounding in their walls, speak truly, plainly, boldly: cry aloud, spare no
man's person, of whatsoever cloth his coat be cut. Be thou a good linguist,
make it known thou art a skillful Artist, and declare an exact Method in thy
proceeding.

And, Conscience, first go thou to all Christian Princes, Kings and Emperors;
speak gently to them, and entreat them to cry to God for wisdom, that they
may wisely go in and out, before the great people committed to their charge;
will them, young and old, to tread in the steps of Hezekiah, Josiah, pull down
the high places, burn the groves with fire, over turn Baals Altars, and cause
all his Priests to fall by the sword. Bid them send Levites through their
Lands, spread the truth of God; for, their subjects have immortal souls in
their mortal bodies; tell them, that is the way, to get a good Conscience, and
how thou art of more worth than a golden Scepter. Put them in mind, how a bad
one was the cause Saul his kingdom, and I^roboam became the subject of Gods
vengeance. Let this Poesy be stamped about the borders of their Crowns, that
the more religious, the more royal.

Conscience; step on to the honorable Lords, and because they affect brevity,
not prolixitie; say to them in a few sentences, that, Nobility without piety
and a good conscience, is like a painted Sepulcher, or blazing comet, good for
naught except to gaze upon; that they fear God, or else they have no curb to
bridle them; that they honor the King, keep their houses well, but the Church
better; that they exceed others as much in goodness, as they do in
greatness, and that without a second birth, none can enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Bid them blaze their Arms, continue their ancient Scutchions; but
take this for their Motto: that, The more holy, the more honorable.

Conscience; See that thou meet with the intelligent Counselors, and grave
Judges of the State and Nations; Will them in riding their Circuits to take
thee as their best Companion. Wish them to call to mind Iethroes advise to
Moses, how Magistrates must be men of courage, fearing God, lovers of the
truth, and haters of covetousness: else how shall they turn the wheel over
the wicked? Smite them h^p and thing? What heroical spirit had he need to
have, who must encounter with the audacious foreheadlesse swaggerers of these
times? Judges should be like Gedeon, that they may receive the Angels
salutation from the common people, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man. And
what were valor without the fear of God, but a spur to all injustice, and
an able instrument of greater mischief? Was it not a mark of the unjust
Judge, that he feared not God? This like a strong bank, will keep in the
rivers of righteousness, that they overflow not and drown up the seat of
judgment. Want of this fear in Abimelech, caused faithful Father Abraham to
fear, he should have dyed, before his time. Also, they must be good men and
true, weighing every action in the balance of the Sanctuary, and not suffer
equity to fall and perish in the street. And that they may be completely
qualified, let them take heed, and beware of covetousness, abandon Balaams
deceitful wages, shake all Bribes out of their laps, hate them as Amnon hated
Thamar; and to him that proffers them, say with indignation, thou and thy money
perish together. They are gods, and shall such love to say with shame, bring
ye? At thy Hos. 4. 18.
farewell round this in their ear, that, with what measure they here mete to
Christ's members, he at his coming, shall mete Mat. 7. 2.
to them again.

And, Conscience, have a saying to all inferior Magistrates, officers; will
them to do justice, love mercy, humble themselves, Micha. 6. 8.
and walk with their God. Shall Ehud do his country better service in a day,
with a dagger, than they, with their glittering swords and silver maces in a
whole years revolution? Ask them, if there be not some, that cry with
Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. 4.
O, that I were made Judge? And when they be so, swear by authority, oppress
by license, drink and swill without control? Demand further, if they have not
heard of Capon-Iustices, Lambe-Bailiefs, and Cheese-Constables, under whose
nose the Devil may turn Tapster, and keep an Alehouse? What a shame is it,
that any one should (who bears rule) be so styled, so accounted? But
Conscience, if thou meet with any of that ragged stamp, whisper him in the
ear, and tell him, that he who is not faithful in little, will be faithless
in much; and that, if they be not found doing of good, evil will undo them
all. And for the righteous, encourage them to be righteous still, and to shine
more and more till the perfect day.

Conscience, lay thou thy charge upon the Tribe of Levi: speak to the learned
and reverend Fathers of the Church; command them to put hands on no man
rashly, to Preach the Word in season, out of season, not for filthy lucre; but
for the gathering of the Saixts, and the repayring of the body of Christ
Jesus. Tell them, that the office of a Bishop, a Minister, is a worthy Work.
Bid them take heed that they deliver the whole counsel of God, bearing with
the weak, comforting the fecblamiaded, suffering the unruly with all
long-suffering and patience. That, they inform, exhort, rebuke, bless and
curse, with all authority and doctrine. Say, that the conversion of a sinner,
is more worth than a Bish^pricke: and the saving of one soul, than the winning
of the whole world. Let Demas embrace the world, Simon Magus hunt after riches,
and Judas* betray his Master; but, bid them, by these men's harms, look better
to their footing. Will all the sons of thunder, to cry aloud in the ears of
our roaring boys, and let fly the arrows of Gods vengeance, against the
brazen faces of impenitent sinners; and command Barnabas with his brethren of
consolation, to speak kindly and friendly to them that are weak in the faith;
considering that as their Lord and Master denounced heavy woes against the
wicked; so would he kindle the smoking flax, and support the bruised reed.
And to induce them, will them to call to mind, what a comfort it will be at
that day, when they can say, here am I, and the Heb. 2. 13.
children which thou have given me.

Conscience; Call upon the Gentry, and fear not their faces. Tell them
roundly, that Gentilitie consists not in cutting of a Card, casting of a Die,
throwing of a Bowl, matching of a Cock, manning of an Hawke, or in hollowing
after a deepe-mouth'd Cry of Hounds: but in good Hospitality, virtuous
actions, and generous deeds. Bid them dwell in the Country, govern their
Tenants, set peace amongst neighbors, and maintain their houses, not
contriuing into a poor narrow Chamber in a City, their whole family, as too
many do; running away, not only with their own Rents and Revennues, but a
great piece of the Church also. Wish them, not to rack and fine, buy and sell
Benefices for ready silver; for, if they do, God and thou, one day, will have
a quarrel with them.

And that thy memory be not clogged, over-laded; in a word, Lessen all
Tradesmen; Will them to do as they would be done unto, making a mutual gain
twixt buyer and seller: Tell them, they must make an equal measure, a just
balance, and an even Stone. The Clothier must not flock, press, spowt, and
stretch, to delude the eye of the common bargainer. Grocers must avoyde dark
Shops, mixed Wares, and counterfeit stuff. All of them, in all things, at all
times, must endeavor to keep a good Conscience, both before God, and before
men, lest the wind blow upon their wealth, it wast, and their souls one day be
set to sale. Charge Merchants, and all Seafaring men, to carry a good Conscience
out of their Kingdom, to take heed they do not Shipwreck it by water; but
land it safe, and plant it in other Nations. Yea, if they can buy it* any
where, so to do; for* if they have no sale for it, at their return, they,
notwithstanding in keeping it themselves, shall be no loosers by such a
commodity.

Conscience, Hitherto thou have spoken meekely, gently; but now thou must rowse
up thy self, take heart, gather thy forces, whet thy tongue, accent thy
phrase, and cause fire to flash, blood to spring in thy auditors faces; for,
thou art to utter black curses, not glorious blessings, to speak to beasts,
monsters, rather than to reasonable creatures, living men: Wherefore, sound out
thy voice like a Trumpet, cry aloud, spare not; tell thou the man of sin,
that since Peter (if so he was ever there) left Rome, thou could never have a
room there. Conscience, tell him, that thou art neither got, nor conserved, by
deposing Princes, riding upon the shoulders of Kings, treading on the necks of
Emperors, nor blowing up Parliament-houses; say, that Christ is supreme head
of the Church, universal Bishop, and that the Lords anointed is above any
Prelate whatever; assure him, that all* profane Popes shall perish; their
Chaplains the Jesuits, Priests, and all the orders of their disordered Monks
and Friars, shall fall: will them all to get knowledge of the truth, to deny
their own works, put their confidence in Gods mercy through Christ; or they
must perish, every mothers son. Admonish the poor pur* blind seduced
multitude, that they receive not the beasts mark, neither in hand nor
forehead; but renounce their erroneous doctrine, else they shall dye the second
death.

Conscience, exhort the Jew to believe in Christ, certify them the Messi^h is
come, and that they watch for him in vain; if they deny this; ask them where
the tribe of Judah is, and David's family? When Daniels sevens shall be
accomplished, what is become of Jerusalem, and the second Temple, wherein Christ
was to be seen? Bid them tell thee, what nation is without a King, a Prince, a
sacrifice, an image, Hos. 3. 4.
an Ephod, a Teraphim, and dispersed through the earth, besides themselves: and
if they do not (as indeed they cannot) inform thee of these things, assure
them, their estate is fearful, and their end shall be destruction.

And Conscience, terrify all wicked persons, of what nation, tongue, or
profession soever; tell the swearer, that the flying Book, full of curses
within and without, shall ceaze upon him; the Sabbath breaker, that there is no
rest prepared for him in the world to come: the rebels, who will not have God
and the King to raig^e over them, that they must be bond-slaues to the Prince
of the infernal pit; that, the Adulterers and Whore-mongers, thou and the Lord
will judge to death; the Murderers, quarrellers, and stabbers, how that the
sting of a bad Conscience shall slay them at the last day: the thief, robber,
and pilferer, that such may not inherit heaven. The Rimers, Iesters, scoffers,
flatterers, Players, and liars, shall have their portion in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever; the drunkard, glutton, and Epicure,
that they shall be drunk, surfeit, and spew up their draughts, morsels, and
carowses, to their eternal torment. In a word, gall, and gaster, strike and
wound, terrify, and hunt to destruction, all that strive not to learn the
Word of God, and keep it with faith and a good conscience.

But Conscience, if in this thy Pilgrimage, thou meet with (as thou shall with
many) an honest person, poor, or rich, salute him friendly, and bid him
good-speed; be his comforter in life, in death, and in the evil day: when thou
entrest into an hall, house, or cottage, if they be worthy, leave a blessing
behind thee; if not, shake off the dust from thy feet, and be gone.

Conscience, bless them, that bless thee, and curse them, that curse thee;
and so wishing thou may return to him that sent thee; (for the present) I
dismiss thee.

That without ceasing, I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers, night and day.]

We have stayed long upon the precedent doctrine, but not without reason;
because a good Conscience is little known, less regarded. In this clause, we
have many things observable, the which admits a double reading; but first we
will begin with the principal point, that offers it self unto us, which is:
that,

Faithful men are frequent in Prayer. Doct. 9.


For Paul says, in my Prayers, without ceasing, night and day. What should I
tell you of Abraham, of David, of Jacob, of Hannah, and others? Each page of
the holy Papers confirms the point. How often shall you find them in Gods
Register, honored with that title, commended for Praying, and the wicked
branded with the contrary mark, the direct opposite thing? Read the Psalms;
Luke 2. 37. Acts. 9. 14. and 10. 30. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ier. 10. vlt.

They have the spirit of God, and where he dwells, there Reas. 1.
is liberty. This fire will, if once builded on the heart, kindle, and smoke,
and flame, and ascend continually, Romans 8. 26.

And have they not a promise to be heard? Ask, and ye Reas. 2.
shall have? Hope to prevail, sets the tongue on work, where fear of
speeding makes faint speaking. Mat. 7. 7.

Do they not also apprehend their misery? Are they not Reas. 3.
sensible of the want and worth of spiritual things? And is not Prayer a
present help to remove evil? and purchase what is best. Romans 7. 23. Psalm. 50.
15. Iam. 1. 5.

Besides; Is not God their Father? Shall not children take Reas. 4.
delight to talk with him? And what is Prayer, but a kind of conference with
him? a mutual questioning and answering?

This being true; whose children then be such? or what Use 1.
faith have they, who never pray; never call upon GOD, night nor day? Continue
they cannot; for yet they have made no entrance, no beginning. Its a wonder to
see, how many we have tong-tyed, when they should talk with God; and
notwithstanding have words at will to discourse with men. Can thou not, or
did thou never pray? Then thou art none of Gods sons; but of Satan thy
Father; for all the faithful have their tongues loosed, and their hearts
enlarged, that they both can, do, and will pray. The Sun shall sooner stand
still, and the earth move round, yea, ascend upward, than a good Christian
shall neglect altogether this duty; and not call upon his heavenly Father.

Would thou then be accounted faithful, registered amongst Use 2.
the sons of the most high? Thou must learn to pray; and when thou have done
so, exercise thy self, in that duty: and seeing it is so needful, so
honorable, so profitable an action; for the better performance of it, we will
first show what it is, and the kinds of it. Secondly, give some directions,
how to pray aright. Thirdly, declare why it is so difficult a duty to
discharge: and finally, bring in some motives, as inducements thereunto. For
the first:

Prayer is a calling upon God, in the name of Christ Jesus, being Prayer
described.
enabled by the spirit, for all things necessary.

In this Description, are five particulars to be considered; of all which, we
will speak, and prove in order.

Prayer is a calling.] In Scripture it is sometimes said to be I. Math. 7. 7.
Mark. 11. 24. Psalm. 25. 1. 1 Samuel 1. 15.
a request, an entreaty, a lifting up of the soul, a pouring out of the
spirit, and the like; but most commonly, both in the Old and new Testament, its
noted by this name, Calling. When Abraham prayed, its said, he called upon God.
Genesis 12. 8. and 21. 33. We may see the like of David, both commanded and
practiced: Psalm. 50. 5. and 4. 1. Of Job: Job. 9. 16. Paul is said to persecute
them, that call upon God. Act. 9. 14. And he writ to such as called upon his
name. 1 Cor. 1. 2. By all which, and many more places, its plain, that Prayer
is a Calling.

This calling is either with the tongue, or with the heart Calling distributed.
Whence arises this distinction of mental and vocal prayer, confirmed by the
mouth of Christ; This people honoreth me with their lips; but their hearts are
far from me. Mat. 15. 8.

We are to call upon God with the tongue. 1. For we have In calling on God, we
must use the tongue and why.
this privilege above all other creatures; and shall we not employ it, in the
Lords service? 2. We are to give up all our members as so many weapons of
righteousness to glorify him: and is not this one of the principal? And
some-where David calls his tongue his glory. Psalm. 30. 13. And it is good for
us so to do. 1. It will be a means to keep our minds from wandering. 2. The
voice stirs up affections, and raises them to an higher temper. 3. In so
doing, we shall find the Lord putting phrases in our mouth, guiding it now and
then in a wonderful manner, far beyond all natural apprehension. 4. And how
can others join with us, or know, when to say, Amen, should we be silent? When
thou prayest alone, imitate Hannah; let thy lips move, not thy words 1 S^m. 1.
13.
be heard, else it may seem a sensible sign of Pharisaicall, palpable
hypocrisy.

And the heart may not be separated in this action. 1. For Also the heart and
why.
such prayers are most acceptable to God 2. They only have the promise to be
heard. 3. Otherwise they cannot be fervent: let a man's breath flow from his
mouth, by a narrow passage, were the hands hot, it would cool them; but if it
proceed from the heart (the lips being wide open) were they cold, it would
warm them; so prayer that springs from the heart, is hot; from the tongue
only, cold as ice. 4. As the Lord is the highest object we look at in Prayer;
so the heart is the lowest center, he regards in this duty; these two in all
holy actions of this nature, may not be disioyned.

1. Vain then are the prayers of many, who call upon God, but with the tongue
only. If this be not profane babbling, what can be? Thus pray our Papists, and
rude ignorant Protestants; so prayed the old Pharisees; Christ checkes them,
yet their custom continues unto this day.

But let us conioyne heart and tongue; else we do but labor in vain. What
profit can we expect in bending the knee, bowing the body, spreading the
hands, and smiting of the breast, when our hearts are roauing from the Lord? Is
this to pray? Is this to call aright? Is this to please God? Nothing less.
What is the tongue, but the hearts messenger? He therefore that uses the one,
and not the other, is like to him that runs before he has his errand. These
men may seem to pray, in the judgment of others; but, before GOD, they are
but vain bablers.

Upon God.] To him is it, and to no other, that we must II.
pray. Observe here, how God is one in essence; three in subsistence; the
essence is not divided, but distinguished. When as we say, East, West, and
North: these are not parts essential to the world, but names only of
distinction; so may we say of the former in regard of GOD: for the Son, and
the holy Ghost, are the same individual essence with the Father: and hence it
will follow, that he that prays to one, prays to all; but, as the Apostle
speaks of another thing, to every one in his own order. 1 Cor. 15. 23.
Understand, that in this definition, we speak of God the Father for teachings
sake.

And, upon God, must we call.] First, For who but He 1 King. 8. 39.
discerns the spirit of man? Who but He knows all the hearts of the sons
of men? I^^ only he, that is acquainted with all our wants, and understands
what is best for us.

Secondly, He is also present at all times; in all places to hear us, help
us; the Lord is always near at hand; so is neither Saint nor Angel.

Thirdly, And is not God sole Lord of all things, both in earth and heaven? Who
made us but He? Who has wherewith to satisfy us but He? And then upon whom
should we call but He?

Fourthly, Is not He also the object of our faith? Shall we then believe in
one, and pray to another? Will that stand with sound reason? Since then that God
is omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent, and the principal Object of our Faith,
it follows, we are only bound to pray to Him.

1. Whence by the way, we may confute the Romanists, who pray to Saints, to
Angels; but do they understand our wants? Are they present in all places? What
have they, they have not received? And may we put our confidence in creatures?
Were not this to seek to a blind guide? Rely on a bruised Reed? And when the
Sun shines brighte^^ to light a Waxe-candle? It is a never-^rring Canon;
tha^, He Exodus 22. 20.
who sacrifices to any gods, save unto the Lord only, shall utterly be
destroyed; they that will do the first, let them expect the second. (...) there
is but one to God the father, namely Christ; but many to the son; comparing
him to a Prince, that has several petitions preferred unto him, by the common
subjects that pass through the hands of his nearest favorites. And they say,
that he is a bad son (meaning Christ) who will do nothing for the entreaty of
his mother (understanding the blessed Virgin:) but does not Christ bid us come
unto Mat. 12. 28.
him? that he will pray to the father for us? to whom then should we go? is he
not our nearest kinsman? our eldest brother? our head? our husband? But if any
lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

2. Again; here is censured, and condemned too, the ignorant amongst us. How
many may we hear cry, God bless me; father of heaven, have mercy on me; Lord
forgive me: which words be good, we grant; but having no knowledge of, or
relation to Christ, are no better then vain babbling, the truth is, that in all
our petitions we should have reference to him, though not always expressed in
words; yet conceived and retained in our minds: this may be the cause, why
Daniel looked out of the window, when he prayed toward the Temple; because it
was a type of Christ; and thereby would teach us, that there is no going to God
without Christ Jesus. And as we speak to the soul of man, by way and means
of the body; so must we to the father of all spirits, through the veil of the
humanity of Christ our mediator.

3. And by this we may judge, what to think of the prayers of the Jews and
Turk, and heathen, who either have not heard of Christ, or deny him, are not
their petitions to no purpose? shall they speed and prevail before God? can
they expect Cornelius his answer; thy prayers are Acts. 10. 4.
heard, thy demand is granted? Alas, alas: all our cries to God, having no eye
to Christ, are but as so many drops of water spilt upon the ground: Wherefore,
let all good Christians bless God for their knowledge and mourn for such men's
ignorance; let us convert Noah's petition, and say; Genesis 9. 27.
God persuade Shem to dwell in the tents of Iaphet.

4. Finally, this being thus, let us first learn to know Christ, secondly, to
put our confidence in him, thirdly, and never dare to approach before the throne
of God without him, no coming to Joseph, without Benjamin; to God, without
Note.
Jesus: Would thou have evil removed from thee? think on his passion,
which speaks better things, than the blood Heb. 12. 24.
of Abel. Would thou have all good conferred upon thee? remember his active
obedience; for thereby he has purchased all blessings. But take heed of the
Romanists error, who maintain that Christ is mediator according to his humane
nature; for the humanity, without the deity profits nothing they
understanding not, how the distinct persons in the Godhead have their proper
operations; and that Adam sinned immediately against the first person, (though
mediatly against the other) have fallen into this slough, and have defiled
themselves; by whose harm learn we to beware.

Being enabled by the spirit.] As no man can come unto the IV. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
father, but by the son; so can no man say that Christ is the Lord, but by
the holy Ghost: how often are we commanded, to pray in the spirit? 1 Cor. 14.
15. Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude 20. understand by Spirit, either the holy himself, or his
graces within us; for these two are put indifferently one for the other; as
grieve not the holy Spirit, the holy Ghost fell on them; and quench not the
spirit; he has given us his spirit; neither may they be separated in any
action of a Christian. For as the spirit does work grace in us; so does he
cooperate, stirring it up, and moving it, as an instrument in the hand. For so
good a cause, will not be absent from its own building. And this ability
consists. First, in direction, leading us into all truth. John 14. 26. And
secondly in power, for he helps us against all our infirmities. Romans 8. 26.
First, For the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God, and is not subject
Romans 8. 7.
to the law of God, neither can be. Spiritual actions, must proceed from
spiritual principles; else they are base, contemptible. Secondly, Again;
every good act must be gin in God, and end in him; as the father through Christ
(...) to be desired in regard of number or perfection of degrees. Now carnal
things are such as are for necessity, or for delight; the one makes for our
being; the other for our well-being: and all things are to be desired,
petitioned for. Things evil be either sin, or the fruits of it; to wit,
affliction. And sin, is either original or actual: we must pray, that the
first may be abolished, clean wasted. Actual sin is, that either we have
committed, or may commit. For the former, we must pray it may be pardoned; for
the latter, that it may be prevented. As for afflictions, they are either
temporal or eternal. We are to pray the Lord, that they may be put from us,
totally, finally. Thus have you a brief of the particulers, or materials,
about which we are to be exercised in prayer; all which, for matter, and
method, are laid down in that exact pattern recorded in the Gospel. Mat. 6.
And all these must we beg for. First, because the Lord has given us a promise;
his word is gone out, that whatsoever we shall ask, he will hear us.
Secondly again, without the fruition of good, and the remotion or prevention
of evil, we cannot live the life of grace (ne, not of nature) here, much less
escape death, and possess life eternal hereafter,

1. Here is an error confuted of them, who hold, that we may ask spiritual,
but not corporal or carnal things, at the hand of God: because Christ says;
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and these things shall be given you. Mat.
6. 33. this was not the Lords scope in that place; but to dissuade his
Disciples from a distracted care about food and raiment. For they used to cry,
What shall I eat, and wherewith shall we be clothed? as also give them a sure
rule and sound direction to avoid the one and procure the other. For if we
could exercise our selves about heavenly: earthly things would be banished out
of our minds; and should we speed in the former, we might have better hope
to prevail in the latter. And does he not, in the same Sermon, teach us, to
crave our daily bread? and have not all the people of God used this in
practice? Genesis 28. 20. Pro. 30. 8.

2. And this serves to reprove a whole world of people: some pray for
corporal, but not for spiritual things. Others desire common, but beg no
special gifts from God; or if they do, they neither regard number, nor
measure. A third sort, entreat that sin past may be pardoned; but not
corruption for the present wasted; nor the effects of it, for future time,
prevented. And there be millions of men and women, who only crave that
affliction may be removed, in this life; but make not one petition, that the
causes of it may be abolisht; or death eternal put far from them, in the
world to come: May we not say of all these? They ask not; or James. 4. 2. 3^
if they do, they ask amiss?

3. Let us be of a contrary practice, and sue to God for all things. What?
Shall he promise, and not perform? Shall we seek good, and not desire evil
to be removed from us? Beg common graces, special gifts, all that's good at
the hand of God: Open thy mouth wide, and he will fill it. Crave Psalm. 81. 10.
pardon for sin past; prevention for time to come. Pray that original sin,
the seed of all wickedness, may be daily wasted, punishments removed, all
kind of afflictions sanctified. God is rich in mercy; he gives liberally to
them that ask him. Princes give gifts according to the dignity of their
persons, not the desert of the receiver: so does the Lord: therefore, ask what
thou will, and he shall confer it on thee in due time. And as there be many
sorts of prayers, use thou all; Public, private, set, conceived, mental,
vocal, Ephesians. 6. 18.
simple, compound; in verse, in prose: and as the Apostle inioynes the
Ephesians, Pray all manner of prayer. Imitate the Gamsters of our times, who if
they gain not by one game, fall to another: this do and thou shall prosper.

Having finished the description of Prayer, we come in the second place to give
particular directions for the better performance of it; Where note, that some
go before; some with; and some after Prayer.

1. Before thou prayest, meditate. 1. Of God, 2. Of thine What is to be done
before Prayer.
own baseness: 3. Of thy present condition: and 4. Of the former success,
which thou thy self, and others have had in the (...) done, despair to speed;
for its not enough to have faith, but in every action, to use it: now when the
understanding is misguided (mark this,) then faith is idle, not exercised.

The last thing that must accompany prayers, is fervency: Ia^ 5. 26.
The energeticall, operative, fervent Prayer is it which speedeth, prevails.
This is the fire which must heat it, concoct it, else God will reject it, never
regard it, reward it; the which may, by these subsequent helps, be procured.

1. Understand the worth of what thou desire, crauest; Helps to pray with
fervencie.
for that will fire our affections, set an edge on our petitions. He who knows
the excellency of grace, mercy, and peace; of the remission, remotion, and
prevention of sin, and the effects of sin, cannot but open his mouth wide,
send forth his petitions, with sighs, and groans, and strong cries.

2. Think how necessary these things of worth are for thee. Why do beggars
cry so earnestly; but from an apprehension of their present necessity, great
misery? Is it not Mat. 8. 28. Luke 18. 41.
evident? What caused the blind man to cry? O thou son of David have mercy
on me. The Apostle? Help Lord, or else I perish; but the want and worth of
that they desired?

3. Get love to the thing thou ask; strong affections cause fervent prayers,
earnest petitions. Christ loving Lazarus well, wept, and groaned in spirit,
when he prayed for Job. 11. 33. 34
him: David did the like for his son. Where affection is wanting, there will
be cold praying; Do we not see this in Suitors?

4. Be humble in thine own eyes; conceive thou art less, than the least of
Gods mercies. Proud persons either never pray, or but coldly, luke warmely. He
that would leap highest, stoopes lowest; so he that would pray with fervencie,
must have humility. 2 Chronicles. 33. 11. 12.

5. Increase thy faith: for as Powder the shot; so faith sends out prayers,
furiously, fervently: a great faith will cause men to burn in the spirit; and
to cry mightily to the Lord God of heaven. Mat. 15. 28.

6. In one word; Cherish no sin in thee. He who steals his bread, will pray
coldly for a blessing on it: more might be added, but these shall suffice.

And after Prayer, somewhat is to be observed also: 1. We What after
must use all lawful means for the procuring of what we Prayer. Ezech. 36. 37.
have prayed for. He that keeps not the condition, may not expect the
performance of the promise or band.

2. And we must watch and wait for the things we have asked at the hands of
God: these two are often coupled together, Ephesians 6. 18. Col. 4. 2.
Pray and watch. Were it not madness to prefer a petition to a Prince, yet
never attend an answer? To crave an Alms, and not look and stay for the
giuers pleasure?

3. If thy demand be not granted at the first, thou must not faint, despair;
but pray still, hope and wait still: great Luke 18. 1.
men, do not always reward the Musician at the first sound or ditty: for then
he would straight be gone, mis-spend the gift, and play at another Window; so
deals the Lord; for we are apt to cease praying; and things easily got, are
soon forgot, little regarded.

4. And when thy request is granted, thou must be thankful: Prayer, Watching,
and Praises are linked together: some fail in the first, many in the second;
but the most in the last. David ^ould bless the Lord, when he had heard Psalm.
116. 12.
his petition; so must we.

In the third place, we are to declare, why Prayer is so Prayer is a difficult
duty.
difficult a duty to be performed.

1. For man must deny himself, go in the form of a beggar, acknowledge a
superior; and his heart naturally being proud, he is not easily brought on his
knees, constreined to stoop to so mean, and low a pitch. Who is the Lord,
cried Pharaoh, that I a King, should serve him?

2. We exercise every faculty of the soul, and member of the body in this
action; as the invention, judgment, memory, will, tongue, hand, and all. The
more strings on an Instrument, the more difficult to well tune, and strike
them; many pinnes to the lace, makes it hard in weaving.

3. Its a most holy duty: wherefore, the harder: What do the Saints in heaven,
more then praise God? And as that life they live is most excellent, so most
difficult: for by how much it exceeds other actions in holiness; by so much
its (...) many earnest words in prayer for the Preacher, as they do in taxing,
and condemning of him, who knows how the Lord might pour his spirit on him,
loose the root of his tongue, and make him one of a thousand? Wherefore, pray
for all men; but especially for Princes, for Preachers. He that does not this
is an enemy to the Church: no friend to his own soul. And pray thou that the
spirit of prophecy may rest upon him, that he may deliver the word with all
boldness; be freed from the hands of unreasonable men; and so speak and so
do, as that he may save his own soul and them that hear him.

Of thee.] Another may be hence collected, that,

Whom we affect, we will pray for. Doct. 11.


Yea, the more fervently, we love another, the more earnestly, and often, we
shall pray for that person. God forbid, said Samuel, that I should cease to
pray for you. What could 1. Sam. 12. 23.
move him to do this, but affection? see this in David, in Jonathan, in Jesus,
and in all the faithful.

For truth of affection will use all means lawful to do Reas. 1.
that party good, who is affected: and is not this one, if not the chief among
many?

Again; the lover, and the beloved, are as it were but one Reas. 2.
subject: so that if we can pray for our selves, we shall for them, whom we
affect.

This shows, that true love is rare, and hard to be found. Use 1.
Many boast of it, who never had it: to use the words of Dalilab; how can
thou say thou love Father, or friend, brother, or sister, wife, or children,
and do not this thing for them? He that affirms, he loves, and prays not
for that person, shall be found a liar; and no affection is there in him.

Make trial of the truth of thy love by this doctrine: can Use 2.
thou pray for him, or her thou affectest without ceasing, night and day? Then
thy love is sound, if not, but carnal. Many a man tells his wife, she her
husband; Preacher, people; and they the Preacher; one another, that they love
them: but where be their Prayers? When call they on God* for them? I dare
peremptorily avouch, that all these are liars. Its (...) possible for a man to
love his friend, and not pray for him: no sooner shall a man begin to petition
God, for himself; but whom he most affects will come to his remembrance.
Thus was it with that good man; so is it with all that are like affected.

Night and day.] The Doctrine is this: that,

As in the day; so the faithful pray in the night season. Doct. 12.


Morning and evening did David call upon God: at midnight, at midnight was his
voice lifted up to the Lord: Did not Christ this? And was it not the practice
of his Disciples? And the custom of the Churches? Psalm. 119. 62. Acts. 16. 25.

For there is no time, wherein their prayers may not be Reas. 1.
heard: the promise is made, as to all places: so to all seasons.

Then, is the time quiet and still, freest from distractions: Reas. 2.
so that a man shall in a special manner draw near to God, and speak to him
more familiarly. For darkness shutting the outward senses; and no noise
annoying them, the inward are more free, and better fitted for this action.

Also, they delight in prayer; and that moves them. What Reas. 3.
causes vnchrifts, to game night upon night? Fishers, to angle? Yonkers, to
run up and down in that season, if pleasure or profit did not allure them?

And many occasions may fall out to induce them; as oppositions Reas. 4.
of adversaries, terrible dreams, or the apprehension of some danger; yea,
such an habit, by the frequent use of prayer in the day may be got, that in the
night they cannot leave it.

What a dissimilitude then is here, betwixt them and some Use 1.
persons? For are there not many, who neither pray night nor day? Its a brand
of a wicked man, not to call upon God at all; and of an hypocrite, not to pray
at all times, at all seasons: Job. 27. 10. Psalm. 14. 4.

Pray then in the day, and in the night, let nor thy tongue Use 2.
cease: for thou know not, whether shall prosper better, this or that.

VERSE. 4. Desiring to see thee, mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled
with joy.
IN this Verse, we may observe three things. The Logical resolution.
1. That Paul longed to see Timothy, which is also another argument of his
affection. 2. That he remembered Timothies weeping, being a token of his love to
Paul; and a means to increase his affection to Timotheus. 3. The end is laid
down, why Paul was so willing to see his son; and that is, that he might be
filled with joy.

Desiring.] The word signifies an earnest desire, such as is The Theological
exposition.
impatient of delay.

To see.] Seeing is either with the eye of the mind, or of the body; the
latter is here meant, though the word be often used in the former sense.

Mindful of thy tears.] Minding or remembering: some think Paul alludes to
Acts. 20. 37. Tears be some-time took for the gum or juice of a Tree: but
here is meant, the water which flowed from the eyes of Timotheus; by which is
understood his sorrow, and grief for their separation.

That I may be filled.] Filled is a Metaphor; and has in it two things. 1. A
subject of capacity. 2. An adiunct of equal proportion, or quantity. Paul
had a spiritual emptiness.

With joy.] Joy is secret in the heart; gladness may more evidently appear in
the face, or outward gesture. It has in Scripture many acceptations; here may
be meant comfort, and spiritual mirth. For his absence might weaken his
rejoicing, especially being in prison; as also Paul having not any to assist
him.

I, though absent in body, yet am not forgetful of the The Metaphrase.
sorrow and grief, that thou endurest; and by thy mourning at our departure
a-sunder, manifested; the which does increase mine affection unto thee, (it
being a sign of thine affection unto me) and makes me very desirous to see
thee; and that, amongst other things, I might be refreshed; and in this
affliction, have some addition and increase of farther joy, and spiritual
comfort; the which at thy coming, I nothing doubt but to be filled with.

Where Paul desires to see Timothy, so earnestly; and yet Doctrines deduced.
Doct. 1.
had writ so large an Epistle to him, we note: that,

Personal presence is to be preferred above writing.

The one is good, but the other is better. This was the cause why the same
Apostle was so desirous to see the Romans; Why he so often purposed to come to
the Thessalonians; and why the Author to the Hebrews willed them, the more
earnestly to pray, that he might be restored unto them the more quickly. Romans
1. 11. and 15. 28. Heb. 13. 19. 1 These. 2. 18. and 3. 10.

For is it not more painful to declare the truth by pen, Reas. 1.
than by speech? This is the reason, why the Evangelist, having many things to
write, would not write with Paper and ink; but trusted to see his friends, and
to speak mouth to mouth, face to face. 2. Ioh. 2. 3. Ioh. 13. 14.

Again; In personal presence, we may propound questions, Reas. 2.
make o^iections, reveal our spiritual wants, and be the better resolved,
relieved. Its good to have the Physician of the soul with us; for so with
speed we may be cured of all our maladies.

A lively voice stirs up the graces of God in a special Reas. 3.
manner: milk from the breast does more nourish, than that which comes out
of the vessel: for part of the spirit is spilt, exhaust: and will not the
countenance of a man, as lightning before thunder, prepare and provoke to more
attention? (...) image is the only Object of his love; and does not every
good man in part resemble that? and carry it about with him? do not the
sparkles of grace and wisdom, appear in their faces? Is there not a kind of
divine influence in their speeches? They in some measure resemble their father,
as dear children; and from the contrary ground, the wicked are an abomination
to the just.

They will build up one another in their holy faith; consult Reas. 4.
for the good of the Church, and tell one another what the Lord has done for
their souls: yea the very sight of a good Psalm. 66. 16.
man in the morning, a dream of him in the night, will make one walk with more
cheerfulnes all the day following. The face of the faithful is like the
Loadstone, it conveyeth strength to many, and yet is never the weaker, poorer;
and as the one is reputed a great wonder in nature; so is the other as great a
wonder in grace.

This must teach those to be grateful to God, when he Use 1.
affords so great a favor. We would better know the worth of it, if we were
a while in the want of it. Had but some of us made such a journey, as David did
to Gath; or Jacob to Padan-Aram; had we lived a while in Meshech, and pitched
our tents a part in Kedar, then the sight of a faithful friend would be as an
Angel of God. The chilling cold of winter makes the summers sun more
pleasant; so does long absence, a friends personal presence.

And here may the profane learn a lesson or two, if they Use 2.
please; for this is the true cause why the faithful, like Pigeons, flock to
the house of God; and are to be found there in Isa. 60. 8.
troops and companies. Is not that the congregation of the Saints, and the
royal exchange, where they all meet together? Again, they may see, why some
sigh in soul, and desire to be loosed. For their best friends be gone to
heaven before them, and Christ is absent from them. Phil. 3. 20.

The person that thus wept was Timothy: a good and godly man; whence it will
follow, that,

The best men have a propension to weeping. Doct. 3.


Jacob wept, and Joseph lifted up his voice and wept; David made his bed to
swim, and with tears, watered his couch. Mary washed Christ's feet with hers;
and Jesus wept. Genesis 29. 11. and 45. 14. Psalm. 6. 6. Luke 7. 44. Ioh. 11. 35.

Why? Have they not the best apprension of the loss Reas. 1.
of good things? and do they not most clearly discern what things are the
worst?

Besides, they have tender affections; and pitiful hearts; Reas. 2.
and therefore are prone to shed tears. This made the Prophet to wish, that
his head were a fountain of tears, to weep Ierem 9. 1.
for the slain of the people; and Christ to weep over Jerusalem.

This may serve for the just reproof of such as esteem it a base and
cowardly thing to fall a weeping, imagining it arises Use 1.
from the minds inbecillitie; and yet such men have bin of greatest
magnanimity: I am sure of the greatest piety.

Judge not that then odious in such men, as is highly esteemed of God: for
fear thou condemn the generation of the just. Use 2.


How many worthy men, have been commended for weeping? and Solomon the wisest
king says, there is a time to mourn: and, when said he of mourning, thou art
mad? or of weeping, what is it thou do? As he did of joy and laughter?
Now, because all tears be not commendable, Eccles 3. 4.
we will briefly declare, what it is lawful to shed tears for: and when it
is prayse-worthy to weep.

1. We must weep, when we see or hear the name of God blasphemed, and
dishonored. Psalm. 119. 136.

2. When the word and Gospel is opposed: and the liberty When and for what we
are to weep.
thereof infringed: Phil. 3. 18.

3. When the Church and Prophets are persecuted, and the Preachers imprisoned.
Psalm. 137. 1.

4. When the truth is rejected: and not sauingly entertained, Luke 19. 41.

5. When the people perish in their sins: and be utterly destroyed. Ier. 9. 1.

6. When religious kings are took away, wicked ones Zach. 12. 11. Isa. 57. 1.
reign in their stead, and good men perish from the earth. (...) and from man;
call we them daily to mind; let them not be forgotten; for this will breed
love, augment it; provoke to gratefulnes, or nothing.

That I may be filled with joy.] Where Paul sent for his son, and lays down
the end, why he coueted his coming; we observe in general from this
particular, that,

In all our proceedings we are to propound some profitable end. Doct. 5.


As he did in this: so we are to do in others. I easily conceive, that this
point is larger than the texts latitude; what than? may it not without breach
of rule, or art be amply prosecuted? Acts. 19. 32. 1 Cor. 11. 17. And look
through the whole book of God, and shall we not see that the end goes before
or follows the act, as the shadow when the sun shines, accompanies the
body?

For herein, we imitate God our heavenly father, who observes Reas. 1. Romans 8
29.
this method in all his proceedings; as of election, creation, redemption,
vocation, and the like. Ephesians: 1. 4. 5. 6.

2 And is not the goodness of the act, in respect of the Reas. 2. Reas. 3.
Reas. 4.
end? 3. are they not one and the same, the end and the good? for they may be
converted. 4. This to do, is the greatest wisdom; and otherwise whereunto
serves man's reason?

Let them then endure reproof, that in their proceedings, Use 1.
either have no end, or that which is worse, some pernicious intention. Herod
will tell you, he sends out the wise men, that if they could find Christ, he
might come and worship him; but was he in earnest? Nothing less; for he meant
to have killed him. Judas had an end, when he kissed his Master, but this end
procured him a miserable end. Dalilah had an end in weeping, but a cursed one;
and so have had many, and have at this time. But let such observe, that never
any came to good end, that in his proceedings aimed at an evil end. And I dare
boldly set down this peremptory conclusion, that, whosoever aims at bad
ends, shall never have a good end. Let them travail of iniquity, and conceive
Psalm. 7. 14. etc.
mischief, yet they shall bring forth a lie: dig pits for others, themselves
shall fall therein: their mischief shall return up, on their own heads; for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

And from this, all men may learn a lesson for their proceedings, Use 2.
(though, we grant that the point from the text is not so general as we
apply it: yet, as a man sometimes steps out of his way, to bring in one that
wandreth out of his right path; so will we at this present, but not without
acknowledgement.)

1. When we come to hear the word of God, we must What are the ends to be
propounded in the use of Gods ordinances.
make this our scope; that our understanding may be rectified and our lives
reformed. For these be the principal ends of preaching; either to be
gathered into the true Church, or to be builded up to further perfection. Ephesians.
4. 12. Art thou converted? then come that life may be amended. But how often
do we neither aim at the one nor at the other? will a man go to the market,
and not consider to what end? and is not the place where the word is preached
the market of the soul? shall we then return home, and not remember what we
have bought? or not direct the truth to its peculiar end? thus to do were
foolishness, madness.

2. Again, prayer has its ends; and we in the discharge Mar. 6. 8. etc.
of that duty must aim at them. Therein we crave either the remotion of
evil, or the fruition of good; or we give thanks for favors received, or
hoped for.

3. And in receiving the Lords Supper, our end must be to strengthen all graces
within us; and to make us with a fresh remembrance, to apprehend the second
coming of Christ Jesus: 1. Cor. 11. 26. a crumme of this bread, and a drop of
this wine like Ionathans honey, should it not open the dim eyes of our mind?

4. And to omit many things, and to apply it to the purpose; do we send for
our friends? let it be to pray, to confer of good things; and to tell what
God has done for us, as well as to eat and drink, and make great mirth. What
a pitiful thing is it to enjoy such abundance of Gods good creatures, the
society one of another, and yet never speak of Gods bounty? or for the
edification of our faith? what salt better to season and sanctify the
creatures to us, and us to the Lord, than gracious words, prayer, and singing
of Psalms? I wish this were the general custom of our country men.

I may be filled with joy.] Also we gather from this sentence, that,

There is joy to be found in the course of a Christian. Doct. 6.


What if few think so, is it therefore not so? know this that as there is a
smell in every flower; so every action in Religion produces comfort. Are not
all her ways, ways of pleasure? Pro. 3. 17. the Prophets and Apostles, have
they not published the word with joy? is it not their meat and Ioh. 4. 34.
drink to do the will of their heavenly father? have not the people heard
with joy? understood with joy? search Neh. 8. 12.
and see. And there is reason for it; first, from their present portion.

1. For are not their sins remitted, the band of their debts Reas. 1.
cancelled? and shall not the remembrance of this breed joy? 2. Are they not
reconciled to God? at one with him? and may not such eat their meat with
gladness, and drink with a cheerful heart? 3. Be they not enriched with the
graces of the spirit? and is not one of them Joy? have they not Gal. 5. 22.
the earnest of life eternal? and shall not that produce joy? 4. Is not the
curse of the creature removed? and shall not bread dipped in the blood of the
Lamb cause joy? do not the blessed Angels attend them, pitch their tents
about them? and is not that matter of great joy?

Secondly, From future promises. 1. Shall they not have food and raiment, fit
and convenient? Need such to fear a dear year? 2. Crosses shall turn to
their comfort; death be their advantage; and the day of judgment, the time of
their marriage, coronation. 3. Shall they not judge Men, Angels, and the world?
4. And is not heaven provided for them? Shall they not anon take possession of
it? if these things minister not joy, what can? O, but me thinks I Object. 1.
hear the worldling fume, and chafe, and say; none more sad to see to, none
more heavy hearted, than these forward professors of the Gospel.

I tell him that's, false; such have meat to eat, thou know Resp.
not of, bread thou never tastedst; a treasure hid from thine eye. May not the
heart be merry under a sad countenance? I tell thee again, they be Gods first
borne, and therefore partake of a double portion.

I, but for all you can say, sir, their very looks bewray Object. 2.
them, their deep silence makes against them.

But o thou fool, when will thou be wise? do not empty Resp.
vessels make the greatest sound? shallow waters run with most noise? When
full barrels ring not? deepest rivers have the stillest stream? is it not one
thing to be rich, another thing to say so? can a man have no coin in his
possession, except thou enter into his Closet, peep into his Chest, and finger
into his treasure? I trow, yes.

I think you would make me believe, that seeing is not believing; Object. 3.
have I not heard such cry? beheld the^ weep bitterly?

Now, I perceive thou have spet thy venom, said thy Resp.
worst; understand me if thou can. Did not Joseph weep greatly? was it for
joy, or for heaviness? may not mirth and sorrow, like sweet and sour, be
mixed together? what if the sun for a time be Ecclipsed? shall it never
appear as in times past? thou art to know, that there is a Mystery in
godliness; the which none can read, but they of the bride chamber. How ever it
be, I am sure of this, that, there is joy to be found in the course of a
Christian. Object. 4.


Well, well, but are not such, every day in ieopardie? subject to crosses,
death too? Resp.


Grant it be so; what of all that? though the body be in bands, may not the
spirit be at liberty? what if they have outward trouble, may they not have
inward peace, that passes all understanding? What if men forsake them, shall
not Angels minister unto them? grant they should dye for the Gospel, can they
do it in a better cause, for a better thing? Object. 5.


But I shall never believe, that such crosses can stand with sound comfort.

Thou Didimist, full of unbelief; they have what thou Resp.
want, to wit, faith, which is all in all; by it they know, that crosses
come from a father, and he has given them David's charge; handle the young man
gently; that like hail on a tyled house, they rattle more than hurt, that
they shall tarry but for a time; and at their departure (as the ouerflowing
river does rich mudde) leave a blessing behind them.

I see you can set a good face on a bad matter; you make Object. 6.
the best of an ill thing; but for all you have said, I am not of your mind.

Of my mind? for thine own sake, I wish thou werst. Resp.
But alas? as yet, this secret is hid from thine eyes: yet let me ask thee a
question in sad earnest: what is thy joy? whence does it spring? how long shall
it continue? or wherein does it excel the joy of a Christian? have thou health
of body? Why? that he has with a sound mind. Have thou goods? so has he, and
grace too. Have thou friends? For one he has a thousand. Have thou many
things laid up for many years? I tell thee, he has all things laid up for
ever and ever.

This then may serve at once to stop the mouths of such men as speak evil of
the truth of God, and course of a Use 1.
Christian; who cry with open voice, turn puritan, become a precisian, then
farewell all mirth and welcome Melancholy. These bring an ill report on the
path to heaven, as the people did on that to the land of Canaan; they commended
the country, spoke fairelie of it, but complained of the passage; as of walled
towns, fenced Cities, and they saw great Giants, sons of the Anakims: so the
carnal men of our times speak well of heaven, think its worth the having;
but there be black storms, raging tempests, and violent persecutions to pass
through; and therefore with Ruben, and Gad, they resolve to pitch their tents on
the hither side of Jordan. These muck-wormes rejoice in, and feed on earthly
vanities; as Curres and Kytes do on stirking carrion; but never tasted of Angels
food. They may eat husks with hogs, think and say, they live the only
iouiall royal life; but they shall never make me believe, that their hearts
answer to their boasting: for death is in the pott, this red broth wrings them
in the belly, and as Ioab said in another case, will be bitterness in the
latter end. But we will dismiss them to wallow like swine, in the mire, and
mudde, swallow each filthy vomit, seeing they can relish no better food.

Let men, by this doctrine, try the truth of their profession, Use 2.
whether they be sound Christians or mere rotten worldlings. Art thou a
Preacher, and have thou joy of heart in studying, preaching? in feeding the
flock whereof the holy Ghost has made thee, the ouerseer? is it thy meat and
drink to prune Gods tender plants, strengthen the weak, and comfort the
feeble-minded? can thou rejoice more in winning a soul, than if thou had
lawfully obtained the office of a Bishop? why? then, thou art a Christian
indeed, an Interpreter, one of a thousand; for these be the branches where
this joy grows, and the only paths where it is to be found. And you that
flock to the house of God, like Pigeons, look the Preacher in the face, as if
you would eat the word from his mouth, and make public profession, do you
hear with delight? pray with comfort? and praise God with rejoicing? are you
ravished in spirit on the Lords day? and account it your Iubile, your heaven?
then doubt not of your spiritual estate: For these are the sparks of far
greater joy, and the undoubted forerunners of everlasting pleasures. But if
the ways of God dampe thy mirth; carry a cold report to thine heart; and, like
old Barzillai, thou art weary of men singing, and women singing; feels no
more taste in the bread of life, than he that has an ague does in the white of
an egg; thou art but a counterfeit; one that has a form, but wants the true
fruits of the power of Godliness, and therefore a stranger in the kingdom of
heaven.

But it will be said, the wicked as well as the Godly, have A doubt resolved.
their joy in the use of the Lords ordinances; where then is the difference?
How may it be discerned? Why thus. 1. The true Christian has sorrow before
solace; mourning preceedes his mirth: for as at the creation, darkness was
before light; the Chaos the comely creatures: and as the ground is first
broken, then scattered with good seed; so is it at our regeneration, new
creation. We first see our ignorance, blindness, confusion; have our hearts
pricked, our spirits wounded by the Law; and then follows beauty, comfort,
and amendment. But it is not so with the wicked: for they have light before
darkness; joy without heaviness, and bring forth comfort, ere they have
conceived sorrow, or felt any panges or throes that accompany the new birth.
The Christian comes to his joy as an Ambassador to a foreign Prince, or
soldiers to the spoil, with preceding crackes of canons, fireworkes, and
garments tumbling in blood; this is the road way to sound comfort.

2. A good Christian fetches the water of joy primarilie from the pure
fountain of justification, not the troubled spring of sanctification; the old
man treads the old way, having no knowledge or experience of a better; he
looks for heaven, but by his good deeds. First he will deserve it, and then
sue for possession; but the new-man is assured, that God indents with no man
upon such terms; only he relies on his all-sufficient surety. Did Zaccheus
purchase Christ, by his alms? by his fourefold restitution? or by faith
rather? only believe, is the new way, and the conduit, that conueyes comfort
into the Cisterne of the Soul.

3. Moreover, the joy of a true Christian is of another nature; spiritual: the
worldlings is carnal; or at the best but a bastardly kind of spiritual
comfort: for he wants the spirit, he has no radical grace planted in his
soul, that can bear and nourish true and solid rejoicing. Do men gather
Grapes of thorns? Figs of thistles? then may carnal mere natural men have
spiritual joy, sound and unfeigned comfort: it were as easy to find an
harvest in an hedge, as this fore named fruit in the heart of the unregenerate
person.

4. Finally, the joy of the sound professor is constant eternal; for the
cause is constant, and abides for ever: but the formal hypocrites candle
shall be put out; his joy shall perish. For the foundation thereof is sandy,
the object mutable, and abides but a season. Suppose, by the addition of
fuel, it should crackle till death; yet then at the furthest, the flame
thereof shall be put forth, never more rekindled. So that you see what a real
and broad difference is betwixt them.

And is there joy to be found in the course of a christian? Use 3.
what then shall be had in the kingdom of heaven, did David dance before the
Arc? how will he leap before the Lamb? could Peter sing in prison? and
shall he not chante it, being set at liberty, with Gods sons? if the
gleanings be so good, what will the whole harvest be? shall a taste so refresh
the soul? then doubtless a full meal must needs revive, ravish the spirit.
Think on this, you that are in this wilderness, so shall it comfort your
hearts, exceedingly. For if to sow, breed single joy, the reaping will trebble
it.

This must persuade men to take up the yoke of Christ: Use 4.
for its easy, light: taste, and see, how good the ways of God be. Men are
worse skard than hurt, when they draw then hand from the work of the Lord; for
great joy is to be found in well-doing. If this afford not comfort, what can?
but the most think not so; therefore they are strangers from the ioys of a
Christian. Begin, I beseech thee, to avoid sin; cast off the communion of
the wicked; read, hear, pray, and be doing of good, and experience shall tell
thee, that no joy is like the joy of a Christian. Its hid in part from the
best, totally from the worst: but if men would make trial, they would say of
it, as the Queen of Shebah, did of Salomons wisdom, that the report is true;
but the half of it was not told them. For it much exceedes the 1 King. 10.
same which they heard on it. Finally, we observe from these words, that,

The strongest Christian may receive increase of comfort from Doct. 7.
his weak brethren.

Paul not inferior to any of Gods servants, hoped to have his joy augmented by
the coming of Timothy. As a poor man by wisdom may deliver a City; so may
he that is weak comfort his stronger brethren. Did not Jonathan rejoice
David, the greatest worthy in the world? and the 2 Samuel 1. vlt.
poor widow of Sarephtah, refresh the man of God? Yea Christ himself was
comforted by an Angel; and betwixt him and them, was there any equal
comparison? 1 King. 17. 10. 15. Luke 22. 43.

For the best man may be left alone, and then any of Gods Reas. 1.
Saints must be acceptable to him. If one be in a strange country, and have no
faithful companion, the poorest boy of all his neighbors borne, would refresh
his spirit at that season.

The best men receive joy in doing good, as well as in receiving; Reas. 2.
they gather comfort they can build up any.

Add to this, the willingness of good men to learn; the mean conceit, they
have of themselves; and how well they Reas. 3.
judge of others.

And that the spirit of God blows as it lists, and will Reas. 4.
not then the point be certain?

Here we must needs soundly lesson the spirits of our Use 1. Isa. 65. 5.
days, who cry, stand apart, I am holier than thou, conceiving that none is
able to reach them, comfort them. But let them swell like leaven; yet a frost
of affliction will bring down such risings. Truly, such persons know nothing
as they ought to know; and will one day confess it, when God (by correction)
has opened the ear. Have not then this swelling conceit of thy fullness: for
such kind of simptoms have made shipwreck of faith.

This as it must teach them that are meaner not to be dejected Use 2.
or fearful in the use of means, to comfort the strongest (for God may use
weak instruments for his greater glory:) so it must learn the best, not to
despise the weakest member of Christ. The head has had help from the foot and
finger. Did not the master stand in need of comfort from his servants, when he
said, could ye not watch with me one hour? and may not servants one from
another?

VERSE. 5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which
dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice, and am persuaded
that in thee also.
IN the two precedent verses, and this ensuing, The logical resolution.
Paul lays down. 1. His affection to his son. 2. How he prayed for him. 3.
How he desired to see him; and that, from a double ground. The one was his
tears, the other his faith, mentioned in these words we have in hand. Which
faith is thus described. 1. By the quality of it, unfeigned. 2. By the effect,
dwelt. 3. By the subjects wherein, Lois, Eunice, Timothy. 4. By the order, how
it did dwell. 1. In the Grandmother. 2. In the mother; and lastly in the child
of the mother, and in conclusion, by a twofold adiunct 1. It was thought on.
2. Paul's testimony of it.

When I remember; or, call to mind.] See this phrase opened verse. 3.

Unfeigned.] That is, sound, sincere, true; not hypocritical, not counterfeit.

Faith.] Faith may be appropriated to God; and then it signifies the truth and
certain accomplishment of his promises, or threats: shall their unbelief make
the faith of God, of none effect? Romans 3. 3. Or to man, (as in this place.) and
it may have a double interpretation; being understood of the faculty, or of
the Act. In the former sense, the Apostle does intend it, when he says, Above
all things take the shield of faith. Ephesians. 6. 16. In the latter, where he
affirms, how all the patriarchs obtained good report through faith, that is,
by the acts or effects of it. Heb. 11. 2. 39. Accept it in which sense you
will, it matters nothing: only they differ, faculty, and act, as cause and
effect. Where note, that the second cannot be without the first: For each cause
in nature and order precedes its effect: yet by a metonimie, the one usually is
put for the other.

Which dwelt.] dwelt has in it, besides the habitation, and inhabitant; two
things more; the one, the possession, the other, a continuance. For before a
thing can be said to dwell, it must first have possession, and then abide there
continually: otherwise, faith should either be an usurper, or a stranger where
it remains.

First in thy Grandmother.] That is, it was in the mother of his mother, then
in his mother, and last of all in himself: so that here you see. 1. The
subjects of faith. 2. The order of its habitation, proceeding from one to
another.

Lois.] That is by interpretation Better, she was Timothies Grandmother, and
Eunices mother.

Eunice.] Which is good, Victory; she was mother to Timothy, and daughter to
Lois.

And am assured, that, in thee also.] This is Paul's testimony of Timotheus his
faith; declaring, that he nothing doubted but it dwelt in him, as it did in
his Grandmother, and mother before him.

It is not without reason, that I thus affect thee, conet The Metaphrase.
to see thee, and in my prayers make mention of thee; for I remember thy
tears, which argue thy love to me, and the unfeigned faith, which is in thee,
and thy religious Grandmother, and mother before thee, in whom this excellent
grace was also: so that thou art worthy to be much respected, highly esteemed
of me.

Whereas Paul commends faith and omits al other graces, Doctrines deduced.
that were in these three religious persons, the doctrine to be noted, is this,
that,

Faith unfeigned is chiefly to be respected in a Christian. Or Doct. 1.
thus, Faith unfeigned is the best inhabitant.

Favor is deceitful and beauty is vanity; but faith is a thing highly to be
regarded, and all things that thou can see, or desire, are not to be compared
unto it. Psalm. 12. 1. Mat. 15. 28. Heb. 11. 2. 3. 9

For where faith dwells, Christ dwells. Ephesians. 3. 17. these be Reas. 1.
as twins in one and the same womb. And as Lydia compelled the Apostles to
come into her house; so does faith constrain Christ to dwell in the heart of
man. These two, (like fire and heat) cannot be parted.

All other graces do still accompany it. Where it is, Reas. 2.
they all be. Faith may be compared to a Prince, which, (wheresoever he
pitcheth his tents,) has many rich attendants. 1 Cor. 13. vlt, as love, hope,
zeal, patience, etc.

Faith expels infidelity out of the heart, as heat does Reas. 3.
cold, wind smoke: For they be contraries. It cannot, nor will not admit of so
bad a neighbor; it shoulders out all unprofitable guestes. Acts 15. 9. Heb. 4.
2.

And besides this, faith makes our actions acceptable to Reas. 4.
God; for without it, its impossible to please God: this is that true fire,
which comes down from heaven, and seasons all our sacrifices: Heb. 11. 6.
Romans 14. vlt.

What then are they worthy of, that neither respect it in Use 1.
themselves, nor others: many have no care to plant this flower, in the Garden
of their hearts; or if they have it, to preserve it from perishing. Jonah
mourned that his gourd withered; yet we grieve not if faith be destroyed. Some,
as Sarah did by Hagar, handle it roughly; and drive it into the wilderness:
but alas, they know not what they do. For if they did, they would water it,
prune it, and by all means strive to preserve it, increase it.

Let us then, be otherwise minded, esteeming it the best Use 2.
guest, that can come to our houses; and the only plant in our gardens; for,
without it we cannot please God, or save our own souls. This is that tree of
life, whose leau^^ heal^ all our wounds, relish our actions, and that does
food our-so^les to life eternal. The world cries, what is a man without money?
but I say, what is a man without faith? For no faith, no soul quickened, heart
purified, sin pardoned; bond Cancelled, quittance received; or any person
justified, saved. Faith is a wonder-worker in the world; it stops the
mouths of Lions, blunteth the edge of the sword, quenches the violence of
fire; of weak, makes strong; and proves valiant in battle. Is not the ground
cursed where its wanting? blessed that bears it? What shall I more say? it
conquers the world, raises the dead; and conuerts Devils into the image of
God; for, what is a man without faith but an infernal spirit, a slave of Satan,
and like Elimas the sorcerer, the enemy of all goodness? wherefore get faith,
and all things are possible for thee; nothing shall be wanting to thee. By the
hand of faith, thou may roll the stone from the cave of Mach-pelah, pluck
out the Kings, set thy foot in their necks, and slay them every mothers son.
Do but pray in faith, and thou shall have the upper springes, the nether
springes, and all that thy soul lusts after, a shame then, is it not; that
so few seek it, respect it?

Now, seeing it is of such worth, we will first paint it out, by a plain
description. Secondly, declare some particulars that attend it. Thirdly, we
will show what impediments hinder men from i^. And last of all, give some
directions, how to procure it, accompanied with motives to persuade to the act
of believing; the which being finished, we will wind up all in a brief
exhortation.

Unfeigned faith is that faith, by which a man effectually called, Faith
defined.
believes in God, through Christ, for salvation.

In this description, six things are to be considered. 1. Its described by its
kind. 2. By its subject, wherein it is resident 3. By its act or effect. 4. By
its proper object. 5. By what means it comes unto it: and finally, by the
end for which it is.

1. I say, that unfeigned faith, is, that faith.] For we are to The
description explicated.
distinguish it from a miraculous; which was in Judas, or others. Mat. 17. 20.
Again, from the temporary, mentioned. 1. Cor. 13. 2. And from an Historical;
which may be found in wicked men, and Devils. Some make the Genus of faith, to
be a confidence; others a persuasion; a third, a Act 26. 27. Iam. 2. 19.
belief; a fourth, a grace, and the like; all which in some sense are true;
but I conceive, that faith is the proper Genus of this faith, as art in
general is the Genus of all arts, if it have any at all. If I call it a
confidence, a persuasion, an affiance, I define it by the effects; if a grace
or gift, that's too remote. For so is love, and peace, and hope, and what not?
wherefore, we have rather made choice to define it, as above said, that faith:
for faith is the general Genus, and the word, that, does make the difference,
declare the species.

And here we must learn two things. 1. That this faith comprehends in it an
historical faith. For without the credence of the history of the Bible, it
cannot stand; though the other may, without it. 2. That this faith has no
specificall difference, though it may admit of diverse degrees; as Great,
little.

2. By which, a man effectually called.] Man is the subject, to which this
faith adhereth, not Devils: and man effectually called, not reprobates; neither
is it to be found in the elect themselves, before effectual vocation. For that
does in nature and order, (if not in time) precede justification; and so
consequently, faith, of necessity. So that unfeigned faith dwells in none, but
in them that are called, justified. And for this cause it may be called the
common faith, or the faith of the elect; because its only found in them, that
are elected, and common to none other: Jude 2. Tit. 1. 4.

3. Believes.] The form is the most subtle of all things: therefore we often,
if not always, put the effect for it. For it sits close upon it, as the
lace does upon the edge of a Garment, and it believes, according to its
degree; either more strongly, as in a great faith; or weakly, as in a lesser
faith. Romans 8. 38. and. 14. 1. Math. 6. 30.

4. In God.] God, he is the adequate, and last object of faith: the Scripture
is not. For then we might pray unto it. And Christ is not neither, considered
as he is our mediator. Heb. 4. 15. 16.
For God the father is the creditor: Christ but the 1 Ioh. 14. 1.
surety. Therefore, faith goes a step further. Again, Christ is he, in whom
the promises are made, by the father, Yea and Amen; so that faith rests not,
when it comes 2 Cor. 1. 20.
unto him. Furthermore, the second Adam must bring us to that estate, which we
were in before the fall, and that is, to faith in God the Father. Its true that
Christ is the object of our faith, especially for the matter of justification;
but we rest not there. God, without Christ is our enemy; for we are his
debtors, and not able to give him full payment: therefore we go first to
Christ our surety, and take him, by the hand of faith, in the way; and then
pass boldly to God the Father, who is our creditour: this must Ioh. 14. 6.
be marked. For many in this thing are greatly deceived. For though faith lay
hold on many objects; yet God the Father is the very center or rather seat,
upon which, faith at the last fixes it self, and wholly rests; and until
then, the Soul is not settled. Psalm. 116. 7.

5. Through Christ.] Here is laid down the order of Ioh. 14. 26. Mat. 3. vlt.
faith ascending. The spirit leads us to Christ; Christ, he, as a second
guide, conducts us to the Father; and then cries the soul, now return unto
thy rest: for it is by faith ascended to the highest step of its climbing in
this spiritual passage.

6. For salvation.] Every thing is for one end or other: and though there be
subordinate ends of faith; yet the principal is, that we may be saved. Before
Adams fall, it was said, do and live: but since, believe and be saved. Mat.
16. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 9.

By this that has been said, we see, that every faith is not unfeigned
faith. Again, that all men have not unfeigned faith. Thirdly, that faith must
rest in God the father, and none other. Fourthly, That we must go unto him by
Christ, and none other. Fifthly, That faith is not idle, but believes more or
less. And Lastly, That it is not unprofitable. For the end of faith is, that
we might obtain salvation.

In the second place, according to promise, we will proceed to lay down some
proper notes of faith, whereby we may the better know it; and if that it dwell
in us, as it did in Lois, Ennice, and Timotheus.

1. Let it be remembered, that unfeigned faith has two 2. degrees of faith.
Luke 17. 6. Romans 4. 19.
degrees: the one is little, compared to a grain of Mustardseede; the other
great, likened to a ship, that is carried with a full gale.

Again, Note, that there be some things, that are common to both of these
degrees, whether great, or little; and others that are proper but to the one of
them.

Those that be common to either, be these.

1. Faith, whether strong or weak, is seated in an humble Six properties of
faith in general strong or vveake.
heart. It grows not in any other ground, it is not to be found in an hard,
and untilled soil: but in such as the Lord has humbled and broken to pieces,
by the plow and harrow of the law. Proud hearts, and high minds possess it
not: Mat. 8. 8. 10. Luke 15. 21.

2. Again, where it is, there will be prayer. This tree will have its fruit;
this fire will either be burning or smoking: and tho a strong faith, send out
strong cries; yet a weak in some model, will not be wanting. Every true
believer is a Prayer. Act. 9. 14. and 16. 16. Mark. 9. 24.

3. Moreover it will purge the heart, where it inhabiteth. Faith is like barme,
it will purify, and cleanse the person into whom it is infused, by its proper
nature, from the filthiness of the flesh and spirit; or in that it assures the
soul, that no unclean thing shall inherit heaven. Therefore, it moves man to
be holy. Acts. 15. 9. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

4. These two degrees agree in their object. For they never rest until they
come to God in Christ. This is the way, they both walk; and the only stay,
that they both rely and depend on. Psalm. 20. 7. Io. 14. 1. 6.

5. Besides, a true faith will apply the promises in particular: it rests not
in an implicit or confused kind of believing: but as the understanding does
distinctly discern them; so does faith severally, yet distinctly apply them;
otherwise to do, were papisticall, Job. 19. 25. Io. 2. 28.

6. Lastly; Faith never separates the end, and the means Genesis 32. 28.
that tend to it. A strong faith will not fail in thus doing; nor a weak
faith either. A false faith does put justification, Col. 3. 2. 3.
and Sanctification; mercy and justice; Christ, a Savior; and Christ a Lord, a
sunder; these all be common both to 1 Ioh. 3. 2. 3.
the one and the other, whether weak faith or strong. And those that find not
these in themselves, have no true faith at all.

A greatfaith, has some excellent properties, and effects, which are not so
proper to a weaker.

1. One is, to praise God in the greatest affliction: Job. 1. 21. Properties of
a great faith.


2. Another, not to make have out of troubles; but with patience to stay the
Lords leisure; being assured, that great and long afflictions, shall do them
more good, than if they were lesser, shorter. Isa. 28. 16.

3. To endure no denial in prayer, until the request be granted; to ask
fervently. Genesis 32. 28. Mat. 15. 24. etc.

4. To believe beyond all hope or reason in regard of natural means, that
might produce the effect they look for. Romans 4. 18.

5. Boldly, to preach, and profess the truth, in the hottest 2 Cor. 4. 13.
skirmish of persecution; and if need be, to resist unto blood.

6. Finally, to long and look for, the coming of Christ, Phil. 1. 23.
unto judgment; and desiring to be loosed, which is best of all. These be some
attendants that accompany a great faith. For a weak faith is often impatient
in small trials, forward to make have, both in respect of time; and in using
unlawful means, now and then: It lives too much by sight and sense, and does
not mount on high; is easy and apt to take a denial in prayer; fears death,
judgment, and hell; and therefore cries stay thine hand a while, that I may
gather Psalm. 39. vlt.
strength before I go hence, and be no more seen. They then, that boast so
much of the greatness of their faith, may here see, if they be not deceived.
Do thou praise the Lord in the greatest troubles? with patience stay his
leisure in all things? admit of no denial of thy requests to God in prayer?
believe the promise, above hope, beyond hope, and past all hope? in the
greatest opposition, for the love of the truth, show the most resolution? and
in a sound apprehension of the vanity of this world, and the excellency of
that to come, wishest to be with Christ; as the chief object of thy
blessedness? why then it is with thee, as it seems otherwise not.

The weak unfeigned faith, has these things to be found Properties of a weak
faith.
with it.

1. A true and clear sight of the want of it. Luke 17. 5.

2. A prizing it above all earthly things. Mat. 13. 46.

3. An earnest longing after it. Acts. 16. 30.

4. A careful and constant use of the means to obtain it Acts 10. 33.

5. A resolution to sin no more. John 9. 36.

6. A great sorrow, they found the want of faith no sooner; Ier. 31. 19.
yet mixed with some joy, that now at the last, before it be too late, they
have espied it: not without this resolution neither; that let God do what
seems best to his Majesty yet they will still sue unto him for mercy.

He that finds these things in himself, finds a good thing: for assuredly
unfeigned faith is rooted in his heart; and though for the present it be but as
a seed, yet, before long, in the daily use of Gods ordinances it will spring,
spread, and prove as a great and large Cedar. This must comfort those that be
weak in the faith, that they be not; for the present, (until faith grow
stronger in their own apprehension) swallowed up of overmuch heaviness.

Now in the third place, the lets that hinder men from obtaining Hindrances,
of faith in the Preacher.
of this unfeigned faith, are to be discovered: and they are partly to be
found in the Preacher, partly in the people.

In the preacher. 1. When he does not preach at all; but lie and sleep and
delight in sleeping. Of whom I may say, as Christ did sometimes of the dumb
Devil; that this kind is not to be cast out but by prayer and fasting. Mark.
9. 29.

2. When men preach, yet rarely, as Papists come to Church according to the
statute; but more to save their livings, than their own souls and others. 1 Timothy 4. vlt.

3. When, though they preach often, yet their Sermons, as Gallio said of
Religion, are but a matter of names and words; and a scraping together of
fables, and vain Phylosophie. Coll. 2. 8.

4. When, the preacher makes wrong application, pressing that upon Gods
people, which is the portion of the reprobate. This is the old custom of false
Prophets, who Ezekiel. 13. 22.
grieved the hearts of the Godly, and hardened the wicked in so doing, by
promising them life. Wherefore, often, sound powerful and plain preaching, is
the way to work unfeigned faith in the people.

Lettes in the people be many; yet few here shall be mentioned. Letts of faith
in the people.
One is a vain persuasion, that all men have it, from their birth. A second
is, in that the people think it not a thing of great worth or necessity. A
third is, a desperate idleness, which makes men negligent in the use of the
means. The fourth is, a settled resolution to live in sin for a season; and
so, if they be cut off in the mean time, yet, they have made this conclusion,
that then they will cast themselves upon the hidden, and unsearchable mercy of
God. This is to hang a man's Salvation, (as Job speaks of Job. 26. 7.
the earth) just, upon nothing. But, if by any means such men might be
allured; we will add some motives, in the last place, to persuade them to it.

1. Consider how often the Lord does entreat us to get faith, and believe in
him. Might not this move an heart Motives to get faith.
of stone to this duty? who would not (out of his private judgment) condemn
such a man that will not obey him, who does beg and beseech, that might
command and kill?

2. And is it not the only way to get rest to our souls, and to procure
peace, that passes all understanding? What person is he, that priseth not this
peace, that does not wish for so great a favor?

3. Who ever came to Christ and went away uncured? the very devils, that
sought unto him, sometimes had their desires: and shall we doubt, or once
despair to speed, if we approach to his presence? Is it possible that he will
not perform his promise to his people? Mat. 11. 28.

4. Call to mind, how cheap we may have this commodity. We may buy it without
gold or silver. If we bring empty hands, yet honest hearts, we shall not go
home without it. Let us but ask it, and we shall have it. Mat. 7. 7.

5. How many are the privileges that accompany it? By Ioh. 1. 12. 2 Pet. 1.
4. Ephesians. 6. 16. 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
it we are united to Christ, made the sons of God, partake of the divine
nature, quench the fiery darts of Satan, overcome the world, and are saved.

6. And if nothing will move thee to get faith unfeigned, Ephesians. 2. 8.
and to believe in the Lord; yet let the fearful judgments, that are
threatened against infidels, prevail with thee. Shall not such be cast into the
lake that burns with fire and Brimstone for ever; which is the second death?
Rev. 21. 8.

And let me wind up all in a short application, and exhortation. I say that to
all, which I do to one, get faith, keep faith, and increase your faith: a
mite of this grain is worth a million of gold; a stalk of this faith, a
standing tree of earthly fruits; a soul fraughted and filled with this
treasure, all the coffers of silver in the whole world. What can I more say?
the least true faith is of more value, than large demaines, stately buildings,
and ten thousand rivers of oil. If the Mountains were Pearl, the huge
Rocks precious stones, and the whole Globe a shining Chrisolite; yet faith, as
much as the least drop of water, grain of sand, or smallest Mustard Seed; is
more worth than all. This will swim with his Master; hold up his drouping
head, and land him safe at the shore, against all winds, and weather, storms,
and tempests: strive then, for this fraught. For the time and tide thereof
serves, but once, and not for ever.

Unfeigned faith.] Whence we gather, that,

Our profession is not to be in Hypocrisy, but in Sincerity. Doct. 2.


Paul speaks here of faith, that's not Hypocritical, but sound, upright. And
though he but mention faith; yet he comprehends under it, profession, and
truth in our dealings Mich. 6. 6. Isa. 9. 17. Mat. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 6.
6.

For if it be not thus, we are under the curse, and subject Reas. 1.
to all judgments what ever. How many woes, does Christ denounce against
Hypocrites? and the Prophets, every where in their Sermons, crying, Woe be unto
you Hypocrites? Luke 11. 44.

Again, the Lord loves Sincerity in the inward parts; such Reas. 2.
service is a delight unto him. And will not Satan, one day or other, as he
did Judas, arrest us, and carry us into the kingdom of darkness? Our
adversaries reproach us, and our own courses condemn us? truly, if our
profession be in hypocrisy we can neither please God nor profit our selves.

Away then with the profession, that is in many, in our Use 1.
days. What form without power of Godliness may we find? what shows without
substance? and shadows that are not accompanied with the true body? do these
men imagine, that the words of God are uttered in vain? or that his judgments
shall not befall them? What heart can they have to look God, Satan, death, or
judgment in the face, when as their own hearts are a strong and crying
witness against them? what if they do? shall it profit them? no verily.

In the second place, seeing we all profess the truth, let Use 2.
us keep our feasts with the bread of Sinceritic and truth; and and mix all
our actions with sincerity and integrity. Let us shun the practice and
properties of Hypocrites; which be these. Six properties of an Hypocrite.


1. To be one in the face, another in heart. Hypocrites be like flales, that
seem to have life; window cushions, glorious without; yet stuffed with straw,
flocks, or some course Rubbish within.

2. They strain at a Gnat, and Swallow a Camel. Make Luke 11. 39.
great conscience of a humane ceremony; yet are desperately negligent in the
commandments of God. Tithe Annise, Mint, and Cummin; yet transgress^ the law
for a morsel of bread.

3. These persons pick quarrels for moates in others, and Math. 7. 3.
spy not mountains in their own eyes. Censure their brethren sharply, if they
stumble; yet justify themselves, though they fall and tumble in the mire and
ditch.

4. They are wonderful in ostentation. Give alms with the sound of a trumpet,
write their good works in the 2 King. 10. 16
windows, have the least act in record; and, Iehu-like, cry, come see, what
zeal we have for the glory of God and the Lord of hosts.

5. Such be inconstant in all their courses. They will pray Job. 27 9 10.
in affliction, but not call upon God at all times: be humble, when God
threats; lifted up like the bull-rush, if the sun do but for a moment shinne
upon them.

6. In a word, they bless at the Church, curse at home; drink with the
drunkard; and commend precisenes with the Puritan: they are like water, that
fits it self according to the Vessel wherein it is. They be all things in
show; nothing Mark 12. 40.
in substance; but thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow them that
call upon the name of God with a pure heart.

The next thing whereby this faith is described, is, in that it dwells, it
stays not like a stranger; whence it might be noted; that.

Where true faith takes possession, it remains for ever: Doct. 3.
If it once be well rooted, it cannot be removed. Romans 11. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

For the right hand of the Lord has planted it, and put it Reas. 1.
into possession.

Christ has prayed for it, that it may not be dispossessed. Reas. 2.


The spirit does water it, and watch and ward its habitation. Reas. 3.


The soil wherein it is seated is holy ground; the house, Reas. 4.
where it dwells, is swept and made clean, every morning. Why then should it
dye or wither, or be cast out by any?

This confutes the contrary doctrine of our adversaries, Use 1.
who hold it may decay and perish.

This also is of great comfort for them that have it: for it abides Use 2.
and indureth continually. And let Satan and corruption do their worst; it
shall never perish.

But before we pass this point; a double question may be Quest. 1.
demanded. The one is, in what part of man, faith is feated; the other, whether
it continue in the world to come for eternity.

Unto the first, I answer, that faiths seat is in the will; that Ans. 1.
is the proper subject of its habitation. And the Scripture seem to confirm
this, placing faith in the heart. Psalm. 1 12. Where faith is seated.
7. Acts 8. 37. Romans 10. 10. Yet here is a trope; for by heart is meant the will,
which is in the heart. So that, if the will be in the heart, and faith in the
will; then faith may be affirmed to be in the heart, example. If there be wine
in the Butte, and the Butte be in the Ship, then its a truth, that there is
wine in the ship: For that which comprehends the subject, comprehends what
is contained in the subject. And the reasons be these.

1. Divinity is the rule of the will; that therefore, which is immediately
ruled by it, must be in the will; as for the body, and the parts of it, they
are but guided by divinity at the second hand.

2. Faith is said to be the ground of things hoped for; now hope is in the
heart. Therefore faith: else make the foundation in one place, and the building
in another; what more absurd?

3. Faith must have a seat, where it may have the best rooting: and that is in
the will. For an error or truth in the understanding is soon removed; but if
either pass to the will, then they stick fast; as in their proper subject.

4. It is where it works. And does it not, like a strong hand, pull Christ
into the heart, purify the heart, and work by love, as by an instrument in
its fist, that is seated in the heart? Gal. 5. 6.

They that have placed faith in the understanding, are therefore deceived. We
grant that the rules of faith are first in the understanding; as of all other
arts, but faith is not seated there. And this may be the cause, why knowledge
is often put for faith, because that must be first; or the other can be never.
And there is also a logical assent in the understanding of the truth of a
thing; but that may be found in wicked men and Devils. For as the external
sense, conueyeth species to the internal; so does the understanding put them
over to the will, where faith being resident, stretches forth her hand and
makes that good, which the understanding did judge for truth. For as the eye
of the body guides the hand; so does the eye of the mind the will: and as we
first see, then work; so we first know, then believe. And to hold this for a
truth, seem^s to me, and many more, to be a truth. Qu^st. 2.


Concerning the continuance of faith, there be diverse opinions. Some think,
it ends at death; others, at the day of Ans.
judgment: but what if we hold, that it dwells in the soul for eternity? there
can be no danger at al in that; but rather on the contrary. And this position
has strong reason; which may seem sufficient to confirm it.

1. For does not the Object of faith continue for ever? if Whether true faith
remain for ever.
the object, then faith. For the better understanding of this, I Will stand a
little to explane my meaning. We must observe, that in Christ, God the Father
has made many promises; some of this life, others of the life to come; those
of the first kind cease. For man being once made Spiritual has no need of
corporal food or raiment. Now for the other promises, we are to consider two
things in them. 1. The truth of them; or 2. The extent of them. At the coming
of our Lord, they shall all be accomplished, not one of them shall fail; yet
there is a promise of continuance in that condition, which yet is to be
believed; example. My Father does promise me many kindnesses, and at such a day
he will give me a good farm for ever. Now in this, there be two things
obseruable. The one is, the time of possession; the other the continuance. When
my Father has put me in possession, a part of the promise cease, as it is
just; but the other part is still of force, and I believe my Fathers word; and
by virtue of that, I do still enjoy my living; and thus it is betwixt God and
his children. All the promises he has accomplished, or will at the day of
judgment; and then he puts his Sons into full possession: yet have not
they a promise from him, to remain there for ever? So that faith does still
continue, to believe the continuance of that condition, which they have in
fruition, and no otherwise.

2. And is it not comfortable to be assured, that as they have fullness of joy,
so it shall be for ever? Adam was in a good condition in the Garden; but God
never gave him a promise. For his abiding in that estate he stood was so, as
he might fall, and the event proved; yet the Lord has given us a sure word,
that we shall never be moved. And is it not faith, that must by application,
persuade us thereof, and fill our hearts, like a never dying spring, with
unspeakable joy? What a misery were it for a man to be put into possession of
an house, but no assurance to enjoy it? had he a good lease and could read it,
then hearing it, he rejoices, otherwise not. Now the sons of God may be
glad. For they have a lease in their hands, and by the eye of faith read it
continually. So that, they never fear dispossession.

3. When is faith made perfect? in earth or heaven? What then becomes of it? is
it annihilated? by whom? either by us, or he that wrought it. But shall we
conceive, that when so excellent a work is perfected, that, on the sudden, it
shall be turned to nothing, by its own author? and if it be not so; then it
abides for ever.

4. I would demand, from what our good actions proceed, as from their proper
cause? is it not from faith? why are we no more holy? is it not want of faith?
let this then be granted, and faith must of necessity continue. For else
holiness would cease also. And if we hold, as some do, that faith is the
essential form of a Christian; and that every good act comes from it, as
natural acts from their proper forms; then who can deny the proposition?

But against this, it will be objected, that now abides faith, Object. 1 Cor.
13. l.
hope, and love, but of these, the chiefest is love.

1. The scope of the Apostle is not to declare the continuance Resp.
of love; but the excellency of it. 2. Love is commended above faith and hope,
but wherein? why they two work inwardly, and their effects are more secret,
according to that saying, have thou faith? have it with thy self Romans 14. 22.
before God. Love does declare her self outwardly, and manifests by her
effects, that we are Christians indeed: otherwise faith is the cause of true
love; and therefore more praise worthy. For that which produces such a thing;
must needs be better than that it effects: because it cannot communicate its
whole nature to its effect, or what it has not in it self. This is that
excellent way to demonstrate to the Church, that I am a true member of it; when
I am loving and charitable to my brethren. 3. Many boasted of faith yet wanted
works: if they had works, yet they did them out of sinister respect, and not
in love: therefore Paul commends it. 4. The word; now, does not denotate
always an adiunct, period, or any part of time; but a kind of asseueration or
affirmation, and the like: and when it does; yet the Greeks use it sometimes;
for time future: and not for the present. And so much for this objection.

But it will be further objected, that we have no need of Object. 2.
faith, having all things in perfect vision.

It is true, we have not, for the believing of any further Sol.
degree of glory: yet it is necessary to assure us for the continuance of what
we have. And though the blessedness we possess, be present; yet eternity is
not. Wherefore, faith, runs on, holding the promise by the end, to
eternity. It believes no more; but keeps fast what it has. A man going up
many steps, when he comes to the highest seat of his wished desire, has
need of somewhat to hold him there: so faith having passed all the promises,
now only secureth the soul of what it has in possession.

Some may yet object, that hope than abides also; but Object. 3.
that cannot be, seeing we enjoy the things we hoped for.

We have the things, yet time and eternity is not in vision. Sol.
Again; God gave man hope to sustain faith, being weak; and the promises
being afar off: but now faith being perfect, needs no supporter.

But is it not said, that we receive the end of our faith? Object. 4.
1. Pet. 19.

True; but by end is meant, that, for the which faith was Sol.
given us to obtain; viz. salvation. Moreover, salvation has in it two
things: possession, and continuance.

If this seem a paradox to any, I would have him know, that it is not without
authority; and besides, were there the least danger in holding this, as I see
not any, then by me it should never have been mentioned. Wherefore receive it,
or reject it; so you once have faith, it skills not.

Which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois.] Here is faith laid out, by its
subject, in whom it dwelt; from the which we gather, that.

Weakness of sex hinders not soundnes of faith. Doct. 4. Reas. 1.


Do we not read, that women are the weaker Vessels? and are not here two
mentioned, who had unfeigned faith? so that the point is plain; the weaker sex
may have soundness of faith. Judge. 5. 21. Mat. 15. 28. Heb. 11. 35. Romans 16.
1. etc.

1. For they are capable of it; having understanding, affection, Reasons.
will, memory. etc. 2. All the ordinances of God are as freely offered to them
as to the other sex: and they have as much privilege to use them. 3. They
knowing their own weakness and Satan's malice, are moved; and stirred up
thereby the more carefully to seek it. 4. And is not the spirit of God the
author of it? does he respect any persons? may he not do what, and work
faith, where he pleases?

This may comfort the weaker sex, and encourage them Use 1.
to use the means, for the enjoying of this precious treasure. It should also
make them thankful to God, that he does vouchsafe so great grace unto them.
Many do rejoice, that they in somethings resemble man; but let this not be
counted a small thing, in that thou art like to him in this thing. For faith is
the first foundation, that God lays within us, of our felicity.

This also should teach the man, to have the woman Use 2.
( though the weaker vessel) in honor, and not too basely to esteem of her.
For has not the Lord looked on her? We must (whom it concerns) endeavor to
make them, by calling on them, sound in the faith. Sow the seed of the word
in this soul: for there is hope, that it may prosper.

Where we read, that faith was first in the mother then in the child, it may be
noted, that.

Faithful Parents will endeavor to make faithful children. Doct. 5.


Who doubts, but that these mothers here practiced this duty; and might be
instruments for the begetting faith in their children? Genesis 18. 19. 1 Chro. 28.
9. Psalm. 44. 1.

For they know, they have given them but a miserable being, Reas. 1.
made them by nature, the sons of wrath; and therefore they strive to make
them, through grace, the children of Ephesians. 2. 3.
blessing,

Again, this is the way for them and their seed, to escape Reas. 2.
the revenging hand of God; and to receive all good things from him. For make
thy son the son of God, and he can want no manner of thing that good is.

Godly Parents know by experience, that children will take instruction, better
at their hands, than from others. They will conceive that the Preacher speaks
out of spleen, not of affection, and therefore they regard not their words.

And they are wise for the world to come; and loving to their children;
therefore they do this. For herein consists Reas. 4.
true affection, and the principal duty of good Parents to their children.

What then be those Parents, that never practice this Use 1.
point? Nay, who never so much, as once mind it? may we not, from the rule of
contraries, conclude, that they are profane and impious? they will prune their
plants; break their horses, and train their hawks to the lure; yet never
dress the plants of the Sanctuary, instruct their Sons, or take the least
toil to make them faithful, and of the Lords family. Do they not rather, by
rotten speech, lewd example, and wicked courses, make them twofold worse,
than children of the Devil? If they procure them a competent portion, a
profitable calling (which be good, we grant) they think they have done their
duty: but what have they done all the while for their souls; and to make them
the Lords sons? the unreasonable creatures will feed their young, till they
can prey of their own wing; so that thus far they are equal to them.

Let them then that would be accounted religions, show Use 2.
it in the imitation of these Godly parents. Provide food and raiment for the
body, but especially a spiritual portion for their souls. Work faith in
their hearts; grace in their persons; and in thus doing, thou shall save thy
self and thy children. Let their ears hear not thy tricks of youth; but
what God has done for thy soul, in the days of old. Let thy practice be a
Pattern, worthy their imitation; say to thy son, do thus, as well as this;
that it may be said of thee: a Godly father, a Godly child. And do not
defer the time, but take the season; teach them while they are young; and let
these reasons move thee.

1. For then they will remember it when they are old. Pro. Children to be
taught young, and why.
23. 13. dye cloth in the wool, not in the web; and the color will be the
better, the more durable.

2. To defer this duty is dangerous. For thou may be took from them. Who
then shall teach them after thy departure? or what if they dye in that
condition? must not thou answer for their blood? 2. Kin. 2. 24.

3. Besides, what if they come to faith? will it not be with the more
difficulty? fallow ground, must have the stronger teame: great trees will not
easily bend: and a bad habit is not easily left, and a better come by. If their
memories be stufft with vanity, as a table-booke, the old must be washed out,
before new can be writ in.

4. What shall I more say? God works strangely in children; 1 Kin. 14. 13.
and rare things have been found in them: and what a comfort will it be for
parents in their life, to hear their children, speak of good things? and at
the last day, when they can say to Christ, here am I, and the children thou
have given Heb. 2. 13.
me?

And here, children must attend to their fathers instruction Use 3.
and not despise their mothers counsel; least the Raven of the valley pluck
out their eyes, and the young Eagles eat it: Pro. 30. 17. Some care not for the
instruction of their Parents; other can out-runne them; but can they escape the
hand of God? and he that obeys not his Parents speech, shall certainly be
destroyed 1 Samuel 2. 25.

We read here of good women; but there is no mention made of their
yoke-fellowes: the mothers be commended not the fathers* whence let be noted,
that,

Faithful wives, may have faithless husbands. Good women Doct. 6.
may be unequally yoked. 1 Samuel 25. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 13.

And this comes to pass through beauty; for that being Reas. 1.
in a man, may much prevail with the weaker sex. For why did the sons of God
take the daughters of men to their wives? Was it not because they were fair.
So might it fall out with the daughters of God. Genesis 6. 2. beauty preuailes
much in this matter. Genesis 12. 12.

Covetousness also may be a cause. Honest maids be often Reas. 2.
poor, have but small portions; wicked men sometimes rich and mighty, and that
may work mightily. Hester 2. 16. And if there be but such a motion, how will
carnal Parents press their daughters to it?

Sometimes men affecting, and knowing the person to be Reas. 3.
religious, will like the Shechemites, serve the true God, to gain favor. By
this devilish dealing, many have been deceived. Josh. 9. 4. Genesis 34. 9. 14.

It often falls out, that when persons marry, they are Reas. 4.
both faithless; and so the Lord calling the wife, and passing by the husband,
that woman becomes unequally yoked. 1 Cor. 7.

Whence, we are taught, not to judge wives by the carriage Use 1.
of their husbands, neither husbands by their wives. For in so doing, we may
commend or condemn without cause, or reason. Nabal the fool, may have a wise
Abigail; and Hester a good Queen, an unbeliever.

All wives that have good husbands must first, praise God Use 2.
for such. Secondly, Make much of such. Thirdly, Pity and pray for those that
have not such: and fourthly, In their lives endeavor to walk worthy of such:
else they may receive the greater condemnation, in being yoked to such.

And good wives, that have bad husbands, are. 1. to seek Use 3.
out the true cause, if some carnal respect did not make them to marry such:
if it did, they must acknowledge their sin with great sorrow: if not, be
patient. For it is but a fatherly correction; and God may work great good out
of it, aiming at another end, they are not aware of ( Hester 4. 14.) for the
present.

2. They must be subject to their husbands, that though they obey not the word;
yet they may without the word, by their good conversation, be won to the
word. 1. Pet. 3. 1. The wives good actions, must be their husbands instructions.

3. Let this teach them to love Christ their first husband, the more perfectly.
For by the badnes of the one, you may judge the better of the goodness of the
other. This is to draw good out of evil, and worthy to be remembered.

4. Such must admire the mercy of God to them, that they had not themselves
been bad, their husbands good; and live in hope, that through the blessing of
the Almighty, they may prove instruments to save their souls. And if this fall
out, how would that man affect, then, his wife? more than ever he disliked her.

From this doctrine, the women, maids, or widows, that Use 4.
intend to marry, may learn a lesson; to beware in their election, least they
fall into the like condition. And the better to direct thee, let these rules be
observed in the choice of an husband.

In the choice of an husband (or a wife either: for the How to choose a good
husband.
rules will hold in that respect also) two things must be regarded first the
person, secondly the portion.

The person is to be respected before the portion, for diverse reasons. 1. For he
is of more worth. 2. He being bad may soon mis-spend it. 3. What comfort can
that woman have in goods, her husband wanting grace? and 4. Otherwise, she may
be said, not to marry the man, but the money. We must cross the worlds
custom, and first say, what is he? then, what has he?

Now in the person two things are to be considered; the one, grace, the other
nature. Grace must be regarded in the election, and much set by. For what is
beauty, or birth, or wealth without this, but very vanity? And, in grace, we
may consider; either the truth of it, or the degree of it. If we (in the
judgment of charity) find some beginnings and some sprouts of this tree, we
may not reject such a plant: for it will grow, and in time come to greater
perfection: but if we find none at all, this is not to marry in the Lord. 1
Cor. 7. 39.

Some may demand, may not one marry with one, that Quest.
has not (so far as she can judge) any saving grace at all? being tractable
and hopeful?

Diverse answer diversely; but I say, the safest way is to Ans.
make a good things as sure as we can. And its a safe course, when we have
choice, to choose the best. Nay take heed, that he, whom thou art well
persuaded of, do not deceive thee, and prove bad enough.

The next thing to be respected in the person is the nature or his disposition:
the which will be more meek and gentle, austere and froward. A little grace,
in a crooked crabbed nature, will not easily be perceived; in a good tractable
nature it will, and show excellent. Wherefore, if the disposition,
constitution, and complexion content thee as well, as grace, there will be the
greatest, strongest, and durablest bond of affection.

It is a fault in some, that are careless in this respect, and cry; give me
grace, and let him be crooked, or deformed, or froward, that will never trouble
me. Thou art deceived, my friend; a little Sugar in sweet wine, makes it
excellent; but a great quantity in tart will not change the taste: so when
grace and nature do both answer thy desires, then will thy love and content
be the greater. We have in our selves a double man, and if thou can please
both, use it rather Next the goodness of the cloth, regard the color: and when
thou have found grace, have an eye to nature.

The second general thing, is the portion; maintenance must be had, or love
will wax cold. And the Lord provided for Adam, before he put him into this
condition. And portions may be in hand, or in hope. In hand, either good
domestical, or terrestrial; grounds, mines, pondes etc.

The portion in hope, is either, the promise of Parents and friends, or the
fruits of ones hands, having an honest calling. The latter is good, but the
first is better.

By all this we may be directed, how to know a good husband, and a very good;
or a bad, and a very bad husband.

If a man have much grace, an ingenuous and tractable nature, accompanied with
lands, and possessions, this is a very good husband. If true grace a tractable
disposition, and a small promised future portion. This man is not, (though not
equal to the first) to be altogether rejected. Indeed, naturally we desire
lands. For wanting much faith, we live by sense; and earth is least subject to
be removed from us.

And on the contrary, when men are not sanctified, of a froward disposition,
and neither have goods in hand or in hope, these must needs prove, if the Lord
work not above man's reach) evil husbands, ^angerous to match withal.
Wherefore, in thy choice, be wise as the Serpent, and lay hands on no man
rashly.

But how shall a gracious man be known? 1. If he take Four signs of a
gracious man.
delight in the society of the Godly. 2. If gracious words proceed out of his
mouth. 3. If he be well reported of. 4. If he make choice of thee for grace,
not goods: and this may appear, if he refuse another, that has a greater
portion than thy self.

When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith.] These Doct. 7.
words be the first in the verse, yet we have made choice to handle them last.
Out of which we note, that,

Unfeigned faith cannot be had, but it will be heard of.

Paul could not remember, but what he had either heard or seen. For
rememberance is of things past, and so properly to be understood here. Faith
will get fame, and cannot be hid. Fire will give light, the wind makes a noise;
and so will faith unfeigned be perceived. Romans 1. 8. Coll. 1. 4. Why should this
be so?

For it will, by its effects, declare it self to the world. If Reas. 1.
roots be found in the earth; some sprigges will be sprouting. Hot rivers will
smoke; and a living heart set the pulse a working: So will faith in the soul,
sprout, smoke and work apparently.

It is ordinarily conceived in sorrow, and borne with Reas. 2.
great gronings. Before it be begot, and brought forth, there will be some
stir, and striuings. And can the travel of a woman be hid? or a Prince be
borne without rumor? Great report

Means must also be used to mainetaine it, as hearing, Reas. 3.
reading, singing, praying, conferring; and will not the world, and good men
too, take notice of these things? these are like so many flashes, which argue
fire for certain.

And the Devil too, will put to his hand to declare it: for then like Herod,
he will go about by all means to murder Reas. 4.
it. He would eat up this seed, wither this branch, if neither; yet he will
sow some cockle to choke it; or send some pur-blinde crow to pecke about it.
Truly the sun may as soon run his full course in the equinoctial, about
the whold Globe, unseen; as faith, pass her Pilgrimage, till death, and not
be heard of.

Do not those then incur reproof; that would be reputed Use 1.
faithful; yet their bruit must not go abroad? they would willingly go to
heaven; but like Balaam, it shall be between two walls, or in corners. What
hope is their, that men will fight, when they tremble to be termed Soldiers?
resist to blood, and cannot suffer to be seen in the combat? do these think
to steal their passage, and not pay their fare to heaven? to be wiser than
their forerunner, and Grand-Captaine the Lord Jesus? take heed, lest now
walking folded in the rags of darkness, thou be not one day wrapped in the
robes of blackness.

This may meet with those also, that will commend, for Use 2.
a handful of Barley, at the day of death, such whose faith was never heard
of, all the days of their life. Is there not a woe denounced against them,
that speak good of evil? and is he Isa. 5. 20.
not culpable of Judgment, to honor those the Lord never did? I would have
men to judge charitably, rather then to speak too confidently: yet God is
wise; for such praise without just desert, stirs up men to rippe up that,
whereby their names rot; and so that is effected, they never intended.

And may not this give us some glimpse, what to deem Use 3.
of them, whose faith to this day, was never heard of? may not such fear their
present condition? and we mourn to consider their woeful estate? wast thou
never a noted person? reputed singular? or entertained of the Saint? surely,
thy faith is dead, and thou art dead; the Lord quicken thee.

Let this, in the last place, be a comfort to those, whose Use 4.
sound goes through the world; and whose names are famous too amongst the
faithful. For it argues some good thing to be in thee, when good and bad have
some words about thee. Crows do not flock, and houer, and cry, but its about
some thing; nor Eagles soar, and gather themselves together, except there be a
carkase: yet, take this also with thee, be sure thou art such in truth, as good
men report of thee, and contrary to what; the world daily discharges against
thee. For otherwise, thou may have a name to be a live, and art dead; and
defamed, but of desert. And by the way, take this, as a note of faith
unfeigned, viz. a care to Note.
become better; when either the good commend thee, or the bad condemn thee.

It may here be demanded, how Paul came to know, that these three, had one and
the same faith? Its not to be doubted of; but by the effects that flowed from
these persons, (though he had an extraordinary gift of discerning too.) From
the which this will arise, that,

Faith v^feigned is to be judged by the effects. We cannot see Doct. 8.
it, in its self, or in its cause. But we omit this, and collect another
doctrine: which is, that,

Faith works like effects in diverse subjects. Doct. 9.


The Grandmother, the mother, and the mothers son, had the same faith, and
the like fruits proceeded from them: else Paul would neither have called it,
unfeigned, or said that it dwelt in them; or given them all three one and the
same testimony. All three had faith, and unfeigned faith. For the likeness of
actions were in them, and proceeded from them, by the which it was called
unfeigned, and equally appropriated to each particular person. And it is an
undoubted position, that faith produces the like effects, in all Gods
children; in truth, it must be understood, not in degree. For as faith
increases, the effects are bettred. Many Lanternes, with several Candles,
will all give light; but in proportion to their diverse degrees and quantities.
Every piece has his report, but according to the bigness: and each instrument
will sound, but variously as they be in proportion: and that for these reasons.

Because faith differs not in kind, but in degree; and like Reas. 1.
causes produce like effects. Every Bell has its sound. Each stone its weight;
and several planets, their diverse influences: yet not in the same measure,
though they may vary in kind.

Again, faith is diffused into subject, though several; yet Reas. 2.
they are the same in nature, and consist of like principles. Fire, put into
straw, will either smoke or burn; let the bundle be a thousand: life, in the
body, will have motion, though not in the same degree and measure; and reason,
in every man acts, but not so exquisitely. The constitution may not be alike:
therefore a difference may be in operation natural; and also, from the same
ground, in acts spiritual. A dark horn in the Lantern, dimmes the light
somewhat.

Faith is begot, and increased by the same originals: the Reas. 3.
spirit and the word be both the principal and conseruing causes of it. If one
woman conceive and bring forth a child, and another nurse it, variety of food
might. somewhat alter the nature, and disposition of it; but that spirit which
begets faith, does also preserve it; therefore it cannot be, but that the like
effects should proceed from it. Here, by the way, we may see, that those
mothers, (if a forced necessity compel not) who bring forth and bear^
children; yet have no care to nurse them, are to be blamed for so doing; in
that they differ from Gods manner of proceeding. And in the last place, if
faith had not like effects in all Gods children, Reas. 4.
then could they not attain to one and the same ends; as justification,
sanctification, salvation, etc. And so should it be in vain, the Lord failing,
and man too, of their chief scope and purpose. Has not God made every eye to
see? and hand to work? and shall we then judge, that faith shall not act, but
be idle? away with that.

From this point, we may learn, how to judge of the faith in our times, which
so many boast of: they cry, have Use 1.
not we faith? Do not we believe as well, as the best? but where be the fruits
of faith unfeigned? have thou an humble and purging heart? do thou call upon
God at al times, tarry his leisure, and rely upon his promise? art thou bold and
resolute for good causes? can thou resist Satan? cleave to God, and shun
the appearances of evil? will neither poverty ouerpresse thee, by despair; or
prosperity, by presumption? Why, its well, and we believe, that Faith is to be
found in thee: but if not, thou have it not rooted in thee. For the tree is
known by the fruit. Will not the flower smell? the candle give light? and the
fire heat? and shall true faith be without her effects? boast not too much,
lest thou deceive thy self, taking the shadow for the body; and that which is
not, for that which should be.

And this doctrine is of great comfort for them, that often call the truth of
faith into question. But have thou the true Use 2.
signs of it? then thou have it. What if it work not so mightily as in
others? will it follow that thou art without it? suppose thou were carried to
the top of some high tower, and casting thine eye upon several chimneyes, of
the which number thine is one, and all smoking; would thou not conclude, that
fire in is thine house, as well as in thy neighbors? there is the like effects;
therefore the same cause of certain. When men, in heart and life, are like the
Godly, let them be assured they have the same faith. It may differ in some
degree: yet, the quantity greater or lesser, alters not the kind of it. Leaven
is leaven, though never so little; and, if the meal be seasoned, it is to be
found in the lump.

This must teach us to take heed, how we rashly censure others; Use 3.
for in so doing, we may be blame worthy. Let a poor Christian cry out, that
he is tempted of Satan, troubled with doubting, and call his estate into
question, the which is usual in the Lords children, shall we not have some
that will tell it in Gath, that such are haunted of the Devil, brought to
despair, and not of the number of the faithful? but these grieve the holy
Ghost, wound their own flesh, or rather declare evidently, that they are
strangers from the life of God.

Let the Magistrate, with Moses, repress impiety, suffer not the offender to
go with out penalty; and if he be resolute to advance religion, how many will
be ready to tell, that he takes too much upon him? If the zealous Preacher,
with John, put the axe to the root of the tree, lash the conscience, and
speak with power, what exclamations will fly, like vncoucht fire works? this
man is without mercy, damnes us all; and sends our souls to hell, before our
bodies be cold. When men pray in their families, search the Scriptures, sing
Psalms, Catechize their children, and frequent the house of God; shall not
such be counted Puritanes, nicknamed Precisians? And yet do but look into
Gods book, and tell me, if all the faithful have not done these things? and
the profane, as branded to destruction, omitted them? but these grunting Swine
are never satisfied: such Dogs will vomit up their filth; and every Kyte of
that nest, cast up his stinking gorge. And what wonder is it? for corruption will
follow his kind, and like grace, produce the contrary effects to her from
opposite principles. For Christ was counted a wine-bibber; John reputed to have
a Devil; the faithful to be full of new wine; and the same censure, must and
shall accompany the members, and cleave to the successors. Yet let us take
heed, lest falling into the same sin, we one day partake not of the same
punishment, or the like.

In the last place, let us all prove our selves, whether we be Use 4.
in the faith or not: for by this point rightly applied we may do it. Thou
say thou have faith; but have thou the effects that follow it? Do thou
bear like fruit, and bring forth good works, as did thy faithful
forefathers? And for our better trial, have we an eye to such as have been
before us, and have exercised the same vocation with us; and then if our
actions be proportionable to theirs, we have the same faith unfeigned.

Art thou a Magistrate? and do thou desire to take a Who have faith unfeigned.
true trial of thy faith? then compare thy proceedings with some one of that
condition, who in the book of God, has been reputed faithful. And thou
may consider to this purpose, Nehemiah, and take a view, whether thine
actions parallel his. What inquiry do thou make to know the Churches state?
what care have thou to reform things that be out of order? how do thou pity
the oppressed; build up the decayed walls of Jerusalem? pull down the high
places? and give charge, for the Sabboths-strict-sanctification?

Has the Lord called thee, to practice that great art of soul saving? and is
thy care, so to preach and practice, as that thou may save thine own soul,
and them that depend upon thee? and do thou yearne, for the gathering
together the scattered Saints? to build up the body of Christ? and wish, (might
it stand with Gods pleasure) that all other with thy self, were in the path,
that leads to heaven?

Is thy estate to govern a family? How then be thy servants and children
trained up in the knowledge of God? What care have thou, to have a little
Church in thine house? and morning and evening to offer up a daily sacrifice?
In a word, in whatsoever calling thou art cast, is thy choicest care, to
glorify thy God, to work out thy salvation, and to draw others with thee to
eternal glory? then be of good courage, comfort thine heart; for thy faith is
unfeigned, and shall assuredly save thee. But if these things be omitted, and
the contrary committed; what should I more say, except I should dissemble, but
that thou art a cursed Jeroboam a wretched Alexander, a profaine Esaw, and
son of perdition? be not deceived; for if faith have not its perfect work in
thee, and good fruits proceed not from thee, thou art no graffe in Christ's
stock; but a wild Olive, whose end is near to cursing and burning. Why? will thou not try thy faith by its effects, if it be sound, seeing this is a sure
rule, and will not, cannot deceive thee? look thy face in this Glass, weigh
thy estate in this balance, and measure thy faith by this rule: for it is the
only way, and I cannot give thee a better.

And from these words, it may also be collected, that,

The approbation of Gods people is not to be despised, but much Doct. 10.
respected.

Its good to be well reported of, by the faithful: for Paul's speech tends much
to their praise: Nehem. 7. 3. 1 Kin. 18. 3. Gal. 1. vlt.

For the faithful have the best judgments, in spiritual Reas. 1.
things; and the least subject to be deceived.

They shall judge the world: and is not their testimony Reas. 2.
of great estimation, who are so honored? 1 Cor. 6. Beginning.

Again, a good name is a great thing: especially, when it Reas. 3.
proceeds from the best people. Mat. 16. 15.

And finally, whom they give good report of, they will Reas. 4.
be sure to pray for: and what can be better? Phil. 1. 5.

Such then undergo reproof, as never regard the good report Use 1.
of Gods people. There be many, who had rather have the applause and praise of
the Gallants, and good fellows of these days. But does this make for their
reputation? can this yield them any ground of true and sound consolation?
will; they have it, glory in it, but a miserable thing is it. For its true
honor, to be honored of the righteous. Therefore Paul little regarded to be
judged of the world.

In the next place, this must teach them that are well reported Use 2.
of, by the faithful, to esteem it a favor; and not slightly to respect it:
for of a truth, it will comfort the heart, encourage to good, and strengthen the
weak faith, to be well respected of the Saints: and the contrary, cannot,
but wound and grieve the upright in heart. I Kin. 18. 9.

And let all men learn, so to show forth the fruits of faith, Use 3.
that they may have with these people, the like commendation. Set up the
ordinances of God in your families, cast How a good report may begot.
out the profaine person, relieve the poor Saints; and entertain the men of
God. For, for such things sake, is the approbation of Gods people acquired; and
if you do these things, who will, or can speak evil of you? if men do; yet
you are blessed in that you are evil reported of, for good things, falsely.
Mat. 5. 11.

Furthermore, we gather this doctrine also, that,

The infidelity of the Father preuents not faith in the children. Doct. 10.
For if it had, Eunice, and Timothy, and many more, should never have been
found faithful. 1 Kin. 14. 13. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Because there is nothing that precedes the Lords election, Reas. 1.
or that could move him to show mercy; but according to his own good
pleasure, he chooses, calls, justifies, and sanctifies.

Then this would follow, that all the seed of unbelievers Reas. 2.
should perish; which were a bloody, and a most unmerciful assertion, and not
to be once named among Christians.

This may make much, for the comfort of such wives, as Use 1.
be unequally yoked, seeing, its no prejudice to the salvation of their
children. Were it for the possession of an earthly inheritance, then this
privilege, would be highly respected.

But some may say, how may I know, that my husband is Quest. 1.
faithless, and profane?

1. When a man delights more in the strange woman, than in his yoke fellow. 2.
When he prouides not things necessary for the wives maintenance. 3. That will
not bear with her infirmities; but vpbraid her. 4. Who does not teach her the
ways of Godliness. 5. Which makes her a servant, rather than his companion. 6.
That will not pray with her, and for her. Ephesians. 5. 28. 1 Cor. 14. 35. 1 Pet. 3.
7.

In the second place, this serves to instruct us, for the Use 2.
answering one of Satan's temptations; who often will a buse the Scripture,
suggesting, to trouble the weak christian, that his Parents were profane; and
therefore they have no part of the promise; but this is an old lying shift,
therefore credit it not.

And might not all of us learn to praise God for this, and Use 3.
to imitate him in so doing? why should man be more cruel, than his maker?

More-ouer, where Paul makes relation of faiths habitation, in the Grandmother,
mother, and her son; yet omits all other privileges, as kindred lands,
possessions; we note, that,

Succession of faith is the best succession. Doct. 11.


The others may be praised, but this surmonts them all. 1 Chro. 4. 9. Romans 16.
7.

For this will bring us to a kingdom, that cannot be shaken, Reas. 1.
but eternal in the heavens.

Again, all others be for this, and subordinate unto it, Reas. 2.
they be hand mards, this the mistress.

This condemns some in these times, who never once Use 1.
mind this great privilege, and prerogative. If they may succeed their
progenitors, in lands, and livings, offices and revenues, the other is not
regarded, to be of the household of faith is altogether forgotten; but when
death comes, the worth of it, will be understood, and the vanity of the other
made manifest.

The poor faithful person, may from this point, draw Use 2.
water that will refresh him, in the heat of afflictions; and such honey and
oil, which will make his face shine, and heart merry, in the pangs of greatest
misery. For what will it avail, to have been of the race of Kings, of
Nobles, or successor to the mightiest Monarch, and want this other? and what
can meannesse of birth, weakness of estate, or poor alliance deprive thee of,
so thou have faith?

Let us all be taught from hence, to be forward to be of Use 3.
Gods family, and to succeed our forefathers in the faith. What is a Scepter, a
Crown, a kingdom; to this? Had it not been better for Jeroboam, or Rehoboam,
to have succeeded their fathers in faith, than the princely throne? but men
will never be wise, to see wherein true nobleness of descent consists. Art
thou a Cobbler? a drawer of water? a tankard-bearer? yet have thou faith? then
thou have Abraham to thy father, and shall one day, inherit heaven with him.
Or would thou be blessed for eternity? then strive to be a branch in this
stock, and a point in this line; then shall thou reign in white robes, when
the flesh of kings shall be rent in pieces; and take possession of the holy
habitation, when Princes, who wanted faith, shall never see the face of God.
And here I must put thee in remembrance, that faith comes not by generation,
but regeneration: neither, (as the Papists would gather from this place) is it
sufficient to be Ezekiel. 20.
of our ancestors religion; except they had been sound in the faith, for the
attaining of this, for ever blessed succession: But we must succeed those in
doctrine, in renouation, and faith, who have trod these steps before us. Yet
we deny not, but 4. sorts might, in the former days of Popery be saved. 1.
Infants, that actually had neither done good or evil in their own persons. 2.
They that were aged and opposed Popery, Who might be saved in the time of
popery.
of which number, some of our ancestors might be 3. They that erred not in
gross points of Popery, and 4. That lived, yet at death, renounced their
former doctrine, and dyed not Papists: besides that knowledge; that would save
them, will not save us, we living in a more blessed time, than they.

I could yet collect more useful instructions, both from the verse in general
and the words in particular, as, that

Where we see signs of goodness, we are to judge the best.

When we give others instruction, we are first to possess them, with the
persuasion of our affection.

For, then they will take it in good part; and our words will have the deeper
impression. But I pass to the next verse.

VERSE. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up, the gift of
God, that is in thee, by the putting on of my hands.
THese words may indifferently be handled as The logical resolution.
they have dependence on the former, or succeeding verse; but how ever, the
particulars are these* 1. Paul puts Timothy in mind of a duty. 2. mention is
made what it is, viz. to stir up. 3. What must be exuscitated, the gift in
him. 4. How he came by it; the principal means is God: the isntrumental,
the imposition of hands. 5. The cause why it is to be stirred up, is laid down
in the first word, Wherefore.

Wherefore.] this is a word of relation; and when it is used, The Theological
exposition.
it does denotate (for the most part) a reason, of the thing done, or to be
perfected.

I put thee in remembrance.] That is, by writing I do declare unto thee thy
duty, and bring it to thy mind.

That thou stir up.] This is a metaphor borrowed from (...)
fire; as when sparks be under the ashes, or the flame begins to be quenched,
then there is need to keep it burning and from being extinguished; and so it
is in respect of the gifts of grace in us.

The gift of God] By gift may be understood, his office; or the graces of the
spirit common to all Christians; or particularly, faith; mentioned in the
former verse. We may be assured of this, that Paul would have his son to be
diligent in his calling; and that could not be, except he stirred up the
special graces, as well as the common gifts of his particular vocation. For as
a piece furnished with shot, yet wanting powder, will never discharge it self
of it; so if the saving gifts of God stir not, they ordinary lie still. This
gift is further amplified by the author of it, God; and in it are two things.
One is, the thing given; the other, the freedom of it. For gifts must be free.

Which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands.] This Ceremony of laying on
of hands, has been used of Parents in blessing their children, Genesis 48. 14.
In sacrifice, Leuit. 1. 4. In healing of diseases, Acts 28. 8. In conferring
the excellent gift of the holy Ghost, Acts 8. 17. And in making of Ministers;
to which time these words have reference. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Where Paul says, this
gift was in him by laying on of hands, we must avoyde the Papists gross
gloss on this place; who hold, that ordination, or (to use their phrase) holy
orders, confer grace: for this action was accompanied also with prayer; and the
conferring of grace, by the hands of the Apostle, was extraordinary and
continued but for a time.

My son Timotheus, I being so well persuaded, that The Metaphrase.
thy Grandmother, and thy mother were endued with faith unfeigned, and also
assured, that now it dwells in thee, am therefore the more willing to put
thee in mind, that thou suffer not the gifts of God to decay or to be idle,
neither neglect the calling wherein thou wast established, by the putting on of
my hands; but that thou preach and practice, as becomes thee, who had so
excellent parents, such a good testimony, and so lawful a call: all which be
great encouragements to these duties.

Therefore.] Let this word have reference to Timotheus his Doctrines deduced.
Grandmother and mother (as though Paul would encourage him from their
fidelity, and brings them as a Pattern to be imitated; then this will follow,
that,

Children are to tread in the steps of their religious Parents.

They must have an eye to their Godly ways, holy courses, Doct. 1.
and walk in them; but if they be crooked, then must they avoid them, shun
them: Dan. 2. 23. Ezekiel. 20. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 18.

For it will rejoice the hearts of religious Parents, and induce Reas. 1.
them to bless God. Why did David mourn so bitterly for his son Absalom?
certainly, one cause was, he erred from his Parents holy paths; living a young
traitor, and dying an impenitent sinner.

Again, if children imitate their Godly forefathers, its Reas. 2.
both commendable, and profitable; for they may expect the same recompense of
reward from God, in life, death, and in the great and last day, else not.

This may make for the shame and confusion of some in Use 1.
our days, who wander (as birds from their nests) from the ways of their
faithful forefathers. Can these expect the blessing promised to their holy
Parents? may they not look for a curse rather?

You therefore that be sons and daughters, cast your Use 2.
eyes on their paths; and if they be good, tread in their steps; if bad,
turn the contrary way. The Romanists are are headstrong in thus doing; yet
run the broad way. Let us then, whose Parents profess the truth, be as
resolute in imitation of their truly religious courses.

I put thee in remembrance.] Timotheus an excellent man must be remembered, and
provoked to discharge his function faithfully; whence we note, that,

Good men stand in need of a memento. Doct. 2.


The best must be provoked, pricked in and to religious duties: if not Paul
here, and his brethren else where, might have spared their pains. 2 Pet. 1.
13. and 3. 1. Ezekiel. 33. 7. Acts 20. 28. Coll. 4. 17.

For are not the best forgetful, unmindful of what the Reas. 1.
Lord requires of them? how often do the actions, to be performed by us in
our callings, slip out of our minds?

And are we not dull and slow to good duties, though we Reas. 2.
have them in remembrance? the best have more need of a spur, than a bridle.

Does not Satan also strive to steal away the heart, and Reas. 3.
allure the mind to fix and exercise it self on unnecessary objects?

What if a man be willing to work, is this any let? does it Reas. 4.
not rather help than hinder, as the wind does the ship to make speedier
passage, notwithstanding it has already the tide?

They are reproved, who neglect this duty, or that scorn Use 1.
to be provoked. Some men are like kicking iades, that fling out when they are
spurred, rather than amend their speed; or not unlike to the ouercharged
cannons, that when the match is put to them, either burst or recoyle, and so
endanger the Gunner.

But let us practice the contrary, putting the best in mind Use 2.
of theirs; and be contented to hear of our own duties. I know the best have
need of it, and would be saved; why then should they not willingly undergo a
remembrance, and endure a memorandum? we count it a favor to be awaked out of
sleep; and shall we fret to be stirred up from sin?

That thou stir up the gift of God that is in thee] From this metaphor, we
collect, that

The graces of Gods spirit are of a fiery quality. Doct. 3.


Was not the Prophets lips touched with a cole from Gods altar? did not fiery
tongues sit on Christ's Disciples? are not the faithful Baptized with the holy
Ghost and with fire? and all of us forbidden to quench the spirit? Isa. 6. 6.
Acts 2. 3. Mat. 3. 11. 1 These. 5. 19.

For grace does enlighten the eye of the mind, as fire does Reas. 1.
the eye of the body. What is vrim, but fire? and Paul saw a light when he was
converted; so did the Gentiles, so do all Christians. For grace is fire; and
fire gives light.

Again, grace will heat like fire, and make the Godly to Reas. 2.
burn in the spirit: the more fire, the more heat, and the more grace, the
more zeal.

Thirdly, fire gives life and motion; so does grace and Reas. 3.
faith. When the sun is in his Apogy, or farthest from us, are not the
creatures in a kind of death? but being in his Perigy and near unto us, do
they not reviue and spring? so when grace comes, life comes; if it be absent,
death is present.

Fourthly, As fire does congregate things homogeneall, Reas. 4.
but segregate heterogeneall; so does faith and grace. It will dissolve things
of diverse natures, but unite the other. Grace will cast out the sinner, but
receive the Saint; yea make divisions in a man's own house, and yet cause union
with Gentile, Barbarian, Sythian.

Fifthly, fire will convert other things into it self, as we see Reas. 5.
by a stone cast into it; or make them burst in pieces, and fly about the
house; so let the profane dwell among the faithful, he will either be
converted or expelled out of doors.

Sixthly, the nature of fire is to go upward, and to carry other Reas. 6.
matter with it, and this is the reason that when water boyleth, it flies out
of the pot. For the fire being united with it, would carry it upward; but being
not able, it falls downward; so grace will ascend on high, pierce the very
heavens, and endeavors to draw others also: though sometime it falls out with it
as with the fire. For meeting with a cold subject, it loses its labor, and
cools it self for a season.

Seventhly, fire is the most active of all other elements, Reas. 7.
having much form but little matter; and so is grace. For where it is, it will
be working, not idle.

Finally, fire comes down by accident, through the motion Reas. 8.
of the sun, that's placed in it; and were it not for the Son of
righteousness, grace would never descend from on high, into this low region.

This informs the carnal man why he is cold in good Use. 1.
duties, and others hot.: why he is unwilling to work, and others so forward
in the greatest opposition: why? can a man carry fire, and not give light?
colaes, and not be burned? ask the Sun, why he shines, and the fire why it
heateth, and they will tell thee, its their nature to do so: and so is it the
nature of grace to shine like a star in a dark night amongst the wicked, and
be hottest in the greatest frost of persecution; and to strike the highest
tower in pieces, as well as devour the dryest stubble.

And here we must all learn a double lesson. First, to get Use 2.
this fire; and next, to keep it from quenching. This is that one thing
necessary; and how should we rejoice, if it be already kindled? For without
it, we are blind, corrupt, cold, yea stark dead. We must make our hearts, the
hearth to uphold it, and our hands, the tongues to build it; it must lodge with
us daily, send out a flame from us, and our lamps must be continually burning;
then shall we glorify our God, give light to others, walk safely, as walled
about with a defense of fire, in this Pilgrimage; and the Lord, at length,
shall send us fiery Chariots to carry us to heaven, where our lamps shall
burn day and night; and shine, as the Sun in the clear firmament, for ever
and ever. One spark of this is more worth, than all the balm in Gilead: This
is that true fire that comes from above; which boyleth, rosteth and seasoneth
all our sacrifices, and makes them acceptable and us also, unto God: for
without this fire, we cannot escape eternal burning. What have I said? yes I
have said, that, where this fire is not kindled, that person cannot be saved.

Stir up the gift.] Note further hence, that,

The gifts of God are to bestirred up within us. Doct. 4.


We may not permit them to lie under the ashes; and ever to be smoking, never
burning. Did not father Isaac call for sauorie meat, before he would bless
his sons? and the Prophet, a Minstrell, before he would Prophecy? David
would cry, Awake my soul, why art thou so cast down within me? and Christ,
when he lifted up his eyes toward heaven, might he not intend the same thing?
Genesis 27. 7. 2 King. 3. 15. Psalm. 42. 5. Ioh 17. 1.

For if they be not, will they not perish? have you not Reas. 1.
heard, that they are of a fiery quality? and therefore subject, without
stirring, blowing, to decay and be extinguished?

And in so doing, shall we not send forth the more light? Reas. 2.
give the greater heat? want of this causes darkness, coldness, in our
conversation.

Here the idle servant is reproved, who wrappeth his Use 1.
Talent in a Napkin, covers this fire in the ashes, and never uses the
bellows to blow it up, and kindle it; and yet those will stir up lust,
envy, and all the bundle of corruption, that is within them to the uttermost.
What provoking is there to strife and debate, carrowsing, and all manner of
uncleanness? but this is to set wild fire a burning, and to kindle a flame
that will devour to destruction, and eat up all our increase. This fire needs
no fuel, this coal wants no blowing; for of its own nature it will burn to
the bottom of Hell. O that these knew what a cooler the Lord has prepared for
them? Let our Sodomites burn in lust; fire and brimstone will consume them.

Well, let us take warning, by their warning, and practice Use 2.
this point so necessary; and that this fire may never dye, but flame, and
ascend continually, we must: first avoid what may quench it, and secondly use
the helps that will inkindle it.

The things that put out the fire of the spirit in us, are What quenches the
grace of God in us.


1. Evil cogitations; as smoke weakneth the eye, cold frosts nippe the tender
budde, and stinking smells damp and dull the purest spirits; so do bad thoughts
disturb, impouerish, and enfeeble the gifts of God that be in us.

2. Corrupt speech; that troubles the fountain, and stops the spirits
spring: it shakes the young plants of grace, as the boisterous winds do the
late graffed sions: this will cause the new man to dye before his time, and the
best fruits he bears to become blasted.

3. Wicked works; they raze the foundation; and like the Boar of the wood
root up all: when these break forth into action, then falls grace suddenly
into a consumption: for they do not only wither the branches, and change the
complexion; but also kill the body, devour the juice of life and destroy the
constitution.

4. Lewd company: This does press down, and keep under the gifts of God,
that they cannot shoot up and spring; as water to fire, green wood to dry,
this quenches all; one grain of this leaven leaueneth the whole Lump. Let the
Isralites live among the Aegiptians, though they hate the men, yet they will
learn their manners; and Peter will grow cold, if he warm his fingers at
Caiaphas his fire.

5. The prosperity of the wicked: that will buffet the soul, wound the very
spirit, and make grace to look pale and wanne: how have the faithful fainted
to see this? and the strongest foot of faith reeled, staggered? this mudde
has made the men of God almost to turn out of the way. Psalm. 73.


6. And finally, the pampering of the flesh: it will impouerish the Spirit, and
make it look lanke, and lean: if the one be pampered, the other will be
starued. When one of these buckets is ascending, the other is descending. Paul
knew ^t well, therefore would beat down his body, and keep it in subjection.
These be the greatest impediments that hinder the gifts of grace from stirring,
growing.

Thus having removed the quench-coale from oppressing 1 Cor. 9. vlt.
the fire of the spirit, like an ouer-laded beast eased of his burden, we will
add some incentines to blow and stir it up, that it may kindle, flame, and
ascend; and they be either public, or private.

1. Go not, my friend, from Jerusalem to Jericho, where, Helps to stir up
grace in us.
though the situation is good, the waters are naught; but plant thy self under
a powerful ministry, and then, diligently attend to the word. When Paul had
said, quench not the spirit, he adds immediately, despise not Prophecyings:
Preaching will 1 These. 5. 19.
like a mighty wind, cause this spiritual fire to kindle and burn within us.

2. The sacraments: The one puts us in mind of our promise, the other of the
coming of our Lord in glory. Will not the least token from a friend cause our
hearts to leap within us? Did not the babe spring in his mothers womb, when
the mother of Christ came near him? and shall not grace bestirred vpin
consideration that he is at the very doors?

3. Good companions: Saul will Prophecy among the prophets; and the greenest
wood burn, being bound with the dry: one coal will kindle many, and diverse
little brands set one another on burning: when Silas came to Paul, did he not
burn in spirit?

4. Diligence in our particular callings. This will constrain us to stir up
the grace that is in us; for the actions thereof are like so many instruments,
without which we cannot set this fire a working; and through idleness, do
not our gifts lie dead, rust, and canker?

5. Singing of Psalms. When we join with others in this action, how will
grace flame within us? every word will lift up the mind and each period leave
a sweet relish behind it, that will glad the spirit. Loue-songs do noe more
inflame lust, than the song of songs will grace in the heart.

6. Lastly, admonition; it will work wonderfully, if it be performed with
circumstance, and in season. Its like oil, that makes the face shining and
glorious; or the morning dew, that waters the tender plants. Where this false,
grace will sprout and flourish.

The private helps are.

1. Reading, either the scriptures, or other holy writings: This being done in
a corner, will refresh the spirit. Its like food to the fainting Passenger.

2. Meditation; he that sits long by the fire shall have his body to grow hot,
and his cold spirits to become active, nimble. Let this be done thoroughly, and
it will make grace to stretch it self beyond its ordinary wont, and the
Christian to be rapt out of himself. He that viewes the sun will soon cast
down his head; so he that thinks seriously of the son of God, will cry, I
have joy enough.

3. Prayer; who ever in his secret chamber went to God by prayer, but he was
ravished in mind, and in the strength of that action, spent all that day
without wearines? God gives the greatest gifts in secret; and, like man,
reueileth himself a (...) not such a one possess the place of one that's
lawfully sent, and called of God and man? and make the ground of the Church
barren?

Let them then who assume to themselves this office of dignity, Use 1.
take heed what they do. The person ordinated must be of good report, well
qualified? For, otherwise it may and will be the very bane and pestilence of
the Church, when men unfit, not furnished with convenient gifts, are ordinated,
inducted. What says our Lord? If the blind lead the blind, do not both fall
into the ditch? Mat. 15. 14.

This also, from the rule of relation, must teach them who Use 2.
enterprise this high calling, to be careful to enter in an holy manner; at
Gods door, not the devils window. Such can neither expect the protection or
blessing of God. They sit, like a man on the top of a mast, the least gust
makes them subject to drowning. Some assume this place, as a thief, an untamed
horse, back him with much a do, ride him in a sweat, and come down with a
mischief. It may be justly said to such, friend how came thou in hither? who
sent thee, or requires this at thine hands?

Whereas Timotheus his gifts were increased, by prayer, Prophecy, and
imposition of hands, we may conclude, that,

The ordinances of God are not without profit, if rightly practiced. Doct. 7.


Who ever used any in an holy manner, but prevailed for a blessing? Was not the
plague stayed, when Aaron took a censer, put fire thereon from the altar, and
incense according to Moses command? and did not the blood of the Paschall
Lamble, stay the Angel which destroyed the Aegiptians, from touching the
Israelites? When was preaching or prayer vain in the Lord, if duly performed?
Numb. 16. 8. Exodus 12. 23. 2 Samuel 24. 16. Acts 2. 41. and 4. 31. and 16. 14.
Ia. 5. 16. 2. Chro. 30. 20. Isa. 38. 5.

For has not each ordinance a special promise? Ask and Reas. 1.
ye shall have, Seek and ye shall find, Knock and it shall be opened unto
you. And shall we think, that, the condition on our part performed, the Lord
will fail on his word? Let not such a thought once creep into our mind. Mat.
7. 7.

What if our best actions be imperfect? is not the sin Reas. 2.
removed by the blood of Christ Jesus? shall he not present them to his father
without spot, without rinckle? When our Lord has corrected our errors, cut
off the superfluity, supplied the defects of our doings, then shall they
appear good before God, and receive a recompense of reward. Rev. 8. 3.

Away then with that old, and (no less) profane complaint, Use 1. Isa. 58. 3.
We have fasted and thou see not, afflicted our souls and thou regardest
not; and what profit is there in serving Job 21. 15.
the almighty? Was not Ahabs humiliation rewarded? Iehues zeal commended? and
in some sort recompensed? Yet were they not Hypocrites? reprobates? Their word
was the Lord of hosts, but their proper scope the praise of men, the safety of
themselves, not the glory of God, rather their proiects were an earthly
kingdom: Shall we think then, that sincerity in Gods service is without
reward? that his ordinances are not, being in an holy manner performed,
profitable every way to his faithful servants?

What stronger motive can be in the world to induce men Use 2.
to be frequent in good duties, than this consideration? Humble thy self, the
Lord shall lift thee up. Preach, the Saints shall then be gathered, the body of
Christ edified. Fast and pray, and thou shall prosper. Commune with the best of
Gods servants, be a companion to them that fear him. Come often to the Lords
table, and corruption shall wither, dye; the fruit of the Spirit grow,
flourish, and wax strong within thee. For, is not the promise of God true?
does not his word stand for ever? and are not our imperfect actions, perfected
by the Lord Jesus? We seek and do not find, because Iam. 4. 3.
we seek and ask amiss. Let me exhort thee to preach and pray, read and
hear, propound and resolve profitable questions; and then if thy labors be in
vain, count me a false Prophet, curse me at thy death. Who ever did sow good
feed in its season, but had a rich and plentiful croppe at harvest? If Peter
cast in his net at his masters command, though in former time he has
labored hard and caught nothing; yet at the last, he shall encompasse many
great fishes, hale them to land, and be sufficiently recompensed, satisfied.
Its not a trade, but the well using of it; not a farm, but the well husbandry
of it, that will enrich the one and the other. Wherefore, be steadfast,
immovable, and abundant in the work of 1 Cor. 15. vlt.
the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

What? did Paul and the people fast, pray, and lay on hands, without observing
the effect of their actions? No, he, and they saw, how the gifts of Timotheus
were augmented, increased: in so doing; whence it will follow, that,

In the use of Gods ordinances we are to observe, how he deals Doct. 8.
with us.

Have not the Prophets, Apostles, and all the Lords people done thus? Should we
make a collection of each particular, we should be exceeding large. When they
did offer sacrifice, did they not observe the success? Fast and pray, what
effects did follow? read and preach, how people were converted, comforted, or
hardened? In administration of the Sacraments, that, Many were sick, and
weak, and slept, others healed, reioiced, and received the holy Ghost? Genesis 4.
3. and 10. 20. 21. Nehem. 9. 9. etc. Psalm. 106. 23. and 107. 6. etc. Mat. 7.
28. Acts 4. 31. and 28. 23. 24. 29. 2 Chro. 30. 20. etc. 2 Kin. 22. 19. Io. 13.
27. 1 Cor. 11. 30.

For, in so doing we come to have an experimental knowledge Reas. 1.
of the truth and fidelity of Gods promises, than the which nothing is better.
If any man will do his will, he may be assured, that the doctrine we deliver
is not sensual, earthly, Ioh. 7. 17. Iam 3. 17.
or devilish; but pure, peaceable, good and profitable. For, all the Lord
speaks shall come to pass. Josh. 21. 45.

And will it not yield matter of thanksgiving? Why are we so barren in
blessing of God? have our mouths so empty Reas. 2.
of his praises? do not continually sing songs of gratefulness? Is it not the
neglect of this observation? Could we with the Prophet, register the many
mercies we receive in the use of Gods ordinances, we should cry as he did:
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? Psalm. 1 16. 12.

Would it not also constrain us to be more frequent in Reas. 3.
good duties? provoke and prick us forward to preach and pray? will not men
spend much time without weariness in that calling, that affords great
commodity with constancy?

Who ever casts off a profitable art? or waxes dull in doing that, which his
own experience makes sure, has recompense of reward?

Suppose we found no fruit in thus doing, but all our actions Reas. 4.
of this kind were blasted. Yet would it not cause us to look out the cause,
why God withholds a blessing? Should we not find some Babilonish garment in
our tent? some Jonah a sleep in the ship? one sin or other, that hinders
the good success of our spiritual endeavors, and were not this worthy of our
pains?

Hence comes to be reproved many a person, who though Use 1.
they perform holy duties, yet never have eye to the event. Are not these
worse than Cain? For, he observed the success of his sacrifice. Or Balaam? Did
not he perceive how the Lord answered him? Do we not read that hypocrites
marked, what fruit they reaped in fasting and afflicting themselves? Isay 58 3.
Are not Christians then blame worthy who come short of such in this thing?
True it is, that in nothing the best fail more, than in not joining
watchfullnesse in the use of Gods ordinances. Want of this one thing breeds
doubting, staggering in the promises, withholds matter of thankfulness,
causes slownesse, dullness in good duties; and keeps sin close, from being
revealed, discovered.

What shall we then do? Why? we must imitate men in other Use 2.
vocations, recreatious. When the husbandman has cast good seed into his
soil, will he not have an eye to its rooting, sprowting, and growing? Who
planteth or grafteth, but observes how the tender blades budde, shoot forth,
and spread themselves? will not the fisherman, having cast in his net or angle,
into the river, expect whether any fish be caught by the gill, or entangled in
the meshes? What fowler spreads pantels, sets his ginne, discharges his
piece, but will haunt the spring, view the scrap, and look with a stretched
out neck, to see if any bird be caught fast, insnarred, or wounded? Shall
Physicians give pills, administer potions, and grow careless how their Physic
works? Learn then by their examples, what success accompanies the Lords
ordinances, Preacher, people. Sow the seed of the word, in season, out of
season, and mark, which does prosper* 2 Timothy 4. 2. Eccles. 11. 6.
this or that. In thus doing, peradventure thou may find some person struck
with the shot* of the word, who like a wounded Pigeon, will single himself
from his former companions, fall in some obseure corner of a field, spread the
wings of his arms* and with a drouping conscience, call and cry to God for
mercy, for pardon. Pray, and watch what the Lord will say unto thee. Read,
and hear, and take notice how thy heart waxes hot, corruption is cooled, and
grace kindled. Yea, in all holy actions, look to the success; and experience
will let thee see, that, as the shadow follows the body, the blessing of God
does acco^panie his ordinances. Above all things, think thou on this; so shall
thy faith grow strong in the promises of God; thou shall find them a sure word
that never fails. Also thou may have matter of praise to Godward, and tell
thy brethren, what he has done for thy soul. And how will this experimental
Psalm. 66. 16.
knowledge encourage thee to preach, pray, read, hear, and never grow weary
in well-doing? At the least, or (if I may so say), at the worst, this benefit
will accrue, how that there is some sin in us not repented of, one corruption
or other not mortified, or just circumstance in Gods service omitted, which
causes our endeavors not to prosper, our best fruit to be blasted.

From the words diversely considered, might many more doctrines be collected; as
that,

1. There may be increase of grace in the best Christian.

For Timotheus was an excellent man before this time; and were not his gifts
now augmented?

2. That a Minister has need of more grace than a common Christian.

This is the reason his gifts were increased.

3. That the more worthy calling God sets us in, the greater portion of his
spirit will he power upon us.

He did so by Timotheus.

4. That preachers may (above others) depend upon God for a blessing.

For, are they not consecrated with great care and solemnity? enriched with
extraordinary gifts and graces? Think on this, O ye men of God, and in
contempt of the world, let the honor of your calling, and hope of good
success in the faithful execution, comfort your souls, and breed an
undaunted resolution in you.

VERSE. 7. For God has not given us the Spirit of fear; but of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind.
THis verse may either be applied to the verse The Logical resolution.
going before, or that which follows; in the which is contained a Reason, why
Timothy should stir up the gift of God in him, or not be ashamed of the
Gospel. And thus the Argument stands. Whosoever is freed from the spirit of
fear, and is endued with the spirit of power, love, and a sound mind, must
stir up the gifts of God in him, be resolute in his calling, and not ashamed
of the testimony of Christ the Lord: But thou my son, art free from the
Spirit, etc. Therefore thou must stir up the gift of God, etc.

In the verse we may observe two things. First, what the children of God have
not; viz. The Spirit of fear. Secondly, What they have; viz. a threefold gift.
1. Power. 2. Love. 3. A sound mind. The Author of all which, is said to be, God.

For God.] That is, God the Father, the first person in the The Theological
exposition.
deity; though we exclude not the other: For as all the three persons consented
to, and cooperated at man's Creation; so do they at his Recreation. Genesis 1. 26.

Has not given.] In a Gift, is 1. A giver. 2. A thing given. 3. The freedom
of the thing given. 4. An act by which it is given. And lastly, some person
that is made partaker of the gift given.

Us.] To me Paul, thee Timotheus; and (it may extend to) other grounded and
strong Christians, under the Gospel.

The Spirit.] This word Spirit is sometimes took in a bad, Spirit taken in a
bad sense. Math 8. Luke 14. 1 Timothy 4. 1 King. 16.
sometime a good sense. In a bad. 1. For Satan 2. For a Ghost, that wandereth.
3. For false doctrine. Or. 4. For some evil motion, stirred up by the Devil,
or some other cause etc.

In a good sense. 1. For God in general. 2. For the subsistences Spirit, in a
good sense. Ioh. 4. Esa 48. 1 Ioh 4. Gal. 5. 17. Ephesians. 3. Rom 8. Acts 23. 1
These. 5.
in particular. 3. For the word of God. 4. For the work of grace. 5. For the
very act or motion, that proceeds and flows from the work of the Spirit.
And it is applied to the whole soul, and the faculties of it, with the
natural, animal and vital parts, the which we omit.

But in this place, it is to be understood (I take it) both of the ill motions,
that proceed from Satan, and his cursed work within us: Or, the good motions
of the Holy Ghost and his blessed work, that is wrought within us. For Satan
like the Spider, is seldom separated from his wicked web, neither may we put
a sunder the Spirit and the work, or gifts of the spirit. For so good a cause
will not be absent from his effect.

Fear.] We read of a fear commended and commanded; Psalm. 2. Prou. 1. Isa.
33. Iam. 2. 19.
the which some style a filial or childlike fear; and it was in Adam by
Creation; and is restored to man at his Regeneration: And we read of a fear in
Devils, and wicked men, condemned, and to be abandoned; the which Divines call
a servile, or slavish fear. (Paul in Romans 8. 15. Makes it an effect (...).
of the Spirit of bondage or servitude, and opposes it to the Spirit of
adoption or filiation:) the which fear is here meant; and it befell man for
sin, and came not by creation: For, before Adam had transgressed, there was
no evil object in the world: and this fear is a punishment of sin:
therefore it may be called, the gift of God; but given in revenge, as we give
blows to the peccant person.

Others, by fear in this place, understand that fear, which is at a man's
first conversion: Or comparatively: For they (say they) under the Gospel had
less fear, then those that were under the Law; and because the Scripture
calls that, often, nothing, which is not in that measure. But I rather hold
the first interpretation; making carnal men the proper subject of it.

But of power.] By power is not to be understood any distinct grace, but
rather a strength of all other graces. For every grace has some enmity that
must be overcome by this power. And as in the natural body, there is a power
or strength in every member: so in the Spiritual body, an ability of each
part, to the welbeing of it.

And of love.] Natural affection is not here meant; but that which is
Spiritual: and seeing our Apostle sets it down indefinitly, and without its
object; we may expound it of Love to God and man.

And of a sound mind.] Some turn the word Sobriety. As if the Apostle had
meant it, or meats and drinks: But I understand it, of a spiritual sobriety;
the which has in it two things. 1. Soundnes of judgment. 2. Moderation of
affection.

It stands thee in hand, my Son, to stir up the grace The Metaphrase.
of God that is in thee, to look diligently to the work of thy Ministry, and
not to be idle, or ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, the Gospel of Christ;
Inasmuch that the Spirit of bondage (which the unregenerate are possessed
withal) is took from thee; and the Spirit of power, and love, and of a sound
mind, to aid thee, to move thee, and to direct thee, (the which are by God
conferred and only given to us his peculiar and adopted children) be imparted
upon thee.

And now, if we consider the words as they be a Reason, The Deduction of
Doctrines.
and have relation to the precedent and consequent verses; then this is the
first point, that we observe, that,

The duties of our callings are not to be neglected. Doct. 1. Io. 11. 9. etc. 1
Cor. 16. 13.


We must go through good report, and evil report. And not fear any contrary
opposition; but quit us like men and be resolute.

For to do otherwise, is to bring the evil upon us that Reas. 1.
we are afraid of. The Jews would not confess Christ because of the Romans;
who, if they did, feared would spoil their Temple. Yet was it spared? No: it
was razed down Math. 16. 25.
to the ground notwithstanding.

And more then this, they that be fearful to do that which is good, shall
not inherit the kingdom of God; for without shall be the fearful and
faint-hearted; as well as the whoremongers, murderers and faithless persons;
and shall taste Rev. 21. 8.
of the second death.

This reproues the timorousnes of our days, and pusillanimitie Use 1.
that is in many persons. The Magistrate, like Pilate, sometimes fears the
people, and so quits the guilty, condemns the innocent: The Minister; too
often, cries peace, peace, when there is a sound of much war; powers in oil
when vinegar were fitter; and all because he fears the Auditors. Peter thus
denies his Master; and Paul's friends do forsake him: Yea, this evil is but
too general under the Sun.

But let it not be so with us, Beloved: least what we most Use 2.
fear, fall to be our portion. Let us be diligent in our several courses: For
he that walks in the day, stumbleth not. We Ioh. 11.
cry out against him that first breaks the Rank, and count him and call him
a white-liuered and faint-hearted Soldier: then let us avoyde, what we so much
condemn and dislike in others: For that which thou detestest in another, by
others shall be as much detested, if it be found in thee also. And learn to
fear God; so shall he make all creatures to stand in awe of thee. For as
Moses serpent did devour all the false; so will this true fear eat up all
that is counterfeite.

The next thing we note out of the words is this; that,

Grown Christians have not the Spirit of servile fear. Doct. 2. Romans 8. 15.
Psalm. 23. 4. and 112. 7.


Yet such as be lately converted and weak, have much and many troubles, and
inward terrors. Carnal persons are full of despair and fear, but men of age
and grace, are freed from it (at the least) in a great degree. Reas. 1. 1 Timothy
1. 9. Romans 6. 14.


For such are not under the Law, subject to the curse; but under the Gospel of
grace and mercy. He that varieth the object, and alters his habitation,
shall find in his natural body a diverse operation: so they that come under the
act of Gods love and favor, are freed from their former fear. Reas. 2.


Again, they have the spirit of adoption; whereby they be certified, that they
are the sons of God, and in state of Gal. 4. 5.
Salvation. Now may they eat their bread with joy, and drink their drink
with a glad heart; for the Lord accepts them. Eccl. 9. 7.
The favor of a Prince, makes the subject merry: and shall not the loving
kindness of the most High; expel all mourning?

First, by this we may try the truth and strength of grace Use 1.
in us. Are we full of terror? Do we tremble at the evil tidings? and quake
in the remembrance of death, judgment, and hell? Then, we are either weak,
or no Chrians at all: for faith and Gods favor makes a glad heart, and a
cheerful countenance. They that are always trembling, have the spirit of
fear, and cruel bondage.

And in the second place, We are directed how to expel Use 2.
fear, and blow away the thick mists of terror; why, get a growth in all
grace; strive to be a strong man in the Lord. Cripples are afraid of every
thing; so weak Christians and wicked persons quake at the wagging of a leaf,
at every little sound.

A third thing from the former part of this verse we gather, which is; that

Freedom from slavish fear, is no small favor. Doct. 3. Rom 8 15. Io^. 13.
2^.


Paul Does make mention of it, as of a matter of much moment, and a thing not
lightly to be passed, from the which they were delivered.

Because its a fruit of sin, and an heavy curse incident Reas. 1.
to the wicked. For if man had not offended, he had never feared either the
remotion of good, or the infliction of evil; Genesis 3. 10.
the proper objects about which this passion is conversant, exercised.

Besides, does not this fear wound the Spirit, eat and Reas. 2.
gnaw out the very heart, consume the bones, dry up the marrow, and make the
face look pale, wanne, griesly, ghostly, Psalm. 39. 11.
and the whole body to consume and wast away.

And is it not an opposite to boldness, hope, joy, and that Reas. 3.
inward peace, that passes all understanding? For no Chastisement, of this
kind, is for the present joyous, but grievous. Heb. 12. 11.
What can pierce the soul more, then this dart? enter so deeply into the
secrets, as this keen arrow? Let Cain's Genesis 4. 14.
flight further confirm it; and our own experience speak the truth of this
thing.

Fourthly, does it not hinder a man from the doing of Reas. 4. Ioh 3. 1. 2.
Luke 19. 21.
many good duties? why do we run from God? often lay his honor in the dust?
forsake our brethen? deny the truth, and omit diverse good actions, holy
excercises? Why? fear Genesis 20. 11. 1 Samuel 21. 12. Math. 26. 59.
constraines us. Why did Abraham call his wife, Sister? David feign himself
mad? Peter curse and banne? Oh! it was a slavish fear, that produced these
effects.

Then let such as are freed from it, praise God, and repute Use 1.
it no common favor: Freedom from this evil is either thanks-worthy, or
nothing. You that sometime have felt the force of it, cast your eye behind you,
and forget not the the days of old: What would not a man give to be rid of
this guest, when he lodges in the house of his heart? Nothing would be too
dear at such a season. And shall God dispossess him, and we prove in
grateful? well; take heed what thou do; for God can cause him to return
with a double sting and vex thee more then in former* time.

And here we must learn to avoid* all occasions, that may Use 2.
procure it; and to use the means that will expel it, drive it away. Take
heed of the omission of good, or the least commission of evil, for these two,
be the natural parents that produce it, conserve it: For as every body has
his shadow; each Be her sting; so every sin has fear for his attendant,
would thou sleep securely, lay thee down in peace: live with joy, and dye
with comfort? Then learn to do good, cease from evil.

Hear is yet another point to be noted, out of Paul's manner of reasoning. Why
does he couple himself with Timotheus, saying, for God has not given us, and
not thee? I take it, to encourage him the more to stir up the gift of God in
him: whence observe, that

There is a wise handling of a matter to be observed in the provoking Doct. 4.
of others to good duties.

It is worthy of our consideration, to mark how our Apostle Neh. 2. 3. Act.
22. and. 26. 27.
sometimes seuereth himself, sometimes coupleth himself with others in his
Exhortations, Prouocations, Reprehensions. Why did Paul say to the Centurion,
Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be safe? and not we cannot be safe
Act. 27. 31? The Reason shall be a Reason of the Doctrine. For otherwise his
words would not have took so deep impression: Reas. 1.
For if he had said we cannot be safe: Then they would have paraduenture
objected, that Paul said so for his own safety; but excluding himself, they
might Conjecture, that God, though they perished, would save him Mark. 11. 30.
etc.
another way. And thus did our Lord, by his wisdom put to silence the
Pharisees in his Reasonings.

Again, when we have used the likeliest course in our proceedings, Reas. 2.
for the effecting of a thing; we shall have the greater hope of the end, we
aim at; And if we be prevented, yet Ester 4. 16.
the remembrance, how we observed the best and wi^est way will be of great force
to comfort and content us; Every wise Christian and daily workman, know the
truth of this by daily experience in their proceedings.

In the use of this, we are constrained to reprove (...) Use 1.
discr^tion of Preachers, and pri^a^^ (...) no wisdom in their provoking of
others to good duties, and thereby rather hurt, then help others, with whom
they have to deal, in the way of Godliness and honesty. What wild fire shall
you sometime see to fly from the Altars in the Temple? what indiscreet carriage
and gesture? incomposed and indigested phrase from the Pulpit? And agreat deal
of passion: little compassion? The same is often seen in the Auditors also; in
censuring the preacher, condemning of his method, manner of delivery, his
deduction and prosecution of doctrines. Is this to honor an Elder? to admonish
him as a father? is this wise and Christian dealing? And, let but one once have
a little life, and true light, he is crying out against all men; condemning
blindness to the Center of darkness. These have forgotten, what they sometime
were; and, though they have zeal, yet its not guided by knowledge, discretion;
and so there Actions work no Reformation, but Deformation.

Let us then get wisdom in the guiding of all our speeches, Use. 2.
and persuasions. Imitate the thresher, when thou art to deal with thy
Brother; who first Tappeth his Corn in the sheafe, before he lay on greater
strokes; for else the good grain would fly into every corner, and the straw
not endure the flayle: so, begin by degrees with another, and when he will
endure Tapping; then smite harder, or else thou do but labor in vain.

And thus we come to the second branch of the Verse.

But the spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.]

These words have a three fold consideration. 1. As they have relation to the
former verse. 2. As they are opposed to the spirit of fear: and 3. As they one
depend upon another.

But first we will handle them as they be absolutely considered in themselves;
where we collect, that,

Gods people have the spirit of power. Doct. 5.


Had not the Poastes of an house need to be of heart of Oak? Gods people
should be as Gedeons children, every one like the son of a King: or David's
worthies, men of valor, mighty, and strong: able to turn the wheel over the
wicked, to smite them, with the sword of the word, hippe, and thigh. Was not
Jeremiah a defenced City? an iron pillar? a wall of brass. Ezechiel had his
face made strong? his forehead like the adamant? harder then flint. Michaiah
was full of power, judgment, strength? Barnabas of faith; Steven of the holy
Ghost. Ier. 1. 18. Ezekiel 3. 8. 9. Acts 7. 55.

First, Preachers have the spirit of power: else 1. How Reasons.
should they study, preach, watch, and pray? 2. Withstand all oppositions? 3.
Boldly reprove great obstinate sinners? for sound preaching will have much
resisting; Judas will be 1 Cor. 16. 13. Ephesians. 6 10. Coll. 1. 11.
betraying, Alexander withstanding, and drunkards railing, balladizing. 4. And
will not the devil play his part, who is strong? And all private persons have
this power.

1. Else, how should they resist all natural weakness in Reasons.
them, which hinders the cheerful performance of good duties? 2. Overcome all
outward impediments, they shall meet withal? 3. Support the heavy burden of
affliction, which is a concomitant of the Gospel? and 4. Without fainting
endure to the end? Weak travelers will soon be tired, feeble professors
quickly foiled.

And here is condemned those, both Preachers, and people Use 1.
who have it not themselves, neither can endure it in others. We commend the
deep-mouthed hound; the shrill sound of the trumpet, the loud report of the
piece; yet cannot away with, care not for, the spirit of power, and resolution
in a Christian. Nay; is not the drunkard, who is mighty to to power in strong
drink, applauded? the great beasts and huge Bulls of Bashan for pushing, and
gorering one another, admired? Why, then, should not the spirit of power in
Gods people be regarded, extolled? Is not power appropriated Job. 9. 4.
to God? Did not Christ speak with authority and power, and not as the
Scribes? Is not this recorded for his praise? Mat 7 vlt.
then where be men's wits? are they not besides themselves?

Will thou hear me? or would thou be reputed Gods? Use 2.
then strive for this strength, procure thou this power: for is it not a grace
of the spirit? are not they that want it subject to slavish fear? what can be
of more worth? stand thee in greater stead another day?

For can a Soldier be too strong? a traveler over well limbed? then may a
Christian be too well fenced, armed. Must he not wrestle with principalities
and powers? combat with the sons of Anak? tread upon the Lion and the aspe?
and who can tell what weight may be put on his shoulders, for time to come?
will we not provin our beast for a long journey? rigge our ships for a rough
passage? build them strong for a long voyage? bend our staff before we leap?
and shall we never fortify the inner man? repair the batterd bark of our
souls: nor try the truth of that stilt, which must help us to heaven?
Wherefore, gather spiritual greatness, strive for this strength, and purchase
this power by all means possible; and that thou may do these things.

1. Endeavor to see thine own weakness: when men think How the spirit of
power may be procured.
they want nothing, they will not care for any thing. If we truly did discern
our infirmities, we would then labor for strength: and stabilitie: But
ignorance in this, makes men like Peter full of presumption.

2. Avoid sin: For as the more we bleed, the weaker we become; so the more
we sin, the lesser power have we: he that sins weakeneth this spirit of
power, and pineth away.

3. Mortify the flesh: for that is an opposite to this spirit. Weaken the
weeds, and the good corn will flourish, so crucify corruption; beat down the
old man; and the new will grow strong, and ouer-master him.

4. Strive to increase thy faith: For as that grows; thy strength will come.
The more natural spirit, the more corporal power; so the more spiritual
strength and ability, by faiths increase. For as natural actions are said to
proceed from the one; so may all spiritual seem to flow from the other. No
spirit, no motion* no faith, no power.

5. Censure not the weak* do not count him as nothing; lest the Lord
strengthen him, and weaken thee. And what 1 Cor. 4. 7.
have thou, which another has not, that thou have not received? This is a
foul evil in our days: and have not such been met withal? yea, God often
lets such blood, who are so rank censurers of their weak brethren.

6. Use that power well, that God has imparted unto thee: for by use it will
grow; and to such, more shall be given. God will not give addition, and
augmentation of strength, when as he sees the abuse of that we have.

7. Add to all these, often and earnest prayer, crying with the Prophet,
firmly sustain me, O Lord, with a free, or, (as some read) a Princely
spirit. Psalm. 51. 13. For, Prayer, like the still dew the tender Plants, will
cause a growth of spiritual strength.

And of love.] Love, being here related indefinitely without its object, will
give us full scope to treat of it at large. First, then it shall be noted:
that,

The children of God have the spirit of love. Doct. 6.


This grace, by the holy Ghost, is shed abroad in the hearts of all good
Christians, whether public or private persons; not one, who is borne again,
wants it. Romans 5. 5. 1 Io. 4. 8.

For what we had by Creation, we have (in part) by Regeneration. Reas. 1.
Shall not the second Adam Christ, recover for us by Redemption, what we were
spoiled of, by the first Adams transgression? The Apostasy, and Anastasie,
fall, and rising again, are equal in this, though not in the latitude of
their object: for the fall was of all, the restoration is but of some. Io. 17.
9. etc.

Again, Christians are members of Christ; and from that Reas. 2.
union, have, of his fullness, received grace for grace. Had Adam stood, all
his seed had participated of what goodness was in him; and shall not those
that be regrafted into Christ do the same in truth, though not in measure? If
it were not thus, why should they be said to be partakers of the divine nature?
Io. 1. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

And have the children of God love? Would thou then Uses.
be one of them* First, Learn what love is; and secondly, Strive for it.

Love is an Act of the Will, embracing with delight whatsoever Love defined.
is first approoved by the understanding.

In this Description are six particulars: whereof we will speak in order.

First, I say, its an Act. For, 1. all Divinity is practical, and consists
not in a bare and naked speculation. And 2. if love were a passion, (as some
will) and not an action, then the promise should belong to the suffering
Patient, not the working Agent, the which were absurd: for its a more blessed
thing to love, than to be loved; because the lover has a promise for his
action; but the beloved person none for his passion.

Secondly, And it is an act, of the Will, not of the tongue* or hand; for, 1.
Divinity is the rule of the Will immediately, though of the whole man
mediately. 2. Again, if love were not an act, arising from the will, but from
an affection seated in the heart (as the most hold,) then should love cease in
the Saints at their deaths, and the Angels never have it, the which may not be
admitted.

Thirdly, In the third place, we affirm, that this act embraces the object
beloved. For, 1. The nature of love is to unite it self to the thing loved, as
the hand takes hold of what the eye beholds. And 2. should not the Will
after its extension be conjoined to the object affected, it would never be at
rest and settled. 3. Hatred rejects; therefore love embraces.

Fourthly, It embraces with delight: for, 1. As every flower has its smell:
so every action in Divinity is accompanied with delight, and comfort, none
excepted. 2. Besides, the Will does embrace what is offered to it as good, and
the fruition of a good thing must needs breed delight, else nothing can.

Fifthly, Whatsoever: Here note the latitude of the object of love; for it may
be either truth or error, good or evil, person, or thing, by accident; and
the reason is. 1. In that the understanding may present to the will an apparent
truth, for the truth it self: As the silly fish catches the counterfeit fly
for the natural, through misapprehension. And 2. the will may be so much
corrupted, though it be not deceived; that it may with delight embrace the
thing that is evil, as we may see in wicked men and devils.

Sixthly, Whatsoever, is; first approved by the understanding: In this sentence,
we see the order of the wills act; for the understanding precedes it in acting,
as the eye the foot. The reason is. 1. because of an unknown thing, there can
be no love or desire: and 2. as whatsoever is in the inward sense, was first in
the outward: so whatsoever thing is in the will, was formerly in the
understanding. It is with the inner man as with the outward: The eye may be
compared to the understanding the feet likened to the affections, and the hand
to the will: the eye beholds the object, the feet carry unto it, and then the
hand takes it by acting: so the understanding judges, then love coveteth; and
the Will as the hand works for it, if it be not possessed: if it be, then it
endeavors to retain it still. Now from this that has been said, many things
may be deduced.

1. That, They that know not God, cannot love him: Ignorant Corrolaries from
the definition.
persons have not the love of God. For from the understanding proceeds sound
affection, and there is no desire of what we know not.

2. That Error in the understanding deceives the affection: for love takes
things as they are presented, and judged; if the one be deceived, the other is
also. This is manifest.

3. Besides, I conclude hence, that, The affection is more worthy than the
understanding; and the Will, than both. For, that which is for another, is of
less dignity, than the thing for which it is. The Sabbath was for man; the
Woman for man; therefore Man is more worthy than either.

4. Moreover, this follows also, that, The affections do immediately attend
the understanding, as we receive objects; and are in the first act Patients:
so, then they importune the Will, like an earnest suitor, to work for what
they affect: for the Will commands them actiuely. When God works to man, he
begins at the outward and inward senses, and ends his work at the Will as
the Center. And, when man works to God, and for him; his act begins at the
Will, but ends at the external and extreme parts and members.

5. In the next place, it will follow from the fore going definition, that;
They who love God, have inward joy: for love always receives its object with
great delight. And little does the world know, what melody, the children of
God have in their hearts: no stranger can intermeddle with their joy. For from
the best intellect, and best object, proceeds the most comfort; and the
faithful have both.

6. And lastly, we may safely gather, that, Such people as do not embrace the
Lord, and endeavor not still to be united to him, did never truly love him.
For the nature of love is to be always present, and to become one with the
thing she loves. Christ, loving us, became Emanuel, God with us, and has
promised never to leave nor forsake us. And if Jacob affect Rachel, he would be
espoused to her. For by marriage they are made one flesh, united in the nearest
bond.

In the next place, we come to handle Love, as it has relation to its object;
Whence we may note: that,

Gods children love God. Doct. 6.


This is a short point in words, but long in work; soon proved, of many
confessed; yet of a few practiced. Psalm. 46. 7. and 73. 25. and 97. 10. Col. 3.
14. 1 Io. 4. 19.

For, they have the best intellect; therefore affect the best Reas. 1.
object; which is God: the acutest eye couets the choicest colors; the
quickest sense, the sweetest smell; so the best understanding the best object.

Again, they prefer many Petitions to him, and he Reas. 2.
grants their desires, by the remotion of evil, and the donation of good:
Hence, David, I love the Lord, because he has heard my Prayer: will we not
love him, that never denies us any thing we request? Psalm. 116. 1.

Before we apply the point, we will lay down some sound signs, inseparable
properties of this love.

1. What thing do we see in God, worthy of our affection? Trials of the love
of God.
When the sons of God, saw the daughters of men to be fair, then, they made
choice of them: Do we love his attributes of mercy, and knowledge, and
presence, and justice? for he that loves God, loves all that is in God, and
sees nothing but good in him.

2. Do we desire to be acquainted with him, and he with us? For this is the
property of true affection; that as we know and would better know him whom we
affect: so we would be known of him, that loves us: they that are strangers
in this, are strangers from the grace of love.

3. Would we have God to love us reciprocally? For if we love any, we would be
equally affected of him; else our love should be lost, and our joy not full. Is
it not so betwixt friend and friend? how should it be otherwise than betwixt
the sons of God, and their hea^enly Father?

4. Furthermore, if we love God, we then desire to be like him. 1. In nature,
being conformed into his image. 2. In actions too, into the consimilitude of
his proceedings. For we have such a deep consideration, and good persuasion of
what we affect, that we think all perfection to be in it, and to flow from it.

5. Again, they that truly love the Lord, think all others should do the
same. See this in Mary; she thought Ioh. 20. 15.
others minds were busied about no other thing, but her Lord; the Church in
the Canticles did the same. For they see admirable things in the object
beloved, to be desired.

6. In conclusion, if God be affected of us, we will use all means to please
him, to retain his favor, and do nothing to discontent him; yea, the nature
of love is such that it rejoices greatly, to have any occasion offered,
whereby it may manifest its unfeigned affection, to the subject beloved.

And are these things true? then undoubtedly the love of Use 1.
God is rare in the world: it is not like fire, kindled on the hearth of every
man's heart; or grasle that grows in each kind of ground. Every one will cry,
he knows as much as the Preacher can teach him: viz: To love God above all,
and his neighbor as himself. But, what admirable things do these see in God?
What desire have they to know him, and he known of him? that the Lord would
love them? or they to become like him in person, and action? do they wonder
that others do not love him? take they care to please him in all things, to
offend him in nothing? the contrary is manifest: Wherefore, whatsoever they
brag and boast, the love we speak of, was never shed abroad in their
hearts: this herb is a stranger from the garden of their minds. Be not then
deceived; for if these things be not, in truth, though not in degree, found in
thee, thou art an hater of him, and a lover of profit and pleasure, and not of
God. David's heart gushed out tears, when others kept not his law: these
themselves rent his precepts, like the veil of the Temple, from the top to
the bottom: David set him always at his right hand, these never have him in
their thoughts: David trembled at his word; these fear not to swear by his
holy name. David did meditate of him day and night; these cry, Depart from me,
we will none of thy ways. David made songs to praise him; these write books,
and coin oaths to dishonor him: David bad the lovers of God; to hate
iniquity; these call others to commit all villainy. Shall they then have David's
portion? nay, how can they escape swift damnation?

In the second place, seeing we have seen what it is to Use 2.
love the Lord, and the true attendants that accompany the same; let us never
be at rest or quiet, until these letters of love be engraven on the tables of
our affections, and imprinted in the leaves of our minds; and to move thee to
this, take these directions following.

1. We must of necessity love something; for as no place Motives to love God.
in nature will admit of a vacuitie, so all men's affections will covet some
object; then love God, for he is the best thing. Take what goodness is in all
the creatures, its no more equal to him, than a drop of water to the whole
Ocean; he is all fair, and there is nothing unlovely in him.

2. Consider also, what a near union is betwixt us and him, has not he took
upon him our nature? married us to himself? is he not bone of our bone, and
flesh of our flesh? and shall not this move us to love him? what nearer? or
more honorable bond? what can be of greater force to allure our affection?
shall the creator thus stoop to the creature, and we not love him?

3. They that love him, shall not lose their labor: and is not this something?
sometime we love him, and her, setting on our affections as the Be her sting;
but lose our labor; and, as Paul of the Corinthians, are less beloved; the
which makes us to cry, my sighs are many, and my heart is heavy. But love
God, and thou shall be beloved; for in this love is no loss.

4. He only can give us content: For as the foot is never stable, till it be
pitched on firm Land; so our affections are ever wavering, until they be fixed
on God; who is the first Being, the sustainer of the soul.

5. Call to mind, how he has loved us: Shall he choose us from eternity, and
we reject him in time? Nay, rather, let his love to us, work in us a
reciprocal love of him; and so it will, in all his chosen: let me but give
warmth, to my clothes and shall I not receive heat, by way of reflection?

6. He is always with us, in us, and neither will, nor can be absent from us;
What a grief it is; experience tells, not to be present with the thing
beloved. This division, like Reubens, causes many thoughts of heart. For
personal presence; when friends affect, above all things is desired; and here
only, and no where else, it is to be obtained. Ne thinks these things,
should like the Load stone iron; draw and knit our hearts unto the Lord, were
they well weighed. But if all this will not, let us further consider this,
that, if he be not the object of our affection; we shall be the subjects of his
eternal wrath and indignation.

This may suffice, to have been spoken of love as it looks toward God: now
we will handle it, as it has relation to man, where we observe, that,

The Children of God, love one another. Doct. 8. Mat. 22. 39. Romans 13 8. Psalm.
16. 3. 10. 15. 10. Reasons.


This point is but short in speech, but long in practice: we must owe nothing
to any man, but that we love one another. Love is a debt always to be paid;
yet ever to be owing.

1. For are they not sons of one father? 2. Members of one body? 3. Temples
of one spirit? 4. And heirs of one and the same kingdom? 5. Does not the
image of God shine in them? 6. And are they not beloved of him? And shall the
creator love that, which the creature will not?

What then shall we judge of some among us, that scoff, Use 1.
deride, persecute, and think they do God good service, in putting of his
Children to death? are these the sons of the most high? or rather be they not
bastards? have such the spirit of love, who hate the holy? despise the most
sincere, religious? verily, they are as yet, strangers and aliants from the
household of faith, and commonwealth of Israel.

Learn how we are to love one another, that we deceive Use 2.
not our selves in this duty, thinking we love, when we do nothing less 1.
Rule is, As thy self. Mat. 19. 19. The rule whereby we love our selves, must
be the same in loving one another; and this may appear either affirmatively,
in what we will do for our selves; or negatiuely, in what we will not do to
our selves: for the first, affirmatively.

1. A man will cloth himself: 2. Feed himself. 3. Lodge himself. 4. Praise
God, and pray to God for himself. 5. grow in, and gather grace for himself.
6. And for heaven, he will daily prepare and fit himself.

For the second, Negatiuely.

1. A good man will not quarrel with or kill himself. 2. He will not steal
from and rob himself. 3. Nor lie and bear false witness against himself. 4.
He will not urge and carowse to make drunk himself. 5. He will not slander
and discredit himself. 6. And lastly, he will not go to law and suit with
himself.

But may not one Christian go to law with another? Quest. Resol.
Yes, but if it may be, he must prevent it. 1. And that by dealing with his
adversary hand to hand, proving if he may prevail.

2. Then, if not, tell the case to two or three, to see if they can end the
controversy. 3. But if these two ways fail, then he must tell the elders of
the Church; the which, as some will, are the Presbytery; others, all the
settled congregation: and if they cannot make peace, then may a Christian go to
law, else, (it seems) not: for Paul checkes the Corinthians 1 Cor. 6.
for going to law, one brother with another. But having used all the former
means, account him thy adversary, a Publican, and no brother, if thou can
not win him, appease him.

The second Rule, whereby we are to love one another, is As Christ has loved
us. Ioh. 13. 34.

1. For order; Christ loved us, before we loved him; for we love him, because
he loved us first; so should we love our brother, before we be beloved of him.

2. In the end; he loves us to do us good, not that he receives good from us.
As Job of righteousness, so we say of love; Our love may profit the son of
man; but if we love the Lord what receives he at our hands? Job. 35. 7.

3. It must be in sincerity; that is, not in hypocrisy; or dissimulation: our
love must be pure, not mixed, not in word, but indeed and truth.

4. And we must have regard to the degree of love: Paul tells us of the height,
breadth, depth, and length of his love, and this, will thus better appear, in
these things.

1. He being God became man, that by this his poverty, we might be made rich:
What a degree of humility was this?

2. He died for us; and herein is the love of Christ made manifest. For greater
love than this, can no man show, to lay down his life for his friends; Nay,
for us, who were his enemies.

3. Christ loved us without measure; for who can limit his love, and say,
hither came it, and no further? this is a great breadth.

4. And he loves us for ever; in persecution of wicked men, temptation of
Satan; nor yet the infinite wrath of his father could either stay or interrupt
it; here is the length of it. without end it is; from eternity, to eternity
has he loved us, and the quantity of it, is unmeasurable.

Should we try the love of our days by the first rule, we shall find but
little: if by the second, much less; for who clotheth his neighbors? may not
many a member complain with the head, they have parted my raiment, and on my
garment have they cast lots? We have few Iobes, or Dorcasses, that make coats
to cloth the poor. Show me the man, that if his neighbor be hungry, will give
him meat, if he thirst; will make him to drink? so our backs be clothed, and
our bellies filled, we forget the afflictions of Joseph. How far might we
travail to find out a Centurion, who has built the poor a Synagogue? a
Paul, who will make mention of his friend Timothy in his prayers, night and
day? Where is he, and what is his name, that grows in grace himself, and
seeks to enrich others with that treasure? Wish I do, that there were not
some; who euvie the Prodigal, for his retnure; and that thinks too much
grace, makes men mad. But for preparing a place in heaven for his neighbor;
let him be one of a thousand, that minds matters of that nature: so that we
may say true, love in these days is little and very cold: many cry they have
it, who never yet sought to know it.

And shall we once imagine, that they who quarrel and kill? rob and steal?
swear and forswear? drink and be drunk? slander and reproach? contend and
go to law, as the young man, (if he lied not) kept the Commandments from his
youth upward, that these love their neighbors? Nay, do they not hate
themselves? To all these I may say, how dwells the grace of love in you? Such
(we hear say) have learned all that the Preacher can teach them, viz. to love
God above all, and their neighbors as themselves; when as they are without
natural affection, and have no spark of this grace in them. But were
Christians tried by the second rule; that is to love one another as Christ has
loved us; we might cry out, help Lord, there is not such a man left: for we
will not love, where we are beloved; our love is for goods, not for doing
others good; and if we have any of this water shed abroad in our hearts, Oh!
how is it mixed with mudde? truly, our love is short and shallow, weak and
often interrupted. It is hardly kindled: soon quenched; begins with a flame,
but suddenly ends in smoke and smother. We have little fuel, much
quench-coale; a drop of water, will extinguish our love; a small puff, will
put it out. Our affections are like a lime-twigge; to day, they catch a foul;
tomorrow they will not hold, the softest lightest feathers; so that in my have,
I had almost said; all men are liers, who say, they have it; for, there is none
that has it; No, not one. We talk of it; and of professors; but let our love
be weighed at this balance, it will be found too light; and not many amongst a
million, to have any of this fire on the hearth of their hearts for all their
boasting. Wherefore let us try our selves, whether we be in the love or no: for
either we have in possession, or at the least in resolution, what has been
said, else, we want the love of God and of man; Now, if thou find it in thee,
after due search; bless God for it; follow it, keep it, and increase it
still. But if not, let these motives following, induce thee to pursue it.

1. He that loves not his brother is a murderer; and we Motives to love one
another.
know that no murderer has eternal life, abiding in him.

We account murder a fearful thing; why? all that love 1 Io. 3. 15.
not as we have said, are guilty of this foul sin, and one day shall be
arraigned, and condemned for it.

2. By love thou may try the truth of thy new birth; for he that loves his
brother is borne of God; and is not this worth the knowing? 1 Ioh. 3. 10.

3. Without this love, thou art but a dead man, odious, in 1 Ioh. 2. 9.
the eyes of God and man; he that loves not his brother, is dead till now: who
would be dead, among the living? how nature abhorres it, we perceive, when we
view but the dead corpse of our dearest friend.

4. Finally, love will expel fear, and make a man bold against death, and the
day of judgment. Why do so many Christians tremble and fear? why do they
shrink and shudder at the remembrance of death! alas, they want love either in
truth or in degree; for perfect love (like wind the chafe) drives away fear.
And know this, that he who harbors 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
hate in his heart, is often struck with horror: but he who makes love his
guest, is filled with boldness. For he that loves his brother is Christ's
Disciple, and has a portion, in all the prayers of the Saints; what need then
such a man to fear? Then get love, and forget not; and if thou do but
ouer-take it, at the day of thy death, it will recompense all the pains, thou
have took in thy life.

And that thou may love thy brother, observe these directions.

1. Banish self-love out of thy heart: say unto it, with indignation,
Directions for Love.
get thee hence.

2. Get a good understanding of the worth of a christian: For knowledge of
that, (like a Be her sting) will set on our affection.

3. Take a view of the best things in thy brother, wink at the worst; He that
would always pore on the defects in his own person, and not eye the best,
will in time hate himself.

4. And last of all, consider that Christ comes to thee, and is in thy poor
brother: a Balaam will not beat his beast, if once he perceive, the Angel of
the Lord to be in him, and speak by him.

More might we add, as 1. Labor to be united with Christ grafted into him; so
shall thou be like minded, and receive of his fullness, grace for grace,
affection for affection. 2. Strive also to love God: For as a greater circle
comprehends the lesser; so does the love of him, the love of all his children.

Thus having finished our discourse of love, we come to speak of a sound
mind. And out of the diverse readings, or several interpretations, we may
derive a double doctrine first, that,

Christians have sound minds. Doct. 9.


Judgment, wisdom, understanding, is the portion of every Christian; Godly
men are not like moles, but resemble the glegge eyed quick sighted Eagle. Isa.
56. 10. Hos. 4. 6. Mat. 23. 16. 17. Pro. 19. 2. 3. and. 30 2. Ephesians. 4. 23. Col.
1. 9. Else, how should they wisely be directed in all their actions? Reasons.
A sound mind is to the soul, as a quick eye to the 1.
body.

And do not good things often go masked under bad 2.
names? evil clothed with glorious titles? Now, without a good judgment,
truth cannot be discerned, error discovered.

Also, by it, are they taught, what they may, and what they 3.
may not do, in their callings. For all things lawful are not always
expedient.

Moreover, by it, they conceive of their own ability, and 4.
is not that needful? What more common evil in these times, than to presume
above our strength?

Besides, when many good actions meet together, like 5.
the sun and Moon in one line, (as sometimes they will) a sound mind does
direct, which is best to be done, which not, for the present.

And is it not that, which teaches them to observe all 6.
due circumstances, order, manner, in doing of good for the excellency of a
thing, is in the well-handling of a matter.

This confutes the doctrine of the Papists, who lull men Use 1.
in ignorance, and maintain it to be the mother of devotion. Why had the
Apostles all tongues, but to teach all nations, to get sound minds? Use 2.


Also, it reproves those Preachers, that take upon them to teach others, yet
never learned the truth themselves: Such (says God) shall be no Priests for
me. Hos. 4. 6. Nay, he threatens further to forget their children.

And it condemns the vulgar sort, who live in all kind Use 3.
of ignorance, never striving to be made wise for their salvation, to discern
betwixt good and evil; when as concerning the time and means, they might have
been teachers of others, they have yet need to learn the principles of
religion. Heb. 5. verse. 12. Use 4.


In the last place, let all, who would be reputed Christians get sound minds;
be not like children, but men of ripe age. Are not men without this, compared
to fools; mad and frantike persons? Who laugh, when they should weep,
account friends, for telling them the truth, enemies; kick against the pricks;
think, being bastards, they are borne to a kingdom; and deceive their own
souls? What is a man without a sound mind, but a very beast, led by lust? not
considering of times past, present, or to come. When these return to their
wits, like the Prodigal, will they not be ashamed? what do such but abuse the
best things, to the dishonor of God and their own damnation? wherefore, get
knowledge, strive for a sound mind; for men of understanding, are of excellent
spirits. And for our furtherance herein, we will set down, what a sound mind
is; and wherein it consists.

A sound mind, is the mind guided by the art of Logic; A sound mind
defined.
that is, the true rules of Reason. For every good Logician has a sound mind.

God has given to man Reason, which is the very eye of the soul; and to
guide this reason, he has appointed precepts, the which if he follow, he
shall do well. For, as it were to no purpose, to have an eye, if he had no
object for it; so in vain to have reason, wanted he rules to guide it. And God
having made man, and all things for man, has given him an eye to see them, and
how by rule to dispose of them. And this must be noted; that the rule of
Reason, Note.
cross not the precepts of Divinity; for they will stand together, though
somethings in Divinity go beyond our reasonable apprehension. For in the word
of God, there is, 1. Truth 2. Goodness. Truth is the object of reason;
Goodness the object of the will; hence, the will is more noble, than the
understanding from the goodness of its object.

And for our better proceeding in this we have in hand, A distribution.
we may consider a sound mind; 1. In it self; or 2. In respect of its object.

All things in the world may be said to be, primarily the object of Reason: for
as the eye has all creatures and colors visible, for his object: so all arts,
or the irradiations that proceed from them, first reflect on the glass of man's
reason or understanding. And as the eye guides the hand, so reason guides the
will. The eye, in order of natural operations, directs the foot and the
finger; the eye of reason, in moral actions, guides affection, and the wills
faculty. And as the hand and foot guided by a dim eye, do often work and
move a miss; so the will and affection, misled by the darkness of reason,
operate and do things not convenient,

And observe further, that as the eye of the body has diverse 5. Intellectual
virtues; all defined.
several acts; so has the eye of reason; the which some call Intellectual
virtues. I think they be distinct acts of reason, arising from the variety of
the object, about the which its conversant.

First, Intelligence; which is, that act of reason, whereby 1.
we understand every particular concerning every thing. 2.


Secondly, Science; which is that act of reason, whereby, we know all truth in
all things.

Thirdly, Sapience; which is, that act of reason, whereby 3.
we understand and perceive, what will follow from every thing.

Fourthly, Prudence; which is, that act of reason, whereby 4.
we observe the fittest opportunities for the effecting of all things.

Fifthly, Art or Skill; which is that act of reason, whereby, 5.
we know how to effect every thing most skilfully.

Or, the first act of reason, is to see simple arguments without any relation
one to another. The second act, how one depends on another, as cause and
effect, absolutely; subject and adiunct after a manner. The third act, is
discerning of what will follow, as the deduction of axioms. The fourth act is,
to apprehend how these are to be applied in use. And the last act is skill, how
to dispose of all aright. For he that does the four first, is an artist and a
skillful artist; so that we see what is needful for a sound mind.

But yet we would not ensnare the tender conscience here, as though without
this acute knowledge none could be saved; we rather do deliver this doctrine,
that, man seeing his blindness might be truly humbled, and not boast, as many
do, of their judgments, that know nothing as they ought to know; and
consequently, seek unto God for wisdom, who gives it to the simple for
salvation. And there is no good Christian but has, in some measure, a sound
mind; 1 Cor. 2. 15.
for the spiritual man discerns all things: and Christ has promised to send
them his spirit, which shall lead them into all Ioh 16. 13.
truth: Yet the best know but in part; and before they understand any thing
aright, God must take the veil from the eye, and anoint it with oil, that
comes from the Lamp of his spirit. 1 Corint. 13. 9. 1 John 2. 27. Reu. 3. 18.

And now we will a little touch the object of a sound The object of a sound
mind.
mind, and so wind both up together. And to these particular heads it may be
referred. 1. Logic. 2. Grammar. 3. Rhetoric. 4. Geometry. 5. Arithmeticke.
6. Philosophy and 7. Divinity.

The art of Logic, guides Reason: Grammar and Rhetoric, speech: Geometry
and Arithmeticke, quantity, both discrete and continued: Philosophy, nature;
and Divinity the will. And a man may be said to have a sound mind, that is
skillful in any of these arts. Further, that may not be omitted, that Arts may
be compared to the steps of a ladder; and as the lowest guides and helps to
all upwards, yet it self borrows aid from none; so does Logic give
direction and help to all the other arts, yet it self receives assistance
from none; and this is worth our learning to see, how one depends upon another.

God, he has made all things liable to reason; and, that man might apprehend
them, he has tipped the creatures, as with colors for the eye, so with Logical
irradiations, for the understanding to receive instruction. Now because all
things fall not under the act of one man's understanding; and in regard he is a
communicable creature, and all things made for him; he has appointed a post
(for speech is but the carriar of the truth to the person) that others might
partake of all his wisdom. Grammar, like one in a plain Man's messengers be 1.
Loquentia. 2. Eloquentia.
suit, delivers the thing as it is, plainly: but Rhetoric, like a brave man in
purple, or some cut, laced, or iagged suit, brings it more plausiblie. Thus
good was God, to give man variety of vessels, that he, with the more delight
might entertain the truth. And here you see how Logic prepares packes for
Grammar and Rhetoric; which be as Carriars to travel with truth. Where note,
that Logic may be without Grammar; and they that bring speech into Logic,
are in an error, greatly deceived.

For Logic has not to deal with speech, but is a distinct art; and speech
is but the vessel by which from man to man, truth is conveied. Its true, that
Logic is in the words, but no otherwise than meat in a vessel, as a common
adiunct to it; not as the form in the matter, which is an essential part of
the thing. Now when Logic, Grammar, and Rhetoric have done, comes in,
Quantity: for if Reason find it out, and Speech give it nomination; it will be
for quantity, great or little; for number one or more; and here comes in the
use of quantity, discrete or continued. Thus five of the arts are passed. In
the next place, Philosophy steps in, and tells you the nature of the thing,
whether hot, cold, sweet, or sour etc.

And finally, Divinity like the highest step of a ladder, having borrowed
help from all the others, comes in, last of all, and is the rule of goodness.
And as the understanding does apprehend truth, and falsehood; so the will
embraces good or evil. But evil comes in by accident, and is not any part of
the wills proper object; no more than falsehood of the understandings object,
except the understanding be first deceived; and so the will embrace it as good
(though evil) in appearance. And now from all this that Conclusions from the
discourse.
has been said, we might draw many excellent conclusions.

First, That he who would be a profound divine, must have ^.
some knowledge of all the arts; especially, he must be a logician. All men
have Logic by nature; but knowledge of the arts precept, does much help and
rectify reason. Those then are far wide, that cry out against Logic, as
though a Logician were no better than a Magician. And they are as far to
blame, that though they approve it, yet seek not for to obtain it; for if the
blind lead the blind, Mat. 15. 14.
both fall into the ditch. I wish, this were well thought upon, by such as take
charge of Gods people, his chosen: For we do all know that a blind guide,
cannot well lead others; a dumb Dog call his companions, by barking; and an
ignorant pilot conduct the ship safe to land, and preserve it from splitting.

Again, we may perceive; that sound minds are not 2.
easily come by: Whatsoever the world may judge. Some think themselves wise.
With a little wit; as others do themselves rich, with no great wealth.

Besides, we gather, that one Art does not cross, or hinder, 3.
but help another; no more then the steps of stairs, being rightly placed,
do one another: if we think otherwise, its our ignorance; for God knew well
how to make all things to agree, and further man in his proceedings.

Moreover, its plain hence; that there is a concretion or 4.
Composition of all Arts in one subject; and an Aphairesin or separation, by
the distinct acts of the understanding, of them. As we may see in this phrase,
All flesh is grass. Bring this to Logic, here is Comparates in similitude
and likeness. All flesh is grass; that is, is as Grass: And the Axiom is
true, affirmed, general; subject and adjunct. Heeres also Rhetoric, and a
double trope; for flesh is put, being a part, for the whole; and all flesh in
general, for man in special; so that here is a twofold Synechdoche; part put
for the whole; and the Genus for the Speices. And who sees not the rest of the
Arts, under the words, grass and flesh? For here might Philosophy be handled
at large. But the divinity, when Rhetorike is removed, and laid bare, is this.

1. That man is mortal: in his axiom, is subject and adiunct.

2. That all men are mortal: for it is appointed for all men Heb. 9. 27. Romans
5. 12.
once to dye; and death went over all men; for all men have sinned.

Note further; that Divinity is the best Art, for all serve as 5.
handmaides to their Mistress: And here we see, that the more special a thing
is, it may be the better; for Divinity is the most special Art, yet the best:
so that the old Rule Bonum Bonum quo communius, ^o melius; expounded.
quo communius etc. The more common a good thing is, the better it is* must be
warily understood; for the more Common a good horse is, he may be the worse.
But this is a truth, that the more subordination there be of things to a thing;
or of ends to an end, the better that last thing or end is: Hence God is the
chief good; for all things are subordinate to him, he to nothing: so divinity
is the best Art; for all are subject to it; it not to any. Wearing the suite is
better, then either shaping or sewing: eating the meat, better then killing,
or roasting; for they are subordinate, and make way for the other.

But I am sensible of my digression; we will therefore conclude 6.
with this, that the sound mind, the Apostle means, is the true understanding
of such principles and rules of Religion, that are of absolute necessity,
either in the right deviding and handling of the word; or for the well guiding
of us in all the duties of Christianity; Whether superiors or inferiors, or in
what condition, a man be, soever. Now the Lord give us true understanding in
all things necessary, Amen.

There is yet a second doctrine that may be drawn from the word (if we read
or interpret it as some do) which is; that

Moderation of affection is needful for every Christian. 1. Doct. 9.
These. 5. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 2. 2.

First, its needful in regard of our selves; for otherwise Reas. 1.
Love is but indiscreet passion; Fear, despair; anger, fury; joy, madness: Yea
even Gods graces, without this, work strangely in his children; for knowledge,
like leaven, puffs up; and power works beyond his Commission.

Again, its needful in respect of God. 1. That we may Reas. 2.
be patient in adversity. 2. Humble in prosperity; for both these are well
pleasing unto him.

And in regard of others its necessary, either in writing, Reas. 3.
or speaking; for still words, and moderation of affection, work mightily in
others; especially in some natures.

This Condemns the rashness and headines of some in Use. 1.
our days, who would have fire and brimstone to come down from heaven to
destroy the adversaries: Oh! how rate is this moderation of affection to be
found in the sons of men! I had almost said in my heat and have, there is no
moderation at all. And if we well weigh it, we shall find but little. For how
do some join house to house, land to land, So that the poor have no
habitation left them? The judges Isa. 5. 8.
love to cry, with shame; Bring ye. The Ministers are not Hos. 4. 18.
altogether excuseable in this; and in too rash censuring, blameable. How do
many men also stuff themselves with the Creatures? and keep no moderation at
all, in their apparelling, recreating? Do not some discharge Cannons, and
drink carrowses; as if the Kings shot and powder were provided for no other
purpose, but to make mirth, and not to wound his adversaries? One cries, like
Moses, Heal her now; another with Rahel, Give me sons, or else I dye; a
third, as David, would God I had died for thee? and with the Thessalonians;
millions mourn, as men without hope. But we omit further reprehension; and
come to exhortation.

Let us all then strive for moderation of affection; for its Use 2.
not the least degree of sanctification. And tell me, wherein Gods children
have more faild then in this? how did Peter miss it many times in many things?
and Jonah grieve for a guord?

The Minister must labor for it in the delivery of the word, he must suffer
evil men patiently; sow the seed in his hand, and contentedly stay and wait
for a blessing; inform the judgment before he work on the affections: or
else like the Carpenters pinnes, if he strike without boaring, his words will
fly again in his own face.

And that we may all of us have moderation, observe these following rules, as
remedies.

If we deal with men; they be either whole Churches or Rules for Moderation.
particular persons. We must not separate from those that 1.
differ with us, but in Ceremonies: we must wisely and moderately carry our
selves toward them; for the band that tieth us together, is not a bare
Ceremony. Its want of moderation of affection, when men make a rent in the
Church; spet their Mother (if they have any) in the face; and count all her
children Antichristian. These know not, or do not what is required of them.

Are thou to deal with particular persons? why then, they are either called,
or not called: if they be called, then they be either weak, or strong. If they
be weak in the faith, receive them not for disputation, but for edification:
Few observe this thing. If he befalle^, the^ restore such a one with the spirit
of meekenes. Bones ou^ of joint have need of atender finge^ed person.

What? are they without? then deal gen^ly* with them at the first; for fell
opposition drives them off the further; instruct them with meekenes, and pro^e
what the Lord will work that way. We see that a skillful Cook, when he
would have the fire to roste, and (...) the meat ^he ^t the first, lays it a
far off: for the ^eate being less* ^^ sooner opens the pores, and peirceth
to the bone, by reason of the small opposition; whereas, were it at the
beginning put too near, it would shu^^ the pores, scortch the meat, and never
roste thoroughly, ^y reason of the opposite force of the contrary qualities. So,
when we be to deal with one that is cold in Religion; begin we by degrees; use
not too much ^eate at the first; least he oppose the more, and be gone: Try
him, if he will be won with the gentle words of exhortation. I assure my
self that for want of Moderation in this kind, the Magistrate^ Minister, and
private man, have not been so profitable, and succesfull in their proceedings,
as they might. Object.


But some may object; they are such as hate and persecute the truth.

God ^eares, so should we; he knows reprobates, so do Sol.
not we; he may have a strange working in it the which we do not see; he
dwells with Angels, but so do not we. Repl.


Oh! but they are Dogs and swine.

Why then* 1. Give them good example. 2. Provoke them Resol.
not 3. Pray for them. and 4. Do not finally judge them; but leave them to the
Lord.

Thus we come, in the next place, to speak of moderation in personal
injuries; Wherein thou must be very careful; for we love our selves very well.
Do men speak against thee, or write against thee? avoid thou all bitterness,
and immoderate courses: Rashness and heat in this case (as I have especially
observed in some men's writings) has done, a good cause, harm: say with
Michael avoiding railing Iud 9.
words; The Lord rebuke thee; or with Paul. I pray God it be not laid to their
charge; And we must bear with small errors in others, and natural
infirmities, for this is great wisdom. Yet we must not be tainted with their
errors, but reprove Caution.
them, though our dearest friends.

I might follow this point further, in respect of outward things; but a word of
all in general. Take heed how thou let thy affections loose, they be
nimble birds, quick spirits, and not easily recalled. Let them not light and
sit long of any stand, either person, or thing; for they will with the more
difficulty be removed. When men set them on, (as the Be does her sting, or the
Cripple lean on his Crutches) with all their strength; then, when the thing
they affect is took away, they fall upon all four, and are foully be mudded:
Set them on, as Citizens do their Mastique patches on their faces, or as we
put gloves on our hands; so will there neither be pain, or peril in the
remotion of them* Or do, as he does by his feet, that stands on the
quickesands, remove them often, by withdrawing the mind from them; so when the
tide of trouble approaches, thy affections, as his feet, will not stick
fast, but, without danger thou may pluck them up, and be gone. The true
cause, why the best men have been so turmoyld in crosses, has been the
immoderate affection, of earthly and moveable objects. In conclusion avoyde all
counterfeite moderation, for Caution.
its as bad as immoderate affection; and be thou assured, that if thou use
either, at one time or other, it shall wound the heart, pierce deep into the
soul, and cost thee full dear. Learn this lesson now, least it prove too
late hereafter.

Having handled Power, Love, and a Sound mind, as they are absolutely to be
considered, we come in the next place to speak of them. 1. But briefly (as
they have dependence on the verse going before. 2. As they are opposed to the
Spirit of fear; and 3. As one has relation to another. And first we note, that

Power, love, and a sound mind, should move us to be resolute Doct. 1.
in good actions, and to stir up all other gifts we have received.

Again, we observe, as they be in opposition with the word fear; that Doct.
2.


The Spirit of power expels fear.

For the weaker is easily subdued by the stronger. Men of strength will with
ease overcome feeble Infants.

Besides, we collect; that

Love drives away fear. Perfect love casts it out, as another Doct. 3.
Apostle writes. 1 Ioh. 4. 18.

And this may be observed also; that

A sound mind puts away the Spirit of fear. Doct. 4.


He that knows all the dangers in his voyage, and has skill to guide the
Bark, will not fear shipwreck. Ignorant Pilots; so iniudicious Christians,
are timorous persons. Reasons.


For 1. It will teach a man why he should fear. 1. 2. 3. 4. Use.


2. What to fear, and what not to fear.

3. When he is to fear, when not to fear.

And 4. How to fear, for kind, measure.

Would thou then not fear, as the wicked do? then strive for a sound mind,
a profound Judgment.

And as they depend one on another, we gather, that

Power, love, and a sound mind are of absolute necessity for a Doct. 5.
resolute Christian; Preacher, or private person.

For Power without Love can work; but will not. Reasons. 1. 2. 3. Use 1.


Love without power would work, but cannot.

And Power and Love can and will, but a sound mind is requisite to guide both.

Woe then to those, that stand in the Sanctuary of God to feed his flock, and
have none of the three, neither seek for them. It had been good for such,
they had gone to plow, or Cart. I say no more of them, but the Lord have mercy
upon them.

In the name, then, and fear of God, let us strive for these Use 2.
three; this cord will not easily be broken. Get we power, love, and sound
minds; so shall we be resolute in good courses; and fight valiantly the battles
of the Lord. Sleep not with the veyle of darkness over thine eyes; cover not
thy heart with the mantle of hatred; neither be thou like the cripple, that is
always crawling, or relying on his crutches. But get thou the annoynting of
grace from above, that thine ^^es may be opened love shed abroad in thy heart;
and strength and nimblenes to run through the whole man: Omit not the season,
neglect not the means, least thou seek one day, and shall not be heard.

And finally, we note another thing, that Doct. 6.


Power, love, and a Sound mind are the gifts of God.

Man by his fall lost all. Learn then whom to praise for them, if thou best
them: whither to go for them, if thou want them.

VERSE. 8. Be not therefore ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, neither of me
his prisoner: But be partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to
the power of God.
TWo things in general in this verse are to be observed. The Logical
resolution.
1. A Dehortation. 2. An Exhortation. In the Dehortation are three things. 1.
What the Apostle dehorts from. viz. Shame. 2. Whereof Timotheus must not be
ashamed viz. 1. Not of the Testimony of Christ. 2. Neither of Paul his
prisoner. And 3. The ground; why he must not be ashamed is contained in the
word, Therefore.

In the Exhortation three things also may be noted. 1. To What the Apostle
exhorts him; and that is to suffer afflictions. 2. What afflictions? such as
accompany the Gospel. 3. How he must suffer; according to the power of God.
And the word, Therefore, may also be a ground to the Exhortation, as to the
Dehortation. The Theological Exposition.


Be not therefore.] This word, therefore, presupposes two things. 1. An
inference drawn from some precedent reason. 2. A thing to be omitted, or
performed, subsequent.

Ashamed.] Shame is an effect that follows the commission of some evil; and
always is a companion of true repentance: But by not being ashamed, Paul
intends more, as Boldness, resolution, constancy, perseverance.

Of the testimony of our Lord.] That is, the Gospel of Christ, and it may be
called his Testimony, for 2. Reasons. 1. For Christ did seal it with his
blood. 2. Because in the Gospel, testimony is given of Christ. Testimonies are
either divine, or humane: they be inarteficiall arguments, having little force
of arguing, or proving a thing; and that they borrow from the artificial; for
they have it not in their own nature. Now the Gospel is a divine testimony,
and has great power and authority, because the author of it, Christ, was
truth it self; and they that penned it, were carried by the Spirit, and could
not err.

Neither of me his prisoner.] There be two sorts of prisons and prisoners;
spiritual, or corporal; of spirits, or of persons. Peter speaks of spirits
in prison: where note by the 1 Pet. 3. 19.
way, that souls departed are in place, contrary to the judgment of some. But
here is meant a corporal or personal prisoner; for so was Paul at that
present. And he ioynes himself with Christ, because his cause was coupled with
Christ's.

The Exhortation follows.

But be partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel; or, Do thou suffer together
for the Gospel.] This word, Partaker, intimates, 2. things, 1. Companions, or
diverse persons. 2. A thing divided, or shared amongst them. The persons,
Companions to Timotheus, was Paul and others; the thing they had part of, was
afflictions. And afflictions are such as either wound the soul, or body; for
man consisting of a double substance, may suffer two kinds of torments: But man
only can hurt the body; not the soul of Paul was in their fingers.

Of the Gospel.] Gospel in Greek is glad tidings; and Gospel, some derive of
God and speech, saying it is an old Saxon word, signifying Gods speech, or good
speech. The sense is, Endure such troubles as accompany the Preachers and
embracers of the word of God, and of Christ.

According to the power of God] There is some difficulty in the understanding
of this phrase; and my Authors say nothing to content me. Some understand them
thus: Being moved by, or with the power of God; others read; Being persuaded
by the Gospel, which is according to the power of God; that is, in which the
power of God does plainly show and declare it self.

For my part I take this to be the truth; that Paul would have Timotheus to
suffer as he was able, and had, or should receive ability from God. And he
seems to answer a secret objection, that might arise in his sons heart. He
might thus reason: How am I able, being young and weak, to endure such great
troubles as accompany Paul, and other strong Christians? Paul takes away this,
thus: Why Timothy, do thou suffer according to thy power; bear what thou art
able; for that is all I require of thee, or that the Lord will afflict thee
withal.

Being that the Lord has set thee apart for the work of The Metaphrase.
the Ministry; has also fitted thee with gifts for the execution thereof; I
therefore do dehort thee from being ashamed and abashed in regard of the great
and many troubles and trialls, that do accompany the preaching and professing
the glad tidings of Salvation: and do further from the same grounds exhort
thee, for to endure with patience, constancy and perseverance such afflictions,
as thy fellow laborers partake of, and are incident unto: neither let thy
youth or weak^es daunt or discourage thee; for all that I desire of thee, or
that the Lord will inflict upon thee, is no more, then that thou have, or may
receive ability to undergo and bear; this is all I would, this is that thou
ought to do. The deductio^ of doctrines.


First, out of the word, therefore, we note, that

Doctrine, Reason, and use, is a warrantable kind of preaching. Doct. 1.


It is not any vpstart and fantastical, but an ancient and an Apostolical
kind and way of teaching. When Paul by many Reasons had proved the Resurrection
and judgment to come; in conclusion he makes use. Wherefore, my beloved, 1
Cor 15. vlt.
be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord; in as
much as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord. So does he. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 14. vlt. And Peter treads in the same steps of method. 1 Pet. 4. And you
shall find it practiced throughout the book of God. For (says the same
Apostle) Seeing these things are so, what manner of men ought we to be, in
holiness of life and blamelesnes of conversation? 2 Pet. 3. 11.

For is it not reasonable? Who can deny it? we gather Reas. 1.
some note that directly flows from the Text; then we confirm it. First, By
axiomaticall propositions; and Secondly, By some third argument. When two
pieces of cloth be in controversy, we take a light, and by that we discern
whither is the better, for color, substance: so when two things are
controuerted, which of them is the truth, we produce a third argument, and
laying that to them, as the candle to the cloth, we come to judge the better
which is false, or true.

And Application is profitable: For men naturally, being Reas. 2.
unwilling to receive the seed of the word, as the hard earth is the corn,
Application, like a mallet or harrow, breaks the heart, and causes the truth
to take the better, and deeper impression.

Men therefore must not condemn this Method as though Use 1. Object. Sol.
it were unreasonable, unprofitable. But some may say, The Scripture does not
use it, I answer, it does; yet not so exactly: for God in wisdom and
goodness, has scattered things, and often uses an inversion of the parts, that
man might seek and search in the use of his Reasons. For Logickes Rules are
like so many hounds, beating the bush of Gods book, to find out the truth. And
as flowers, were they laid upon an heap, would not be so delightful to the
gatherer, as when in the garden, they be plucked here and there by one and one.
So the truth in Gods Book, being found out by seeking and searching, here a
little, and there a little, is much more acceptable and well pleasing unto man.
And this (I judge) is the Reason; why the Scripture is writ as an history.

This may confirm and encourage those; that use this Use 2.
method, to go on, and not to cast it off, for the dislike of a few.
Notwithstanding we tie no man to our order; but let every one write and speak,
as he has received of the Lord. Yet this I add, that it is good for memory,
and the common people do profit the most by that way of teaching: therefore
its not amiss for their better edification, to descend and stoop to the
capacities of the simple, unlearned.

And this, by experience, I have proved, that the doctrine Directions in the
deduction and application of doctrines.
and my text (if rightly deduced) make a Syllogism; the text it self always
being the third argument to confirm it. Again, my Reason and my doctrine make
a Syllogism also; my Reason being a third argument further to confirm it. And
last of all, my use and doctrine must be also a Syllogism, and ordinarily a
connexe; so that so many uses as you deduce from the doctrine, if they will
(the doctrine being the third argument) make a syllogism; you never miss your
rule, be they few, or many.

Be not therefore ashamed.] Whence note, that

No man is to be ashamed of, but resolutely to bear witness Doct. 2.
unto the Gospel.

The faithful are called a cloud of witnesses. And this is not Heb. 12. 1.
without command. Acts 1. 8. Matthew. 10. 32. Acts 26. 16.

For it is the power of God to salvation, to the Jew first, and Reas. 1. Romans
1. 16. 17.
to the Gentile, both before and after the coming of Christ in the flesh; this
Reason Paul gives of the point. Who would be ashamed of that ship, that was a
means to preserve him from drowning?

Because to be ashamed of it, is to be ashamed of the Author Reas. 2.
of it, Christ; for he that despises his doctrine, despises Heb. 10. 29.
him; and is near unto cursing and burning.

This reproues both Ministers, and people; for how many Use. 1.
have we, that will not bear witness to it, but are ashamed of it?

You will say, who be they? Quest. Ans. What Preachers be ashamed of the Gospel.


I answer, for Ministers: 1. Such as can Preach, but do not. 2. They that
give over their calling, and, with Demas do embrace the world. 3. When men
Preach without study and premeditation; idly, not soundly. 4. When they fill
their Sermons, and stuff them with a bastard kind of eloquence, of variety of
tongues, Poets, Authors; for why should they do this, if they were not proud,
and had not a base conceit of the Gospel?

But may not a man do this? Quest. Ans.


Yes. When he speaks to a learned, intelligent, and judicious Auditory: or,
when the point is in controversy betwixt us and our Adversaries: or, when the
end is not for ostentation, but to win dignity to his Ministry, and for
edification of the people. But yet cautions must be observed. Cautions in
Quotations.


1. It must be done sparingly.

2. Augustine, Chrysostom and Jerome, must not shoulder out Peter and Paul;
James and John.

And those Ministers may be said to be ashamed of the Gospel, who Preach one
thing, and practice another; herein Peter was to be blamed. Gal. 2. 12.

And for People, these may be said to be ashamed of the When, and what people
are ashamed of the Gospel.
Gospel.

1. Who think, that the power of godliness consists in Ceremonies, beggarly and
impotent rudiments; as the Papists do.

2. Who if they dislike the person, they will none of the doctrine: these are
like those that will not drink good wine, out of an earthen vessel, or wooden
dish. Math. 23. 3.

3. Who, if any sentence dislike them, they reject all the rest of the Sermon:
these will no corn, if chafe be growing near it. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.

4. Who, when a Sermon is twice Preached, cast it away; meat that has been
once before served, pleases not their pallats. Phil. 3. 1.

5. Such as will not speak the truth, having occasion, but seem worse then
they are: they had rather be counted wise and wicked; then simple and religious,

6. Those, who will not profess the Gospel, because Christians are poor.
Proud men cast off the fashion, when it grows common amongst the vulgar sort.
Ioh. 7. 47.

7. Who, when some fearful judgment befalls a man that has been forward in
religion, shrink back, and are daunted. Eccles. 9. These will not to sea; for
a skillfull Pylot has been drowned in it.

8. Those, that will have Sermons when they are dead; but will none in their
life time: These take Physic when the disease is past cure. Or would have a
funeral, that their friends might be commended, who never deserved any.

9. That, of all company, care not for the communion of Saints.

10. That have a form of godliness, but deny the power of it. 2 Timothy 3. 5.

11. And finally, who will none of their sons to be divines, except he be
blind, or maimed.

But, (beloved) Let us not be of this number; but bear Use 2.
witness, to the truth, the which is done, 2. Ways. 1. Inwardly by loving of it
and believing on it, 2. Outwardly, by confessing it, and professing it. Romans
10. 10. Ioh. 3. 33. Romans 10. 9. Luke 9. 26.

And to move thee the rather to it. 1. Consider, that God Mo^iues not to be
ashamed of, but to bear witness to the Gospel.
is not ashamed to be our God. 2. Christ is not ashamed to call us Brethren. 3.
Think what an honor it is, to be witnesses chosen of the Lord; he has
Angels that would do it. Act. 14. 17. 4. Our disgrace shall turn to our good.
Romans 8. 28. 5. We ought to be ashamed of nothing, but sin. Romans 6. 20. 6. And
Lastly, consider what shame they that deny Christ and his doctrine, shall
undergo another day. Compare our shame here on earth, with that which the
wicked must partake of at Christ's coming; and it will seem as nothing.

And that we may be good witnesses, and not ashamed. What needful for a good
witness.


1. Let us get a true understanding of the worth of the Gospel. 1. In respect
of itself* and 2. The great benefit, that 1.
we do and shall reap by it. Get a feeling of it in our hearts.

2. We must strive for faithfulness, justice, integrity, for 2.
they will further us.

3. Labor for love to the truth; and abandon covetousness, 3.
pride, pleasure etc. for Love will constrain us.

And 4. Get courage and resolution, for that will embolden 4.
us. This was wanting in Pilate.

Now from these Rules we learn, that No ignorant, covetous, unfaithful and
faint hearted person, is either fit, or able to bear witness of the Gospel,
and not to be ashamed.

Neither of me his prisoner.] Here we might consider, 1. Who was in prison,
Paul. 2. Of whom he was put in prison; of the great men of Rome. And 3. His
dealing toward the Saints in time past, before he himself was in prison.
Whence from the person, we may collect, that,

They that have persecuted the Gospel, may prove prisoners for Doct. 1.
the Gospel. Again, that

Faithful Preachers have been used like Malefactors. Doct. 2.


And, from his Adversaries; that,

Great men's proceedings are not always according to equity Doct. 3.


Injustice may lodge in the mightiest persons. What was Pharaohs course to the
Israelites? Ahashuerosh toward the Jews? Herod's, Pilates, and the Pharisees
to Christ, and his Disciples?

For great men are not always wise, neither does the aged Reas. 1.
always understand judgment. Job. 32. 6.

Because, though they have knowledge; yet injustice may Reas. 2.
be executed through covetousness. Felix may take a bribe; and Judas sell his
Master for money Act. 24. 26.

We must not therefore think that all is well which great Use. 1.
men do: for they may, and have misled it; and might, has and usually does,
overcome right.

And let us not hang our selves on man, and make flesh Use. 2.
our hope; but put our confidence in God, whose actions are always just, and
equal. For God is not a God, that loves iniquity; neither can the Almighty
pervert judgment. Jobs friends mist it far, crying against him, Art thou the
first Job. 25. 7. etc.
man, that was borne? Do thou restrain wisdom to thy self? have thou
heard the secret counsel of God? What know thou, that we know not, and
understand that is not in us? With us are both ancient, and very aged men,
far elder then thy Father. So some cry, we have such, and such on our side:
What tho? may they not be deceived?

Again, where Paul put the Saints in prison the time past, and is now a
prisoner, we gather, that

With what measure we meet to others, the very same may befall Doct. 4.
our selves.

Pharaoh was forward to have drowned Moses and the people; yet was not he and
his host drowned themselves? Adonibezek cut off the thumbes of seventy
Princes; and was Judge. 1. 6. 7.
not he served, as he served them? Let Jacob trip up his brothers heels, and
deceive him both of his birth right and Gen 27. 35. and 29. 25.
blessing; Laban shall give him bleare eyed Leah in steed of of fair Rachel,
and change his wages many times: And if David will wrong Vriah in abusing his
wife; an Absalom shall pring out of his own bowels, to defloure his
Concubines in the sight of all Israel.

For its just with God, to measure to us, as we have done Reas. 1. Matthew. 7 2.
to others: and he has said it, and shall he not do it? Yet it is not
always in revenge, but to his as a correction; Paul was better in the being a
patie^t, then an agent in this regard, and action is not always better then
passion; except the ground, end, and the rule by which the act is guided, be
just and good. For we gain more by Christ's passion, then by Adams action.

And the Lord does this, that we might the more warily Reas. 2.
avoid sin, and not have that punishment to fall on us, that has done upon
others. The master sometimes strikes his servant in the sight of his son, for
a fault committed; because he would have his child to avoid his steps, by the
beholding the others correction; so what God does, is for our edification; and
that we might flee sin and evil.

This may inform us, how to carry our selves in our troubles, Use 1.
we must not lay the fault on him, or her; this or that; fortune or chance: but
cast our eye on our former dealings to others, and peradventure we shall spy
out the true cause, why, in that particular, we are afflicted. And if in so
doing we find out the root, from which this branch sprou^e^h; why, pluck it
up; and let it no longer grow in our ground: Lay the fault where it is, for
fear a worse thing follow.

And is this true? then let us all learn Christ's lesson: Do Use 2.
as we would be done unto, another day. Would the servant have done obedience,
by his, when he is a Master? then let him be serviceable, when he himself is
in subjection. And they that are children must obey their parents, else they
shall find theirs to prove but untoward tools. Speak ill of no man; for if
thou do, its just with God, to let one loose that shall pay thee home in the
same kind. And in brief: would thou be releiued in want, comforted in
misery, have the faithful to pray for thee, and in the hour of death to close
up thine eyes? then give to the poor, pity the weak, comfort the feeble
minded, pray for thy brethren, and visit them that are a dying. And though this
point by me be short in pressing: yet I would have it of thee to be long and
often in practicing.

Neither of me etc.] Where we note; that

We are not to be ashamed of such persons, as by suffering bear Doct. 5.
witnesses to the Gospel.

1. For God is not: they are precious in his eyes. Reas. 1. Reas. 2.


2. If we be, we do not as we would have others to deal with us.

And from this branch we note one thing more, that Doct. 6.


Corporal bondage does not deprive Gods servants of Spiritual freedom.

For Paul says he is the prisoner of Christ; both prisoner for his cause; and
also respected of him in prison, as his servant.

This is a point that has or may have his use, and is comfortable Use.
to all, that shall at any time suffer for the Gospel in Turkey, Rome, or
nearer home: for though such be man's bondmen; yet they be the Lords freemen.
From this very 1 Cor, 7.
ground, Paul comforted the poor servants of infidells.

But be partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel.]

Having finished the dehortation, we come to speak of the Exhortation; where
we first collect; that

We that profess the Gospel are patiently to suffer all afflictions Doct. 7.
that accompany the same.

So have the faithful done in former time; not counting their lives dear unto
them for the truths sake.

For we loose nothing by it. 1. If friends forsake us, Angels Reas. 1.
shall pitch their tents about us. 2. If we want liberty of body we have
freedom of spirit. 3. If there be no outward peace; yet we have in ward, that
passes all understanding. And ^. though our outward man perish,
notwithstanding the inner man is renewed daily.

Herein we are the likest to Christ; and what greater honor Reas. 2.
to man, then to be made conformable to his Lord, and Master?

And is not the Gospel, and the obedience of it the best Reas. 3.
things that we have, or can do? what were wealth without the word? one drop
of this balm is to be preferred before all the rivers of pleasure and profits
in the world. And one act of believing in Christ, will restore a man to all,
and more too, then that he lost by one offense in Adam his Father.

We must once die, and never in a better cause; besides all Reas. 4.
this, Christ he has suffered for us, and we have the Lord on our side.

And here we might reprehend some, that will suffer nothing Use 1.
for the Gospels sake; they never respect candle or candlestick. The Preacher
and the Gospel are the only things that best may be spared in the parish. A
word will make them cast away their weapons, and be gone: And, like little
children, they hang their heads, clappe their hands on their faces, set their
hatt in the brow, and run away at the very humming of Bees and flies.

In the next place, let us all in wisdom and resolution Use 2.
confess the Gospel and profess it, and partake of the small afflictions that
be in these days. Beloved, we have not resisted to fire and faggot, neither
has our purple blood colored the stones in the streets: then shall we not
suffer the tongue, with patience, to smite us? I cannot prescribe what kind or
measure we may suffer; But it is the voice of heaven, that in the world we
shall have many tribulations: All that Act. 14. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 12. Ioh. 16. 33.
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions: But let us be of
good comfort, for our Captain Christ, in whom we are more then conquerours,
has overcome the world.

Again, we observe hence; that

The Gospel whether preached or professed is always attended Doct. 8.
with sufferings and afflictions. Psalm. 22. 2 Chronicles. vlt. 15. 16.

For some do imprison the very word, and would not Reas. 1.
have it to run and be glorified. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.

And it must be so: For 1. God has glory by it. 2. His Reas. 2.
children get good by it. And 3. hereby the devil is proved a liar; for Job
serves not God for naught. Yea and 4. The baseness of the Gospel (as some
esteem it) brings sufferings; as to trust in a crucified God.

Those then that are Ministers, must arm themselves with Use 1.
patience and resolution; Private Christians must do the same. Yet here is a
wonderful mercy of God, that no power or policy can prevent the liberty of the
word, or hinder Mat 24. 24.
the salvation of one soul; for its impossible, that any of the elect can be
deceived. condemned.

And this must teach us not to think the worse of that Use. 2.
Gospel, that is accompanied with troubles, or of such as do embrace it. Some
cry, Oh! the days of old were good; when we had less Preaching, we had more
peace and plenty. What marvel? for ^ow Satan seeks to put out the Candle
that directs to heaven; and wicked men labor to put out that light, that does
discover them. Let Popery bring peace with it for the present, yet perdition
shall follow it in future time.

According to the power of God.] Taking these words in that sense we have
mentioned, the doctrine to be collected is, that

The Lord proportioneth the sufferings of his children according Doct. 9.
to their power.

He will not suffer them to be tempted above their ability. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Christ would not deliver many things; for the people for the present, were not
able to bear them. Timothy escaped prison (it seems) when Paul a stronger man
kissed the stocks: Act. 16.
for God had an eye to his weakness.

First he would have us suffer according to our power, because Reas. 1.
he would have his graces in us excercised to the uttermost. He that buildes a
ship, fitteth the burden answerable to her bigness; else (in part) his labor
and charge were in vain. For a lesser bark would have fitted his purpose,
served his turn.

And if our afflictions did exceed our ability, then it were Reas. 2.
not for probation, but destruction; No man will ouerburden his beast, for that
would bruise him, break him. Christ would not have new wine put into old
vessels; for the vessels would burst, and the wine be spilt: his Disciples
Math. 10. 14.
had too much of the old man in them, they were not renewed, so much as to be
able to undergo, for the present, extraordinary duties of Religion; therefore
for a time he would spare and exempt them.

This reproues such as accuse the Lord of injustice, crying Use. 1.
out, like Caine, My punishment is greater, than I can bear; for God is just
and equal in all his proceedings.

And here we see the goodness of God, that in judgment Use 2.
remembers mercy; he looks at the ability of his children, and makes their
power the rule of his proceedings; his will is not, but their weakness, the
ground and sole cause of their greater, or lesser afflictions; Yea he fits them
for sufferings, before he try them; and then makes the burden proportionable to
the measure of strength received.

By this point we may also be informed, why one Christian Use 3.
suffers much, another less? because of their inequal^ty of strength
exhibited: He that has much grace, shall ^eare much; little, suffer the less.
And it^ plain from this ground, that to suffer many and great afflictions,
argues ^^e ^ore grace, the greater ability.

This is for the comfort of the weak Christian; for he having Use 4.
received a little strength, shall endure the les^e ^^i^ll; for God is merciful
to the beasts, much more to his de^re children. What man will s^^ke his ves^^ll
with overbu^dening of it? break his beast with overlading o^ him? or p^^tle
his servant, or son to death, by casting too great a load on their shoulders?
And then, shall God burst his golden vessels, with filling them too full of
this liquor?

Moreover, we must learn hence, that as we grow in Use 5.
grace, so to prepare for greater sufferings. Christ will have his chiefest
Champions to fight the greatest combats; weak soldiers shall come in the
Rereward, and not in the forefront, or in the heat of the battle. And be sure
of this, that if thy strength be increased, thy troubles shall be also
augmented; Note.
for all our graces, in truth and in degree too, shall be employed: If Christ
be infinite in power, he must undergo the infinite wrath of his father being
made a sinner by imputation.

Furthermore, if God deals thus with us, let us have the Use. 6.
like hand one toward another. A minister must hauean eye to discern the
state of his flock, and put a difference in his commands; he must not tire the
Lambs with driving them too fast, or too far, with the elder Sheep. Choice
must be made to fast and pray, and to perform extraordinary duties, at
extraordinary times, lawfully commanded, lawfully to be executed. Parents too,
and Masters must not, like the taskemasters of Egypt, enjoin their children
and servants a greater work then they are able to discharge. And would to God,
that all men would remember this in all things; for its just, and equal.

Finally, we must take knowledge of our own power, and Use 7.
never press our selves beyond our might. Christ would not have some to speak
of him, and to tell of his works: why? for they were not, for the present,
either able to defend the truth, suffer for it; or those with whom they were to
deal, fitted to receive it. We have many, but too forward in these times,
except their ability were better; young Christians will be (now a days,) in the
heat of the skirmish, without a calling, casting Cannons off their carriages,
that never gave fire to a double Muskert, control the Captains; when as they
themselves never fought on foot. Yet bear, fight, quarrel, but know thy
standing, thy strength; and presume not (like Peter) above thy power.

For our direction; we must know, that ability is either Power distributed.
inward, or outward, Inward. 1. Spiritual. 2. Corporal. Outward is in our
head Christ or our riches: And according to all this power we must bear and
suffer. Some Christians, like great bony beggars, are able to bear much; but
in the time of trouble, they either run away, or shrink when the burden is to
be put under their shoulders: others (as we have heard) think nothing too
heavy for them: so that these are extremities on both hands, and to be, as
dangerous, avoided.

The last thing we note, is this, that

It is the power of God received, which will support a Christian Doct. 10.
in affliction.

This is as wine to the spirit, the spirit to the soul, as wind to the sails,
and the sails to the ship. But in regard we have touched it before* we omit it
here, and proceed to the verse which follows.

VERSE. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us
through Christ Jesus* before the world was.
IN this verse the Apostle declares what the Lord The Logical resolution.
has done for him, and his son Timotheus, 1. He has saved them. 2. Called
them. 3. Wherewith? with an holy calling. 4. Why he has done this? First Paul
remoues a false ground, in these words, Not according to our works; and
Secondly, he lays down the true cause in these words, But according to his
purpose and grace etc.

Who.] That is, God: for this word has relation unto the The Theological
exposition.
last word in the foregoing verse:

Has saved.] 1. Salvation is either corporal, or spiritual. 2. It is either
partial, or total: Spiritual and total is here meant; and it contains 3.
things 1. A freedom from some evil we are fallen into, or subject to fall
into. 2. A position and setting of us in a good condition. And 3. A perpetual
preservation of us from all dangers for future time: This is, totally and
perfectly to be saved.

And called.] Calling may be distinguished. 1. By the means, and 2. By the
subjects of it. The instruments, are either principal or secondary. God is the
chief efficient of our calling; and the Minister, word, and creatures are but
as instruments in the workemans hand. The subject is man only; and that either
general, or particular: General, as whole Nations; Gentiles, Jews:
Particular, as persons; Paul, Timotheus; the latter here meant.

Moreover, calling is either effectual; or not effectual; for we may
distinguish of it according to the success.

And finally, its either ordinary, or extraordinary: ordinary effectual
calling is by the wor^ and spirit; extraordinary effectual calling is
immediately by the spirit, without the word. The calling here, is effectual;
and in respect of Paul's manner of being called, seems extraordinary; though
not so in regard of Timotheus. Act. 9.

Us.] That is, me Paul, and thee my son: yet all the elect, either have
been, or shall be called, with an holy calling.

With an holy calling.] Here Is another distinction of callings, Holiness it is
either personal, or by imputation. So God is called holy. Yea, he is holiness
it self. Personal holiness is either inherent, or actual; and both these are
to be found in the subjects of this calling, though not perfectly, yet in some
degree. Besides, imputative holiness is double also. 1. When Holiness imputed 1.
to persons. 2. things.
Christ's holiness is made ours; for he is our sanctification. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And
as our sins were made his sins, and he became a sinner by imputation: so
his holiness is made ours, and we without sin by imputation. Finally, holiness
is ascribed to the word, to the Sabbath, and many other things; because they
are causes of holiness, or times wherein we are specially commanded to serve God
in the duties of the first table, or in that the things be not applied to a
common use; and in some one of these senses or other (as we shall hear more
anon) this calling is said to be holy.

Not according to our works.] That is, not for the prevision and foreknowledge
of man's faith or merits.

But according to his purpose and grace.] viz. Freely, and of his mere mercy,
and from no other ground.

Which was given to us in Christ Jesus before the world was.] 1. Here Paul
gives a strong reason, why their works were not the cause of their calling,
in the word Given, for a gift must be free, and 2. He draws another from the
time, it was given; viz. before the world was 1. From all eternity.

And amongst many other arguments, this is not the The Metaphrase.
least for to move and instigate thee to preach the Gospel, and to bear
witness to the truth and to partake of the afflections which I and others
suffer; in as much as the Lord of his mere grace and favor, before any thing
had a being, and without any regard at al of thy faith, works, or merit, has
freed thee from all dangers, placed thee in a good condition, and in time
called thee effectually by his blessed Spirit, with such an honorable and holy
calling as he has done me, and will also preserve thee to his heavenly
Kingdom, through the Redemption of Christ his son, our only Savior and
Mediator.

If we hold this verse as a digression from the former matter, The deductio^ of
doctrines.
then this point will follow, that

A Digression is warrantable, either in words or writing. Doct. 1.


And the Scripture else where does confirm this proceeding. Genesis 4. 23. Isay.
7. 16.

For it is a means to stir up better attention, and to Reas. 1.
draw the Auditors more strictly and respectively for to give heed to what
follows. The Hawke sometimes goes afar off, that she may get the wind,
and be better able at the stoop, to strike and catch her prey. And this
Crypsis in preaching may be used.

Again, the Spirit of God may draw the tongue sometime Reas. 2.
to speak what we have not purposed, for the good of some particular person,
who is in the assembly; and some present occasion may minister just occasion to
do the same; as we see and know by our daily experience.

Then let not the Auditor be too forward in censuring the Use 1.
preacher, for digression from the matter in hand: for God may have a secret
hand therein, that we for the present are not ^ware of, for the comforting or
converting of some person present.

And this may warrant the Minister in this kind of proceeding: Use. 2. Cautions
for Digressions.
Yet Cautions must be observed: 1. See it be not for want of study, through
idleness, or thy own neglect and carelesnes to be well provided. 2. Forg^^
not to return to thy former matter, and purpose; for otherwise a judicious
Auditor will fear, as Saul's father did him, when he had long sought his Asses;
that the preacher has lost himself.

Again, where Paul in the former verse and the last word thereof, having named
God, does in this make a description of his goodness, we note, that

It is usual with good men, when they name the Lord, to make Doct. 2.
mention of his mercies, or some benefit they have received from him.

For they would have him to receive all glory. We use in Reas. 1.
the naming of our friends to make mention of the kindness we have received from
them, to show our thankfulness, and that they might be praised.

Again, they would not have the Lords name took up in Reas. 2.
vain, or be profained; and the more they can speak to his praise, the more
inward comfort they have. We joy in the commendation of those we most affect;
so do the children of God in the due praise of their father.

Would to God, that this were the custom of our country; Use 1.
but with too many it is not. We use his name, but (alas!) how often in vain?
not once making mention of the least of his mercies; nay, it were well if some
did not first swear by it, and next declare what villainy they themselves have
committed.

But if we would glorify our heavenly father, have Use 2.
others to speak to his praise; show forth our thankfulness, and have much
inward comfort, let us couple his name and his mercies together; and he that
does this, shall have a secret and hidden joy stirred up in his heart. Is it
not usual, that if we speak much of a friend, and his favors to us, for
others to say, Sure you are beholden to, or you are in love with such a one*
and will not such sayings make us right glad?

In the third place, if we consider these words as they are a motive cause, and
depend on the former, then this is the doctrine, that will follow, that

He who would not faint, but suffer affliction, is still to have an Doct. 3.
^ye to his Salvation.

Moses had respect to the recompense of reward, and thereby was moved to suffer
affliction with the people of God for a season. The Saints looked for a better
resurrection, therefore endured Racking, sawing asunder, and resisted unto
blood. The forerunner and finisher of our faith Christ our Lord, he setting
before him the glory provided for him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame Heb. 11. 24. 35. and 12. 2.

Because varying of the object varieth the minds motion. Reas. 1. Psalm. 40.
When David considered his misery, he cried out I am poor and needy; but when
he thought on the affection of God toward him; he altered his joy and note,
saying; Yet the Lord thinks on me.

Besides, salvation is a thing of great worth, and of the Reas. 2.
faithful principally desired, and therefore casting the eye of their minds
upon that, they will endure any sorrow. Why did not Paul and others faint? Why?
they accounted that, the 2 Cor. 4 vlt.
afflictions of this life were not worthy of the weight of glory, that way laid
up for them in the heavens.

Here we see what enemies those be to themselves, Who Use. 1.
are always casting their eye on their present miseries, but never look up to
the heavens. If the husband man would never have thought on the day of reaping,
he would have small comfort in plowing, sowing, etc.

And this is to direct us, what to do in the sad times of affliction; Use 2.
namely to think on our salvation. David had utterly fainted, but that he
expected to see the goodness of God Psalm 27.
in the land of the living: and so shall we in troublesome times, have we no
eye toward the land of Canaan, the new Jerusalem. He that wades through a
strong and swiftriuer, must look to the shore, not down under his feet; For
then his head would grow giddy, his eyes dazell, and he be in peril of
drowning; so when the strong streams of affliction compass us on cuery side*
if we would not faint and fall; cast we our eyes on the bank and coast of
heaven. And this thing is worth our daily observation: for we shall have some
rubs, lesser or greater, continually.

This point then is physic for each time, every malady.

Thus we proceed to handle the words without any relatition to the verses
foregoing.

Who.] The note is, that.

God is the Author of man's Salvation; whither temporal, or^ternall; Doct. 4.
total, or partial.

All the Prophers bear witness to this, David cries; Salvation Psalm 3* vlt
and 27. 1. Isa^. 12. 2.
is from the Lord; The Lord is my Salvation; Isaiah, God is my Salvation; and,
the Savior of all men* 1. Tim. 4. 10.

For he found out that new and everliuing way, when man Reas. 1. Genesis 3. 15.
had lost himself; into which Sat^an could not pry, and the Angels desired to
peep into.

And as he found out the way, so he prepared the means; Reas. 2. ^oh. 3. 16.
for he sent his son, made of a woman, that they that believed in him might
be saved.

Thirdly he was contented to take a satisfaction of the Reas. 3.
surety, whereas he might have required it at the debtors hands; and then no
flesh had been saved: for none could have made an infinite satisfaction.

What shall I more say? he has sent his word, law and Reas. 4.
Gospel: he has fitted and thrust forth Ministers to divide it aright, and
to discover the hidden mysteries in the same: finally, he has given us of his
Spirit, and by the finger of the Holy Ghost in some measure made us (for the
present) capable of his kingdom: its he, and none but he that saves Israel.
For the father he saves us by grace; Christ by Note.
purchase, the Holy Ghost by application.

This serves to confute the Papists, who ascribe too much Use. 1.
unto man, for the work of his salvation; but we pass by that.

And is God the principal agent in man's salvation? Then Use. 2.
not unto us, not unto us, but unto his name give we the praise. For what
power had we to give our selves a being? to preserve our selves since we were
borne, and to work out our salvation? why were not we rejected with many,
borne in a land of darkness, or strangled sucking of our Mothers breasts? who
took the veil of ignorance from our eyes, caused the light of the glorious
Gospel to shine into our souls and made us (who sometime were fools) wise
unto salvation? why then, with a grateful heart, say with the Prophet:

It is the Lords mercy, I was not long ago consumed: and, he is my God and my
Salvation.

And would we all be saved? why then, seek unto God, Use 3.
rely upon him; yet use thou all other helps that he has prescribed: Do the
best thou can, but still depend upon him, not on the means, the which
without his finger, as Moses rod, will work nothing.

And is God the author of man's salvation? why then let Use. 4.
the righteous be of good comfort, for they shall be saved. What can hinder?
who can prevent his resolution? Let Satan and all the Spirits of the infernal
pit, gather their wit, power, and forces together, cast rivers of water out of
their mouths, breath fire at their nosthrills, spet venom as fast as words;
yet God shall pluck off their Chariot wheels, smite them in the hinder parts;
they shall in heaps lie dead and stinking on the shore, when the waters shall
give way, that all the Israel of God may safely pass, and possess heaven. And
though sometimes we may seem, to be in great dangers, as Paul and the people
were in the ship; yet Act. 27.
as they did to land at the length, so shall we come safe to the land of the
living. For not one whom the father has chosen, and his son redeemed, but in
the time appointed they shall be saved: Not one of these soldiers, shall
become captives; none of these children shall be disinherited: Fear not them,
little flock, seeing nothing can deprive you of salvation.

Has.] Out of this word it may be gathered, that

The Salvation of the faithful is certain and not doubtful. Doct. 1.


Paul speaks of it, as of a thing perfected, finished. And it is usual in the
Scripture to call things that are not, as Number. 23. 10.
though they were; Bal^^^ made no question of thi^ God says, he will put his
fear into them, and they shall never (m^^ke Ier. 32. 29. 40.
that) depart from him. He has promised to marry himself to them in
faithfulness, that is, in a covenant that shall not be Hos. 2. 19. 20.
broken: and to such there is no condemnation: And for the Romans 8. 1.
certainty of this point we may produce many worthy reasons.

And first from God the father thus we argue. 1. Has he Reas. 1.
not chosen them 2 Timothy 2. 19. and shall he at any time reject his people? Why
then does he not make a new election? why? for his counsel shall stand. 2. He
loves them, and whom he once loves, does he not love them with an everlasting
love. Ier. 31. 3. 3. He cannot repent of what he has promised, or fail of his
word Romans 11. 29. and 4. Is not his justice satisfied? has not Christ paid the
full debt, and shall God require it again of the debtor? Romans 5. 8. And if God
has chosen them, loved them, his justice be satisfied for them, and he has
promised to save them; shall then any of them perish on Gods part? I trow this
is plain to every man's capacity, that they shall not, nor cannot.

A second maine Reason, or rather many may be drawn Reas. 2.
from Christ the Lord. 1. Has he not bought them? and will he now not demand
his due? Yes: thine they were (says he to his father) but they are mine. Io.
17. 6. 2. Has he not prayed for them? Io. 17. 24. and does not the father
hear him always? Io. 11. 42. 3. He also makes daily intercession for them. 1
Io. 2. 2. And shall he not prevail? and 4. Christ has glory by them. For if
one member were lost, the body would be imperfect. Ioh. 17. 10.

Also from the Spirit we gather reasons. 1. If he should not Reas. 3.
perfect the work of gracein them, the word that came from him would be
against him. Phil. 1. 6. Again in the 2. place, his power and mercy would not
equally appear to the elect in Regeneration, as the power and mercy of the
father and the son in the Creation and Redemption, if any of them were not
perfectly sanctified. 3. Then Christ should prove a liar, for he has promised
to send his spirit, that shall lead them into every truth; and again the
Spirit should not obey the son, which were the deepest blasphemy to conceive.
Io. 16. 13. 4. They are the Temple of the Holy Ghost; and shall he suffer that
to be destroyed? or the unclean spirit to thrust him out of his possession? 1
Cor. 6. 19. So that on the Fathers part, the Sons part, and the Holy Ghosts
part, they cannot perish.

And we may draw reasons from the faithful themselves; Reas. 4.
For 1. They cannot be deceived. Math. 24. 24. 2. They never sin with a full
consent; the new man, the part regenerate cannot sin. Romans 9. vlt. 1 Io. 3.
9. And then shall he perish for the old man's transgressions? This were to
verify Note.
the old Proverb. The fathers have eat^^ sower grapes, and the childrens teeth
are set on edge. 3. They will always use the means that will bring them to
heaven. Col. 3. 2. and shall not he that walks in the way come to the end of
his journey. Ier. 6. 16. 4. They are united to Christ by faith, love and the
Spirit; and who can burst these bands asunder?

And we may also collect arguments from the similitudes Reas. 5.
in Scripture for this purpose. 1. Christ is compared to a vine; the faithful
to his branches. 2. To a spring; they to living waters, that flow therefrom. 3.
To an head; they to his real members 4. To a foundation; and they to the rest
of the building. And who shall stop the course of this river? John 4. 14. Rent
this tree up by the roots? Io. 15. Bruise this head? Io. 1. 18. Or remove this
foundation? for its said, that the Gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Math. 16. 18. This is not like Abraham's well, that was stopped; Ionah's guord
that withered; the Serpents head, that was bruised; or the Temple of Jerusalem,
that was ouerturned.

Finally, if they should not be saved, what great absurdities Reas. 6.
would follow? for 1. Grace should be overcome of corruption, the younger serve
the elder. 2. The body mystical of Christ be maimed, yea, in part, condemned.
3. We should ascribe less to grace and the Spirit, then to Satan and
corruption, both for power and privilege, and 4. Christ should be subject to
die in vain, in (...) or wholly; for by that rule and means, that one may fall
away, two may, yea all the faithful; and then Christ should (...) to loose his
purpose and to he gratis, for no end.

And by this Doctrine in hand are our Adversaries confuted Use 1.
who maintain, that the faithful may fall, and finally parish. They instance
in Solomon. But he fell not totally and for ever. Reasons why Solomon was saved.
For 1. He writ a book of his repentance. 2. He had a special promise, that
the Lord would never forsake him. 3. Peter styles all, holy men, who penned the
Scriptures, of which number he was one. 4. He is in the natural (I say not
legal) Genealogy of Christ, and no doubt, but Christ would give him that
honor, as to save him. 5. He might not commit idolatry, but permit his
Concubines; so his sin was the lesser; for as he was said to build the Temple
by others; so might he be reputed an idolater in bearing with others. 6. He was
a special type of Christ; and all this being thus, who dares conclude, that
he was condemned? We may boldly, avouch the contrary.

But the Papists have reason to hold that Solomon perished. Why the Papists
hold he perished.
1. In so doing, he being a King; then Kings will the sooner submit themselves
unto the Pope, and seek for a pardon. 2. If as a Prophet he perished; and a
penman of the Scripture; 1.
Oh! this makes notably for their purpose; for then this 2.
will follow; that the Pope may be free from the spirit of error, yet dle a
damned person, as many, by their own confession, have done. 3. If as a good
and private man; then, 3.
certainty of Salvation cannot be obtained, as they seek to defend. and 4.
Hold this position they must, or else pardons 4.
and Purgatory will be of no praise, or prize, but utterly perish.

But you will demand, why should so excellent a man fall Quest.
so fearfully?

1. The Lord might permit him, to humble him, as Paul Sol.
must have a prick to buffet him, least he should be exalted with the
abundance of Revelations: and was not Solomon having so rare parts, incident to
the same? and if that was a remedy for Paul, why not this unto Solomon?

2. Again, if this King had lived without spott, he being so wonderfully
qualified, and having so great a kingdom that none was ever like him; the
people, peradventure, would have taken him for the true Messiah. For how many
still looked for Christ, at that day; and after Christ was come, dreamed of an
earthly kingdom? Many more arguments they produce, but we have answered them
elsewhere, therefore here omit them.

And this doctrine is of great comfort to all the faithful; Use 2.
for come what can, they shall never perish. Nothing shall be able to separate
us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. We should more rejoice in this, then
wicked men in their wine, and oil, and large possessions. Jobs heart was glad
in the remembrance and assurance, that his Redeemer lived, and that he should
see him with his eyes: David rejoiced, that his flesh should see no corruption,
and the Apostle, that he should be saved. Shall a King be glad, that none can
take away his crown? a nobleman the Ensign of his honor? the Judge, his
scarlet robe? the Bishop, his Rochet? the Captain, his Ancient? the Pyrate
his flag? and the poor man his farm? shall the certain possession of these
things breed so much mirth? and shall the assurance of a kingdom, not expel
sorrow and mourning?

Art thou poor? in a far Country? despised of the world? or with the Jew in
Babylon? have thy parents rejected thee? thy friends cast thee off? and all thy
familiars wait for thy halting? Yet grace shall never leave thee, or the Lord
forsake thee, but preserve thee to eternal glory. Let Rachel die in travel;
Abel be slain of his brother; James be beheaded; Christ crucified; and Eli
break his neck; yet they shall be saved. And if thou be faithful, God shall
deliver thee from every evil work, and preserve thee to his heavenly
kingdom. Then be of good comfort, for if earthly privileges breed such joy,
what should these heavenly do? Why, where be our hearts? and what do we
think upon.

And this should teach us thankfulness to God, who has Use 3.
now made our spiritual estate more certain in Christ our surety; then it was
at the first in Adam our father. The Pope gets large sums, for long pardons;
the Landlord great fines, for a lease for many years; But we have a pardon and
lease that are of force, for ever and ever: ours be signed, sealed, and
delivered by the finger of the Spirit, through the blood of Christ Jesus, and
with the full and free consent and presence of God the father: Then say with
the Apostle upon the same ground, To whom be praise, for ever and ever Amen.

And is our salvation certain? How then should we be Use. 4.
pricked forward to go on in the constant and cheerful use of all means
that may effect it? for does not expectation and assurance of the end, set all
a work? who would plow, if he had no hope of a harvest? cross the dangerous
seas, if he were out of all heart, for his return in safety? or take Physic,
should he not thereby expect recovery of some present sickness, or the remouall
of some future disease feared? And had we no hope, then we might be out of
heart: But seeing not one of our hairs shall perish, as Paul said Acts 27.
concerning corporal safety; let us eat and drink with gladness, be of good
courage, and use all helps prescribed: for as the wicked have no mind to use
the means, because they have no hope to inherit heaven; so we, by the
contrary ground, should be stirred and enliued to cast off sin, grow in
grace, suffer affliction, and (if need be) to resist unto blood; in as much,
that we be assured, and know, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. And
with what willingness will man and beast, bauke and hunt, being in hope to find
and catch the prey? shall we then, having such a prize in our hands, have no
hearts? surely it should not, nor it must not be so.

Saved.] Hence let it be noted, that

The Salvation of man is a rare and great blessing. Doct. 6.


No doubt but Paul does mention it as a special favor from the Lord. And
seeing in these words he seems to use a Reason to move Timotheus to be
resolute in all good duties, if he had known a better or more forcible
argument, he would have produced it for his purpose. See Genesis 49. 18. Which
place the two Caldee Paraphrasts expound, not of Gedeon, or Sampsons delivery,
that were temporal and transitory, but the salvation by Christ, which is
eternal and permanent, 1 Pet. 4. 18. Io. 4. 5. Phil. 2. 12. Isai. 45. 17. and
this will further appear by many reasons.

Let us consider it in the causes. 1. We were not redeemed Reas. 1.
with gold and silver, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 2. Does not the word, the good word of God, and
the Spirit effect and* apply it? and was not the best message that ever Angels
brought, Salvation to mankind?

And are not all times, means, and things subordinate to Reas. 2.
the same? this is the end of all ends, Gods glory being excepted; and yet his
glory is procured by the same. The more general a thing is, the better it is;
for begetting, conceiving, bearing, baptizing, calling and justifying, yea
Sanctification preceede it. And is it not then the best thing?

And is it not directly opposed to damnation, the worst Reas. 3.
thing that can be named? the wicked shall be in hell amongst the damned
Devils, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire: on the contrary, the Godly
shall inherit heaven, enjoy the communion of the blessed Angels, for ever and
ever.

Finally consider what it is to be saved 1. Shall not the Reas. 4.
image of God in such be perfectly renewed. Psalm 17. vlt? 2. Their joy, shall
it not be full? Psalm. 16. vlt? Their habitation of pure gold, and the fruition
of all, eternal? and now lay all these together, and will not the point be a
truth, that man's chiefest blessedness consists in his salvation? Come we to
the use.

Where we reprehend many, that esteem it a matter of no Use. 1.
moment or estimation. Is it a thing of weight to preserve a young plant from
withering? a beast from drowning? the body from dying? and nothing of
importance to save the whole man from damning? The ignorant man, as he
understands not the worth of it; so he never seeks after it. The Covetous
cries, its good to be here, gain is great godliness. The Epicure, he goes
in purple and fine linen every day, fares delicately, drinks wine in
bowls, spends his time in pleasure, and altogether forgets his latter
end. The voluptuous man makes merry, saying, The next day shall be as this, we
will have our fill of love, and never once minds his salvation.

As for the drunkard, biting usurer, and the swearer, they long agone have made
a league with hell, and a covenant with death; boasting, Tush God will do
neither good nor evil Zeph. 1. 12. and is there wisdom in the most high?

This point may justify the courses of such, as take pains Use 2.
to work out their salvation, and to make their calling and election sure. Go
ye on, and the good Lord shall be with you. Let it never be said of any of
you, ye began well, but who did let you? Its a fearful thing to begin in the
spirit, and to end in the flesh.

This might move Parents, to make their children the Use. 3.
subjects of salvation: for would you not have them to be heirs of great
things? Say then with Abraham, Oh, that Ismael might live! with Noah, God
persuade Iapheth to dwell in the tents of She^. All call with David, Come
hearken unto me, ye little children, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. For those be the best parents, that can use the means to bring their
sons and daughters to be coheires with Christ of the kingdom of God, and to
participate of endless salvation. Whereas our Lord said, Weep for your
selves, and for your children; So say I, Get salvation for your selves, and for
your children.

And from this ground, we are all to be entreated, and instructed Use 4.
to seek Salvation. What was Pharaoh the better in being a King? Athaliah a
Queen? or Judas an Apostle, and cast out of heaven? Where be now the Fools
great barnes, Nebuchadnezzars Babel, or the rich gluttons purple fine linen
and dainty fare? What is now become of dancing Dalilah, painted Iezabel, or
drunken Nabal? whose ears would not tingle, and hearts tremble to tread in
their steps, and to think at what a doleful haven they be landed? wherefore
cry, and cry again with the Iailor, Syrs, what shall I do to be saved?
Master, how may I inherit eternal life? Oh think and think often, that
salvation is the greatest good that can befall a man; for without that, we
shall perish for ever; and then woe to us that ever we were borne.

Us.] That which hence I gather, is that

One good Christian rejoices in the salvation of another. Doct. 7.


Paul envieth not that Timothy was partaker of the same blessing.

Again, we note, that

Certainty of Salvation may be had, if it be rightly sought Doct. 8.
for.

Yet some think, that Paul understood this by extraordinary Revelation: Yet
the point is a truth though it were not drawn from this Text. 2 Cor. 5. 1. 1
Io. 3* 1. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 Ioh. 3. 19.

For in the use of the means we may get faith, and that will Reas. 1.
assure our hearts of salvation.

Again, God gives his spirit to such as seek aright, and Reas. 2. Ephesians. 1.
13.*
it will bear witness with our spirit, that we be the sons of God; and if
sons, we shall be saved.

This confutes the contrary doctrine of the Papists; who Use. 1.
leave a man, like a Meteor, hanging in the air, always doubtful.

But they object, that faith is not felt by sense.

1. What if it were not, yet repentance is sensible, and he Object. 1. Sol.
that repents truly, shall be saved.

2. He that believes is sure that he believes; for as the eye does see, and
knows it sees; so does faith believe, and is assured it believes by that
faculty it has in it self.

But the best doubt. Object. 2. Sol.


True; but 1. Doubting comes from the flesh; and diverse causes produce contrary
effects. 2. Varying the minds object varyeth the act for the present. and 3.
Faith and doubting Causes of doubting.
may stand together when as they be neither of them in the highest, but in a
remi^se degree; And as limping is a sign of life, halting of motion; so is
doubting of believing: for as without life there can be no limping; so without
faith, no doubting, though, I grant, there may be despairing.

We may try by this doctrine what good use we have Use. 2.
made of Gods ordinances: Have we got assurance that our names are writ in the
book of Life? are we sealed by the spirit of promise? are we certain we
shall be saved? Why then we are good profitients in Christ's school, else not.
Do we still hang all upon seeming, saying, thinking and conceiting? why then
we are much amiss, and must labor for assurance.

We would have our Lease sure, hold our Lands sure, and make all sure: and
shall we take no pains to make our salvation sure? Well: we through the
goodness of God have time and means to do it; and if we omit the opportunity,
the day of had I wist, will overtake us. What is of greater estimation, then
the certainty of salvation? and what less regarded, more neglected? Some
think, its a doctrine impossible; others cannot stand about it; and many
desperately, in a blindfold manner, cast themselves on the secret and
unsearchable mercy of God. Art thou any of this number? then in the fear of
God amend this thing: I can tell thee it will prove worth thy labor at the
length, though it seem labor in vain for the present season.

And has called us.] From the copulation of these two together, it is to be
observed, that

Effectual vocation accompanies Salvation. Doct. 9.


None shall be saved, but such as be effectually called. Adam was called, no
doubt, when the Lord came in the cool of the evening, and said Adam, where art
thou? Genesis 3. 9. See Math. 9. 13. Romans 8. 28. 1 Cor. 1. 9. Gal. 5. 8. Col. 3.
15. 1 These. 2. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Heb. 5. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 15. Jude 1.

Because we by Nature are in darkness and spiritual bondage; Reas. 1.
we lie, like Adam hidden in the bush, until the Lord call us out, and set us
at liberty. The bondage in Egypt of Israel under Pharaoh prefigured this: and
as they were called corporally; so must we spiritually, before we can come to
the heavenly Canaan.

Again, the Lord has set down a most sure path, that Reas. 2.
leads to heaven: he therefore that will come to his iourneies end, eternal
salvation, must travel the Kings high Exodus 14.
way* Rom 8. 30. Israel did so to Canaan.

Besides, if we be not called, we cannot be justified, and Reason 3.
consequently saved: For effectual vocation (in order at the least) does
precede justification. And if we have not this link of the chain, we lose
the other also. Romans 8 30.

And last of all, No vocation, no true title to the promises; Reason 4.
for they belong to as many (and no more) as the Lord shall call. Act. 2. 39.
And he that has not right to them, but is still under the Law, cannot be
saved; for we come to heaven by no other way, but by the promise.

And here we task the carelesnes of many, that never have Use 1.
care, by proving the truth of their calling; to make their salvation certain.
Some cry, they are not assured of heaven, what marvel, seeing they be not
called? for the one is, or the other can be never. Who will expect wages, when
the Master of the house has not called him to work?

This teaches us how to get assurance of salvation. viz. in Use 2.
making our calling sure. Get the one, and thou shall have the other. And
because thou may the better try the truth of thy calling, we will stand a
little to show the order and manner of it.

We must know, that preparation goes before this effectual The order of Gods
proceeding with whom he calls.
vocation. And it has 2. parts. 1. A cutting off. 2. A fitting.

This cutting off is done by the knife of the law, which, like an axe, loppeth
us off from the wild olive tree, Adam. For though we be not called by the law,
yet we are fitted by it.

In this cutting off, we may observe, 1. The time when, What time the Lord
calls.
and 2. The manner how. The time is ordinarily, when we are the best able to
do the Lord service in his vineyard, which is, in a middle age: seldom are
children, and rarely be old men called: for the one is not of age to work, the
other, almost, past age to work. Yet we read of some children, as Jeremiah,
Josiah, Timothy, and others, that of children were called; that Parents might
be encouraged to use the means of conversion, and not be without all hope of a
blessing: And so we do of some old men, as of Abraham called at 70 years of
age: and it seems probable by Nichodemus his answer to Christ, that he
himself was an old man. John 3. This, no doubt, is written, that we might not
Aged persons rarely called.
despair of any; for God can call whomsoever, and whenever he will. Yet men
and women of great age are not often called 1. For they are most unfit for the
Lords work: what man will take an aged person to make a watch, or to become a
Musition? for are not his fingers set; which should be nimble for such a
calling? how unhandsomely will they go about so curious an instrument, or
action? And shall the Lord then, not make choice of the fittest persons to
perform his actions? 2. Old men have gotten a stronger habit of sin then
others: what says Christ of such? Can a Blackamore change his skin, and a
Leopard his spotts? then may ye do well, that are accustomed to do evil. 3.
Satan has more possession of such people, and is the harder to be cast out.
4. We read in the Gospel, that God calls at the third hour, sixth hour,
ninth and eleventh hour: why not at the twelfe, making an equal distribution?
I cannot tell, I do but guesle; but it may be, because at the twelfth, hour,
either none, or few are called. I would not be mistaken here, as though this
were impossible with God: but that men* might be moved not to procrastinate and
defer their conversion, I have added this. And when trees have been often
watered, pruned, and dunged, yet bear not, does not the Lord of the vineyard
bid them to be cut down? Luke 13.
for why make they the ground barren? wicked men hinder the good of others.
This for the time of calling.

The manner how, follows; and that is, either violently, How the Lord calls.
or more gently. God is wise in all his proceedings, and therefore calls, as
he sees needful: Some he peirceth to the very heart, wounds the spirit, and
causes them to quake and tremble exceedingly at the voice, of his power:
others he calls with a still and quiet voice as is most convenient. The
discreet Mother having a child stubborn and untoward shakes the rod; when as
one, that is more meek and tractatable is allured by a cherry or apple; and
even so deals the Lord by his chosen children; for he calls them according
to their dispositions and several qualities, yet always so, as they come and
obey his voice.

2. And this may serve to have been spoken of their cutting off, both for time
and manner: Next their fitting follows, the which consists of. 2. branches;
the one Compunction, the other desperation.

When the Cyon is cut off from the tree, then in order it follows, that it be
fitted to be set into the stock, into which it is to be grasted: And so, when
by the knife of the law, we are either violently, or more leisurely lopped from
the old olive; it ensues that we be fitted to be set into the new, Christ the
Lord. Now this compunction of heart has two degrees; the one rendeth asunder
the very joints and sinews; pierces and enters into the very bones, and the
marrow. But the other does not wound so deep; but, as it were skarreth the
skin, and ^ateth into the flesh. For as some be let blood in the finger, others
in the arm, or head: so God, being a most skillful Surgeon, does prick,
and let us blood, as he discerns the nature of our disease. The child came to
himself by neezing seuentimes. 2 King. 4. 35.

And after this compunction follows an holy desperation; which consists in
the denying of a man's own merits and relying on the Lord for mercy: for his
sins being great and many, his good works not any at all, he is thereby
brought to despair in regard of himself, and also to call the mercy of God
into question: Yet not doubting whether the Lord can, but whether he will or
not, grant him a pardon for his sin. Now does the sinner hang the head, smite
his hand upon his thigh, cry earnestly to God for mercy, and seek to the
Minister, the Physician of the spirit, for grace and comfort. And this
compunction and holy desperation is greater in some, then other, for these
Reasons.

1. Some man may have had many outward calls by the Six reasons. why all men
are not called a like.
word, and inward motions by the Spirit, the which he having resisted and not
obeyed, then he is brought to fear, that he has sinned the sin unto death:
And if he has any knowledge in the Scriptures, peradventure, will bring that
to fight against himself; especially that place in Heb. 6. or. 10.

2. Other some have had good education, and have bin trained up in the
Scriptures of children; so that they have been restrained from many grosser
sins, then others have committed. Whence it follows, that there is degrees
of compunction: Trees that have been long vnpruned, have the more cuts, when
they come to be lopped and dressed.

3. Peradventure, the Lord has a purpose to send some one of his children, for
to dwell, like Lot in Sodom; or Joseph, in Egypt; and there he foreseeing, that
they shall have weak provocations to good, strong temptations to evil,
lets them drink the more deeply of the dregs of sin, that they, in
future time the rather may be moved to avoid it: For a wounded spirit, and
troubled conscience for sin, will prove, for time to come; an excellent
Tutor. He that has burnt his feet with treading on the hot stone, will look
the better to his steps, in all his journey afterward.

4. All men have not constitutions of body alike; some be strong, others weak;
so that, that measure which will but cure the one, humble him sufficiently,
would kill the other and bruise him to powder. And if some were so cast down
as others be, they being poor men, and to live by great toil, and daily
labor, would never be able to execute the duties of their calling, and to get
their bread by the works of their hands. A man in the breaking of his beast,
will have an eye to that; and shall not the Lord much more in the reclaiming of
his children?

5. God appoints some to be sons of thunder, to speak with power and
authority, to Preach amongst a people, whose faces be as brass, and necks
like sinews of iron* and therefore he brings them home (as we say) with a
witness, at their conversion: For as he that has received much wrong by a bad
neighbor, will speak worse of him, then he can, who has had lesser injuries
at his hand: so will such, as have felt the enmity of sin the most, preach
more fervently against it, then he who has not felt the sting of it, in that
measure.

6. Finally, some men have most excellent and acute understandings; now the
more clearly the intellect receives a fearful object, the more will the
heart be troubled. If one, through the dimnes of the eye, take a Lion for a
tame beast, he will not be shaken with equal terror, as he will, that by the
clearenes of his sight discerns the beast in his own kind and nature. And
this is a most true position, that the best wits, be the most wounded in heart,
at their effectual calling; because sin and the punishment be the more
clearly apprehended: and men (ordinarily) more then women, from the acutenes
of the understanding.

But some may object; Its from God, not man, that one is Object. 1.
thus humbled: for God in this does all.

True: yet the Lord works according to the condition Sol.
of the subject, about which he is excercised.

And women are often more cast down, then men be, at Object. 2.
this season.

We grant it: Yet that comes from the weakness of the sex. Sol.
And shall you not see one more terrified at the drawing of the sword, then
another is in beholding it sheathed into the very bowels?

Thus you have heard, how the Lord prepares a sinner, before effectual
vocation, cutting off and fitting of him to be grafted a new; at which time, he
is like a branch sl^pped from the body of the tree, and ready to wither and dye
in his own apprehension: And then the Lord speaks unto the poor perplexed
soul by his Spirit, in the promises of the Gospel; and that, peradventure,
when he the least expects any such comfortable tidings, secretly saying, and
whispering the sinner in the ear of his soul; Be of good comfort, for thy
sins are forgiven thee. Now he gives Christ to him, and him unto Christ, so
that the penitent person is come home into his desired place, and the liberty
of Gods children.

Now from this that has been said, we may deduce many Conclusions from the
precedent discourse.
things for our further instruction, and to confirm us concerning the
certainty of our effectual vocation.

1. Here we see, that the law is necessary to be preached, that, like a
schoolmaster, it may whip us to Christ, for to find comfort in the time of
need.

2. That the true sight of our sins and humiliation is a companion of
effectual vocation; for the sick have need of the Physician; and Christ
calls none, but such as are lost in their present apprehension.

3. That every sigh for sin, and compunction of spirit is not to be
effectually called: for Reprobates, like Ahab and Judas, may, for a time, be
much dejected; yet never receive Christ, whereby to be truly justified.

4. We learn from hence, that effectual vocation is an action, sensibly to be
felt by the persons, who be the proper subjects of it; and a work, though, on
Gods part, secretly effected; yet on man's, easily apprehended.

5. And here men that have not endured so much humiliation as others, yet are
not to despair of their spiritual condition; for the Lord does not call all
his a like. To one he reveileth some little sin at the first, least he
should be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness; yet by the punishment thereof he
comes to conjecture, what is due unto him for the rest: And when the poor
sinner has got power against this, then he will reveal unto him some other of
greater nature: for having had experience of Gods former mercy, he is made the
more bold and able for to wrestle with greater transgressions, and Satan's more
fell and fierce temptations, the which usually come in the latter end of this
spiritual combat; For like a cunning Captain, that would raze down the
walls, he first discharges his lesser pieces, and if they will not effect it,
then he gives fire to his greatest Ordinances, and roaring Cannons.

6. And for conclusion, let him that is never so much dejected not be out of
heart, as though the Lord could not raise thee up again, and comfort thy
soul; for as his mercy, so his power is infinite; The deeper the fo^^dation is
laid, the firmer will the building be; and the more we be hu^^led and broken
at our preparation, the more shall we be ^^le to stand fast, after our
effectual vocation. Wherefore read, pray, meditate, hear the word, receive
the Sacraments, and seek to the Physician of thy soul; and at one time or
other through one of these conducts, he will seal to thy soul a certificate,
for the remission of all thy sin; and thou with comfort shall say, Now soul
return unto thy rest; Do^ but use the means, tarry the Lords leisure, and* he
shall come, that will come, and comfort thy heart: say not, that no man ever
felt what thou do; for many have, and found pardon, peace unspeakable.

But when thou are come home to thy long desire h^uen, A Caution.
and the Lord has heard the voy^^ of thy weeping; then see 1.
thou fail not to perform the v^^es, that thou made ^^ him in the days of
thy former affliction, least a worse thing follow. Neither think^ it thine
honor, that thou have b^^^e 2.
more te^^efied and dejected in thy preparation, then thy brethren (as the
manner of ^o^e i^*) but be thou the mo^e ashamed, that thy heart was (...),
th^^ (...) ^ust exhibit more power to ^^ll ^h^^ ho^e, then ^he rest o^ his
children. And by how ^u^h the more (...) Lord ^^th ^^mbled 3.
thee above others; be ^hou so (...) the more (...) in all good works: For the
more p^ines and labor the Husbandman takes in tilling his ground, the more
corn, he expect^th from it, at the time of harue^^* and shall ^ot the Lord
look for the like from al^ his manured and well ^^lled closes? yes vndoub^^^ly.

And here I will add some particulars, that he who is of where in the that is
called, has experience.
fectually called knows by experience, whereof men in the estate of nature
are ignorant.

1. He knows now, what a featefull thing it is to be a stranger from the life
of God, and to have him for his enemy; and would not for the (...) of a world,
be one ^^ture in his former condition.

2. How unable he is of himself either ^^ answre* the Lords call, or to
believe in him, though he would, and find in himself a mind to both.

3. What an enemy sin and Satan is to the sons of men. Now he perceives the
sting of the one, and the fiery darts of the other; and how deep they will
strike and pierce into the very joints and the marrow.

4. He can tell you, that a wounded spirit is the extremest of all
extreamities; and that peace with God passes all understanding.

5. That Christ was God, as well as man, or else he had not been able to have
borne the full burden of one man's sins, much less of the whole world of the
elect; this is a secret, which by experience he has searched into.

6. He is able to comfort others, by the same means, and with the same
comforts he was comforted of the Lord. And from this knowledge of experience, a
poor unlettered man may be a more skillful P^^^ition to a wounded spirit* then
a more learned Clearke can. These things and many more does the (...) called,
know by his own experience: And this is that preaching and wisdom which the
world co^^^s foolishnes* and not many (as Paul says) great men, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
26.
wise men, and noblemen, are called unto.

But yet for all this that has been said, least some man might deceive
himself, and not make his calling and election sure; I will further set down
some inseparable effects, that accompany effectual vocation.

1. He is in a wonderful admiration, to see what an alteration Fruits or
effects of effectual calling.
the Lord has wrought in him. Peter never admired more at his strange delivery
by the Angel, out of that strong prison; then that man does in being brought
into the kingdom of freedom, out of spiritual bondage and darkness.

2. He has mixed affections: terror and fear in looking back on the object of
his former condition; and joy unspeakable and glorious, in consideration of
his present good condition. Now he can both sigh and rejoice at one and the
same instant; like the men at the building of the second Temple. Ezr. 3. 13.

3. Now he will eat his meat with a glad heart, follow the duties of his
calling with readiness, sing Psalms of praise for his late and great delivery;
sleep and rest in peace, for the Lord accepts him. And we are the most
forward to all good duties, when we are most assured of the Lords favor, and
our own salvation. And this the reason, why Satan Note.
so strongly tempts the faithful to doubt and despair.

4. If he have in former time lived in none, or an unlawful calling; now will
he alter his course, and take a better; for (note this) when God calls any to
mercy, as he did Adam, he sets them again in a lawful calling. He never
called the Devil, therefore let him go compass the world; and so does the
Rabble of Friars, disordered people, as Bearewards, players and idle persons
live out of a calling and go a compassing (its likely) in that God has not
yet effectually called them; for if he had, they would have gone to work. And
there is no surer sign of one effectually called by God, then to live in, and
work and perform the duties of a lawful calling; and no more fearful note
of a man not called to mercy, then to have none, or to abide in an unlawful
calling.

5. He now, with Lydia, will attend to Paul's voice, depend upon the word, and
in nothing rejoices more, then to hear the Lord speak to him in his
ordinances. Nay, he will not omit any means to further him in the course of
Godliness.

6. Finally he will often call upon God by prayer, praise him for his great
deliverance, show what the Lord has done for his soul; and, as much as in him
lies, seek to call home others, that God might be glorified, and they with
him saved. I have the longer insisted upon this point, because it is the very
first entrance to all true blessedness, and the only ground of our sound
comfort and great rejoicing.

With an holy calling.] Whence we gather; that

The calling wherewith Gods children are called, is an holy calling. Doct. 10.


The Author of the Hebrews styles it a celestial calling; and elsewhere its
said to be an honorable or high calling. See Heb. 3. 1. Phil. 3. 14. 2 These.
1. 11.

For the causes of it are holy; God, Christ, the Spirit, and Reas. 1.
the word are all said to be holy. And the Ministers (for the most part) are
holy, who be instruments in this action. I say for the most part; for a man not
called (I judge) may Whether Preachers not called can call others?
call others. For 1. I dare not tie the Spirit to the dignity of any man's
person. 2. Such may be fitted for the Ministry, and sent of God, and shall
they not attain to their end? 3. Paul rejoiced, that Christ, though by the
false Apostles, of envy was preached; why did he this if they could not call
others, at the loast build up others? 4. And lastly, he that holds the
contraly cannot be assured o^ the truth of his own conversion: for we are not
infallibly certified, what Ministers be truly called. For 1. Some men's sins
go before hand, others follow after. 2. God only knows the hearts of all the
sons of men. 3. No man knows the thoughts of man but the Spirit that is in
him: And he that is not certain of this, cannot be assured of the other; for
so long as I doubt of the Ministers conversion (holding this) I must needs call
my own in question; because God uses man in the conversion of man.

I am not ignorant of some, who hold the contrary: and of their objections, and
Scripture against this position: But yet I hold, that an unconverted Minister
may convert, though few and seldom, as we see by experince in former times,
and in our days also.

And in regard of the end too, and the subjects from which we are called, and
to which we be called, its an holy calling. For 1. We are called from darkness
to light. 2. From uncleanness Reas. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 These. 4. 7. Heb. 3. 1.
Psalm. 15. 1.
to holiness. 3. From wicked men and Dinels, to the communion of Saints and
Angels. 4. We are called from earth that is polluted, unto heaven, the holy
Mountain of the Lord.

This serves first, to answer an objection of wicked men, Use. 1.
who demand, why men will not run with them to the same excess of riot? Why?
the Reason is, In that they be called with an holy calling. Wicked and lewd
persons tumble in their sin, like the sow in the mire: but what mervaile,
seeing they be not the called of the Lord? When men have had an holy calling,
then will they have an holy conversation.

And by this Doctrine we may try the truth of our calling. Use 2.
Have we cast off the ways of darkness? singled our selves from the profaine
multitude? and left sin and uncleanness behind's? Do we purge our selves, as
Christ is pure? strive to be cleansed from the filthiness of the flesh and
spirit? and to be presented without spot and blameles^e in the day of our Lord?
why then we are called with an holy calling; for as effectual vocation is a
true sign of salvation; so is holiness, of our effectual vocation.

This Doctrine may be of great comfort to such as doubt Use 3.
of the truth of their calling. Some, because they are not able precisely to
say: I was called such a time, by such a man, and in such a manner, fear they
were never called at all. Can every woman tell the time of conception? any man
where the wind first begins? or, clearly discern the motion of the shadow
on the Dyall? Does not the head grow gray, and the corn white, by degrees, and
an insensible motion? Tell me then: art thou holy? then be thou assured, thou
art effectually called; for the effect argues the truth of the cause. Where
there is heat, there is fire, and wheresoever is sanctification, there also
was effectual vocation.

In the last place, this is to teach such, as are called on this Use 4.
manner, to walk worthy of their calling. Is it an holy calling? live thou
holily. Shall a Prince plod in the mire, defile his clothes, and pollute his
person by the base offices of poor subjects? How unseemly then is it for
these holy brethren (for so be they styled Heb. 3. 1.) to wallow in sin and
follow uncleanness? Let us then be holy, as our heavenly father, who has called
us, is holy.

Not according to our works.] The point is this, that

Man is not saved for his works sake. Doct. 11.


Dan. 9. 9. Psalm. 14. 1. 3. Romans 3. 12. And that neither in respect of the
beginning nor end. For the beginning, the Papists themselves say, we have
remission of sin by Christ; but hold, that this is only a degree; and that
our justification and salvation proceed from our own works; But our works
have no such hand in this business.

If we be saved by our works, then either by the works Reas. 1.
before our conversion, or after: But by neither. Ergo. For the first; are we
not blind 1 Cor. 2. 14? The motions of our hearts evil, and that continually.
Genesis 6. 5? Are not our wills turned from God. Hos. 5. 4? Have we power so much
as to think a good thought. 2 Cor. 3. 5? Are we not beasts, fools, madmen,
dead in trespasses and sins, and the very children of wrath by nature. Psalm.
49. vlt. Ephesians. 2. 13? And if the fountain be thus polluted, what shall the
streams be? first make the tree good, and then expect good fruit. Again, we
are not saved for the good works done after our Regeneration: for 1. They be
due to God, as the works of Creation were. 2. They are imperfect. 3. If they
were perfect, yet not proportionable to eternal glory. And 4. When we have
done our best, we are commanded to say, that we are unprofitable servants; and
shall Christ bid us lie? Romans 7. vlt. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Romans 8. 18. Luke 17. 10.
And we are not saved partly by works, partly by grace; for God will have all
the glory and Christ's merits may not be either divided or extenuated.

Because we are not able to repair the breach that Adam Reas. 2.
made. For the Law requires two things (If since the fall we would be saved by
it:) One, that we undo what our father did; another, that we perform what he
omitted: And who can do either of these? wherefore the Papists play the fools
who tell us of doing of good, but never of suffering evil: Let them first
satisfy the rigor of the Law, and the infinite wrath of God by suffering; and
then perfectly keep his commands, and they say somewhat. But though they would
be doctors of the law, they nothing know as they should, neither understand the
things which they do affirm. And have we not true title to heaven, before we
can do any good work, being justified by faith?

This confureth the Papists, and reprehendeth the ignorant* Use 1.
Protestants (who differ in name only) that hope to be saved by their good
deeds. Demand, how they hope to come to heaven? Oh sir, say they, by my good
works. Thus blind are many at nooneday.

Learn hence, not to trust in thy own works, but solely Use 2.
to rely on the free mercy of God in Christ Jesus. Yet thou must do good
works. 1. Because God is glorified by them; Why good works are to be done.
therefore our light must shine. 2. They adorn our calling, and bring honor
to our profession. 3. Thereby we shall stop the mouths of our enemies. 4.
Give Satan the less ground of temptation. 5. They assure us, that our faith
is true, not a dead faith. 6. And does not our salvation consist in perfect
holiness* And is it not also begun in this life?

And for the direction understand, that there be these things in a good work.

1. The Person must be justified. For if we be not graffed Four things needful
to do a good work.
into the true vine Christ Jesus, we shall but bring forth wild grapes. I^h.
15. 1.

2. The rule by which we are guided, must be 1. The word Ier. 6. 16. Romans 2.
14. 15. Isa. 30 21. Romans 8. 13.
of God. or, 2. The Rule writ in the heart* or, 3. The motion of the Spirit.
or, 4. The example of the faithful. For more Rules then these can no man show.
Gal. 6. 16.

3. We must have an eye to Christ, and do it in his 1 Cor. 11. 1.
name, for he remoues the imperfection of it.

4. And finally, the principal end must be the glory of God; not excluding the
good of our Brethren, and our own salvation.

I might gather further from this phrase, that Doct. 12.


Men have works.

Every one will have a Religion, such as it is, and will be doing this, or that.

But according to his own purpose and grace, etc.] Hence we (...) what he
purposes shall come to pass; his calling is without repentance; for it comes
from his purpose.

Let us not finally censure any; for his calling and the Use. 4.
time of it proceeds from Gods purpose: instruct them, and prove if the Lord
(at any time) will call them out of the snares of the devil. Young conuerts be
the sharpest censurers of old sinners.

This may confirm thy faith in the promise of God: for Use. 5.
his purpose shall stand. What if some wander from the flock? they shall be
brought home at the lenght, if they belong to his election.

And finally, let us do according to our good purpose Use. 6.
this pattern of Gods, is worth the imitation of man. We often have good
purposes, but they are speedily blasted. Some purpose to build God an house;
but they are soon altered. Others to leave sin; but death prevents their
purpose. And many have a mind to become Christians, but time changes this
purpose. Wherefore purpose, and perform, for this is the glory of man.

I could further gather, that Doctrines deducted, not handled.


1. There is a distinction of callings. Therefore Paul puts in, Purpose: Whence
will follow, what the Papists deny: viz. a distinction of Churches.

2. That The difference of Gods calling some, and rejecting others, is taken
from Gods purpose.

3. That, The doctrine of Election, is a part of the Gospel; for it brings
salvation.

4. And finally, that The purpose of God was from eternity. And others would
follow hence; But, for the Reasons alleged, we omit what might be further
collected from this verse, and proceed to the next.

VERSE. 10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality unto
light through the Gospel.
THis verse depends on the former. For our The Logical resolution.
Apostle having affirmed, that we were called and saved in Gods purpose, before
the world was: in these words declares the manifestation of Gods mercy, and
the benefits we receive through the same.

The particulars in this portion of Scripture be these. 1. That the grace and
purpose of God, and man's salvation, is manifested. 2. The time, in the word
Now. 3. With whom or by whom it appeared; and that is Christ: who is described
by two effects* one, that he destroyed death; another, that he brought life;
and the isntrumental cause whereby, is said to be the Gospel.

Now.] This word includes all times before and after the The Theological
exposition.
coming of Christ.

Made manifest.] There be diverse degrees of the appearing of Grace, but only
in our apprehension. 1. Grace appears in Gods decree. 2. In the dark
promises at the beginning of the world. 3. When the efficacy of the merit of
Christ, appeared in the world. 4. By the application of the Spirit. 5. When
Christ came in the flesh. 6. And lastly, when he shall return again in Glory.

Who has abolished.] That is, Removed, obliterated, destroyed, swallowed up. 1
Cor. 15. 54. etc.

Death.] By Death is meant the sting of death; (for all must once dye) and the
torments of hell hereafter, called the second death. Reuela. 21. 8. As also the
death of corruption, which is in us may also be understood, with all other
kinds, that be inflicted as curses.

And brought life.] First the life of grace here, and of glory hereafter.

And immortality.] This argues a further benefit, that Christ has procured;
for as Adam brought death, and eternal death: so Christ brings life, and
life that shall endure for ever. Some read the word incorruption: and the
bodies of the Saints shall after the day of judgment see no corruption.

Unto light.] First, openly, manifestly, and as clear as the Sun, at midday,
unto such as have their eyes opened.

Through the Gospel.] First by the promises and doctrine of the new Testament,
written, preached.

As the Lord, from before the beginning of the world, of The Metaphrase.
his gracious and free purpose, gave, through Christ, Salvation to his chosen
people; so has he now since the beginning of the Law and promises exhibited,
clearly and conspicuously, unto every one of understanding, manifested the
same by the bright appearing of Christ our Lord, who has blotted and rooted
out death temporal in respect of the sting, and torment and eternal pain in
the kingdom of darkness; and has also brought unto light the assurance of the
life of grace here, and the perfection of endless glory hereafter; and that by
the writing and Preaching of the Doctrine and promises of the Gospel.

From the relation and dependence of this verse with the The deductio^ of
doctrines.
former, we gather, that

Gods purpose in his appointed time shall come to pass. Doct. 1.


Grace was given in Gods resolution before the world; and now manifested in
former and present times. Let man devise what he can, Gods counsel shall
stand. The Lord of h^^sts Prou. 19. 24. Isai. 14. 24. and 46. 10.
has sworn, saying, Surely like as I have purposed, so shall it come to
pass, and as I have consulted, so shall it abide. He declares the last things
from the beginning, and from old the Psalm. 33. 11.
things, that were not done. Yea, the co^^sell of the Lord shall stand for
ever, and the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation. And though
Christ was long, yet he came in the fullness of time. Gal. 4. 4.

For he is not subject to forgetfulness. The Butler, being Reas. 1.
but a man, may forget Joseph, and Joseph his fathers house; yet howeuer that
be, the Lord always is mindful of his purpose. David was in a passion, when
he cried, Has God forgotten to be merciful? The Lord has the Idea of all
things in himself, and every thought is before his eyes; so that he is not
forgetful of his purpose. Psalm. 139. 16.

He is true of his promise; for it makes for his glory. Shall Reas. 2.
the Lord purpose and not perform? Sure, this should argue instability and
mutability in the Lord, the which cannot be. For the Lords purposes are founded
upon his counsel, his counsel is most wise; therefore he never alters, or
changes his former purposes.

Neither does God, like man, purpose any thing, that he Reas. 3.
is not able to perform. Nature may be interrupted, and not produce her
effects; but the Maker of it, cannot be hindered at all; for his power is
infinite; and if he but will any thing, it is done; yea speak but a word.
Speech is one of the least motions, yet when God said Let there be light, Genesis
1.
it was so.

This may serve for to terrify the wicked, and confute Use. 1.
their Atheism, who cry out, Where Is the promise of his coming? have not all
things been alike from the beginning? Yet Act 17. 31.
shall not the Lord appear in his appointed tim? He has set a day wherein he
will judge the world. The young man Eccles. 11. 9.
may rejoice in his youth, and do what seems him best in his own eyes, yet
let him know, that the Lord will bring him to judgment. The Epicure go in
purple and fine linen, and fare delicately every day; but his sweet morsells
shall be gravel in his mouth, when his account is cast up. And be thou
assured, that as the Lord has purposed mercy to his children: so has he
judgment without 2 These. 1.
mercy to all wicked and ungodly persons; and in the time he has purposed, it
shall be performed. For he is Job. 9. 4.
wise in heart; and mighty in power, who ever waxed fierce against him, and
has prospered? God spared the old world long; but the flood swallowed them up
at the length. Iezabell had a long time of turning, and Jerusalem of repenting;
but was not the wrath of God powered down at the resolved time to the
uttermost? And so shall it be at the last with such as cry and think, the Lord
is like us; he will neither Psalm. 50. 21. Zeph. 1. 12.
do^ good or evil.

And in the second place, this must teach the faithful patience, Use 2. Ioh. 2.
and to wait the Lords leisure. We may not appoint the Lord a time, when to
finish his work. It was Maryes fault, that would be directing her son, that
was God and man, when to work his miracles; and be handling of him; and we
read that the best of Gods children have failed, in not patiently waiting for
the accomplishment of Gods purpose and promise. But we have need of Heb. 10. 36.
patience, that after we have endured, we might receive the promise. Art thou
in bondage with Joseph? there is a time to set thee free? in a strange country?
Why, H^rod is yet alive that would seek the childs life: what if thou be in
want, cannot the Lord feed thee in the wilderness? Art thou persecuted? why
one day thou shall be blessed, if it be for well doing. Do men condemn thee
without cause? Are the wicked set up, and they that tempt God delivered? Do
Mal. 3. 15. Isai. 59. 15. 1 Pet. 4. 14.
such as refrain from evil make themselves a prey? And because they run not
to the same excess of riot, as others, are they badly reported of? what of all
this? the day of trial is at hand, and every secret thing that God has, in
his secret counsel, purposed, or in his word revealed, promised, shall be
accomplished.

Truly this must support thee, comfort thee, and create patience in thee; for
yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry;
and reward every man Heb. 10. ^7.
according to the works he has done in his flesh, good or evil. Think,
think, think on this; thou shall soon see 2 Cor. 5. 10.
an end of all thy troubles, and thy desire accomplished, upon all the Lords
enemies.

But is now made manifest.] Where let it be observed, that

We are to take knowledge of Gods gracious visitation. Doct. 2.


The faithful have observed the distinct acts of Gods providence, from the
beginning of the world unto this day. We are sent to the Crane, and the
swallow, and the Hawke that flies in the South; she flies from the pinching
cold of the North, for the heat of the Sun in the South; or when she is in
casting her feathers, they do prick and tickle her, therefore she spreads
her wings on the South, that the Sun might ripen and further them the more in
growing; so she should be heated. Ier. 8. 7. Job. 12. 7. Prou. 6. 6. Genesis 32.
10. etc.

For in so doing, it will yield us matter of thanksgiving: Reas. 1.
why are we so barren in the praise of God? we do not consider what great
things, the Lord has done for us. David from this ground, cried out, What
shall I render unto Psalm. 116. 12.
the Lord for all his benefits?

It would strengthen our faith for future time; work in Reas. 2.
us patience, contentedly to wait the Lords leisure; as we see in the Prophet,
Manoahs wife, and many others. Psalm. 42. 5. Judge. 13. 1 Samuel 17.

This justly taxes many in our times, who never think Use. 1.
on the days of old, neither take knowledge of Gods gracious visitation. How
few dream of this duty? and rare be those men, that mind it. We are worse
then the unreasonable creatures, who sing in the spring, bathe in the summer,
and praise God in their kind, by a secret instinct of nature; yet man endued
with reason, the Prince of all created things, for whom all other creatures
were made, minds not this duty.

And if this be our duty; Why let us do it. Cast thy eye Use 2.
back as far as the Creation, take a view how often the Lord visited his
people; how he has from time to time performed his promise, and effected his
purpose; for this is worth thy labor: why are we so ungrateful, unfaithful,
distrustful, and always repining? Alas! we consider not the distinct acts of
Gods providence over us.

I have woundered at Job, for he began with God, and went hand in hand, from
his Conception, with him, unto that very day; observe his words; Lord, thou
have powered me Job. 10. 10. etc.
out like milk; thickened me like curdes; clothed me with skin and flesh;
fenced me with bones and sinews; thou have given me life and favor; and thy
visitation has preserved my spirit: Be thou this just man's scholar; for never
can thou learn and practice a more comfortable and profitable point of
doctrine. For it will humble thee; breed admiration in thy heart; strengthen
thy weak faith; work in thee love to God; and cause thee to praise him with
delight, all thy life long. We take a view how the beast move upon the earth;
birds fly in the air; fishes play in the waters; and the Sun and Moon run
their course in the firmament; and shall we have no eye to him that created all
these, moves all these, and is present at, and works daily in all these; by
all these? Surely, surely this is not well done; therefore to be speedily
amended; and the rather in that we have failed so long, so often.

David forgot not, that some time he kept ewes with young; Moses, that he had
been a shepherd; Amos, a fig-gatherer; and Shaphat that he had followed the
plough; and shall we forget from what poverty we by God are advanced to great
promotion? All your progenitors have not worn gowns of purple and scarlet,
been Rulers in Cities and Corporations, neither tasted of the powers of the
world to come; therefore let the gracious visitation of Gods good hand never
depart out of your minds.

The time of this appearing is to be understood under the law, but chiefly in
the days of the Gospel, whence we do deduce this doctrine, that

The estate of the Church is more glorious since the coming Doct. 3.
of Christ, then before him.

And for many Reasons: First in respect of the Jews. Reas. 1.
For first, Circumcision was removed, which was full of torment; it made
Zipporah to call Moses, bloody husband; yet many Exodus 4. 25.
be so ignorant, that they know not this privilege. Secondly, The Ceremonies
and sacrifices which were chargeable were abolished: we have the body in stead
of the shadow; the substance for the circumstance. Hence Paul styled Gal. 4. 9.
them beggarly and impotent rudiments. And if we must not come into the
Temples, but bring our Lambs and Rams, we then would see the privilege we
enjoy. Thirdly, The Jews, before his coming, were in great slavery: the
Romans governed by 70. Elders; the Scepter was departed from Judah, and the
Pharisees had corrupted their doctrine: Herod sought the babes life, for fear
a King should rise up to the Jews of the family of David; and they had heavy
burdens imposed upon them, the which they were not able to bear. Fourthly,
Christ came of their flesh, and was not that an honor? For many desired
children, and esteemed it a curse to be barren under the law; because each one
hoped to have been the Mother of our Lord. And did he not first preach to that
Nation? wrought miracles amongst them, and do many great works there? Now his
first fruits were to be respected. Reas. 2. Math. 15. 26. Romans 11. 17. and 3.
29.


And secondly in respect of the Gentiles, it was more glorious; for First, They
were dogs before; but now God persuaded Iapheth to dwell in Shems tent. God was
both the God of Jews and Gentiles at this season. Secondly, The Apostles had
diverse tongues to preach to them; Paul was their Apostle; many of them
converted; the Wise men were Math. 2. 9.
the first fruits; And the Gospel was writ in their Dialect. So that the
barren womb brought forth more children then the married wife. Reas. 3. Ioh.
4. 1 Timothy 2. 8.


The Kingdom of God came then to men's doors, they might serve the Lord in all
places, which was no small benefit. Reas. 4.


And finally, greater grace was given after Christ's coming, then before him.
Therefore the Temple Prophesied 2 Cor. 3.
of in Ezekiel, was bigger then in the days of Moses. Its true that some
particular persons were rare and excellent under Isai. 6. 8. etc.
the law; but if we look at whole Churches, they then exceeded them, under the
Gospel.

This serves to confute those, that of late are sprung up, Use. 1.
who hold the contrary doctrine; and surely, they are deceived: I would know of
them. Why Abraham desired to see our days? why the second Temple was more
glorious then the first, wanting many things that the other had? why John the
Baptist was the greatest of all the Prophets, yet the least under the Gospel
greater then he? Why Paul called, Gods ordinances, (for so they were in former
time) beggarly rudiments? why Genealogies were to be reputed as fables? why the
Patriarchs without us are not said to be perfect? why Simeon desired, for a
time, he might not see death. And then cried (when Christ was exhibited in the
flesh) Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. If it were as they
would have it?

They will say, that Christ was truly, and as plainly seen Object.
under the Law, in the sacrifices; as now under the Gospel.

1. I answer, No: for the word was made flesh; he walked Sol. 1.
amongst his brethren; they saw him, handled him, heard him, beheld his
wounders and miracles, saw him condemned, crucified, raised, and carried into
heaven; and what more liable to sense then all these things?

2. We have the same sacrifices in the letter, and may make 2.
use of them; and in stead thereof we have the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords supper; which represent Christ as clearly, except we should hold, that
our eye sight is more dark and dim, then their was: For what more lyably to
sense then breaking of bread, pouring out of wine; the which represent the
crucifying of Christ's body, and shedding of his blood? But if any lust to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

And in the next place, I am constreyned to reprove two Use 2.
sorts of persons: the profane, and professors.

For the first kind; notwithstanding all the great means which they enjoy, yet
to see to, they are very beasts. Spots they be in our Markets, blots in our
feasts, like the Dog and Sow, vomiting and lapping up the filthiness of every
sin; wallowing in the mire of all uncleanness; and neither fearing God, or
reuerencing man: they speak evil of all in authority; and contemn, and
condemn too, the things and persons highly in favor with God. Its fearful
to live in ignorance; but how far greater damnation are these worthy of,
seeing light is come into the world, and they love darkness more then light?
Shall it not be easier for Sodom and Capernaum in the day of judgment then for
these? Have we not some, that deny the Lord that bought them? tread under foot
the blood of the new covenant, and crucify again the Lord of Life? Witness
our swearing, drunkenness, and drinkings; our whoredoms, fornications, and all
manner of wickednesses. Do not some count it their grace to appear
graceless? glory in their faithlesnes? accent their words with vain phrase,
and make the beginning and Conclusion of their sentences to be nothing else but
an oath? It were tolerable for men (if at any time) to stumble in the night;
but to drink, stagger and fall in the day, is damnable. And how shall such
persons escape condemnation, if they neglect so great salvation? Wherefore,
seeing you have the light, become children of the day, and hence forward
abandon the works of darkness, reproving them rather.

And I may not omit those of the better sort, who take not (as they ought)
notice of Gods providence over us in these latter days. We cry out of many
things amiss; but see, and say nothing of what is amended. How many have
desired to see the days that we have, yet it was not affoarded them? Are we
awake, or sleeping? why then do we not behold, how the Sun these 60. years
has continually shined in our Horizon? What if the Papists have sought to
eclipse it? have they prevaild? How many have warmed their cold spirits at this
flame, whose parents never put finger to a sparkle of this fire? Has not this
Sun expelld many mists and clouds of darkness? Does he not run his circular
motion still? and have not many a poor soul passed through the dark night of
this wilderness, to the fruitful and clear shining day in the land of Canaan?
Wherefore praise God for that you have; and pray often and earnestly, that the
Sun of the Gospel may never set, or the Candle of the word be put out, so
long as the Sun and Moon endure. Be not like Rahel, crying for your wills,
as she did for children, or else ye die. And be not offended to hear me speak
a word more; Repine not, murmur not, and fret not at that Manna you have; for
many have fed well of as course and little food, looked fat, fair and well
liking, and rested contented with less then an Homer full: For Gods power is
always the more seen in weak means, then stronger. Yet, I wish we might be
sensible of what we find amiss, and recommend it to God by prayer, putting to
also our helping hand, yet wisely, oportunely; and every one in his own rank
and order.

And seeing that the days wherein we live are better then Use 3.
the days of old, we must strive, and be better also. The more choice diet we
feed on, the fatter and fairer should we be: the clearer light, the cleaner
must we keep our selves from pollution, contamination. When trees are removed
to a more fertile soil, do we not expect, that they should spread further,
and be more fruitful then before? when cattle are put into a better pasture,
will we not look for greater growth, more labor at their hands? Shall not we
then grow strong, work mightily in the Lords vineyard, and resolutely run the
ways of his commands? Is not our light brighter, our spiritual food better,
and our journey shorter? then why is there not some equal proportion? Brethen,
these things must be thought upon, made use of, or else our account one day
will be the greater, the heavier: for unto whom much is given, shall much be
required. They who have greater means for grace, then others; must strive to
be more gracious then others, or look for the more heavier reckoning. Our
fathers were led in the night, the Moon was their conducter; we are now in the
day* when as the Sun guides us: shall we not then go faster, farther, with
less fear, and more resolution, greater boldness? But alas! who takes
knowledge of these things, makes the true use thereof? we have the Sun
shining, yet sleep; or if awake, we cry; want we not light? I say no more, but
wish that our idleness cause not the Lord to remove our Candlestick.

By the appearing etc.] This word signifies a bright, clear, From which word
we take our Epiphany Doct. 4.
or glorious appearing, whence note, that

The appearing or coming of Christ was glorious, whether under the law, or in
the time of the Gospel.

For under the Law, was not the Temple, the furniture, Reas. 1.
the attire of Aaron, the brestplate, the Vrim and Thummim and all the rest,
glorious? And did not all these point out Christ, typify him? if these things
were not glorious, which were made of pure and beaten gold, fine silk and
twisted linen; and of the choysest colors, as crymson, purple, and skarlet,
then what may be said to be glorious?

And in the time of the Gospel his appearing was glorious; Reas. 2.
for was he not borne of a Virgin? turned he not water into wine? healed all
diseases? wrought miracles? spoke so as never man did? and on the Cross, by
Christ, was not a theife converted? and were not these things glorious? Yea his
death, burial, resurrection and ascension were all glorious. And the more we
think of these things, the more glorious they will appear. What says the
Apostle? Great is the 1 Timothy 3. 16.
mystery of Godliness, without controversy: for God is manifested in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, and received up into glory. The more we view the works of
man, or nature, the less will we admire; for we come to see the Reason of
them, and the manner how they be done: But the longer we study on these
mysteries, the more wonderful and past finding out, we shall see them to be;
because they so far exceed our apprehension.

And after his ascension, as we in part have heard, the appearing of Christ was
glorious. How did his image shine, and his spirit appear in his Disciples?
what souls were converted by them, and wounders wrought daily? Was Act. 9.
not Saul's conversion glorious? and all his life after led in glory? Did not
Stephen end his days in glory, and many Act. 7. Heb. 11.
a poor person? And his glory appears unto this day. For has not he
ascended on high, and given gifts unto men? When was the word of God more
soundly preached (except in the days of the Apostles) then now? How are the
mysteries of Religion cleared, and the depthes discovered? points controuerted
brought to the issue; and error laid open without ragge to cover her? what
learned tractates have we in our mother tongue? So that I may boldly say two
things; that the like has not been before; and that an Englishman that can
but read his own language, may be a great scholar. But its Meditation that
must clear this, better then my pen; and the particular coals that give light
to this truth are infinite. Therefore come we to application.

Where first we reprove, not the people under the law, Use 1.
neither the Pharisees in the time of the Gospel; but the men of this age, who
see no glory in Christ's appearing. We see glory in gold and grass; but none in
the Gospel of grace; in purple and white linen; yet discern nothing worth
admiration in the robes of Christ's righteousness. There is a glory in the herbs
and flowers; beasts and birds; fowls and fish; and in the Stars, Moon and
Sun: But the glory in the Son of God and his Gospel far exceeds all.

Are not such men like moles, blind as the wants? that see no matter of
admiration in these things, into which the very Angels desired to peep into?
the Gospel is called glorious; the conversion of a sinner, glorious; grace is
styled glory; yea (somewhere) the Saints rhemselues, are said to be the glory
of God. Some glory in their apparel; others in a ring, or bracelet; many in
the wealth, power and wisdom; millions in the works of art and nature: but
yet never glory in the most glorious objects. I wish that these men's glory be
not (some time) turned into shame, who can glory in many things; but not in the
thing which is in glory beyond all.

And was Christ's appearing glorious under the law, in Use 2.
the days of his flesh, and continues so to this day? what then shall his
second coming be? when he shall ride upon the wings of the wind, pass
through the clouds with thousands of thousands of Angels attending upon him?
when the Trumpet shall sound, the dead shall rise, and he appear with his
scepter in his hand to judge all the world? If the day was glorious in the
giving of the Law; the time when the Temple and the walls of Jerusalem were
finished; When Solomon was crowned King, and Christ rode into the City on an
Asses foale; what will the time of the perfection of all things be? No marvel,
if the Saints have prepared for this great day, and longed and looked for it
continually. And that which they did, let us do also: Prepare for this time,
pray that it may come, and often meditate of it deeply in our hearts: and be ye
assured, its well worth your labor.

Our Savior Jesus Christ.] Here is laid down the second principal thing in
the Text; which is a description of that person, through whom grace and
salvation is given; and he is described, 1. By his office, viz. A Savior. 2.
His Names. 1. Jesus. 2. Christ. 3. By the execution of his office, and in two
things it consists; one in the remotion of Death; the other in the production
of life. The point we first collect is this, that

Christ Jesus is our only Savior. Doct. 5. Act. 4. 12. Job. 19. 26. Isai 18.
20. and 62. 11. Zach. 9. 9. Ioh. 4. 42.


There is none other name given under heaven, whereby we can be saved, but
this. This is he that Job desired to see; Isaiah foretold; and at whose
coming, the people were to shout for joy; and he is called the Savior of all
the world. viz. Of the Elect world. For there is a world, for the which Christ
would not pray; I pray not for the world. Ioh. 17. 9. That is, for the world of
the Reprobate. Now many reasons may further confirm the doctrine.

First, for God the father, being the party offended, set Reas. 1. Gal. 4. 4. 1
Pet 1. 20.
him apart, and appointed him for this end. And then shall we doubt of it, or
of Christ's sufficiency?

A second we may draw from his person: for he is God Reas. 2.
and man. Therefore our only and absolute Savior. He must be man that saved
us. 1. That the justice of God might be satisfied in that nature, whereby he
was offended: for in Heb. 2. 17.
no wise he took upon him the nature of Angels. 2. That we might be his
brethren: and 3. He have a fellow feeling of our infirmities, the better to
succor us and comfort us, Heb. 4. 15.
when we are tempted. And he must be God, two natures in one person. 1. That
his merits might be sufficient, to satisfy the infinite wrath of the father;
for the worthiness of the merit comes from the dignity of the person. 2. That
he might overcome him, that had the power of death, that is, the Devil;
Christ was stronger then he. And 3. That he Romans 14. and 4. vlt.
might be able to raise himself from death: so that he might be able to raise
himself from death: so that he is our only Savior; for none was ever like him
before him; or ever shall be after him; this is our Kinsman.

And he may be called our Savior from his properties: Reason 3.
for he is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26.
and made higher then the heavens. He is infinite in knowledge, power and
presence; neither can he ever sleep or slumber.

Finally, he may be called a Savior. 1. In respect of his Reason 4.
doctrine. 2. Example. 3. His mediation. And 4. by his merit, Heb. 7. 25.
and that is principally. So that he is a Savior every manner of way. For all
the promises are yea and Amen in Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 1. 20.

And here we might show the misery of the Jews, Turks and Heathens, who put
no confidence in him; neither have Use 1.
heard of him: As also the Papists, that put their confidence, and place their
hope in Mary and their own merits

This should teach us to be acquainted with him, and to Use 2.
repose al our confidence and trust in him, for our salvation. And that so much
the rather, seeing eternal life consists Ioh 17. 3.
in the knowledge of him, and the obedience of his doctrine: For this is a sure
way.

Who has abolished death.] The note is this, that

Death by Christ is destroyed. Doct. 6.


Oh death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory: But thanks be
unto God, who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor 15.
55. etc. Reasons.


For he only it is who has borne our infirmities, and the burden of our
sins, paid our debt, dissolved the works of the Devil, quickened us by his
spirit, took away the law of ordinances, broke down the partition wall,
cancelled our bond, and satisfied the justice of the father for the first and
second death. The which if any should deny, these reasons may serve to confirm
it.

1. For, the law requires both after the fall: therefore Christ must satisfy
for both; or he had not discharged the full debt and payment.

2. They that are not partakers of his sufferings, shall dye the first and
second death; who calls this into question?

3. What had we suffered if he had not died? the separation of soul and body,
and of both from the favor of God for ever and ever, had we not?

And 4. Have we not a double life from Christ? then a twofold death was
abolished by the rule of contraries.

But it may be objected, that his sufferings were finite. Object. 1. Sol. 1.


True, in respect of time: but there is another infinity in regard of degree
or quantity, the which Christ endured.

2. The course of original sin is stopped in all his members 2.
that they do not sin for ever: therefore it was not necessary that Christ
should suffer for eternity.

But some may further object: how is this manifested in Object. 2.
scripture? and when did he suffer for it?

Were not the bodies of those beasts, whose blood was Sol. I.
brought into the holy place, by the high Priest, for sin to be burnt without
the camp? and did not Christ suffer Heb. 13. 11. 12
without the gate? What can be understood by this but the second death? For is
it not a privation of all joy, and the infliction of the torments of hell for a
season? 2.


And was not Christ, in his agony, in great perplexity, when he cried, My
soul is heavy to heath: My God let this cup pass from me: And, why have thou
forsaken me? In what sense Christ may be said to suffer the second death.


Yet this is warily to be understood. For we may not in any wise so much as
think, that God the father did ever wholly withdraw his love from Christ
Jesus, or separate his affection from him; the second death so accepted is to
undergo the full justice and implacable anger of God for all eternity, the
which may not here in that sense be admitted. For the father did never with
draw his love from his son indeed: Though for the present, he looked on him
as he was our surety and a sinner by imputation, with the strict eye of a
severe judge and creditor, who would not remit one farthing of his due debt,
but exact a full and perfect satisfaction. At which time Christ felt the most
bitter pangs in his passion, and that torment, the which was equivalent to the
second death.

This should work in us both love and thankfulness to Use 1.
Christ, who has wrought so great a work for us. How should we praise him for
so great a favor? If a Physician remove a disease, or prevent death in us,
will we not pay him and commend him? And is it not thanks-worthy to have
corruption removed, death destroyed, and that temporal and eternal? David
would glorify God in that he had delivered his soul from the nethermost part
of hell. And 1 Samuel, 25. 32. 33.
did he not bless God, and bless Abigail, and bless her counsel, in that
she was a means to preserve Nabal and his family from death? and shall we not
do so much, who are our selves preserved from death eternal? I wish, that we
did but well consider this thing; then we would be more affected with Christ,
more thankful to him, for the remouall of so great an evil.

Again, this may comfort every christian heart in its greatest Use. 2.
troubles. Does corruption fight within thee, and strive to put out the spark
of grace? Be of good comfort; for it shall never prevail. When that serpent
death shoots out his venomous sting; why, consider its took from him. And
that which thou seem to see, is but like the Enchanters serpent,
counterfeit. Let the devil tempt thee; why have recourse to Christ, who has
destroyed his plot, redeemed thee out of his hands, and took his power from
him. And if the remembrance of the second death cause thee to quake and
tremble, yet fear not, for, the gates of hell shall never prevail against
thee. This ought always in these pangs of terror, to wipe all tears from
thine eyes. And the reason we are so often astonished is, because we do not
mind o^ believe this thing. For if we did we would cry out with joy. O death
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? This salve is good for the
fourefold forenamed soar: This Physic, like Moses rod, will remove all death
whatsoever. Wherefore in thy greatest fear call to mind that death by Christ
is abolished.

And has Christ's death destroyed death? then have a Use 3.
care, that ye bring it not again into the world. Give not food to this
infant, revive not him by any means. For as Judas his master, it will, one day
betray thee, lift up his heel against thee. Adam could bring in death, but he
must be more then a mere man, who can utterly destroy him; yet, strive thou to
tread this serpent under thy feet, bruise his head against the stones, suffer
him not to crawle or creep. For, in so doing thou shall be blessed.

But may some say, how might I destroy death? Quest. Ans. 1.


In a word, diverse ways. 1. Thou must avoid sin; for, by sin, death came
into the world. Sin to death is like fuel to the fire, food to the faint,
wine to the weak, and Physic to the distempered patients; so that he who
sins, reviues death, restores to him his sting, and pulls him with speed
unto the door, and into the very inward parts of the soul, And for thy better
direction, consider what sins have brought death, corporal and spiritual.
1. Drunkenness. Deuteronomy. 21. 20. 2. Gluttony. Luke 12. 20. 3. Unthriftiness. Pro.
6. 12. 15. 4. Idleness. Ezekiel. 16. 49. 5. Pride. Acts 12. vlt. 6. Lying. Acts.
5. 5. 7. Scoffing of the Prophets. 2 Kin. 2. 23. 8. Ignorance. Hos. 4. 6. 9.
Infidelity. Jude 5. 10. Disobedience to Parents. Pro. 30. 17. 11. Want of
preparation to the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 30. Finally, all sin whateuer
brings death; For the soul that sins, shall die the Ezech. 18. 4.
death. Would thou then crucify this Barrabas, that too often escapes, when
Christ is executed? see good days on earth? have grace to flourish in thee?
the first death to be advantage to thee? and escape the second? why, avoid
sin; and all the occasi^ns thereof, abandon and flee. Behold, I have told
thee before.

2. Thou must mortify the earthly members, crucify thy 2.
inward corruptions, and str^ue to be cleansed from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit. For, as a disease in the body may cause death, as well as some
outward accident; so may some secret corruption cherished in the heart, as
soon, as some external and gross transgression.

3. Cherish the life of grace within thee. For, if it flourish, 3.
death shall perish. When corn and cockle grow together, that which is the
more watered, will be the further from withering: then feed the spirit, and the
flesh shall pine away.

4. Often meditate of the efficacy of Christ's death. For, as 4.
the great flame will draw the less spark of heat out of the finger, if held
to it; so bring the eye of our minds close to this object, and death, will
pine away, The lesser shall be devoured of the stronger*

We have some who hold, Christ's death to work this How Christ's death kills
death in us.
death in us, not only as meritorious, or by way of meditation; but
operatiuely as an efficient cause produces its effect. Yet to me, it seems to
be otherwise. For though it be certainly true in the two former respects, yet,
the last is doubtful, and that for these reasons.

1. Death is a mere privation, and therefore being nothing cannot produce by
way of causation, any perfect effect.

1. Death is a mere privation, and therefoer being nothing, cannot produce by
way of causation, any perfect effect.

2. The death of Christ was a curse, therefore causes good by accident, not of
its own nature. Whereby the way* we see an other error to be in those, who
hold, that Christ's death without his active obedience is absolutely sufficient
for our justification. But the succeeding arguments may serve to confirm the
contrary.

1. That obedience which the law requires is necessary for our justification.
But the law requires active obedience; therefore active obedience is
necessary for our justification. The former proposition, I suppose will be
granted; neither can the latter upon any good ground be denied. Because the
justice of the Law is still enforce, time not changing the nature of it.

2. That obedience which was to have justified man, before his fall, is
requisite to justify him being fallen. But active obedience was to have
justified man before his fall. Therefore active obedience is requisite to
justify him being fallen. What can be objected against this argument, for the
present, I perceive not.

3. That obedience, which Paul opposes to his own righteousness, which was of
the law, concurreth to our justification. But the active obedience of Christ,
Paul opposes to his own righteousness, which was of the Law. Phil. 3. 9.
Therefore, the active obedience of Christ, concurreth to our justification.
For, who ever commenting on that text, excludes Christ's active obedience? And
to say the truth, passive obedience is rather a satisfying of the threat, than
a fulfilling of the laws precept.

4. If the actual breach of the Law made man unjust, then the actual
observation of it, must make him righteous. But the actual breach made him
unjust; therefore the actual observation of the law must make him righteous.
Except we should maintain, that our surety Christ, was bound only to pay the
forfeiture, and not the principal, which may not be admitted. For, man after
his fall incurred a doubled debt, both which Christ was to discharge, else he
had not satisfied, the full payment to God our creditor. And does not active
obedience the one, as passive the other? Its death that must remove death, life
that must procure life. For, contrary effects must have contrary causes, such
as life and death be. A sharp powder, or water, may eat off the thick filme,
that covers the eye, and hinders sight, but there is another internal
principle is the cause of seeing. In like manner, the death of Christ, may
remove what hinders life. Yet there must be another primarie cause, for the
procuring and conseruing of it. For conclusion, Christ, in suffering, obeyed;
and in obeying, suffered. Wherefore, what God has joined together, let no man
renta sunder.

And if death, through Christ, be abolished, and by no Use. 4.
other, then deaths destruction was no easy action. For, who but he, could
have done it? If it had bin to have bin abolished by another, shall we think
then, that the father would not have spared his only son?

But you may demand; Could not God have saved man Quest.
from death and pardoned sin, without a satisfaction?

I answer; No. For, 1. Its against his nature, Justice in God Ans.
is not a quality as in man, but his very essence, therefore it must be
satisfied, or no flesh could be saved.

2. His word was passed forth. At what time thou eatest, thou shall dye the
death. Yet the Lord shows the liberty of his justice, in saving some by
Christ, and condemning others without him.

So that we see sin must be punished, Gods infinite justice satisfied, either
in us, or by another.

But it will be objected, that man being finite cannot satisfy for infinite
justice.

Its true, that man is finite, in respect of place, or a geometrical quantity,
but infinite, in regard of duration of time, or Arithimetical enumeration; so
that though no created nature, at an instant in one act, of it self, is able
to undergo the infinite wrath of the revenging God, yet in regard of
continuance, or times succession, his torment may be said to be Viz a part
post.
infinite. What he cannot do at once, he must be doing ever.

How can God be just in this his proceeding?

1. Because man has offended an infinite God. Now, the Quest. Ans.
dignity of the person offended, aggrauates the offense; as, we see, a word
against the king is death, to a subject, pardonable.

2. The sinner has had a world of sinning here, therefore must have a world of
suffering hereafter.

3. The sinner sins continually, never comes to a period; therefore, the
punishment, as the shadow does the body, when the Sun shines, follows the
sinner continually.

And 4. The sinner would have sinned in a greater degree, had it been in his
own power, or if he had not been by a necessity restrained. Therefore, its
just with the Lord, to punish him; with eternal torments.

And brought life] We have handled the like doctrine in Doct. 7.
the first verse, that arises out of this place; viz. that, All spiritual
life is procured by Christ. Therefore, we pass to this, Doct. 8. Phil. 3. 1.
2. Pet. 1. 12.
that, Repetition of the same thing, is warrantable, profitable.

Paul does so here, and all the rest, who preached, and writ, as we may see
elsewhere. Compare Mat. 5. 1. with Luke 6. 20. and you shall see, that Christ
preached one sermon twice. In Matthew, he is said, to sit, in Luke to stand; the
one says it was in a Valey, the other in the Mountain. Yet some seek to
reconcile them.

Because we understand not all we hear, at the first delivery. Reas. 1. 2. 3.
4.


What if we do? yet, we may not believe it.

But grant, we believe, may we not forget it?

I am sure, we do not practice it, though we understand it, believe it, and
also remember it. Therefore, to repeat the same things may be profitable.

And a man may be in a different disposition, so that he 5.
(...) panions to thee, thou have just cause to fear thy present condition,
and to labor for these things. For when the spirit sauingly applies to the
Christian, the virtue of Christ's death, these forenamed effects or properties
will be in some measure felt in that person.

And would thou also know, whether life be by Christ Trials if we have life
by Christ Jesus.
procured for thee? then examine thy self by these rules.

1. What knowledge have thou of Christ? what understanding of the Gospel? For,
its eternal life to know Christ, and his doctriue. Hagar had her eyes opened,
before she could see the well* so must thou the eye of thy mind, before thou
taste of the water of life.

2. What power have thou to do good: How often does the pulse of prayer beat
in thy closet, and in the secret room of thy heart? What strength have thou to
run the paths of Gods commands? Can thou like the creeple, rise up, leap
and be glad in the praises of God?

5. What care have thou to preserve the life of grace in thee, and to come to
eternal glory? Men that love their lives will make choice of their food,
Physician, and air: And he that loves the life of grace, will eat up the good
word of God, depend on a skillful Preacher, and plant himself, where the pure
air of holiness is sensible found and felt breathing, moving.

4. And in conclusion, how do thou employ thy life? what be the ends of all
thy motions? Do thou spend thy strength, that God may have glory by thee, and
his children receive good from thee? then thou have done well. For, as all fire
that comes from above, will tend upward again, and the heat that comes from
the heart will disperse it self to every member; so that life which is
received from Christ will always incline, and move, that he may have praise
and benefit by it. Are these things also within thee, and proceed from thee?
then have thou participated of the first resurrection, and shall never taste of
the second death.

And if thou want them, strive for them, or else Christ's life will profit thee
nothing. See thou defer no time, omit no oppertunitie, neither neglect any
means: but seek this life while it may be found; purchase this field, though
it cost thee all thy treasure. Thou have now a price in thy hand, want not an
heart. For, the tide and season to sail to this land, to buy this commodity,
serves but once, not ever. And to move thee, thus to do, let these things be
well weighed, seriously thought on.

1. Consider the excellency of this life; the least degree of Motives to get
spiritual life.
it, is of more worth, than all other life what ever; therefore its called the
life of God. Ephesians. 4. 18. How many kinds of life be there? and amongst them how
many degrees? yet the nearer it approaches to the fountain of life, God, the
more excellent it is. The subject has a life as well as the King, the sick as
the whole; but what is it in comparison of this, but a kind of death? now, the
better a thing is, is it not the more to be desired?

2 Without this life, we can do no action acceptable to God, or profitable to
our selves; and what a misery is this always to be doing, yet all in vain? A
natural life can do but natural actions; therefore such as be in the flesh,
cannot please God. Romans 8. 7.

3. This life will make us acceptable, and well pleasing to God and man; yea,
the Angels shall rejoice, and the father say with delight, This my son was
dead, but is now alive. Luke 15. 24. We joy to see the trees budde, the corn
peep, the graftes flourish, and shall we have no care to obtain that life,
wherein all beauty consists?

4 Finally, he that has not the beginning of this life here, cannot possess
eternal life hereafter; for they only shall escape the second death, that
partake of the first resurrection, to life. The covetous; when he has gotten
goods; the Prodigal having satiate his soul, with the husks of pleasures*
the ambitious, when he has climbed to the highest pitch of honor, think they
live the only Iouiall life, and yet all dwell and breathe in the chambers of
death* and (as the Apostle speaks) are dead, while they be alive; no better
than walking ghosts in the forms of living men. Let such buy and build, plow
and sow, marry and beget many children, yet the untimely birth is better than
they. The basest life exceedes as much the best mere being, as Adam, the red
earth, whereon his body was made; but this life excels all others (Gods only
excepted) more than men do beasts, or Angels Devils. Why then let the worth of
it move thee; the withering of this is worse than the death of the Gourd of
Jonah. And will not this consideration, that all thy actions are but as so many
beautiful sins, and distasteful unto the Lord, set thee a work to obtain
it? Then call to mind how it makes all things beautiful, and well pleasing to
the eye. Will not our flesh tremble to see a body without a soul, the teeth
closed, the eyes open, the lips shrunk, and the blood set, black and swart in
the face and members? is not such an object odious to man? Even so, yea worse
are we being dead in sin, to God and good persons. Yet, if all that's said,
will not move thee to this; then know, No life here, no escape of death
hereafter.

And immortality.] We collect hence, that,

Life spirituallis eternal. Doct. 10.


It is not like the Lillies, that flourish to day, and wither to morrow.
Methushelah lived long, yet died at the age of 969. but he that once has the
life of grace, shall see no corruption. Mortality shall put on immortality;
and though the body perish, yet this life is in the soul, being a more
excellent subject; for, as he that puts off his apparel, does not leave his
natural life in it; so, he that lays down the body, loses not the life of
grace and immortality with it. For as the natural life is in the body, not in
the apparel; so the spiritual life is in the soul, not in the dead corpse
after the separation. Mat: 19. 29. Mark: 10. 17. Ioh. 5. 24. 1 Cor: 15. 53.

For Christ has purchased eternal redemption. Heb. 9. 12. Reas. 1.
Christ was a holy person, yea God as well as man: and he obeyed freely; these
two made the satisfaction of Christ sufficient. And there is a proportion
between Adams sin and Christ's sufferings.

1. Finite sin offending. Adam. Christ. Adam. Christ. Adam. Christ.


1. Finite suffering, satisfying.

2. Finite sin offended the infinite God.

2. Finite suffering satisfied the infinite God.

3. Finite sin, infinitely offended the infinite God.

3. Finite suffering, infinitely satisfied the infinite God. So that life must
be infinite; because the satisfaction was infinite, in value, and worth; and
equal to the offense, in removing eternal death.

God has promised eternal life, and he is faithful and Reas. 2.
cannot deny himself 1 Ioh: 2. 25.

Christ from whom this life is derived, lives for ever, and Reas. 3.
makes intercession. Heb: 7. 25. Reu: 1. 18.

Else, it were better with the wicked than the faithful: of all Reas. 4.
men they were most miserable. 1 Cor. 15. 19. And the word is called eternal.
1 Pet. 1. vlt.

And we read of an eternal house, an eternal weight, an eternal kingdom, an
eternal crown, and an eternal inheritance.

This, 1. Confutes those heretics that hold the soul is Use. 1.
mortal: 2. the Papists also, who say that a man may have true spiritual
life, and lose it. But we see, that Christ has brought life, and immortality;
or immortal life; and if this life should end, then it were mortal.

This makes also for the comfort of such, whose friends Use 2.
are departed in the Lord: why? be of good cheer; they are not dead, but live;
for, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. This use is of great
use, were it well used.

This likewise might and ought to encourage all to go Use. 3.
on with cheerefulnes, and Christian resolution, and not be afraid of death;
seeing after it follows eternal life: death, like a door, lets the soul
pass a better room of habitation.

And here we have a strong motive to move us to labor Use. 4.
for this life; Is it immortal? incorruptible? why then strive for it. What
man would not live long? why live this life once, and live for ever; and that
thou may, thou must

1. Be united to Christ: for every branch that abides not in Helps to life
spiritual.
him, is cast out and withers. All spiritual life flows from this
conjunction: For as the graft has life from the union with the stock; so have
we from Christ Ioh. 15.

2. Hear the Gospel preached; for the word of is God spirit and life; and he
that bears this voice, though he were dead, yet shall be live. What though we
cannot quicken our selves yet we may use the means. And the Angel may trouble
the water, and Christ come and heal us, when we are at the wels mouth, and
unable to help ourselves.

3. Pray often. David, near about 19. times, in the hundred and nineteenth
Psalm, prays, Lord quicken me; Lord give me the spirit of life etc.

Did he thus? sure then it was good for him; and to be practiced of all such as
would be quickened, and enliued. Finally, and above all things, resist no good
motion, that thou have in the use of Gods ordinances, or at any time else: for
this is to drive the author of all life from us. Entertain them therefore, and
kindle those sparks by obeying of them; so shall thy soul live and not dye.

Through the Gospel.] Here is manifested the isntrumental cause, by which
death is abolished, and life brought unto us; whence, let this be noted that,

Though all grace come by Christ, yet it is derived unto man by Doct. 11.
means of the Gospel.

For, that declares how it may be attained, and no other Reas. 1.
writing.

God gives his spirit with the Gospel, not by the Law: Reas. 2.
Gal: 3. 2. and hence it is called the ministration of the spirit: 2 Cor. 3. 8.

This must work in us a love to the Gospel, and a care Use. 1.
to continue it amongst us. Had we but one herb in our grounds, that would
cure all diseases, would we not hedge about it, water it, and by all means
seek to preserve it it from perishing? Why? the Gospel is this herb, that
tree, whose leaves only cure all the nations.

We must make much of them, that bring this Physic, Use. 2.
for the wounded spirit: how should such men be respected*

Pray we that the word may run, and be scattered to the Use 3.
four ends of the world: otherwise death will reign, life be abolished.

Finally, this may prick on the Ministers to Preach the Use. 4.
Gospel, in season, and out of season; seeing, its the only way to make the
barren, gracious; and the dead, to live for ever.

VERSE. 11. For the which I am appointed a Preacher and Apostle, and a Teacher
of the Gentiles.
PAVL in this verse maintains the dignity of The Logical resolution.
his calling although he had done so in the first verse of this Chapter, the
which is farther explicated. First, by the object, matter, or end: For the
which]. Secondly, how he came unto it, in the word Appointed.] Thirdly, by the
dispenser of it (being Paul himself) who is infolden or Comprehended under a
threefold denomination or tittle 1. Preacher. 2. Apostle. 3. Teacher. And 4.
and lastly, the Persons be specified unto whom he was to execute his function,
and they are said to be the Gentiles. So that in this verse we see four things
to be considered. 1. His calling. 2. How he came by it. 3. The subject that he
was to Preach, and 4. To whom.

For the which.] That is, the Gospel; for he had mentioned The Theological
exposition.
it in the last word of the precedent verse; so that this has relation to
that: or to the end of his calling, which is to work life.

I am appointed.] That is, preordained of God, and by him now set apart for
this function.

A Preacher.] The word signifies a Crier, who with an audible voice did openly
proclaim things; also, it is sometimes expounded amongst the Greeks for a
fish; and of the Latins, a Trumpet.

And Apostle.] See ver. 1.

And a Teacher.] Some expound the words thus; A Preacher, that is, one that
delivers the truth openly, audibly: an Apostle, whatsoever he had received:
a Teacher, rendering reason of his calling and the doctrine he delivered.
Others hold that every Congregation should have both a Preacher and a Doctor,
and they instrance in Moses and Aaron; Paul and Timotheus: the Doctor was to
deliver the principles of Religion; and the Preacher to press the people to
put them in practice: But because every Congregation was not, and is not of
ability to maintain both, therefore one must supply the duty of Preacher and
Teacher. The Doctor must be able to deliver new thing and old; and the Preacher
had need 1. Of a faithful memory. 2. An audible voice, and good utterance.
But I assent to those who hold, that by these three words the same things is
meant.

Of the Gentiles.] These people came of Iapheth, the son of Noah, for whom he
prayed. Genesis 9. 27.

That Gospel, the which is an isntrumental cause for The Metaphrase.
the abolishing of death, and the bringing in of life; I Paul am preordained
and separated of God to preach unto the poor seduced and ignorant posterity of
Iapheth, who hither to have been strangers from the life of God, and aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel; and this do I repute no base but an
excellent function and honorable calling.

It is worthy our observation, how that when the Apostle Doctrines deduced.
names God, he still makes mention of some mercy of his; and but nominating
the Gospel, we see how he runs on it in diverse words, whence we may gather,
that

The servants of God take delight to dwell and discourse of Doct. 1.
good things. Gal. 6. 11. Acts. 20. 7.

Its no burden or wearisomnes to the Saints, for to enlarge their speech on
heavenly subjects: A Traveler when he has taken view of the situation of
many towns and countries, beheld the rare monuments that he has met withal,
rejoices to make relation thereof unto his friends after his return, and so
is it with a Christian, who is a spiritual traveller when he has seen into
the mysteries of Religion, found out the great secrets therein contained, by
the painful travel of his mind. He makes it the joy of his heart, largely
to discourse thereof unto his brethren.

For this will draw others to see and search into the Reas. 1.
worth and dignity of the things. Why is the Gospel no more regarded? or the
high calling of a Minister so little esteemed? the Reason is, because men of
worth and learning do not speak much and often in the commendation of the
same.

Another Reason springs from the love they have to the Reas. 2.
things. If David love the word, he will write a book^, and dedicate it to the
succeeding ages and generations; he will speak of it at home and abroad; yea,
whatsoever we love, we will long, by speech, dwell upon. To use a familiar
similitude; Let the hound affect the haunt, will he not double and treble his
voice and crying?

This reproves such, that condemn men for speaking, Use. 1.
and often repeating of the works and word of God: Such use to cry, Oh! you be
full of the spirit: And is not this to speak evil of good? and to despite
(in a kind) the spirit of grace? Surely this is a foul and fearful sin,
and cannot without repentance but be rewarded with a vengeance, or some heavy
judgment. Such men, like the Athenians, account preacher^ but bablers; but let
those remember, that they that despise them, despise him that sent them.

And by this doctrine we see a difference betwixt Gods Use 2.
sons and Satan's slaves; the one count it there meat and drink to do and
speak the will and word of their heavenly father: the other seldom or never
do the one or other. But did they love the Gospel, they neither would or
could besilent; for their word, like fire in straw, would burst forth. Will not
the Soldier speak of his wounds, the huntsman of his hounds, and the
husbandman of his Cattle and grounds? And shall we love the Gospel, and never
make mention of it? No, no: this little speech of heavenly things, argues that
the love of many is but cold: Love the word once, and say nothing of it, if
thou can.

For the which.] The doctrine to be gathered is this, that

The Gospel is principally to be preached. Math. 4. 23. and Doct. 2.
24. 14. Mark. 16. 15.

Because the end of our preaching must be Christ crucified, Reas. 1.
who is the end of the Scriptures; for the Moral, political, and ceremonial
law do all point at him.

Besides, all grace is wrought in the heart by the Gospel Reas. 2. Act. 20. 32.
Tit. 2. 11.
preached; therefore it is called the Word of grace; yea Grace it self; and by
the Law we cannot come to grace and glory: the which was signified by Moses,
that entered not into the land of Canaan; and Joshua typified Iesns, who brought
salvation by the Gospel.

Was not Christ preached, and the Gospel under the Quest.
Law?

Yes: but more darkely then in these days: so that for Answ.
matter, we have no other Gospel, but for manner and form.

This reprehendeth those Preachers, that preach all things more then the
Gospel, scraping together an heap of authority, Use. 1.
yet shoulder out the chiefest testimony. And they are also blameworthy, who
are always thundering out the law, casting fire and brimstone daily into the
midst of the Congregation; but never seek to quench the flame of justice by
the milk of mercy. Its true, the Law must be preached, that we may see from
whence we be fallen, how far we be from that state, wherein we were created,
to humble us, wound us, break us, and to bring us to Christ; yet the Gospel
must not in any wise be omitted; for Grace is wrought by it, the way to heaven
pointed out, the feeble minded comforted, and the sons of sinful men saved,
glorified.

And the people here are to learn to discern between Use. 2.
things that differ; they are to judge betwixt precept and promise, Law and
Gospel; And it stands them on to do so; for salvation is tied to the
obedience of the Gospel; and 2 These. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 4 4.
all grace and glory brought and derived unto man by no other conduite. Wounded
spirits must hear what the Gospel speaks to the Churches, not the Law; for
otherwise they shall not be healed, helped.

And know this; that to Preach the Gospel is to Preach Math. 11. 28.
salvation only by Christ Jesus; and to such as be weary and heavy laden:
Papists do not the first; many omit the other.

I am appointed.] Seeing Paul stands so much on his calling, having touched it
before, we note, that

The Dignity of our calling is to be maintained. Doct. 3.


Or, Preachers are to dignifie, and maintain their Ministry.

Thus have all the Prophets done.

Inregard it comes from God. Reas. 1. Reas. 2. Ephesians. 4. 12. 1 Timothy 3. 1.


Its honorable: 1. In respect it has the best object the Gospel of Christ.
and 2. For the end. For first it is for the gathering together of the Saints.
secondly, the building of the body of Christ. Hence its called a worthy work.

Thirdly, its profitable for our Brethren. Reason 3. Reason 4.


And fourthly, Satan and his instruments will endeavor much to oppugn and
disgrace both it and the Preachers; As we see the Papists do the Ministers in
our days; and others, as the Anabaptists, and Familists, and Common
Protestants.

This must teach Ministers to have their callings in great Use. 1.
estimation, and to keep them from contempt; and that so much the more, in
regard many seek to disgrace them. The Papist cries, where had you your
calling? for where be your miracles? We answer, that calling is either
ordinary, or extraordinary, to the Ministry.

And at the first, in the days of King Henry the 8. ours was of the latter
kind; (And John the Baptist was extraordinarily called, yet did no miracles.)
And that the calling of our Ministers in those times was extraordinary, its
evident. For 1. they had extraordinary gifts. 2. Extraordinary courage. 3.
Extraordinary success; for in a short time, notwithstanding the great
opposition, how far was the Gospel scattered? Satan fell from heaven, at
their preaching, like lightening, suddenly, speedily. And 4. in this, their
calling will appear to be extraordinary, that they (after so many ages past)
stood up being but a few, against the great sins of that time. Why did not
others before them thus, and this, if their calling had been ordinary.

Again, they needed no new calling to reform Religion, for that which they
had received from the Papists themselves, was sufficient. They were ordinated
to the work of the Ministry, and now they began to put it in execution; And
had they not done this, they had faild in the true end of Ordination.

And if Ministers must maintain their dignity, let not the Use 2.
people debase them or their calling; for it will prove unprofitable to such at
the end, We read of many ways, whereby the Ministers have been wronged by
others.

1. On the left hand 1. In drawing them that were simple to believe, they were
not sent of God; this is common in our days. 2. Alluring them to be idle. 3.
By intising them to commit some scandalous sin. 4. In forbidding them to
Preach. 5. In setting enmity betwixt them and their people. Lastly in putting
them in prison. Thus have the Apostles been used in former times.

2. On the right hand 1. By proffering them favor. 2. In seeking to make them
Kings, or to advance them in the world. Thus they tempted our chief Shepherd
Christ Jesus.

A Preacher.] From the Etymology, or proper acception of the word, we observe,
that

Preachers be Cryers. Doct. 1. Isai. 58. 1. Ier. 4. 5. Math. 3. 3. John 7. 37.
Reas. 1.


Isaiah was commanded to Cry a loud: Jeremiah must cry: John the Baptist was a
Crier: And Christ himself cried, H^, he that is a thirst, let him come to me,
and drink!

For Men naturally are deaf, and have no hearts to attend to the word of God;
the treasure of the soul. Have we not some that fall asleep under the very
Pulpit, and cannot keep eye or ear open? We have ears open at large for
corporal things, but wonderful dull we be of hearing spiritual things.
Reas. 2.


Again, the Commodity that is cried is of great worth, and of small price;
therefore Wisdom cries, and must be cried in the street; Pro. 8.

It is an argument, that the Preacher brings not stolen Reason 3.
stuff, nor bad commodity. He whose fruit is best, as we see in Cities,
cries loudest. A low voice in the street, argues either an ill commodity, or
a false way of obtaining it.

Preachers are Cryers; for God will have life to come in Reason 4.
at the ear, to cross the Devil, who first brought death by a voice unto
mankind. Use. 1.


And are Preachers cryers? Can we choose then but tax some in these days, who
never cry at all? does not the Isa. 56. 20.
Holy Ghost call the like, damb Dogs, that cannot bar^^, wholye and sleep, and
take delight in sleeping? I had almost said of such Psalm 115. 5.
as David does of Idols, they have tongues, but speak not. etc. And I wish
that when the great Crier shall come to call to an account, their tongues be
not loosed to cry, that the Mountains might fallon them, and the hills cover
them from his presence. Rev. 6. 26.

Yet we exempt such as through age cannot; or other lawful employments, as
writing, etc. Do not. But such a^ can and will not, we may not (for God will
not) send scot-free. Use 2.


Again, this must teach the Auditors, not to cavil with the Crier, but to
hear the words of exhortation patiently. Some, like Festus, tell Paul, if he
cry aloude, that he is besides himself; reputing the Preacher, rude,
indiscreet, passionate, Why? Can a Bell have too shrill a sound? an hound too
deep or base a mouth? a Piece give too great a Report? or a Crye^ extend his
voice too high? Shall not the sheep heard shout when the sheep are wandering, or
ready to be devoured by the wolf? Will ye not ring the Bells awke, when the
City is on fire? Discharge the greatest Canon, when the ship is in distress,
and in danger to be lost in the haven? And shall not the Preacher cry, roar,
and like John, bellow like an Ox, (for so the word is read) when men sleep
and sink in sin, and be in hazard to be drowned and devoured by Satan that
cruel wolf, and Pyrate of the soul? And is not God said to cry? Christ to
cry? the Spirit to cry? and shall the sons of thunder then be silent, or not
heard? Surely if these should not cry, the very stones in the street would
take up a complaint and cry aloud. Say not then, Here Is a Rut indeed (for the
word seems to be borrowed from that we have in hand) but be swift to hear,
slow to speak, remiss to wrath.

And here let the Preachers learn and take warrant to cry Use. 3.
aloude, and spare not. O ye that be sons of thunder, let your voices be
heard above; sound your tongues like trumpets, and shout on high. Fear not the
frowns of the vulgar, care not for their Cauills; but imitate the great Crier,
Christ the Lord, who cried in the great day of the feast, and Cautions for
Criers.
when he was checked, cried the louder. Yet take these cautions with thee.

Cry not before thou be sent, least thou loose thy labor, 1.
and spend thy voice in vain.

Again, Cry nothing, but what the Lord puts in thy 2.
mouth; and then thou need not to be ashamed; for such commodity is
saleable, warrantable.

Besides, Cry where God would have thee; keep a compass; 3.
for all persons are not willing to buy; neither is the Lord well pleased in so
doing.

Finally, put a difference in Crying. Cry to the wicked, 4. Ier: 22 29.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; and to the, poor in
spirit, Come, buy milk and honey without money: Cry Psalm. 101. 1.
justice to the wicked; mercy to such as hunger and thirst after righteousness.

And are the Preachers Cryers? why then, let the people Use. 4.
give attention to them. Is it not a shame to sleep in the market place? to be
napping, when the fair is in proclaiming? and to have the ears, closed when
the crier cries his commodities at our very doors? And take these Rules Rules
for auditors.
for thy direction.

1. Hear not every Crier; for many false cryers are gone out into the world:
Satan sends forth false Prophets daily. As Papists etc.

2. Learn to judge of the commodity, or things that be cried. The Jesuit has
much couuterfeite stuff, and many a false message that he cries. If he come
from the Pope; never fear his proclamations, or buy his Bulls; for they shall
as soon hurt thee, as Nimrod endanger heaven by the building of Babel.

3. When thou understand what is cried, then be sure that thou buy it, put
it in practice: Whatsoever pertains to thee, hear and obey.

4. And in Conclusion; go home and tell thy Neighbors, what was cried in the
Market: Thus did the poor woman; and it may be profitable for them and thee.
We Ioh. 4 29.
will do so in earthly things, that others may know how to avoid a danger, or
buy a good commodity; and shall we not do the same in spiritual matters,
which concern the conservation of the soul? surely it stands both with Reason
and brotherly affection; therefore do it also.

And a Teacher of the Gentiles.] The doctrine is, that

The word preached is the principal means whereby Sinners Doct. 5.
are converted. Ephesians. 4. 12 Isai. 61. 1. 2.

We may say of it, as David did of Goliahs sword, that of all other ordinances
which God has appointed; There is 1 Samuel 21. 9.
none to that. Peter did convert thousands at one Sermon. Acts. 2. 41. Reas. 1.


Because by Preaching, sin is more clearly discovered, and the judgments of
God more manifestly, and with power, set before the eye, then by reading or any
other means: It does unfold the things that are closely wrapped and couched
together; And the more that sin and the judgment of God against it, is
declared to the eye of the mind; the more apt is that person to turn unto his
God. Ezekiel. 13. 22.

And Faith comes by the word preached, which is the only ground of true
Conversion from sin and evil. For Reas. 2.
so says our Apostle. Romans 10. 17.

This confuteth the opinion of those, that prefer Reading Use. 1.
before Preaching, for the Conversion of sinners: We do not deny but the word
read is the rule of holiness, may convert, the Spirit accompanying his
ordinance, and therefore is to have his place, and due respect in the
Congregation; but we will not equal it to preaching, for therein we should
not do well and wisely.

And if Reading were more excellent, and of greater force to convert, then
Preaching, why are not the people converted that have a Reader? To what end
then serve the Schools of the Prophets? Wherefore should men study the
knowledge of tongues and Arts? to divide the word aright, and to distribute to
every man's present necessities? And why should Satan rage more against
Preachers then readers, except the word powerfully delivered, did not the more
batter and beat down his Kingdom? Besides: why did not Christ send out his
Apostles with this charge, Go read; but Go preach to all nations? wherefore
does Paul pronounce a woe to them that preach not the Gospel? And why did he
not charge his son Timotheus before God, to Read in season and out of season?
What should we more say, but as Paul does of another thing? He that gives his
virgin to mary does well, and he that does not, does better: So he that reads
may do well, but he that coueteth to prophecy does better; and I think, that
in this, I have the Spirit of God.

But it will be objected, that Reading is preaching. Object. Sol. 1. 2.


Reading by a Trope is put for preaching, et ^ contra.

But I answer, that every ordinance of God has its proper rule, by which it
is performed; Now Reading and Preaching have not one and the same Rule to guide
them; therefore are not the same action: For two contrary rules produce
contrary effects, when effects or things effected are proportionable to the
Rules by which they were framed. But I omit this; seeing so many learned have
handled it at large; yet I thought it not amisle to say somewhat.

And here I might fall into another point, that is at this Quest.
day, amongst some controuerted. viz: Whither Preaching is to be preferred above
praying; or praying before preaching?

Some say Praying, others Preaching: Ans.


I answer, that as every member in the natural body has its proper use, and
end, for the which it was framed, and therefore the most weak member, may
excel the principal in some one thing; as the foot by fleeing may save the
body, when the head cannot move without it: So the least of Gods ordinances in
one thing or other may be more profitable then the highest. For ^xample: For
the plantation of a Church, the conversion of the sinner, the begetting of
faith, the information of the judgment, and the directing of man in the paths
of righteousness, Preaching doubtless has the pre-eminence: But in easing of
the troubled heart by confession, in recounting the great and many things the
Lord has done for us; in praising him for his benefits, and obtaining of
comfort and help in the time of need; and to a sinner converted, prayer (I
think) is the more profitable. Object. Sol.


It will be said, We cannot pray without preaching.

True; not well: neither can we preach well without praying,

Again, faith comes by preaching, and without faith no Object.
prayer.

We grant it, yet prayer does preserve it, increase it; Preaching Sol.
is the procreant, but Prayer the conservant cause of faith, the one is as the
Mother, the other as the Nurse.

We in preaching hear God speak to us, in praying we Object. 3.
speak to him.

True it is, that the Lord in the word truly preached, speaks Sol.
to man, yet not immediately: And so in praying does God speak also: For the
Spirit of God does direct and assist all the faithful to pray: And in this
following respect, Prayer seems to have the praise: For in Preaching, God by
man speaks unto man. But in Praying. Man by the Holy Ghost does speak unto
God the Father.

And on the other part, Objections are brought, as this. Object.
That which is for another thing is of less value, then that thing for which
it is: But preaching is for prayer, therefore not to be preferred above it.

This rule seems to me not always to hold true: Example. Sol.
The father and the Mother are for the son, therefore the son is better
then they. God was in Christ, and redeemed the world by him, therefore the
world is more worth then the son of God; This were a doubtful, if not a
blasphemous consequence.

Yet observe this, that one thing may be for diverse ends; as the Redemption of
man by Christ, was not solely for the good of man, but for his own, and the
glory of his father; and Christ as he was God, was both the end, and the
means; so that sometimes things be not as they seem to be.

I will to and fro dispute the question no longer; for my first general
answer shall stand for all; And none needs to doubt of the truth of it, Only,
thus let us conclude, that as Christ said, Give that to Caesar, which is
Caesar's, and to God, that which is is Gods: So give we to preaching that which
is its due, and to prayer its privilege also.

And in the second place, this should teach us thankfulness Use. 2.
to God for the word preached. Alas! what were all other favors worth, if we
had not the Gospel to convert us, and to sanctify us to God, all things to
us? We esteem not of this favor as we ought, and as it deserves: Have we a
guide to direct us, being out of the way? a Physician to remove some dangerous
disease: or but a remedy to turn our cloth into a better color? We esteem
highly of such things: But have too little respect unto the word taught, the
only means to heal our spiritual maladies, and to convert us unto the Lord.
And if this be not thanksworthy, then all we have is of no worth. Praise we
the Lord therefore, that our visions fail not.

Again, would we and our children be converted and Use. 3.
healed? then let us depend on the word taught. Moses Rod in Moses hand did
work miracles; and so the word in the mouth of the men of God, will destroy
the cursed work of Satan in us, and make us in mind and life like unto Christ
Jesus. We must wash in this poole, attend at this porch, and suffer this water
to fall upon us: so shall the Leprosy of our sin be washed away, and we be
transformed into the image of the Lord, wherein we were at the first created.
But how few mind, or practice these things? Yet its a truth, that there is no
way to bring us (ordinarily) unto heaven, but the diligent hearing of the word
preached.

Last of all, Let us all strive to continue the word taught Use. 4.
amongst us; for if it fail the people perish. Nay we should, to the uttermost
of our power, with the Thessalonians, cause the Gospel to run and abound in
all places; this is a work of worth, and great necessity. You often, (and its
good) speak in the praise of that (in his Art) matchless Peer, Sir Francis
Drake, for deriving the water into your Corporation; and you are at daily
expense to repair the breaches of its passage And shall we then never be at
any charge, to cause the water of life to slow through the Towns and places
about us, by the Conduits of faithful preachers? Nay, would to God, some did
not stop this wells mouth, or rather hinder the passage: But woe to them
whosoever they be.

Of the Gentiles.] We might gather diverse things from these few words; being
diversely considered, but the chief I take is this, that

When the Lord will call and save a people, he rayseth up the Doct. 6.
fittest instruments for that purpose.

Who fitter then Paul to be a Preacher to the Gentiles? or, to deliver Israel,
then Moses, being skillful in all their learning? Peter was a man resolute and
fiery, therefore the more meet to deal with the stiffnecked Jews. And the
Lord sent Papists to Pp': for their conversion; for they knew their iuglings,
and were able to beat them with their own weapons.

Because the Lord is wise in all his ways, and skillful in Reas. 1.
all his enterprises. A man of understanding will do his best to have his
matters effected; and shall not the fountain of all wisdom work wisely?

Again, the Lord does this in respect of the people; for Reas. 2.
they naturally are subject to quarrel, to make objections, and to deny the
means of their conversion: Now a man well qualified, will remove their doubts,
convince them in judgment, discover their folly, and so the sooner draw them to
repentance. For though God can work, and sometimes does, with weak or no
means at all; yet this is his Method, in his ordinary course of proceeding.

By this point, we may partly tell what to judge of many Use. 1.
places and people in the world. Does the Lord send them fit Pastors? then hope
the best; but if not; fear the worst.

This must teach us to reverence the Lord in his works, Use 2.
and not to pass by, without casting our eye, on his wise providence. For its
worthy of our observation and imitation. I fear few do this; and the fewer
that do this, the worse; the more, the better.

Another point we collect is this, that Doct. 7.


Paul was sent to preach principally to the Gentiles. Act. 22. 21, Gal. 2. 8.

From which it will necessarily follow, that Peter was not B. at Rome; for then
he should have to deal in Paul's Diocese. And Peter was appointed to the
Jews, therefore dedicates his Epistle to the dispersed Jews. Besides, an
Apostle could not be strictly tied to any one Diocese; as they write Peter was
to Rome; And if he was there, shame was it for him, not to assist Paul, but to
forsake him. This we but touch by the way; for many worthy Clerks have scanned
this at large.

Besides, we know when Noah prayed for these people, it was many a hundred
years agone, yet now it came to pass, according to his desire, whence we
note, that Doct. 8.


Prayers made in faith, are not always granted at the first.

Jonah was not cast on the shore, so soon as he showted; neither Paul at the
first request had an answer returned him. David waited long; Jeremiah fainted
in expecting; and Christ himself stayed some time, before the Angels came to
comfort him. We sometime meet the poor with a penny in our hand; and at
another time we suffer them to cry, run, and weary themselves, before we hear
them; so deals the Lord with his children. Reas. 1.


Because, that as God has appointed all things to be done, so has he set
down the very precise time, wherein they shall be effected, and not before.
This is the principallest Reason of the point. Gal. 4. 4. Reas. 2.


And the Lord does so sometimes, that we may cry the more earnestly and
fervently unto him. Let the Infant fast, it will know the dug the better, and
seek it the faster: stop the Lure, and the Hawke will mend her pitch, and fly
the higher; and if the Lord deny the faithful their requests for a season,
their prayers will pierce the deeper, be heard the better. David, in one
Psalm, uses one petition thrice; and mark how he did grow in feruency: First
says he, Turn us Psalm. 80. 3. ver. 7.
again O, Lord, etc. the second time he adds, saying O Lord of hosts etc.
and the third time he proceeds further, and ver. 19.
prays; Turn us again O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved. Thus by iteration he gathers the more heat, fervency, like a
stone by often tumbling.

Mervaile not then if the unfaithful be not heard at all: shall Use. 1.
the Lord deny his children long? and will he give bread instantly unto
Bastards? shall the good man of the house sleep at the discharge of the
greatest Cannon? and will he awake, and cry Who is at the window, at the report
of the narrow-mouthed piece or pistol? No, never respect it. If Noah's prayer
be put off 2000. of years, Let the drunkard, Fornicator, Blasphemer, and such
as regard iniquity in

laid down the object of Paul's faith which is God: secondly, his knowledge of
him; and that is not a bare understanding of him, but a knowledge of
experience, or practice; and thirdly, an act that accompanied this
experimental knowledge, which was his believing or faith: This is the first
ground why Paul suffered afflictions without being ashamed.

And I am persuaded.] That is, I am confident, and certain, and fully assured.

That he.] to wit, God.

Is able to keep.] Gods power is twofold 1. Absolute. 2. Active, that is a
power joined with his will, and is here meant: for else Paul's reason had not
been good; for his will must accompany his ability in the preserving of what
was committed to him.

That which I have committed to him.] Some interpret the thing he committed to
God, to be his person: others his grace, faith, salvation: the difference is
nice or none at all: the Original word signifies both that which is committed
to us of God, and that we commit to him. The Pp' on the Rhem. expound it of
good deeds, sufferings, but absurd: for that, how ever a truth, yet not from
this place?

Against that day.] Either the day of trouble, or of the last judgment. I
rather understand it of the great day of the Lord. For Paul was put to death?
and its usual with faithful men, in great trials and tribulations, to cast
their eye on the day of judgment.

It may seem strange, but it is a truth, that I am afflicted The Metaphrase.
for preaching the Gospel unto the Gentiles: yet for all that I go on
resolutely in the execution of my function, and am not ashamed: Neither is it
without reason, for I have had experience of him in whom I put my confidence;
and besides that, I do verily believe, that the Lord is not only able, but
also willing to preserve my soul in safety, against the great and last day of
judgment.

For the which cause I suffer these things.* Out of the ground Doctrines
deduced. Doct. 1.
of Paul's sufferings, we may gather this conclusion, that

The goodness of an action does not always free the deer from affliction.

Abel was slain, because his works were good. Joseph 1 Ioh. 3 12. Genesis ^7 20.
Amos 5 10. Ioh. 7. 7. 20.
sold, for the discovery of his Brethrens sins. Amos hated for speaking
uprightly. David in danger, for weldoing. Christ did many good works, none
evil, yet they went about to kill him; and they so went about, that at last
they killed him indeed.

Ignorance may be the cause; and that of the person or of Reas. 1.
the thing 1. of the person. For many of the Saints I shut up in prison, but I
did it ignorantly. The Princes of this world, put to 1 Timothy 1. 13. ^ Cor. 2. 8.
Act. 3. 17.
death the Lord of life; but had they known him, they would not have crucified
him. I know that through ignorance ye did is, as also your governors. And,
Father, for give them, for they know not what they do. And 2. of the action;
What new and strange Act. 17. 19. Mark. 2. 24.
doctrine is this? He does, and teaches things unlawful. They think they do
God good service; they erred, in that they have not known my ways. O that ye
had known these things!

A second Reason may be drawn from the rage and malice Reas. 2.
of the wicked. Ahab hated Micaiah, therefore he must to prison, if God prevent
not. Christ was sold of envy. Away with such a fellow; for he is not worthy to
live. And, Had he not been an evil doer, we would not have delivered him into
your hands. Not Jesus, but Barrabbas. All this smells of malice, and sents of
envy. For which of them was ignorant that the one was a thief, and who could
accuse the other of sin?

And pride in the profane, causes goodmen suffer for Reas. 3.
weldoing. Master, in thus saying, thou rebukest us also. The Pharisees were
zealous for the law and ceremonies, and Paul preached the Gospel, called them
beggarly and impotent rudiments; told that if they were circumcised, Christ
profited them nothing: Why this so took down the pride of man, that he should
not be justified by his own works, but by another, that Paul was persecuted,
and hardly entreated of his own Country men. If a skillful Tailor take measure
of a crooked and misshapen person, and fit the garment proportionable to the
pattern; a proud piece of flesh will powte, swell, and wrangle with the
workman; so let the Ministers and men of God do good, devide the word aright,
high and lofty spirits will be muttering; for they cannot endure the light, or
to be told of their deformities. Thus Paul was reputed an enemy for telling
them the truth. A counterfeite and false glass is the fittest for old,
withered, and wrinckled Curtezans to view themselves in; for if it should show
them their right shapes, all things to nothing, they split it against the walls.

And in the last place, the goodness of an action cannot Reas. 4.
exempt the weldoer from affliction: for its a means to break down the walls
of Babel, to throw the gates of Hell off her hindges, and to weaken the
kingdom of Satan. God says, He will set enmity between the woman's seed, and
Genesis 3 15.
the Serpents; and how. For thou shall bruise his head: so that break the
Devils plots and pate by doing good, and be thou assured, he will have thee by
the heel. And Paul was the worse entreated for preaching to the Gentiles; for
the Jews hated them, and Satan had long held them in his custody and prison
of darkness.

Here we are taught a rule of wisdom, and that is, Never Use. 1.
to judge the goodness or badnes of an action by the usage and future
entertainment of the Doer: for in so doing, we may commend amiss; and speak
good of evil, and evil of good. Was not Abel killed, Moses forced to flee,
Jacob ill entreated, David derided, the Prophets imprisoned, Stephen stoned,
James beheaded, Christ crucified, and many of his innocent members massacred,
murdered for well doing? Judge not therefore before the time; condemn not
least thou be condemned. But rather use your censuring in this, in not laying a
block of stumbling before your Brethren.

Pharaoh, a wicked King, may have peace, when David, the anointed of the Lord,
may flee for his life: Ahabs four hundred of false Prophets may have freedom,
when faithful Micaiah may kiss the stocks: Christ may be crucified, when
Barrabas shall be delivered; And so may the guilty sometimes escape, when the
guiltless and guilelesse are in great ieopardy. For he that refraineth from
evil, makes Isa. 59. 15. Mal. 3. 15.
himself a prey; When as they that tempt God, and work wickedness, are set up,
advanced, delivered.

In the next place, we see how impossible a thing it is for Use. 2.
a good man to live in peace; for wicked men will reward evil for good. Let
Christ turn the Jews water into wine; he shall have from them vinegar to
drink; tell them the truth, they will hire false witnesses to swear lies
against him. If he say he has the Spirit of God; they will say, No, he has a
Devil. Let him remit sin, they will cry, he blasphemeth. If he demand, for
which of his good works they seek to kill him? they will answer, that the
Devil goes about to kill him, and not they. And did the world thus deal with
him, who had no sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth? then never
expect thou any good entertainment from the world, in this world; for she
loves none but her own. Shall men burn green boughs, and spare those that
never bear? spue out the water of life, and taste deeply of the muddy puddle?
Eclipse the Sun, and not puff at a candle? Dig up the roots, and cherish the
branches? pierce the head, wound the heart, slay the heir; and shall the
members not be mortified, the hands nailed, and the younger brethren foully
entreated? Wherefore let David arm himself, for Saul will cast a spear at
him; for he is the Lords anointed. If Nehemiah will repair his fathers
sepulchers, build the walls of Jerusalem, he shall meet with a Sanballat, a
bush in a place, here or there; a Tobiah, that will oppose, dissemble, write
counterfeit letters to hinder him; for he seeks the welfare of Israel, and
that is their grief. Will Paul scatter the Gospel, write Epistles, preach to
the blind and ignorant Gentiles? the proud Pharisees then, his own Countrymen,
will prove his greatest enemies, and repute him a plaguey fellow, for preaching
new doctrine, to a new Nation. Will Ames, Shaphat, Peter, and James leave their
former mean callings, to preach and prophecy at the command of the Lord?
shall they not be disgraced? What! is Saul among the Prophets? how know these
the Scriptures? Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? Amo. 7. 13.
And g^^ to thy fathers house (some Amaziah will cry) and eat thy bread and
prophecy there; but come not at Bethel; for it is the kings court. And seeing
this has been done to the best in times past, let us in our days expect a
part, so long as the Devil and the Pope are at liberty.

I suffer these things.] We see here two things. 1. Who suffered. 2. What he
suffered. The Doctrines shall be pointed at and briefly passed. The first from
the person to be noted, is, that

Neither learning, wisdom, piety, or external privileges, Doct. 2.
can preserve a man from suffering affliction. Math. 23. 34. 35.

For Paul was well descended, of rare parts, singular prudence, Phil. 3. 4. 5.
and great sanctity; yet all these could not exempt him from persecution, great
tribulation. Christ was the fountain of all wisdom, grace and holiness; yet
who ever more vilely entreated then he? Moses the meekest man on earth; David a
man according to Gods own heart; and Job a just and perfect man, yet all
scoffed, derided, vpbraided, and the drunkards made Ballads of them.

Why? the wicked are not respecters of persons: all fish Reas. 1.
are alike, that come to their net: Nay, rather the more holy any is, the more
be they hated of them: A crabbed Kyte will seize on the tenderest carcass: so
wicked and profane men make a prey of the most singular person.

Again, the rarer parts any has, the more does he build Reas. 2.
up the decayed walls of Jerusalem, gather the scattered Saints and repair the
body of Christ; and this cannot Satan, neither his instruments tolerate with
patience? If the great Temple of Diana go down, Bethel be advanced, let Paul
expect the greatest spite that created Natures can complot against him. If the
Lords anointed call his Nobles for the welfare of our Israel, then fire,
faggot, and gunpowder shall be provided.

If this be thus, then how do they miss the mark and Use. 1.
shoot besides the Butt, who think the ground of all sufferings come from
men's indiscretion. Its better to suffer for well doing, then for evil donig;
yet it will follow hence that good men, great men may suffer for weldoing.

Surely, if Christ had lived in our days, some would have taxed him for
indiscretion, questioning with him, why he would denounce so many woes to the
Scribes and Pharisees, men of great place and learning, calling them painted
Sepulchers, whited Tombs, Hypocrites, etc? John would have been reputed a
rash fellow, for telling Herod of his incest: and Micaiah, that the King and
his fathers house troubled Israel. Wisdom (we would say) should have past by
these things: But the foolishnes of God is wiser then the wisdom of man. Yet
we say still, that Circumspection is good; and that some, through indiscretion,
pierce their souls through with needless sorrows.

This must teach men of great place and rare parts patience; Use 2.
for even the best Princes have had their portion of persecution. Let our
Sovereign put his pen against the Pope, call Rome that great Whore, discover
her skirts, and lay her naked, he must expect neither pardon, nor Purgatory,
from his Holiness, but Excommunication; and (if it were in his greatness hands)
condemnation. What should we more say? the Dragon and his Angels fought, and
Michael and his Angels fought; and this quarrel shall not be ended, until the
number of the elect be accomplished: and then peace shall come.

These things.] Paul says not this thing, but these things, whence observe,
that

Good men suffer many things. (...). 10. vlt. Psalm. 22. 12. etc. Doct. 3.


In the world shall ye have many persecutions; many are the troubles of the
righteous: one depth calls another; and thou breakest me with one sorrow
after another* And how comes this to pass?

First, from the diverse, ill disposi^^ns of wicked men. For Reas. 1.
some, like Rabshakeh, delight in ray^^ing's others, like Do^g, in informing; a
third sort, like Pilate, would please the people; a fourth, with Judas, have
their minds on Coveting: and, at a word, some are such as never can be
appeased, merciless. Now we must know, that as every Creature of diverse
constitutions, desire the contrary things, that might content them; so various
minds in evil persons produce several evil effects. And as every kind of
weed has a stinking smell, though distinct one from another; so all ungodly
men have variety of persecutions against the Saints of God. All weeds stink,
but not alike; so all wicked persons persecute, but not in the same kind and
degree.

Besides, the children of God bring forth variety of good Reas. 2.
fruit, do many good actions; now wicked men hate all good, though not in a
like degree; so that for variety of actions, they prepare various corrections.
A skillful Physician prepares pills, potions, and prescribes receipts
according to the kinds and nature of the diseases: and the men of Beliall,
Atheist and Papist are wise in their generation, therefore they have a several
salve for sundry soars. They had whips in 88. fire, brimstone and gunpowder
within a few years after. Anno Domini. 1605.

Let the Pope then and his poll-shorne Brethren, boast Use. 1.
and brag of their long peace and plenty; make such sure signs of the truth
of their Church and the Lords favor: yet they build on a wrong foundation; and
their hopes 1 Pet 4. 17.
shall one day make them ashamed. Babylon must sit as a Queen, be no widow,
see no mourning; yet in a day, as Rev. 18. 8.
it were in a trice, shall famine, sorrow, and death befall her: for strong is
the Lord God, which will condemn her.

Again, art thou afflicted, and suffer but a few things? Use. 2.
then murmur not, neither repine at all; for sure the Lord is good unto thee,
in chayning up Satan, and in putting an* hook into the nose of his
instruments, that they torment thee no further. Truly God is good to this our
English Israel; for though we suffer, yet the Lord moderateth his corrections;
he restra^^eth the rage of our Adversaries; and has confounded them, that
sought all our confusion. Many complain (perhaps not without some cause) of
our days; but I wish a worse age may not follow. And tell me, What suffer
thou? Do thou live in Mesheck amongst them that hate peace? so did David. Is
thy righteous soul vexed in seeing and hearing of uncleanness? so was Lots.
Have thy friends proved unfaithful? so did the Apostles? My good friend, thou
have escaped the whip, the stone, the fire, the Rack, the Cross, that many of
thy forefathers have suffered, tasted: Thou wast never constreyned, through
famine, to feed on the fruit of thy own womb, to say this I must eat and
then dye. And have thou wanted food for thy soul? then blame not God; for thou
may have it, either at home, or with thy Neighbor; and that in such a manner
too, as many a poor good soul never enjoyed.

But I am not ashamed.] In these words is laid down Paul's carriage of himself
in sufferings; and he adds this as an Argument from his example to encourage
Timothy in his course, and not for any sinister end of vain boasting; But we
omit that for the present, and gather this other instruction, that

A Resolute Christian is not, nor should not be ashamed of the Doct. 4.
Gospel. Romans 1. 16. Heb. 12. 1. 2.

For there be many great and excellent mysteries contained Reas. 1.
in it. Why then should any man be ashamed to preach or profess it? Sin
should breed shame, and not the means that can, and no other, remove it.

We have a warrantable calling to it; and shall we then Reas. 2.
cast it off, and be gone? No: we are to abide in that calling, whereunto we
are called. Nehemiah will not flee, if the Lord have sent him.

Again, we have all good by it; and all things that we Reas. 3.
enjoy, without it, are but curses. This salt must sweeten all our naughty
waters, and remove all heavy plagues both temporal and eternal.

And why should we be ashamed of it? For God preached Reason. 4.
it; Christ, the Holi-ghost, and the Angels have preached it. Its a privilege
to suffer for it. God is not ashamed of us, and shall we be ashamed of his
cause?

Why then let us go on in wisdom and Christian resolution, Use 1. Helps to
endure shame.
and never be ashamed of our profession. And take those breife helps.

1. Consider what vow and promise thou made at thy Baptism; and be ashamed
to break Covenant with thy God.

2 Call to mind, that the professors of Antichrist are bold and resolute for
their false Gospel, and are marked in their hand and forehead; if they, much
more we.

3. What greater honor to man, then to be chosen to be the Lords Champion in
so great an action?

Finally, let a forced necessity urge thee to resolution; for they that will
not suffer now, shall be denied of Christ hereafter at his appearing. Such as
are found halting must be turned out of the way.

And as the words stand in way of argument, we may gather, that

The sufferings of others should move us to suffer also. Doct. 5.


What a cloud of witnesses have we? Christ example is propounded to this
purpose; and many more in the book of God; that we with patience might endure
the cross, and despise the shame. Heb. 12. 1. 2.

For its a good thing to follow a multitude in the way of Reas. 1.
righteousness; as it is evil to tread in the lewd steps of ungodly persons.

Again, if their example move nothing, then they shall Reas. 2.
rise up in judgment against us; For are not they recorded to this purpose?

Let us, in time of trouble then, cast our eyes on those that Use. 1.
have gone before us: for, like a lively picture, they will give vigor to our
faint spirits, when we are ready to fail* Examples are of great force in all
things: and shall so many worthy patterns prevail nothing? No I ade so dull,
but will follow a free and forward leader.

And here we are instructed to give good examples to others. Use. 2.
Let us learn some encouragement by our practice to future posterities, that
they may be pricked forward to tread in our footesteps. For undoubtedly the
best way of teaching others (as we see) is not by precept only, but by example
also.

For I know whom I have believed.] We have heard of two causes why Paul
suffered: the one, in that he preached the Gospel* the other, that he preached
it unto the Gentiles; and now follows a double reason, why he was not ashamed
of so doing, but resolutely did go on in the fulfilling of his Ministry:
Whence this point will truly arise, that

As the wicked have pretended causes to afflict the faithful; so Doct. 6.
have they good grounds not to be ashamed of their sufferings. Heb. 11. 24. and
35. 2 Cor. 4. 16. Acts 5. 29.

Ask Moses, why he would not be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season, but choose rather to suffer affliction? his
reason is at hand; he has respect to the recompense of reward. Why would not
Heb. 11.
the Saints in their greatest tortures (by unlawful means) be comforted? they
looked for a better resurrection. Wherefore did not the faithful faint in
their suffering? they did account, that the momentany afflictions of this life,
were not w^rthy 2 Cor. 4. 17.
of that eternal weight of glory that should be revealed. What reason had
Christ that he would not come down from the Cross and save himself, that
saved others? He must do the will of him that sent him; finish his work, and
perform his promise. And he knew that his death and resurrection would be a
greater miracle, then to have delivered himself another way.

For the Children of God go by a sure rule; they ground Reas. 1.
their proceedings and sufferings upon Gods precepts and promises; when as the
profane have false rules, fained causes.

And if it were not thus, they could have no comfort in Reas. 2.
their suffering; for blessed are those that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake. Therefore they ground the cause of their affliction upon
Reason. Use. 1.


Wonder not then, ye men of this world, why the Saints in all ages have
resisted unto blood, and not counted their lives dear unto themselves; but
have carried them in their hands. For they know, that though man frown, the
Lord will favor; though Antichrist bind with a curse, Christ will lose with a
blessing; though Satan tempt and terrify, the Spirit will strengthen and
comfort; if the flesh be weakened, the spirit shall be renewed; if death go
before, that life shall follow after; and if the world loose them, heaven shall
find them: For so its said, that if their earthly house of 2 Cor. 5. 1.
this Tabernacle be destroyed, they have a building given of God, an house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens; of the possession whereof they be
assured, after their dissolutions. A wonderment rises from the ignorance of
the cause, or the rarenes of the event; and these be the proper grounds why
many men admire and are astonished at others sufferings for the Gospel. But
surely the servants of God have had great reason for their courses, whatsoever
blinded men do deem of them.

For I know etc.] The next Instruction we observe from these words, is this,
that

It is an experimental knowledge of God that will cause a Doct. 7.
man to be resolute in good courses, and to suffer afflictions.

See this in David, and in the wife of Manoah; for notable are these two places
for this purpose. 1 Samuel 17. 34. 35. etc. Judge. 13. 23. Romans 1. 16. 17.

Because it is a great means to strengthen our weak faith; Reas. 1.
Now as our faith increases, so is our resolution and patience bettered.
Christ would call his Disciples, Men of little faith, when they were troubled
and dejected in small matters: so that weakness of faith must be removed to
beget resolution; and that is done by the experience we have had of the Lords
proceedings.

Again, the former performance of Gods promise does Reas. 2.
not take away the efficacy and force of it for future time, but rather
confirms it. For when God loves once, he loves ever; so to whom he performs
his promise once, he will perform it for ever. The often setting and rising
of the Sun does assure us the more both of the one and of the other; for we
have had long experience of the stability of it, in its course and motion.

In the first place, here we may see, why men are faint, impatient Use 1.
under the Cross, and unsettled, irresolute to any good word or work; they
have no experience of God and his proceedings. For experience will cause
tribulation to bring forth patience; as many little acts do make a great
habit. Romans 5 3.

And in the next place, this point serves for our direction, Use 2.
and teaches us what to do, that we may patiently bear the Cross, and
manfully fight the battles of the Lord; namely to get experience of Gods manner
of proceedings.

And for our direction, the better to gain this, observe Rules to procute
experimental knowledge.
these Rules following.

I. Observe Gods dealing with, us. 1. In temporal, 2. In spiritual things.

1. Has he not fed thee, clothed thee, lodged thee, since he gave thee a
being? and is his hand shortened, and not stretched out still? When the
Disciples of Christ were troubled in mind about these matters: What? (says
he) have ye not remembrance, how I fed you with a little bread and a few
fishes? When I sent you forth without money in your purse, meat in your
scrippes, and all other provision, wanted you any thing? they answered, No
Lord. When a poor man has been always, in his want, relieved by his rich
friend, will it not make him the more boldly to rely on him for help in time
to come?

2. Consider how he has given thee knowledge, when thou wast ignorant; infused
faith into thine heart, being before an infidel; and preserved his graces in
thee from perishing. For the calling to mind the days of old is a notable
help for this thing. Is it possible that he who has begun to do well, will
now wax weary in so doing? What man planteth a tree, and will not labor to
preserve the same from withering? And shall the Lord suffer his pleasant
plants, after he has so often pruned, watered, and dunged them, to dye and
perish for want of dressing?

II. Call to mind the many dangers from the which he has delivered thee: Why
might not thou have been buried in thy Mothers womb, been drowned in the
waters, or devoured on the land? the thief might have slain thee, some crumbe
choked thee, or a thousand diseases been thy death. And shall not the fresh
remembrance of these things work powerfully in thee? When our Apostle had
been delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, he gathered strength thence, that
the Lord would deliver him from every evil work, and preserve him unto his
heavenly Kingdom. 2 Timothy 4. 17. 18.

III. Take a view how, in times past, he has dealt with his children; run to
and fro, through the stories and acts of holy Writ; and as he has done to his
servants of old, so will he do to thee, assuredly. I wish that this were well
thought on; for its a notable remedy. Psalm. 37. 25.

IV. Confer with grounded Christians. Demand of them, how the Lord has dealt
with them, in some particulars; for they can teach thee by experience; their
comforts will comfort thee also. A timorous patient will be encouraged to
swallow the bitterest pill, when another stands by, that has been cured of
the like disease, that he now is annoyed with, tells him the experiment.

V. Take a view of the vanity of all other things: ( Our Ioh. 6.
fathers ate Manna in the wilderness and are dead.) For in so doing, thou
shall get experience of Gods constancy: the Creature is changeable; sometimes
killing, another whiles curing; But the Lord is one and the same for ever.

VI. Finally, and above all, Consider how the Lord deals with thee in the use
of all his ordinances: Mark what power the Word has in working in thy soul:
how it weakeneth corruption, strengthens the new man: Observe how the Lord
has heard thy prayer in time past, and now how he enableth thee to call upon
him, being in the like condition: David, from this ground, cries out, The
Psalm. 6. 9.
Lord has heard my petition, for grace, the Lord will receiu^ my prayer; and
therefore, as one refreshed, bids the workers of iniquity, be gone. Can
thou pray at this present, as in times past, when he heard the voice of thy
weeping? then doubt not, but he will deal favorably with thee: For when the
Lord intends to confer a favor upon his children, he will always give
them hearts for to use the means, whereby he does ordinarily, convey the same
unto them, and whereunto he has annexed his promise. If Hannah prevail for a
son, or Abraham either, they shall first be enabled a long season to power
out their souls by prayer unto the Lord. And so it is in all other things
whatsoever. I wish that every one had but the experience of this engraven in
their minds; for it would be profitable for them every manner of way. And true
it is, that this experimental knowledge of God, is the very food and spirit
and life of a Christian, from which all faith, patience, and resolution in the
times of trouble, spring and flow, as from their proper fountain and root:
Then strive for it in the use of the forenamed means; and when thou have
obtained it, wonderful and unspeakable are the effects, that it will produce,
and thou shall taste of.

Again, in these words, we see Paul places knowledge before belief; whence
we may collect this doctrine, that

The knowledge of God precedeth faith in him. Doct. 8.


How can they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And for this cause,
Knowledge in Scripture, is many times put for faith Romans 10. 14. Ioh. 17. 3.
Io. 4. 10. Reas. 1.


Because the act of faith in believing follows the act of the understanding
rightly guided. Knowledge is like the needle, which makes the way: faith the
thread, that tyeth and unites things together. And as whatsoever (by ordinary
working) is in the inward senses, was first in the outward: so whatsoever comes
to the will (the proper seat of faith) must first be in the understanding.

And if this were not so, then might an ignorant man be Reas. 2.
saved and have faith, the which the whole current of Scripture runs against.
As, My people are cut off, for want of knowledge: and, God shall come in
flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know him not. Hos. 4. 6. 2 These.
1. 8. and many more to that purpose.

This confuteth Bellarmine, and his adherents, who say, Use. 1.
A man may better believe things whereof he is ignorant, then those which he
knows. If he had spoken it of the things recorded in their leaden Legend, I
should easily have consented with him; for, I think that when men have heard
them, they more doubt of them, then when they were ignorant of them.

To name some of their ridiculous fables; we read of one that was sick, his
stomach would vomit up whatsoever he received; so that he being willing to
receive the Sacrament, yet doubting he should not retain it, if he received it
by ordinary course; it was put (the consecrated Host, I mean) to his side,
the which opened, and after the receipt thereof, closed as before.

And there is mention made of a woman, whose Bees were sick of the Murraine,
who took also an Host, put it into the hiue, and (mark this) they within a
few days were not only cured of the danger of the disease, but there was a
miraculous increase of them in number; and they had built a Chapel, and
steeple, and bells, and an Altar, and laid the Host thereon; and the Bees sung
their Canonical hours about it (just) as the Monks use to do in their
Cloisters.

I could relate the like of the Lady of Loretto: (for there is books of her too
in Folio.) Its reported that she sometime (understand the house too) being
discontented, displaced her self, and passing by a wood, all the trees, in
reverence, bended and stooped, with their heads to the very earth, unto her;
(wonder it was, they had not rent themselves up by the roots, and proffered
her their standings).

Also the Book says, that one, being prisoner in Turkey, and there having his
bowels ripped out, by the aid of a prayer that he made to the Lady (for we
will not wrong them) and Christ together; he was enabled, having put them up
again, to travel into Italy, where this house is, and there having received
the Sacrament, then dyed.

Many more such as this the Books mention. And do ye not now easily believe
that these things are harder to be credited, being related, then if in gross
or implicitly, they had been uttered? I may say of these, as a man replied
once, hearing a strange tale, that he gave small credit to; and the Relater
demanding said, Why sir, do you not believe this? the person replied; truly,
its too much for one to credit it himself, but if the persons present will
take my part, we will believe it amongst us. And I think the Miracles in the
three Books of the Lady of Loretto, and their Legend, are too many and too
great for any one Protestant in the world, after they have knowledge of them,
to believe them. Therefore we will leave the ignorant Papists, who never read
or heard them, to give credit to them. I speak not these things (mistake me
not) to move laughter; but to make them (if possible) ashamed of their
doctrine; and that we thereby, seeing their most palpable blindness and error,
might be the rather induced to praise God for our light, and the truth we
partake of.

But to omit them and their false Doctrine: Let us come Use. 2.
nearer home, and learn what to judge of such as have no knowledge of God at
all; Why surely they have no faith in him neither: for the Lord has put these
together, like man and wife, and therefore they may not be put asunder. Christ
propounds this Question, When the son of man (says he) shall come shall he
find faith on the earth? From the use of this Doctrine we may make answer;
Surely very little; For if knowledge be but amongst few (as that is a truth)
then is faith rarely to be found.

This must move us all to get knowledge of God, if we Use. 3.
would have faith in him; yea the best must grow herein; for the better we know
him, the more confidently shall we believe in him. For its so in all other
things: When* I know, the firmenes of the Land, I will the better rest my foot
on it; the strength of my staff, the rather lean my whole body upon it; and
the faithfulness of a friend, put and repose my confidence in him. And we must
know God

1. In his power, how that he is able to do whatsoever he How God is to be
known.
will: this confirmed Abraham's faith, and moved him to offer his son, to whom
it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called; For he considered, that God
was able, even to raise him up from the dead. Heb. 11. 18. 19.

2. We must know him in his truth and justice. This made the Apostle to be of
great courage in his perilous voyage; and Sarah to expect a son, after she
was past the natural course of conceiving, because she judged him faithful
which had promised. Heb. 11. 11. Act. 27. 25. And here we Justice either
Revenging, or Rewarding. 2 These. 1. 6. 7.
are to understand, that the justice of God is either revenging, or rewarding.
Its a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you; there is Revenging justice: and to you that are troubled, rest with us; that
is, Rewarding Romans 2. 6. 7. 8.
justice: The one accompanies the truth of his promises; the other the truth
of his threatenings. And if we were more acquainted with this, it would
strengthen our faith in the performance of all his promises to us; and the many
threats given out against the wicked.

3. We are to know God in his stabilitie. How that time changes not his
nature, neither alters his purpose; He had no beginning, therefore cannot
either be young, or grow old. He consists not of either matter or form; but
is one most simple and pure act; so that he is not incident to any shadow of
turning. What the Lord has said, it shall Iam. 1. 17.
stand for ever, for God is not like man, that he should repent or change his
purpose. Did we know this, it would wonderfully support our weak faith, and
stay our staggering minds. Did we understand that the affection of our friend,
we most affect, were constant, it would make us the more confidently to rely on
him. But fear of mutation, weakens persuasion.

4. We are to understand, that God is sovereign Lord, that there is none
higher then he* For if we should trust in an inferior, we might be deceived.
But know this, that he is above all, and then thy faith cannot fail thee in
believing in him. To put confidence in an inferior Lord were dangerous in
policy; but in Divinity desperate.

5. We must know God in Christ; For without him he is a severe Judge, a
consuming fire: But if we know him in Christ Jesus, he is our Father, and all
his attributes, that otherwise would be terrible, will be most comfortable.
Think on this.

Finally, We are also to know God in the distinction of Persons: One Deity,
yet three subsistences, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and we should have some
apprehension of their several operations: For otherwise we cannot believe as
we should, and ought, for his full glory, and our certain salvation.

And thus briefly I have poynted out some things in God, and of God, that must
be known, if we would obtain Faith to the eternal conservation of our souls.

Rules to come to the knowledge of God.

God is known either

1. In his Word. 1. The Law. Psalm. 19. 2. The Gospel. Romans 1. 17.
Or, 2. In his Works. 1. Of Creation. Ro^. 1. 20. 2. Of Providence. Act. 14.
17.

And this Doctrine, with that has been delivered, may Use. 4.
serve to inform Ministers how to deal with their people, Parents with their
children, and Masters with their servants* If they would have them faithful to
God, and to themselves, they must make them acquainted with God, and whom he
has sent Jesus Christ; for to know this, is ^t^^all life. Ioh. 17. 8.

1. When men hear much, but practice little or nothing. (...) of the souls
settling. 2 Pet. 3. 17.
The neglect of this, causes men to be plucked away and to fall from their
former stedfastnes. For every act of godliness is like the blow and stroke of
a Mallet, that stablisheth, rivetteth, and setleth the soul on a firm
foundation, like a pile or post in the earth by often beating.

2. Too much confidence in sanctification, and too little in justification. We
must fix and fasten our faith in the obedience of Christ; and make his life
and death the sure foundation of our establishment. For such shall neither
stagger, or be moved. Romans 8. 1.


3. Omission of private and often prayer; the contrary to this, like a strong
Cord, does bind us fast unto the tree of Christ. David therefore cried, Lord
establish me. Psalm. 51. 12. and 119. 116.


4. When men are carried about with every wind of doctrine. For what one man
makes firm, another in teaching Ephesians. 4. 14.
the contrary, dissolveth, weakeneth. He that runs to every Physician, to know
the state of his body, shall prove a weak and infirm Patient.

5. Unmortified lusts: if they be let loose, and cherished 2 Timothy 3. 7.
in the heart; the soul, like him that stands on a slippery place, will be
reeling, sliding.

6. Finally, when men will cast their eyes on their own infirmities, and not
look to him that accepts the mind and honest intent of the heart, for the
deed; they shall still Romans 7. vlt.
be wavering, doubting.

And now to come to another Collection, which is, that

The best way to save and secure the soul, is to commit it into Doct. 10.
the hands of God.

For that which was the best to Paul and others, will be the safest way for us
also. Psalm. 32. 7. and 71. 1. Judge. 12. 3. Dan. 5. 17. Esth. 4. 16.

For we are weak, and our enemies be many, powerful; Reas. 1.
subtle, and malicious. Satan could fetch a prey out of Paradise; one from
amongst the Apostles.

God has all the properties of a good keeper. 1. he is wise. Reas. 2. Job. 9.
4. Psalm. 121. 3. 4.
2. powerful. 3. watchful. 4. faithful. He has given laws to be faithful,
and then shall not he?

This discovers the indiscretion of many. For some put their confidence in
Chariots and Horses; others in the arm of flesh: Millions, as the Papists, in
the Creatures, but pass by the Creator. But can those stay the swelling floods
from drowning? the earth from devouring? the plague and pestilence from
destroying? and Satan, with all his huge host, from tempting, and condemning?
These men stand Job. 26. 7.
on the Ice, lean on a broken staff; and, as the Lord is said to do the
earth, hang the security and safety of their souls upon nothing.

But ye that would be wise, and preserved from all dangers, Use 2.
cast your care upon God^ make him your secret place, and have your eye always
toward him: For its he, and there is not another, that can keep you safe and
secure at all times, in all dangers. And in regard (whatsoever we ween) its no
easy matter, practice these two Rules following to further thee. Helps to
commit the to god.


1. Learn to commit less matters of this life to him, and to trust him with
smaller things; for he that cannot do the lesser, it is impossible for him to
do the greater. He that will not trust God with his earthly substance, can
never credit him with his soul and salvation. This Rule is worthy the
consideration and practice.

2. Strive to keep thy soul holy and unspotted from all sin. We will blush
to commit into the custody of our friend, any thing that is polluted and
unclean; and can we have the hearts to commend into the hands of God, who is
Holiness it self, a corrupted, impure, and a soul defiled with sin? What if
we could do it? will he receive it, think we? No verily.

And there be certain times when we are to commit our Special times when to
commit the soul to God Psalm. 4. vlt.
souls especially into the hands of God: And that ordinary, or extraordinary.
The ordinary is the Morning and Evening. David in the evening would commend his
soul into the Lords hand; for he knew, that his sleep might be his death, and
his bed his grave; but in so doing he should sleep soundly and securely. It
were an excellent thing, if we could give God our last thoughts, before we
close up our eyes, then would we, when we awake, find our minds fixed on him:
And what if death should come? Yet our souls would be with him, and preserved
in safety,

And in the Morning we must ordinarily do this Prou. 27. 1.
for who knows what a day may bring forth? The wise King compares a day to a
woman with child, who often labors at an unlooked for hour: And have we
not seen our Mother the day, bring to light strange and unexpected birthes?

The extraordinary times of committing our selves to God are in troubles, or at
death. This did that good Prophet in time of persecution; Into thy hand I
comm^nd my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Psalm. 31. 5.
Judge. 12. 3. And when Stephen was stoned to death, he Act 7. 59.
cried, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and Christ when his hour was come,
Father into thy hands I commend my Soul. Luke 23. 46.


Let us then trust the Lord with smaller matters; keep our souls unspotted;
Morning and Evening commend them constantly unto him: so in afflication,
persecution and death we shall have ability and boldness to do the same. Use
makes perfect; a good habit is hardly got, So not easily lost: For he that has
used to commit his soul to God in the times of peace, shall with ease do it
in time of danger. Yea let such a man but dream of death or drowning, in his
broken sleep, his mind will reflect it self on the Lord, and he run unto him
for perservation. Grounded Christians know the truth of this by experience. And
in Conclusion, know; that the oftener we commit our souls unto God, and draw
the nearer him in this duty, why, let death come, how and when, and where it
can or shall come, we shall fear it the lesser or any evil; but embrace it,
entertain it, shutting up the eyes of our bodies with the which our minds now
see God, as through a pair of spectacles, and more clearly and comfortably
behold him with the naked eye of our spirits.

Now whereas Paul makes mention of the Lords ability, we note thence, that.

God is a God of Power. Doct. 11.


He is called the strong and mighty God; all-sufficient; that can do
whatsoever h^e will. Genesis 17. 1. Exodus 34. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 18 Apoc. 1. 8. Math.
19. 26. The Reasons follow.

For he is the first Ens or being, and altogether perfect and Reas. 1.
independent: he has his beginning of himself, and does not participate of
any borrowed power, or exhibited ability. Therefore no impotency or
imperfection can be found in him, he being of himself; and the sole cause of
all created power.

Again, he is one most simple and pure act, immutable, Reas. 2.
eternal, and every way blessed; Therefore he cannot be hindered or resisted;
Neither is he subject to any passion; for he is not compounded of any simples:
Passion proceeds from matter, and presupposes an imperfection.

Before we come to apply this point, we will speak somewhat of his power for
our better understanding and information.

The power of God is that whereby he is able to do all things The Power of God
defined.
possible. I say possible; for there be that contradict his essence and the
nature of things, the which be impossible for him to effect.

And the Reason is, because that contradiction includes untruth and impotency,
the which be not to be found in God.

And the things which are impossible to be done by God, be of two kinds. The
first is not to be found, neither has any place in him: For then God in truth
should not be God. And to this rule these particulars following do appertain.

1. God cannot lie, deny himself, or by any means commit The first kind of
impossibilities.
sin. 2 Timothy 2. 13. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. Because he cannot will, or do
contrary to himself, the which he naturally wills or does; neither can he
destroy his own nature. In Arist. 4. Topic. 5.
this the Heathen foulely have erred.

2. God cannot dye, suffer, be hurt; or under go any kind of pain or
calamity; for he cannot but be altogether perfect and blessed; and these argue
mutability, misery, and imperfection. And though God be said to be pressed as
a cart with sheaues, yet it is not really and truly, but Tropically and
Metaphorically to be understood; and not otherwise Amo. 2. 13.

3. God cannot in himself effect natural actions, such as belong to man and
beast; As to eat, drink, sleep, digest, generate etc. (understand, in kind
and manner,) which is merely proper unto Animals: Because these actions argue
a defect and imperfection; for they imply a passive power to be in the subject,
or cause*

4. God cannot be extended, or contracted; grow old, and decay etc. For he is
not comp^ehended in any local place, composed of matter and form; neither is
he measured by the adjunct of time. And these are the Species that we have
named, which imply impotency, or contradiction i^ God, the which he therefore
cannot do. The second kind follows.

1. God cannot make a thing to be defined without a definition; The Second sort
of impossibilities.
for the thing defined, and the definition in respect of the essence or
quiddity be both one: As, a man not to be a reasonable creature; or, a body to
be without his dimensions; or a thing created to be infinite: for the one
cannot be without the other. Yet this Caution is to be had, that the definition
be true, consisting of the essential causes, and not of the effects or
adjuncts.

2. God cannot cause, that a subject should exist without its essential
properties. Exa. As that a man should be without the faculty of speaking or
laughing; fire, without heat: And though these do not constitute the essence
of the subject, yet they be so nearly and firmly knit to it, yea, do so
immediately flow from it, that without them the subject cannot exist no not for
a moment. For we are to know. that more belongs to the actual existence of a
thing, then are required to the simple essence.

3. God cannot cause that opposites should be attributed to one and the same,
if so that all the conditions of opposites be observed: As that a body should
be sick and sound at the same time; visible and invisible, and in diverse
places at the same instant. That black and white be in the same part of the
subject that very moment: For then opposites should not be opposites; whose
nature is, that if the one be granted, Conf. Arist. 6. Ethic. 2.
the other is expelled, for a season at the least; as sight and blindness in the
same eye; for the one is a privation of the other.

4. God cannot make things done not to have been done; because being once
effected, they are not within the compass of things possible; For if they be
once truly made, now its a necessary axiom, that they were made; for
whatsoever is, whilst it is, is necessarily that that it is. God has created
the world; what if we grant that he has power to destroy it? yet it cannot be,
but that it was created, and had (...). And by this we may see how the Papists
abuse this doctri^e, holding that God can do mere contradictions; as a
subject to be without accidents; a body to be in diverse places at the same
time, etc. But they extend the power of God, too far, not considering that
they argue not from a posse ad esse, but from an impossible thing to a
necessary.

And this also refuteth the error of those, who reason without judgment from an
impossiblity of being to a being; as though this or that be true, because God
can do beyond our apprehension. But God cannot contradict (as we have said)
his own nature, or the truth of things.

In the second place, it will follow from the definition, that God can do more
then he has or will do: He could have raised up children to Abraham of
stones; Christ could have called for Legions of Angels; but would not. Math. 3.
9. and 26. 53. Romans 9. 18. From these places its manifest that God can do the
things he has not, neither ever will. Also he does those things the which he
might wholly omit, or do other ways then he does, if he would: if we regard
his Power solely. But whatsoever God wills, without impediment he effects:
According to that; I will do whatsoever (...) says. All my will I will do:
of the second its said, Who can Isai. 46. 10. Romans 9. 19.
resist his will? But because these things to the most are hard to be
understood, we will say no more at this time: Only proceed we now to make use
of the doctrine; the which is manifold.

First, the knowledge of this point of Gods power does Use 1.
confirm our faith very much in the creation of the world; how that the Lord
was able to form all things of nothing; how he has power to preserve and
govern, all things, that they be not destroyed, or the order of them
disturbed; how he can preserve their several kinds from utter destruction; how
he is of ability to reward the Godly and revenge the peccant persons; to raise
up the dead, giving to each one according to the works he has done in the
flesh, good or evil; to burn the whole world, as he has threatened; and to
make a new heaven and a new earth according to his promise.

And in the next place, it serves to confirm our confidence Use. 2.
in the promises of God. What if they be both mighty and many? believe in his
power, and thou shall credit them. What if they seem to Cross nature? Yet
that is nothing; for his power is great, infinite, and not to be resisted. When
Abraham considered this, he did not doubt of the Romans 4. 20. 21 Genesis 12.
performance of Gods promise; but was made strong in faith this also made him
willing to offer his only son; for he believed, that God could raise him up
again. Heb. 11. 19. Use. 3.


In the 3. place, this will support our weak minds in all temptations and
afflictions. What if Satan seek to devour us? the sea to be ready to drown
us? the earth to swallow us? Tyrants to murder us? Death to terrify us? or
hell it self to include us, and ceize on us? Yet look up to Gods Omnipotency,
and we shall be bold as the Lion; quenching Satan's darts; walking upon the
waters as upon dry land, deride death, and make a mock of Hell it self. David
no doubt, thought on this; Psalm. 23. and. 27 and. 46. Romans 8. 31. Io. 10. 29.
therefore he would not fear the wicked, but walk in the valley of death, and
never tremble at the most terrible tidings: For if God be with us, what matters
it who be against us? None can pluck us out of his hands. And in respect of
others, this may move us to hope above hope; for he can bring home the Romans 11.
23.
Jews; graffe them again into the true Olive, and make the withered branch to
bear; why should the Eunuch say, I am and shall be, a dead tree? Isa. 56. 3.

And finally, this should teach us all to tremble before Use. 4.
him, and to stand in awe of his Majesty: for he can arm the least creature
with power to destroy us; yea the caterpillars, frogs, and crawling lice, to
vex and consume us: Oh, that this were well considered, and seriously thought
upon! Would not frail man tremble, if this thing were well weighed? We fear
the water and fire as dangerous; the Bear and Lion, least they devour us: And
shall we not fear him that after death has power to cast soul and body into
hell? Pilate thought to cause Christ to speak and answer him from this
ground: I am sure, we should be moved to leave sin, and to pray, from the
same. It Is not our houses that can help us; our beds that will secure us; our
great barnes, purple and fine linen that can protect us: For at midnight, even
at midnight he can send his Angel to slay thousands; and pale death, who is no
respecter of persons, to haunt the court, wither the green branches, and kill
the strongest, stoutest. What a cry was sometimes in Egypt? What fearful
news to the rich man, This night Luke 12. 20.
shall thy soul be took from thee? Cannot he cause Achitophel for all his
wit, to hang himself, and play the fool? Judas to be his own executioner?
And Saul to fall on his own sword? Wherefore consider him, that binds Kings,
in fetters, and aduanceth the poor to great degree. And the more thou shall
think on Gods power, the stronger shall be thy faith; the more firm thy hope;
the greater awe will thou stand in, and be the more fearful to sin, and
forward to all good duties. Then let this point take deep impression, and
never depart out of thy mind.

And if thou would have experience of Gods power. Psalm. 92. 5. 6. Rom 1. 20.
2 Cor. 12. 9.
1. Meditate on his works of creation. 2. Consider, how he has destroyed and
dissolved the strong and cursed work (...) will is goodness; yet we add evil;
for as the understanding is exercised about truth and error (though error be
but a swerving from the truth, and, by accident, part of the intellects
object): so is the Will conversant about good and evil in the same manner.

The Will may seem to have two contrary motions; to will, and nill; the first
embraces good, the second refuses evil: yet I have sometimes thought, that
to nill is rather a cessation, then an action: For as the hand does extend it
self to apprehend what the eye judges for good, but moves not at what is
evil, except by violence it were imposed upon it: so likewise it may seem to
be with the Will; viz. acting about good, resting in respect of evil. And a
man may be said to nill what he does not will. But we leave this to the most
learned to judge of.

Goodness may be considered, either first, or from a first. The former is in
God, and indeed very good; so that he wills himself necessarily and
primarily; because he is the chiefest good; and this may be said to be an
internal, not an external action; for so the acts of Gods will are
distributed. The latter is, whatsoever proceeds from God; and this good is of
two kinds, either of nature, or grace; and his Will is conversant about them
both, as its proper, (though secondary) object.

Finally, Evil is likewise double; the one the evil of sin, the other of
punishment: And in both the Will of GOD works, though not directly, and
altogether with approbation. For in no wise may we think, that the Lord
affects, allows, commands, or allureth directly to sin: But forbids,
disswadeth, and punishes it; according to that, These things have I hated;
and, the soul that sins, shall Zach. 8. 17. Psalm. 5. 5. Ephesians. 5. 6.
dye. Notwithstanding the Lord, though not by coaction, or a forced necessity,
permits and suffers these things to be, and does dispose of them for good
and profitable ends; therefore he the rather does suffer them, then altogether
prevent and hinder them: For although evil, as it is evil, is not good; yet
that not only good, but also evil should be, is good: for the evil of sin
and affliction can the Lord turn to his glory and his childrens good; and, by
direct opposites we the better perceive which is the best: But observe, that
sin and punishment of their own nature are naught, and become good by
accident only.

As we have described the Will of God, according to our power; so we may, in
the next place, use a distinction: But this must be well considered, that Gods
Will is but one, it admits no division into Species: yet, as his wisdom is
simple, notwithstanding the Apostle calls it (by reason its refracted in the
creatures) the manifold wisdom of God: so in like fort, for the same reason,
Gods Will may diversely be considered, and distinguished. Ephesians. 3. 10.

And in the first place, it may be said to be internal and The first
Distinction of the Will of God.
external. And its called internal, because it works in him; and has God
himself for his adequate and proper object; for God wills himself, before
he can will any other thing: The external is that, whose object is said to be
without God; that is to say, all created things, or whatsoever is not himself.
The first is necessary and essential to God; the second seems to be, after a
sort, accidental, yet free, and is the foundation and root of all Contingents
in the whole frame of Nature.

Again, Gods will is either secret or revealed. We call it The second
distinction of Gods Will.
secret, not in regard that he knows not before hand what he will will; but
in respect he keeps it (at the least for a time) hid from us; As, the day of
a man's particular departure, and, the last judgment. Act. 1. 7. And this is
but one and the same Will in God: for the time of its manifestation, and the
manifestation it self, are but adjuncts or accidental to it; so that the
secret will of God may be the revealed: For before the Creation of the world,
Gods whole will was hidden in himself, that afterward became manifest. It was
in David's heart to build the Lord an house: when he did declare it to the
people, it was then but one and the same will.

In the secret will of God, two things are to be observed:

And from all that has been said, will many profitable lessons follow. 1. We
must take heed that we do not conclude, as if the Lord did work all outward
things of necessity: For his Will is free in respect of the outward object.
Genesis 45. 5. Act. 2. 23. Isai. 10. 6. 7.
2. Because it is the first mover, that therefore we conclude not, He is the
Author of sin. For God can do the same which man does, yet free from
iniquity. And 3. we must avoyde the error of those, who imagine, that because
Gods Will works in all things, that therefore God wills sin and
punishment absolutely without any condition on man's part. And 4. of them and
their opinion we must beware, who think that Gods Will can make any thing
lawful, be it never so unjust. 5. Of those also, who because Gods Will is
unchangeable, therefore will use no means at all, for what they would partake
of. 6. And finally, Let us all take heed, that we maintain not the heresy of
the Monothelites; who held, because Christ was God, therefore his Will was but
one; when as our Lord himself witnesses the contrary. Ioh. 6. 38. Math. 26.
39.

And seeing that Gods Will is free, and the first moving Use. 2.
cause of all goodness; Let us. 1. praise him for the good he has bestowed on
us, or at any time done by us. 2. Depend upon him for direction and ability in
all our proceedings. 3. Reverence the extraordinary acts of his Providence. 4.
Yield our selves and all our ways with willingness to be ruled, and disposed as
shall seem best in his eyes. 5. And as he wills good, and nilleth evil; so
let us do the same. 6. In conclusion, let us always pray, Lord, thy will be
done, and not ours. If we do these things we shall never fall; but with our
Apostle, be confident in the assurance of the conservation of our souls, which
we commit to him, at the last day. Let thy faith be fixed on Gods power and
Will; and then thou shall have the desires of thy heart and Will.

We might now come to speak of Paul's persuasion and assurance he had in God
for his preservation. Some of our Divines make five degrees of faith. 1. A
credence, 2. an assurance, 3. an affiance. 4. a confidence, and 5. a
persuasion. Persuasion seems to be the greatest: so that we may collect, that

Of Faith there be distinct degrees. Mat. 6. 30. and 15. 28. Doct. 13. Mat. 8.
10. and 13. 32.


We read of a faith no bigger then a grain of Mustardseed: and of a
Plerophorie, or full persuasion. And in the Gospel mention is made of a little
faith, and of a great faith. So that this point is manifest, that there is two
(at the least) distinct degrees of faith. And not without Reason:

For some have had greater means, and lived longer under Reas. 1.
the powerful Preaching of the Word then others; who thereby are become strong
in faith. For as we see, that trees which be planted in a good soil, near the
pleasant rivers, and have stood long, do flourish and spread more, then they
that have grown in barren ground, wanted watering, and a shorter season: so is
it with the flower of faith. Great means, great faith; little means, the
less faith; except the Lord (as sometimes he does) work extraordinarily.

Some, after their effectual call, have been more frequent, Reas. 2.
and diligent in the use of Gods ordinances, then others; more forward to do
good, careful to abstain from the least appearance of evil; so that their
faith is grown mighty. Twins of equal age will outstrip one another, by
careful attendance.

And this is to comfort the feeble minded, and to support Use. 1.
the weak in faith. Be not dejected, though thy faith carry thee not with a
full gale to the kingdom of God: for as all ships, have not alike sails and
wind; all birds equally winged; and all women infants of like proportion in
every part; so have not all Christians the same degree of saving faith: yet the
weakest mind, and lowest sail will carry the ship to shore as securely,
(though not so speedily) as if they were greater: and the least true faith and
hope will bring the sanctified soul to the haven of heaven as certainly,
(though not so comfortably) as the greatest. But yet we must not content our
selves with this weak deg^^e; we are to endeavor for the strongest faith, and
the greatest measure (...) goes to the sea for water, will not fear, that he
shall return with his vessel empty. For what heat can dry up the same? And
shall we doubt of grace, when we go to the fountain it self, whose depth is
unsearchable, past sounding? When we cast up our heads, the Sun shines in
our faces, and does refresh and heat us: so by the act of Meditation we come
under the beams of Gods mercy, that shall confirm our feeble faith.

2. Consider, that Christ has satisfied the Fathers justice, paid the full
debt, cancelled the bond, and is making intercession for all repentant sinners.
Therefore, in his Name, Heb. 4. 16.
go boldly to the throne of grace: What if it be called a Throne, for
greatness? Is it not a throne of Grace, that resembles goodness? When Esau had
killed Venison in his hand, he went boldly for his blessing, though he mist it:
But take thou Christ, the Lamb of God, and come with, and in him unto the
Father; and none can steal away thy blessing; for God cannot be deceived;
neither wants he mercy in store for such.

3. Call to mind that the promises belong to such as are Mat. 11. 28.
in doubt: Come unto me, all that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease
you. Whom came Christ to save? Such as in their own feeling, not in Gods
purpose, were lost: Whom will the Physician heal? They that be sick. Unto
whom has the Lord promised comfort? to the mourners in Sion: And who ever, in
godly sorrow sought the Lord, but he returned Mat. 9. 2.
with this encouragement, My son be of good comfort, for thy sins are
forgiven thee, Salvation is entered into thy house?

4. Finally, Pray often in private: for as the slender and still dew that
falls in the night, does more refresh the young sprouting and tender buddes,
then more wet that falls, or a greater shower in the day: So oftentimes, the
prayer made in secret prevails with God more then the public, for the
increase of faith. Paul at his conversion, prayed three days and three nights.
Yet use all the ordinances of God; for it sometimes may fall out, that when we
have them in respect, advancing one too much above another; the Lord may
withhold a blessing from that we so much prize in particular, because he would
have the other had in honor: Like a wise Mother, who when the child will
covet more one breast then another, either rubbeth it with some bitter thing,
or draws it dry before the child begin to suck it: And verily, when we omit
to draw the water of life (just circumstances observed) at every conduit; God
will either stop that for a time, we so much depend on; or mix the water with
some brackishnes. And this may suffice to have been spoken of this Doctrine,
and Text too, though other points might be collected.

VERSE. 13. Keep the true pattern of the wholesome (or sound) words, which
thou have heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
PAVL Having by many forcible arguments The Logical resolution.
in the former Verses, encouraged his ^onne to Preach the Gospel, practice the
true Doctrine of Christ, and to suffer affliction, rather then to leave or
neglect his calling; He in this Verse, comes to give him Direction, how he may
so carry himself, as becomes a Christian; and avoid all sin, impuritie of
l^fe, and false Doctrine.

This Verse therefore is a preceptor exhortation; wherein these parts or things
are comprehended.

1. He persuades him to an act, Keep.] 2. To what he must keep, or the object
of the act; the pattern.] This pattern is described. 1. By the matter whereof
it consists, words.] 2. What kind of words, viz. sound words.] 3. How he
came by this pattern, which seems to be an adi^nct to it; and that was by
hearing of Paul:] 4. The parts of the pattern (probably) are declared; or by
what it is to be observed, as causes, and they be two. 1. Faith. 2. Love: Which
thou have heard in faith and love. And finally, we see either the root from
whence they spring, or the subject wherein they meet; and that is, Christ
Jesus.]

Keep.] There is a four fold keeping of this pattern, and The Theological
exposition.
all here meant. 1. In memory, not forgetting. 2. in faith, not doubting. 3.
In affection, not hating. 4* In practice not disobeying. And there can be none
of the four without the first. Some read, have; others, hold the pattern: all
one in effect.

The pattern.] It is by some turned, the true pattern; or perfect pattern,
or form. It seems to be a word borrowed from a painter, who first draws but
after a pattern; or from a Carpenter, that works by rule.

Of sound words.] A thing may be said to be wholesome or sound, 4. ways. 1.
When its sound in its self. 2. When it works soundnes in another thing; or 3.
Preserues it being wrought: and 4. When it is a sign of soundness. Ioh. 3.
12. And all these be in the words of this pattern.

I might tell you here, 1. What is a word. Words consist of letters or
syllables, and are the vessels wherein truth and error be contained, and by
which delivered and discovered to man. And 2. The several acceptions of it.
viz. 1. For the son of God, as he Ioh 1. 1. Luke 16. 2. Mat. 5 32. Acts. 22.
22.
is abstracted from his humane nature. 2. For reason. 3. The act of reason. 4.
For a book, epistle, sentence, or word either writ or uttered; whereupon the
Papists from this place ground their traditions. But who makes question, that
has wit; but that Paul meant the Epistle and doctrine especially which he had
delivered to Timothy in speaking as in writing? And that the substance of what
Paul spoke, was writ else where in the book of God?

Infaith.] Some expound it thus; faithfully not deceitfullie. Others would
have faith to be, a part of the pattern being distributed. The former sense
shows the manner of deliu^^i^. The latter the one part of the pattern. And we
read, that faith is both took for faithfullnes and doctrine Mat. 23. 23. Romans
12. 6.

And love.] That is, out of affection, as some will; The second member of the
pattern, as others. I Confess the place is doubtful, for it may well bear
either sense.

The interpretation of the former sort has this sense. Keep the form of
doctrine, the which I thy father out of fidelity and affection, to thee, in
Christ Jesus, have delivered.

The second, this: Keep thou the pattern; the parts where of are two; faith
and love which is in Christ Jesus.

There is yet another reading, that I select above other, and it is this.

I think, that faith and love are to be referred neither to Paul nor the
pattern, but unto Timothy making him the subject of both: And that the word,
In, is to be turned, by, and then this is the meaning. That Timothy is to keep
the pattern by the assistance of that faith and love, which the Lord had given
him. My reasons be,

1. For Paul had mentioned faith and love, and was persuaded that he had both,
in ver. 5. and 7.

2. Paul in the next verse makes mention of the ground which did support him,
in keeping the pattern, and what? 1. Belief. 2. Persuasion. Surely the same
cause must help Timothy in the like duty.

3. It is usual with the Apostle, not only to tell what man must do, but how
and by what means he is to perform the same.

4. Because these two are in this sense coupled together in the former Epistle,
and else where; and referred to the persons; not the doctrine, but as they be
guided by it. 1 Timothy 5.

Which is in Christ Jesus.] These prepositions, in, of, from, to, etc. are
difficult to be understood, and may admit of several interpretations: and
here, in Christ, may diversely be expounded.

1. Faith and love may be said to be In Christ Jesus, as he is the subject of
them and they adhere to him.

2. As he is the object of them: for when these two peep (as I may say) out of
man, they are fixed and fastened both on Christ Jesus.

3. As they are a motive cause to induce us to the performance of any holy
action: As, if there be any love in Christ, think upon these things. For
faith, and love in him will move mightily. Phil. 2. 1.

4. And, in, is put for after; compare Mark. 13. 24. with Mat: 24. 29. So in
Dan. 2. 44. In, for after* etc.

5. And lastly, faith and love may be said to be in Christ because he is the
only mean, by whom we come to partake of them, and so here I understand it, In
Christ, that is, through Christ.

I have by many forcible arguments dissuaded thee The Metaphrase.
(my son) from fainting in affliction, or being ashamed of the Gospel, and
also persuaded thee by weighty reasons faithfully to execute thy function; to
purity in doctrine and conversation; The which that thou may perform, I do
now exhort thee, as aspeciall help, to direct all thy speech and practice
according to that pattern, consisting of sound words; being so in themselves,
as likewise able to work and preserve soundness in thee; To the knowledge
whereof thou came by the writings especially, that thou have received at my
hands. And know thou, that this pattern cannot any ways else be observed,
but by the aid and help of that faith and love, the which God the father has
shed abroad in thy heart; not for any desert of thine, but through his mere
mercy, has conferred them on thee by Christ Jesus.

Where as Paul has dissuaded, and persuaded, and now Doctrines dedi^^d.
gives Timothy a rule by which he may be directed in his proceedings, we first
note from his example, that,

Persuasion and disswasion are to be accompanied with direction. Doct. 1.
1 Cor. 12. vlt. Heb. 6. 1. 1 Timothy 6. 2,

Its not sufficient for a man to say, do this, and not that; but he must lay
down rules and helps; whereby he, with whom he is to deal may be enabled for
the duty.

For, otherwise a man will either stand still, and do nothing; Reas. 1.
or if he do not so, yet he shall work out of all good order.

Again, else the minister should not deliver the counsel of Acts 20. 27.
God: guilty should he be of the peoples blood: and so consequently without
sound comfort.

This corrects the hot and fiery spirits of some; who like Use. 1.
an unskillful rider be always spurring, but never guiding. They cry, why will
ye do that? and wherefore do you this? but, do not give them direction, how
to avoid the one, or perform the other. And so it falls out, that the one has
no profit; the other as little comfort.

Let us then learn, as to persuade and dissuade, so to direct Use 2.
others. God willed that Moses should build him a tabernacle: yet he gave him a
pattern how to be directed in the perfecting of the same. So let ministers
have an eye to this, that their people may do all things in comeliness and in
order.

Keep thou the pattern etc.] As these words be a direction, we gather, that

The best way to maintain the purity of Religion is to have a Doct. 2.
pattern. Exodus 20. Ier. 6. 16. Gal. 6. 16. Psalm. 119. 9.

For God at the first, writ the pattern in man's heart, by the Reas. 1. Adam
had the the law writ in his heart, at the creation. Romans 2. 15.
which he might have been kept from all sin, and impuritie; as may be thus
proved. For

1. The Gentiles many years after, had some remainders of the law (by which
they were guided) in their hearts; the which could not have been, had it not
been engraven in Adams at the creation.

2. Those to whom the Lord will show mercy, he has promised that he will put
his law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. Ier. 31. 33. Heb.
^. 10.

3. We are commanded to write it upon the tables of our hearts. Pro. 3. 3. and
the Prophet says, He hid the word in his heart. Psalm. 119. 11.

4. Every creature had the rule created with him, and in him, whereby he was to
be guided in all his actions; But man sinning broke the pattern, and
obliterated these excellent rules, that were perfect in him at his creation.
And if the rule was not within him, where was it? or why should God guide all
his other creatures by an internal precept, and not man? And every good man
may find this in himself, and see it in others, that the more holy they grow,
the more shall they find the word of God imprinted in their hearts. And
(doubtless) when that a man is perfectly sanctified (which will not be here)
he shall have the law absolutely 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10.
renewed and engraven in him: so that in this sense, the word may be said to
abide for ever.

And here we might add the judgment of the Hebrew Pirke R* Eliezer in Genesis 2.
doctors, and the most that ever writ for the further confirmation of this;
that Adam at his creation had the law writ in his heart, and was to have been
guided by it.

The reason I stand to prove this, is, in that those who hold that Christ's
active and passive obedience do not concur both of them to man's
justification, seek to maintain, that Adam had no law in him or out of him to
guide him, except the trees of life and death, good and evil. But certainly,
this is a far fetched shift, and as far from the truth.

1. For the trees were as Sacraments to seal life or death, upon the breach or
observation of the law, as ours be. Adam broke the moral law.


2. When Adam ate the forbidden fruit, did he not break all the Decalogue!

3. Satan was subtle and tempted Adam to break the kings seal, for that
spoiled all the rest. And the blotting out of a word or sentence is not so
great an offense in any deed, or writing, as to destroy, spoil, and abuse the
seal.

4. Why did God give the tables in stone afterward if man was not to be guided
by them in his creation? Was he then bound to God and his brother, and not
before? or did God make a new law? or set Adams sons a task, their father
never had?

But we let this pass, and proceed to give further reasons of the point in
hand.

Again, the natural powers of man are much weakened, Reas. 2.
much more the spiritual, since Adams fall. And the Lord seeing that, gave his
people a law writ in two tables of stone, for a pattern; and why then?

1. Because the children of Israel were multiplied as the Why the law was writ
in Moses time.
sand by the sea shore, according to his promise made unto Abraham.

2. In that the governors of families were grown negligent, and would not
teach their house, and children the laws of God.

3. And especially in regard at that day, there was scarce any print or
footesteps of the law, left remaining in the hearts of the sons of men. For
process of time had worn them out.

4. And finally, for that the people began to murmur at the doctrine of Moses
and Aaron: crying, they took too much upon them; as if they had bound heavier
burdens, than the Lord himself prescribed to them.

Besides, in the course of our Pilgrimage, we shall meet Reas. 3.
with many false teachers, infinite and innumerable errors, and heresies, and
how can these things be discerned otherwise, than by a true and infallible rule?

Furthermore, do we not see how that grounds are good Reason. 4.
in all beginnings, as to dispute, speak etc?

And last of all; patterns help our dark judgments, ^eas. 5.
better our affections, confirm our memcries, and yield us comfort and
encouragement in all our proceedings.

This serves to confute our adversaries, who deny the Use. 1.
people the pattern of all purity, the word of truth. They may be likened to
the ancient Lawyers, who neither entered into the kingdom of God themselves nor
suffered them that would. We would ^all him a blind guide, who would have a
man to draw out the portraiture or picture of a man, yet will not let him take
a view of his person or image that represents him, and such masters be the
Papists.

And in the next place, we are all taught to have a pattern, Use. 2.
if we would preach soundly, or live sincerely. Notable are our Catechismes for
this purpose; but, still the pattern of all patterns, the precepts of God
must be respected, after which all true forms are framed? But (more is the
pity) we live without rule, cast the pattern behind our backs, and do the
most of our deeds at randon. For what pattern have we to worship Idols? to
serve God after our own inventions? to take the Lords name in vain, tossing
it like the tennise? to profane the Lords day? disobey authority? to kill and
murder? to commit fornication and all uncleanness? to cozen, filch and steal?
to equivocate, lie, and bear false witness? Surely they who thus run
without rule, at their iourneies end, shall never with comfort see the face of
God

Wherefore lay a side these leaden rules, cast off these crooked commaundes, and
walk after the only canon, so shall Ier. 6. 16. Gal. 6. 16.
thou find eternal rest to thy soul. Where our Apostle says pattern, and
not patterns, we gather, that

All men are to be guided by one and the same pattern. Doct. 3.


One rule must guide all. We read of one Decalogue, Exodus: 20. Of one way. Ier.
6. 16. of one form Romans 6. 17. of one rule 2 Cor. 10. 13. and of one Canon.
Gal. 6. 16.

But mention is made of a new commandment? Io. Object. 1.
13. 34.

1. It may be called new, in regard man had forgot it. 2. In Sol.
respect it was renewed by Christ: otherwise it was the same from the
beginning. For Christ came, not to abolish the law, but to perfect it. And we
use to call a suit new, when its but renewed: And has not divinity the same
scope as at the first?

But they had none; or one contrary to ours, before the Object. 2.
law was given by Moses?

Neither: For 1. They had a rule, and the same that was afterward given by
Moses. For, they did deliver it to their children, and so by tradition it was
continued. Genesis 10. 19.

2. The diverse delivery of the same thing does not alter the nature of it. For
whether I sing or speak a thing, its the same, though the action differ.
Whether I write in parchment, or paper; engraue in wood or stone; this is but a
distribution from the subjects, when that I have writ or engraven is the same:
So the law delivered by the immediate motions of the spirit, by Moses preaching
of it, or written in stone, or man's heart, is the self same and no other.
Indeed, we have it more perfect in Gods book, than that engraven in our inward
parts. For, man's conscience though compared to a book, yet its an imperfect
writing, like some books that here and there want a leaf, a line in a leaf,
a word in a line, or a letter in a word, so that its an imperfect rule.

For if we had 2. patterns, they are either equal or unequal; Reas. 1.
if equal, then one would serve, for its but the same; if not equal, then the
best is to be followed: For in all things, we are (in Gods service) to covet
the best things. 1 Cor. 12. vlt.

We are to aim at one end; therefore to be guided by one Reas. 2. Phil. 3. 16.
pattern. This Reason the Apostle gives. For us proceed by one Rule, that we
may mind one thing. Let diverse rules produce diverse effects: As if 2.
Carpenters work by a seucrall frame; or 2. painters draw after contrary
patterns; will not the effects differ?

If diverse patterns, then unequal obedience; and so God Reason 3.
should be a respecter of persons.

And all men were made by one Rule, therefore to be governed Reason. 4.
by one rule; for otherwise they should swerue from the end of their creation.

But some will say, Are Kings, subjects; Masters, servants; Object.
Parents, children, to be guided by one pattern?

I answer, that they are, and they are not. As a King, subject, Sol. 1.
Master, servant etc, are Christians, they are all guided Sol.
by one rule. For by the same way that the poor be justified 1.
before God, the Princes be, and no other: The water will drown, and the fire
burn Kings, as well as beggars: So will God both alike, if they come not
clothed with the wedding garment.

All Kings, subjects; Masters, servants; Parents, children; 2.
as they be Kings, subjects, Masters, etc, are to be guided by the same
pattern: So are Ministers, as they be Ministers; Paul an Apostle and Peter
etc, had but one Rule, as they were Apostles.

But if we consider them in their particular orders, and 3.
subordinations, then the King is guided by one, and the subject by another.
For there be diverse callings, and one subordinated by God unto another;
therefore several patterns prescribed for them. Hence is that precept; Let
every 1 Cor. 7. 20. Romans 12. 4. etc.
man abide in that calling wherein he was called, and the Lord placed him: For
as all the members in the body have not one office, so all the members of
Christ have not one calling.

This doctrine meets with many Heretics, errors, and Use. 1.
heresies in our days. 1. With the Friars; why are not all guided by one
pattern? they are all Friars; therefore as Friars but one pattern. For tell
me; have not all Logicians to dispute by, if they truly do dispute, one
pattern? every Grammarian and Rhetorician the same pattern to speak by? and
so of all other Artists whateuer? Why then have not this Rabble the like? But I
will send these to lack vplands tale in Chaucer, for further confutation.

And 2. it meets with the errors and heresies of others; viz. such as think
it lawful to allow a Toleration of Religion; that Papistry and Protestancy may
easily be reconciled; that men of any Religion may be saved; that great men are
not bound so strictly to serve God as the poor; and many other of the like
nature. But let those look into Gods book, and the truth of this doctrine,
and they may easily see their wanderings.

Here it would also thirdly refuce the Anabaptists, who think all men may be
Preachers, all things should be common, all persons are equal But we have no
such pattern in the word of God; except Cautions be exhibited, the which by
them are denied.

And this Doctrine is of general use to all. Would thou Use 2.
be reputed a Christian? then walk after the pattern of a Christian: mind no
other Rule. Art thou a Magistrate, Minister, Master, servant? then know the
pattern the which God has appointed for thee in particular, and keep that.
Why was David styled a man according to Gods own heart? Why? he kept the
pattern: A good King? Why? he kept that pattern too. Why was Moses counted
faithful in all Gods house? Why? he made all according to the pattern. Why
was Paul and his son Timothy praise worthy? Why? they kept the pattern. Why
is One^imus prayed for? ^hy? he, kept the pattern. Why is there such a
Catalogue well Heb. 11.
reported of? why? they kept the pattern. Have not one weight for the Rich,
another for the poor; but keep just Balances, equal measures, and be not a
respecter of persons. For as many as walk according to this pattern, peace
shall Gal. 6. 16.
be upon them, and mercy, and upon the whole Israel of God.

And here it will not be amiss, to give some breife Rules Rules to direct us
in our callings; general, particular.
for direction.

First, for thy general calling, thou must practice two things. 1. Believe all
the promises. 2. Obey all the precepts. For faith and obedience are the parts
of this pattern; and to be kept of all, whether inferiors, or superiors; And
he that commands one, commands all; for the like Reason is given of both; and
of the whole, as well as of any part or member in particular.

And for thy particular c^lling, thou must also understand it, and then learn,
and do what the Lord requires of thee.

Art thou a Magistrate? Then thou must do these things 1. Appoint good and
wholesome laws. 2. See them that they be executed.

Has the Lord called thee to the Ministry? Then thou must 1. Seek to gather
the scattered Saints. 2. To build them up to perfection. 1. By doctrine. 2.
example.

Is thy calling to govern a family? Then 1. teach them committed to thy Charge
their duties (1. to God: 2. to man) And 2. Call them to an account how they
walk after that pattern. If they do well, reward them, encourage them: if
not admonish, correct them; ^f then no amendment follow, cast them out. Psalm.
101. Suppose thou be a father? 1. Train and nurse up thy children in the fear
of God. 2. provide an honest calling, and convenient means for them; and use
all alike, until thou see the Lord put a difference. Let David dandle his
Adonijah and Absalon without Reason; God will whip him with his own rod.

Finally, art thou in subjection? Care not. for it. But 1. give ear to what
thou art commanded, that's lawful. And then. 2. Do it, 1. Without answering
again. 2. As in obedience to Christ, thy greatest master. And know, that what
good thing thou shall do, the Lord will recompense it, either here, or at his
appearance.

And let no man think, that he may warrantably live out of a calling, as some
do, being like Drones in Church and Commonwealth; eating the honey, but fly
not into the field to gather any.

1. For God, at the Creation, did not only command Adam immediately to serve
him, but also to dress and keep the Garden. I will not say that the neglect
of his particular calling (as some do) was his first sin; or that the not
casting out of the Serpent made way to his fall [for he should have kept the
garden, that no beast (say they) of the field should have entered; therefore for
not punishing of the Serpent, God made him an instrument of his own death; as
sometimes we have seen, that he who has spared a Malefactor worthy of
execution, that man has afterward proved the executioner of the person that
pitied him.] But this I may safely affirm, that our first parents were to
work in a particular, as to perform the duty of a general calling.

2. After the fall, and when the Lord out of his unsearchable mercy, and when
Adam expected no such favor (for when we least imagine of such a thing God
calls us) had received them into his love, and given them the promise of life,
did he not send him to till the earth. Genesis 3. And is this ^o with the first
borne? and shall the second Brother live in idleness?

3. The Angels have a double calling: and no doubt, but Christ too, wrought (as
the most write) at the Carpenters trade, for a season; and had a twofold
vocation, as was but expedient; for he was to fulfill all righteousness, and to
undergo all the means of humiliation.

4. And why did the Lord write the Commandments in two Table^? No doubt, to
teach this point we have in hand. And be there not precepts in the first, that
teach us our duty to God? and in the second, what we are to perform to our
Neighbor? Brief notes on the decalogue.


5. It is worthy of our observation, to consider, how man is tied with a double
bond of obedience. 1. to God. 2. to his Brother.

To God he is bound with a fourefold coard. The 1. to I.
serve God, and none other. The 2. to serve him with his own worship, and none
other. The 3. after that manner he wills, and none other; for all
circumstances of Gods service fall within this precept, whatsoever some
affirm. The 4. and last is, what day principally and wholly, and none other.

And mark, how these four things are necessary in perfect service. 1. The
person served. 2. The worship wherewith or Rule by which he is to be served. 3.
The manner how. And 4. The time when. So that here is a strong Reason for the
Morality of the Sabbath. II.


In the next place, we shall see man tied to man by a six-fold bond. The 1.
tyeth superiors and inferiors together. The 2. binds them by the hands. The
3. to their own bodies; for Man and wife are but one flesh. The 4. tyeth them
to their own substance. The 5. binds by the tongues The. 6. and last by the
thoughts. Or first motions of the will and affections.

And this breefely may give some light for our direction in the knowledge and
true obedience of this pattern; and does without controversy, prove, that All
persons are to live in a twofold Calling; general, particular.

Further observe, that the breach of the first precept in the first Table, is
in respect of the object: the breach of the second precept in the first Table,
is in regard of the Rule: the third in circumstance, or manner: and the fourth
in time. It will be said that time is a circumstance, therefore a breach
Object. Sol.
of the third precept. I answer; 1. That time, though an adjunct, yet it is
essential to an action: for no action can be done, but in time, shorter, or
longer; And take away time, all created things would cease. For time is an
affection that runs through and measures all things, God only excepted,
who was from eternity. And thgouh, we read that Time shall be no more, yet (I
take it) it is meant of Creation, Generation, Repentance, etc. for all things
shall come to an end, or the end of all things is at hand; that is, shall be 1
Pet. 4. 7.
settled in that Condition wherein they shall without change continue for ever:
For as when time began, things began; so if time should end, the things would.
For time and place do inseparably attend all created things.

2. Yet I must confess that time in particular. viz. this or Sol. 2.
that hour or moment, seems to be a circumstance to the action; for it may
as well be done the next hour, as this present. But on the contrary, seeing all
things are done in time and that God has appointed a particular time for all
things to be performed in, it may seem not to be numbered amongst other
circumstances, or so direct a breach of the third precept. For otherwise the
breach of the Sabbath were a breach of the forenamed precept; and (I must
acknowledge) in a second relation it is so inded. So that time and circumstance
being distinguished, and some relations rightly considered, it is a breach of
the third precept, else not.

But before we pass this point, I might come to give solution to diverse
Questions or objections.

Some man may demand, when he breaks the first precept Quest. 1
in the first Table?

Briefly I reply. 1. When he sets any thing in the room Answ.
of God, were it an Angel himself. 2. When he gives obedience to any, as to
God. 1. By believing in it, and resting on it more then God; and for this cause
the covetous man is called an Idolater. And 2. When he does not make God the
beginning and end of all his actions. If the action run not so far, the thing
whereon it rests, for the present, is that persons God.

When the second of the first Table? Quest. 2 Ans.


1. When I invent any new way, whereby to serve God.

2. When I do an action being not guided by Gods rule prescribed.

When the third of the first Table? Quest. 3. Ans.


1. When I do an action to God, guided by his own rule, yet neglect the
circumstances required. Exam. I give to the poor, but not cheerfully; rely on
God, but doubtingly.

2. And here note, that all actions that God commands whateuer, may be a
breach of this precept, through the neglect of just and lawful circumstances.

When the last of the first Table? Quest. 4. Answ.


1. When we do an action of our particular calling, except a necessity require
it, and then we may: But as a duty of charity, not of commodity, if done to
another person.

2. When we omit those duties the Lord requires, or spend not the whole time
allotted in holy excercises. When the Sabbath begins. Quest. 5. Answ. Lev.
23. 32.
Whence this Question arises, viz. When the Sabbath does begin?

Some have begun it in the Evening, as the Jews, and the Athenians; others in
the morning, as the Chaldeans; others at midnight, as the Romans; and the
Egyptians, began their day at noone.

But since the Resurrection of Christ; the most hold that it begins at that
hour he rose, which was about break of day, as we speak; others be
confident, that it begins in the evening; and yield these Reasons.

1. When the Jews Sabbath (say they) ended, ours must begin, for ^ls one of
the seven were not a Sabbath, which they defend must be. For take the last of
the seven, and the first of the seven, then one of the seven is still (though
changed) a Sabbath. Therefore Christ would die the sixth day, that he might
rest all the Jews Sabbath, which seems to be typical. Now if the Jews
Sabbath ended at even, then ours must begin, or else one of the seven were not
a Sabbath; but part of the eight and ninth etc. and the Remnant added to one,
or considered it self alone, would overthrow the first order appointed of
days.

2. They say, that when the Sun sets, all creatures go to rest, and so should
man; for the Lord has put out his candle to us.

3. Heaven is compared to a supper, not a dinner; because after dinner they go
to work, but after supper to rest, this seems to have some force in it.

4. They argue, that its the most agreeable to Reason. For first if the Sabbath
begin in the evening, then we know when to begin it distinctly, when to end.
Secondly, We may the better be fitted for it; for some, who hold it begins in
the morning, toil late that night, and so are then more unable to sanctify
the day. Thirdly, Wicked men are most prone to defer the time, rather then to
redeem it; and what such affect, we are to suspect. Fourthly, If we begin the
Sabbath in the evening, then we leave the object of our particular calling
behind us, and have one simple subject of the immediate worship of our general
calling in the eye of our understanding; the which is the most agreeable to
reason, breeds least distraction, and is most comfortable: so if at the Sunset
we end our Sabbath, we may talk and dispose of the duties of our particular
calling for the morning following; rise betimes without danger of the breach of
the Lords day, the which will not be so convenient, if it begin at any other
instant, in respect of the forenamed particulars. But I leave this and refer
it to others; only let us be careful that (...) have regard to the duties of
the Sabbath, and the full time: Yet there can be no danger at all, to begin the
sanctification of it betimes; for delays in all good duties breed danger.

Why was the Sabbath changed? Quest. 6. Answ.


1. As the Father did rest after the Creation; so the Son would imitate the
Father, and sanctify a rest after the great work of Redemption.

2. If the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, was typical, and must
be the beginning of months etc. Why not Exodus 12. 2.
this great delivery then?

But we omit this Table, and cease to resolve any more doubts, either in this
or the second, but as in ordinary course; (though my Text seem to allow me
full scope) because so many learned on this part of (...) have done worthily:
so we proceed to some other (...).

Of sound words.] From these words, in one word, ^^ may note two instructions,
the first is, that

A Christians pattern is to consist of words. Doct. 4. Ioh 5. 39.


How is it written? how read thou? To the word, Understand that words are
twofold 1. Spoken. 2. Written, Isa. ^ 10. and 8. 20.

For God at the first put his truth into this vessel, and Reas. 1. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Rev. 22. 19.
we may not alter it; and if we add or detract either to it or from it, Its
written; what fearful judgments are threatened for so doing?

Again, Its the only way to avoid idolatry; for if we Reas. 2.
were taught by pictures, it were a breach of the second precept in the first
Table.

Here the Papists are confuted, who make Pictures Laymens Use. 1.
books; and they defend, that it gives no occasion of Idolatry; I say, no more
then cutting of throats does of murder; or running into the fire of burning.

This must teach all of us to have regard to what is written; Use 2.
To the Law, we must, and to the Testimony. This is the surest way to keep our
selves from all idolatry and superstition; for what is superstition, but that
which is above the Supra statutum.
stitute?

The next point is this, that

The words of the pattern are to be sound words. Doct. 5.


Sometimes the Word is called Pure, holy, precious, wholesome, tried, sweet,
good, and the like; all which presuppose soundnes, sincerity. Psalm. 12. 7.
Prove. 30. 5. Romans 7. 12.

For if the words be not sound, the pattern cannot but Reas. 1.
be unsound. When poison is mixed with good meats and wines, it spoils all;
so when the words be not wholesome, the (...), and form of doctrine is
defective; one rotten post makes a weak building.

We must be transformed into the doctrine; and as the Reas. 2.
spirit in the meat we eat is turned into ours; so must the Word we read or
hear be converted into us. Romans 6. 17. And if our spiritual food be not
wholesome, our souls will grow sick and dye.

This taxes the Familists, who have words never heard Use. 1.
of, but from themselves; As Manified, Godified, fulcom, throw-breakings, and
the like. So the Papists, they fetch the milk of the Word out of the breasts
of the Whore; as Mass, Pope, our Lady, Cardinal, Jesuit, transubstantiation,
and many more. We read of Canaanites, Iebusites etc. Of which number these may
well be reputed. They cry out against us for strange words; as, Companation,
impanation, circumpanation: But we all abandon them with transubstantiation.

But may we not use words that be not in Scripture? Quest. Answ.


Yes: But the sense must be there; as if we say faith only justifies, etc.
But here the Papist, with an open mouth, calls us Heretics; and say we
never read, faith only, in Scripture. Well, this only would I ask them: is
Christ's exposition true? Is it imitable? Then we may say, faith only, it being
a truth, though only be not added. For its written Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him; which latter phrase, Christ turns, him
only shall thou serve. Math. 4. 10. Luke 4. 8. Sure they had best, now they
know it, to correct Christ's words, and say, Only is not in the Hebrew Text.
But these exalt themselves above all that is called God; And therefore the very
Antichrist.

And as here we be taught to avoid unsound words; so Use 2.
we must truly understand the words: else, though words be good, the sense will
be bad. The Papists understanding Grace, which is the free favor of God, to be
that which is habitual in us; and righteousness imputed, for inherent
holiness; or created righteousness, for justification; have by that means
made such a pattern, as (we may boldly speak) is not only dangerous, but
damnable; A pattern of their prescription, in stead of saving, poy soneth.

Which thou have heard of me.] Whence it follows, that

Apostles are to prescribe Patterns. Doct. 6. A


No man under the degree of a Prophet, or an Apostle, may prescribe Gods Church
and Children patterns. See Ephesians. 2. 20. Math. 28. vlt.

For they know, like skillful Physicians, all the diseases Reas. 1.
of our souls; and, like cunning Painters, they understand the very height,
breadth, length, bayre, complexion and age of our spiritual man, and so do no
other; therefore the fittest to prescribe patterns, to give us receipts.

They only had the hand of Gods spirit to guide their Reas. 2.
Pensill; for they spoke and gave their patterns, as they were carried by him:
otherwise they might have erred, now they could not; therefore they only can
prescribe true patterns. 2. Pet. 1. vlt.

And here again, I might meet with Pope and Papist, Use. 1.
who have made more false patterns, by the usurpation of authority, then
there be lies in their leaden Legend, or false stories of theirs in the three
Books of the Lady of Loretto: But (blessed be God) they shall prevail no
longer (with many:) for their madness is evident to all (wise) men. I will not
stand to name them; for they be like so many leprous persons, wrapped in
menstruous rags, stinking relics. Pity such Painters, abandon their
patterns.

And here we learn a double Use. First that we take not Use. 2.
upon us to prescribe patterns; we are neither Prophets, nor Apostles.
Secondly, Learn the knowledge of the true pattern, and draw the picture of
thy life by that; for they were directed by the Holy Ghost; they could not
miss their draught; and there is no word, or thing, that can truly settle thy
soul, and quiet thy heart, but the words of Prophets and Apostles. Keep then
this pattern which thou have heard.

In faith and love.] According to our former exposition of these words, we
collect this Doctrine, that

By faith and love the pattern of sound words is kept and observed. Doct. 7.


These two are often coupled together, and pressed by all Psalm. 27. vlt. An^
186* 1.
the Prophets and Apostles. Cotoss. 1. 4. 23. 1 These. 1. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Phil.
5. 6. Rev. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 1 Ioh. 1. and 2. and 3. John, the loving Disciple,
treats still of love.

For by faith we believe that God is, and a rewarder of them Reas. 1.
that serve him. Faith believes the Law, Gospel; the threats, promises: And
therefore its said, Without faith its impossible Heb. 11. 6.
to please God. And, by faith we live; quench the fiery darts of the Devil;
are justified; overcome the world, and be saved. And, whatsoever is not of
faith performed, is said to be sin. Romans 14. 23.
So that Faith is necessary to keep the pattern; For it purifieth the heart
inwardly, and is the true ground of all outward and acceptable obedience.

And for Love, that is needful also.

For Love helps attention, strengthens the memory, Reas. 2.
sets the Will aworke, unites to God and Man; and therefore it is rightly
said, that By love we fulfill the Law; For Rom 13. 10.
without this affection, our best actions neither please the Creator, nor be
profitable to the creature.

Love has four principal properties. Properties of love.


1. It will make us go speedily about good duties; how did the women run to
the grave? Sichem make haste to be circumcised? And Christ raise up Lazarus
quickly? and Love constrained them.

2. Love will endure sorrow. Christ, through love, laid down his life for us:
the Apostles for their brethren; it suffers all things. 1 Cor. 13. 4. etc.

3. Love seeks revenge: Shall he make our Sister a Whore? Genesis 34. 31.
And it will break a good heart by taking revenge on it self, for offending
so good a God, so merciful a Father.

4. Finally, Love with godly sorrow will make the man of God pine away. Amnon
did thus for the love of Thamar; and we must know, that true Love has the
like, yea stronger operations. In a word, Love will produce admirable effects;
of patience, bountifulness, long-suffering, and passing by of great and many
wrongs and injuries: So that no Love, no observation of the pattern.

And here we see that men without Faith and Love can Use. 1.
do nothing, that is good before God. Paul desired to be kept out of the hands
of men without faith; for he accounted them unreasonable and evil. 2 These. 3.
2.

Would we then practice the Apostles doctrine? then let Use. 2.
us strive for faith and love: these two support the estate of a Christian, as
the two pillars did the house of the Philistims; if these be removed, the
foundation of our obedience and salvation fail and fall. Faith and Love
include all the duties of the Conenants of grace; and all the Commandments are
reduced to Love: for at the beginning we were created Note.
in Love; the breach of the Law set all enmity; so the observation of it
produces amity; hence Love is styled, The bond of perfection. Many boast of
their great faith, but we may say of their Love, as Lot did of Zoar, that it
is a very little one; for who of Love to God escheweth evil, and does good? or
of affection to man, passes by a fault, and is liberal? He that would soar
to heaven wanting either of these, may as soon see a bird mount on high, and
take her stand, who wants one wing. Faith, like the hand, takes hold on
Christ; and Love, like the feet, must carry us to him.

And amongst many other duties, What a fearful thing is it to come to the
Lords Supper without faith or affection to God and man. We will not come at the
earnest invitement of an enemy to his Table for fear of danger or dislike: Yet
when we are haters of God, and our neighbors too, living in malice and envy,
hateful and hating one another, we stay not our steps. But do not such
persons ear their own judgment? For they want that wherewith they should
feed truly on Christ, or give them an appetite to this food, if they have not
affection and faith: for as the mouth and stomach be to the body; so be Faith
and Love to the soul.

Thou will say, How may I know when an action is Quest.
done in faith and love.

If it be done in faith. 1. Thou must be in the faith, that Answ. What action
is done in faith.
is, in Christ, and Christ in thee. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2. It must be guided by the
rule of faith. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 3. It must be done with faith, not doubtingly.
Romans 14. 23. 4. And last of all, it must be done to the object of our faith.
viz. in obedience to God in Christ, and for his glory. 1 Cor. 10. 31.

If an action be done in Love. 1. Its done so freely, that What in love.
there is not the least expectation of any future recompense. Genesis 23. 15. 2.
So secretly, that (if possible) none might Math. 6. 2.
ever come to the knowledge thereof. 3. So cheerfully, as there is equal, (or
rather greater) joy in the doing, then Ruth. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 9. 7. Philem. 10.
receiving of the like favor. 4. So affectionately, that the more good we do
to any, the more we find our hearts enflamed with the love of that person.
These four things accompany an action done in the truth of affection. For a
good heart is constreined by love; it will vpbraid no man; it knows that its
better to give, then to receive; and it never waxes weary or repents for
well-doing. And there cannot be a surer sign of an heart sprinkled with love,
then to rejoice, that it is willing and able to do good to God or man.

If we take the words in the other senses; then these be the points to be
collected; First, that

The essential parts of a Christians pattern consist of faith Doct. 8.
and love. Again, that

All our actions are to be done in faith and love. Doct. 9. Quest. 1.


Why Faith before Love?

1. Because faith is the root, love the branch. 2. Salvation Answ.
is tied to the Gospel, the principal ob^ect of faith.

Why both faith and love? Quest. 2. Ans.


1. For faith, or love alone is not sufficient. 2. Because the one has regard
to the fulfilling of the Gospel, by the obedience of faith; but the other
looks to the Law, which is perfected by Love.

Which is in Christ Jesus.] From the fourefold interpretation, we may note so
many Doctrines.

1. That Faith and love are given to man, of God, through Christ Jesus.

2. That Faith and love in Christ, should stir us up to keep the pattern.

3. That The object of faith and love is Christ Jesus.

4. That Faith and love are comprehended in Christ Jesus.

And whereas our Apostle has now brought in this phrase five several times in
this short Chapter, we may note diverse things worthy our instruction.

1. That We are hardly brought to believe, that all grace and mercy comes
through Christ Jesus. Divine truths are not easily believed.

2. That The best things may often, for good ends, be mentioned.

3. That When we speak of any grace or favor received, we should consider
through whom it is conveyed to us. viz. Christ Jesus.

4. That The often repetition of the same thing is profitable.

5. That What the people most naturally are prone to doubt of, that is
principally and often to be Preached.

6. That An holy heart is not weary in writing or speaking the same things
often.

VERSE. 14. That worthy thing, which was committed unto thee, keep, by the Holy
Ghost which dwells in us.
IN these words Paul persisteth in the exhorting The Logical resolution.
of Timothy; and having persuaded him to keep the pattern in the former
Verse, it seems he now would have him to be careful to keep that whereby
the pattern of sound words may be kept by him.

1. We may here also observe, to what he is exhorted; and that is to keep. 2.
What he must keep, and that is called a worthy thing committed, etc.] 3.
Whereby he is to keep it, or the means whereby he came by it is laid down,
which is, the Holy Ghost. The which Holy Ghost is said. 1. to dwell. 2. the
place is mentioned where, viz. in us.

That worthy thing,] or, that good thing: By thing, no doubt, The Theological
exposition.
is meant faith and love, and the graces of the spirit; so that this Verse
serves to confirm that exposition we gave in the former. And thing is put for
things, as tree for trees Genesis 3. 2. work for works. Psalm. 95. 9. Heb. 3. 9.
Ship for Ships. 1. King. 10. 22. compared with 2 Chronicles. 9. 21.

Which was committed to thee.] The word in the Greek here used is the very
same which is in the 12. Verse, and it properly signifies a Deposition, or
thing committed to our trust and faithfulness. If you say, that this Exposition
crosses that in the 12. Verse, where we did interpret it of Paul's soul, or
salvation; the answer is this: he that preserves faith and love and the
graces of the Spirit in him, shall be saved; and they that commit their soul
and salvation to God, are careful to preserve grace within them; for the one
is a means of the other. And there could be no danger in expounding this good
thing to be the soul; for its a good thing, and by Christ's affirmation, more
worth then the whole world. But the gifts of the Spirit, is the truest
interpretation.

Keep.] Or, hold fast, that is, cherish, preserve, have in safety.

By the Holy Ghost.] These words may have a double (...) If we read them, as
some do, thus, That worthy thing which was committed to thee (keep) by the
Holy Ghost: then the holy Ghost may seem to be he that committed this worthy
thing to us, that dwells in us, which is a truth; but the other I take to be
the natural meaning* for Paul informs Timothy how and by whom he is to keep
that worthy thing, and he tells him that is done, through the holy Ghost. By
the Holy Ghost is to be understood the third person in the Deity.

Which dwells in us.] The Spirit here is described by 3. things. 1. That he
is holy. 2. By an effect, he dwells. 3. By the subject place where; and it is
said to be in Timotheus and Paul: and in every believer also he dwells.

As I have lately persuaded thee to keep the pattern of The Metaphrase.
sound words, so now I likewise exhort thee, as a means for the performance of
that duty, that thou cherish, increase, and hold fast the good and worthy
graces of God committed to thee, and that are within thee: And for thy better
direction, I would have thee to know, that the only way whereby they are
preserved, is through the holy Spirit of God, that has his a blood and
dwelling in me and thee*

That worthy thing.] The point hence is plain, which is, that,

The graces and gifts of God are good and worthy things Pro. 3. Doct. 1.
14. 15. Luke 14. 34. Phil. 1. 6*

The causes of them are holy and good. For the chief efficient Reas. 1.
cause is God; and is not he good? the isntrumental is the Word and Preachers;
and are not they good? Indeed Heb. 6. 5.
wicked Ministers (for the most part) beget men, as Adam did after his fall, in
their own image: yet as he is a man sent from God, and in regard of his
calling, he may be called good, and do good.

And from their effects, they may be called good; for they Reas. 2.
make him good, before God, in whom they be; they do stir up and enable a
man to do good; they will weaken all evil in that person where they dwell;
they will make our actions good, and never leave us, until they have brought
us to perfection of glory.

Here are those reprehended, who never had any care to Use. 1.
possess these worthy things. Nothing in man, or out of him, that is of
greater worth, and nothing less regarded. We do count that person blessed,
that has his house hung with rich Arras, his chests full of gold, and his
barnes stuffed with corn; and yet we never have esteem of these excellent and
rare things. Truly the least degree of faith is more worth then all the gold
of Ophir; a remnant of true love, then all the gay garments in the world. Hope
of heaven will more rejoice the heart of David, then his scepter and kingdom.
But men do not think so, neither will they have it so; yet the day of death,
like an equal Balance, shall declare it to be so.

This may serve to comfort the poor man, who, like Peter, Use 2.
has neither silver nor gold: Have thou faith and love, and hope and zeal
(that all the world quarrel with)? then thou have cause to rejoice, and be
glad: Many wish to be as wealthy as such and such: But what? Art thou a poor
Christian? and have thou grace? Why then, (except he have it too) thou art
richer then he: One is rich in goods, void of grace; thou have grace, but
want riches; would thou change estates with him? No, no: then be content
and of good comfort.

Are they worthy things? Then put them to the best uses; Use. 3.
and abuse them not: Its pity to hear, how many men lay their faith to pawn,
and pledge their hope for every trifle, crying, By my faith it is thus: As I hope
to be saved, its not so, nor so. Is this well done? and will our master take it
well at our hands, that his graces and gifts be thus employed? I trow not. We
make great stir, before we lay to pawn our chiefest Jewels; yet we let our
faith go freely, which is more worth then all. And it is to be feared, that
God will severely correct this; or, we may doubt rather, that they, who do
thus, have no faith or hope at all; for if they have, they know the worth of
it, and how they came by it: and (whatsoever many judge) its not easily gotten.
But such play the Logicians, and make a distribution, saying, They swear but
by their Civil faith, not by that which justifies. I answer; first, that
this distinction will not justify them. Again, how shall a man know when they
swear by their civil faith? Sure they sound alike, therefore they must give
another accent, or tone; else they may, and others too, be mistaken. But when
will such be wise? Is it not the greater offense, to place the meaner and baser
thing and creature in the Creators room? Let them judge.

And in the last place, seeing these be worthy things, Let Use. 4.
us all labor to possess them; for of how much more value a thing is, by so
much the more we should strive to obtain it. And to persuade us hereunto,
Let Us consider to what they be likened. Grace is compared to fire, to water, to
food, to air, and to gold and silver. Is it not a misery to want fire to warm
us, water to wash and refresh us, food to nourish and to strengthen us, air to
breath by, and to cool us, and gold and silver to enrich us? We could not but
think him a poor man, that a miserable place, where all these be wanting; and
shall we not see our own woe, when we do not enjoy these things? All our
sacrifices are to be seasoned with this salt, boiled in this liquor; roasted
with this fire, if acceptable to Christ, or profitable to his members: See then
the worth of the one, by the want of the other. Have we not now time and
means to furnish our selves? But will this wind blow, this tide return, this
fire descend, and this treasure be got, when we expect it, desire it? No such
matter: Then take the opportunity, leost the time come, and the evil days
approach, wherein we shall say, that are have no pleasure in them.

And let the rareness too of this thing work in us some desire to endeavor
for it: For all men have not grace and faith: its sown but in few Countries,
and where it is, its not found growing in each man's grounds. We say, that
things far fetched and dear bought, are the greatest dainties. Why? does not
this treasure come from far? and what Ship could bring it to us, except
Christ the Lord? What could purchase and ransom it, but the precious blood of
the Son of God? Will not these things allure thee? Why then beware, least the
Lord have a purpose to kill thee.

Keep.] The thing we note from hence is this, that

Grace once gotten, is to be preserved. Doct. 2.


We must hold fast the good gifts we have, and neither suffer sin or Satan
to pluck them out of our hands. And every where we are bid to grow therein.
Revel. 2. 25. Heb. 6. 6. 2 Pet. 3. vlt. Lude 21.

Because if grace grow weak, the pattern will not be Reas. 1.
practiced. When all the parts of the natural body be in a consumption, can we
walk and work in the duties of our particular callings? And if the New man
wax pale, and pine away, the paths of Gods commands will not be run or
trodden. For as all natural actions proceed from the bodies strength, and the
purest spirit; so do all spiritual from the vigor of grace, and the Newman.

Again, if grace decay, then corruption will grow: for as Reas. 2.
it was, in another sense, said of Christ and John the Baptist; so may it of
these two: When the one increases, the other decreaseth.

This checketh the carelesnes of some Christians, who Use 1.
play the Prodigal with their spiritual portions, in misspending; or permit
their graces to fall into a consumption. It was a reproof made by the Spirit,
I have somewhat against Rev. 2.
thee, for thou have left thy first love: and the same has befallen many
persons. When men have got some competency of wealth, they lie long in bed, and
will not up to work, and and so their riches waste: In like manner it falls
out with Gods children; for when they have attained to some competency of
gifts, they are highly conceited, grow idle, neglect the means, and so are
overtaken with spiritual poverty; then the which what greater damage, loss?

We must then learn here, not only to get grace, but to Use. 2.
keep it. We will mourn if we loose our money, grieve if we be deprived of
our corn, natural strength and earthly commodities: And shall the loss of
grace never pinch us, pierce us? Shall Jonah be so dejected for his Gorud, and
we never be moved, when grace is withered, ready to persh? Shall the
earth-worme sigh at the loss of goods, and we never shrink at the shipwreck
of heavenly gifts? No greater damage then this, none less regarded, more
insensible. Let our plants begin to prin, our hair wax gray or fall, it will
make some impression: But grace may decay, the spirit faint, and few be wounded
in heart. Yet to such, a time shall come of great mourning. Then get grace;
keep grace; so shall corruption be expelled, extenuated; and the pattern of
sound words observed, practiced.

A second instruction we gather out of the word Keep, which is, that

Spiritual gifts are in danger of loosing. Doct. 3.


Grace got, may be lost: Else wherefore should Paul bid his son keep the
worthy things in his custody? We give the greatest charge, when things are most
subject to peril, damage, or destruction. This point has its proof in holy
writ. For did not Sampson loose his spiritual as well as, or rather then his
corporal strength and sight? the shearing of his head, was the cutting and
killing of grace in the heart; for by that, another thing is meant. The Church
of Ephesus left, (though not totally lost) her first love. David desired to
gather strength. See Judge. 16. Rev. 2. 4. Psalm. 39. vlt. and 51.

And this comes to pass through our own negligence; Reas. 1.
for when we do not employ these talents to their proper ends, or watch over
our selves, or neglect the means to preserve them, or dig them in the earth,
not using them at all; we shall either have them removed from us, or, at the
least, weakened in us. Fire must have fuel, or it will cease to flame;
infants are to be fed, or they will be feeble; And so must the babe of grace,
the newborn child of faith, or fall into a fit of languishing.

Again, it may come to pass in respect of the Preachers, Reas. 2.
and that of the bad, or better sort: False Teachers did creep into the Church
of Galatia, and they fell from their former stedfastnes. And when such as be
truly sent, preach rarely, coldly, negligently, and watch not over their
flock, much grace may be lost by their default. Let the sheep fast, or feed
barely, they will grow lanke and lean of body.

Besides the Devil cannot endure that grace should grow, Reas. 3.
and corruption decay; for then he shall lose his croppe, and his hope shall
perish: therefore he is nipping this fruit in the bud, and would tear it if
he could, up by the root; and though he cannot, yet he will venture at all.

Finally, the Lord may suffer it to be lost (at the least, for Reas. 4.
a time in our own feeling,) and that for these causes. 1. When we begin to
swell, wax big, and are puffed up with his graces which should humble us. 2.
When we are too severe in censuring of our weak brethren. And 3. When we grow
ungrateful to him, for the gifts he has freely conferred upon us. For God
cannot endure pride, security, or ingratitude; therefore, he permits
oftentimes, a winter, whereby, for a season, these flowers look dead and
withered.

Wonder not then, if we see some backsliders in our Use. 1.
times, as has been in former ages. For its no unusual matter to find
declinings in this kind. And it is a disputable question, whether any Christian
what ever (except he depart soon after his conversion) does grow and go from
strength to strength without some loss of the inward power of the graces
wherewith he is endued? For Churches in general, and persons in particular,
have had their symptoms, and distempers.

And this is to warn all men to watch the more diligently Use. 2.
over themselves, that this languishing do not befall them: As also to try
themselves, if they have not fallen already from their former perfection, and
left their first faith. And here two things may seem needful to be proposed.
1. How far a man may fall and lose his former gifts. 2. By what signs he may
try, and know it. How far a man may fall from his former grace. 1 Samuel 26. 14.


For the first, we must understand that the gifts of God are either Common, or
special: Common belong to all men, elect, reprobate. The Reprobate may lose
those general graces which they have had, as we see in Saul. For its said, The
spirit (to wit, the gifts whereby he was to govern the Kingdom) was taken
from him. The like may befall Ministers.

Again, the Elect themselves may fall thus far: 1. That they may call into
question, whether they ever had the grace of God, or not. 2. In so much as the
Church, for a time, may suspect the same also. 3. That they may never recover
their former estate, and do the same works they have in time past, with that
power, delight, constancy: And this seems to have been the estate of Asa.
But these never fall totally or finally from the grace of God; And many times
they come (but by much ado) to their former condition, and are more strong in
the grace of God, then they were before their declinings: for experince has
taught them the worth of the gifts of the spirit, and what a misery it is to
the mind to have her weapons weakened.

Now for the second, we may know our estate by these Signs of falling from
grace.
signs. 1. When men begin to be idle, and neglect the duties of their
particular callings; its a sure symptom of the fall from grace. He that has
no desire to work or walk, but to cast himself on his couch, wrap himself
in the woollen garments, and there lies with his arms folden, his eyes shut,
and his feet stretched out, is either weak or lazy: so that man who is not
diligent in the discharge of his duty, is in a spiritual consumption, or
perilous lethargy.

2. A man may perceive it by his praying, and by nothing better: If thy prayers
be cold, short, and seldom, sure thou art in a decaying estate. When men lie
speechless, or be unwilling to speak, we then fear death will befall that
person.

3. If the public means be omitted and neglected, it is dangerous also. For
weak natures have the worst appetites. They that eat little, and deslike
their diet, cannot but be feeble persons.

4. When a man will not endure reproof with patience, he is going backward. If
Jonah tell the Lord, he does well to be angry, his condition is not as it has
been.

5. Severe censuring of others is not the secretest sign of this thing. For
when our own case is the worse, we, usually, are most forward that way.

Finally, if we make less scruple of sin now, then heretofore, this is
fearful. When David can sheath his sword in the bowels of his brother, that
had in times past a smiting heart for touching of the lap of Readiness garment,
his strength is abated, and his grace weakened. Men in sleep digest the
hardest thing; so those that be in a spiritual slumber, concoct greater
sins, then in a day of waking.

Now by these marks may thou prove thy condition; wherefore if these things
follow thee, know, that thou have not held fast, that power of the spirit, thou
had at the first: so that it stands thee in hand to consider from whence thou
art fallen, to recover thy former estate, and to do thy first works and
better,

Through the holy Ghost, which dwells in us.] I have told you, that this is
the means to keep us from falling, and that also in these words, we have a
description of the third person in the Deity. 1. He is set our by his nature.
2. By an effect. 3. By the subjects, where he inhabiteth. Now, we will begin
with the last first, and then this is the doctrine, that

The faithful are the Temples, and habitation of the Holy Doct. 4.
Ghost.

Where shall we find such a man in whom is the spirit of God? Ye are the
Temples of the holy Ghost. And its said, that Steven was full of the holy
Ghost. Genesis 41. 38. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Act. 7. 55.

For they have the gifts of the holy Ghost; and these two Reas. 1.
may not be separated, though distinguished, in a Christian; for where he
works, there he is present. He forsakes not that building, no not for a
season.

Again, he unites the faithful unto Christ, and (to Reas. 2.
speak with respect and fear) as the spirit in man coupleth soul and body
together; so does the holy Ghost unite the the head Christ and all his members.
And this is an invincible bond.

But he is infinite, therefore in all persons. Object. 1. Sol.


True: yet he is in the faithful in a peculiar and special manner, both by
his working and presence. 2. He is incomprehensible: notwithstanding, as we
say, the Sun is in the house, though a part of the beams be but there: so
the Spirit is said to be in man, although he be not wholly included in him.
Object. 2. Sol.


But wicked men have Prophesied; therefore he is in them. He uses them
sometimes as instruments to tell the truth; But he never continues with them,
neither did ever dwell in their hearts by sanctification.

Here all men must take heed, how they wrong the faithful; Use. 1.
for it were better for that man, that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and to be cast into the bottom of the sea, then to offend any of these little
ones. And he that destroys the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. 1 Cor.
3. 17.


We account it a fearful thing to pull down, or batter a Princes palace;
it is death to wash or clip the Kings coin, and shall we not tremble to wrong
and injury this building? for such cannot escape the damnation of hell. Oh,
that the swaggerers of our days did but think on this, and such as account it
the greatest manhood to stab, strike, and destroy their Mothers son! Would
they begin, continue, and defend so many soule-killing quarrels? For who ever
waxed fierce against the faithful, and have prospered? Abel's blood did, and
so shall all others, cry to God for vengeance upon every cruel and persecuting
Cain. And this sentence is not yet repealed, that Whosoever sheddeth Genesis 96.
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

This is for the comfort of the faithful. For what greater Use. 2.
honor then this, To have the high God to dwell in our hearts. Should our
Sovereign, but come into a poor man's cottage, he would rejoice (and good
reason) for that all his life long: And shall the King of glory dwell with the
sons of men, make his chamber of presence in their hearts, and they want
hearts to solace themselves in the remembrance of that? Lydia was glad when
Paul was in her house; and shall not we in the fellowship of the Holy Ghost?
Michah could say, Now shall God be good unto Judge. 17. vlt.
me, seeing I have a Leuite to be my Priest. And shall it not then be said of
every faithful man and woman, I am sure it will go well with me, seeing I
have the Spirit of God in my heart?

And this Doctrine must teach the faithful diverse lessons. Use 3.
1. They must take heed that they greiue not the holy spirit of God. For never
had any a better guest. 2. To marry in the Lord; for shall they make the Temple
of the Holy Ghost the member of an harlot? 3. To keep their vessels in
comelines and honor, and to touch no unholy thing. For shall we defile the
Temple of God? 4. And finally, to use all means that it may be continued and
preserved, both from destruction and pollution.

Again, Let not a man disdain to entertain the faithful. Use. 4.
When the Author of the Hebrews would persuade the people to give lodging to
strangers, he produces this as Heb. 13. 2.
an argument to move them; for (says he) some in so doing have received Angels
into their houses. Was this of force? why then, let the consideration of the
point we have in hand be powerful to persuade to the same duty. It went well
with that family where Joseph was; so shall it with those that entertain such
in whom is the Spirit of God.

And here let man learn a lesson, and wonder. Is the Use. 5.
Spirit of God in Paul and others, where the spirit of all uncleanness not long
before ruled? Admire his humility, that would descend so low as to dwell in so
mean an habitation. He that dwells in that light that none can attain unto,
now dwells where was a palpable darkness. Solomon on this consideration broke
out: Is it so that the most high will dwell with the sons of men? and shall
not we do the like from the same ground? 1 King. 8. 27.

In the last place, Let us examine our selves, whether we Use. 6.
be Temples of this Spirit or not: for if he dwell in the faithful, it is
reason we should prove, if we our selves be not seduced. And let these trials
following decide the matter. Signs if the spirit dwell in us.


1. Where he dwells there is peace that passes all understanding: joy that is
unspeakable, glorious. 2. There is liberty (not to sin, but) to all holy
actions. 1. They can pray with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed.

2. Praise God with an heart enlarged, and with a willing Romans 8. 26.
mind. 3. Run all the ways of Gods precepts chearefully; and 4. Are
resolute in the greatest, and most desperate opposition, for God, his truth,
and their brethren.

3. Where he takes up his lodging there is holiness. He does not dwell in
Drunkards, Epicures, Usurers, fornicators, or any unclean person. This fire
purifieth the heart, cleanses the inward man; though never so full of
filthiness in former time. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 5. 18.

4. In a word, where he inhabiteth, he always moves the mind to do good;
refreshes the soul after the performance of any holy action, with a secret
content, and hidden approbation; opposes all evil iniections, in the first
apprehension, as of Atheism, merit, murder etc. and in Conclusion, he always
allureth that person in whom he is, to bring all his actions, words, gestures,
thoughts and intentions to the word of God revealed; for that is his own Rule,
and by that we may know if he be in us, had we no other trial.

We may gather another Note of great consequence, out of the word, Dwell, which
is, that

Where the Spirit of God takes true and special possession, he Doct. 5.
is not cast out for ever.

For the word, Dewll, imports not only possession, but continuance. David,
Abraham, Jacob, with all the faithful were never totally and finally deprived
of the Spirit, or the graces of the Spirit, after they once were the subjects
of the same. Ioh. 16. 13. Math. 28. 20.

First because he delights in his habitation; and where Reas. 1.
that is in the inhabitant, he will not be removed from his home.

Who is able to dispossess him? is there any greater then Reas. 2.
he? he it is that has cast out the strong man Satan, and will never suffer
him again to reenter.

But its said, that Satan finds the house swept, brings Object.
seven spirits worse them himself, and dwells there. Math. 12. 44. etc.

To omit the diverse interpretations of that place, this I Sol.
take to be the truest. Satan is compared to a wayfaring man or traveler, who
wandreth up and down the Moors and Marshes to find water, yet when his hope
is frustrate, it being dry land, he then returns to home his own habitation,
the which is garnished to his mind: So the Devil, when he cannot take
possession of other persons, he, like a sow, returns to his former muddy
poole, and finds it swept, but from all goodness, therefore he rests there
with greater content, then he had in his progress. He has malice enough to
seek a dwelling in all the elect temples of Gods spirit; but that fire from
above, has dried up the spring of sin, he cannot find reentry, therefore he
makes a regresse to that person or Nation, where he shall certainly enter: For
if the Spirit had swept and garnished the house from the power of sin, and
adorned it with his gifts that are peculiar to the elect, the Devil might
knock at the door, but he should never be admitted to entrance, much less to
dwell there.

This might serve to confute the Papists; who hold, that Use. 1.
the Spirit may be lost, and cast out: but we have elsewhere spoken more at
large of this point, then here we will.

And this may confirm the salvation of Solomon; as also Use. 2.
teach us what to think of those that began in the spirit, yet ended in the
flesh; assuredly their gifts were general, not special; neither did the Holy
Ghost ever in a peculiar manner, dwell in their hearts.

This may be of good use to all the godly; for their salvation Use 3.
is sure; the Spirit shall never leave them until (nor then neither) he has
safely conducted them to the haven of heaven. Oh that we knew the worth of
salvation, then this doctrine would ravish our souls, and, in the greatest
storms of temptations, yield us boldness! Were a great Merchant assured that
his pilot would and could bring his ship safe to shore, oh how would it rejoice
his heart, and glad the soul! and shall we have no joy in the consideration of
the certainty of our salvation? Sure then it is, because we know not the worth
of heaven, or misery of shipwreck at the gates of hell. Would it not have
comforted David or Jacob, to have had a Jonathan in their journey? And shall it
be no matter of mirth to us, that the Spirit of truth, will lead us into all
truth? This made the man of God in his greatest danger, when he had almost
slip^, and been turned out of the way, to triumph, that the Lord would guide
him by his counsel, and afterward receive him to glory: and in a good heart it
will work the like effect. Psalm. 73. 25.

And in the last place, this might stir us up to use all Use. 4.
good means that we might once entertain, and ever retain so worthy a guest.
How will we inuit and entreat to have our good friend but a day, nay, one
meal to be with us? then shall we not use all the skill we can to possess the
Spirit of God, who will abide with us and comfort us at all Quest.
times, in all conditions? Thou will say, Sir; by what way may I come to this
thing? Why, thou must get a new heart: Ans.
for he will never lodge in the old; for that is naught. And this heart must
have these properties.

1. It must be broken, and that by the Law and the Gospel. Properties of a new
heart. Luke 18. 13.
The Law breaks the heart 2. Ways. 1. In revealing unto man the number and
greatness of his sins: so great an enditement will pierce deeply. 2. By
declaring what fearful Act. 2. 37 and 16. 27. etc.
judgments we be subject unto: For these two will humble a man to the dust. He
that sees his former perfection, what it was; and present misery, what it is,
cannot but be a man of sorrow; and the law reveals both. But a Judas may go
thus far; therefore the Gospel must have its stroke in this business; and
that thus: when the Law like an hammer has dashed in pieces our hard hearts,
then the promises must come to make them melt and relent within us; and that by
a double act: the one is in the consideration, how our sins caused the only
son of God to become accursed: for a good Nature, having but a general
illumination cannot but be wounded at this consideration, But yet we must pass
another step, ahd that is, when the remembrance of Gods mercy, in giving us his
son to dye for us; and in assuring our hearts that all our sins are freely
pardoned; the many heavy judgments, that we were liable to, are for ever
removed, and our salvation sealed to our souls; I say, when the remembrance
hereof has its strong operation, and makes our hearts to melt in our bodies.
The Law, like the mallet, breaks the flinty heart; but the precious promises
of the Gospel, like a kind shower the earth, brings it to a good temper. For
as the field that becomes fruitful, must have the first and second rain after
that its plowed and rent asunder by the harrow; so must a new heart have this
twofold work by the Law and gracious promises contained in the Gospel. We
must not only mourn, that our sins be many, and the judgments, we be liable
to, heavy: but also even our bowels must yearne within us, that Christ was
crucified for us, being an innocent person: and the Lords favor work mightily
with us, who has declared unto us in particular, such a depth of mercy.

2. The new heart must be a pure and purging heart. For Math 5. 8.
blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. And this pure heart is
procured by two means. 1. By getting of faith; for faith will purge, like
barme in beer, and purify the heart; it will cause that no corruption shall
lodge or abide near it. 2. A pure heart is obtained by this consideration,
that no unclean heart shall inherit the kingdom of God: For every thing,
naturally, seeks it own preservation, and this once understood, it will have
its operation. This new heart must be like a living spring.

3. A new heart must be a smiting heart; and that for the least sin that is
done in secret, known only to God, and our selves, as well as for great
offenses committed in public, 2 Samuel 24. 10.
and in the view of many. David had a new heart, and his had both these
qualities; and it must smite. 1. For sins of commission. 2. Of omission.

4. A new heart must be an upright heart, and that is in regard of time or
person: for time, always endeavoring to be righteous: for person, 1. Before
God. And 2. With all Acts 24. 16.
men. And herein I do endeavor my self always to have a good conscience
before God and before men. So that we see that new hearts must be 1. Broken
hearts. 2. Purging hearts. 3. Smiting hearts. 4. Upright hearts; and in such an
heart dwells the Spirit of God. Wherefore strive thou for such a one, and be
thou assured, that the Spirit of God will come into thy heart, and dwell with
thee for ever and ever. But if thine heart be not thus qualified, be not
deceived, the Holy Ghost shall never take one nights abode in the mansion of
thy soul; and on the contrary, thy heart will be but a Den for that foul
and unclean spirit, the Devil, who, if he possess thy heart, will draw thee
on into that fiery Lake, that burns with fire and brimstone for all eternity.

I might here note another Doctrine, which is, that

The Spirit of God is an holy Spirit. Doct. 6.


He is in many places so styled in Scripture. 2 Cor. 13. 13. Ephesians. 4. 30. etc.
And he may be so called for these Reasons.

First, in that he proceeds from the father and the Son, Reas. 1.
the fountain of all holiness.

Again, he is coequall, coessentiall, coeternall with the 2.
Father and the Son. Therefore God, holy, yea holiness it self.

And he works the beginning, progress and perfection 3.
of all holiness in the Creature: And as he is opposed to Satan that unclean
spirit, he is said to be holy.

Finally, he always disswadeth from uncleanness, and persuades 4.
to holiness, as we may see in the holy Scriptures, which by the holy men of
God, were penned, as they were carried by the holy Ghost.

Take we heed therefore, how we resist or quench the Use 1.
motions of this Spirit. For this is a fearful sin, and to be avoided, We
read of some, that have grieved, and despighted the holy Ghost; but the end of
such was near unto cursing and burning. And this may be done in our selves and
others. What a lamentable thing is it, when gracious words proceed from men's
mouths, to hear one say; O Sir, I perceive you are a Puritan, and one full
of the Spirit? Do thou this of ignorance? Why then thou art blameworthy, to
speak evil of what thou know not: if of knowledge? the greater is thy
offense, and seems to be a step unto that sin unto death. Therefore in the
name of God, despite not the Spirit of grace in thy self, or thy brother.

And seeing this Spirit is holy, Let those that enjoy him Use. 2.
be careful to keep him; and them that want him to strive for him; for he is
worth the having. Holiness is a thing much to be respected, and cannot be had
without the spirit. And do thou observe these directions.

1. When thou feel and find any secret motion stirred How the spirit may
be procured.
up in thy heart to holiness, entertain it; praise God for it, and give willing
obedience thereunto. For there is almost no man, but at one time or other he
shall hear a still voice within him, saying, This is the way, walk in it:
This must Isa. 30. 21:
be cherished, greatly regarded. For if we put this from us, peradventure, when
we would with all our hearts feel such whisperings, they will be wanting, and
not easily come by.

2. Attend upon the men of God in the Ministry of his word: For its said,
While Peter spoke, and the people heard the holy Ghost fell upon them. They
that deny the means cannot expect this mercy. Act. 10. 44.

3. Pray to God the Father, that he would send down his Spirit into thy heart.
Can they that are evil (says our Savior) give to their Children good things?
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that ask
him? Luke 11. 13.

4. And in Conclusion: Speak not evil of thy brother; say not, he has a
Devil: This was the Pharisees fault, and Mark. 3. 30.
in so doing (it seems) they sinned unto death; For they told him, that he
cast out Devils by the Prince of Devils, when they thought otherwise; so that
malice against the truth, being accompained with a sound understanding of the
truth, appears to be that irremissible sin.

Now the last thing to be collected, is this, that

The Graces of the Spirit, are preserved by the Spirit. Doct. 7.


Paul having commanded Timotheus an hard task, gives here a notable direction,
how he may be able to do the same; and that is, through the assistance of the
holy Ghost. This is also seen. Phil. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 13. 13.

For Satan is strong, man but weak: 2. He is subtle, we Reas. 1. 2.
be simple: so that the Spirit of all wisdom and power is he that can enable
us to preserve this worthy thing within us. And who more fit to do this, then
he that has wrought this good work by his own finger in us?

Here we might control the doctrine of our Adversaries, Use 1.
who ascribe so much power to man after grace received; or especially, that
they attribute so much to man in his pure naturalls. Has Timothy need of the
special work and aid of the Spirit to keep the gifts of grace in him? Let
them then that will, stand upon their own strength; we dare not. Use. 2.


And in the next place, here we learn instruction, to be humble in our own
eyes, to deny our own power, and to run at all times, and in all distresses
to this refuge of the Spirit for assistance; He that does this, does wisely,
and but his duty neither, the which he is commanded: And he that does not this,
lays himself open to the fiery shot of Satan, and dangerous methods he
uses; builds on the sand, and the house of his hope, the foundation of his
faith is certain to fall. But let not us so learn, or teach the Doctrine of
Christ: Yea rather pray we with the Prophet, Lord stablish me with thy free
Spirit. Plal. 51. 13.

VERSE. 15. This thou know, that all they which are in Asia be turned from
me: of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
IN this Verse is contained a complaint: Where four things are to be observed.
The Logical resolution.
I. The persons against whom it is made; and they be laid down. 1. Generally
and implicitly in the word, all etc. 2. Particulary and explicitly; one is
named Phygellus; another Hermogenes. II. These people are explicated by their
place of habitation or birth; which was, In Asia. III. Their fault was, that
they turned back. IV. From whom; and that is expressed in the word, Me. And
the proof of the truth of all this is annexed. For this thou know*

This thou know.] That is, thou Timotheus do The Theological exposition.
very well know by experience, that what I say is truth.

Thet all they which are in Asia] Or, which were in Asia: for the time is not
expressed in the Greek; neither is it much material, whether he complained of
them that followed him to Rome, or that remained still in Asia; or that dwelt
in Rome, being borne in Asia: But this is most true, that they were Asians. I
will say nothing where this place was, or how far distant from Rome, or the
situation and largenes of it; but leave it those that have skill in Geography,
and Topography.

Be turned from me.] That is, have not visited me, refreshed me. Me.] Paul, the
Ambassador of Christ, but have forsaken me, and denied their former
profession. Some read, are become adversaries to me, and rise up against me. I
think that they omitted all these duties of love and resolution in Religion,
the which were in Onesiphorus; so that I would expound their fault, by the
future commendation which immediately follows.

Of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.] Or, of which sort, country, number:
and, its likely, these two were of the chief of them; probably Ministers.

I do not think it unprofitable, in vain, or all together The Metaphrase.
without warrant, to put thee, my son, in remembrance of the many
Backsliders, who were in Asia, forsaking of me, and revolting from their former
profession of the Gospel; of which number Phygellus and Hermogenes were, men
not of the meanest rank and note amongst them, although it be very well
known unto thee by experience already.

For this thou know.] Hence it may be collected, that

It is warrantable and profitable to put the people in mind of others Doct. 1.
backesliding and falling away.

For if it were not, then Paul would not have done it, we may be assured. This
may also be seen in Act. 20. 29. etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 13. etc. 2 Timothy
4. 10.

For by this means they may learn to beware of such; Reas. 1.
And is it not good to be acquainted with our enemies? for he that is
forewarned, is forearmed.

It will cause the people to make the more of them that Reas. 2. Ioh. 6. 67.
be faithful; Will ye also go away! and is not this an help to discern
betwixt the good and evil?

It will make the best to look better to their footing, least Reas. 3.
they themselves also fall away. For good Christians are jealous of their own
estate, and will draw spiritual instruction out of every thing: When one falls
before us, we shall look the more circumspectly to our footing.

Finally, they will be the less discouraged or disheartened Reas. 4.
when they hear that some have fallen. For were there not some such examples,
it would go worse with the best; for hereby they see it is no new thing to
hear of revolters.

From this point we learn a twofold lesson; first, to take Use. 1. 2.
knowledge of the Backsliders. And next, to make others that be professors; or
Preachers of the Gospel acquainted therewith: For its warrantable, profitable:
therefore we are to put this duty in practice; and the neglect of it, is, or
may be, a wrong to thy self, hurtful to thy faithful Brethren, as experience
has taught many a time. What if others know it already? Yet it must be done;
for Timothy, we here see, knew this thing full well; And often admonition in
this kind, cannot be hurtful: for as man is too incredulous of the best; so,
too much prone to credit the worst.

Are turned from me.] We note here, that

To Revolt and turn from our former profession is a foul fault. Doct. 2.
and great offense.

For Paul does complain against it, and sets it down for a sin to be
abandoned of all men. Ioh. 6. 66. 1 Timothy 1. 19. and 5. 11. 12.

For in so doing, we dishonor God; yea, no way more. Reas. 1.
For will not profane men judge that there is no profit or comfort in serving
the Almighty, when such forsake their profession? For thus they will reason; If
that Religion had been good, they, and they would never have cast it off.

Again, we weaken, as much as in us lies, the Church of Christ; for cut off a
member, will not the body be the less Reas. 2.
powerful? And it gives the Devil and his instrument the more encouragement
to tempt and persecute the righteous; for having prevailed with some, they have
hope to do so with all.

Let us then that embrace the Gospel, be careful to hold what we have, and
never to revolt from our Religion: For Use.
we can no way more dishonor God, scandalize the truth, give fuel to the
rage of wicked men and Devils, then in so doing. Better had it been that such
had never made profession; better for them selves, better for all men. For none
but Satan and hell make gain of backsliding: And that thou may never revolt
and forsake thy Religion, do these things.

1. Before thou enter into Religion, lay a sure foundation Helps against
reuolting.
be well grounded in the truth and worth thereof; for ignoance of these two, is
the cause of backsliding. Why was our Apostle so resolute? Why would not Peter
and others forsake Romans 1. 16. Ioh. 6, 68.
Christ? They knew that he had the words of eternal life.

2. Cast up thine accounts, and prepare for the worst thing that can befall
thee; yea expect what evil the best are subject unto. For want of this causes
many to revolt in the least trial or temptation.

3. Withdraw thine affections from the love of all earthly things; for we
cannot follow God and Mammon: these be contrary Masters, commanding contrary
things.

4. Get experience of the comforts that be in the practice of the power of
Religion; so shall thou never leave it in the most fiery and hottest assaults.

5. Be jealous of thy self, especially when thou growest negligent in the
performance of good exercises, for this does presage a fearful revolt.

6. Consider, that without perseverance thou can not be saved; or if thou be,
that thy rising again will cost thee more toil and torment, being once
fallen, then to hold thee in thy present good condition. Let all these, and the
like be well thought upon.

Of which number be Phygellus and Hermogenes.] From the nominating of these
two, who, in all likelihood, were some principal persons: we gather, that

Men of high place and much respect among the people of God, Doct. 3.
sometimes fall away.

Judas did so, and Demas, with others. Psalm. 55. 13. 14. Act. 1. 17. 24. 1 Timothy
1. 20.

And here it is to be considered, that there be diverse kinds of falling away.
1. When men fall from the profession of Religion; first, either in respect of
the precepts, and that totally, or in part: or secondly, in regard of power in
the practice of Christian duties. 2. When they maintain their former
profession, yet separate from their brethren. 3. When men fall away for a time,
yet recover themselves afterward. 4. And last of all, When its done by some
urgent necessity, or willingly. In many of these respects the best have fallen,

And God would have it so,

First, that the world may see, that the Lord can support Reas. 1.
and maintain his Church by weak instruments, and mean persons: For his
power is the more manifest in thus doing; he has chosen the foolish things to
confound the wise, and weak to destroy the mighty.

That we may see how to stand fast, and that by cleaving Reas. 2.
unto him, and in seeking his assistance; for experience of our own and others
weakness, like a child to the wall, makes us to run to the Lord for
supportance, after by a fall we have hurt our selves.

And if it fall out thus with great men sometimes, then Use. 1.
let it be no new thing in thine eyes, to see the same in our days: For what
is there that has not been? and what has come to pass heretofore, that may
not fall out hereafter? Say not, as some do, that (if one fall away) cry out,
They are all no better; this kind of reasoning from some to the whole company
is not sound.

What? and may such Cedars shake, totter, and fall? then Use 2.
let the weak willowes and poplar take heed of the wind. For blessed is he,
whom other men's harms do make to beware. And it shall not be amiss, to lay
down here some causes of falling away.

And they be either, 1. inward, or 2. outward.

The inward be four especially.

1. Weakness: thus many have fallen of infirmity. Inward causes of falling
away.


2. Some affection not mortified: for one such a Jonah in the ship will
unsettle all.

3. Infidelity: when men want faith, they are unstable in all their ways.

4. Want of experience of that secret comfort which the Lord infuseth into the
hearts of such as stand resolutely for his truth in an evil time.

The outward causes are principally these.

1. Persecution: this has turned millions backward, Outward causes of falling
away.
who in the days of peace, had their faces to Sion-ward.

2. Some wrongs or injuries: the Israelites from this ground, thinking to be
revenged, fell from Rehoboam unto Jeroboam; But they were carried away captive,
and never returned.

3. Scandal, or offenses taken at some doctrine: From that time, many of his
Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Ioh. 6. 66.

4. The example of great men: Does any of the Rulers or Pharisees believe in
him? This is a cord that pulls thousands from the true path and Rule. Ioh. 7.
48.

5. When men have expected great promotion, but seeing their hopes frustrate,
they turn aside. This is a great load stone to draw an iron heart, from the
path to heaven.

6. Too much familiarity with men unsettled in the truth. Fearfully have some
fallen by this stumbling block. These be some of the maine causes, both inward
and outward that have moved many to become back^^ders: So that he that will go
on constantly and with resolution, must have an eye to all these things.

We may further note from these two named, and the rest omitted, that

God proportioneth man's shame according to the offense. Doct. 4.


These were (very likely) greater then the rest, either in place, or forwardnes
of profession, and therefore they ^urning aside, God has caused their names to
be registered in his book to their greater and perpetual infamy; as Judas
Iscariot, etc and these may be the reasons.

First, for God is just, and measures all his affairs by Reas. 1.
judgment; rewards all men according to their works.

Again, he does it to declare his hatred and detestation Reas. 2.
to sin, for God is not a God that loves iniquity. Psalm. 5.

Moreover, to take away the lying cauils of false censurers, Reas. 3.
who be prone to say, that his ways are unequal, partial. Ezec. 18. 29.

Finally, that great offenders may fear his revenging hand Reas. 4.
the more and thereby be moved to cease from sin. 1 Cor. 10. 11. Luke 13. 3.

Then let the greatest sinners expect the greatest torments and shame, either
in this or another world, for he is just in Use. 1.
all his proceedings, the mighty shall be mightily tormented. He that has been
a ring leader to drunkenness, if he do not turn, shall drink the viols of
Gods greatest wrath in the cellar of darkness and blacknes, where he shall be
drunken, but not with wine; stagger, reele, fall and never rise again. The man
that has fallen from co^tinency to the foul sin of fornication and
uncleanness, polluted the young and tender virgin with the spreading infection
of his hotbreathing lust, and has corrupted so many hope full subjects, must
know, that Whoremungers and Adulterers shall be deeply ad^udged by the Lord:
For these be the sins that will eat up all a man's increase, burn to the
center of hell, and devour to destruction. And it shall so be to all peccant
persons, for the higher they fall, the more fearful shall be the bruising, the
breaking.

And does the Lord proportion man's shame according to Use. 2.
his sin? Then let all of us abstain from the least appearance of iniquity.
This is a point of high wisdom to be practiced of profane persons. What if
we cannot abstain from all sin? yet let us fly it as much as we can. Is
it wisdom for a man to tumble in the mire, because he cannot walk but his
feet will be fouled, spotted? to run still on the scoore without all care,
being somewhat already indebted? to swallow poison, in consideration that he
has tasted of some vnhealthful and noisome thing? Then learn to be wise,
shun all the evil thou can, so (at the worst) thy torment one day shall
be the lesser, the lighter. Nay, be thou sure of this, that though thou be
God's, yet thy shame shall abound with an heavy and tart correction, set on by
the sharp correcting hand of a father, if willingly and wilfully thou swallow
up sin, and devour with great greediness the full cups of iniquity. For the
more power the Lord has conferred upon thee, whereby to enable thee to stand;
if such a man as thy self then fall, thy rising again shall be the more
fearful, painful. This is a truth that cannot be denied.

And from Gods proceedings, Let them that are Gods Use 3.
on earth, learn to follow his example. Therefore if an Absalom entice the
subjects from the Father and Prince of the land, to rebel, rise up in arms
and seek to depose him; above all the rest, let such a man die the death, and
have his name writ in the earth. Thus did other Magistrates in the days of
old, so do thou in these latter times. One too many: that Phygellus and
Hermogenes by their example or persuasion, being of some greater note, drew
many of these, all, to fall away: for which cause our Apostle, guided by Gods
Spirit, left their names recorded to have them rot the more, and that others
might tread in his steps.

If thou then, that are advanced by God, meet with one of those breathing
devils the Papists, that like the ancient Pharisees compass sea and land to
make a Protestant fall away and become like themselves: to insult against his
Sovereign, and to bath his hands in the blood of the Lords anointed, whether
they be plodders in the night, or (for more close effecting of their damnable
enterprises) walk in the day, and with the Moon are beheld full in the
Congregation with borrowed light once in the Month; Let them be rewarded
according to their sin, and the evil they have, or, if they had not been
prevented, would have effeced: For blessed shall that man be, who dasheth such
heads against the stones.

I might here further note from these two, that

Great wicked men fall by couples. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 17. Doct. 5. Reas. 1.


For the Devil in all things seeks to imitate the Lord. If God have a Moses
and an Aaron; he will have a Iannes and a Iambres. If Christ set out his true
disciples by two and Exodus 7. 11. 12
by two; Antichrist will do the like. We read of Joshua and Caleb: and of
Sanballat and Tobiah: of Paul and Timothy, and of Philetus and Alexander.

Because one will toll on, and tempt another: for sin Reas. 2.
unites sinners as grace does the godly: and by couples they seem to be the
less faulty, the more able to defend their false cause.

Learn we hence to rise by couples: turn we and allure Use.
others to return: For woe to him that is alone, when two strong men oppose
him, or a true cause.

And it may be noted, that

Many may fall away together. Ioh. 6. 66. Luke 2. 35. Doct. 6. Reas. 1.


Because one temptation may have the same power in the weak or false hearted
Christian, were they thousands, as in a singular person. For by one Rule many
may fall, as by the truth millions may stand.

Examples in any thing prevail mightily, and multitude Reas. 2.
draws wonderfully forward, backward.

Say not then in thine heart that such a Religion is not the Use. 1.
truth, because many fall from it; for in so doing thou may condemn the
Gospel of Christ.

In such a time as this, especially beware; lest thou be also Use 2.
drawn from thy stedfastnes, and the truth of Religion. For where one leads,
another is prone to follow: Men in this are fitly compared to sheep; for let
one run out of the fold, not one will stay behind.

Further it may be observed, that

Usually when men forsake the truth, they fall from the professors Doct. 7.
of it also. For no doubt but these fell from both.

And finally, let it be marked, that

The best man may be forsaken. These left Paul. Doct. 8. Quest. Ans.


Did these never return to the truth afterward?

God knows, not we: and though we hope the best of some; yet let us fear the
worst for the good of our selves.

VERSE. 16. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus: for he often
refreshed me; and was not ashamed of my chain.
WE may not think that this complaint and commendation The Coherence.
are here annexed without reason, or relation to the percedent verse. For thus
(I conceive) it is.

Paul having pressed Timothy by many maine and forcible arguments, not to be
ashamed of the doctrine of the Gospel; In the 13. ver. gives him a direction
what to do that he may not be ashamed; which is, to keep the pattern of
sound words; for he that works by a true and straight rule, shall have no
cause to be ashamed of his workmanship. But in regard this might seem hard to
Timothy, he tells him what he must observe, that he might be able to follow
this form of doctrine. viz. Keep the graces of God from decaying that are in
him. Oh, but he might suggest, this thing is as hard as the other: Now Paul
secretly grants him this; and therefore tells him that he can no ways do
that, but by the assistance of the holy Ghost. ver. 14. And having given him
this good rule, least his son should be puffed up with presumption, and omit
all subordinate helps, he tells him how many have fallen away. ver. 15. for
Timothy might thus conceive; Well; if the Holy Ghost be, and dwell in me, I
will fear the less; or he might be temped to be careless, from that ground,
for the preservation of these worthy things. And last of all, least upon the
Mement of so many Revolters, and that of Phygellus and Hermogenes, he might be
too much on the other side again dejected, (for man on both hands is incident
to fall into extremities) he, brings in a worthy example of love, boldness,
stedfastnes and resolution in this Onesiphorus to hearten and imbolden him.
This may seem to be the true scope of Paul, and dependence of these four last
verses. Or it may be thus; Paul, may put Timotheus in mind of these men's
falling away; and of this good man's resolution; that he by the shame which
befell the one, and the praise accompanying the other, might be the more
dissuaded from declining, and persuaded to stand fast: For doubtless these
instances of coutrary persons proceedings carry with them the seeds and force
of an argument being by Paul thus produced. But to omit that, we come to the
words, the which consist of a petition, and a reason.

In the petition we may obserne 3. things. 1. To whom, it is The Logical
resolution.
preferred, the person is, the Lord. 2. The thing petitioned for; and that is
mercy. 3. For whom this petition is put up; and that is for the house of
Onesiphorus. Thus much for the prayer or petition.

In the Reason are 3. things also, or it is threefold. 1. Onesiphorus refreshed
Paul. 2. He did this often. And 3. He was not ashamed of his chain. And though
the Reason seem but twofold why he prayed to God for this man, yet we may
without breach of the Reasons rule, apprehend it to be threefold, as we have
demonstrated out of the word [ Often.]

The Lord give.] That is, God the Father impart, confer The Theological
Exp^sition.
or grant.

Mercy.] I would here understand mercy to be taken in a large extent; as for
outward and inward blessings, with whatsoever is profitable or comfortable for
soul and body; or, for all the like refreshings I was in my troubles refreshed
with, may be the Apostles meaning.

To the house of Onesiphorus.] House in the Hebrewe is of building; in Greek
of dwelling: in our English from custody or tuition: And the word, house, may
be borrowed from the Almaine, huis, which is of hu, to defend. Whereby the way
we may take the description of an* house, the which is a building wherein man
does inhabit or dwell for safety and tu^tion. By house in this place is
meant, the people whereof Onesiphorus had charge, whether wife, children, or
servants, by a Metonymie.

For he often refreshed me.] That is, did by his personal presence, prayers,
conference, and gifts many a time recreate and comfort me both in body and
mind.

And was not ashamed of my chain.] That is, When I was used like a thief or
malefactor, and went up and down with irons on my heels; or, having a keeper,
was led being chained by the hand; he took knowledge of me, and did not pass
by me, as they of Asia did, accounting it a disgrace to their reputation.

As I cannot but justly complain against, and condemn The Metaphrase.
all Asia, of which company were Phygellus and Hermogenes, in that they were
ashamed to visit or refresh me; So I must needs highly commend Onesiphorus for
many refreshings, whereby he comforted me both in soul and body; and took
acqnaintance of me, esteeming it no disgrace or shame, although I was chained
and used like a Malefactor. For the which his kind dealings toward me I
beseech the Father of all mercy, to comfort* and bless^ all his whole family,
wife, children ^^d servants, both in soul and body with all earthly and
heavenly benefits; even as he has comforted and refreshed me in all my
miseries and great afflictions by his presence, prayers, conference and other
favors.

The Lord give mercy etc.] Whereas many fell away, and Doctrines deduced.
one mentioned that was resolute; and Paul brings him in to be imitated of
Timothy, we may note this instruction, that

One good man's Example is to be preferred and followed before Doct. 1.
a world of wicked persons.

We may not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23. 2. No: one Lot in Sodom;
one woman in the South; one Michaiah is to be respected before al other
unclean Sodomites, lazy Damosells, and hundreds of false Prophets. 2 Pet. 2.
Luke 11. 31. and 1 King. 22. 8.

For he has the truth on his side, he follows the narrow Reas. 1.
way that leads to heaven. Now the truth is to be preferred more then error,
though Millions swerue to the one and a few embrace the other.

Again, God will excuse no man for so doing. It will be Reas. 2.
a cold plea for a man to say; I saw few of that stamp but multitudes of this;
I did as the most did, when he shall come to the time of reckoning, the great
day of his account.

This justly meets with some in our days, who hold Use. 1.
neighbors fare, good fare; and, to do as the most, the best way. But have
these many the truth on their side? do they keep the form of sound words?
What a madness would we esteem it, if a man when he is conuented before the
judge and accused for theft, should say, why? all my Townsmen do still live
by stealth; I scarce know one of many who will not filch and steal? And shall
we not then judge him a fool, that will be drunk for company, and follow the
most, though they be the worst? Noah might have followed the old world;
Onesiphor us all Asia; the Queen of the South have staid at home; Lot ate and
drunk with the Sodomites; and the Prophet Mithaiah Prophesied lies with 400.
false Prophets upon as good ground: But should they have then escaped drowning,
burning, and damnation? Would these examples have exempted them from fire and
destruction? yet they were great, many, and mighty for multitude.

In the next place therefore, let us never be led by the most Use. 2.
but the best; for if we follow the many millions who drink up sin, as the
fishes do water, we shall participate of their pain and torment. Let us all
then with good Iosuah, resolve, that we, with our families will serve the Lord;
for heaps of lewd examples, exempt none that tread their dark steps from
cursing and burning. Wherefore, with fewest, follow the truth in love; and
never run after the rude and rash multitude to commit evil.

Another point we may single out from the comparing of them that fell away,
with him that stood steadfast in the faith; which is, that*

In the time of persecution few have been found faithful. Doct. 2. Psalm. 12.
1. 1 King. 19. 10


David cries, Help Lord, there is not a godly man left. Elias, I am left
alone. The faithful are fallen from the earth, diminished are the righteous.
Luke 2. 35.

For affliction is harsh to flesh and blood; it will not easily Reas. 1.
be sustained, undergone: Oh! how hard a thing is it to forsake all and follow
Christ?

Because many were never thoroughly rooted and grounded Reas. 2.
in the truth; they have not deeply tasted of the powers of the world to come;
therefore they pity themselves.

Stand not amazed then, if upon the same ground, thou Use 1.
see whole troops cast off the yoke, throw their ensigns in the field and
run away: For the strong water of affliction will carry unsound minds like
chafe, on heaps before it. Let this sword be drawn, pierce the hearts of one
or two, the Hypocritical thoughts of thousands will be unsheathed, discovered.
Luke 2. 25.

Then boast not too much of others or thy own resolution Use. 2.
in the times of peace: for thou may well, with Peter in an hot skirmish,
shrink and shriuell, seek out a secret place and deny thy Master. Many cry, I
would have dyed rather then have done as such, or so: But wast thou ever in
like trial? have thou proved thy prowess by experience in equal peril? why
then it is somewhat to the purpose; If not, do thou fear (for wisemen will)
it is but vain boasting, cowardly like bragging. And I have seen this, that
baw^ng curres bite least, soonest run away: so hot spirits in calm times, have
proved the greatest cowards when Garments have tumbled in blood. I had rather
be that son, who promised naught, and yet did his Fathers will; then he that
said enough, but did nothing.

And so we come more directly to the words as they are independent, and
absolute in themselves. And first of all we collect this instruction, that

A good governor may procure a blessing to the whole family. Doct. 3.


For Paul's prayer was grounded on the Lords promise; Genesis 19 and 30 27. and 39.
5.
therefore he might prevail. Lot did so to Sodom: Joseph to Pharaoh's house,
Jacob to Laban: Lydia, and the Iaylor, being Act. 16.
baptized and believers, no doubt but their families fared the better for their
sakes. Rahab, the harlot saved many alive; so Josh. 22.
Paul in the ship.

For godly governors are in the Covenant of grace; and Reas. 1.
the Lord has promised to be their God, and the God of their seed also: and
shall his promise take none effect? Away Genesis 17. 7.
with that.

A second reason may be drawn from the near union Reas. 2.
that is amongst them: for Masters and servants; Parents and children make, as
it were, but one body; so that if it go well with the head, welfare the
members. Whelps fare the better for the childrens sake, in gathering up the
crumms that fall from their fingers.

This serves in the first place, to cut off the many cauills Use. 1.
which such men use to make. They use to reply, like the virgins when they are
moved to distribute to the necessity of the Saints; I would, but I fear that
I have not enough for my self and children; you know that I have a great
charge, and no small thing will maintain so many, fill all these mouths; And,
He is worse then an Infidel, that provides not for his family. Thus covetous
men quote Scripture to serve their wicked purpose, but never else. Yet alas!
they never consider the prayers of the Saints; how God of oftentimes punishes
their posterity with poverty, for their pinching; nay takes from them. his
word and Spirit, the greatest judgment on earth, as he did by the family of
Jeroboam. And though children be punished for their own sin, yet that they
are punished such a time, and in such a manner or measure, often comes to
pass through the wickedness of parents: As we see* that when the Canaanites
sin was full, they brought a speedier and greater curse upon their posterity.

This may be a great comfort for good governors; for Use. 2.
certainly they shall not loose their reward: have thou visited the widows and
fatherless? washed the Saints feet? distributed to their necessities? then
shall the Lord show mercy to thee and thy seed after thee; build upon it: for
God is true of his promise; yea such as comfort his, shall be comforted of him.
But on the contrary, such parents as pinch and spare, withhold their hands from
doing of good, when just occasion is offered, they shall lay up wealth for him
that shall wast it; nay, peradventure, they shall never know who shall be their
heir; and is not this vanity, and a great grief?

And this may be a strong Motive to move parents to be Use 3.
good and godly for their childrens sake: would thou have thy throne
established, thy feed flourish, and thy posterity blessed? then be merciful
to the poor; become an honest man, fear God and work righteousness. A wicked
father and profane mother, as much as in them is, do pull down poverty,
shame, contempt, and all the fearful curses of the Almighty upon their own
souls and bodies, with their children also. Oh! that they would believe this?
Let natural affection move thee, if the fear of God will not work upon thee
to do good and to be pitiful. And know thou this, that wicked Parents are
likest to the Devil, murderers from the beginning; no sooner have they given
the weak infant a being; but by their sins, as so many sharp pricks, or
keen knives, they they pierce and strike it through the heart (if God show not
greater mercy) with deadly wounds, temporal, eternal. Why then weep for your
selves, and do good for your selves and for your children. Yet, for all our
preaching and pressing of parents to piety, some houses are like little hells,
and diverse governors worse then Achitophel, who though he hanged himself, had
a care first to set his house in order.

Furthermore, this doctrine should instruct us to pray for good governors,
godly parents. For woe to that society, Use. 4.
where the Ruler of it is ignorant, profane, or a child in understanding. Such
good men are little regarded, respected; men esteem of them at too small a
valuation. Cork is light, yet it keeps the net from sinking to the bottom
of the sea: so good governors are too little esteemed of, Notwithstanding,
were they removed, fire and brimstone should fall down from heaven, and heaps
be tumbled into the nethermost hell.

When good Josiah was taken away, the people as men sensible of their own
misery, mourned so, that it became a proverb, like Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddo; for his death did presage future and fearful evilles to follow. When
Lot was gone to Zoar, what befell the inhabitants? and if Paul had not been in
the ship, who had come safe to shore? Wherefore make much of such, pray often
and earnestly for such, mourn and spare not for the departure of such,; and
let all the men of God in their preaching, aim especially at the conversion of
such: For one good King, godly governor, holy father is worth ten thousand of
the inferior people; for all the world will be tapt to imitate the Rulers; and
great men being good, will do the more good by their speech, example, and
authority. Why did King David, a little before his death, give his son
Solomon a charge to serve the Lord God of Israel in such a particular and
special manner? Why? for he was to succeed him in the kingdom, to build the
Temple; therefore he was so urgent to press him to piety; Let us in the like
case do the same. In a word, if they that govern houses, Colleges or
Kingdoms be godly, pray for them, praise God for them; but if not mourn, and
entreat the Lord to amend them: And the higher place thy son is to have in
the Church or commonwealth, strive thou the more to teach him the knowledge and
service of God.

And may a good governor bring a blessing to he Use. 5.
whole house? then depart not out of such a family, from under such a man's
protection; for if thou do, thou may draw judgments upon thine own pate.
Some cannot endure such Masters as well curb them of unlawful pleasures,
press them to the performance of holy duties; but will like the prodigal, up
and be gone. These outrunne the shower of Gods grace, and think they do well,
when alas! as much as they can, they drown themselves in perdition and
endless destruction. They had rather eat and drink, and devour beef and
garlike in Egypt, then the water of life and Manna from heaven, under the
conduct of Moses. Are thou one of this mind? then alter thy manners, for fear
a worse thing follow.

Finally, this must teach those that live in bad houses to Use. 6.
be up and gone. Is the governor a Papist or Athiest; a swearer or filthy
person? carry not with him, except a forced necessity compel thee; For, as the
Lepers said in another case, if thou abide in such a^ place, some mischi of
evil light upon thee. 2 King. 7. 9.

Thou will say unto me; how shall I know a godly Quest.
family?

Well enough: and that by these marks: Answ.


1. Is there in it more good books and Bibles, then payres of cards and tables?

2. Is there more praying then playing? searching of Scriptures, then shufling
of cards? turning over of the holy papers, then tossing of tables? singing of
Psalms, then obscene songs and sonnets? desire and endeavor to grow in grace,
more then to gather goods?

3. Is there constant prayer morning and evening? sanctifying of the creatures,
before they be received? casting out of the bad, receiving in the good?

And last of all, Is the Sabbath strictly observed of all strangers that rest
there, as of the daily inhabitants? then conclude, that the fear of God is in
that place; and (if thou may) lodge and cate thy bread there. That house that
has neither. Bible or good book, reading, praying or singing of Psalms;
instruction, catechizing, nor care to keep holy the Lords day, is that place
where Satan's throne is, and the Devil dwells. And (not to belie them) such
filthy and infectious habitations be the families of Papists, yea all that I
have been acquainted with; of which sort the Norherne parts are but too fully
replenished: Rome has two much room there amongst them. Abraham did teach his
family: Jeremiah imprecates the Lord to pour down his fury upon the families
that call not on his name. David did the like. See Ier. 10. vlt.

But passing this point, we come to handle another, which is, that

True affection is of a spreading nature. Act. 26. 29. Romans 2. 3.

Paul loved Oresiphorus well, and from the head we see it enlarged it self to
the whole house, all the members: Hence it is, that in the Scriptures it is
compared to water; for love is said to be shed in the heart: or to oil, that
being Romans 5. 5. Psalm. 133. 1. etc.
powered on the head, runs down all the garments. Certainly, he that in
truth loves the parents, cannot but affect the children.

For at the first, it was so created. As the understanding Reas. 1.
was to see all truth in all things; so was the affection framed to effect all
things the which reason approved. Those two were to be proportionable, like the
pattern and the thing made by it. Now at our Regeneration Love, in some
degree, is restored to that perfection it had at the Creation, therefore
spreads.

Because that Love is nimble, subtle, active; therefore likened Reas. 2.
to fire that would convert all contrary elements and subjects into its self.
Its hotter then the coals of Juniper; it compasses the creatures as a
garment; it will dilate it self far and near. For of all simple elements,
fire is the most active, and spreads (as we may see by a candle) the
furthest; and so will true and fervent affection.

Again, Love shouldreth out envy, the which a pinching Reason 3.
and cold frost, freezeth and holds things together, from spreading. Envy
would draw all good from others, to it self; but love does break those bonds,
and sets the heart at liberty.

And is not Love, true love one of the most sacred attributes Reason. 4.
in God? yea God is called Love. And did not the Lord (before sin brake the
condition) extend his affection to all creatures? Why then; a spark of that
true fire in the creature, cannot but have a large extent, a spreading
operation.

This may inform us, what to judge of many in these Use 1.
days; surely they have little or none of this oil, or fire abroad and
kindled in their hearts; for if they had we should fee it is spreading. We may
truly say, with Christ, that Love is waxen cold. Many boast much of it; but
where shall we find a faithful, loving man? for all seek their own and not
the good of their brethren. We have a proverb, Love me, and love my dog; I
wish some did not more love their dogs, then the Lords children.

And by this doctrine, in the impartial examination of Use. 2.
our selves, we may try the truth of our Love. Can thou, that art a
Magistrate, say with Moses; Oh! that there were such an heart in my people to
serve God? being a preacher, can thou break out with Paul, I would to God
that all that hear me this day were such as I am, the children of the Lord?
Has the Lord made thee a father, and can thou pray with Abraham and Noah, Oh
that Ismael might live? and Iapheth dwell in the tents of Shem? that is, that
my disobedient seed might know the Lord God of their father, serve him, and be
saved? you that are Governors of families, is it in your hearts and hands for
you and your people to follow God? do you labor, like Cornelius, that all
your family might fear the Lord? And you that are single persons, do you
help one another to get grace and to grow up in godliness? then this fire of
true affection is from Gods own altar descended on you, this love is shed
abroad in your hearts; the oil of amity has anointed your garments, and you
are of that number which with joy unspeakable shall one day behold the face of
God. But if this desired spreading be absent, your hearts are stuffed* with
hatred, cold envy has benumbed your subtle and active affections; and
therefore take heed of this, that you be not found haters of God, and lovers of
pleasure above him or his. If you be, hear your doom, Depart from me into
everlasting fire, for I know you not; you did never visit me in my members;
cloth me, feed me, or build up my decayed body, by prayer, instruction,
example, nor in affection; therefore you have no love in you, neither shall ye
receive any favor at my hands, for the head and members make but one object.

Thou will say unto me. How far will love spread it Quest. Answ.
self? Why; from God the Father, to all his children; Christ the head, to all
his members; from the beginning of Gods book to the last letter; in breife,
from one end of the world, from one part of the large heavens, unto the other;
true love would have al sexes, persons, countries and kingdoms (so far forth
as it may stand with the will of God the Father) to be sanctified and for ever
blessed: for there is no bounds in love: Affection (unless God chain it, the
which he may and does for man's unworthiness) is without limits; spreading it
self from the external conuexe of the highest throne round about, and thence
descends to the earth's lowest center; yea Love embraces the Lord who is
infinite, incomprehensible, so far forth as sound reason does rightly guide
it, direct it. It is a garment that does cloth all creatures, and to the
uttermost of its power, wrap within its lovely arms the eternal Creator. He
that finds this in himself, finds a good thing; and but that very
character which is imprinted in the heart of every true believer and faithful
person.

I might deduct another doctrine out of the matter of this petition, which is,
that

The mercy of God is principally to be desired for our friends. Doct. 5.


For what Paul prayed for, for his friends, we should request also for ours.
Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 3. Gal. 1. 3.

For if we receive mercy from God, we shall want no Reas. 1.
manner of thing. For to whom the Lord shows mercy, to that man he will give
all gifts spiritual and corporal whateuer, so far as they be good for him.

Again, had we all other favors the world can affoard, Reas. 2.
yet without the mercy of God, they would but prove curses to us in the end;
for without mercy we are no members of Christ, so no sons, and consequently
no heirs of heaven.

This checkes the preposterous course of many in these Use 1.
times; The Papist he entreates God that his friend may have his Purgatory here
or in another world; but omits the mercy of God in the beginning. The common
Christian or earth-worme wishes his kindred and companions strong bodies, large
possessions, heaps of silver and long life; but no mention of Gods mercy all
this while; that is least thought on, seldom prayed for. He that observes but
the custom of many in their best wishes, shall hear them ordinarily cross
this Canon and method of our Apostle.

Let this then be a derection to thee, what chiefly and Use. 2.
first of all to beg of God for thy friends. Ask not that thy sons may sit
at the right hand of Christ in his earthly kingdom; for it is not of this
world. Cry not for Quails in the wilderness; for they may choke thee and
thine: nor for riches, for the thief may break through thy wall, carry them
away: seek not long life, or like Saul the honor of the people: But cry to
the Lord for grace and mercy: this, this is that one thing necessary for thy
self, for all thy friends. And though few do think so, yet it is so; for if
the Lord do not deny thee this, then he will deny thee nothing; and he that
has this shall have all things: This will wash away thy sins; cloth thee
with the righteousness of Christ; enrich thee with the saving graces of the
Spirit; procure thee food and raiment, sanctify all things to thee, affliction
and sin it self; give thee comfort in trouble, hope in death, and carry thee
to the throne of God, where, in his presence, thou and thy friends shall have
fullness of joy for evermore. Then when thou prayest; say, The Lord give mercy
to me, and my friends, to them and their families.

For he often refreshed me.] In these words we will briefly point out the
Doctrines, and handle some of them. From the person refreshed, Paul, we gather,
that

Want may befall Gods dearest children. Doct. 6.


Jacob sometime went over Jordan with his staff: Joseph was once no rich man:
the widow of Sarepta was in a great Gen 32. 10. 1 King 17. 6. Luke 16. 20.
strait: Lazarus was poor: and it is said, the women did minister to Christ (
Luke 8. 3.) of their substance.

The Lord does it for many Reasons.

First, to correct his for the abuse of his creatures; for Reas. 1.
when we have, like the Prodigal, misspent, abused, or surfetted on them,
the Lord in justice may correct us in that kind.

God does it to humble us. For that which wicked men Reas. 2.
cast in the teeth of Gods children to disgrace them, the Lord does in
goodness to root out pride and ambition in them.

That their faith and patience may be tried. Who fed thee Reas. 3.
with Manna in the wilderness to prove thee, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. And so the Lord did
deal with Job.

Lastly, God does it, to make his power the more to appear Reas. 4.
in the preserving of his children by weak means; or from so mean a
condition in lifting them up to great promotion.

This must teach those that never wanted, 1. not to Use 1.
count them wicked, who have been, are, or may be in want: 2. to praise God
that their pastures have always been green, and their cups flowed over: 3.
to prepare for a change; for prosperity is often seconded by adversity. Job 1.
vlt.

This must be a stay to uphold the poor godly man Use. 2.
from any murmuring, or over much heaviness; for his estate is as good as
sometimes his Masters was. Do not repine at the Lords providence: For that is
but to draw down a heavier correction; nay rather, find out the cause, and if
it be sin, 1. leave it, 2. crave pardon for it, 3. pray for relief, and 4.
tarry the Lords leisure, and (in time convenient) he shall comfort thine heart.
Psalm. 27. vlt.

Again, here Note, that.

We are not once, but often to refresh our afflicted brethren. Doct. 7.


We must do it again and again, Phil. 4. 16. and never wax weary in
well-doing. 2 These. 3. 13.

For we are members of one body; and shall we but once Reas. 1.
feed and cloth them?

Christians are Temples of the holy Ghost; and shall we Reas. 2.
not often repair it?

God does often refresh thee; and will thou not tread Reason 3.
in the steps of thy heavenly Father?

Thou would desire to be often refreshed thy self, and Reason. 4.
must thou not do, as thou would be done unto?

This reprooueth those, that grow weary in weldoing; Use 1.
they begun well, but something lets perseverance: well beware, lest as thou
have measured to others in their need, the Lord measure not the like to thee
in thy greatest extremity.

Then let not us begin only, but persevere in welldoing; Use. 2. Gal. 6. 9.
for (by this reason Paul urges this duty) we shall reap in due time, if we
faint not. He that does not endure to the end, cannot be saved.

Moreover we may collect hence, that

Gods children are a thankful kind of people. Doct. 8.


Or that, Former favors are not forgotten by the faithful.

Paul he carries in mind the kindnesses done unto him, and prays for his
friends. So good David, is not unmindful of his trusty Jonathan after his
death. Is there yet (says he) any man left of the house of Saul, that I may
show him mercy for Ionathans sake? 2 Samuel 9. 1. See Romans 16. 4. Phil. 2. 29.

For they are just; and the remembrance of favors conferred Reas. 1.
is a kind of justice; thanks is the least requital.

For they be also humble. Proud men forget all kindnesses, Reas. 2.
or at the least, take no knowledge of them.

Its a means to maintain affection; and, as much as in Reas. 3.
them is, they seek peace with all men.

They know, that if they forget their friends, they shall Reas. 4.
be forgotten. For with what measure we mete, it will one day, be measured to
us again. Mat. 7. 2.

This justly reproves many in these days, who suffer Use 1.
all kindnesses from God and man to slip out of their minds. We have hundreds,
that have been cherished, relieved* yet have not returned thanks. Nay, now a
days, he that lends to some in want, shall loose both his goods and his
friends. But no marvel: For how should we expect thanks from them; from whom
the Lord, for all his favors, receives naught but daily indignities?

Would we be counted Gods children? then forget not Use. 2.
former favors but be thankful: for its a good thing to praise God and man
for the least kindness received. And its a brand of a wicked person to be
unholy, unthankful. I have sometimes thought that the nine Lepers were so
glad that they were healed, that for joy they ran^^e to their friends, and
forgot to return thanks unto Jesus; like a little child, who when his parents
have put upon him a new coat, he is so forward to show his play fellows, what
a brave man he is, that he returns no praise for it to them for the present.
Well; howeuer this be; come thou to thy self as the Butler did; call to mind
thy fault this day, and be thankful; least thy father (at least for a time)
strip thee of thy most desired blessings; for a thankful heart is a good
heart, and highly respected with God and man.

And was not ashamed of my chain.] Here we note two doctrines; the first is,
that

Faithful men have been used as Malefactors. Doct. 9.


Joseph was put in the prison; Daniel in the den. Jeremiah in the deep
Dungeon; John beheaded; his Master crucified. See also Act. 12. 4. 6. Math. 26.
47. Ephesians. 6. 20.

For the world does so esteem of them. Have we not Reas. 1.
found this man a pestilent fellow, and an enemy to Caesar?

Or it may come to pass through hatred. Christ was put Reas. 2.
to death of envy, for they had no just accusation against him. What evil have
I done? Which of you can reprove me of sin? not one who could. Use. 1. Use. 2.


Let not the people be too forward in their censures.

And if thou be a Minister, or man of God and suffer to bonds, be patient, so
it be for welldoing; for thy brethren, thy Master too, have trod this press
before thee.

The second doctrine we note is, that

Not to be ashamed of the faithful in affliction, is a sure sign Doct. ^0.
of a sound Christian. Romans 1. 17. Josh 24. 15.

For Onesiphorus is opposed to them in Asia who fell away, and were ashamed of
Paul's bonds.

For its a token of Christian courage and resolution; for Reas. 1.
why? might not they be caught also?

It argues a great degree of humility; the which is an inseparable Reas. 2.
sign of a good Christian; for the more holy, the more humble.

Then those that shrink at such a season or occasion may Use. 1.
be deemed weak, or no Christians at all.

Never judge well of thy soundnes, if shame cause thee to Use 2.
forsake the doctrine thou professest, or to estrange thy self from the
deliuerers and preachers of it, especially in their affl^ctions.

VERSE. 17. But when he was at Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found
me.
THese words declare, that Onesiphorus was not ashamed, for whereas all they of
Asia turned from Paul, he sought him out and found him. And here it may seem
to appear, that these people were at Rome, when they forsook Paul; and also,
probably, that they met with him, with his chain, and would not take knowledge
of him, but turned themselves from him, and that by the opposing of these
several persons actions directly one against another.

Now in this Verse we have a description of Onesiphorus; The Logical
resolution.
1. Its said, that he was at Rome; that was the subject place where for a time
he abode. 2. He is described by an effect. For he sought 3. By the manner how;
very diligently: And 4. By the success of his seeking; he found whom he
sought. Again here be two things laid down in these words concerning Paul;
the one, that he was at Rome; the other, that he was prisoner, and in distress
there.

But when he was at Rome.] This word, But, is diversely used The Theological
exposition.
in Scripture. Sometime exclusiuely; I have lost none that thou gave me, But
the son of perdition. 2. Inclusiuely. Now is laid up for me a crown of
righteouses, and not for me only, But for all them that love his appearing. 3.
Discretiuely: He gave them all, none excepted, change of raiment; But unto
Benjamin three hundred pieces of silver. 4. Oppositiuely: Not Jesus, But
Barrabbas. And in the last sense, it* seems to be taken here. They of Asia
sought me not; or, He was not ashamed; But etc. opposing it to shame; and then
the arguments are diu^rs. I have thought it might be read. For, making it the
third argument of a Syllogism, or Reason to prove that Onesiphorus was not
ashamed of Paul's chain.

He sought me out very diligently.] To seek, in Scripture is sometimes taken
in the worst sense; also for prayer etc. Here it signifies, searching and going
from place to place, very studiously and inquisitiuely.

And found me.] That is, came where I was, and did meet with me. The
Difference betwixt Inuenire and Reperire is this. When we go on a thing, we
do inuenire; when a thing comes on us, we do reperire. The one seems to be
an act per se, the other per accidens.

Let no man once doubt, that Onesiphorus was ashamed The Metaphrase.
of me, being poor in and bonds; for he being at Rome, where I was prisoner
and in chains very diligently and studiously inquired for me, and trudged from
place to place until he had met me, found me out. And would he ever have done
this, if he had been ashamed of me, or scorned me? No verily, be thou assured
of that, my son.

For he being at Rome etc* or, when he was at Rome] When Doctrines deduced.
he was there and heard or knew of Paul's troubles, he then sought him, and
refreshed him, whence note, that

When the faithful are afflicted, then they are to be refreshed. Doct. 1.


Say not unto thy neighbor, Go and come again and to morrow will give thee,
if thou now have it. Prou. 3. 28. I am. 2. 15. etc.

For that is the fittest time: Now a morsel of bread, or cup Reas. 1.
of cold water to a dry and hungry stomach will be right welcome, comfortable.
A word now spoken to the weary and wounded soul, is in its sit season; and
how gladly will it be received?

Again, we know not what a day or hour may bring Reason. 2.
forth: our brother may be dead or swallowed up of overmuch heaviness in the
mean time; And will not that be pitiful, fearful? Now sleep hence forward;
the hour is come etc. could not but pierce the sluggish hearts of Peter and
John.

Besides, we may have our goods taken from us; or in Reason. 3.
future time want all opportunity to do good when we be willing; the which
(though the world never dream of such a thing) is an heavy curse. Would it not
grieve the husband to much have good seed, and yet want ground and time to sow
it?

In so doing we make God our debtor; and the sooner Reas. 4.
the better: is it not?

And here the best may be taxed, for omitting of the Use. 1.
present occasion, or poor man's necessity. We are prone to commit sin
instantly, and to put off good and charitable duties from time to time, and to
do them lingringly. But, beloved, this should not be so: we gather fruit when
it is the ripest; cut down corn when it is hardest; let blood when it grows
ranckest; and shall we not refresh our brethren being poorest?

Let us be otherwise minded. Is thy brother hungry? now Use. 2.
feed him? thirstly? now give him drink: burdened with sin? now comfort him:
sick, or in bonds? now visit him. And do but observe the Lords proceeding,
and thou shall see that always in the greatest straites, then he has declared
his arm of mercy. In the midst of the sorrows (says the Prophet) of my
heart, the Lord comforted my soul: In my days (mark; the best have their
days of affliction:) he heard me. Then go thou, and do likewise. Can thou
tell how it may fall out with thee in future time? Death will come; and its a
righteous thing with the Lord to deprive those of means of comfort then, when
as they would not comfort others in great sorrow, at that hour: We may run
from the poor, and his homely bed and cottage, but God and his swift curse
will one day overtake us. Wherefore, I, in the name and mercy of God, beseech
you, to mind this thing: Say not, Pharisaically, see to it thy self: Little
do thou know how the very presence of thy friend, in time to come, may
comfort thee: And I wish that the experience of the want of it, may sometime
teach thee the worth of it. I may truly say, that if men knew the sting of
death, burden of sin, or extremity of hunger, by experience; they would run
to and fro to comfort and refresh the afflicted: but men have not felt the one,
therefore they neglect the other: A morsel of bread or cup of small beer,
nay, a word spoken in due season, may not save the body, but a soul from
death. Then seriously, assiduously mind this one thing.

Thou will reply, we shall endanger our selves in so doing. Object. 1. Sol.


1. Onesiphorus might have said so, being at Rome, but would that have served
his turn?

2. Thou therefore must do it, and leave the event to God. Epaphroditus was
near unto death, and regarded not his life in this case for the service of his
brethren. Phil. 2. 30.

But they are visited with strange and noisome diseases. Object. 2. Sol.
Why, such have most need of all others; the greater misery, the more need of
mercy.

I am a Minister, and my people have the plague, may I Quest. 1.
visit such.

Its generally held, no, thou may not; being a public Answ.
person: for thy death, may be the death (in man's judgment) of many a soul:
And a general good is always to be preferred before a particular. Yet thou
must see that such by some trusty keeper, may be respected, well attended, at
the least.

May a Minister live in a corrupted air? Quest. 2. Answ.


Yes: For 1. Its as good for him as for the people. 2. And God would have such
saved.

He sought me etc.] We will collect hence, that

The faithful, where we travel from home, are to be sought for.

We have in the Scripture, both precept and example to this purpose, and to
confirm the point. See Act. 21. 4. 8. Math. 10. 11.

For they be of our kindred; we are children of one father; Reas. 1.
and will not every one be desirous to see and be acquainted with his nearest
friends?

We shall receive comfort from them, and they from Reas. 2.
us; for they will tell us, what great works of mercy, the Lord has done in
that place; how the word runs, what faithful Men, Magistrates, Ministers, etc.
the Lord of his good providence has sent amongst them. And thus when the
Saints have met, they have, as we read, refreshed one another, and builded up
one another in their holy faith.

This checketh those that never do it, nor can endure others Use. 1.
to do it; Such a one was Diotrephes. 3 Ioh. 3. 9. 10.

Then when we go into a far country, let us enquire Use. 2.
who are worthy, that is, honest men. For its profitable many ways; in buying,
selling, borrowing, lending; in comforting and being comforted. You shall have
the drunkards gamsters, whoremasters, and the like enquire out one another, and
shall not we, such as be faithful, truly religious? This point is of good use;
but seldom practiced; and the best in the neglect of it, may be a great enemy
to himself, even in temporal affairs.

How shall I know such? Quest. Ans.


1. If the best report well of them. 2. If the worst say ill of them. 3. By
their speech and carriage; for wisdom and grace will appear in the words and
face, as the wiseman says. Yet believe not every report, fair show, good
word: For some men's sins follow afterward, as others go before, 1 Timothy 5. 24.

Very diligently.] The point is, that

Whom we affect truly, we will seek for diligently, speedily. Doct. 3.


For so the word may be rendered. This will hold in all things whateuer. David
loved the Lord and he would seek him early, at midnight, and all seasons:
Elisha loved his Master, therefore sought him: The parents of Christ loved Luke
2. 48.
him; and did they not seek him with heavy hearts? the Bride loved her
Husband, and so sought him: and we Cant. 3. 1, 2.
may say the like of what can be named.

Because the affections are implacable, unless the object Reas. 1.
be enjoyed which they most affect. It is the nature of love to delight in the
present fruition of that it most affects. And as every grave thing is in
motion, until it come to the Center, so are the affections stirring until
they claspe about the subject they affect.

Again, true affection desires to manifest its self to the Reas. 2.
thing it loves, and to make it the better; yea to be, if possible, made one
with it: But how can this be, if they two be separated? therefore the
affections will woo and importune the will to work for the bringing of them
together.

What then shall we say of those, who never sought the Use. 1.
Lord, says, grace, or the kingdom of heaven, in all their lives? do they
love the one or other? Is their cafe blessed, or cursed for the present? It
pittieth me to think of the misery that many be in; yet believe it not, or
know it not. Where do the most men seek him their souls best love? when do
they seek him? how do they seek him? Did Onesiphorus thus seek Paul,
because he loved him? and do we love Christ, and never enquire after him in
his Word, or in heaven? Surely it cannot be.

Would we then understand the soundnes of our affection Use 2.
unto God* his truth, graces and children? then let us try it by the diligent
search we make after these things: Do thou seek after God, search the
Scriptures, and use all other means for the having of them? then thy love is
seruent, not sained: But if thou do not labor the enjoying of them; of a
truth, the love of them was never entertained in thy heart, or salvation entered
into thy soul. Dau^d could say, Oh, how I long for God? and, When shall* I
appear in his presence? I meditate in the law day and night: Paul, I^couet to
be with Christ: and the Saints have used to cry, Come let us go into the
house of the Lord. Cold is that love, weak is that affection which never
works or endeavors to obtain and possess the thing it loves.

And sound me.] Here is laid down the success that Onesiphorus had in his
diligent search, whence collect we, that

They that seek shall find: all convenient circumstances being Doct. 4.
also observed.

For some shall seek to enter and shall not be able; because they either seek
amiss, and that in regard of the means, or end; or in that they take not the
acceptable time: For these cautions must be considered, and then the point is
firm, sound. Mat. 7. 7. Psalm. 50. 15.

Because the Lord cannot lie, deny himself, or break Reas. 1.
promise: his word is gone out, and it shall stand: therefore those that seek
shall find.

And if it were not so, then who would use the means, Reason. 2.
depend on the Lords promise, or could be saved?

This Doctrines Use serves first, to clear the Lord against Use. 1.
all false imputations that the Atheistical people have or may object against
his promise. For undoubtedly, he that seeks shall not lose his labor in the
end. Say not then with the idle servant, who dug his talent in the earth,
that the Lord is an hard Master: for he is true of his word, faithful to all,
that with honest hearts, do, or ever shall seek him, or his.

This may be, in the next place, a ground of great comfort Use. 2.
to all the faithful and upright hearted; for in whatsoever they go about,
they shall prosper. We may apply it to all things as well as to this
particular: and that by the warrant of the Prophets and Apostles themselves.
Do thou seek after the Lord? do thou desire his favor? call thou for
grace or mercy? cryest thou after wisdom and understanding? followest thou
after faith, love, and the the like gifts? pursuest thou, and pressest thou the
God of Abraham for wife, children, food, raiment, for earth and heaven? why
fear not, but hope still in the Lord, and thy heart shall be satisfied with
these things. But here let these rules be observed.

1. Take the present time: Seek the Lord while he may be Rules to be observed
in seeking.
found. The young man must Remember his Creator in the days of youth, least the
hours come wherein he shall have no pleasure in them. Iezabel had a time, so
had Jerusalem, Agrippa and many others; but when they foreslowed the
opportunity, they found not in future time any mercy. When God calls and we
will not come, we shall cry, but we shall not be heard. Woeful experience has
taught this truth to many thousands; for there is an appointed time for all
things under the sun.

2. Seek for what thou would have at the Lords hands, let him be the
principal. Asa was sick in his feet, Ezekiah at the heart; the one seeking
to the Phisician first, died: the other going to God, had his life many years
prolonged. Go not with Saul, to a witch at Endor; with Judas, to the
Pharisees: with Ephraim and Judah, to Ashur and Hos. 5. 13.
king Iareb: with the Papist, to the Pope or Angel; But go to the Lord; for
these are miserable comforters; and the best of them, if the God of all the
world, the first mouer of all things and chief Phisician be absent, cannot
heal thee or cure thee of thy wound. But seek unto God, and he will hear
thee, help thee.

3. Go to him; but not like the proud Pharisee, with I thank God I am not so,
nor so; neither with the boasting Papist, in the robes of thing own
righteousness; but come unto him in the name of Christ Jesus the son of his
love; send him, or set him before thee: For whatsoever thou shall seek in his
name, that is, in his worthiness, it shall be given thee. For without Christ, he
is a consuming fire.

4. Let the word, and that neuer-erring spirit be thy guide. If these two lead
thee to the Father in the new and everliving way of Christ the Savior of all
that are saved, thou shall find according to thy hearts desire. Practice this
Rule.

5. Have respect to the manner of thy seeking; let it be upon the feet of
faith and affection, with the wings of pure zeal and feruency, and then thou
shall find assuredly.

6. And finally, let the end of thy seeking be for the glory of thy God; the
good and comfort of thy brethren; and reformation of all thy ways; the curing
and curbing of thy strong corruptions, the increase of all grace: and for food,
friends, favor and raiment so far, and no farther, as the Lord sees them to
be needful for thee. Observe these directions, and then stay the Lords
leisure, and be sure of it, that as Onesiphorus found Paul, so shall thou the
thing thou have sought after, be it what it can in earth or heaven.

Now whereas Onesiphorus sought Paul at Rome, and was permitted to refresh him,
we may note, that

Rome heathen was not sobad then, as Rome Christian is now. Doct. 5.
Act. 28. 30.

For Paul might be suffered to live, to have his keeper Reas. 1.
to lead him in a chain, to dwell in a house; all that would were permitted
to come unto him; and without let he might preach the kingdom of God, the
Gospel of Christ; But now, if a Paul were there, he would not be thought
worthy to live, no not for an hour.

Again, wicked men grow worse and worse. Reas. 2. Use.


Let this for ever be as a sure brand for that Beast, who is drunkk with the
blood of the Saints; that it is he and no other who exalts himself above all
that is called God, and the very Antichrist whom the Lord will consume with the
sword of his mouth. They boast of piety and pity, when as Cain was no more
cruel to Abel, then they be to the faithful. Well; Let them think, that they
do God good service in putting us to death; yet they are deceived it that: In
this we are not; that for so doing they shall taste of the very dregs of Gods
hottest vengeance, spue, and fall and dye the second death. For Pope and
Papists are men according to the Devils own heart.

VERSE. 18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy with the Lord at that
day; and in how many things he has ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know
very well.
WE are now come (through the good providence The Logical resolution.
of God) to the last verse of this Chapter; In the which two things are
comprehended. 1. A prayer. 2. An Appellation. In the Prayer we may observe 4.
things. 1. To whom Paul prayed [ the Lord.] 2. For whom he prayed, [ him] That
is Onesiphorus.) 3. For what he prayed [ mercy.] 4. At what time he would have
his friend to receive the thing he prayed for [ at that day.]

In the Appellation we have these particulars. 1. That Onesiphorus relieved
Paul. 2. The place where it was, at Ephesus. 3. Wherewith, that is, many
things. And 4. The probation of this in the last words: These, or this thou
know very well. He draws an argument from Timotheus knowledge to confirm
his Testimony.

The Lord.] In Hebrew, Adonai is Lord, being a word of The Theological
exposition.
the plural number, yet often used in the form singular: it is derived of
Aeden, a base or pillar which sustaineth a thing: and our English word Lord,
has much like signification, being contracted of the old Saxon word Laford,
which comes of Laef, to support, sustain or cherish; so that, Lord is a
Sustainer, refresher, supporter, cherisher. For if God withdraw his power, all
things come to nothing. In the Greek, it properly signifies one that has
authority, or on whose authority something depends or consists: and so
indeed do all things depend on God, and he is chief governor and owner of
all things created.

Mercy.] The word in the Hebrew put for mercy, does import a sacred affection
of piety; favor, benignity, and bountiful good pleasure or will of God
toward a man, without respect of desert or merit. It is also applied to man,
and then it is meant, a pious, loving and benign affection, whereby he is
moved and inclined to do good, to show pity, compassion etc. or that grace
of God the which he has received from the father through Christ, which is
inherent in him; or conferred externally upon him, and then its glory. Isai.
40. 6. and 1 Pet. 1. 24. And it is frequent for the Greeks to use that word,
which our Apostle does here, for it; the which Christ himself allows and did
practice. See Hos. 6. 6. Math. 9. 13. And the Hebrews of Chesed, which is
Mercy call a godly man, chasid, that is, gracious, merciful. Psalm. 4. 4. some
read, a gracious Saint.

With the Lord.] The like phrase we read Genesis 19. 24. The Lord rained fire and
brimstone from the Lord. Paul uses the like manner of speaking; for as
judgment came from the Lord upon Sodom; so he prays for mercy to befall
Onesiphorus from the Lord: Yet I have thought, that Lord, in the first place,
is to be understood of the Father; and in the second, is meant the Son; for
he is the judge of the world: As if our Apostle had thus prayed; Now God the
Father grant that Onesiphorus may find mercy of his son, at his appearing,
unto whom he has committed all judgment. For Paul knew this, that Christ must
judge the world, and might therefore distinguish thus in his understanding,
when he prayed. But howeuer, the sense is good and sound.

At that day.] Some think; at what time he should also be afflicted; for at
one time or other Paul thought he might also suffer for the Gospel, though for
the present he escaped. Others have conceived, at the day of death: I rather
would take it to be meant, at the day of judgment; for then is the righteous
rewarded for his works; and that is a day, wherein, if it go well with us, it
will be well with us for ever. And its usual for good men, to have their minds
in trouble, set upon that object of the general freedom from all misery, and
fruition of all felicity.

And in how many things; or, how much.] By things may be understood, money,
meat, apparel, and the like; or parchment, papers, books, conference,
encouragement etc.

The sense is, very abundantly, liberally.

He has ministered unto me at Ephesus.] That is, freely, lovingly imparted and
conferred upon me, when I was personally there present.

Thou know very well.] Here Paul appeals to Timotheus, for the truth of his
testimony and confession. To speak my private opinion: This Appellation (I
think) has reference to that in the 15. verse: And thus the sense seems to
me. Thou know how many fell from me of Asia at Rome: But thou art better, or
very well acquainted in how many things, or how much I was relieved by
Onesiphorus at Ephesus: For (peradventure) Timothy saw not them, when they
rejected Paul, and cast off their profession, but heard it; or if he did, it
might be but once: yet he being Preacher at Ephesus, and abiding there long,
might often see Paul relieved by Onesiphorus. And this I take to be the reason
why Paul saying here, as in the 15. verse, thou know, does in this, add
better, or very well, which he omitted there: For it seems to be a comparison,
The one thou know well; the other better, or very well; or Timothy might
hear of the first, yet saw the second.

Though it be not in my power to make requital to my The Metaphrase.
good friend Onesiphorus for many his kindnesses; yet my hearts desire and my
prayer to God is, that he would show him favor and mercy, by the hand of his
son in that great day, when, and wherein, he shall come to judge all the
world: And good reason have I thus to petition the Lord for him; for thou art
very well acquainted, how abundantly he administered unto my necessities, being
at Ephesus; as thou art not altogether ignorant how all Asia fell from me and
forsook me at Rome.

The Lord grant unto him that, he may find mercy with the Doctrines deduced.
Lord at that day.] For our better and more methodicall proceeding, we will
first begin with the time, when Paul would have his friend to find mercy;
whence this is the point to be collected, that

There is a distinct time wherein the world shall be judged. Or, Doct. 1.
There is a day of Judgment. Eccles. 11. 9. Dan. 7. 13. Math. 24. 37. 2 Pet.
3. 10.

And that for these following Reasons.

That the creatures might be freed from bondage; and all Reas. 1.
manner of groaning; for till then they be subject unto much sorrow, going
against the proper end of their first creation; whereby the Lord is much
(through the abuse of them by the Reprobates) dishonored. They be the great
Book of God, always unfolded, wherein the wicked might read his power,
Deity, and wonders, if they would: they are oftentimes punished for man's
offenses; the earth is barren, groaning like a woman with child, yet cannot
bring forth her fruit; the Sea rages, and the springs are dried up; the
beasts of the field mourn; the fish of the waters die and smell; the fowls of
the air perish, and the very heavens become as brass: The good Angels are,
till then, ministering spirits, take many a journey from heaven to earth, place
to place, and from person to person, to comfort and kill, preserve and slay:
And some (but without grounds) have conceived, that they move, until that
day, the Orbs and celestial spheres: when as it is probable, no such things
be: For thus I would reason.

1. If there be material Orbs, wherein the stars, as If Angels move the
Orbs.
nails in a wheel be fixed; then they must be either more crasse and solid,
or more subtle and rare then the Element of fire: If they affirm, that they
be more solid; then how can a more grave body ascend above that which is
lighter? And if they hold, they be more subtle then the fire (above which they
say, they are placed): then how can the stars be fixed in them, for we cannot
fallen them in the air, much less then in a fine^ subject.

2. We see fishes in the sea, beasts placed on the earth, fowls in the air,
and Angels in heaven: Why then should the element of fire be created to be
void, since every element is replenished with its proper and peculiar
creatures? Earthly bodies be on earth; watery bodies in water; aerie, in the
air, heavenly, in heaven; so that by proportion and method, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars should be in the element of fire; and running their circular and
swift motion, they cast down the fire, which otherwise of its nature would not
descend; participating more of fire, (and being without sense, for otherwise
the fire would consume them) then any other element: For if we mark, we shall
see the Lord does maruailously fit every creature for its subject. And this may
seem to be the reason, why the Moon is spotted and no planet besides; in
that she runs her motion in the very ebb (as I may say) and dregs of the
element of fire: for the purest, as we see in water, is highest. And why the
stars nearest the Poles, do twinckle and look bright, may also be, in that
the fire, being moved there by the reflexe, does enlighten them more fully. And
whereas some seem to wander, it is not because they are not moved with a
circular Motion; but they come short, going a lesser compass, and therefore we
think that they go forward and backward. We may see the truth of this in
those people, that, in diverse paths one distant from another, do run with
a circular motion about a post or pole.

3. It is the position of those that do maintain Orbs, and Epicicles, that,
No violent motion is perpetual; how then, if the Angels or Intelligences did
move the Orbs, wherein they hold the stars be fixed, should this motion be
so constant, permanent?

4. Finally, God made every creature very good, able by an internal faculty or
principle to accomplish its end: Why then should not the stars have this
power by nature, as well as other things? So that, it seems they have a kind
of motive soul; as all other creatures that move have either a vegetative,
sensitive, or reasonable soul. This that I hold is no new opinion; and there
be many strong reasons, by learned Philosophers, to prove it; the which I omit,
only alleging such as I my self have conceived: And if it be a truth that
they also hold, that now the Sun is nearer the earth by many degrees then in
former time, it will follow, that there is a vacuity in Nature, which they
deny: for the Orbs do also descend, and what supplieth the place? But we omit
this as somewhat intricate, and not much edifiable, and render other Reasons of
the doctrine.

And this day must be, in regard of the wicked and godly Reas. 2.
persons: For many a man lively here in sin commiting many close adulteries,
thefts, murders and the like, the which never come to light: And the upright
man does perform many a good duty in secret, give alms, and pray in private,
and yet is wronged in this world. Therefore God has appointed a day, wherein
he will reward every man according to his works.

And, as the Father finished his work and rested; the son Reas. 3.
his, and now keeps a rest; so must the holy Ghost perfect the work of
sanctification, and then keep an eternal Sabbath: For there must be an end
put to the work of Renouation, as there was of Creation and Redemption.

Last of all, this must be, that the Son of God may be Reas. 4.
seen in his glory, as he was in his humiliation; that he, with his very
presence, may wound the hearts of all such, as in the days of his flesh,
pierced him through with many sorrows. Then shall he tread all his foes under
foot; fully break the head of the devil, that crooked serpent; render up his
kingdom into the hands of his father, and jointly with him reign for ever and
ever.

This serves to confute the opinion of the Sadduces, who Use 1.
who denied the resurrection; of Hymeneus and Philetus who held the resurection
past already: and the rabble of all such as cry, where is the promise of his
coming? are not all things a like from the beginning? 2 Pet. 3. 3.

And here we must learn, not to judge any man's final Use. 2.
condition before the time. Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? for
he stands or falls to his own Master. Every man's fat must stand of its
own bottom; and if any err, is not his error with him? We must all appear
before the tribunal sear of Christ, to receive just recompense of all our
actions: Let us therefore, brethren, no longer judge one another: for he that
does this, is not an obseruer of the Law, but a judge: And Vengeance is mine, I
will pay, says the Lord God Almighty. And, He that thinks he stands let
him take heed least he fall. Be not many censorious Masters; for there is one
that judges even the Lord.

This point must also learn us patience in all wrongs, Use 3.
troubles, and persecutions. What if just Job be reputed an hypocrite? Paul,
that man of God, a pestilent fellow, a mouer of sedition, a preacher of false
doctrine, and not worthy to live? Jesus Christ the righteous, the Carpenters
son, to have a Devil, to be a Drunkard and wine bibber, a friend to
Publicans and sinners, an enemy to Caesar, a speaker of blesphemy? Yet the
remembrance of this day did cause them to endure the cross, despise the shame,
resist unto blood, and never to deny their innocence to the death. And this
ought for to work the same glorious effects in us, when we are crossed and
cursed of Turk and Pope, Papists and Devils. We must know that our Redeemer
lives; that he shall judge the quick and dead; and that it is unto them, a
day and sign of perdition; but unto us that be faithful, of joy and
salvation; and that from God, and of God.

Moreover, we from hence are to learn, not to mourn as Use. 4.
men without hope, when our faithful friends are gone hence, and are not to be
seen. Why, they are not dead, but a sleep: they shall awake, at this day, out
of the dust; the Lord shall shake the earth, withdraw the curtains of the
grave, call by his powerful voice; and Lazarus, withal that lie with him in
their beds, shall come forth. Paul makes 1 These. 4. 14. 15. etc.
this use of it, when the people of God were puiling, and would not be
comforted. Why, says he, what do you weep, as the Heathen that have no hope?
shall not the Lord, that raised up Christ, raise up your mortal bodies, send
his son in the clouds with the voice of a trumpet? and shall not you and they
be gathered together, come before him, and then being carried into the great
throne of his Majesty, for ever remain together? Wherefore comfort your selves
with these words. And we, in these latter times, are to make the same use also.
For whatsoever is written aforehand, is written for our learning; that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Romans 15. 4.

And from this doctrine, the wicked and profane may be Use 5.
stricken with terror and fear. For what an immeasurable object of wrath and
indignation discovers it self to all such? when the earth shall tremble, the
mountains, like men frighted, shall skip out of their settled places, the sea
roar, the waters boil like an hot and raging cauldron, the Sun be turned
into blood, the stars fall; (as the tree that after a pinching frost, casts
her leaves and fruit,) from the firmament; and the whole frame of Nature flame
with fire; yea the heavens themselves shrivle and pass away as a paper
scroule, and all the elements, from the lowest depth to the highest ascent,
shall melt with heat, and burn like a furnace: I say, when these things shall
be, where will the ungodly and the sinners appear? Now shall the drunkard,
drink the deepest violls of the Lords vengeance, spue and fall, and never rise
any more: the Fornicatour and Adulterer, shall burn in torment, the very
marrow of their bones shall fry, and their proud flesh be consumed by fire:
the Usurer and Covetous man, shall have their gold and silver to eat up their
flesh like rust, and their thick clay, falsely got, shall press them down to
the nethermost hell; the Epicure, and dainty feeding person shall be pinched
with hunger and thirst; and shall not have so much as one drop of cold water to
cool their tongues: the swearer, who has dipped his tongue red in the wounds of
Christ, shall be pierced through with many sorrows: In a word, that soul,
which has bathed it is self in the pleasures of sin without repentance,
shall die the second death. Wherefore, while it is called to day, return and
cause others to return, that you may escape the dreadful and importable wrath
to come. But alas! wicked men, for all that man or God can say or threaten,
they are like Jobs horse, Job 39. 21. etc. they walk in the valley of sin,
and rejoice in their strength of iniquity; they go out to meet the harnessed
man Christ with the revenging Scepter of justice in his hand; they swallow and
break the ground of Gods precepts with their fierceness; they account brass
as straw, iron as rotten wood; they think that they can drink up (as the
Leviathan does Jordan) the Rivers of Gods wrath with their mouths; they smell
this great battle afar off, and cry, Ha, ha, at the sound of the last
trumpet, and say, Tush we shall never be moved, the Lord neither thinks
good or evil. But for all this, God, who sits on high, has girded himself
with the garment of vengeance, his sword is whetted, his bow bent, he will
therefore make his shafts drunk with their purple blood, and will for ever
have them in derision. And seeing these things are so, What manner of men ought
we to be in holiness of life, and blameless conversation? Oh, now consider
this, ye that forget this day, lest thee strong God tear you in pieces, and
there be none that can deliver you.

And is there a day, wherein the Lord shall judge the Use. 6.
world? why then, on the contrary, here is a world of comfort to the just and
perfect man. In all thy crosses, wrongs, injuries, troubles, persecutions,
sicknesses, and in the hour of death, look up to this hill, soar to this
height, and have this continually in thy remembrance. For now shall thy wounds
be cured, thy infirmities healed, thy enemies revenged, and all thy honest
works rewarded: Now shall Satan be trod under thy foot, his instruments
bound in everlasting chains of darkness, and thou with thy Lord and Master
Christ, be carried into the holy of holies, filled with joy, and bathe thy
soul in the rivers of pleasure for all eternity. All the men of God, in their
greatest anguish here below, have fetched comfort by the eye of faith, at this
Mountain. Job rejoiced, being cast on the dunghill, that his Redeemer lived,
and that he should see him stand the last on earth. David's heart was glad, and
his flesh did rest in hope, because his soul should not be left in
deadlihead, nor his body see corruption. John longed and cried, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly: and had we the same precious faith, we have the same
precious promises; why then are we not ravished with the remembrance of these
things? Let the mind of the righteous wander whither it will or can, this will
be the spring where to cool its thirst, the poole to wash away its
filthiness, the stay whereon to rest, like the Arc on Mount Ararat, after all
its storms and tempests. This is the acceptable day of the Lord, the year of
Iubilee, and the very time when all things, in an unchangeable, eternal, and
neuer-fading condition, shall be settled, established. Wherefore be steadfast,
immovable, resolute in good, patient in suffering evil; for this is the day
that will pay for all.

And thus we come to handle a second doctrine. Where Paul says, that day,
adding the Article, That; we note, as others from the like grounds do, that

The day of judgment shall be great and wonderful. Doct. 2.


It is elsew here called, the great day of the Lord. Jude 6. Reu. 6. 17. and
16. 14. And it may be so styled, for diverse Reasons.

First, if we consider the Judge, (for that adds to the Reas. 1.
days excellency and greatness:) and that 1. for his person; is he not God
and Man, Wonderful, Councellor, the almighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6? This is he, who made all things of nothing, the
first and the last, who though he was dead, yet now lives for evermore. Reu.
1. 18. 2. Where is his habitation, and from whence does he come? he dwells
in that light, which no man can attain unto; and whither can we flee from his
presence? 3. How shall he be attended? What, will he come like Nehemiah, with
one or two poor attendants? or, as Naomi, with Ruth? or like David to the King
of Gath, all alone? No: he will be accompanied with two bands, like Jacob:
having a thousand thousands of Angels with him; his scepter shall be in his
hand to break his enemies in pieces like a potters vessel. 4. And where shall
he come? from Jerusalem to Jericho? from Egypt to Canaan? from the East to
Bethlehem? No? he descends from the highest throne, riding on the wings of
the wind, passes through the thick clouds, and his way shall be in the air:
Then shall his signs appear (by which I understand not the Cross with the
cursed Papist; but that splendor which shall flow from his glorious person)
that, like the Sun, with his beams, when he rises, shall enlighten all the
world.

And it may be called great, if we mind who shall be Reas. 2.
judged; not Paul before Festus; John of Herod; or the Prince of the Pope: But
all creatures, men and Angels: The sea, the earth, death and hell shall give
up their dead; so that all evil spirits, Men, women and children that have
been, are or shall be, must appear before him: Kings, Nobles, Judges,
Bishops, without their crowns, rochets, scarlet robes, and worthy ensigns of
honor.

And what acts and enditements shall be preferred? All Reas. 3.
and every one that has been done good or evil, from the very beginning of
the world until that day: all shall be examined, cleared, not one omitted. The
book of each man's Conscience shall be opened, and Gods eternal Register; so
that the most secret sin, or hidden act shall come to light: And does not
this add to the days greatness?

Finally, if we consider the words or matter of the sentence Reas. 4.
it will aggrauate the merueilousnes of the judgment day: For the Reprobate
shall be rewarded with eternal torment, and the elect with immortal glory:
the one shall have as much misery, and the other as great felicity, as created
natures are capable of.

And will this day be such and so great? Are not those Use. 1.
then to be checked who never have it in their minds; neither make the least
preparation? All times, seasons, months and days be thought on, longed and
provided for; yet this that surmounteth all, is forgot, not regarded: What
provision shall we see for the Sessions or Assizes of one little County or
City; and yet none for this general, universal gaole-deliuery of the whole
world? where be men's wits? or what do they think on? For to what end does God
place them here below, and affoard them time and means, but to stand spotles,
blameless at that day? Yet men be unwise, and never consider their latter end.
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. If a Master should set a light upon a Candlestick, give his
servant, wherewith to work, affoard time food, and all things convenient; yet
when he comes to see if his task be finished; he finds that the meat is
wasted, the time ended, the Candle to the very socket burned; and yet little or
nothing of the work furthered; how would such a servant excuse himself to his
Master? And is it not so with many of us? God has given us meat and drink;
time and matter; candle and fire; But what have we done? Is not the lamp of our
life almost consumed, the Sun of the Gospel about to set (at the least from
us;) and yet we have not finished the work that was given us to do? We are
without our wedding garment, polluted in our blood, and in regard of cloak or
cover of grace, stark naked. How shall we then expect to avoid that fearful
sentence? Friend, how came thou hither, without thy wedding garment? Take
him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness.

And is that day so great? Then let us all prepare for it, Use. 2.
before it come, finish our work, be clothed and not found idle or naked. For
blessed shall that servant be whom his Master shall find so and so doing. Say
not, with the fool, that there is no God. Make not a league with hell and a
covenant with death. Believe not, Hymeneus or Philetus, that the Resurrection
is past already; neither cry, with the scoffers and mockers, Where is the
promise of his coming? Doubt not of the day, and the certainty of its
approaching: For does not the drowning of the old world; declare it? the
devouring of Sodom by fire and brimstone, prove it? the destruction of
Jerusalem, confirm it? the curse upon the Jew at this day, ratify it? the hot
plagues, inundations of waters, earthquakes, extraordinary frosts, the blazing
star, and many petty judgments that hourly have and do befall the wicked,
seal it? Oh* therefore as thou do believe it, so prepare for it: Now time
is present, means at at hand, the Lord allures thee; But will it be, shall he
do so, ever? No, no, Remember the foolish virgins; get oil in thy lamp,
grace in thy heart, righteousness on thy person, and a good conscience to thy
companion; or else it had been good for thee, thou had never been bred or
borne: For without these, the judge will frown, bend his browe, and be a
consuming fire.

The next instruction we gather is this, that

Christ the Lord shall judge the world. Act. 17. 31. 1 Cor. 1. Doct. 3.
7. Math. 28. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 1 These. 4. 15.

If we understand by Lord (in the second place) the son of God, then the
point is plain: But howeuer its, a sound position. For if we expound the word
to be meant of God the Father; yet, he will show mercy and judgment by his
son; For he has committed all things to his hands.

For by him, at first, were all things made; by him, since, Reas. 1.
was Man redeemed; therefore its most meet they should be judged by him.

The judgment shall be visible; so that its most convenient Reas. 2.
the judge should be so too: Now the Fathers invisible but the Son, in our
nature, is not.

And shall Christ the Lord judge the world? What then Use. 1.
shall become of those that have crucified him and persecuted him in his (...)?
that have trod under foot the Son of God (...) a mock of the blood of his
Covenant? that (...) ^^spighted his Spirit, and disobeyed his Gospel? that
(...) (as it were between their teeth) his flesh by their cruel oaths, and
would not have him to reign over them* Wo^ull and unutterable will their
condition be; fearful and lamentable shall be their portion. Did Moses
tremble at the Mount? John fall down troubled at the sight of an Angel? Felix
shudder before Paul? and the stubborn Jews fall, at the voice of Christ,
backward? What will the profane men do, when he shall come to be revenged on
them, and to reward them according to the number and greatness of their sins?
Shall a man clothed in purple, or scarlet, whose throne is in the dust, and
his breath in his nosthrills, make a guilty conscience to quake and tremble?
shall not then the Judge of all the world enwrapped with glory, covered with
jealousy, and having the keen sword of revenging justice in his strong hand,
make the hearts of such as never would obey his laws, to fail them for fear?
shall they not wish that the Mountains might fall on them, and the hills cover
and convey them from his presence? would not they be glad if they might creep
into the crannies and close caves of the earth, from his revenging and
impartial justice? And if a Lord have mercy upon thee; a Take him away Iailor,
will cause such shedding of tears, folding of arms, and wringing of hands?
what will that irreuocable sentence do, Go ye cursed into eternal fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels? I could wish, that those words were
graven with a pen of iron in, the palms and foreheads of every impenitent
sinner, of every dissolute and godless person.

And shall Christ judge the world? shall he that redeemed Use. 2.
thee, sit upon thee? then be of good comfort, for it cannot but go well with
thee. No man ever hated his own flesh, consumed his real and royal members,
or put away a chaste virgin. Assure thy self then, that thy head and husband
Jesus shall neither leave thee or forsake thee, or ever be divorced from thee.
This use is worthy our best consideration, and a ground to every honest and
upright heart, of unspeakable comfort. Therefore when Satan, Death,
Judgment, and hell look thee in the face, think upon this thing.

And shall Christ judge thee? Then Agree with thine adversary Use 3.
quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him, least he deliver thee to the
Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Iailor, and he cast thee into prison:
For verily, thou shall not depart thence, until thou have paid the uttermost
farthing. And when will that be? Never, never: And might not this word break
thine heart, and move thee to do it?

When Joseph was to go before Pharaoh, he shaued his head, and put upon him
another robe or change of raiment: When Hester went unto the King, she clothed
her self with her royal apparel: And shall we meet the King of Kings,
wrapped in the stinking weeds of drunkenness, swearing, and lying? covered with
the monstrous clouts of fornication, adultery, and all uncleanness? Surely if we
do; we shall never find favor in his eyes. Let him then that has stolen,
steal no more, but labor with his hands: And that I say to one, to all I say
it, Change your minds and turn; that your sins may be put away, when the
time of refreshing shall come from the presance of the Lord, and he shall send
his son Jesus, the which is now preached unto you, to be The Judge of all the
world. But in regard the most little consider this day, or dream of their
latter end; or if they do, usually, like Agrippa, put it off, until it be too
late; let these following Motives somewhat prevail with thee to practice it
speedily.

1. Remember, that he may come suddenly, in the dead of Motives to prepare for
the day of judgment.
the night; when thou little dreamest of such a matter. Was it not a dreadful
summoning to the rich fool, This night shall thy soul be fetched from thee?
Suddennes makes an evil, a double curse; We may die in our sleep; and what a
fearful thing would this be, if we be took away in our sins? for as death
leaves us, so shall judgment find us.

2. We cannot hide our selves, or the least of our sins, from his all-seeing
eye: For all things are naked and bare before him, with whom we have to deal.

3. Consider his power; he can send his Angels to fetch us before him, from
the four ends of the world; be we never so strong in might, or potent for
number.

4. Call to mind, that he is strict and just in all his proceedings; not one
can escape death, if sin be found upon him.

5. That there shall be no delay, or bail; when he comes, judgment shall be
executed speedily.

6. And last of all, let it be well thought on, what the judgment is; where the
torments shall be; with whom, and how long. The pain shall be in soul and
body; the place, that dark and infernal pit; the persons, Satan and all the
damned, from the presence of God, and the spirits of just and perfect men; and
the continuance for all eternity.

What heart so hardened, conscience so seared, or person so desperate,
reprobate, weighing these things in the equal balance of his own mind and
consideration, that would go on in a sinful course and not amend? Yet if this
will move nothing, I say no more, but the Lord have mercy upon thee; for thy
case is fearful, dreadful.

The fourth Note we observe, is, that

The best man is not to rely upon the merit of his works, but Doct. 4.
the free mercy of God at the day of judgment. Math. 25. 37. 38. etc.

For he has many falls into evil. If we say we have no sin, Reas. 1.
we deceive our own selves, and the truth is not in us: And, There is none
that does good and sins not, no not one. Even in many things we sin all.

Besides our sins, the best works we perform, be imperfect; Reas. 2.
For as chafe grows up with the corn, so does sin cleave to our
perfectest actions. Grace and corruption like fire and water mixed, hinder the
acts one of another from absolute perfection.

Away then with the Merit Mongers, that plead, through Use. 1.
desert, for salvation: Had Onesiphorus need of mercy, that did so many good
works? and shall the Papist hold works of supererogation? We might say of
Supererogation. Can thou stay the Sun in his swiftest motion? gather the
wind in thy fist? remove the earth out of its center? or stop the hot burning
furnace with straw and stubble? then plead afterward for merit; yet these
things be easier to mortal man then the other; yet both impossible.

But they object; Why then does Daniel exhort the King Object. 1.
to Redeem his sins by righteousness? Dan. 4. 27.

1. The Hebrew phrase is not truly turned. Sol.


2. Its but an exhortation to repentance, inducing him for to break off his
former cruelty he had committed; the which is needful for all persons. 2 Timothy
2. 25.

Christ bids the people to Make them friends of their riches Object. 2.
of iniquity, that when they want, they may receive them into everlasting
habitations. Luke 16. 9. Sol.


1. They, is not to be referred to the riches, but to the persons, as is plain
by the parable's application.

2. No other thing is meant, but that they would testify of their goodness and
charity toward them, and pray for them. Why then does God command good
works? Object. 3. Sol.


1. To manifest that he approves and allows them.

2. That we might be provoked to do them.

3. To comfort us in the assurance of the truth of our faith.

4. To strengthen the weakness of our belief that often staggereth.

But God has promised a reward to them. Object. 4.


True: but 1. Its of his free mercy, not for our merits. Sol.


2. He crowns his own graces in us.

And we cannot Merit; for

1. He works both the will and deed of his good pleasure.

2. There is no equal proportion betwixt our works and salvation; For they be
finite, imperfect, temporal: it is infinite, perfect, eternal.

3. A work of merit must be above that which is required at our hands, above
Gods due; we have none such: For God has created, redeemed, sanctified us
freely.

4. We confess, that God might condemn the best; for if he should Mark what
is done amiss, no mere man could abide it. And he of his mercy, can save the
worst; Let the best therefore not presume; neither the worst utterly despair.

5. And we read of a threefold promise of reward. 1. Under* the Covenant of
works. 2. Of faith. 3. After we believe in Christ. But this is all out of the
Lords mercy and dignity, not for our merits, or desert.

6. And if that be a truth, that Christ's merits do not proceed from him, or
are procured by him without relation to the free promise of his Father (the
which some hold,) how then can man merit condignely? Yet the Protestants
maintain good works, and no barren faith do they allow, as the lying.
Aduer^aries know well enough, though they send us all to hell with our fruitles
faith: Only we say, that by faith we are justified without the works of the
law; for were it otherwise Christ had died in vain. And this is our firm
position; that as fire cannot be without heat, air without leuity; water void
of humidity; or the earth be abstracted from all gravity: No more can a true
lively faith be without some fruits worthy amendment of life. Good works are
the way to heaven, and a necessary condition, if man have time and means, to
be observed; yet they are not the sole cause of reigning. When the Figtree
(says our Lord) puts forth his leaves, ye know that the spring draws near:
But is that a cause of the spring? or the spring of that? So when we bring
forth good works we know we have a true faith; but faith is the cause
thereof, not the contrary; and so consequently of man's salvation. Bellarmine
himself says, that in regard of the uncertainty of man's works and our own
presumption, the safest way is to depend on the mercy of God. Thus, by the
ouerruling hand of God, a second Caiphas has once again prophesied aright.

And let this doctrine reach us to practice Christ's lesson Use. 2.
which is, that When we have done all we can, to confess our selves
unprofitable servants. Let us never dispute with our Maker, plead perfection,
or by our selves justify our selves, or expect the least reward. Surely; he
that is well acquainted with his own inward corruption, and actual
transgressions, will never boast of his own worthiness. And no one point which
the Papist does defend, has caused me to doubt more of their final good
estate then this. For if they were borne again of the water and spirit; they,
by their own frailty, would have learned experience to have been far from
the least thought of merit. Wherefore, in thy best condition, say; Lord thy
mercy is my merit; thy free favor my felicity.

Where Paul in the twelfth verse, and now again in this makes mention of the
last day, we note, that

A good man's mind is often carried to think on the day of Doct. 5.
judgment. Job. 19. 25. Psalm. 17. vlt. 2 Cor. 5. 2. Phil. 3. vlt.

For when they cast their eye on the poor creatures, the Reas. 1.
which groan for our sins, and shall not be freed until that time; how
should a good man, who is merciful to his beast, but remember that day,
wherein they shall be delivered into the liberty of Gods sons?

Gods children have many false tales fathered on them, and Reason. 2.
with strange aspersions are they besprinkled, the which, as upon Eagles wings
fly through town and tavern, country and city, Gath and Ascalon under the
great broad seal of good fellowship, never to be reuerst or contrould, until
the Ancient of days, the searcher of all hearts, that impartial judge, have
the hearing of the case which must be at that day.

The faithful feel and find in themselves many great infirmities Reason. 3.
of soul and body, the which shall never be perfectly cured till Christ shall
appear. So that the very loss of a tooth, or of the least member, will carry
a good man's mind to that day, wherein he believes to be made perfect.

And he is so affected with his Savior, he has such a secret Reason. 4.
love to all the Saints of God, the which he never saw, and a desire to behold
the great possession his Father has prepared for him, (the which he shall not
fully behold, and in soul and body absolutely partake of, and jointly enjoy
until Jesus come to judge the world) that his mind is often carried thither.
And is it not the great day of reaping* the year of Iubilee? and the marriage
of the Lamb and his beloved? Shall not the Devil and all his soul spirits,
that have persecuted the Saints of God, be rewarded according as they have
rewarded us? and all the faithful take possession of that glorious and
immortal kingdom, where they shall all with one tongue and heart, with joy
unspeakable and glorious, sing glory to God, praise to the Lamb, without the
least inward opposition or interruption; the which is their chief desire, that
here on earth they aim at: that wherein their greatest blessedness
consists for evermore? So that wonder not then, if the faithful have their
minds often carried to think on the day of judgment.

And if this be thus, as it is indeed: What shall we Use 1.
think of such who never mind this day? verily, they are much affected with
earthly pleasures and profits, and have little regard of the greatest good.
Many men in the Inn of this world, are like the swaggerers and prodigals in a
Tavern, who call freely, eat and drink, laugh and are fat, but never mind
either the reckoning, or the time of harvest; for they have sown no good seed,
neither have wherewith to discharge the shot: therefore suffer these things
willingly to slip, and absent themselves out from their minds, because they
have, or can expect no commodity by either. But the faithful man is of a
contrary mind; for he is sparing in expense, and has scattered much good
grain, the which will bring a goodly crop at his Masters appearing; the great
day of reaping, both of which cause him often to look upward.

And by this Doctrine we may prove whether we be Use. 2.
like minded, or not, to the most faithful person. Do thou again and
again think on this day? Is thy mind often carried to this object? So arest
thou on high, with the wings of faith and a sound eye to this hill? why then
thou art a right bird, truly bred, and not of the bastard brood. Every cross,
base imputation, false report, ach in the joints, corruption in the flesh and
spirit; each good action, faithful prayer, motion of true affection toward
Christ and his members, heaven and holiness will carry the mind of him or her
that is truly religious, upright hearted, to this Mountain, Marriage day, and
time of refreshing. So that, find thou this in thy self, then be of good
comfort: for thou art of the Brides company, and one that shall see the
everlasting light, sit down and reap joy and gladness, life and glory in the
largest fields of Gods goodness, the heavenly Canaan, the new Jerusalem which
is above. But if thou art destitute of these kind of motions, eleuations; then
strive for these properties that are the inseparable breathings and mouings of
an holy heart, sound mind, and blessed person. The very frame of nature
stretches forth her neck, and peepeth upward to this season. And shall the
Eagles of the Churches own breeding, never flutter with their wings, and cast
up their piercing eyes to this rich prey, but stand a pruning? that were a
thing incredible. Therefore have this in thy self, and be blessed for ever.

We may further collect, where Paul prays for mercy against that day, that

All our prayers are to be grounded on Gods promises. Genesis 23. Doct. 6.
9. 12. 2 Samuel 7. 25. 1 King 8. 25, etc.

For our Apostle knew full well that such a time would come, and that the Lord
would reward every good work at that season, by virtue of his former promises.

Because that they are all Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus: Reas. 1.
not one but shall be performed, sooner or latter.

Again, otherwise we can have no hope to be heard. Reas. 2.
For no faculty can or ought to extend it self beyond its adequate and proper
object; it is limited by its peculiar Rules. The eye of the understanding, and
foot or hand of faith may lead us to God the first Ens and cause of all
things; but beyond that they cannot pass; for there is nothing further to act
or rest on: He therefore that prays without a promise, denies his own
request.

What madness then is it for the Papist to pray to Saint Use. 1.
and Angel? Can they make promises in Christ? or have we any such ground given
us of God? Vain wishes are reprehended hence; as when men pray for
impossibilities; and this does meet with those that use unlawful
imprecations; and also the blind devotion of Papist and ignorant Protestant in
their inuocations.

It may be objected that Moses desired to have his name Object.
blotted out of the book of life: Paul, to be accursed and separated from
Christ, both of which are impossible.

1. I answer; that these wishes proceeded from great sorrow Sol.
of heart for the sin of the people; from the zeal they had for Gods glory,
and love of their brethren and kindred in the flesh: yet might be mixed with
some imperfection, as the act was in breaking the two Tables.

2. Moses dealt as a Mediator between God and man, and was a figure of our
Mediator Christ, who became accursed that we might be blessed, Gal. 3. 13.

3. The intent of Paul and Moses might be, that they might die a temporal
death in stead of the people, and so bear their punishment: For the death of
the just makes reconciliation. Isa. 53. 5. And one of their deaths was
worthten thousand of them all.

4. It must be understood conditionally, and with its limitation; for so Christ
prayed; Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; nevertheless,
not my will will, but thy will be done. Math. 26. 39.

5. They might have this reservation; as that it might so appear in the
judgment of the people, not otherwise; for David desired, that the names of
some might be blotted out of the book of life, whose names were never written
there. Psalm 69. 27. 28.

6. Finally, these examples are extraordinary, if we either respect the
persons, the occasion, or the end; therefore not to be attained to, or imitated
of every common and private man in his usual and set devotions. The Objection
I have to my power resolved: Now consider what I have said; and the Lord give
thee understanding in these things.

And this doctrine will give us a sound direction and a Use. 2.
right rule to guide our selves in praying. Learn the number of Gods promises;
know them (as it were) by name, and then ask what the Lord has promised, and
he will give it thee. Care not how many they be for multitude, how great for
substance and worth; for they be all true, and but the rule of faith and
prayer; and the more excellent favors the Lord shall give thee, the greater
glory shall he have, and his children good. As thou may not dare to ask what
he has not promised; so never fear to pray for what he has promised; but
open thy mouth wide, and he shall fill it. Come not short, neither go beyond
the rule, and thou can not err. A Logician, Grammarian, Rhetorician, and
every Artist must know all his precepts and practice them: So must a good
Christian be acquainted with every promise, and pray as they shall direct him.
I would have this lesson Directions for prayer.
well learned of every person: And take these helps for thy direction.

1. Consider, that the promises are of this life or the life to come; temporal
things, crave conditionaly; eternal, absolutely.

2. All that the Lord has promised, or that is contained in his promises, is
either the remotion of evil, or the fruition of good. And evil is, either the
evil of sin, or of punishment: Good is, either carnal things or spiritual.
And in these heads, or within these particulars are all things comprehended
that thou art to pray for, or against. Now thou art to petition for thy self,
or thy brethren; for blessings to fall on thy self, or the elect; or cursings
on the reprobate: For that which is a threat to the wicked is a promise to the
faithful; because when judgments befall the profane, it is good some way for
Gods glory, or to his children. But let these things be wisely understood,
warily practiced.

Moreover, from this example of the Apostle, who received many favors, yet
having not in the same kind to make requital, but prays for his friend, we
note, that

When we want wherewith to requite our friends, then we are to Doct. 7.
pray unto God for them.

This has been the practice of all the faithful. 2. Cor. 9. 14.

For by prayer we may prevail with God, so that they may Reas. 1.
receive greater favors; we in so doing may procure them spiritual blessings,
or an increase of the same substance, wherewith we by them have been relieved,
refreshed.

Again, what if we should not? yet in the performance of Reas. 2.
it, we shall have comfort; for we have done our duty and what the Lord
requires of us.

Let none then say, that he wants means to repay, or pay Use. 1.
his debts: for this help can never be taken from thee. Prayer has a large
extent: poverty does not deprive a man of this privilege; neither take away
the presence of Gods Spirit, or the virtue of his promises. Truly, this cannot
but comfort an honest and thankful heart, and prick him forward to this way
of requital.

And this should teach those, that have contributed to the Use. 2.
necessity of the poor Saints, not to repine or repent for so doing: But
rather to proceed therein and never to grow weary in this kind of weldoing.
Little do thou know for whose sake, at whose request, thou art s^ rich and
prosperest: For the prayers of the poor are not vain in the Lord. Then
comfort the feeble minded, visit the sick, cloth the naked, and feed the
hungry: for it may, nay it shall prove profitable to thee, and thy posterity.

Resides all that we have said, diverse doctrines notwithstanding remain
behind: they shall be pointed out, and briefly passed; one is this, viz. that

Our principal friends, in a particular and peculiar mann^r, are Doct. 8.
to be prayed for.

Paul had been often refreshed by this his friend; therefore prays for him in
particular; so he did for others, who have used him kindly. See to this
purpose. Luke 22. 32. Ephesians. 6. 19. etc.

For the law of God and Nature warrant it. As much is to Reas. 1.
be required, where much is given; so much is to be restored where much has
bin received. And is not prayer a special means to return favors into the
bosom of our friends?

Again, such friends have by many kindnesses manifested Reas. 2.
the truth of their affection, supported us in our weakness: And shall not we
then, by all means we can, declare our reciprocal amity, and strive to uphold
them? Mary loved much, the reason was, because Christ forgave her many sins:
so must we in regard many things are given us: And no surer sign of sincere
affection, or stronger means to procure welfare to a friend, then earnest,
often, and particular prayer for him.

This Doctrine seems to discover a fault in them, that always Use. 1.
pray in generals; and have defended too, that we are not bound to remember
particular persons; grounding their position on the Lords Prayer, where we be
taught (say they) to say Our Father: But Christ practiced and his Apostles the
contrary. The one must be done, and the other ought not to be neglected.

And it does teach us a twofold lesson. 1. To observe and Use. 2.
learn who be our principal and special friends. 2. To pray to God in a
particular and peculiar manner for them.

1. Subjects here must remember their Sovereign, and the Lords anointed,
under whom they enjoy peace and plenty. Nebuchadnezzer must be prayed for, for
Sions sake; for the members are much beholden to the head.

2. Let children be mindful of their parents, who, next to God, have given
them a being, and preservation. We have too many Chams, that discover their
fathers skirts; but too few Shems, who seek their honor* Is not that eye
worthy to be picked out by the Ravens, and of the young Eagles to be devoured;
that hand, like to the wicked Kings, to wither; and that tongue to cleave to
the roof of its mouth, who be never opened, lifted, moved to pity; desend,
and bless their natural begetters* that have suffered and done so much for
them? Let such take heed, that Cain's curse do not befall them.

3. The people must not forget their Pastors: For they be they, that of the
slaves of Satan, children of wrath, have be got them to be sons of God,
heirs of heaven. But this is not the custom of our countrymen; they, of all
others, care least, pray least for their Preacher; and hence it often falls
out, that God remoues their candlestick, tyeth the the tongue of their
spiritual Father, that he speaks not to their comfort; or sends some heavy
judgment upon them for the omission of this duty.

4. And in conclusion; Jonathan must be remembered of David; every private
friend must pray for another: Pray (I pray you) for all men in general, but
especially for Princes, Preachers, Parents and principal friends in
particular: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Another point is this, that

Merciful men shall obtain mercy. Doct. 9.


No doubt but that Paul prevailed with God for his kind friend Onesiphorus; And
Christ confirms the point, affirming, that Blessed be the merciful: for they
shall obtain mercy. Math. 5. 7.

Because the Lord has so promised. Reas. 1.


Again, he loves his own image and likeness in his Reason. 2.
children; and so crowns it with reward.

Art thou unmerciful? Then expect condemnation without Use 1.
mercy: For to such shall be shame and confusion.

And as this may comfort the merciful; so it should move Use. 2.
all to show mercy, that they may be comforted with the same comforts
wherewith they have comforted others, and that of the Lord. But observe these
Rules.

1. Let the glory of God be preferred above and before Rules in showing of
mercy to be observed.
the reward.

2. Let love of our brethren, and Gods command, move more than the reward.

3. Confess, that it proceeds from Gods mercy, if thou receive a reward.

4. Stay thou the Lords leisure in expecting the reward.

Finally we gather hence, that

They who would find mercy in the day of evil, are to show mercy Doct. 10.
in the day of evil.

One siphorus refreshed Paul in his day; Christ shall reward him at his day: he
found out Paul in Rome amidst the profane; and he shall be found out in the
air, not amongst the reprobate. Compare. Ier. 38. 9. with cap. 39. vlt. Josh.
6. 17. 25. Math. 25. 40.

For God respects the circumstance of time; and such actions, Reas. 1.
of all other, are the best pleasing unto him, that be done in their season;
for all things are to be done in co^lines and order.

God then does declare the truth of his promise, his fatherly Reas. 2.
compassion the more, then at another season: For favors in their season are
best apprehended, most accepted: And in so much as God will have a time to
reward every good work in; why should he not pick the fittest opportunity, the
most acceptable season?

Let this assure thee, that have comforted others in their greatest Use. 1.
misery, that God shall comfort thee in the time of thy greatest extremity:
Thou may build upon it.

And learn we hence to take knowledge when is the day of Use. 2.
evil to others, comfort them at that instant, that we may with boldness expect
the like at the Lords hands. Refresh the poor afflicted, and needy in their
need; and God (in mercy) shall remember thee in thine. We would al have comfort
in the hour of death and day of judgment: why then here is the way; take
compassion on the members of Christ now, and it shall be unto thee as thou
desire.

But here a Question may arise, why Paul prays for mercy Quest.
at that day, rather then at another time?

1. Because it will be the greatest and* most dreadful day Answ.
that ever was, to thousands.

2. If he find mercy then for his friend, he shall be blessed ever after.

3. And if he should pass that day, there could never be any hope of future
favor.

4. Finally, though the Lord should defer mercy long in the requital of
savors, yet then Paul knew was the day, wh^ no good work should be forgot, or
go unrewarded; therefore he named that day: From whose example and reasons, Let
us all learn to pray, that all those whom we truly affect, and from whom we
have received many kindnesses may all find mercy with the Lord at that day.
Amen.

It will be objected that if Onesiphorus had once the possession Object.
of heaven, the which he had long before that day, he needed not mercy, for he
had it already.

1. If he was sure of mercy then, who doubts but that he Sol.
was certain to have it here also? For he that ascends to the highest step,
of necessity must take the lower in his passage. Therefore in this we see the
Apostles great wisdom in praying.

2. Paul prays for the manifestation and declaration of Gods mercy to him at
that day: For a man may have a pardon for his offenses, be sure of it in
respect of himself in particular; yet it cannot be known to all until the
king cause it in public to be proclaimed. And, by the way, learn we this
lesson, that God will take a particular knowledge of every distinct person at
that day; for Paul prays that Onesiphorus in particular may have mercy
manifested to him: Yea, he knows all his children by name, as he said of
Moses; the which were it truly believed, and well considered would be no weak
ground of rejoicing to the faithful person.

And in how many things he has ministered unto me at Ephesus thou know very
well.]

Because the same things, for the most part, have been handled heretofore,
that are to be observed out of this appellation, or testimony; we will but name
the doctrines, and so omit them. Where Paul was prisoner at Rome, and now as we
fee at want as heretofore in Ephesus; we note, that

Sometimes in great Towns and famous Cities it has gone hardly Doct. 11.
with Gods Saints.

For there the devil endeavors to dwell; as the Pope at Reas. 1.
Rome at this day: and he raises storms of affliction: the leprosy of sin
cleaves close to their walls, through his setting on.

Again, those places commonly have many sorts of false religions, Reas. 2.
and all will conspire against the truth, and in that become friends, as we see
in Herod and Pilate in crucifying of our Lord Jesus: so we read of Ephraim
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim; yet both against Judah. Isai.
9. 21.

Let none think that the greatness of the place can exempt Use. 1.
him from poverty or persecution.

Be not too forward to pitch thy Tents at Bethel, except Use. 2.
thou have a full and lawful calling. Lot may live better in little Zoar, then
in the great city of Sodom: Christ in the small village, then at Jerusalem;
Moses at Madian, then in Egypt.

Where On^siphorus relieved Paul so worthy a man, and an Apostle, this will
follow, that

The best man and worthiest Christian may stand in want, and be Doct. 12.
releiued by a meaner person; and that both for soul and body.

For the one may be in prosperity, when the other is in adversity; Reas. 1.
in peace, when the other is in war, corporal, spiritual.

God brings it to pass for to increase affection, and to knit Reas. 2.
them the nearer together in the bands of love and amity.

Do not lightly regard thy inferior brother: for the weaker Use. 1.
may do pleasure to the stronger: Timotheus may do Paul a kindness in carrying
him his books and parchments.

And the meaner man and weaker Christian by this may be Use. 2.
of comfort; for little does he know how the Lord will employ him. Iephthah was
despised being basely borne, yet in future time, the people prayed him to be
their Judge, and he was so, and he fought, and prevailed for Israel.

The third point we note (where Onesiphorus ministered to him many things) is
this, that

A good man thinks nothing too dear for the preachers of the Doct. 13.
Gospel.

We are commanded to make such partakers of all our goods. Romans 15. 27. 1 Cor.
9. 4. etc.

For they give spiritual things for carnal. Reas. 1. Reas. 2. Reas. 3.


They watch for men's souls.

They suffer much pain in study, reproaches of the wicked, and bitter pangs for
others good.

In a word, they are the Ambassadors of the great King. Reas. 4. Use. 1.


This checketh many, who would be reputed forward professors, and with Simon
Magus, some great bodies; yet think all too much that goes that way. These
could be content, that, like Paul, Ministers would turn tentmakers.

But be thou otherwise minded; if he be a man sent from Use. 2.
God, preach the word, and is faithful, holy: all thou have is too little for
him. Let such a man enjoy a sufficient, honorable, and constant stipend: I
say, if his doctrine be sound, his conversation proportionable, make ye much
of such.

But would ye know what lets?

1. Coueteousnes: This holds all, and cries give, give; b^t will never part
with any thing. We have a thousand young men in our days (Christ met but with
one in his we read ^f) that would go away sorrowful, if they should sell but
an hundredth part of what they have to give the poor, especially were he a
preacher.

2. Infidelity lets: For men want faith to credit God, therefore they be so
strait-handed. Did men believe that they should be rewarded an hundred fold,
would they not be more liberal? And of all men the Usurer he has no faith;
for he will take man's band, before Gods, for Ten; where he might have the
Lords, for Ten-times Ten in the Hundred, and will not.

3. Idleness is another let: these usually do nothing: so they have nothing,
that live in this lethargy.

4. And the last let is unthriftiness: An unthrift and prodigal always be in
want; for they have one way, whereout more runs in a day then will return in a
year.

The two first, Coueteousnes and Infidility get all but will part with nothing;
the two letter, unthriftiness and Idleness, either are usually in want, or if
they have it, it runs apace, but a wrong way, and takes its rest, but never on
the right subject: So that let Ministers never expect maintenance from any of
these; especially if he cry out (as he must) against these bosom and beloved
sins. Christ was never worse used, or Paul either, then when they preached
against Coueteousnes and Prodigality: And lazy and unthrifty persons make
sure work for amending; for the one is, usual, turning himself on his bed,
like a door on its hinges; and the other in the tavern, or tippling house into
a barrel or a beast, when they should hear the preacher and be reformed.

And to end with the end, this we note for a conclustion, tha^

In the greatest straits the Lord remembers them, that suffer Doct. 14.
for his cause and Gospel.

Read the Acts of the Apostles: Paul was relieved at Rome, often at Ephesus;
yea the rude Barbarians did use him kindly. Act. 28. 2.

For God has the most glory by them. Reas. 1. 2. 3. 4.


The rest of the Church most benefit by them.

The truth the greatest praise by them.

And sin, Satan and all his depthes the greatest over ^^row by them: and shall
not the Lord then remember them*

Let us imitate our heavenly Father, ever respecting those Use. 1.
most that suffer for our good; and always to the uttermost of our power to
make much of such. Priscilla and Aquila must be greeted, much respected; why?
for they, to save Paul's life, laid down their own necks. Surely if God deal
mercifully with those that suffer for him; shall we want compassion toward
them that suffer for us?

And is it so as we have heard? Then be resolute in the Use. 2.
Lords cause, take up thy burden, gird thy sword upon thy thigh, put on all the
armor of a Christian soldier, and march on in thy rank and order. What if
Satan tempt thee? the Serpent brood do bite thee? the fiery trial befall
thee? or the King of fear, pale faced death look grin upon thee? Yet the word
is gone out, the oath is (...) to it, and the Spirit has sealed; that they
that suffer for the truth of God of Papist or Pope; men or Devils; in Rome. or
is ^ll shall never be forgotten, for saken. Take a view through all (...) holy
letters; cast thine eye on all the former ages; look where thou will, or
can, and thou shall always find it so; that in the greatest misery, God has
remembered mercy; in the greatest weakness, given power; in the most pinching
poverty, sent plenty; and in death conveied life. Wherefore never fear want,
misery penury, mortality: for the Lord shall be with thee, whether soever thou
go, and in what estate soever thou be.

But (me thinks) I hear some say, What needs all this? (...) not at peace?
may we not sit under out vines? sleep safely in our beds? walk the pleasant
fields? eat, drink, and take our pleasure?

Mistake me not: For I am not weary with these favors; I wish the Sun of that
morning may never rise, or that evil time approach, wherein it might be said,
the Arc is gone, and the glory of God from this our Israel. Yet, is not Satan
compassing the world? has not the Serpent much viperous spaw^^? will not his
great instrument, that black, crawling, ugly adder, the Papist, be casting
forth his venom, shooting out his sting, and lie lurking in the sweetest
herbs, to bruise the heel of the seed of the woman? But to let this pass;
death will come; judgment will come; and damnation will come: this thou
know: And is it then in vain to comfort thee against those three fierce
giants? that, thou shall conquer and overcome them all; that not an hair of
thine head shall perish; but thou shall be landed safe at the kay of Canaan,
the kingdom of God?

I cannot tell; I do but guess; yet (except thy faith exceed mine) me
thinks, I am not herein at all deceived, neither a whit unprofitably
exercised. But I say no more; Let the day declare it.

FINIS.
Laus Deo. Amen.


