A SEASONABLE DISCOVRSE OF Spiritual Steadfastness; WHEREIN, 1. It, and a
Relapse, with the heads, members, and degrees of both, are exactly defined. 2.
The Subjects, Causes, and Symptoms of the fearful sin of Apostasy clearly
expressed.


As also Directions, incentiues, to recover, re-inkindle the old-cold-declining
Zelot.

Together with Arguments, Motives, that the young, or strong standing Convert
may be in Grace firmly established.

Lo thus, have we searched it: So it is, hear it, and know it for thy good.
JOB. 5.27. By I.B. Preacher of the Word.

LONDON. Printed by I D. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at the three
Golden Lions, near the royal Exchange. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL NICHOLAS INCE Mayor of the City Chester; And to the
worshipful Aldermen his brethren, the Sheriffs, with all who bear Office in
that much honored Corporation; I.B. wishes growth in grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ Jesus.
Worthy Sirs,
ITs a true saying, That one sinner destroys much good. Eccl. 9. vlt.
For like a bad Tree, he possesses the place of a better: And (though barren)
devoureth equal nutriment with him that bears. Besides, Luk 13.7.
he Cumbers the ground, bring forth ill fruit, whe^soever he stands. 2. Chro.
10 13.14
Let Rehoboam be rooted in the land of Judah the grave Counsel of the aged is
rejected, that of green youth is accepted: he finds shields of Gold, 1 King.
14.27.
leaves them of brass: And, in taxing of the subject, makes his little finger
heavier, than the whole body of his father. Set a Pilat in the soil of
judicature, Mat. 27.26
perjury is approved, Barabbas delivered; And Jesus Christ the righteous
condemned. Plant a proud Pharisee in the vineyard of the Church, Math. 23.5. etc
he glories in swelling tytles, claims the highest room at the Table, And
covets the chiefest seat in the Synagogue. He tithes Mint, Cummin; Luke 11.42
omits mercy, truth; strains at a Gnat, swallows a Camel; violently pressing
the traditions of men, Mat. 23.3.
desparatly neglecting the Commandments of God: He says, and does not;
pointing at the way to heaven by speech, treading the path to hell by practice:
And (O shameless hipocrit) the Phylacteries upon his garments, Mar. 12.40
are the largest; his prayers in the Temple, are the longest. And if this, be
thus? Why then are the profane Prodigalls reputed kind men? styled good
fellows? And enemies to none, Josh. 22.2^
except themselves? Did not one man sin, And wrath fell on all the
Congregation? 2. Sam. 21
Was not the whole land plagued, in the days of David, three years together
with famine because Saul and his bloody house slew the Gibeonits? Read and see.
And from this ground, may we not be glad when unfruitful trees are cut down?
Exodus 15.1.
What did Moses? Deborah? Judge. 5.1.
Let it go well with the righteous, does not the City rejoice? Pro. 11.10.
And when the wicked perish, is there not shouting? Will it not also follow
hence, that its a worthy work, by lawful means to remove graceless men? 2
King. 10.24.
To root them out, of Church, Country, Kingdom? But not to aim beyond the
mark; Let me be bold, from the wise kings proverb, to advise you, exhort you;
that in all your elections you lay hands rashly on no man. Tim. 5.22
Call to mind Iothams parable. Plant a bramble in your City, ^dg. 9.14, 18
he will hang on each good man's sleeve; And if not tear your flesh, yet prick
your fingers. Set him in the Sanctuary, Mat. 21.13
your Fathers house will be a den of Thieves. Place him where you please,
Luke 13.7.
he shall make the ground barren: Or else ever hold me guilty of a damnable
lie. For your selves, like Job, Job. 29.14.
be clothed with the Garment of justice: filled with the fruit of
righteousness. In your old age, Phil. 1.11.
be fat and flourishing. Govern your families well: Psalm. 92.14.
So shall you the City better. Ephesians. 6.4.
Nurse up your Children in the fear of God: And (if need require) let them
marry. Tread not in the steps of bastard Protestants; 1. Cor. 7.36
who will yoke their sons to untamed heifers, if but laden with thick clay:
Their Daughters to very Asses, have they pastures large enough. Graffe yours
into Gods stock: 1 Cor. 7.39
And account your Prayers, their greatest portion. Let others halt between two
opinions; but as Ioshuah, do you, and yours serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15
If you demand, why this little treatise is directed to you? My defense is at
hand. Did you not (unexpected) give me a free and general call, to be one of
your City Lacturers? Shall I be thought worthy to speak, And not to write unto
you? Again; when one mean fails, to manifest affection, grateful minds will
use another. The Law, after Adams fall, was unable to revive him: Then did not
God reveal the Gospel? In the like case, may not his practice be my
president? Moreover, (not to boast) of all the papers I ever penned, these, by
my judicious friends, have bin best approved, most desired to be published. And
finally, how I love you, my soul knows right-well. But nothing doubting of
your acceptance, I commend you to God, and the word of his grace; Acts 20.32
which is able to build further, And to give you an inheritance among all them
that are Sanctified.

Yours (such as he is) to do you service. I. B.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader (according to the Apostles Prediction, 2 Timothy 3.1. etc.
) we live in perilous times; the last, and worst age of the world. For are not
men Lovers of themselves? Coveteous? Boasters? Proud? And what not? Who can
number the dust of Atheists? Papists? Heretics? Hipocrits? Or measure the
spacious Gloabe of mere Formalists? Selfe-condemned Apostats? Have we not a
Viperous generation among us, who profess themselves to be of the damned Crew?
Will swear for a wager? Drink health's to the Devil? And account it their
Grace, to be reputed graceless? Crying, in the Epicure an language, Let us
eat, and drink: 1 Cor. 15.32.
for to morrow we shall dye? And is not the heavy hand of our God, gone out
against us? How many worthy men ( some whereof our English forest brought
forth) in Germany, Bohemia, And the Palatinate, are fallen upon the sword?
And have spilt their blood, like water, on the ground? Who can tyth the
widows, or tell the tenth part of fatherless children, that fold their arms,
wring their hands, And shed tears, because the Enemy has possessed the Land?
Is not their fathers house, at Prage, Heidelberg, Math. 21.13.
And Bre-da, made a den of Thieves? Has not that noble Prince, And right
noble Princess Palatine, bin pursued as David before Saul, of the
uncircumcised Philistines? Carried their lives in their hands, And many a time
constrained, to refresh their fainting spirits, to put their royal feet, under
the Table of some Churlish Naball? And (ah my brethren!) is there yet a Prophet
gone out, to declare when these things shall have an end? But because this
doleful object is more remote; therefore (though it should not) the less
lamented, Let us draw nearer home. And take a view of our own Nation. Has not
Death cruel death, haunted the Court, City, Country? Killed our King? Slain
our Nobles? And turned into small dust, sixtie-six-thausand of the common
subjects? Call for the aged, and let them (if they can) tell when so many in so
short a revolution of time, have vealed the head, And given up the Ghost? But
what effect has followed this dreadful mortality? Is not England (London
especially,) as proud, covetous, prophaine, And secure as ever? I doubt not but
that some have laid these judgments to heart, brought forth fruit, worthy
amendment of life: Math 3.8
But as the Disciples said of the five loaves and two fishes, what are they
among so many? Alas! Alas! The dead carkesses of neighbors, kindred, friends,
like rotten dung spread on the earth, have caused the seeds of wickedness, in
the lives of a huge multitude, but to shoot up, and grow the faster. What then
shall we, can we expect (without a change) to be the end? For will not God take
vengeance on such a people as this. Zeph. 2.2.
You therefore (before the decree come forth,) Who make profession, like Moses
stand in the gappe, pitition the Father of mercy, And the God of all
consolation, not to enter into judgment, with this sinful generation: but to
put the evil day far from us. Pray for the life of our King, the peace of
our Land; And the continuance of the Gospel, to us and our posterity from
generation to generation. Cry in the ears of the Lord of hoasts, to power
down the Spirit of wisdom and resolution upon his own anointed, that he may
guide the great people committed to his charge, in the way of truth; be the joy
of all his chosen, and a terror to all his enemies. That the Sun of that
morning may never rise, or that day numbered to the Months of the year, when
it shall be said, the Adversary has invaded the land; the Ark of God is gone
from our English Israel. If we sit secure, take heed of a Spanish whip, a
Catholic scourge For what privilege have we, Judah, Jerusalem; And our
Neighbor kingdom^s have not inioyed? Why then may we not fear the like
correction? Chiefly, if we lie in the same sins? Now that you may be
prevented of or prepared for the invasion of Foes, fiering of Beacons, roaring
of Cannons, sacking of Cities, ravishing of wives, deflouring of virgins,
tossing infants on Pikes, rending of members a sunder, and resisting unto
blood, Heb. 11.37
Consider what I have said, And write in this short succeeding Tractat. Heb.
11.37
Better Counsel to undergo the harshest torments to flesh and blood, than I
have in these few lines, I cannot give thee. Read them for thy self, Pray for
me. And the rather, in that thou little know, how short a time thou have.

Thine in the Lord Jesus: John Barlow.
February 23. 1626.
The particulars, in this tractat, prosecuted; are in this Table, related.
Doctrine 1.

A Spiritual steadfastness may be obtained. Page 6. Spiritual steadfastness
defined Page Distributed into Habitual Understanding. Will and afections.
Page 12. Practical Internal. External.
Page 15.
Doct. 2. Spiriuall stedfastnes may be fallen from. Page 30. And it is
Described. Divided: into Habit Total. Partial.
Page 31. Acts Inward. Outward.
Page 35

Causes of Apostasy Within us. Without us.
Page 37 Symptoms of declining. Page 55. Helps to recover the de^lined. Page
70. How to support him who stands. Page 78. Rules for young Converts. Page 85.
Doct. 3. Error leads from stedfastnes. Page 89. Error defined, in General.
Special. Legal. Evangelicall.

Page 90. And either may be, in Judgment Universal. Partial.
Page 93. Practice. Weakness. Willfulness.
Page 69.
Doct. 4. The way of error, is the way of the wicked. Page 104. Doct. 5. By one
error many may be seduced. Page 108. Doct. 6. Error discovered, to be avoided.
P. 114. The shops of error and profaneness. Verse 18. Doct. 1. Admonition to
be seconded with direction. Page 131. Doct. 2. Growth in grace required of a
Christian. Page 146. 1. If grace be of a growing nature? Page 138. 2. May he
who has it, increase it? Page 139. 3. Does every Christian, grow? Page 139.
4. Can its habit be decreased? Page 141. 5. Is it possible, to stand at a stay?
Page 144. 6. Or be augmented, and not discerned? Page 145 Doct. 3. All graces
to be increased. Page 195. May one grow, and not another? Page 198. An
objection removed. Page 169.
Doct. 4. Christians are to grow in the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Page 208.
This knowledge is Intellectual Of his person Offices.
Page 214. Experime^tal To our selves To others.
Page 222.
Several heretical opinions concerning Christ's Person and Offices confuted
Page 224 Diverse texts of Scripture perverted are cleared. Page 225 Doct. 5.
Christ Jesus, man's Savior. Page 24^ And that in respect of his two Natures
Divine. Humane.
Page 244 Obedience Active. Passive.
Page 248
Salvation Defined. Explicated.
Page 253 Objections produced, refelled. Page 258 A forcible exhortation in the
conclusion. Page 260.
A SEASONABLE DISCOVRSE OF Spiritual stedfastnes.
2. Pet. 3.17. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before; take
heed lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your
own steadfastness.


THE Apostle Peter, The Logical resolution.
having the Spirit of prophecy, in the beginning of this Chapter foretells,
that in the last days shall come, Scoffers, walking after their own lusts;
saying, where is the promise of Christ's appearing? for are not all things, as
they were, since the Creation? The which heretical opinion, he by many strong
arguments, confuteth; And so, with several admonitions and exhortations,
concludes this his Epistle. Wherefore, to speak as the thing is, in these
verses are contained both an admonition, and a direction, and in the
admonition, these following particulars may be considered, observed.

First, the persons to whom it is directed; next the ground; and thirdly the
matter of it. For the Persons, they are laid down Collectiuely, Ye, or by an
adjunct title, beloved. The ground is employed in the word therefore, and
expressed in this sentence; Seeing ye know these things. And the matter has a
twofold branch, ignorance, and backesliding: both which properly adhere to the
wicked; yet by occasion may cleave to the godly. Lest ye also being led away
with the error of these Mockers, fall from your own stedfastnes.

Ye:] my Countrymen, believing Jews; The Theological exposition.
and all succeeding Churches, and grounded Christians.

Beloved:] the object of my affection; I being an agent, but you patients.

Therefore:] in this word is closely employed the ground of this admonition, it
being a word of relation.

Seeing you know these things:] here is plainly expressed the full foundation
of the admonition: for the Apostle does not intend, the things hard to be
understood, in the Epistles of his beloved brother Paul; but the
mis-interpretations which the unlearned, and unstable deduce and draw from them
to their own perdition.

Take heed:] beware, watch, have an eye: a kind of presidiarie, or Martial
guarding of a man's self.

Lest ye also being led away:] or led away together: a Metaphorical speech
(it seems) borrowed from a traveler; who, by the wandering of others, is
subject to be seduced.

With the error:] mistaking, false opinion, or wandering from the true way; the
Apostle continues on in the Metaphor.

Of the wicked:] the proper signification of the word, is one Lawless; or (as
some will) for whom no law is put, and appointed: (...) answers to the Hebrew
word (rashang) which is by interpretction, restlesnes, for (...), comes of
(...) privativa and (...); as if we should say in English, unsettled.

Fall:] slide, or go down as stars.

Your own:] that which, in the use of the means, you have obtained and the
Lord conferred, ^mparted.

Stedfastnes.] Strength, stablenes, confirmation; and that Spiritual, not
Corporal.

Whereas in the last days shall arise, scoffers, The Metaphrase.
walking after there own lusts, and perverting the word of truth to their own
perdition, I do therefore admonish you, my well affected Countrymen; and, by
you, all succeeding Churches; especially knowing these things before, that you
be circumspect, and set a Martial watch over your selves, lest, you together
with these erroneous and unsettled persons, through ignorance or weakness, be
seduced and led away from the right path, the doctrine of godliness, and so be
deprived of the Lords ordinances he has imparted, and you, your own selves
obtained.

Now in the deduction of doctrines, we will begin with the last words of our
text first, and as Ruth after Boaz his reapers gleane and gather the fullest
and best fed ears, which the hand of the Holy Ghost has let fall, for the
Spiritual bread and nourishment of our souls.

Doctrines deduced.
Fall from your own stedfastnes.] From this sentence we, in the first place,
collect, that,

A Spiritual stedfastnes may be obtained.

Psalm. 27 vlt. and 51.12. and 112.7.
The Prophet David commands it, prays for it; and confesses, that some did
obtain it, possess it; And does not the Apostle also persuade to the same, 1
Cor. 15. vlt.
crying, be steadfast, immooueable? For this end, did he not desire to see the
Romans? Romans 1.11.
Send Timotheus to the Thessalonians? And do not his fellow laborers Urge, 1
These. 3.2.
press, the same thing? Iam. 5.8.
Who then has cause to question the truth of this Doctrine? If any shall, Rev.
3.2.
reason may relieve him.

faculty of his understanding, in respect of its essence, Sound? his will of
power, strongly, since his fall, bent to action? And has he not affections,
violent? passionate? Memory too, to retain injuries? things done of old?
Fallow ground, Ier. 4.3.
may be manured, receive good seed; and bring forth fruit, fifty, an hundred
fold. Wax, if the signet be imposed, will it not take a fair stamp? a
semblable impression? a slip rent from the tree, may live, bud, bear in
abundance, if set into a flourishing stock, the Body, though dead, the soul
re-infused, will reviue, move, and perform its natural operations. And what
if we affirm, Ephe. 2.1.
that man by nature, is as a liuelesse log, a senseless stone, John 15.5.
and a withered branch? Yet this must be understood, in regard of Spiritual
motion; not graces, and steadfastness reception.

impossible with God? In no sort; Matthew. 19.26.
except it cross his own nature, and contradict the truth of things; and does
this, we have in hand, either of them? What? or who is he, dares say so? From a
privation to a habit, there is no regresse, or return by the rule of
Philosophy; Ioh. 9.6.7.
but in the Art of Theology, Ioh. 11.44.
it may be found. Has not God opened the eyes of him that was borne blind?
raised the dead to life? and could, if he would, have made stones, reasonable
men? Heb. 11.3.
Did he not, at the beginning, make al things of nothing? And be there any
greater opposites? Contradictions then these? Where may they be had? Is not
Logic, the Art of reason, Silent? or dare we imagine that the hand of Jehovah
is shortened? His power weakened? What a height of blasphemy were this? Without
controversy, to Create is little less difficult, then to remake, and amend.

preaching appointed? Sacraments ordained? and Prayer commanded? are these
given in vain? For no end? What greater impiety? Deeper degree of indignity
can be offered against God, and his holy powerful Ordinances? Is not the word
mighty in operation? Heb. 4.12.
able to pull down strong holds? And repair his decayed image? Romans 1.17.
His ruinated Temple? Is it not Spirit and life? Ioh. 6.63.
And has not Christ promised, that the dead hearing it shall live? Certainly,
this seed, John 5.25.
being sown in the Lords chosen closes, will prosper, not a corn thereof
shall miscarie. Wherefore, let Satan's plots, not Gods purpose be frustrate,
and brought to naught.

Adam of imbecillitie lost? The Holy Ghost to build, what the unclean Spirit
did destroy? What if Satan be strong? Is not the Archangell able to match him?
break his head, and grind him to powder? Shall not the Creator, conquer the
Creature? Genesis 3.15.
the younger here shall serve the elder. What a depth of infidelity were it to
dispute? Doubt of this? Why then, let it ever remain as an infalible truth
that a Spiritual Stedfastnes may be obtained. For what the son has
purchased, by the Spirit shall be applied. Ioh. 16.15.
Now for our further information, it may thus be defined.

Stedfastnes defined.
Spiritual stedfastnes, is afirme retention of the degree of grace received.

In this definition, two things are chiefly to be considered: the Genus, a
firm Retention; and the Difference, of the degree of grace received. We call
it a firm, stable, or settled retention, the which truth is in the holy letters
pressed, though under various terms. 2. Timo. 1.14
That worthy thing which is committed to thee, keep: Rev. 2.25.
hold what thou have: Let no man take away thy Crown; and many the like.

And it is a firm retention, or settled conservation of grace and
Sanctification; not of gold, silver, place, promotion: for these we catch as
the living; hold as men dead; nothing shall pluck them out of our hands. We
add, of the degree, or portion: For all the regenerat have not one equal
measure of holiness and sanctity; And that for several reasons. 1. One is of
ancient standing: another of yesterdaies planting 2. Some have had much
watering and dressing: others little in comp^rison of them. 3. And all are not
a like dilligent to redeem the time, and use the means inioyed. Besides, God,
for Special ends, may confer more upon some one Christian at his first
conversion, then another shall have acquired at the day of his dissolution yet
for all this, to keep and conserve what they have (be it less, or more) from
diminution, is to continue in the fore mentioned stedfastnes. A child, as the
aged man, may retain his natural strength: So may a babe, as the grown
Christian, his Spiritual in Christ Jesus.

Stedfastnes distributed
Observe further, that this stedfastnes is Habitual. Practic^l.


Both these are in our definition comprehended, by the Apostle intended; And,
without question, may be procured. They differ as cause, and effect: For the
former in nature preceads the latter, gives an essential being to it, as the
father to his Son; neither, for a moment can exist without it. Take away the
habit, or any degree of it, and proportionably the act perishes: whence (it
may be) as a wise Teacher, our Apostle primarily intends, habitual; at the
second hand, practical stedfastnes. For conserve the fire, and it will heat;
retain the habit, and it will work.

Again, habitual stedfastnes is in the Understanding, Will and affections.


For as the faculties so the habits of them are distinct, and may be
distributed. God, when he sets upon the soul to Sanctify it, plants a divine
light in the understanding, whereby truth, and error be clearly discerned; the
narrow path to heaven, and the spacious Gate that leads to hell. This is
called, ey salve; Rev. 3.18.
or the annoynting which teaches all things. Also, the Lord infuseth a new
created power into the will and affections, 1 Io. 2.27.
enabling them to covet and embrace good, to reject and shun evil; so far
forth as the understanding part apprehendes and presents them. Its a fond
dream of the Arminians, that grace should not be habitually infused at our
conversion; or if it be, it is no Sanctifying grace of the Spirit: here is a new
doctrine indeed. But does not knowledge expel ignorance? Faith, infidellity?
Shall not that then which abolisheth corruption, be justly styled a grace of
Sanctification? Nay these men maintain, that the Act in divine graces preceads
the habit; as if burning, should go before fire. Wit, whether will thou? Mat
12.33.
Must not the tree first be good, before the fruit can? does pure water, Iam.
3.11.
spring out of a troubled fountain? True it is, that many Acts confirm and
perfect the habit; Romans 5 3.
but yet give not its essential being, passing this, let us go on.

As for practical stedfastnes, that is External. Internal.


Christ admits of this division, when he says, Matthew. 15 8
these people draw near me with their mouths; and honor me with their lips,
but their hearts are far from me. The former without the latter, is
profitable for nothing. Who more frequent and constant in external shows, and
Ceremonies, than the Pharisees of old, the Papists in our times, and yet both,
the most abominable Hypocrites in the world? Take Paul praying, 1. Cor. 14 24.
it is in the understanding and spirit; preaching, it is in power, and
authority; Singing, it is with grace and gladness of heart. 2. Tim. 1.7.
Where is the ground of his greatest joy? He serves the Lord, in the law of his
mind. Of his deepest grief? The law of his flesh, rebels against the law of
his mind. Romans 7.22.23.24.
This man would obey God with the whole man: or he accounts himself a
miserable, wrecthed man.

O what sweet internal strains have issued from that settled sanctified
spirit! Psalm. 139.27.
How dear (speaking of God) are thy thoughts unto me? They are exceeding many.
Whom have I in heaven, Psalm. 73.28
but thee? When shall I appear in thy presence? Psalm. 16.8.
I set thee always on my right hand. Thy law do I love; I will meditate there
on night and day: Psalm. 17. vlt.
And, when I awake I shall be fatisfied with thine image, Psalm. 119.77.
Where knowledge is planted in the mind, it will see him who is invisible;
still casting the eye that way, amidst a million of other objects. If faith be
once rooted in the will, let Heretics dispute, Satan roar, the world tempt,
and death terrify, it stands fast, is unshaken. Grant it be moved, its but a
little; and then afterward with more eagernes and affiance, like a resolute
soldier his fallen arms, lays hold on the Lord Jesus, cleaves faster unto
him. These are some of the internal motions of Spiritual stedfastnes: as for
the external, it is when we bring the members of the body to a constant course
in holy actions: to preach, read, hear, meditate, sing, pray, with any other
outward act whatever, Now from all which has been said, what a large path of
application have we to walk in? to pace through?

Spiritual stedfastnes, with the kinds of it: but what marvel? When they
neglect the means, omit the season, conserve a strong habit of corruption in
them, by pampering the flesh, and a settled course of evil doing; are strangers
from the life of God, have not one grain of grace, neither ever felt the least
wound of Mortification: should we demand of these the like to Paul's question,
have you received this Spiritual stedfastnes, since you were baptized? Acts
19.2.
We might expect the like answer; for how many would reply, We have not so
much as heard that there is a spiritual stedfastnes? Or, as Festus concerning
the Apostle, they have no certain thing to say of it. Acts 25 26
So these may have milk in their breasts, marrow in their bones, and corporal
stabilitie; be able to plow, sow, run and ride without wearines, this is all
they think of, care for; yet do but observe the course of these men, and
shall you not see, how they never doubt, question the procuring of any other
kind of stedfastnes, if it fall within the fathom of a created possibility? And
harshlie censure all, who tread not in the highest step, and lift not the toe
into the loftiest stirrup of profanes? For were it to drink soule-slaying
healthes, he who comes not to their pitch, is condemned, casheered as an
unworthy companion: to kindle and smoke, if he once deny the pipe, must get
him gone, and be packing. Is he unfit for his calling? Or careless in the
execution of it? With open mouth, they cry; such a man is simple, an Idiot, and
worthy to die a beggar. Will he not hold out at Dice and Cards, from sun to
sun? Then he is no body, nor a commendable Gamester. Does he ever grow weary
in getting or spending? Want the least skill, omit any opportunity, until he
become immooueable, invincible in a settled path of impiety? He is reputed a
lazy person, a destroyer of good fellowship, and deserves the whipping post.
And notwithstanding all this, if they live in Palpable ignorance, obtain not
the knowledge of holy things, never acquire one grain of faith, procure the
weakest Anchor of hope, purchase any sacred fear of the most high; learn not
how to Call upon God, Confess their sin, petition, for what they would have,
and to be constant in well doing, though they have time, and means for all
these, and their salvation depends thereon, Yet God and Man must hold them
excused. O heartlesse people! Most unhappy generation!

stedfastnes may be had, yet strive not for it. These have a price in their
hands, but no willing hearts. Luke 14.19
One must as in old time, go veiwe his farm, a second prove his Oxen: a third
bury his father. And a fourth married a wife, that he cannot stand about it.
Some log, or other lets. We have too few rooted in knowledge, grounded in
faith, or stablished with hope. Psalm. 107.27.
Every windy doctrine puffes them out of the way, makes them stagger and reele
like a drunken man. The report of a Cannon will cause a faint hearted soldier
to quake, to tremble, And any terrible tidings, 1. Timo. 1.19
constrain many to Shipwreck their faith, split a good conscience in pieces.
Some as Naball, are half dead at a threate, 1. Sam. 2 5.37 Judge. 9.36.
others with Gaal, for all their boasting, fear the very shadow of a
mountain. Do not many among us, read the Bible, as beasts run into bushes,
on stormy rainie days? Hear a sermon, as he who has an ague mooues his
body, when they feel the fit to come upon them? Pray, as the deaf man speaks,
when God roundes them in the ear by some heavy judgment? sing Psalms, as
beggars work never but (and scarcely then) when authority inioynes them? Give
alms, as Jordan fills her banks, rarely in a years revolution? And receive
the Sacrament, when the silly Papists eat an egg to shame Lent, and
themselves too, and that's but once per annum, and then at Easter? our
Understandings are seldom set on God the Object of all perfection: our
affections with great difficulty are raised to him: our faith fixed on his
never failing promises; And our wills be weakly bent to run the paths of his
Commands: so that, as the Leper, cried, I am unclean, I am unclean. We may,
we are unsettled, we are unsettled. He is one of a thousand, who can truly
testify of himself, that he meditateth upon God, relieth on him, and has his
heart firmly fixed on the Lord: for some, in a great degree, lose the very
habit of grace, others the acts thereof; and the most, with much wavering, hold
what they have obtained. Are we not tossed, like a feather, by the wind?
Carried about, as a Cocke-boate, with the least gust? Rev. 2.4.
ready, as Peter, to sink after a few steps made on the water? With Ephesus We
have left (if not lost) our first affection, run from the husband of our youth,
misspent our portion: Hos. 2.7.
And as the Dog to his vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.
the Sow to her wallowing in the mire, turned to our former wickedness; and lapt
up that sin, which in times past, we had spued out, with great eagernes,
greedines. They, who (like the Galathians) received their Ministers as an
Angel of God, are grown slack, Gal 4.14.15
in giving to him his deserved honor; yea, peradventure, would (were the power
of their hands, equal to the malice of their hearts) pluck forth his eyes, do
him a mischief; but beloved, these things are not, ought not to be so.

Spiritual stedfastnes may be procured. Let us try whether we, or no, have
obtained it. Has the Oldman received his deaths wound? is he peirced through
the sides? Broken in pieces? Not able to stand? Does the New feed sat, grow
strong, sing like birds in the pleasant spring? is the eye of thy mind opened,
to see clearly the wonders of the law? Deep mysteries of the Gospel? With
the vanity of all Earthly things? Is thy soul filled with Faith, Love, Hope,
and all the graces of the holy Ghost? Is the pulse of the flesh feeble? Of the
Spirit, firm? Can thou preach in season, out of season? Hear, without
wearines? Pray, Continually: and bear crosses with Contentation? Do thou
hunger, after the bread of heaven? Thirst, for the water of life? And that as
often, as for thy appointed food? Where be thy thoughts for the most? On God,
or the World? Earth, or Heaven? What are thy words ordinarily? Corrupt, or
Sanctified? Thy Actions? Good, or Evil? To be brief; art thou strong in the
the Lord, and his mighty power? As able now to fight the good Joshua 14.
fight of faith, as Caleb was the battles of his God, many years agone? Is thy
life ever flowing with the streams of holiness, as a never dying Spring? Thy
last crop, better then the first? And thy meat and drink daily to do the
will of thy heavenly Father? Then be of good comfort: Ioh 4.34.
forthy labor in the use of the means, 1. Cor. 15. vlt.
has not been in vain in the Lord. But alack! How many are ever learning, 2.
Tim. 3.7.
and never come to the knowledge of the truth? Full of unbelief,
no^withstanding their long profession of the Gospel? And scarce worthy to be
numbered among the steadfast? For Catechize our people, how many know little?
Nothing? Look into their actions, are they not unsettled? Follow them home, veiw
their order there; And how few call upon God; desire his blessing; Or with the
Noble Bereans, Acts 17.11.
search the Scriptures to boult out the truth they have heard? May not the
Ministers complain of our people as did there Master, how long must we be
among you? When will you procure this stedfastnes? Mar. 9.19.
O ye of little faith? Less stabilitie! We Preach, and you hear; we Pray,
and you too in appearance; we give, and you receive, Angels food, Mat. 6.30.
bread from heaven, the Sacred body of the Lord Jesus; and yet you are not, its
to be feared, established. Men, like a green Nut, stick still in the husk, are
shaken as the reed with the least wind, weak they be as water; and have need,
notwithstanding the long time and great means they have enjoyed, to learn the
first principles of religion. Heb. 5.12.
But is this well done? Will God, think we, take it well at our hands? Or be
contented to receive his talent with so great damage? disadvantage?

seeing it may be had, strive we for this stedfastnes. Are we not capable of
it? God able to give it? Is it not promised to them that seek it? Has not
Christ procured it? Be not the means great to effect it? Or shall not the
Spirit have will and power to apply it? Why then labor we no more for it?
Spend our time, consume our days without it? And as it may be had; So is it
worth the having. Will a wise man take a dwarf to his prentice? Make choice of
weak willowes to be the posts of an house? Or press children for soldiers? I
trow not. Then, if ever we would be the servants of the most high God, Acts
16.17
timber in his Spiritual Temple, fight under the colors of the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, 1. Pet. 2.5.
and be crowned with glory immortal, Rev. 5.5.
get we this Stedfastnes. For our Captain Christ, our Lord and chief Master,
admits of none, but strong men in his army, tall Cedars to build him an house;
and stones of the firmest temper, to be placed in the walls. We live in good
days better then our forefathers before us; So that less strength was
expected from them, then will be at our hands. For God is equal in all his
ways, looks for increase answerable to the times and means. Wherefore be
thou assured, that where much is given, Mat. 25.20.
much shall be required: and why should it not? Had we a plant in our garden,
should we water it morning, evening, prune it, hedge round about it; and, for
all this labor, did it not grow, shoot up, flourish, would we not rend it up
by the roots, cast it forth, and suffer it to dye, to wither? And shall not
the Lord do so to us; if we attain not to the forenam^d stedfastnes? What
could he have done more for us, then he has done? Will he suffer us always to
cumber the ground? Make the place barren? Luke 13.7.
No, no; he will send forth his Vine-dresser, give him astrict charge to cut us
down; And say to us, as Christ did to the Figtree, never fruit grow on thee
more. I can tell you, Mar. 9.14.
that this would be a sorrowful season, a dismal day, and a woeful, fearful
sentence; whose ears would not tingle, and hairs bristle to hear it? And
rather then undergo it, wish he had never been borne? Wherefore, get wisdom,
and faith, and stedfastnes, and abound in all; And when thou have it in the
habit, then bring it into act; exercise thy self, lay thy policy, bend all
thy might, to be deeply rooted; grounded in the grace of God, and all times to
be doing. A weak man in the gifts of the spirit, is like to him, who has many
corporal infirmities; both his person and motion are unpleasant, unprofitable.
Who will Commend a feeble beast? Or who desires to back one that halteth? And
so much for this point.

And fall from your own stedfastnes.] The next thing we observe out of these
words is this, that

A Spiritual stedfastnes may be fallen from.

It may, though it should not, ought not, else why did the Apostle give out
this charge? publish this Caveat? Or why are believers so often forewarned,
premonished to beware, to take heed of it? And what a cloud of witnesses in the
holy letters have we recorded, who fell from it? 2 Samuel 11.4 11 Neh. 13.26
What a fall had David, one of the Lords worthies? His goodson was a long time
carried down the wind, went back many degrees; Gal 2.13.
Peter also had a sudden, but a shrewd slip, pulling Barnabas down with him.
Rev. 2.4.
But what do I talk of, tell of single persons, 2. Tim. 1.15. 1 Kin 12.20.
when as whole Churches, tribes, nations have turned backward? as Galatia,
Ephesus, all Asia, and the Jews.

Now for the more full and profitable prosecution of this point, we will first
declare what this defection is, with the kinds and degrees of it: next the
grounds and causes of it: thirdly the symptoms that attend it: and last of
all, from the forenamed particulars make application; where 1. Remedies to
recover the declining Christian, shall be prescribed. 2. H lpes, to support him
who stands annexed. And 3. directions, for the young convert added, these
things being premised, let us go on.

A falling from Spiritual stedfastnes, I The fall from Spiritual Stedfastnes
defined.
is a decay of the degree of grace obtained.

For as Spiritual stedfastnes, is a firm retention of the degree of grace
acquired: So, by the rule of contraries this must be, a loss of the measure
thereof received.

And this decay, Distributed
may be of the Habit. Acts.


The habit of grace may be derceased.
Some there be, who hold that the habit admits not of the least loss or damage:
for as the Moon (say they) has various aspects, yet her body nothing
diminished. So would these have it with the habit of grace, in a sanctified
person. But I rather accord with them, who are otherwise minded: And that for
these succeeding reasons. 1. For is it not a Created thing? 2. It is a
separable adjunct, may be rent from its proper subject; for it results not out
of the principles which give man his essential being, as the faculty of
risibilitie does. These arguments make it possible. 3. As the habit, in the use
of the means, may be strengthened. So, by the neglect thereof, why should it
not be weakened? 4. From the rule of opposites, corruption, we all agree may be
decreased; and then, why may not grace be also diminished? These two latter
reasons, make the position, as the former, possible; if not more then probable.

habit may be decayed in a found Christian, Solut.
it may be demanded, in what degree? For the solution of this question, may it
be thought worthy to pass, we answer; that seldom, if ever, is it wasted to
that degree, it was of at the first infusion: or if it should proceed so far,
yet never beyond it: our reason. For, as we were mere patients at the first
reception So, are we no agents in its destruction. Lose we may, what addition,
by our Cooperation with it, we have gained: but not the least dram of that,
the which, without our coworking, was, at our effectual call, infused. A
natural father (could he prevent it) would not suffer his Son to wast the
stock, he primarily conferred on him, although he might wink at the
mispending of what he by the use thereof, has gained. And then shall our
heavenly (who can let) permit his children to consume his talents he first
imparted to them? Again, our Apostle, in this place, admonishes the Saints,
to beware that they did not fall from their strength, or strengthening, not
from the habit of grace, or that bulk (as I may call it) the which, as a seed
in the soil of their souls, was at the time of their conversion scattered;
but from that degree, they since that time had acquired, obtained.

But be it granted, that the habit cannot be decreased; yet the acts without
doubt, may be remitted, being by some strong enemy, from within, or without
us, opposed. the Sun may be eclipsed, his beams restrained; when his body
remains perfect, nothing wasted. So is it here. However (though we thus write)
we are of opinion, that were this Spiritual cessation of long duration, it
would greatly in danger the habit. For (as we have said) it grows by use,
decays by disvse; as we find by experience, that natural habits do, by
natural operations, relaxations.

Observe further that this decay of the habit, and acts of grace be Total.
Habitual falling subdivided.
Partial.


Total; When the habit is wholly destroyed; or all the acts of it universally
suspended, the former befell Adam of special grace at the creation; Romans 5.14.
And Alexander of common, after man's redemption. But this kind of fall (we take
it) is not in this place, by our Apostle intended; 2. Tim. 4.14
nor incident to them, who are, unto Christ Jesus, by the Spirit united.
Partial is; for the habit of grace may be decreased, and its acts remitted in
the most regener at person. Now this latter kind, Is Inward. Outward.


Inward in Judgment, then in the will and affections. For the understanding may
not only be weakened from the clear apprehe^ding of the truth formerly
obtained: but also, Gal 3.1.
as in the Galatians, with error corrupted. For, they fell from the doctrine of
justification, in the true rule and ground of it, mixing their own works with
the object matter of it, which is Christ, and his obedience; active passive.
This was their judicial fall.

Again; in the will and affections, Rev. 2.4. Video meliora etc.
there may be partial decay. This was the fall of the Church of Ephesus, which
is said to have left her first love. And a truth it is, that a man may hold the
doctrine sound in respect of judgment, and yet fall from it in regard of
practice. For the hahit of grace in the understanding, is distinct from that in
the will and affections; whence spring these various declinings. And as
inwardly; So outwardly may we fall from the acts of grace, the which, in time
past we have performed. David (doubtless) was sound in judgment, when he fell
so foully in his practice. And a man may have a will to do well, when the
external effects may be blasted, Psalm. 39.1.3
as of Peter in the denial of his master. The Prophet purposed to look to his
ways, not to offend with his tongue. 2 Cor. 16.10
But this was too painful for him: therefore he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.
When that Godly king imprisoned the Seer, his judgment was sound; yet his
practice corrupt. But ordinarily, when the inward asts be remitted; then the
outward are stinted.

II. Thus having finished the first thing proposed, we proceed to the second;
the causes of these declinings.

And they be Within us. Without us. Causes from within us.



Melancholy, for its a true axiom, that the soul follows, the disposition
and temperature of the body, the forenamed humor has various and strange
operations, drawing a black and mournful curtain over the New-man, casts
hidious conceits into the mind, and presents to the eye of reason, the
manifold misshapen ougly forms of approaching death; burns and consumes the
purest spirits, the immediate instrument of the souls acts; Or so clogges them
with thick fumes, that she cannot lift up the wing, and soar into the third
heaven; but like a weather-beaten, or limed foul falls down, and makes her
motion on the earthie Center, creepes on the Globe. And Daily, hourly raises
such cogitations as these. Love, why thou art but passion; zeal fury, joy
madness; hope, a groundless conceit. And all the graces of the spirit, but
the operations of mere nature; or a more pure disposition of corporal
temperature: whence it often comes to pass, that such; who be pestered with
the forenamed peccant malady, complain of the souls corruption, when its
nothing else, but the bodies bad indisposition, grow thereby to be out of
heart, cease from spiritual action; and so consequently fall from their former
setlednesse. He who is ignorant of this thing, well may he be an aged person;
but (I am sure) no expert Christian.

2. Some raging lust, unmortified affection. When such a passenger is in the
ship of man's soul, like another Jonah, it will unsettle all. Was not David
strong in the grace of God? How came it to pass then, that he in some degree,
fell from his former stedfastnes? Why? he was of an hot Sanguine complexion,
which provokes much to the sin he committed; 2. Sam. 11.
now being not careful enough, to curb that natural pronenesse, of certain,
was an internal cause of his foul declining. Genesis 39.12
Joseph in this, it seems, out-stript him: For, he resisted, though strongly
tempted; was (likely) as young as David; had none, he six wives, as appears;
And had he disputed with flesh and blood, as forcible arguments to have allured
him. What a broad difference was this, for David a king, to go in to a
subject; and Joseph a servant, to run from his mistress, had noe more bin
mentioned? Was not his son Solomon, Neh. 13.26.
in his youth, a rare young man? Yet, in his elder years carried away with
outlandish women? Why so? in plain english; his lust was let loose, his
affection not mortified. He trod not in the steps of holy Paul, who labored
with his hands, 1. Cor. 9. vlt.
fasted often, brought his body into subjection, that the flesh might not
overmaster the spirit. The like might be the forerunner to Noah's drunkenness,
Lots incest, and his wives looking back to Sodom. If the reins hang under
his feet, the strongest, readiest footed beast, may stumble, catch a fall. Cut
all the feet equal; the table stands steadfast, else not.

3. Unbelief (this works greater wounds in the soul, than ever any
mountebanke professed to cure in the body. It, as a moth the garment, eats up
the gloss of grace; like the worm the Gourd of Jonah, smits faith at the
root, causes it to wither; and makes the acts thereof feeble, liuelesse. What
mists will this Iugler raised in our understandings; Earthquakes within us;
Blind the eye of reason to question common principles; Doubt of what we have
known by experience? How subtly will this Sophister argue? Dispute? What?
Are not all things alike from the beginning Where is the promise of Christ's
c^mming? 2. Pet. 3 4.
When shall the Jews be called? Rome ouerturned? Gog and magog destroyed? And
all Israel saved? Mala. 3.14.
Are not the wicked advanced? Isa. 59.15.
They who tempt God delivered? And he that refraineth from evil made a prey?
What profit is there in serving the Almighty? Seeking the kingdom of heaven?
Calling upon the name of the Lord? Art thou not poor? Despised? Psalm. 37.1.2
etc.
Persecuted? Who flourish, but the ungodly? Are without bonds in death, except
the transgressor? Brethren, infidelity will raise in man's heart loose conceits
of God, and of his nature; almost persuade that seeing is not believing. Had
not the Prophet such thoughts as these? Was he not almost by these
Sophistications, fallacies well near turned out of the way? Cast upon his
back? And run the path of open profanesse? Without doubt, they stayed his
steps for a time, hindered his holy progress. Read Psalm. 73. Per totum.

4. Carnal confidence; that is, whatsoever we trust in, except Christ Jesus.
The Jews had Abraham for their father, Moses to their master, teacher;
Circumcision the seal of righteousness, the Arc, Temple, Oracles, all holy
ordinances, and worshipped at Jerusalem; yet excluding Christ the true Paschall
Lamb, the Messiah premised; What was al they did or had, but a confidence in
the flesh? Was not Paul an Hebrew of the Hebrews? Of the kindred of Israel? And
of the tribe of Benjamin? Circumcised the eight day? Brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel And profited above many? Phil 3.3.
a Pharisee by profession? zealous toward God? And lived after the most strict
sect of that religion? And what was all this, Acts 26.5.
(Christ being denied of him) but a fleshly confidence? And may not a man
effectually called, perfectly justified, and truly sanctified, have an eye,
look back to such things? Put some affiance in them, whereby the better to
confirm his Spiritual standing? And if he do, what can it be but a carnal
confidence? And may not a man effectually called, perfectly justified, and
truly Sanctified, have an eye, look back to such things? Put some affiance in
them, whereby the better to confirm his Spiritual standing? And if he do,
what can it be but a carnal confidence? And a step from grace? Give we an
instance of this, without exception. What say you of the Galatians? Would not
they have their works concur with the obedience of Christ, in the act of
justification? And for this cause, be they not said to have ended in the flesh?
Gal. 3.3.
Fallen from the grace of God? This is a secret, yet a certain truth, that a
man may be carried away to place some confidence in his own worthiness; and if
he do, according to that degree, he falle^h from Spiritual stedfastnes. For
Christ must be all in all, Col. 3.11.
else no setlednesse: and therefore, for this very thing, we truly affirm,
that Rome is fallen from the faith, and led away with the error of the wicked.

5. Weakness of grace. To speak properly, this is not a real, or positive
cause of declining; yet by occasion, may have a finger in the business. For
grace, as all other things, is apt to conserve it self, and no agent by
intention of its own diminution. Put a small portion of fire, into a bundle of
green wood, will not the act thereof, by its ouer-strong adversary, in some
degree be weakened. So grace being a little one, corruption big and mighty, and
besetting it round, why may it not also in part be extinguished? Gal. 5.17.
For flesh and spirit are contraries, lodge in the regenerate person, are
always quarelling, whence it comes to pass, that grace, being unequally
matched, is over-mastered and quenched, though not totally consumed. Yea
doubtless, were it not for the spirit of God, who at al times stands by the
new-man, and in every conflict, as Eli the lamp with oil, 1. Sam 3.
Ioab David, with a new created power releeues him, the old man would put out
the ca^dle of his life, co^quer and overcome him.

6. Want of knowledge experimental. When a tradesman has a stock, follows
his calling, sees how customers come in, has daily doings, whereby he
augmenteth his substance, gains great things, and wins reputation, will it
not animate, put spirit and life into him, to be constant in the execution of
his vocation? And so will it be with the experienced Christian. When he can say
by proof, Psalm. 6 9.
the Lord has heard my prayer, performed his promise, comforted me in trouble;
and (to this day) has never failed or forsaken me, he will go on in the
continual practice of holy actions, 1. Cor. 6.8.
thorough good report, and evil report, without the least relaxation. There is
a mystery in godliness, the which being learned, will make a Christian
steadfast, immooueable. When a man has tasted of the good word of God, savingly
felt the power of the world to come, and is familiarly acquainted with the
ravishings of the spirit, nothing can stay his steps, hinder his progress to
the land of the living. Does not a tradesman know in the time of bargaining the
worth of skill? What, when commodities are dear, money will do? How sweet a
thing it is, to gather out of a great heap? Not to be beholding; or to take
upon trust of his neighbor? And the same does an experienced professed
Christian. He understands the necessity of faith and grace, when God (as I may
say) sets Christ and salvation to sale; and how, (were he now without the
treasure of the spirit, constrained, like the five foolish virgins, to borrow
of his acquaintance, Mat. 25.
in a day of dearth) he were quite undone. Who is so unwise, but knows that
goods are always profitable? Money will, can do many things? A diligent hand
makes rich? Pro. 10.4.
And to him who has, Luke 8.18.
shall be given? But too few understand the gain of Godliness, the use of
grace, the purchase may be made therewith, what credit such men have with God,
and what promotion he will confer upon them, who carefully seek it, conserve
it. Ignorance in this thing, makes many banke-rupts, political, spiritual.

Now the contrary of all these we have mentioned, will be excellent helps for
the firm retention of grace received. Wherefore keep thy body in good plight;
feed on choice meats, walk in pure air, use moderate labor, recreation;
And drink a little wine, 2. Tim. 5.3
to prevent thy corporal infirmities. Consider how plants spread in a fertile
soil, beasts feed fatter in a fresh pasture; and in the use of the lawful
means, means, all kind of creatures thrive, prosper; Col. 3.5.
mortify also fleshly lusts, crucify the whole body of sin; for, in so
doing, 1. Cor. 9. vlt.
thou shall remove rubs out of the way, curb the Oldman, and bind him to good
behavior. See in like sort thou increase thy faith; and that will expel
infidelity; consume it, as fire does subble; and drive it out of the heart, to
dwell, as Hagar, in the wilderness. And shall not hope in Christ, make the
Newman lusty? Strong? Arm him against fear? Foul despair? And in all
assaults cheer up his spirits? Be sure to grow in grace: For is not a feeble
person, subject to trip? To stumble? Catch a fall? When able bodies, hold out?
March valiantly? Win the field? In a word get experience of Gods dealing with
the righteous; what sound joy there is in the powerful practice of religious
duties; unspeakable comfort in suffering for well doing. Thus do, and when
Satan does tempt thee, his sworn slaves persecute thee, the world allure
thee, and the flesh resist thee, thou shall say to all with Indignation, Neh.
6.11.
get ye hence. Shall such a man, as I am, flee? Do this wickedness, to live?
Offend my good God? Genesis 39.9.
And hazard the final estate of my soul? Nay, rather let my arm fall from my
shoulder, Job. 31.22.
Psalm. 137.5.
my right hand forget its cunning; and my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth. And thus much of the inward causes of declining; the other, from without
us, follow.

2. Chro. 21.13.
1. Wavering-minded companions. He who walks with such, will, in time, walk as
such. When the kings of Judah fell from the true worship of God, did not the
subjects also? Did not Peter by his example, Gal. 2.13.
seduce Barnabas his fellow laborer? The one led awry; the other followed.
What was the cause Samson lost his strength? Was it not too much familiarity
with dancing Dalilah? This is not the least block in the way.

2 The fiery trial of affliction. Luke 2.35.
Pierce the Soul of Marie with this sword; will not the hearts of many be
discouerd? 2. Tim. 1.15
Put Paul in prison, all Asia straight forsake him. Let Jesus be condemned, his
own Disciples will be offended. Oh! Affliction is harsh to flesh and blood:
skin for skin, Job. 2.4.
and what will not a man do to save his life? This wind, where and when it
blows, causes the strong to stagger; and trippeth up the heels of many
weak ones.

3 Personal wrongs; undeserved injuries. Nabals churlish dealing with David
well deserving, gave him a sudden slip; staide, 2. Sam. 25.11.15.
for some season, his spiritual motion. What else made the good subjects of
Solomon, 2. Chro. 10 7.16.
to fall from his Son Rehoboam? to cry, what portion have we in David? Or
inheritance in the son of Iesse? O Israel, see to thine own house? Had the
king spoke kindly to them; given them good words, they would have bin his
servants for ever.

4 Public scandal. When the Word preached, but seems to sound against a
man's person, then he recoiles like an overcharged Cannon: on no other occasion,
did many of Christ's followers forsake him; Ioh. 6.66.
walk no more with him. Were not the Galatians in the same predicament? Gal.
1.9.10.
What else had a foot in their retrogradation? And is any thing more common in
our days, than for the people to take offense at the doctrine? Sometimes from
the habit of their Teachers?

5. Example of supposed great ones. Hence sprung these speeches: Do any of the
Rulers follow him? Of the Pharisees believe on him? Ioh 7.48.
Moses is our Teacher; and does this man restrain learning to himself? Ioh.
9.29.
We know God spoke to the one: 1. Sam. 8.5.
But as for this fellow, we know not whence he is. Likely, from the same
ground, the people would have a king: other nations had so. As with the
fashion, we deal with religion; if great men use it, all follow it: but if
not, we cast it off.

6. Disreputation. When persons have rare parts, fair promises, but not
promoted; then they turn Priest, Jesuit; as Sanders, Stapleton, to get
preferment. This may be the cause why Demas forsook Paul, cast off his
calling; 2. Tim. 4.10
And (as some think) became an Idol-priest at Thessalonica. However that was;
this cord pulls many from the right path, wherein sometimes they had walked.

I might here mention many more; as the habites of pleasure, seat of
promotion, titles of honor, paritie with nobles, command of the vulgar, and
revenge on the adversary: false teachers, falls of great ones, seeming
foolishnes of Gods ordinances, glorious shows of holiness, counterfeit
miracles, and shining ceremonies. The chair of security, sad looks of the
forward, simplicity of honest hearted Christians, or their silliness rather.
Add to all these, the Devils cunning, Satan's enterprises, always stinting us
at the heel, to dim the eye of the mind, wither the hand of faith, or
eclipse its object. This red Dragon with his depths, coals of envy, boiling
up all the forenamed parts in the Cauldron of his malice, will make such a
filthy scumme to ascend, the which being smelt of the New-man (were it not for
the good Physician of our souls, who cures all diseases) would cast him into
a total irrecouerable consumption.

Here, before we proceed to the next general head, it is to be observed, how
these causes mentioned may be applied, as well to him who has but a form of
godliness, as to the sound Christian; and that they do not only hinder the
exercise of grace, but also weaken the habit: Sometimes working it, as Ioab
stabbed Abner to the heart, at once; now and then successively, as a thief is
said to quench the Candle. For some are like a strong poison, that dispatcheth
its patient quickly; others a lingering disease, which kills certainly thee
not suddenly. These things being inserted, let us proceed to the next head.

1. Symptome^ of declining.
When we have not so clear an apprehension of the worth of grace, and the
means to procure it, increase it, as in former time. If the glory thereof be
darkened; and we account faith, love, hope, but as common favors, in some
degree we are declin^d. When the corporal eye behouldes external objects (not
changed from their natural gloss) but dimmely, it argues a decay in the
organ, the faculty of seeing. So when the good word of God, the sacred gifts
of the spirit, present themselves to our internal senses, as broken notions,
ordinary things; not as Baulme to cure our deadly wounds, Angels food to
refresh our never dying Spirits, and the only pence, whereby to purchase a
pardon for our sins, the loving kindness of our God, and the land of
eternal rest, then is the habit of our understanding decreased. When we see
the forespecified things, as grass under our feet, common passengers we meet
withal, as if we saw them not, questionless we have caught a fall.

2. If we want an eager appetite after the doctrine of sound words, the bread
and water of life; feed on them more for fear and fashion, than love and
affection, we have just cause to suspect our selves. That stomach grows weak,
which desires novelties, longs for uncouth things: And having fed twice or
thrice on wholesome meats, begins to turn. When men pick out some odd
author, tie themselves to him in their continual study; talk of him, quote
him, commend him, as the only Champion of all the learned, be they who, or
what you will, their spiritual eie-sight, and appetite are weakened; and the
New-man is in a fit of languishing. He who leaves the road-way, is out of the
way.

3. Ion. 1.3. etc.
A neglect of our particular callings. When Jonah will not to Ninevie; but pay
his fare, lance forth, and sail to Tarshish, his soul has took a
spiritual nappe. They who grow busybodies in other men's matters, and
overlooke their own, are turned backward. Idle censorious Christians, either
never had good stock, or they have diminished their store. For a diligent hand
makes rich, as well in spiritual as corporal things. Unthrifts and
Loyterers, always dye beggars.

4. When we feebly perform holy actions, or fearfully omit them. He who
preaches without power; prays but not fervently; sings Psalms, without
ravishings of the spirit; and approaches into Gods presence, without
trembling, serious preparation, is in a spiritual consumption. That man who
speaks fainly, walks limpingly, and works laz^ly, is either a Laisht, a
Gibeoxit, or an Ephramite; idle, luskish, or a counterfeite, if his natural
habits, and abilities be not decayed. I may affirm the same of the other. From
this ground, Col. 4.17.
Paul might be occasioned to put Archippus in mind, to look to his ministry.

5. A fifth symptom, is a quiet concoction of what heretofore we have
distasted, 1. Sam. 24.5.
spued out, holding the same, as then, for loathsome meats. Take David in his
right temper, 2. Sam. 11.25.
touch but Saul's lap, and his heart smites him; if disordered, sheath his sword
in the bowels of Vriah, it will not check him. Men digest that being a sleep,
which (were they waking,) would cause them vomit. A soul in her best plight,
as she abhors the greatest: So hates the least known evil.

6. Finally; When men offend, 2. Chro 16 10.
and will not endure reproof. If Asa, imprison the Prophet; Jonah, Ion. 4 9.
tell God he does well to be angry; And Job, challenge him the schools, Job.
13.3.
they all three are gone down the wind. He who enters into his lodging, bolts
the door, shuts the window, stretches himself on his bed, and draws the
curtains, is certainly inclined to sleep: if he storm, cast the stau^s
about, being awaked, you may safely conclude, he has no will to work. You
have heard, that Spiritual stedfastnes may be fallen from; what it is, with
the kinds, causes, and Symptoms of it; And now from all the particulars
specified, and our method propounded, we proceed to application.

adversaries, that saving grace once obtained, cannot totally be consumed,
destroyed. Gain say we do not, dare not, that the acts may not be for a
season suspended; or the very habit, from which they flow, Romans 11.29
weakened: But this we deny, that the tree with all her fruits may universally
and finally be blasted, Ioh. 11.42.
withered. For, are not the gifts and calling of God without repentance? Heb. 4
14.
Does not the Son intercede for us? Will the Father deny him any thing? Shall
the spirit permit his work to be abolished? 1. Cor. 3.16
Is it equal, that the New-man suffer for the Old-mans offense? Phil. 1.6.
For, all that is borne of God sins not. 1. Io. 3.9.
If one member perish, would not the body of Christ be imperfect? Should one
finally fall, by the same cause, why not all? And then might not Christ dye in
vain? Were not his end, at the least in part, made frustrate? What fearful,
and to be abhorred consequents are these? What if corruption, like a
land-flood, gather head? Grow big? Overflow the banks? And seem to drown
all the good grain in the nether grounds? Yet, in a trice, shall it not be
dried up? Vanish, as if it never had bin? When as grace, like a little river,
keeps the channel, runs continually, though she have no such boyleings?
Swellings? But we leave them to drink up puddle, who dislike to taste spring
water.

backe-sliders, lest we condemn the generation of the righteous. What if Some,
who have made a great profession, give back? Will it follow, that they are
finally? Totally fallen? Have made an apostasy? Do we not read of many of
the Lords worthies, who fell, in some degree, from grace obtained? Shall we
thence conclude, they made shipwreck of all? Never recovered? In no sort. Did
not David decline? Run out of the road-way, when he returned to murder,
dissimulation, adultery? Yet held he not the habit of grace, in some measure,
sound? 1. King. 11.5.
What did his son Solomon also? In his younger years, took he not many out
landish women? In his ripe age, went he not after Astoreth, the Goddess of the
Zidonians? And Milcom, the abomination of the Amorits? Build an high place,
for Chemosh and Molech, the abomination of Moab, 2 Chro. 16.10.
and Ammon? Was not Asa, wroth with the Seer? Put him in the prison house? And,
at the same time, oppress many of the people? What should I relate, Noah's
drunkenness? Lots incest? Abraham's equivocation? Moses his staggering? Ionahs
anger? Or Peter's denial of his master? Lying? Swearing? Cursing? He who had
seen these, might he not have bin swayed, to have past a round censure, upon
them? And in so doing, had he not gone beyond his last? Plucked up plants of
righteousness? What if the Sun stand still? Go back many degrees? May it
not return, to its former motion? Run its course, as in the days of old?
Christians in this, often get it mist; step too far. Its a soul Symptom of a
declining soul, to pass a rash censure of his failing brethren. Yea these,
many times run out of the way, when they are complaining of others wanderings.
When a tree lets fall her fruit, casts her leaves, looks dead, is it dead? No,
the spring is not far off, the Sun is in his regresse: and then shall she
bloome, bear in abundance. Wherefore, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, be not
rash to utter this thing: but rather, be swift to hear, Iam. 1.19.
slow to censure.

a declining Christian a twofold lesson. The former, when he discernes his
spiritual decay, to repent; Smite his hand upon his thigh, and be ashamed,
that with Ephraim, Ier. 31.19.
he has misspent the time of his youth; as the Prodigal, run from his
father, Luke 15.13
wasted his stock, and lost part of his portion. The latter is, when he
conceiues, that he cannot finally fall, his store totally be consumed, to
gather heart, and be of good comfort. For there is life in the root, nature is
not wholly destroyed; Isa. 65.8.
the cluster of grapes is sound, and there is a blessing in it. What if the
water ebb? Shall it never flow? The babe not spring? Is it dead in the womb?
The sun eclipsed? His body consumed? Israel once, or twice flee? Will it
follow, they shall never return? Fight? Win the field? I tell thee, grace is
not like Ionah's gourd, Ion. 4.8.
that springs in a morning, withers in a moment: neither the Lillies, which
flourish this day, the next cast into the Oven, and burned. We may not say, as
Christ of the Fig Tree, never fruit grow on thee more. But as once borne, ever
borne; So once gracious ever gracious, though not in equal degree. For the
variety of graces existence, prevents not the perpetuity of its essence. May
not all the members of the body consume, yet not totally? So may every part of
the New-man, and not wholly be wasted. A truth it is, that the believer may thus
fall; First, that the Church may question the soundness of his heart, 1 Cor.
5.5.
use her public authority, and deliver him up to Satan. Witness the
incestuous person. Also, that he himself may have strange, and loose conceits
of his spiritual estate. What did David? Psalm. 51.
And so, that he may hardly (if ever) recover his former strength, have that
near and sweet communion with God, 2 Chro. 16.10.
and his Saints, which he has had. Was not this the condition of Asa? Yet for
all that has, or can be said, the seeds of grace shall never totally wast, and
perish. Neither is it impossible, but that he who has fearfully fallen, may
recover his former strength, do his first works: Judge. 16.22
Have we not an example of this in Sampson? For God can, and will too, restore
the declined, Rev. 2.5.
if no time be omitted, means neglected. And experience of this so great a
damage, may persuade the Prodigal, in the use of his talent, to be the better
husband. He who has gone astray, when he sees his wandering, and returning
into his right path, will he not trudge on the faster? A bone being broke, if
once knit (say Chi^urgions) is the stronger. After a long languishing disease,
nature has recovered; and that body received her former force, bin the more
healthful a long season. When the Sun had gone back many degrees, who can
tell, 2. King. 20.11
but in his re turn, he gained what he had lost, that all days and nights,
might be of equal proportion, according to the season, as at the creation?
But, beloved, though this may be so; it likewise may not. A relapse is with
great hazard recovered; for nature is weakened, the peccant humor
strengthened; So is it in this. For when the New-man decreaseth, the old
increases; both of which, breed danger. Its more easy to keep the weak on
foot, than being fallen to lift him up again. How ever, yet is it possible.

Spiritual stedfastnes be fallen from? Then try thy self, if thou be, or not
revolted. Tradesmen keep a register of all their proceedings, cast up their
accounts yearly; take a strict view how they decreased, or increased their
substance; and should not Christians be as wise in their generation? Make
proof therefore, by the former Symptoms related. Is thy spiritual eye groan
dim in seeing? Do thou behold Christians, as the person, who received his
sight, did men, walking like trees? Isa. 65.5.
Say thou to such, stand a part, come not near me, I am holier than thou? Is
thine ear dull in hearing, what the spirit speaks to the Churches? Covet'st
thou frothy windy stuff? Rev. 2.7.
Contentest thy self at home with a printed paper? And delightest in some new
odd invention? Can not thou (as in times past) relish Angels food? Bread
from heaven? Absentest thou thy self from the Lords table? Or coming, feedest
on the sacred body of Christ without an eager appetite? Are the actions of
grace feeble? And willingly omitted? Want thou power in Prayer? Is that
pulse weak? Trembling? And yet thou never challengest thy self in that
regard? Is unwholesome food well enough affected? No way disturbant? or better
diet received, not into the veins distributed; but passes through the draught
undigested? Concoctest thou the word with wambling? Feel no reluctation of
weaker sins, heretofore distasted? And for all this, can thou not admit of
Physic; sharp and keen reprehensions? Will thou quarrel with the man who
seeks thy recovery? account him rash, indiscreet, and but thine enemy? Then,
in good sooth, thou art gone back, carried with the tide, and fallen from thy
stedfastnes. But, and if thou allowest this that thou do, mournest not for
it, neither striuest to return to thy former strength and motion, thy
declining is will full; and thou may fear an apostasy. For these symptoms,
Characters, as luskish reachings of a lazy body, are the certain forerunners
of a final revolting. Wherefore, as by this search, examination, thou may
try thine estate: So if thou find thou have fallen, labor to return to thy
former stedfastnes. And to recover thee, according to the order premised; what
helps we can, we will afford thee.

And they are of Direction. Persuasion.


1. We must call to remembrance, what truth in the understanding; or in our
conversation, we have fallen from, and so return unto them.

2. We are to consider, what sin we have imbrased; whether it be an error in
judgment, or practice: and if we clearly discern any, then to cease from it.
For, all our failings will and may be ranked under these two heads; of
Omission, or Commission. When the natural body is weakened, by refusing of
wholesome meat, or receiving of noisome diet; is not the way of corporal
recoverie, to feed on the former, and to reject the latter? Even so must it be
in the regaining of our spiritual strength, we have fallen from. He who has
erred from the true way, must take knowledge of his wanderings, and return to
his wonted walk. Wherefore begin, though, at the first, faintly to hear,
read, meditate, pray. And also to cease from sin, avoid the occasions of
evil; then shall thou by degrees, be restored to thy Spiritual stedfastnes,
as a weake-sickly body by good diet, moderat exercise, to its former strength.
This is the way of direction; that of persuasion being compounded of many
particulars, follows.

1. Cast in thy mind, what an uncomfortable condition thou art fallen into:
compare it often with the times of old. Do not slavish fears upon the least
occasion arise in thy soul? Art thou not suspicious, how the best question thy
soundness, be privy to thy secret slips? Hidden failings? Who would be
reputed a prodigal? Gal. 3.1.3.
Or having bin accounted rich thought to bank? Did not Paul, on the same
ground, call the Galatians, fools? Persons be-witched? Will you (says he)
having begun in the spirit, end in the flesh?

2. Consider that greater evils, than these, may attend thee. For shall not the
Lord withdraw his loving kindness from thee? Change his countenance, and
seem (though he be not) thine enemy? Would not this like the divisions of
Reuben, Judge. 5.16.
cause thoughts of heart? What will sooner make the Lover sigh? Any thing, than
the angry frowns of his best affected friend? Of all the burdens befell good
Job, Job. 29.2.3
it seems the disaquaintance with his God, did the most break him: therefore
cried, O that my soul were, as in mouth spast! As in the days when the Lord
preserved me! His candle shined upon me! And by his light, I walked through
darkness!

3. And, if thou rouse not up thy spirit, be assured, that thou shall be
awaked. For, fearful dreams may fall upon thee, strange visions in the night
present themselves unto thee; and crosses, thick and threefold, follow thee
close, until thou return to thy former taste. For, shall God lose his labor?
And his child his soul? May not the Lord, shut thy womb? Slay thy posterity?
Call for a famine? Send the sword to wound thee? The Pestilence to kill thee?
Grant thou escapest all these; may not a worse arrest thee? What if he correct
thy sin with sin? That the Church cast thee off? Excommunicate thee? What
pleasure can thou take in all thy privileges? May thou not rather suspect
every moment, to be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness? 2. Cor. 2.7.


4. But let it be admitted, all these might be avoided; Yet will not Satan
tempt thee? Bend the strong bow of his malice, feather his fiery darts, Set
them in the nocke, loosse them from the finger of envy, and strike thee to the
heart? Have thou bin his but in the months past? When thy eye was first opened?
And thy corrections sealed? Then let the bitterness thou at that day feltest,
cause thee to awake, Ephesians. 5.14.
and stand up from the dead. Suppose, in this declining condition, thy soul
should be taken from thee? However, it might land safe; yet would not the
passage be fearful? What flesh, but will tremble to die in a sleep? To awake
on the sudden, at its everlasting home? And to depart in a spiritual decay,
what is it else, Mat. 25.5.
but the foresaid evil?

Wherefore, O thou declining Christian! Present these objects to the eye of thy
mind, take a strict view of them, meditate thereon continually, and let them
never slip out of thy remembrance. When they would wander, call them back, tie
them to thee, bind them fast: And that with the coards of a solemn Promise,
Vow, Oath; until they have wrought thy perfect cure, recovered thy wonted
health, let them never leave thee, forsake thee. If thy eye (as its apt enough)
be once off them, say to it, Genesis 3.9.
as God to Adam, where art thou? In what be thy thoughts employed? Is not ^his
one thing necessary? Think, and think often, how thy companions begin to
whisper, thy God to g^ beyond the vail, thine enemies to insult, Satan to arm
himself, and be thou awaked. Consider, that the sword is in varnishing, the
palgue descending, famine approaching, Job. 28.14.
and death, the king of fear, hasting to kill thy body carry away thy soul.
Say, at the morning, in thy settled thoughts why may not my life set before the
Sun? When thou lie down, my bed be my grave? And my sleep my death? Let this
cry still sound in thine ears, that a declining estate is woeful, fearful,
and the extremest of all extremiti^s to a believer. Do this and thus, then
shall thou return from the Chambers of hell, thy spirit lift up the wing,
mount on high, and soar above all the swelling waters of iniquity: Thy
brethren say unto thee, the Lord is with thee, Judge. 6.12.
thou valiant man; and blessed art thou among many: Thine adversaries shut
their black mouths, spit their venom in vain: And wish, that their last end,
might be like unto thine: Numb. 23.20.
Yea, thy God shall descend from heaven, scatter the black clouds, break
through them all, and smile in thy face; say, well done, my servant, my son;
give his Angels a second charge over thee, put his spirit with more power into
thee; And, as with David, be with thee, whithersoever thou go. 2. Sam. 8.6.
Thou shall tread on the adder, and young Dragon; Psalm. 19.12.13.
walk in the valley of death, fear no evil, nor tremble at the m^st terrible
tidings. But as astately ship under sail, having a fresh gale, and her colors
spread, swiftly and yet securely, have to the shore, and cast anchor at the road
of eternal rest; And that, when backsliding professo^s, shall either
shipwreck their consciences, split all a pieces, sink the freight of their
souls in the bottomless gulf; or like a distressed bark, which has spent
her maine maste, sprung a plank, cut her tackling, and cast it over board, with
great hazard and terror put in, and save themselves.

him who stands, take heed lest he fall. For a spiritual stedfastnes, 1 Cor.
10.12.
we see, in some degree, may be fallen from, decayed: And then, why should it
not cleave unto thee? What privilege have thou to avoid it Above thy
brethren? Have not the tallest Ceders in Gods Sanctuary, been shaken? The
strongest sometime staggered? And is this any new thing in the world? Wherefore
take thou heed to thy standing, eye well thy foot steps, keep a strict watch
over all thy ways, that this evil do not overtake thee, ceize upon thee. And
to prevent it, practice these subsequent particulars, as remedies.

1. Be humble in thine own eye. Have a low conceit of thine own worthiness.
Helps to support him who stands.
When men, like leaven begin to swell; or, as the Pharisee, to boast, set the
best side out; such without controversy, are not far from a fall. Was not
this the forerunner of Peter's denial? Pro. 16.18.
And good Ezekiahs backsliding? So true is it, that pride goes before a slip;
Luke 1.53.
and an high mind leads to destruction. God gives grace, to the poor in
Spirit: but sends the conceited-rich, empty away. Low growing trees, escape
the storm, stand up right, when such as shoot up, mount a loft, with a small
gust are often shaken, sometimes overturned. Carry a mean sail, and never
fear shipwreck of grace and faith: For, so long God sits at the helm.

2. Rather question thy self, suspect thy standing. Fear is a bad getter, yet
a sure keeper: And who sooner catch a fall, than they that run without
regard? Many have bank't at unawares, when good-take-heed was not their factor.
The best Physician our kingdom had, D. Butler
dyed (say some) of a consumption: And being demanded, why he did not prevent
it, his answer was, he never feared it. Our proverb is, that death comes often
at unawares; And retchlesse people dye poor. Sure I am, graces decay may be
sudden, the souls exchequor well near empty, Pro. 10.4.
when treasurer providence takes a nap, a wakes to play. A diligent hand makes
rich; an evil fore seen is half avoided. Wherefore, always fear to fall;
but chiefly, when the means of standing are neglected.

3. Shun the rash censure of weak, and declining brethren. The Jew was
nearest to apstatize, when he the most scorned the Gentile. The dog, which
daily licketh others sores, soonest sometimes catches a surfeit. He who,
without pity, visits the poor, may perhaps fall into the like disease, and
himself become a patient. Those who rejected Iphtah, not long after were his
suitors, Judge. 11.7. 1. Cor. 12.21.
and made him Judge. Say not to the weakest member, I have no need of thee,
make no pharisaicall comparisons; Luke 18.11. etc.
lest the Publican go away justified, thy self not. Have I not seen young
converts outstrip the aged? Thessalonica was not first called; yet excelled her
sisters. David's worthies, were they all the eldest sons? Consult, and give
sentence.

4. Also, avoid sin, These. 5.22
abstain from every appearance of evil. Above all things, doubtingly do
nothing, the least slip, makes way to a fall: any wavering act, will unsettle
the soul. When men grow over-bold, in walking near the brinke, at unawares
may they tumble down. He who will do all he may, shall now and then do what
he would not, (I am sure) should not. A small moate in the eye will weaken it,
cause it to water; And to discern the external objects, but darkly, dimmely.
Is not that man blessed, Romans 14.22 23.
who condemns not himself in the thing which he allows? And he that
doubts, if he eat, is he not condemned? For he does it not of faith: And an
act not effected in faith, is it not a sin? Overventurous Merchants have lost
all.

5. Neglect no means: not the weakest. Every ordinance of God is good, if
lawfully used, What if it begin not the work? May it not further it? When the
children of the Church hang all on one breast, have not their mothers teates in
any equal proportion of acceptance, shall not the father draw that dugge dry,
we so much desire to suck at? With-hould the milk of grace from flowing
thereat through, into the Cisterne of our souls? And as none are to be
rejected: So with constancy let them all be used. Rather had I, for the
cursorie performance of a duty, be checked; than, for a total omission,
condemned. Wherefore hear, read, meditate, pray, however dully, deadly: for
intermission will not help, but hinder against another season.

6. Consider, that they only, who persevere, shall but besaved: all revolting
Apostate must perish. What (the which is necessary), if thou recover? Will it
not cost thee much toil? Great torment? grace once lost, is not with ease
regot: This playing at get again (as Gamsters speak), is always without
comfort; often without commodity. If there be therefore any true joy in thy
soul, the least spark of the Spirit kindled, cherish it, conserve it. Read
not these things without regard, view them not with a slight eye: but with
anxious devotion, the most serious meditation. Let others harms teach thee to
beware. And know this one thing for certain (it may be the Preacher speaks by
experience: Rev. 2.4.
) that if thou loose thy first live, thou will be weary of thy life, never
eat, or drink with comfort. And but a dream of death, will cause thy hair to
bristle, Job. 5. vlt.
thy heart to tremble in thy body. Hear this; and learn it for thy self: for
thy good.

doctrine may serve to instruct those, who be about to step into the way and
course of a Christian; that they look fa^re beforehand what another day may
bring forth; what they are incident unto. Some become proselits, prick
forward at the first, but a none give in and tire. Where lies the cause? They
knew not, that grace got, might be lost: stedfastnes obtained, much decayed. A
wise builder casts up his accounts, not only what expense it will cost him, to
lay the foundation, rear the wall, steake the roof, paint and perfect the
whole edifice: but also being finished, to support it, conserve it. This use,
Christ Jesus the chief Architector makes of it; presses (it seems) from the
same ground, And backs it with a strong reason. For, if he do not, will not
his neighbors mock him, Luke 14.29.30.
and say, This man began to build, but was not able to make an end? Wherefore,
thou that art almost a Christian, and resolved altogether to be one, mind
this; And, to my power, at this thy entrance, I shall lend thee my helping hand.

1. Rules of direction for young converts.
Before thou set a foot in this good way, place one stone in this new building,
be careful to lay a sure foundation. He who errs in the entrance, the further
he travailes, of necessity must the more wander. And that house, which is
founded on the unsettled sends, Mat. 7.24.
of certain will fall. Ignorance of the truth, and worth of our profession,
are the ring leaders to bac^slyding. What made the Ap^stles, and common people
so resolute being opposed, persecuted, imprisoned? They knew the words of
eternal l^fe: that the Gospel they preach and professed, Ioh. 6.68. Romans 1.16.
was the power of God to salvation. He who begins well may end well: when he
that does not, without a change, cannot.

Col. 3.2.
2. In the next place, withdraw thine affections from the things below; Fix
them on things above. No man can serve two (contrary) masters; Mat. 6.24.
God and mammon. For, follow, the one: And flee from the other. The young man,
who had great possessions possessing his heart, at the first step, gave back;
the like made Demas to revolt. When men will be Christ's Disciples, and shake
not hands with this world, Amos 3.6.
they never stand. The old saying was, is there any evil in a City, and God
has not done it? Thus Now; is there any back slider, and the love of money
has not turned him? 1 Cor. 7.31
He who would dye rich in grace, must resolve to live poor: or, as the wicked
their knowledge, use the world, as if he used it not.

3. See thou prepare for the worst, as hope for the best; Mat. 10.34.
He who is forearmed, must be forewarned. Christ told his followers, he came to
set fire, cause the sword The Jew expecting peace, and prosperity, when his
hops failed, fell from the faith. Have I not beheld a man in a common muster,
march in fury? Charge and discharge? Break pike upon pike, as one skillful,
valorous? And for all this, in a hot skirmish, the report of a piece, has
caused him to quake; the fall of his next fellow, struck him with so great a
fear, that he has stood, as one half dead, and gathering heart, was first in
the flight? Wherefore, if thou would prove a worthy warrior of Jesus
Christ's camp, Heb. 22.1.4
fit thy self to fight in the Cannons mouth; to resist unto blood. For
unexpected crosses, wound deep; kill deadly.

4. And when thou have gone this three fold step, then march on with
deliberation. Mat. 26.70.
For, violent motions, though sometimes strong; yet seldom are the p^rmanent.
Aguish fits, breed flushings, blazing Comets soonest fall: hasty curres, bite
least; heady horses, quickly tire: The trumpets sound, was louder and louder:
So a Christians pace, should be faster and faster. The wind rises by degrees:
the spirit blows stiffest last; else suspect its a counterfeit blast. Grace
may, in this, without danger imitate nature. Shall you not see a weak spring,
break forth at the side of an hill, increase, grow strong, and make a little
river in its own banks? Thus should it be with the waters of sanctification.

Thou therefore, who art but a babe, at the most but newborn fainte and
feeble, understand the truth and worth of thy profession shake hands with
pleasures, profits, arm thy soul for the bitterest assaults; And lance into
this depth with great care and fear. Job. 5.2.6.
So shall thou grow from ablade to an care, and from an care to a ripe corn;
dye in a good age, full of days, And, like a rich ricke, be gathered to thy
fathers in due time, the best season.

This may suffice to have spoken of the last branch of our text: the other
succeeds.

Lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked.

In our Logical resolution, you may remember, we made these words the first
part of the Apostles admonition; and they to speak as the truth is, contain
in them, the cause of backsliding, whence we collect, that

Error leads from steadfastness.

He who is led with error, is always unsettled; were he man or Angel. Else,
why are the wicked compared, Pro. 23.34.
to one in the top of a mast? Said to stagger and reele, like a drunken man?
And as the troubled waters, Isa. 57.29.
to cast up mire and mudd? How comes it to pass, that all Heretics are so
mutable? Isa. 57.20
Variable? And that Satan is still compassing the earth, yet never settled?
Why? They, and he are led with error; and so consequently, always moving,
raging, tossing.

error leads from God: And is not he the bast, stay, and very Center
whereupon all the Creatures (than much more man) are settled? established?
Whilst the Prodigal roaved from his father, Luke 15.
was he not unquiet? When he returned to him, did he not find rest? was not his
wavering mind, calmed? Ever after, settled? Is not the same, in the Prophet
himself, Psalm. 73.
verified?

error? To any constant object? Is it to the world? 1. Cor. 7.31
Does not the fashi^n of it pass away? To Angels? Found the Lord any
stedfastn^s in them? Job. 4.18.
What is it to beauty? Or favor? A lack! Pro. 31.30.
The one is vanity the other deceitful. Error in judgment, leads from
stedfastnes in practice. For the act of the will, follows the act of the
understanding. And error in practice leads from setlednes in the habit:
because it strengthens corruption its opposite adversary, weakens it self.

Will you hear, what error is? With the kinds of it? And So step to the use?

Error is a diverting from the doctrine of truth. Error defined.


We must conceive, that as God has given man his being; and, the which is but
equal, requires obedience from him: So has he prescribed him rules, like so
many ways, to guide his steps, Psalm 119.19
that he wander not in his m^t^on. Now to swerue from the foresaid rules, is
truly styled error: 2. Tim. 2.18.
as we see affirmed of Hym^neus and Philetus, who are said to have erred
concerning the truth. Ion 1.2.
When Jonas paid his fare, sailed toward Tharshish, he erred both in his
Corporal and Spiritual motion. For, the Lord had chalked out a path unto him,
the which led unto Nineveh, wherein he should have bounded his footsteps.

As for the kinds of error, they are to be distinguished according to the
several arts, whereby every act, the which proceeds from man, is to be
guided, and directed. When a Log^cian does not invent and judge answerable to
the precepts of Logic, the true rules of reason, he is said to divert from a
Logical truth: a Gramarian speak, or write proportionable to the grounds of
grammar, to swerve from a Grammatical. And the same may be affirmed of every
Artist whatever, when as they divert from the warrantable principles of their
proper, and professed art. But the error here to be handled, is none of all
these: therefore we omit them, and proceed to it; the which, that it may be the
better discerned, we will, in a plain and specificall difference, point it
out: and this it is.

A diverting from the doctrine of truth, Error in special defined.
which is according to godliness.

Every art, as it comes from God, and a beam of his wisdom refracted in the
creatures, (...). Ephesians. 3.10.
may be truly styled a Doctrine of truth; And if they, much more this we have
in hand. So that, to divert from any one precept of the forerelated arts, is an
error generally received: But, in our definition, we add, which is according
to godliness. Were a man as skillfull, as Moses was, in all the learning of
Egypt, to divert from one, or all the rules thereof, is not an error from the
doctrine of godliness. For, although these arts in themselves be true and
good, and excellent helps unto the art of divinity: yet may we not call them
doctrines according to godliness, Mat. 22.16.
but the art of living well, Theology we may. For we find it sometimes
styled, Ephe. 1.13.
the way of God, 1. Tim. 6.3.
the way of truth; and in express words, the doctrine according to godliness.

Neither is it so named, because God only is the author of it, and in that it
leads to truth (for the like may be said of all other doctrines, which are from
above) But in respect it is an isntrumental cause, Io. 17.17.
to work grace and truth in us; directs how to walk in holiness, Gal. 6.16.
righteousness unto God and man; and conducteth to the kingdom of heaven The
heathen Philosophers had more deep skill in the general arts than the most of
us have: yet wanting this, erred from Theological truths; And (its to be
feared) finally perished. See therefore (by the way) the great mercy of God to
us above them, who have it: And our misery above theirs, if we abuse it.

Observe further, that this error is Legal. Error distributed.
Evangelical.


When God at the first had formed man righteous, Eccle. 7. vlt.
that he might conserve his image in him, and his person in a good condition,
he gave him a Law writ in his heart, to direct him in all his actions: But he
obeyed not the truth, wandered from it, and so by his swarving became miserable.
Yet, for all this, the goodness of God was such, and so great unto him and his
posterity, that he revealed unto him, and conferred on him another Law,
whereby he, and they might recover their former damage, called the doctrine of
the Gospel, Gal. 1 7.
the new Testament, Iam. 1.12.
and the Law of liberty. So that, from this twofould truth, springs a double
error: For, if there be a doctrine of the Law, Rom 2.20.
and a Doctrine of the Gospel, as is evident; Gal. 2.5.
then will it necessarily follow, that error may be distributed into Legal,
and Evangellicall. For, as to divert from the doctrine of the law, is a Legal:
So from the doctrine of the Gospel, an Evangelicall error.

And either of these may be in Judgment. Practice.


In judgment, when we take false doctrine for true: or true for false. In
practice, when, though we know and approve of the way of truth; walk not in
it, but wander from it.

Again, error is General. Special.


General; When we divert from every truth, whether Legal, or Evangellicall: in
judgment, or practice. Special; When as we receive some, reject others: flee
this, follow that,

Finally; there is an error of: Wiflullnesse. Weakness.


Of wilfulness; when the truth is in judgment approoved: but, in practice
willingly avoided: Of weakness; when as it is not obstinatly rejected; but of
humane infirmity, either not apprehended; or (if it be) not practiced. All
these forgoing particulars, by plentiful proof, may be confirmed.

For the first: Adams error was legal, not evangelical. Because before his
fall the doctrine of the Gospel was not revealed unto him: neither in the time
of his innoce^cie had he any need thereof. Satan's, and his seeds, are both
legal and Evangellicall. For he, nor they were obedient to Law, or Gospel.
Wherefore Christ said; Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your
father you will do: Io 8.44.
he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth.

And that there is a judicial and practical error (as in the worst sense I
may best term them) its manifest. For the former: ye err, Mat. 22.29.
not knowing the Scriptures: And as yet, Ion. 20.9.
they knew not the holy letters. For the latter. Do after their words, Mat.
23.3.
not after their works: For, Romans 1.21. and 2.21.22.
they say, but do not. And when they knew the truth, they were disobedient.
Note here, that when any man sins of ignorance, its a judicial: Of knowledge,
a practical error. The first, in order, precedes the second. For, as
Physicians hold, that an error in the first concoction, is not corrected in
the second. So is it in this; err in the former, and err in the latter. When
the eye is deceived, the foot is mis-guided.

Moreover, for the third distribution of error, which is general, or
special. The former head properly appertains to Atheists: For they
universally deny both the law, Psalm. 14.1.
and Gospel. The fool says in his heart, there is no God. And who is the
Lord, Mal. 3.14.
that we should serve him? We will none of his ways. Also, the error of the
Turk and Jew, Ier. 6.16.
is total in respect of the Gospel: For, they wholly in judgment and practice
divert and turn from it, not allowing one tittle of that truth. As for
partial error, it may be found in the best men living. For judgment, they
know but in part. 1. Cor. 13.9 Romans 7.21.
And for practice, when they would do good, then is evil present with them.

In conclusion; the error of weakness was in Paul before his conversion.
For, Phil. 3.6.
as concerning the righteousness of the law, he was blameless. But, Acts 9.17.
until his eyes were opened, he rejected the Gospel, persecuted those that
Preached, or professed it. But he did it ignorantly, of weakness, not
willfulness: 1. Tim. 1.13
And therefore the Lord, had mercy upon him. He who swarues from the doctrine
of godliness in judgment, or practice; yet approoues not himself therein,
rests always with a mind ready and willing to be better instructed and
informed, is not tainted with this wilful evil. But when men are ignorant,
and profane, obstinatly and desperately go on, with a supine neglect of all
means whereby they might be informed and reclaimed, according to the doctrine
of godliness, they be deeply infected with the forenamed peccant humor. This
wilful intellectual (that I add not practical error, (I fear is the
error of too many learned Papists, and Schismatickes, 2. Tim. 3.1.
in (as the Apostle calls them) these last perilous times; And is always the
forerunner and ringleader to blasphemy, and that sin unto death, 1 Io. 5.18.
which is unpardonable. But all who are borne of God, keep themselves that
that evil one touch them not. Yet it cannot be denied, but that a true
believer may sometimes go a stray, and that not of infirmity, but willingly
witness David, Romans 7.15.
Jonas and others. Howeuer, this is most certain, that what they do, they
allow not; no not in the very act of erring. It remains, that we now make
application.

err from the doctrine of godliness, be unstable in all their ways. What
marvel is it, that men walking on craggie rocks, steep mountains, and
unequal ways, trip, stumble, and catch a fall? How should they choose? If the
blind lead the blind, Mat. 15.14.
shall they not both tumble into the ditch? What made the Galatians so
unsettled? Any thing but error? The Ephesians to be tossed too and fro like a
feather? was it not a windy doctrine, which carried them hither and thither?
We may say of such who are led with error, as Jacob of Ruben, Genesis 49.4.
that they are unstable as waters. Take a proud man, who diverteth from the
truth, no fashion can long content him: an Epicure allured by the belly, he is
never satisfied, but insatiable: The voluptuous, what sport, or recreation can
give him contentation? Let the Mizer have millions, what of that? Has he
enough? If so: its but for a season. As for the heretic, he is a peripatetick,
Isa. 5.7. vlt.
never at rest; but, like a boat on the waters without a steereman, always in
motion, in agitation. Never did drunkard stagger more, or blindman stumble,
than the erroneous person. Read their books, hear their words, view their
actions; And tell me if error lead not from stedfastnes?

Prophets direction: Ier. 6.16.
stand in the gates, inquire of the good way, walk in it, And thou shall find
rest to thy soul. Get a sound mind, faith unfeigned; these will make thee
firm, Iam. 1.8.
stable. A wavering minded man, in all his ways, is still inconstant: When as
he, who understands the truth, guides his actions by it, like the Center,
stands steadfast. For, he is united to his God, who only can, and nothing else,
settle the soul. Christ was always immovable; and why? He understood the
truth, gave obedience to it. So that, when the earth trembled, he was settled.
Wherefore cry to God, that he would open thine eyes, make the truth known unto
thee, and guide all thy footsteps by it; then shall thou, like a ship in her
trim, pass on in thy spiritual voyage, without perrill of shipwreck. No
waves shall toss thee; or black storm sink thee: When as Scullers,
Cockboats, I mean ignorant, and erroneous persons, shall die, and not live in
the least tempest. Keep it, Pro. 4.14.
and it will keep thee. But as for error, come not near it, turn from it,
and pass away; least she lead thee into a raging Gulf, and in extricable
Whirl-poole, to thy endless damnation.

Whereas the Apostle calls it, the error of the wicked, we may collect, that

The way of error, by a peculiar prerogative, is the way of the wicked.

True it is, that error is called away: but a crooked, wandering and evil one.
Psalm 119.27.
For, as the Commandments of God, are styled ways; So are the doctrines of
men. The way of idolatry, was the way of the Kings of Israel: 2. Chro 18.23
The way of covetousness, Balaams: The way of fornication, Jude. 11.
the whorish woman's And the way of evil, Pro. 7.25.
the way of all the ungodly. Thus far we are agreed: Psalm. 1.6.
but what may be the reasons hereof?

authors of them. For what a man effects, is properly said to be his own:
and is it not equal?

He who begets a Son, and does nourish him, is his natural father, no man
else; So here.

way is not from God, he disclaimes it. For, Psalm. 19.7
all his paths are holy, and good, Psalm. 5.4.
and true. He is not an inventor; or approouer of the least iniquity.

godly, from their hearts, speak the truth; keep the way of life, Psalm. 25.2.
shun all evil paths. And if they sometimes wander (as who does not?) its
of weakness, not wilfully.

Caesar's to Caesar; and that which is Gods, to God. So give Satan, his right,
and wicked men, their due. Let the way of sin, death, damnation be theirs by
peculiar prerogative; and why should they not? Are they not their own? Who,
but they, did invent them? Does maintain them? Keep them open? Shall a man
father another child? Make it his heir? That were to wrong the natural
parent; himself too. Let the Leprie cleave to Gehazi; not the Lords Prophet.
Lay the fault where it should be; clear the innocent. Job. 27.5.
Job would not deny his right, to the death. Paul makes the oldman the cause
of his evil, Romans 7.20.
not the new: disclaimes the Law, lays title to the Gospel, yet wrongs
neither. And may we not follow, tread his steps without perrill?

wicked learn, what, in truth, they may lay claim too, as their peculiar
portion. And not shake off their natural brood, bind them to the back of
stepdammes. This will not serve their turn; free them from bastardie.
Inventors of error they are: error therefore is neither Gods, nor any of his
childrens. Adultery was but David's strangers he gave it but a nights lodging.
This monster was the Gentiles beast, found daily entertainment within their
walls. Drunkenness was of the old-worlds brue: not of Noah's breeding. Lot he
begat not incest; his daughters did it. Solomon slept, while the Idols were a
framing: they had a more peculier father. Polligamie was not hatched in Abraham's
nest Lamech, not he, did first disclose him. Many, like Pilat, seem to wash
their hands from all injustice, as that man of sin does his from pride; yet
exalts himself above all, who are called gods. The pyed bull was the peoples
beast; not Aarons: the golden Calves, Ieroboams cattle; not the good subjects.
Murders, rebellions, superstitions, Heresies, treasons, are the cursed seed of
the Romish whores. And not the virgin Church of England, or her chaste
neighboring sisters. The like may be affirmed of single life in Ministers,
equivocation, Masses, Dirges, Indulgences, Salt, Cream, Oil and the Stews,
that they all ascend out of the bottomless pit of Popery, not the Cabbinet of
Gods holy letters. Why then should not they, who breed, and feed them, lay
title to them? Such as hate them, repress them, be no Authors of them?

Beware lest ye also, etc.

The note which issues out of this phrase, is this, that

By one error many may be seduced.

Search the Scriptures, view all divine and humane histories, and it will
easily be confirmed, ratified. How many in former ages were led away with the
heresy of Arianisme? In these days with Arminianisme? Has not the earth
groaned under them? Heaven it self been provoked by them? And many reasons
hereof may be produced.

error: for it is of a spreading nature. 1 Cor. 5.6.
Hence is it compared to leaven; a little whereof, leaveneth the whole lump.
To a Gangrene, which co^passeth, 2. Tim. 2.17.
and infecteth all the parts of that body unto which it adhereth. Did not sin
spread from Adam our head, to all his posterity? Romans 5.17.
What member is free from it? Not polluted with it? And such as the root is;
such are the branches. Its like fire in a train of gunpowder, which runs
until every corn be blown up.

error is easy, pleasant.And what is agreeable to the flesh, of multitudes,
will be followed. The way of truth is straight, rarrow; with much ado^ found,
Luke 13.24.
but with greater difficulty practiced. He who treads this tract, like
Jonathan and his armor-bearer, climbes the hill: the other, swimmes with the
stream.

to follow examples: the worst not the best. Therefore Moses, lays a block in
the way: Exodus 23.2.
and Christ, a counter-command. For naturally, Mat. 6.2.
they not knowing the good old way of truth, are easily induced, by others
wandering examples, to trudge on in the broad-gate of error. He who is ignorant
of his path, will pace after any seduced person.

as Judas to the Pharisees; Mat. 26.15.
What will ye give and we will deliver the truth to you? They set it to sale,
at an high rate, as if error were the only commodity, and the very truth of
God: and this causes the silly-simple Merchants to buy it the faster. The
Devil, as the Quake saluer of his druggs, says of error, that it has a
sovereign power to cure all diseases.

beast; and every Sectmaster, has a multitude to follow him. Ahab may have
four hundred false Prophets; good Iehoshaphat, but one true Michaiah. Theudas
many disciples; When Jesus treades the wine press alone. Arius, may walk with
thousands; Athanasius, with a few. And what wonder is it? For error is easy;
the truth harsh to flesh and blood. Ill weeds spring a pace, spread far;
when good herbs grow thin, hang the head. Cockell, and Kerlocke cover the
field; Wheat and Barlie are well near blasted. Landflouds ouerflow the
grounds; clear waters keep their channel. Rags often have more room, than
the richest roabes of Princes. The Popes Bulls have great sale; when Paul's
Epistles are locked up, see no market. Rotten wood is quickly fired; sound
timber hardly heated, a loathsome smell fills the air; a sweet perfume houlds
one subject. Presumption, with Saul, slaies his thousand, when faith in Jesus,
cures but fifty. Simon magus rules all Rome; Simon Peter sees no Pulpit.
Papisme and Atheism has whole Innes; when Piety and Protestancie lodge in
the stable. Would thou be wise? Not seduced? th^n fear that faith, which
spreades fast, has most friends.

by one error, may many be seduced? Then get a good eye, a sound judgment:
exercise thy wits, that thou may discern between truth and falsehood.
Sectaries be now grown cunning, are become their craftes-master. Whores brats,
have naked breasts, painted faces: Popish points, are straight laced rarely
clothed. Bellarmines bastard-brood, are attired like lawful borne, Legitimate
children. A Catholics heretical hatched, like Peacockes birds, are finely
feathered. Our young Jesuits with a new coat, a neat distinction, can make a
crooked Saint, an erroneous point; a comely person, a sound position. At one
stone, many have stumbled: one rock, has split sundry ships a pieces: And
one by path has seduced several thousands. And that thou may discern truth
from error, let these rules be observed.

1. In the first place; know, that truth is divine, error humane. For,
whatsoever is grounded upon men's traditions, either is, or may be erroneous:
upon Gods word, cannot.

2. Again, all truth is at agreement with every truth, for truth is single,
but one; ever conformable to it self: error manifold, dissonant; and mixed
with several contradictions.

3. For conclusion; the truth has no other scope, aim, than the glory of
God, from whom it flows, proceeds. But error seeks it self; shootes at
honor, ambition, temporal promotion. wherefore, try the truth by this test,
weigh it in the forementioned balance. So shall thou behold it with open face,
discern the current coin, from all false s^ips, and be freed from Apostasy.

More doctrines might be deduced: but one only, from the ground of the
admonition, which is thus, and so an end: that

Error being discovered, is to be avoided.

Deuteronomy 30 17
It were to waste time, blot paper to no purpose, should we insist long on the
proof, Pro. 4.14.
when as all grant what we do affirm. Mat. 24.25. Acts 3.48.19. Heb. 6.6.
Yet if you please, read but these places quoted: the reasons aleadged.

teacher. How would it grieve the man of God, to study, preach, reveal truth,
discover falsehood, should the people not embrace the one, reject the other?
Might he not cry, I am greatly pained? Isa. 49.4.
Have spent my strength in vain? Lost my labor among you? Suppose the husband
man to rise early, sit up late, Plow, sow, harrow, hedge, and, for all this
toil, see no fruit follow his hands, would he not hang the head? Fould his
arms? And be much dejected? Why? Are not Preachers, Sowers? Mat. 13.3.
Shall they not then, having no better success, be pierced with the like
sorrows?

error is, and the danger of it, yet will not avoid it? Are not such said to
be near unto cursing? Everlasting burning? Heb. 6.8.
This is wilful neglect: and shall be rewarded with greater damnation. For such
as are ignorant, shall be beaten with many: They who know the truth, and do it
not, with the more stripes. And, 2. Pet. 2.21.
it were b^tter, not to have known the way of righteousness, than after a man
has known it, to turn from the holy Commandment given of God. So that for
their own, if not the Teachers sake, when the people discern error, they are
to avoid it.

millions in these our days; who, for all our preaching, practice nothing. Was
sin at any time in any age, since the Apostl^s days, more clearly
discovered than now? And yet, how few be there, who flee from it? We are grown
to Babels conclusion. Rev. 18.7.
Is it as a queen, I am no widow, I shall see no mourning, is the cry of our
common people. May not the Moseses of these days complain, that England is a
stiff-necked people? Ezekiel. 13.22
A froward generation? Do they not make the hearts of their pastors sad, whom
God would not have made sad? Will they not to Jericho, though they fall amongst
thieues? And return (tho not dead) yet sore wounded? Who can conjure the
spirits of our times, within the circle of Gods commands? Are they not, Iud. 13.
like Iudes planets, always wandering? In their judgments, the Prophet is a
fool, and the spiritual man is mad. Hos 9.7.
Tell the Usurer, that to lend freely, is the narrow way, will he not run in
the wide path, of ten in the hundred? Make drunkenness, whose staggering
steps lead to hell, as palpable to the Swill bowls in this age, as a pot in
their hands. Yet, for all that, will they not say of good Ale, as Ruth to
Naomi, Ruth. 1.16 17
whither thou go, will we go? And nothing but death shall part thee and us?
Who can be ignorant, but that common swearing is a sin? Yet, in bargain and
sale, almost all chapmen use it. Nay, will they not excuse it? Defend it? What?
May we not (say such) swear the truth? Put off our commodities with an oath?
And who will buy? Believe us else? Thus Ahab-like, to sell their wares, they
make Merchandise of their souls. What should I tell you, of the damnable path
of fornication? For we can a-voide the danger, trudge in that deadly way, from
the example of unconverted Gentiles. Have we not many amidst our congregations,
who, for all we can preach, will be justified by their honest minds;
harmless meanings, good deeds, when, God knows, and all men too, they never
had any, but such as the Lord hates, and the taphouse rings of? But I will make
my self no longer ridiculous to these evil beasts, filbellies; stir no more
in this filthy puddle. But leave them, as Amasa in his blood, to wallow in the
straights of death, until they arrive at their long home (if they return not)
of infernal darkness.

Pastors? And save your own soul s, then e^chew error when it is discov^red;
hate it with a perfect hatred. Leave the Ath^ist to say in his heart, Psalm. 14
4.
ther^ is no God: The Turk and Jew, to deny Jesus, reject his Gospel. Let
the damned rabble of Arians. Make Christ a mere creature, dispute against his
deity; other heretics, his humanity. But build thou the house of thy
salvation on this foundation, Io. 1.14.
That the word was made flesh; The Messiah is Emmanuel, God with us. Mat. 1.23.
Say to those who in words confess him, but indeed deny him, as Jacob of
Syme^n and Levy, brethren in evil: O my soul descend not into their secret,
mine honor, Genesis 49.6.
be not thou united to them. Make Christ, thy wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor.
1.30
sanctification, and redemption. Put him on, with the eye of knowledge, and the
hand of faith; by application, Romans 13.14
imitation. Let him be all in all. His word, thy card; his example, thy
compass, to sail the troubled and raging seas of thy spiritual voyage, unto
the land of everlasting life. Where thou want skill, beg his Spirit, obey
his motion; So shall thou avoid the hazard of all shelues, and sands, Art thou
in doubt? Fear thou ship-wracke? Ioh. 16.13.
Put him in mind of his promise; and he will lead thee into all truth; and at
the last, land thee safe, where the storms never arise, waters swell, or the
winds blow.

The shops of error.
And here let me exhort you of this famous City, to beware of the shops of all
error and profaneness. But (you will say) which be they? My answer is; A
playhouse, A dicing-house, A brothell-house, and A tipling-house. I had almost
said of all these, Genesis 20.11
as Abraham of Abimelechs, the fear of God is not in them. Rev 2.13.
Or as John writes of the Church of Pergamus, I know their works, and their
dwelling place, even where Satan's throne is. For what is a Playhouse, but the
cheating Exchang, where the sacred Scriptures are abused, the glorious name of
God blaspheamed, lies and fables set to sale; And all kinds of obscenitie,
scurrillitie bought and sold for ready silver? Is it not the Devils forge,
where the bellows blow, the hammer beats on the bodies of corruption, until
lust be enkindled, smoke and burn to the bottom of hell? And for the
Dicing-house, how should I describe it? Paint it forth in its propper colors?
Its the Common hall, where Thieues and Robbers, Gentlemen and Beggars meet
together; Swear and lie, Cozen and cheat, Deceive and are deceived. So that
poverty arrests them, or (that which is worse, and often comes to pass) a
Ty-burne tippet, with one crosscast sends them to their longhome. But what?
Will such reply, are not lotts in recreation lawful, cautions being used? we
hope, Cards and Dice are harmless creatures, can murder no man. I tell thee,
upon such terms; I may play with a Bear. For cannot I, pull out his eyes?
Dash forth his teeth? Cut off his claws? Muzzell his mouth? Chain him fast
to a stake? And keep me a loofe? Far from his reach? And then, will he do
any man harm? Prodigal, know this; that wise persons dig not pits wherein
people may perish, and think they are excused, when they forewarne men of the
danger. Nor feed on that dish, having variety of sound meats, which will
cause death, if but mist in the dressing. Go thou, and do likewise; lest a
worse thing follow.

Now for a Brothel-house, its the Synagogue of Satan, the very suburbs of
hell. Or, if you will, the noisome Pest house of the Devil. For such as tread
her steps enter within her doors, have received the sentence of death; not one
of a thousand, Pro. 2.19.
that ever returns again For shall not God take vengeance of all those, who
burn in lust, prostrate themselves to an whore; And offer soul and body, a
living and acceptable sacrifice to the Devil? I tell such, in the Apostles
own words, 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
that they shall never inherit the Kingdom of heaven. For, whoremongers and
adulterers, the Lord will judge. And as for a Tipl^^g-house, its Nabals Inn,
whither fools flock and resort, to drink and smoke, kindle and quench, shout
and roar, as if Devils were come from hell, in the shape and similitude of
men. A Tap-house now in England, is like Purgatory at Rom^: There, when men
have lead a lewd and loose life, that they may escape a worse evil, pardons
are procured, and they be sent to Purgatory: Here when Prodigalls have misspent
their portion, shipwrackt their substance, to a-voyde beggerie, we grant them a
License to sell ^le: And if one god^y Josiah pull them down, we have two
graceless Iehoiachims to rear them up again; lest the full tale of drunkards
should be diminished. But, O ye men of God, flee these things. Set a cross on
all these doors, step not over the thresh-houlds; Psalm. 139.22
hate them, as David the Lords enemies, with a perfect hatred. When the spirits
of these Butteries intise thee, consent thou not: Say unto them with
indignation, I will none of your ways. Can men tread on Serpents, and not be
stunge? Carry coals in their bosoms, and not be burnt? Live among the
infected, and escape the contagion? Swallow poison, and not dye the death?
Without controversy, the forenamed places; And the sins ascending from
them, have infected the air, provoked heaven, and drawn down the late great
devouring Pestilence. Are not some sparks of this consuming fire, yet smoking
in the corners of your City? And if you, by these abhomiations, still incense
the Lord, Ier. 22.19.20.
may not the bellows of his justice reinkindle them, to burn you, and your
habitations, to dust and ashes? Is it not the mercy of God, that you, who
hear me this day, are left a live? How comes it to pass, that you fell not,
when so many thousands gave up the Ghost? Are you not compounded of the same
principles? Formed in the same mould? Did you not breath in the same air? Feed
on the same food? To be plain, have you not committed the same, if not
greater sins? Let then, the long suffering of God, lead you to repentance;
Romans 2.4.
And diswade you, from the least appearance of evil. You have heard, what
error is, where it lodges; 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
And, being discovered, how it is to be avoided. Now blessed are they, (and
none but they) who understand the truth and keep it.

VERSE. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.
The Logical resolution.
THe Apostle, in the precedent words, having admonished the people, to take
heed or a double evil; the former, that they should not be led away with the
error of the wicked; the latter, nor fall from their own steadfastness: he,
in this verse, now prescribes a two fold remedy to prevent both. The one is,
grows in grace: for that will support them: the other, increase of knowledge:
for it will direct them. Now because the most errors and heresies, which shall
spring up, and spread in the latter days, may be, and are about Christ Jesus,
he makes mention of him.

Consider the words in themselves, The Theological resolution.
and they contain a single act, Grow: And a double subject, Grace and
Knowledge; which knowledge is amplified by its object, Jesus Christ: And he
described by a twofold relation; Lord, Savior.

Grow:] This word is a metaphor, and comprehends in it, motion, and
augmentation, the former, as we see in the stars, and planets, may be without
the latter but the second not without the first. For, all augmentation does
presuppose aforegoing motion.

Grace:] Grow is the act; grace the object of it: And grace is appropriated to
God and Man. When to God, it is either of election, or acceptance: But here it
is referred to Man; the which is the grace of Sanctification, or confirmation.
Observe, that in God and man, the former preceades the latter. For God, in
order, first elects, then accepts: choosing the creature to make it good, not
in that there is any goodness, to allure the Lord, to choice of it, orriginally
in it. Again, man is first Sanctified: then established. The latter is here
intended.

Knowledge:] That is, in a more clear and complete understanding. For, in some
measure, their spiritual eye was opened, to apprehend the Lord Jesus.

Our:] In this word is included, the Apostles personal and special faith he
had in Christ Jesus: And also, his favorable opinion, that his countriemen
were partakers of the same.

Lord:] The hebrew word, ordinarily thus re^dred, springs from a root which
signifies abase, or pillar: the greek, one who has rule or diminio^, being a
word of relation: our English word Lord, as the learned gather, has much like
force with the hebrew, being co^tracted of an old Saxo^ root Laford which is
by interpretation, a sustainner.

Savior:] This word, as formerly I told you, is also a word of relation. Of
Saviors, they be general or special: principal, or isntrumental. Christ as
God, 1. Tim. 4.10.
saves all men: as God man, them only who believe in him.

Jesus: Mat. 1.22.
] This name comes of an Hebrew word, which signifies to make safe: And it was
given our Lord at his birth, with the notation thereof, by the command of an
Angel.

Christ:] The Greek root, from which this springs, implies as much, as to
anoyn. Now of Christ's there be two kinds, true, or false. And of the former
sort, they are typical, or real: The which are here meant. And, it is not
improbable, but that he assumed both a Greek and an Hebrew name, closely to
teach, that he came to save the Jew, and Gentile. For under these titles, are
his offices comprehended.

The Metaphrase.
As I have foretold you, my beloved Countrymen, that in the last days shall
arise mockers, men wa king after their own lusts, and bringing in many
damnable heresies to their own, and others destruction; And also admonished
you, with all succeeding Churches in you, to beware, that you be not seduced,
and unsettled by their evil example: So d e I in like manner exhort you, to
prevent the former related evils, to grow and increase in grace, and the
knowledge of Christ Jesus; who is my Lord and yours, my savi^ur and yours. For
increase of grace, will support you: and knowledge, direct you, that you
neithe^ be seduced, or unsettled.

Before we proceed to the words themselves, Doctrines deduced.
from the connection of this verse with the former, we may safely observe, that

Admonition is to be seconded with direction.

All the Prophets and Apostles bear witness to the confirmation of this
doctrine: neither need we any ample proof for it; only let the places
annexed, be perused. Mat. 6.33. Gal. 5, 16. Acts. 3.19. 2. Tim. 3 5.

Preachers guides? Watchmen? Physicians? Ezekiel. 33.7. Mat. 9.12.
Wherefore, as they admonish: So they must prescribe remedies. What folly were
it for a guide, to bid the passenger, beware; and never to tell him what? Or
where the danger is? For a wa^chman, to cry, look about ye: yet not point to
the place? Or person? For Physicians, to admonish their Patients to take heed
of a surfeit; And to prescribe them no diet? Neither make mention of noisome,
unwholesome meats? And were it not as great simplicity for a Preacher, to
call upon his people, to beware of this, and that: yet never inform them, what
they are to follow? Neither afford them necessary helps to eschew the evil?
Ministers must divide the word of truth aright, 2. Tim. 2.15
deliver the whole counsel of God: Acts. 20.27
But, if admonition be not seconded with instruction, direction, how is their
duty discharged? Or their flock thoroughly informed? Edified?

travailer, he is out of his path, and show him not the right way, is he ever
the nearer? Say to the steeresman, beware of shelues and sands; Yet give him
no sign to turn on this, or that hand, may he not split, and sink his
vessel for all that? Admonish the late recovered pati^nt, to take heed of a
relapse; but leave him there, how should he, in all possibility escape it? Or
conserve his health? Surely, if Pastors do not both premonish, direct, exhort,
and give sound receipts, it argues ignorance, negligence, and leaves the
sheep liable to peril, to be torn in pieces.

Minister receive both warrant and incourag^ment, for matter and method in his
proceeding. He may admonish, and direct without commission of the least error,
Deuteronomy 14 31
abberation. Did not Moses, Joshua and all the wise Judges, Josh. 24.
tread in the forementioned steps? Iethro prescribed what kind of Magistrates
were to be elected; Exodus 18.22.
describes them by several evident Charracters. Isa. 58.2.
How often did the prudent Prophets, and sage Seers, Ier. 21.12.
as to command the people what to avoid, what to do: So give them, when they
came into the heathen Countries, directions how to behave themselves? Our Lord
Jesus, Mat. 6.8.9.
as he taught the people to abstain from evil: So did he prescribe them
remedies for all their preceedings. Else what means all this? Mat. 5.29.
If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out: Thy right hand, cut it off. Take
heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. Mat. 7.6.
Cast not holy things to dogs: Neither pe^rles before Swine. Wherefore, when
we diswade from sin, provoke to good; remedies must be adjoined, 2. Tim. 2.15
rules annexed. Thus to do, is to be a workman, who needs not to be shamed.

Christian. For, it may direct him how to read and hear to his further profit,
edification. What more frequent in the vulgar sort, ignorant auditorie, than to
hear by halfes? Listen without regard to direction? Let but a Preacher say,
this, and that is lawful, they never respect caution: but run on without any
eye to limitation. The neglect of this, has made the best things often abused:
and many a person. Suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Swear we may, Iud. 7.
but what then are the common peoples conclusions? To abuse this holy ordinance
upon every trifeing occasion. Many are not unlike to foolish patients, who
having received sound recipts, never inquire how to use them: whence it falls
out, when they should be cured, they are often killed. Who is so simple, not to
ask the right way, as to demand if he do not wander? Brethren, take heed
therefore what you hear; how you hear: lest it be for the worse, not the
better, as after a flash of lightning, we expect thunder. So when admonition is
gone forth, have an eye to direction, to caution.

But we will step to the words themselves, where let it be noted, that

Growth in grace is required of a Christian.

Ephe 5.18. and 6.10.
Name me one Church not called upon to practice this duty? Does not the Apostle
bid the Ephesians, 2. Cor. 13 11.
be strong? filled with the spirit? The Corinthians, to be perfect? 1 Thessalonians. 4 1
The Thessalonians, to abound more, and m^re? His Son Timotheus, 2. Tim. 2.1.
to be strengthened with grace? Are not the righteous said, Psalm. 84.7.
to go from strength to strength? Pro. 4.18.
And to shine more and more till the perfect day?

commendable. What more praise-worthie, than grace? Psalm 4 etc.
Shall not then the increase thereof be laudable? Augmentation of any good
subject, Rev. 5.2.
has, in the holy letters, due commendation. For are not Psalms dedicated to
him, Acts 7.55.
who excels? The opening of the seal, to the most worthy, ascribed?
Wherefore is Steven said to be filled with faith? Neh. 7.2.
Hanani, to fear God above many? Moses styled, Number. 13.3
the meekest man on earth? 1. Chro. 11.
Why are David's worthies described, by the greatness of their power? Might?
Several taxed, for their weakness? Feebleness? Except grows in goodness
were greatly to be extolled? Wherefore, as John of his friend, 3. John 12.
I conclude of graces increase; that its well reported of all men, and of the
truth it self: And, for that cause, to be desired, increased.

And is it not also profitable? What growth, can equal this? What increase,
like to this increase Shall we descend to particulars? Do we not by the
augmentation thereof, recover the great loss we had in Adam our father? Are we
not restored by it, to that glorious image, wherein at the first we were
created? Made more suitable to our head, the Lord Jesus? Will it not support us
with patience, to undergo all kinds of crosses? With ease to perform holy
duties? And the more grace here, the greater glory hereafter: Who questions
any of these things? As the Apostle says of the excellency of the Jew, Romans
3.1.2
and benefit of Circumcision: So may we of growth in grace, that its profitable
every manner of way.

The doctrine being prooved, before it be applied, certain questions are to be
propounded, resolved.

Whether grace, or not, be of a growing nature?

We affirm, it is in man, not God: Else, why are we bade to grow? Grace
resembles seed, the which being sown in the furrows of man's soul, springs
first into a blade, next to an ear; And in the end to a ripe corn. Mat. 13.23.
Does not the parable of our Lord prove this? Mar. 4.28.
Grace in a Christian, is not like a star in the sky, or stone in the
center, always equal: But as the Ceders of L^banon, grows greater and
greater; stronger and stronger.

But as a man, who has grace, increases in it?

He may: For there is a vacuitie, in the most sanctified vessel. Grace, like a
bullet in a molde, is not perfected in a moment: the soul, at the first
infusion of it, is not filled with it. It rises by degrees, Ezekiel. 47 3 4.
as the waters of the sanctuary; the which came first to the ancles, then to
the knees, from thence to the loins; And so to a river, that could not be
passed over. As in the union of soul, and body, man was filled with
corruption: So at their disjunction, he comes to his highest pitch of
sanctification.

It may further be demanded, if each Christian do Grow in grace?

For answer to this: If man's life be considered in the bulk; that is; from the
instant of his conversion, unto the time of his dissolution, then doubtless he
does grow: But if we break it into parcels, as weeks, months, years, he may
not increase therein. For, as a tree he may have his winter, stand at a stay,
if not decline. Again, he may be said to grow, and not to grow at one and the
same season, by way of comparison: because, at all times, his growth is not
equal. A tradesman, this year, gains an hundred pounds to his stock, the
next he adds but fifty: here is an increase, though not proportionable to the
former. And this seems to be the condition of the Church of Ephesus: she is
commended for not fainting; Rev 2.3.4.
And in the next words checked, for the loss of her first love. A Trava^ler,
runs fast at the first, mittigates his speed toward the end of his journey:
yet, in that he is going still, he may be said to proceed, although his pace be
not at all times equal: So may we conclude of this supernatural motion.

4 Can the habit of grace be decreased?

This question, in the former verse, we have affirmatively resolved only; an
objection by some experienced Christian, here may be produced. Now he believes,
anon he doubts: this hour he hopes, the next he fears: One day he prays
willingly, fervently; but another he is slow, could in the action. What? Does
the habit of grace increase and decrease in these different kinds of motion?
For resolution: we are to know, that in the most regenerat person, Gal. 5.17.
there is, as grace: So corruption; from which contrary principles, spring
contrary effects. Also, that both of these have coadiutors by whom they are
assisted, in their operations. The spirit, is always present to conserve,
move, and stir up the grace of God in his children: So is Satan, with the
Mass of corruption: But neither of both (it may be) at all times, in equal
degree; whence when there is no diversity of grace, or corruptions Existence,
yet there may be variety of the strength of their several operations. For,
when the power of the external cause is remitted, the actions of grace and
corruption, are also weakened: and so the contrary. As with a ship, it falls
out with a Christian: sometimes. He has a fair and fresh gale from the
Spirit, and at that time he makes a speedy passage: a none the blast is
slacked, and then his course, to the land of life, is but slow. We may not
therefore conclude, that the habit of grace, in this diversity of effects, is
d^ca^ed. No more, then we will, that the sails of the bark be furreled;
because its course is somewhat weakened.

Again; varying the object, alters graces operations. For, when a Christian
casts his eye on his strong corruptions; his many actual transgressions;
his pronenesse to evil, unwillingness to good: calls to mind how the
promises and vows he has not perform^d, the which at his conversion, with a
most settled resolution, from him proceeded; And, as the dog to his vomit, unto
his old sins, he has returned, to doubt and stagger he is constrained: But
on the contrary, when he seriously considers, what change the Lord has
wrought in him, what long experience he has of his loving kindness, what
great things, beyond his expectation, he has done for him; how that he
allows not what he commits, but of weakness, not willfulness falls
into such and such a sin; And that it is so, and was so w th the best of Gods
children, then is ^e strangely ^xalted, and cry to with (r^ioycing, who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Romans 8.33.
I thank the Lord, that in the law of my mind, Romans 7.25.
I serve him: though in my flesh, I serve sin.

5 May grace for any season, neither admit of augmentation, or diminution?

Why not? For Whatsoever is in the rule, may be in the thing ruled: or thus.
What is possible in the nature of things, may come to pass: Example. A man may
go forward, backward, or stand still. What then should hinder, that a
Christian may not neither increase nor decrease, but hold what he has? A stone
cast up into the air, being at the point of its ascent, presently descends.
Yet will it make some little stay, though scarce sencible, before its return.
And why may not the like be in this Spiritual motion? But not to go forward,
is to go backward? True, if we understand it of the acts and exercise of
grace: or in that God requires a continual growth, until we give up an
account of our talents, else not. For the habit may, neither suffer increase,
not decrease for a very short season. If it should not be thus, would it not
follow, thar the spirits of just men, nor the blessed Angels should ever come
to the period of perfection, but still grow (as we use to speak) in infinitum?
I am not ignorant, how that some men be of a contrary judgment. Let the wise
judge.

But what? May not grace increase, and a man not perceive it?

Yes, of certain. For desire of gain, may take away the sense of growth:
n^glect of casting up our spiritual a^counts, hinders the apprehensio^ of
graces increase a jealous suspicion, breeds doubt of what we have: And
augmentation, is not easily perceived. Infants grow, yet are ignorant of it:
the hair waxes white, but not discerned: And the Sun ascends, without
perception: So may it be, in this supernatural motion. Eager minds, weak
judgments, suspicious persons; and want of experience, discover not secret
objects, see them not, as in truth, they are. When fire is first kindled in a
cottage, there is much smoke, little heat: the one flies out at the door,
chimney, window, and every crevise in the walls; the other, in the mean while,
is not apprehended: Now tarry, but a very short season, and the reeke
wastes, the flame increases: so here. When the Holy Ghost sets this fire
which is from heaven, on the hearth of man's heart, he, on the sudden, seems to
burn in spirit, to have zeal in abundance, no sin can stand before him:
notwithstanding, he, for the present, has but a spark, a small measure, his
coal rather smoaks, than glowes. Ancient housekeepers know the former: so do
aged disciples, the latter by experience. Again; When grace is first infused,
the young convert thinks himself rich, having not a drop before: For he
compares some with none which are the greatest opposits. Now more being added
to that he has received, the augmentation is not so easily perceived: because
the inequality, twixt some thing and something, is not so great as that which
is, of something with nothing. Give but a penny to the poor, who before had
none, he now can better discern himself to have silver, than the increase of
his coin (a farthing being added to it,) by reason of the more fell opposition
in the dissentanie rules. These questions being thus resolved, the point
remains to be applied.

Familist, and the Papist. The former holds, that when a man is fullcome, he is
perfect as Adam our father was in Paradise. And we say so too, but then he must
be considered after his fall, not before it. The latter maintains, how a man
in the estate of grace, may absolutely keep the whole law of God, do works
worthy of merit; yea of super erogation: the which cannot be, except we defend
perfection here of sanctification. But what says the Evangelist? I. John 1.8.
if we affirm, that we have no sin (be it actual, or original) we deceive
our own souls, and the truth is not in us. Wherefore, if the Papists and
familists will have the first; let them also take the second. For why should
they not?

growth in grace, grow in corruption. True it is, that many increase, but it is
in a contrary subject. Psalm. 37.7.
For are not some of us, such as the Prophets have described? Out faces shine,
our eyes stand out with fatness: Our breasts are full of milk, Job. 21.24.
our bones of marrow: Collops we have in our flanks, we be lusty and strong:
yet, this were not to be condemned, but that the causes thereof are evil, as
ease, fullness of bread, Ezekiel. 16.49
and abundance of idleness. Another kind there be, who be grown mighty to
power in strong drink, Isa. 5.22.
whose shapes are monstrous: A short belt will not wind about their exte^ded
bodies nor a suite of small size cover their vnfathomed shoulders. These drink
soule-slaying healths, till their heads grow heavy, their hearts light, and
all who fear God grow ashamed of them. Will you see a drunkard marching in his
hellish colors? His eyes water, his nose runs, his tongue stammers, and his
breath stinkes: his mouth drivels, his lips quake, his spittle falls, and his
feet stumble. Bring him to the field, he can neither plow, nor sow: to the
market, buy, nor sell: set him at the table, there, if he speak, he spues: lay
him in bed, he wallowes in his filthy vomit; and, as a Boar in a loathsome
frank, or stinking fly, defiles himself. O that th^se graceless men would
learn, that God, for this kind of growth is grown angry at them And that, if
they repent not, and a mend, they must another day, will they, nill they,
drink whole violes of his purest wrath, until they grow giddy-headed,
heavie-hearted, and, with Nabal, and Belshazzar their damned brethren, 1 Samuel
25.36. Dan. 5.26. Genesis 19.9.
tumble into the bottomless pit of hell. Others, like Nimrod, are grown
mighty hunters; not of the hare and dear (for that) so far as my judgment
leads me (is commendable, warrantable:) But of men's pursses, places, persons;
emptying the first, possessing the second, and persecuting the third: for if
Christians in preaching and professing of the Gospel, do but conioyne (which
the apostle in-ioynes) power with the form of godliness, 2. Tim. 3.5
they cry out against such as the Edomites of the Israelites, Psalm. 137.7.
down with them, down with them, even to the ground. But, let these know, that
though their consciences be grown senseless, God shall bring upon them swift
damnation. For, 2. Pet. 2.1.
he is wise in heart, mighty in power, Job. 9.4.
who ever grew fierce against him, and has prospered? And we have an evil
beast; a slow-belly grown up among us; how should we define him? He is one,
who sells time; uses his money, as though he used it not; strives to prevent
the contingent acts of Gods providence. And rather than the forfeiture of a
band, will forfeit his freedom in the kingdom of heaven: And if you demand,
why he does so, he replies like him, who being found breaking of his neighbors
hedge, and reproved, answered, is it not better to do thus, than to be idle?
Certainly, if David (the which he never will) prove not a liar, Psalm. 15.5.
a usurer shall never inherit, the mountain of holiness. And what? Is not the
weaker sex, grown mightily in wickedness? Have we not some so masculine, that
they walk in their doublets? Ride in their coats? And salute with their caps?
Were but their hearts answerable to their habits: their spirits proportionable
to their apparel, why might they not, at our common musters, be pressed forth
for soldiers? I will, nor can give such any precise precepts, for cloth or
color, form or fashion: yet take this in general. Suppose, that now thou
were to come unto judgment, to hold up thy hand before the ancient of days;
And to receive thy last doom, thy final sentence of life or death eternally?
Would thou appear, in a pointed body? With embroydered hair? A curled
head? A painted face? A French ruff? And a naked breast? Then, as the Prophet
to Naaman the Syrian, 2. King. 5.19.
I say unto thee, go in peace. But, if thou would not, change thy garments,
alter thine attire, lest death on the sudden, strike thee; the Judge come in an
hour, thou art not a ware of; weigh thee in the balance of the sanctuary,
strip thee naked, and cloth thee with shame eternal. Shall not the husband
grow jealous of that wise, who, at his return, is aba^hed to meet him in her
daily habit? I appeal unto thee. But alas! For all that can be said according
to the Apostles, prediction, we grow worse and worse; 2. Tim. 3.13
deceiving and being deceived. The truth is, we are so grown, that the heavens
grow black the earth barren; and the whole frame of nature groans for our
growth. Romans 8.22.
What should I tell you of the late Famine? The blazing star? The inundations
of waters? The bloody wars? The late Plague, wherein so many thousands have
vealed the head, and given up the Ghost? Yea, does not the spirit grieve and
groan for our unnatural growth? Ephesians. 4.30.
Wherefore, let us by unfeigned repentance and new obedience, ease him of this
burden, or we shall groan under the direful wrath of the most high for ever,
Psalm. 50.22.
and ever. O consider this, you who forget God, lest he tear in pieces and
there be none, nothing to deliver you.

doctrine also serves, soundly to lesson some of the better sort. For do they
grow in grace? increase in goodness? I wish, the Lord had not just cause to
say of our nation, Rev 2.4.
I have somewhat against thee. Have we not them amongst us, who have bin as
zealous as Peter in appearance but now have cooled their hearts, in warming
their hands, at ^aiaphas his fire? Others, who seemed as strong and upright as
an oak, are grown weak, fitting themselves to every form and figure in the
congregation, like water in a vessel. Have we not many who in times past put
forth their fingers to all pious uses: But now pluck them back, draw them
in, as the slug her horns? Ran well, and now are let? Began in the
spirit, end in the flesh? Its a disputable question, whether we have more
Bankers in goods or grace, Prodigalls, who have misspent their corporal or
spiritual portion. England, as Ephesus, has left (though not lost) her first
love. Our affections were hardly kindled, but soon cooled, our coal glowes a
while, and anon ends in smoke and smother. 1. King. 1.1
We resemble David in his old age; little heat is within us, not any will
begot into us. Few, like Caleb, Josh. 14.11.
are at this day as able to fight the battles of the Lord, as in former time.
What a weak pulse beats in all places? Scarce sensible. We are like a forced
piece of land, whose second crop is worse, then the former. We hear and read
much: yet in shape, as Pharaohs cattle, are lanke, and lean; deformed and ill
favored. But, beloved, this should not, ought not to be so. Let but a man lie
speechles, fall into a consumption, and become a bankrupt, Oh! this like a
passing bell, in the ears of the world, rings a doleful sound; And all who
hear it, smite their hands, shake their heads at it; send forth deep sighs,
heavy groans: But, the mean while, Prayer may be tongue-tyed, Faith
ship-wrackt, and a good Conscience split in shivers; yet few for these things,
have the least thoughts of heart: no sorrow does pierce us, loss of this kind
pinch us. What the Apostle forewarned, in these last days is come to pass:
for we are plucked away, with the error of the wicked; and are fallen from our
own steadfastness.

Christians to grow in grace? Let us all then look about us: weigh the
proficiencie we have made, in this School. Have thou no grace? Its high time
to gather some. Any? Strive to increase it. Art thou declined? Recover thy
loss. Hitherto have thou grown? Why add to thy stock: still augment thy
store. For, this duty concerns all: and therefore, we will press the point
so, as every person may reap profit by it. You well know that a thing must be
had, before it can be increased. For who prunes, a liuelesse plant? Waters a
dead stake? Trial then is in the first place necessary, if we have any seeds
of grace at all.

1. Signs of found grace
Do thou find and feel an emptiness of grace in thy self? A great want of
it? Then in truth, tho not in full measure, thou have it. For, blessed are the
poor in spirit. Mat. 5.3.
And what is this poverty, but an act arising from grace, whereby we sensibly
apprehend an emptienesse thereof in our souls. By grace we feel grace, as
with one hand we do the other. Dead men perceive no want, when living persons
behold their penury. Let him who is truly gracious, cast his eye whither he
will, he sees a vacuitie of grace in all creatures, an insufficiency to
relieve him. Job. 28.14.
To the depth he says, its not to be found in thee. To the Saints and Angels,
nor in you. They all make him the like answer, Mat. 2.5.9.
the five wise did to the foolish virgins; go thy way, at the most, we have
but enough for our selves. Only, when he looks up to Jesus, then he sees
sufficient for all, though for the present he has but received a little
portion; scarce any in his own apprehension. But, as a voluntary motion is an
act of a living Creature: So is Spiritual poverty of a gracious Christian.

Also, if when men feel the want of it, in judgment they approve of it, and
in mind highly esteem of it, is not the weakest argument that they have it.
For do but demand of them, what is good before God? The best thing in Saint or
Angel? Their reply will be, Grace; grace; Ephesians. 2.1.3.
For what is the reasonable creature without it, but a senseless block? A
dead carcass? And a child of wrath? Defiling the earth, infecting the air,
provoking the heavens; near unto cursing, Heb. 6.8.
everlasting burning? Want and worth, are graces inseparable companions: the
contrary, corruptions ringleaders, and the evident tokens of graceless
persons.

3. After these two, proceeds an earnest desire to be partaker of it; and
hungring and thirsting for it: else, for ought I know, thou have cause to
question, the truth of thy Sanctification: A very castaway (say some) may go
thus far; that is, see the want and worth of it; yea eagerly hunger and
thirst after it: But I am not of their opinion. For hungring and thirsting are
actions of a living, not a dead man: And is not the promise of blessedness,
Mat 5.6.
made to such? Do thou esteem grace, above thy appointed food? Prize it
more, Job. 23.12.
than thousands of silver? or ten thousand riu^rs of oil? Mich. 6.7.
Account all things, nothing in comparison of it? And often and earn^stly
cryest, O how I long for grace! Then be of good comfort, the water of life, the
guest of grace is come to thy house.

4. Add to the former three, care and constancy in the use of the means;
whereby it is begun and increased, And that will seal up all. Do thou
hear the word in s^ason? And out of seas^n? Job. 27 10.
Call upon God at all times? in public? Private? Meditate in the law of God,
night and day? Come often to the table of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
to drink the water of life? Eat the bread of heaven? Psalm. 16.3.
Art thou a companion to the excellent? Cryest thou to Ministers, Sirs, what
shall I do to grow in grace? Then grace thou have: For these are not the
motions of the flesh; but of the Spirit.

5. Art thou yet in doubt? Then tell me, what conflict thou have within thee?
Genesis 25.22
Feel thou twins struggling in thy womb? Cryest thou often, why am I thus?
Is any Christians condition, Lam. 1.12.
like to my conition? Then thou art borne of God: grace is formed in thee
indeed. Fire and water will quarrel, on the same hearth: Gal. 5.17.
So will grace and corruption, in the same heart: for, these latter, as the
former are contraries. When all is peace at home, the old man possesses the
house. A gracious man has an universal strife within himself: Mat. 12.29
for reason against reason, judgment against judgment, will against will, and
affection against affection will be at variance. But, if thou feel this kind
of combat, wax not faint, but gather heart: for God has begun his good
work in thee: Rev. 17.14.
thou art called, and faithful, and chosen; and thy captain Christ has led
thee to skirmish, against his and thine enemies in the sands of Sanctification.

6. Finally; does Satan now more tempt thee, than in times past? Why; this is
not the least mark of Christ's sheep. The Dev^ll is like a gentleman thief who
breaks into a rich man's house, not a poor naked cottage; carries a way, as
the Israelites did from the Egyptians, Exodus 12.35
Silver plate, golden eare-rings, and the choicest Jewels; Not, as the
Gibeonits are said to meet Joshua withal, Josh 9.4.5.
Mouldie bread, rent bottels, old shoes and clowted. This red Dragon, like a
bloody butcher, so long as we trudge the blind steps to the slaughterhouse of
hell, as direct as he can guide us, and as fast as he would have us, he keeps
himself a far off, whistleth some pleasant note in our ears: (for should he
hallow out some fear full noise of temptation, we like frighted cattle, might
stand still, throw up the head, look about, snuff, and run forth of the
road-way:) but when, by the spirit of God, our eyes are vnseeled, we smell the
danger before us, begin to stay our steps, and alt^r our paths, then straight
shall we have a band of the cruel Mastiues of his temptations, to fly in our
faces, pluck us by the throat, that (if possible) we might return into the
bl^cke path of damnation, wherein we had informer time, walked.

Prove thy self now, examine thy own soul; And if thou can say in truth,
that the forenamed things are in thee, and strong and strange temptations be
fall thee, be thou then assured, in some degree thou art Sanctified: question
the matter no more, but withal speed and diligence, set thy self to increase
it. Now because, as Elias said to Elishah, 2. King. 2.10.
this is no easy task, which is required of thee, take these rules following
to direct thee, to the better performance of this so commendable, so profitable
a duty. And first,

Helps to grow in grace.
1. Would thou grow in grace? Then empty thy soul of corruption. These
twins will not thrive in the same womb. 1. Cor. 5.7
For if the old man increase, the new must decrease: the destruct^on of the
former, is the generation of the latter. This Ishmael must be thrown out; else
ill will it fare with brother Isaak. This Barabbas is to be crucified; or the
Babe Jesus shall. Pluck up the cockell, will not the good grain flourish? So
mortify the flesh, and reviue the Spirit.

1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
2 Take heed of actual sin: for a double wound follows such a blow. It
strengthens the old, weakens the new-man, what is that, but fuel to the flesh?
quench-coale to the spirit? Banish then all evil works, from thine hands:
rotten speech, from thy tongue: and vain motions, out of thy mind. As Christ
the money changers, whip all kind of wickedness, cast it forth of thy
temple, spare not any under what pretense soever.

3. Neglect not the least means; Hear, read, meditate, fast, pray, receive
the Lords supper; and have none of his ordinances in contempt. Put not them a
sunder, Christ has coupled together: Col. 3.16.
lest he stop that pipe, roll a stone on that wells mouth, whereat thou
delightest to drink most. Iam. 6.13.14
God would have all the Vessels, and instruments of the Sanctuary had in
honor: the water of life into the cisterne of our soul fl was through every
one of his conduits; then use all; for who can tell, what the least may bring
foor^h?

4 Entertain every good motion; open the gates, let them in, bid them
well-come feed them, cherish them, as the best guests that ever came to thy
soul. Many sparks, make a fire, sundry drops, Isa. 30.21.
fill the banks. Hear thou this voice whispering in thine ear, Acts. 5.9.
This is the good way? Listen to it, Heb. 10.29.
understand its errand and do what, and as it inioynes thee. Acts 7.51.
Know that resisting, makes way to grieving; 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
grieving, to despiting; And despiting, to quenching the little spark of grace
within us: And if that go out, we are undone. Should I enlarge, the time would
be too short: therefore we will wind up all according to the Spiritual
condition of every person, in a round particular exhortation.

1. And first, I will begin with thee, who have not reaped any the least fruits
of the spirit, Ier. 4.3.
in the soil of whose soul this seed was never scattered: I say to all such,
plow up your fallow grounds, sow not among thorns: For its now high time to
seek this grain. What Is the man without grace, but a dead dog? A very Devil?
And firebrand of hell? Never was any blessed without it: Cursed, who did
possess it. What shall I, or can I say of it? Its the water of life, which
raises the dead: the honey, that opens each Ionathans eyes: the tree, which
makes the bitter rivers sweet; whose leaves, heal all wounded spirits. This
oil will make him see clearly, who was borne blind to speak the language of
Canaan distinctly, being dumb from his mothers womb. It boareth the deaf
ear, to hear what the spirit speaks, to the Churches: sets an hungry
appetite, on the stomach of the soul: seasoneth its palate, And gives a
pleasant relish to all heavenly nourishment: It stops the bloody issue of
sin, dries up that fountain, which all the Physicians in the world could
never cure: And loses the anklebones of the aged creeple, to stand, leap,
and run with joy, the paths of Gods commands. O grace! What shall I say of
thee? How should I commend thee? Thou art a wonder-worker, in this present
world: strange things bring thou to pass, every day. And, O ye sons of
earthie Adam, how should I entreat you! a grain of this metal, is worth a
million of gold: a stem of this tree, all the Cedars in Lebanon: And a drop
of this water, all the baulme in Gilead. Yea, were the hugest hills, the
choycest pearls: the mightiest rocks, the most precious stones: And the
vnfathomde Globe, a shining Chrysolite; yet, one corn of this sand, more than
the Sun a Candle, in brightness and goodness exceeds them all. As the wise
man of money, I say of it; that bread nourishes, wine refreshes: but grace is
all in all. Would thou purchase? Plant? Build? Why, grace will do it. It
will make thee, a glorious temple of Gods sacred Spirit: the adopted child, of
God the father: And a coheire with the Lord Jesus, of earth, of heaven. In
trouble, it will comfort thee: in bondage, free thee: and being faint, put
valor into thee. Yea, when the graceless man, shall tremble at a paper-Canon;
quake, at the wagging of a leaf; lagge, like a starcht ruff, in a shower of
rain; And wish, he had never bin born^: Then shall the gracious man, hoyse up
his sail, lance into the deep, cut the swelling waves, pass by all shelues
and sands; salute death the King of terrors, with an holy scorn, and put in
safe at the key of Canaan, the land of everlasting life.

II. And now, let me turn my speech to thee, who have laid the foundation of
grace, begun to build; go thou on, perfect the work of thy Sanctification:
feign would I add to thy mite, and wind thee up a pegge higher. Have I not
told thee, that graces increase is commendable? Profitable for all things? Men
of great stock, trade to the east Indies, when they of less store, but barter
with their door neighbors: a candle inlightneth a narrow room, the Sun a
whole world: A single coat, keeps back a weak shot, a double one, the most
fiery piercing bullet: A child shrinkes under a cushion, and a feeble body
stumbles at a straw. Want of water makes the Mill to stand: a spark sets not
the pot a boiling: And a drop of wine refreshes not the Spirits. Our green
har^s are not easily inflamed: our stiff wills bent to action: And our frozen
affections need much blowing. Our sacrifices are but offered up with smoke:
our corruptions are not quite licked up; and the cursed work of Satan is not
thoroughly dissolved in us. Wherefore, would thou not revolt? Shrink back?
And fall from thy former stedfastnes? Why grow in grace. Would thou with
ease perform holy actions? With patience bear all kinds of crosses? Do much
good? Have fulness of joy? And be a shining light? A burning candle? Then let
grace have her perfect growth? Strong men stand fastest: long-winged Hawks fly
swiftest: larg-sailed ships run speediest: great Planets shine brightest:
full purses make merriest: And big-boned bodies bear easiest. Grace to a
Christian, is as metal to the horse: mainner to the earth: And the Moons to
the tide. As feathers to the foul: wheels to the chariot: And the soul to
the body. So that, want grace, and we are but feeble liuelesse creatures; bring
forth no crop, bear lanke ears (if any) and that very seldom. Many
complain, that they are in good duties, cold in prayer, slow to hear, and
empty of comfort, stagger in faith, question their salvation, impatient in
troubles, And shrug at the remembrance of death: But where lies the fault? Who
is blamworthy? Any except thy self? Knowing thou have a present help A speedy
remedy to redress all, but strives not for it? What a shame is it, that we
living in so good days? In a land which flows with milk and honey? Levits in
most corners on it? The kingdom of heaven come to our doors? And ma^na falling
with in our tents morning, evening, should complain of feeblenes? Weakness?
Had we cruel wars, garments tumbling in blood; our Cities sacked, besieged as
Samaria, that we were constrained to eat the fruit of our loins, to preserve
our natural lives: Or, had we a Ieroboham to rule over us, who would repair
the high places, make Priests of the basest people, consecrat to Baall; pull
down Bethel, build Babel, and cause all the Lords Prophets to fall on the
sword, why then to complain to be a young plant, an Infant in grace, were
somewhat more tolerable. Me thinks, I like Jonah, do well to be angry, when
I consider how long, how wonderfully we have enjoyed great means to be strong
men and women in the Lord, and we can hardly keep soul and body together. We
look, like spirits pinde, sterved, And not living, fresh, and grown
Christians. I may, in respect of spiritual food, fitly apply the Apostles
phrase, 2. Cor. 6.12
We are not made straight in God, but in our own bowels. David could pen more
Psalms in time of war, than we have leisure to read in these days of peace;
Luke 7.9.
The Centurion in gleaning, gathered more faith, than we reap who have the
full harvest. I speak it to thy shame, henceforward make no such complaints:
but see what God does for thy soul; and let thy growth, and the means be
equal. He who thus does, Romans 2.4.
does well; And whereunto the Lords bountifullnesse should, (I am sure ought
to) induce him.

III. Neither will I omit thee, O thou decayed, and declin ng Christian, who
have wasted part of thy stock, diminished thy store. What merchandise of more
worth? What gain to the increase of grace? Shall not then, the loss be
equal? The damage proportionable? Will it not grieve the husbandman to see
his tenderest plants wither? The rankest corn become blasted? Does not a
consuming body, breed sorrow? Presage death? and what patient in such a case,
if not grown desperate, seeks not recoverie? The Prodigal Gamster, does he
not sigh at his loss? And with an eager mind, play at get again? Shall thou
then suffer this precious treasure to waste? Permit the buds of grace to pine?
Perish? O see thou do not so: but seek to the Physician betimes, take
restoratiues to recover thy former health, thy wonted strength. Hos. 2.7.
Return to thy first husband: For at that time, was it not better with thee,
than now? What content, comfort can thou find in prayer, that's cold? Short?
And not mixed with fervencie? Will flesh half boiled, delight the palate?
Nourish the body? Has not the Lord threatened, Rev. 3.16.
to spue the lukewarm Christian out of his mouth? Can he away with a
sluggard? A non-proficient in his service? Does not our master expect to
receive his talents with advantage? And shall not the idle servant be
condemned? Awake therefore, Ephesians. 5.16.
thou who sleep, stand up from the dead; And Christ shall give thee light,
more increase of grace. Consider how thou art fallen, into what a pitiful
case thou have plunged thy soul: And tie thy self, to thy ancient task; use
a constant course in holy actions; every day read some portion of Christ's
loue-letters; See his great affection, how friendly he invites thee, and be
allured. Psalm. 119.25.
Call and cry, Lord quicken me, cause thy face to shine, give me the spirit of
life and power, restore me to the wonted joy of thy salvation. Psalm. 80.3.
Psalm. 51.12.
Wash thee seven times in the river Jordan, bath thy self in the poole of
repentance, sing Psalms in secret. And get thee into the company of the
strongest, hotest Christians: So shall thy flesh become as a child's, the leprie
of sin wear away thy vigor return, and thy heart wax warm, burn within
thee. Loue-songs no more inflame lust, than the song of songs increase, stir
up grace. What bangling kite with a lofty flier, mendes not her pitch? What
fainting believer with one who staggers not, but will grow in fa th? Suppose,
thou find in thy self a backwardness to good duties? Shall not the
omission thereof, make thee more unfit the next season? Use limbs, and have
limbs, is our English proverb: use grace, and have grace, a Christians
experiment. But, if all this move thee not to recover thy decayed stock, to do
thy former works; then thus reason, why may not I shrink back? Retire? Prove
an Apostate? Or, Job. 31.14.
how shall I answer God, when he returns to judgment? Sure I am, that if thou
be his, he will not long suffer thee to sit on thy lees; but remove thee, from
vessel to vessel. How long, Ier. 48.11.
think thou will the Lord endure thy lingering? Brook thy wambling? Take
heed, lest one of these days, he boil thee up, by some sharp, schorching
fire of affliction. What if the spirit of fear, should re-fall thee? 1 Samuel
16.14
The sword of thine enemy pierce thee? The spreading plague, infect thee? The
food of thy soul be taken from thee? Or thou, Amos. 8.11
by some foul public offense, left to scandalize thy profession? Then have
thou not spunne a fair thread? Will not thy ill husbandry prick thy fingers?
Shall thou not go mourning all thy life long? And, at the last, leave a weak
evidence, a feeble testimony of thy soundness, of thy salvation behind thee?
1. Cor. 15.34.
Awake therefore to do righteously. Think, and think again of these things;
set them before the eye of thy soul: Judge. 16.3.
So shall thou, as Samp^on, when he saw the Philistines approach near him,
gather thy forces together; up, beg^n, and f^^e for thy life.

IIII. Now, in the conclusion I have a word of exhortation unto thee; thou,
thou, who have kept what thou have; And not consumed the least mite of thy
stock. Psalm. 87.4.
Think not, that this is all which G^d requires of thee: but grow still.
Proceed from strength to strength: be rooted, and deeply grounded in the grace
of Christ Jesus. Col 1.23. and 2.7.
Spread thy branches far and wide, shoot up, and sprout on high, be strong,
as an ell-boare. Let no vacuitie (as nature admits not any) be in thy vessel
but be filled to the brimme. Be a mighty valiant man: exceed the godly, 1 Samuel
10 23.
as much in this spiritual growth, as Saul the common subjects in corporal,
who was higher by the head and shoulders. Christians should resemble the most
honorable of David's worthies, equal the first three: Yea, 1. Chro. 11 21.
like the brethren of Gedeon, every one be as the child of a king. Judge 8.18.
A waster of his stock, is much condemned: So is a Dwarf in stature, derided.
Shall we then decrease our heavenly substance? Or with the North Pole, be still
at a stand? Let the motion of other men, somewhat incite thee, provoke thee,
who are never satisfied. Ephesians. 5.18.
When Drunkards are filled with wine, be thou with the spirit. When thou see
an Elimas, a Sorcerer full of the Devil: with Barnabas, Acts 13.9.10.
be thou filled with faith and the holy Ghost. When worldlings, whose portion
is in this life, aim at stately buildings, Large possessions, great ruffes and
cuffes, let thy care and scope be, to excel in this one thing necessary: Luke
10.42.
exceed them as much in grace, as they thee, in the contrary grain. For thus
to do, is acceptable to God, Mat. 16.28.
profitable for thee, For all men. What, if a man could win the whole world,
yet want grace, would it be any benefit unto him? Whereto may I compare him,
who has much, many things, yet without grace; But to a piece charged with
shot, not equalled with powder? Will? Can such a person discharge his calling?
Be liberal to pious uses? No, no: his coin lies rusting in his chest, Luke
7.5.9. Acts. 9.39. 2 Timothy 1. vlt.
his corn rotting in the Garner, as lead in the Cannons belly. Who built the
Jews a Synagogue? Made coats for the poor? Refreshed Paul in bands? Were
they not persons furnished, filled with the hot, active, mighty working powder
of grace? Consult and see.

Wherefore, thou Embrio; Thou Neo-phyt; Who art formed in the Churches womb,
graffed into the true olive tree, and now beginst to bud, to flourish: be not
content with a mean stature, an ordinary growth: but be thou enlarged. And O
thou Prodigal; Luke 15.13
Whose portion, (in part) is spent, come to thy self, confess thy fault,
return to thy father; be thou reconciled: So shall thou like that valiant
Nazarit, Judge 16.22 29
recover thy decayed strength; bind, the wedding garment faster to thee; lay
hold on the pillars of promise, pull down Satan's throne; and cast the gates
of hell from off her hinges. And thou growne^ Christian; I must raise thee to
an higher pitch; wind thee to the greatest period (if possible) of
sanctification. For thou art not to rest at an ordinary degree of grace: but
to increase, like Noah's flood, until all the vacuities of thy empty channels
be filled, the tops of the aspiring hills, and mountains be covered: And the
depth be unmeasurable, not to be sounded. It were to be wished, that every
Christian could give the like testimony of himself, Job. 32.18.19.
as does Elihu; I am full of matter, my belly is as wine, which has no vent;
it is ready to burst, like new bottels. Grow we should not only in quantity
of grace: but also in the quality of it. Our gifts are to be of a more ^ure
and defecate nature. When an apple comes to it bigness, we see it grows in
color, taste, and proceeds to a better relish, a more delectable temper: and
so it should, must be with us Christians. Wherefore let no means be omitted,
which may further thee: nor incentiues unthought on, that may provoke thee.

And first, make it thy chiefest care, daily employment, to crucify the
old man, with all his lusts. Gal. 5.24.
Smite him on the face, none shall revile thee: beat him black and blew, its
no breach of law: Bray this fool in a mortar, stamp him to powder, burn him
into ashes, and bereave him of his life. Or deal with him, as it was done to
the Levits concubine; Judge 19.
force him to death, cut him in twelve pieces, send them into the coasts of
Golg^tha; And if no man will, God shall commend thee, reward thee for it. But,
because, when thou have done thy best and worst, some palm of this cursed
Iezabell will remain, 2 King 9.
some part of his skull vndevoured, And some drops of his blood not lapped up:
yet for all this, be not out of heart, wax not fainte in this quarrel, but lay
on load, play the man still. As the Philistines by Sampson, Judge 16.
pluck out his eyes, shave of his hair, cause him to grind in the mill of
mortification, and take away his strength. Inioyne him to keep a perpetual
fast, creep on his breast; or with the serpent, lick up the dust, and so fall
into a sensible, incurable consumption. Stop his cares, as Stevens auditors;
with David, curb him by a bit; And like Agabus, with the girdle of the word,
bind him hand and foot. Suffer him not to kick, to spraule or move a very
finger: to peep, listen, or whisper. For, if he do, he will recover, renew
his vigor and buffet the new-man. Strangle all his ill motions at the
conception, bury them in the womb: Let not one of them have a timely birth.
And if for all this (as it is like enough) he will be meddling, not brought to
subjection, then make him a Mendicant, grant him a pass to beg: Or, if not so,
live, like the Monk, in the order of idleness, lazines, may it please you,
consecrate him to Baal, permit him to be his Priest that he may lash his
scurvie skin, lance his putrified flesh; And, at the last, with Judas, become
his own executioner. Do thus; for none but Satan, will mourn at his death,
seek to raise him up again. When this Saul is slain, then shall little
David, grow stronger and stronger; fiercer and fiercer.

2 Take further advise, and be a companion to those who fear God: have all thy
delight, Psalm. 119 63. and 16.3.
in the most excellent Christians. The better the object is, the more content
it gives to the senses: And is not the best of all things, most to be desired?
When Christ talked with his Disciples, Luke 24.32.
their hearts grew hot within them. When Paul met Sylas, Acts 18.5.
he burned in spirit. Will not the greenest billet, fire with the dry? And one
flaming bavin, kindle a thousand? One who is strong in the grace of God, by a
secret operation conveieth, as the loadstone into iron, power and vigor into
all who touch him. His prayers, conference, gestures, and whole carriage, is it
not like a costly banquet, which calle^h forth the fainting Spirits, arms
them with a fresh infused power, as if a man had bin at the wine? Doubtless,
the more we apprehend the work of grace in any, the more will it reviue the
new-m^n in us, curb the old; And by an overruling command, bind all his
lawless members to the peace. Young plants thrive not under dropping trees,
weak Christians grow not in lewd company such a fire warmes the hands, cooles
the heart: kindles the flesh, quenches the Spirit.

3. And if by serious examination, thou find in thy self some raging
corruption: (for as Abraham his beloved son; each convert has his darl ng
sin:) then up with it by the roots, above all other. To it, with the
mattocke of the law, down with it to the ground: for such a weed unmortified,
will nourish all the rest about it. Want of wit in this kind of husbandry,
makes the good grain of grace to grow slowly; look lancke, and lean. When
men would have a rough field fitted for the plow, will they not first rid up
the strongest trees? And then fall to the weaker? Therefore, set upon thy
vnruliest lust; fight not with small or great in the entrance of this battle,
but with the Prince only. Give him not a blow, and be gone: But hack and hew,
until he fall on the ground. 1 Samuel 17.51
For when this Giant is dead, all the army will faint, be put to flight; And,
with the turning of an hand, be conquered, overcome.

4. Add to all, private and frequent prayer. Secret meals make a fat body:
Closet-duties a w^ll-liking mind* Will not the tender dew, that falls in the
silent night, more refresh and cause the herbs to flourish, than a great
shower of wet in the stirring day. For the one is less mingled with the sun
and wind of hypocrisy, than the other: And God, like man, gives the choicest,
richest gifts in secret. Iam. 4.6.
When thou have this, and thus done, be humble in thine own eye; have a low
conceit of thy gracious stock; never once dream of enough, nor of being rich:
for that is the high way to bancke, to loose all. Came not Christ to lay the
hills equal? And to raise up the valleys? Luk 3.5.
To make the crooked paths straight? And to fill the empty vessels? was not
the Church, in an error, which said, she was incr^ast? Had all things? Rev.
3.17.
Nay, was she not poor? 1. Cor. 5.7.
Naked? Blind? Miserable? And wanted all things? O that we could purge out the
old leaven! abstain from all actual sins! be conversant in the use of all
Gods holy ordinances! 1 These. 5.22.
entertain all the motions of his spirit? And be poor in our own
apprehension? Then would grace grow, Luke 1.53.
the new-man flourish; And the old receive his deaths-wound, be pierced through
his sides, and broken in pieces: Then, then should we be rare Saints on earth
shining lights in this dark world; Phil. 2.15.
lead our lives in righteousness, Luke 1.75.
holiness; And do more, than graceless men imagine can be done by any
created nature.

Wherefore, when thou feel thy soul to mourn, thy Spirit to faint, thy
heart melancholy, dumpish, all a mort, then look up to heaven, rouse thy
self, fall to meditation, mind the days of old. And call upon thy God: Cry,
Lord help me, quicken me, a wake my soul; So shall thou, like the dead child,
neese seven times, 2 King. 4.34.35. etc.
wax warm, and return to thy former life and strength. This course if thou
constantly observe, the power, feeling, comfort, and all the effects of grace,
in a short time, by little and little, will strangely grow, wonderfully thrive,
until thou come to that period, full perfection, the Lord has appointed for
thee, and promised to thee in Christ Jesus.

Incentiues to grow in grace.
And as no means are to be omitted, neglected: So all motives, inducing to this
growth, must be minded, remembered: thus therefore expostulate with thy self.
What? Do not plants grow? Animats thrive? And are the covetous; or ambitious
ever satisfied? Will not Citizens aim at the most honorable place? Merchants,
venture for the choicest commodities? And all tradesmen, desire the greatest
gain? Shall not a Christian then strive for perfection? Let theirs: yea Paul's
resolution be emulated, imitated of thee; Phil. 3.11.
who, (if possible) would have attained to the resurrection of the dead: As
some will, to have bin as perfect, as the glorified persons in the day of
judgment. In the estate of nature wast thou not insatiable? Did sin ever
give thee full satisfaction? I tell thee, that champions of Satan, must be
champions of Christ: Such as have bin full of corruption, Ephesians. 5.18.
must be filled with the Spirit.

And the more we grow in grace, will not corruption the less burden us? Shall
we not with the more ease (if not wholly cast it off) bear it? The bird which
has the most feathers, mounteth highest, conserues her body from many
brusings: So surely by this increase, we should soar up to heaven, be freed
from innumerable heart-breakings. Why have we inioyed so great means? Seen so
many good days? But to grow strong? And grace; Why should not thy excellencies
allure all men to affect thee? Procure thee? What? Art thou not of a
soule-curing quality? care in this present world? And only to be found in the
vessels of honor? Where thou pitchest thy Tent, like a Prince, thou art
attended with royal companions, as Wisdom, Faith, Hope, Love, and what not?
As in the absence and presence of the planets, all elementarie bodies heat and
cool, lighten and darken, reviue and dye: So, by thy contrary motion, does
every christian. Thou art, as the spring and oil, which turn all the wheels
of soul and body, to run the paths of Gods precepts: Rev. 22.2.
the vine which bears all kinds of fruits. Thy branches feed the tender
Roes, being cropped; thy juice will heal all diseases, when once applied. Where
thou fallest, like the showers in May, the barren fields grow fruitful, bring
forth in great abundance; And multiply, the seed of the word, to an hundred
fold. Never was covetouse chuffe when his garners were full of good grain,
more glad; the Grasier, having his lands stockt with the choicest cattle, more
merry: Nor the Prodigal with his purse extended with pieces more iocunde,
than the man is, whose heart is replenished with grace. O grace! glory is thy
inseperable companion, as shame the inevitable consequence of sin. Where thou
openest the eye, all the divine attributes of God, as his omniscience,
omnipresence, omnipotence: yea, his very justice, smile upon it, are delectable
unto it. For, if grace be with us, who or what can be against us? Grace in thy
soul, will assure thee of mercy in Christ; And if thou be secured of that,
what need thou to fear? What can be terrible, or dreadful unto thee? The
more Wi^e, Just, Potent thy friend (...), will it not the more comfort ^hee?
Rejoice thee? And is not El-shaddai the Lord of earth and heaven, thy fast
friend? Thy everlasting Father? Let them then fear, who have cause: For thou
have none. Grow in grace, and thou may go through the world as a man whose
mind is in a deep study; Like Ahimahaz, who had special have of a weighty
business; gaze on nothing, hear nothing; 1. Cor. 7.30 31.
use it, all things in it, as though thou use them not. Thy conversation
shall be in heaven, thy thoughts on him who is invisible, Phil. 3.20.
that never man saw and lived: And having, as Peter, past the first and second
watch, thou shall come to thy self in the presence of God, Acts. 12.10.11.
where is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and al variety of pleasures at his right hand for evermore. O thou; who
read, hear these lines bind them to thee, think often on them; And till
thou be stron^ in Grace, which is in Christ Jesus let them never depart from
the^ Now, if all that we have said ca^ not allure thee, I say no more unto
thee: but wish, when it is too late, thy careless neglect of graces increase,
may not repent thee.

Whereas our Apostle exhorts to grow in grace, verse: 5.6.
more is included then mentioned. For what in the first chapter in particulars
he named; Genesis 3.2. and 4.20.
here in the bulk are comprehended. And as a tree, is for trees; cha^et, for
charets; Psalm. 78.2.
parable, for parables: So is Grace put for all the gifts of the spirit. Mat.
13.35
Whence it will follow, that

An increase of all graces is required of Gods children.

Name what grace you will, and an augmentation is required, urged. Romans 1.17. 1
These. 4.10. Ephesians. 4.15.
Are not the Romans incited, to grow in faith? The Thessalonians in love? And
the Ephesians in all things? Paul in other places calls for it, prays for it?
Jude. 2.
So do his fellow-Apostles in their Epistles.

emptiness? a weakness in all? What one grace is perfect at the first
infusion? Adams were at his creation: not ours at our regeneration. Justified
we are in one act, absolute in a moment. For the object matter of it is without
us, imputed to us: but sanctified we be by degrees; in that grace is inherent,
wrought in us by way of infusion addition. Things easily got, are the less
regarded. We must therefore with much struggling, finish the measure of our full
and entire Sanctification.

old man left within us? The feeds of all the kinds of corruption, in some
degree unmortified? What then? but increase of grace, can expel these? Will
Satan drive out Satan? How then should his kingdom endure? It is the many
fingers of the new-man, which must dispossess these unclean spirits. For
knowledge, as light darkness, dispelleth ignorance: faith, as wind chafe,
blows away infidelity: And love, as heat cold, banisheth hatred: yet these
must be stronger, than their contraries; otherwise it will not, cannot be.

a Christian several sorts of temptations? And will they not, like Goliahs
brags, grow greater and greater? What? Or who shall quench these fiery darts?
Pluck the Devils weapons out of his hands? And hurl him against the wall? Any
thing but faiths, and hopes increase? It is a truth, that every particular
grace of the Spirit, has an opposite adversary within man, and special
temptation from without him, and that a strong one. Therefore a growth in all
of them is necessary, to conquer and overcome their contrary enemies.

grow at all, we were but dwarfes: and in some, not every grace, would breed
deformity. Is it not a comely thing, to see a plant spread all her branches
equally? A body thrive, in each member proportionably? What then? Is this
commendable in the outward and not the inward man? Should but one finger stand
at a stay, would we not count it a blemish? Shall we not blush then at the
other? And thus you see, it stands with reason, how Christians must grow in all
graces they have received.

But may one grace grow, and not another?

acts cause a stronger habit? Else, how should tribulation bring forth
patience? Romans 5.3.
Again the frequent use of one (its probable) by accident, may hinder the
augmentation of some other. For several charitable actions may occasion pride,
though not of their own nature. This chafe will cleave to the best grain,
now if pride grow, will not humility, for a season stand still? And will it
not appear, from the rules of Contraries? Shall we not see the wicked, grow in
one corruption, decay in another? And that not only of such, as have the most
contrariety (as Covetousness and Prodigality:) but of those that be Disparats
(as drunkenness and gluttony:) admitting of far less dissension in nature?

faith is a radical Grace, and infuseth her force into all, which flow from
her, equally. Grant it be so: yet, Sol.
that hinders not. Does not the root send her juice and vigor into all the
branches in like sort? not withstanding external causes as the rise of the
Sun, fall of the dew, and blast of the wind, not all like striking all the
boughs, may occasion a disproportion.

Romanists? And the troop of bastard protestants among us? For let the growth
of their graces be judged by the effects, and in reproving of them, shall we
wrong them? Do they not brag of knowledge, and defend ignorance? Commend
faith formed, yet live like infidels? Extol love, and cherish deadly hatred?
Exalt hope, and leave men in despair? Vow chastity, and mainetaine the
stews? Have they not candles to burn on their altars? Gunne-powder to blow up
Parliament houses? Will they not grant Pardons? And imbrue their hands in the
blood of Innocents? Bless God with their tongues? And curse his anointed in
their hearts? Great devotion the yshew in appeara^ce, when destruction and
calamity be in their practice? Romans 3.16. 2 Timothy 3.13
What can I say of them? But that they grow from evil to worse, deceiving and
being deceived? For, they can lie, and tell truth, with one very breath: send
forth sweet, and bitter water from the selfsame fountain: Grow in grace, and
increase in corruption: Cry out for unity, and sow the seeds of enmity: And
that, which surpasses all; A Jesuit can live a Traitor, dye a Catholic
Martyr: Therefore of the Serpents brood, and spawne of the Devil be they. And
be there not some among us, in the same predicament? Who go in knowledge,
forward? Yet like the Crabbe, in practice, move backward? Boast of great
faith, when their good works are little ones? Have peace in their heads; But,
as Sampsons Foxes, Judge 15.4.
certain firebrands in their tails? Do they not call for prayer, cry down
preaching? Are not these monsters? Deformed Satyrs? Rather than complete
Christians? Throughout sanctified persons? 2. King 17. vlt.
These resemble those who feared God; yet served their Idols.

virtue, 2 Pet.. 1.5 6 7.
faith: to your faith knowledge; to your knowledge temperance; to your
temperance, patience; to your patience, godl^nesse: And to godliness,
brotherly kindness. For, if these things be in you, and abound you shall
neither be barren, nor vnfrui^full. Christians in the Church must not be like
stones in the building, always in bulk equal; neither grow as the bul-rush,
bigger and weaker: but burnish as the Cedar; wax strong as the Oak. Gods
plants must achieue an augmentation: Of each branch every member, a
consolidation. Thy l^ue must be hot, thine hatred deadly; thy desires eager,
and thy zeal burning: Thy faith never failing, thy hope longing; thine anger
fierce, and thy delights ravishing: yea, thy grief deep, thy fear terrible;
and thou thy self, prove more than a conqueror. Romans 8.37.

But above all graces, grow in faith. The Apostle Jude, exhorts the people, to
edify one another, in their holy faith. Jude. 20.
For faith is the root, from the which all other branches spring, the
fountain, out of which flow all the rivers of holy actions: and the sure
foundation, that supports the whole building of godliness. Wherefore, if faith
decrease, every gift of the Spirit will wither, dye: the waters of
sanctification run weakly, be dried up: And the goodly frame of our new
erected Temple, reele, and totter. Doubtless, many and great advantages has
a Christian, by his faith, For it raises the dead, justifies the wicked,
purifieth the heart; It comfort the feeble minded, quenches Satan's fiery
darts, ouercomes the world: It brings good tidings from God to man, unites
the creatures to the Creator, and saves the sinner. What is faith but the
choicest Grape in Canaan? The prime fruit of the spirit? The essential form
of a Christian? And the p^r^e which purchases heaven? Its like the poole of
Bethesda, which cures the cripples, 1 Samuel 2.22
the sword of Saul, that never came empty; And the bow of Jonathan, which
never bended back from the blood of the slain, the fat of the mighty. For
crosses, faith will assure thee that the Lord sends them, their burden shall
not exceed thy ability; and that, like a thunder clap, they rattle more than
hurt. That they are the cognizance of Christ, the Physician of the soul; shall
handle thee gently, stay but a very little while and at their departure, leave
a blessing behind them. This baulme heales all diseases, helps at a dead lift,
and cures when nothing can.

And what shall I more say? For the time would be too short for me to tell of
Gedeon, Barak, Heb. 11.32 etc.
and of Sampson; of Iephtah, David, Samuel, and of the Prophets; who through
faith, subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the
mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of f^re, escaped the edge of the sword,
of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle, resolute in war and put
to flight, whole armies of their enemies. For when reason presents these things
unto thee, as so many she bearer, roaring Canons, implacable Devils; And the
promises of God, the acts of divine providence, And the kingdom of heaven, no
better than fate, destiny, broken notio^s; (at the best, but like some
ruinated and forraged Country) th^n will faith give them luster, make them
shine, And as it were, with open face, appear and stand forth in a most
glorious form and order.

Grow in faith, and thou shall be able to break a bow of steel, lift up the
wing, soar on high, slight temptations, defy the devil, and bid death do
his worst. A great faith, will fill thy soul with joy, thy life with good
works and the whole world with praises. Faith if big and strong, will make thee
a noble warrior in the Lambs camp, one of a thousand; A man, as David,
according to Gods own heart. It will ascend to heaven, lay hold on thy surety
satisfy thy creditor, And bring thee a quittance for an universal, an
everlasting discharge of all thy debts, original, actual; past, and to come.

But I must confess, that what I press is hard to practice: For Satan daily
desires, does winnow it. When its seed is first sown in the soil of our
souls, feign would he rend it up by the roots: but finding that a matter
impossible, because it is of Gods planting, then will he, by his subtle
suggestions, tempt us to question the truth of its objects: And when this will
not serve his turn neither that we may prove grain for his garner, then with
his sieve, he will toss and tumble us up and down, to prevent faiths act,
separate it from its proper object, and keep us in a continual intercourse of
doubting, staggering. Beloved, of all the strings which be on the instrument of
my soul, I find none more to jar, than this of faith. O how hardly is it
turned! How suddenly out of temper; It will prove a pretty piece of service, in
the time of trial, and day of temptation, to rely on God, to cast all our care
on him. However, yet there is hope: for the Lord has blessed Faith once; And
it shall be blessed for ever: the elder shall serve the younger.

And in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Having finished the
first thing wherein we are to grow; we proceed to the second. From the which
we are instructed, that

Christians are to grow in the knowledge of Christ Jesus. Who better acquainted
with Christ than Paul the apostle; yet did he not strive to increase his
knowledge of him? His desire was among the Corinths, to know nothing but Christ
Jesus, 1. Cor. 2.2.
and him crucified. No time would he omit, means neglect, that he might
apprehend him, Phil. 3.12.
of whom he was apprehended. The charge he gave his son Timotheus, may serve
further to confirm the proposition. Does he not command him, 1. Tim 4.13.
to attend unto reading? Doctrine? Exhortation? And may not reason enforce it?

Christ, the Being of Beings? The natural Son of God the Father? The
brightness of his glory? Heb. 1.3.
And the engraven form of his person? Are not all the treasures of Wisdom and
Holiness, Col. 2 3.
hid in him? Does not the fullness of the Godhead, dwell in him bodily? Is he
not coeternall? Coessentiall? And coequall with the most high? Will you hear
his own testamonie? I, Ioh. 10.30.
and the Father are one. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways,
before his works of old: Pro. 8.22 etc.
when there were no depths, I was brought forth no fountains abounding with
waters, year the mountains were settled or the hills created: while as yet he
had not made the earth, nor the fields; neither raised the highest part of the
dust of the world. When he prepared the heavens, set a compass upon the face
of the deep; And established the clouds above, I was there. When he gave the
Sea, his decree; commanded the proud waves should not pass their bounds; and
when he appointed the foundations of the earth, then was I by him, as one
brought up with him; and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him?
And this being thus, Phil. 2.6.
is it any robbery for Christ to be equal with God? Was not the Word made
flesh? 1 Ioh. 1.1.2
Dwelt amongst us? And did we not behold his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten of the Father, Ioh. 1.14.
full of grace and truth? What object more wonderful? Better deserves our
knowledge? Did not the Angels desire to peep into this mystery? 1 Pet. 1.12.
And shall not we? Then are we blame worthy.

elected us, Ioh. 15.16.
before the world was? In these good days, created us of nothing? Beautified
us in a comely manner? Job. 10.10.
Imprinted his own image upon us? Psalm. 8.6.
And we by sin having spoiled our selves, with no less price than the
shedding of his sacred blood, 1 Pet. 1.19.
redeemed us? Recovered the great damage, we lost in Adam our father? And
restored us to a far better condition, Psalm. 103.1.2.
than was allotted to us at our first creation? It is he, who pardons all our
sins, heals all our infirmities, delivers our souls from hell; And from
whom all the good we enjoy, we have received. Are not all things from him? Ioh.
1.3.
For without him was not made, Ioh. 5.17.
any thing that was made. And by him? For the father works hither to, and he
works. And for him? Thou art worthy, O Lord, Rev. 4.11.
to receive honor, and glory and power: For thou have created all things; and
for thy pleasure they are, Eccle. 12.1
and were created. Have we not a command to remember him who formed us? Psalm.
147.9
Do not the Ravens look up unto him? The winds, and Sea obey him? And shall
we Christians then be ignorant of him? Certainly, Mar. 4.41.
this were a sin, Job. 31.12.
would eat up all our increase; a fire, would devour to destruction.

this knowledge work? 1 Pet. 1.8.
For who ever knew Christ, but was infl^med with the love of him? Acts 9.6.
Stood in great awe of him? Psalm. 116.7.
Humbled himself before him? Put his confidence in him? And said; Soul,
return unto thy rest? The Ox, Isa. 1.3.
knows his owner, the Ass his masters cribbe; and shall not man be
acquainted with his Lord? Is it not eternal life, Io. 17.3.
to know Christ Jesus? Everlasting death, to be ignorant of him? Tell me? What
was the Gentiles mis^ry, but that they were strangers from him? Ephesians 4.18.
The Athenians sin, but that all their devotion was do e to an unknown God?
Acts. 17.23.
The Lepers ingratefulnesse, Luke 17.17
except that they returned not thanks unto him? And what sets forth Paul's
praise more, Phil. 3.9.
than his earnest desire to know the Lord Jesus, and to be found in him?

to illighten our eyes, that we might see Christ in open vision? For, does not
the Spirit, through the whole Bible, set him forth in pl^ine phrases? Shining
prophecies? In tipes? ^arables? And similitudes? What are the Scriptures, but
the subject matter of him? In each story, page, verse, may we not have some
hint, some glympse of him? Beloved, all the lines in the holy letters, meet in
Christ as their proper Center; And such as come short of that point, are
profitable for nothing. He is the Alpha and Omega, a. o.
Rev. 1.18.
the beginning and end, of all famous h stories, noble acts, and renowned
persons, the which are good before God Shall we then, with the want, root in
the earth? And have no care to know Christ Jesus? What if we know him a little?
Will that serve our turns? No, no: our eye spiritual is like his corporal
who was borne blind, Mar. 8.24.25.
but opened by degrees. This object is profound, deep; And the better we
understand it, the more powerfully profitably will it produce the forenamed
gracious eff cts. Therefore, as get: so grow we must in the knowledge of Christ
Jesus.

The knowledge of Christ distributed.
And here it is to be observed, that the knowledge of Christ is either
intellectual, or experimental. When we do, with the act of our
understanding, apprehend a thing, be it what you will, it is intellectual
knowledge; But we purpose not to exceed our bounds; We will confine our selves,
within the limits of our present Object Christ Jesus.

Now this intellectual knowledge of Christ, is of his person, or offices. For
the former, we are to consider these four following particulars.

1. In Christ, we are to note his two natures, the Divine and Humane; both
which concur, and are hypostatically united to make one individual Person.
Ioh. 1.14.
Heb. 2.16.
The word was made flesh; he took not on him, Mat. 1.23.
the nature of Angels, but he took on him, the seed of Abraham. Whence it is,
that he is called Emanuel, Heb. 10.5.
which being interpreted is, God with us. So that in the Person of Christ, 1
Ioh. 5.20.
was perfect manhood, a body thou have fitted me: And perfect Godhead, this is
the very God, and eternal life.

2. And in the manhood of Christ, observe a soul, and a body; Luke 23.46
A soul; Father into thine hands I commend my Spirit. And a body Behold my
hands and my feet, Luke 24.39.
that it is I my self handle me, and see; For a spirit has not flesh and
bones, as you see me have. Where note by the way, Mat. 26.39
that Christ had a twofold will; one from his Deity, another flowing from his
Humanity. Therefore praying, he said, O my Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. As he was
God, the will of the father and his were the same.

3. Thirdly, He was borne of a Virgin, his mother knew not man: Luke 2.35.
for the Holy Ghost came upon her, and the power of the most high over-shadowed
her. And thus it must be: For if he had proceeded by natural pro^agation,
Psalm. 51.5*
he, in his conception, had bin polluted with orriginall corruption; And then
he could not have bin a meet mediator and holy sacrificer, to have made an
ato^ement for the sins of the people. For such an high Priest it behoved us
to have, Heb. 7.26.
as was holy, harmless, undefiled, separat from sinners, and made higher than
the heavens, in truth, Christ's original purity, is to equal Adams at his
Crea^ion: that the root being holy, all the branches may in like manner. Heb.
7.3.
Christ as man had no Father; as God, no mother: And therefore the true
Melchizedek, without father, without mother.

4. The last thing is, that in the very instant of Christ^ conception, the two
natures were inseparably knit together, and in substance and actions, ever
remained distinct either from other; conserving their proper qualities from all
mixture, or confusion And as the soul and body being united, make one entire
man: so the two natures conjoined, constitute but one individual person. For
(mark this) Christ did not assume to his Deity, the person, but the nature of
man; neither did the humani^ie for a moment subsist by it self; but in the
very act of its conception, was united to the Godhead, and so always continued
for ever after, yea, when Christ's soul and body, at his death, were separated
yet neither of them from the Deity. This union, as it is wonderful: so is it
eternally indissoluble. Thus much of the intelectual knowledge of Christ's
person: his Offices are now to be handled in order.

1. And we will begin with his Priesthood, Heb. 7.11. Levit. 10 2.3. Heb. 5.1.2.
that Christ was a Priest, the Scripture, in many places, speaks evidently:
And who was shadowed out by Aaron and his succ^ssors, but the high Priest of
our souls Christ Jesus? For he was to offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins; to have compassion upon the ignorant; and to make a reconciliation for
them, who were out of the way. And here we may note the differences betwixt the
Priesthood of Christ, and that of others. 1. He was of the tribe of Judah:
they were all of Levi. 2. He was God-man: but they mere men. 3. He was without
sin: they taynted with original corruption, and actual transgression. 4. He
was consecrate with an oath: so were not they. 5. He was of the commandment of
the spirit: they of the law of the flesh. 6. He offered up himself once, as a
full sacrifice to purge a way man's sins: they, other oblations, whereby it
was impossible that iniquity should be taken away 7. He put an end to the
priesthood they made but way to it. 8. Lastly, he was a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchizedek: theirs was often changed. For as John was the lest of
all Prophets: so Christ of all Priests: that is, there was no continuation of
personal succession after him, read, Heb. 7. per totum.

2. The second is, his Prophetical office. Therefore the Scriptures give him
several names importing so much: As of Teacher, Speaker; yea, the very
Prophet. For he was to instruct them in the truth, whom he had reconciled to
his Father. See, Mat. 23.10. Dan. 8.13. Acts 3.22-

3. And Christ had a kingly offlce; that he might conserve and govern those
whom as Prophet he had taught, and as Priest he had reconciled; subduing his,
and their enemies, and to preserve them to his heavenly kingdom. Hence it is
written; A child shall be borne, and a son given us, upon whose shoulder the
Dominion shall lie. Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness: And again,
they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up
unto them. These places, and many more are spoken of Christ Jesus. Consult,
Esaias. 9.6. Ierem. 23.5. and 30.9. Psalm. 2.6. Acts 2.36.

4. Fourthly, and finally, we may mention his Mediator-ship; although (as some
will) the forenamed offices be all comprehended in it: however the holy letters
speak distinctly of it, Mala. 3.1.
calling Christ, Heb. 12.24
the Angel of the covenant the Mediator of the new Testament. Observe here,
that Christ is Med^ator according to both natures: For the manhood without the
Godhead would profit nothing. is one mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5.

Resol.
1. I answer, that our Apostle uses Christ's own phrase, who ordinarily
styles himself the son of man: for he gloried not in swelling titles, 2. It
is a kind of tropicall speech: wherefore by a communication of properties,
Acts. 20.28
we are said to be purchased with the blood of God. 3. Paul so speaks, to
comfort the feeble minded: for when a man is wounded in spirit, by the stroke
of God, the very bare naming of God will make a sinner, in the painful
panges of regeneration, to quake, to tremble, and fall backward. But hearing of
a mediator, who is man, as he is God, Heb. 4 25.16. and 5.1.2.
which is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and in all points
tempted as we are, (yet without sin) we shall lift up our weak minds, go
boldly to the throne of Grace, and find mercy in the time of need. 4. And the
truth is, our mediator is to communicate of both natures: for he must be
inferiror to God, as touching his manhood: And superior to man, as concerning
his Godhead. And this is that intellectual knowledge of Christ's person and
offices that Christians are to get, and grow in. The Experimental follows,
whereof we will speak but a very little, to avoid preplexitie.

This knowledge differs from the former, in diverse particulars. 1. In the
instrument of apprehension: For that is effected, with the rational faculty;
this, with the sensible. 2. That is active; this rather passive falling within
the fathom of our feeling 3. That, without this profits a Christian nothing.
4. The former borrows help from the latter, not the contrary. For
Experimental knowledge seals Intelectuall, that it is true; Philosophy
teaches me, that fire will burn: but if I put my finger into it, the truth is
infallible: For I have felt, what I heard: And hence grows our English
proverb, that Seeing is believing. Ioh. 20.25.
This was verified in Thomas, when he put his fingers into the wounds of Jesus.

And this Experimetnall knowledge of Christ, 1 These. 1.5.
may be in respect of our selus or others. When we feel a change wrought in
our selves, by the Gosp^ll preached: when it has not bin in word only, but in
the powerful operation of the holy Ghost; inlightning our dark minds,
dissolving the cursed work of Satan in us, and renewing us according to the
imag^ of our maker, this is knowledge Experimental. Paul knew this well; felt
by experience, Romans 1.17.
that the Gospel of Christ, was the strong arm of God to salvation. He could
say with sense, I live, and Christ lives in me: He rules, as a king; and I by
his power can do all things. Col. 1. vlt.
He is set in heavenly places; And I am raised together with him. He found the
death of Christ to kill sin in him; Ephesians. 2.6.
the efficacy of his resurrection, raising him up to newness of life; his
Spirit leading him, into all truth; And what petitions he preferred, to God the
Father in his name, never returned empty. This was that excellent knowledge of
Christ, he so much gloried in, 1. Cor. 2.2.
longed after, and by all means sought to increase. And thus to know Christ is
to be somewhat, ^om^body.

And there is an experimental knowledge in regard of others. Heb 4.2.
The Author of the H^b^ewes saw, that the Gosp^ll preached to other by them,
Gal. 2 8.
was without profit, in th m who heard it: because it was not mixed with faith.
Paul sensibly perceiu^d that Peter was mighty in Circumcision, as he himself
was in the vncircumci^ion. 1 These. 1.9.
And he observed, what a great entrance he had among the Thessalonians. He
also gives God thanks, 2 Cor. 2.14
which caused them to triumph in Christ: and made manifest the savor of his
knowledge by them, in every place. And thus you have demonstrated, what is that
knowledge, both intellectual and experimental, Christians are to increase in.
The application follows.

may confute many heretical opinions about the Person and Offices of Christ
Jesus. And First, that of the Patro passians; who mainetained how that God the
Father took our flesh, and suffered. But is it not said, that in the fullness
of time, God sent his Son made of a woman, and made under the Law. Gal. 4.4

Christ is called Father, Isa. 9.6.

It is true, Resol.
that Christ in many respects may be called Father.

1. Because he created all things. For it is usual with the Hebrews, to style
that, whether person or thing, a Father, which is the cause or ground thereof.
Genesis 4.21.
Hence Iubal is said to be the Father of all such as handle the Harp and
Organ. And in Job, shafts and bullets are called the Sons of the bow: as if
it were their Father. 2. Heb. 10.13
Christ is a Father, in that he begat many by the word of truth: 1. Cor. 4.15
and in that sense, Paul tells the Corinths, that he was their Father. 3. In
regard that he is the vine, and we as branches united to him. When a graft is
set into the stock, Ioh. 15.1. etc. Ioh. 1.12.13. 1. Cor. 15.22.45.49.
the Hebrew manner is to call it a Son of that tree. 4. But chiefly as the
first Adam is our Father, because we are all his sons by natural
propagation: so is Christ our Father, in as much as through him we are children
by regeneration and adoption. He who makes Sons is a father. Christ makes
Sons. Ergo a Father.

Col. 1.15.
Secondly, the Arrians: their heresy was, that Christ was God by Office, not by
Nature: how he was first created, then all things by him. For he is said to be,
the beginning of every creature. Rev. 3.14.

Resol.
1. And it is also written, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God; Ioh. 1.1.
And the word was God. 2. He is the beginning of every creature; Because he
gave them their first being: And after man's fall, their well being. 3. But did
he give the creatures a being? Then is he God. For to Creat, requires an
infinite power; the which can be found in no Creature, but in God only.

Thirdly, this meets with Samosetanus heretical opinion, who held that Christ
was not, before he took upon him man's nature: as though his Deity began with
his Humanity. But what more absurd? For God has neither beginning, nor end:
if he had, he were not God.

Fourthly, And that of Apollinaris falls to the ground, who thought that
Christ assumed a body only, And the Godhead was instead of a soul. But he
assumed the whole nature of man: Therefore a soul. Again, the soul of Adam
was the beginner of his Act in sinning: a soul therefore is to suffer. And did
not Christ cry, my soul is heavy to the death? Luke 23.46
And commit it into the hands of his Father at his giving up of the Ghost?

Fifthly, Marcian and Valentinus are here confuted: these taught, how Christ
took his body from the air, or from heaven, And that it passed through the
womb of the Virgin, as water flows through a conduit, Ephesians. 5.30.
or pipe. But this is evidently false: for then he had not bin bone of our
bone, and flesh of our flesh: Neither had that nature satisfied, which sinned.

Sixthly, Hebion and Cerinthus, these defended, that Christ was conceived by
ordinary generation, Luke 1.34.35.
as other men: which is a flat contradiction of the Angels speech, and would
bring the humane nature of Christ within the compass of original pollution.
Ioh. 3.6.
For whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and how can the stream be
pure, when as the fountain is defiled?

Seventhly, And that of Nestorius may not be admitted, who divided the persons;
one God, the other man. To hold this opinion would breed confusion.

Eighthly, Acts 3.22.
We may not omit the error of the Monothelits; these say Christ had but one
will; 1. Cor. 11.26.
as if his soul had been deprived, of its proper faculty.

Ninthly, And that of the Vbiquists, who held that the body of Christ, at one
time, might be in many places. But is it not written, that the heavens shall
contain him, until the restoration of all things? And if it were so, why are
we commanded, to wait till he come? Or enjoined, to receive the Bread and
Wine, in remembrance of him? By all this you may see, what need we have to grow
in the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. For all heresies, in the dogmaticall
points of faith, are in, and about him. And may we not also from this ground,
confute and reject the doctrine of the Romanists? For do they not extol
ignorance in the common people, to the skies? Trample the knowledge of Christ,
as mire under foot? Esteem it a matter of no moment? Better lost, than found?
See their notes on the Bible, view their books, consult with their Councels,
listen to their Decrees; And tell me, if this thing be not true? But shall we
think this Apostle, to be in an error? Beside himself, when he penned this
Epistle? Or may we safely imagine, the Laity were not to learn it? Was that
good for Paul (I mean the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3 8.
) but naught for the people? Were this their Tenent sound; for what end did the
Lord write the law, Neh. 8.3.
with his own finger? Command it to be read before men, women, children? Was
not all this labor in vain, if ignorance were not to be blown away? Acts
2.4. etc.
Why had the Apostles all tongues, but that all nations might learn to
understand the Gospel? 2. Tim. 4.2.
For what purpose was the Evangelist charged, to Preach in season, out of
season? Or false Teachers checked, 1 Cor. 14.6
for Prophesying in an unknown and strange language? What praise can redound to
good Iehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 19.8. 2 Timothy 3.15
who sent Levits through his land? To Lois, Eunice, for training up Timotheus
in the holy letters of a child? If knowledge were not necessary in the vulgar
sort? Our adversaries will not, for all this, stick to affirm, that ignorance,
is the mother of devotion, among the common multitude: But we may more truly
say, that she is the step-damme of two cursed twins; superstition, and
profaneness. For take but a strict view of the inhabitants of our Northren
parts, where the most know nothing, as they ought to know; 1. Cor. 8.2.
And shall we not find, how they be like Elies Sons, openly wicked? Or, as
the Athenians, wholly addicted to Idolatry? Acts. 17.16
Wherefore, this wisdom of theirs is not from above, Iam. 3.15.16.17
pure, peaceable, easy to be entreated, and full of good works: But from
below, sensual, earthly, and devilish. Thus we leave them to do with their
own, what, and as they will.

Papists, notwithstanding tread in their steps. For have they any knowledge of
Christ Jesus? Do they discern betwixt Law, and Gospel Precept, or promise?
The new way, or the old? Ask them, who, or what Christ is? And can they tell?
Truly, they understand not whether he be Jew, or Gentile; Male, or Female. They
hope he is a good man; And why should they not? These come short of Satan's
confession: he could say, what have I to do with thee, Mar. 5.7.
thou Son of God? Thou Jesus of Nazaret? Mat. 20.30
The blind beggar might read such a lecture, who prayed O thou Son of David,
have mercy upon me. So these men's back^s be clothed, and their bellies filled
their grounds stocked, and their lusts satisfied, they care no more for the
knowledge of Christ (as our proverb has it,) than a Swine for a pe^rl^, Act.
18.25.
or the devil for holy water. They think religion, with Gall^, 1 Pet. 3.^5
to be bu^ a matter of ^ames and ^ords. No reason can they render of their
faith. The best sign of their Christendom is, that they were b^ptized: and,
O, that their lives would testify so much! But if they cry out, they are no
drunkards, nor swearers; no thieves, nor usurers; nor Papists, nor Puritans;
go to Church hear a Sermon, receive (as they call them) their Easter
rightings and contribute to a Preacher, why then they imagine they have struck
all dead. We can, (say the best sort of such) our Creed, and our confession;
our ten Commandments, and our Pater noster; And what need we more? Will not
this serve our turn? Who would not pity these people? And mourn for their
misery? What heart so hard, will not weep over our Ierusal^m? Luke 19.41
And with Jeremy, wish, that his eyes were a fountain of tears, Ier. 9.1.
to bewail the sla^ne of the daughter of this igno^a^t nation? What sin more
dangerous? More general than this, no knowledge of Christ Jesus? And what
less regarded? Lamented? Every man in his place, strives to be his
crafts-master; ignorance of al kinds is hated, condemned: yet, this we have in
hand, is too much affect^d, has great and many friends May not the Prophet^ of
these times, cry with them of former ages, Isa. 49.4.
we have spent our strength in v^ine? Hos 4.6.
And the people perish for want of knowledge? Hear this, O ye sons of Adam!
2 These. 1.8.
Will not God come in flaming fire, to render vengeance upon all who know him
not? Mat, 15.14
And if the blind lead the blind, shall not both fall into the ditch of
condemnation? Understand this at the last; that ignorance is the road way to
death and hell; And whosoever treades her hidden steps, shall take up his
lodging in the land of everlasting darkness. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked: For what a man sows, that shall he reap. He therefore, who
scatters the seeds of ignorance, shall gather the ricke of endless
perdition, and destruction.

much knowledge of Christ, as through the unsearchable mercy of God, may serve
to save your souls: be not content therewith, but be filled with Spiritual
wisdom, Col. 1 9.
and understanding. The more thou see into this mystery, the greater will be
thy admiration. Take a strict view of the secret work of the whole frame of
nature, with the most skillful and curiou^ inventions of profoundest men, alas!
the better we understand them, the lesser is our astonishment at them. But it
is not So with this, and these things we have in hand. For as our knowledge
increases ^f Christ, and of his acts of old, the more wonderful will they
appear unto us; because no found reason can be rendered of the form of his
person, or many of his proceed ^gs. And truly, as our ^nowl^dge is augmented,
our love will be inflamed, our faith confirmed; And all the actions of grace,
the which fl^w from us, bettered A man o^ understanding is of an excellent
spirit. Pro. 7 27.
His affections burn within him, his confid^nce is immovable, and his hope
never fails, faints, why was Paul so resolute to do all things? 2 Timothy 1.12
Suffer all things? He knew him whom he had trusted: that the Gosp^ll was the
power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16.
the which he Preached, professed. O that we could tread in this man's stepps!
be like minded to him! He would rejoice in nothing, but Christ; speak and
spread nothing but him: 1 Cor. 1.1. etc.
He was never weary in naming of him; and therefore in nine verses, he
ten-times makes mention of him. Christ was the object of his understanding,
will, affections, faith, fear; Col. 3.11.
yea all in all. How would he chant it with his tongue, pen, when he smelled
this sweet savor? Pleasant odor? This sent, like sugar, did sweeten all the
bitter sorrows he sustained: like a precious grain of Musk, perfumed his
most stinking afflctions. What marvel then, if he desired to know nothing
else, but Christ Jesus, and him crucified? 1 Cor. 2.2.
For what is the exactest knowledge without him? But a blind, unprofitable
science? Faith? But a wild, groundless confidence? Patience? Except a stupid,
senseless blockishnesse? Or any internal habits? Moral actions? But sour
grapes? Glistering vices? And though unto some this may seem a paradox; yet a
Christians, who has a sound mind, is a thorowly-well furnished Artists; A
Logician: For he can argue, disput; and render a reason of his religion, by the
never-erring dictate of the spirit. A Gra^marian; who speaks, and that
distinctly, with a new tongue, the language of Canaan, as a Saint an Angel. A
Rhetorician: for he is able, by his pronunciation, to pierce the highest
heavens, procure audience, and prevail with the King. A Geometrician:
measuring the height, depth, and breadth of the best and greatest Globe, the
Love of God. An Arithmetician: numbering the days of old, and future ages;
sins pardoned, prevented; judgments inflicted, removed; favors conferred,
promised; and all things, how they are now ordered; and in their due season,
for ever shall be established. A deep Eagle-eyed Philosopher; that discernes
betwixt grace and nature, flesh and spirit; And (O great secret) how the body,
follows the temperature of the soul in a regenerate Person. Without
controversy, he who knows Christ, knows all things: he that is ignorant of
him, 1. Cor. 81.2
nothing as he ought to know. And in this sense, as many more, Christ may be
said to be all in all, to Jew, Gentile; Col. 3.11.
to Barbarian, Scythian.

purblind want, and dul-sighted moale, get wisdom, get understanding of
Christ, and forget not. Seek into these mysteries, search into these so
profound depths: for they are more precious than pearls; And all thou can
desire, are not to be compared to them. Means thou have, if thou have an
heart, motives strong and many, if thou will be allured. He who would be
skillful in any science, will he not read, the cho^cest authors? Purchase the
most ancient manu-scripts? And be a companion to the cunning Artist? Shall we
not then does is, and more too, for the gaining of so excellent knowledge? What
if it make not such a stir, and rattling in the world, as others? Is any like
it? To be equalled to it? If thou wander in thy spiritual progress, Ioh 16 6.
is not Christ thy leader? Art thou in doubt? Is not he the author? Heb. 12.2.
Finisher of thy faith Do thou faint; he is thy life, and length of days.
Deu. 30.20
Are not the holy letters, the swadling-bands wherein the babe Jesus is
wrapped? That I say not, the express image of his person? 1 Cor. 9.22
Is he not made all things, compared to all things that he might win some of
each rank to know him? Ioh. 6.35.
Thy Bread and Wine, do represent him thy apparel put thee in mind of Rom 13.14
him; and thy lying down, resemble his lying down of his life for thee. Is
not thy rising up, Romans 13.14
a type of his resurrection? Or by way of allusion might be? When thou pe^pest
into thy well-stored Chest, it will call to remembrance, the Arc of the
Covenant for Christ, Ioh. 10 7. Ioh. 15.10. Cant 2.1.
as it kept the Law of righteousness for us. I am the door, says he, that
thy out-going and in-coming might be in his name, with his leave. Let the trees
of the forest teach thee: the Roses of the field tell thee: the light instruct
thee: and the Rocks, Ioh. 1.9.
give thee to understand. What obi^ct liable to sense, Christ assumes not to
himself, that he might gain some? Or leave them without excuse, who will not
l^arne? Princes and poor pers^nes, point at him: Hills and Valleys, are not
without refer^nce to him: Bulls and Heifers, Rams and Lambs, Kine and Calves,
when they low and bleate, give some glimpse of him, call unto him. Does God all
this for no end? No, no, he would have us to look through the creatures, as so
many opticke glasses, more clearly to apprehend the Lord Jesus Christ should
be still in our hearts and hands; words and actions; all Christ, nothing but
Christ. He who desires to know, or affect any person, before him, equal to
him, or without him, is but carnal. For in all relations of husbands, Mat. 22
49
wives, children, friends, We should mind him: And where he is formed, we must
fix our affection, on nothing ese, no where else. Let but a gracious man walk
in the desert, thus he says to himself, in the like place was my Lord
tempted: Mat 4.1.
rest on the top of an h^l^, he minds the morn^ from whence he ascended:
Acts. 1.10.11.
throw up his head, and behold how the wind drives away the dark clo^des,
then he thinks, these are the Chario^s which carried away my master; And one
of these days, he wi l r^turne ryd^^g on them: They rejoice his soul as much,
as Joseph's wagon did his aged father, Genesis 4 5.27.
when he saw it came to fetch him; his Spirit is stirred, reviued in him. What
can I more say? How should I move thee? Induce thee? No Satisf^ction, but by
Jesus; going to the father without him; or hope of heaven, but in him, Consider
now what I have said; 2 Timothy 2.7
and the Lord g ue thee understanding in these things. Amen.

Of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.

Not to collect all we might from this twofold relation; we will only insist
of this doctrine, that

Christ Jesus is man's Savior.

I say man's; not the Ang^l^. 1. For the good, they are the elect of God, kept
their station, 1 Timothy 5.21
obeyed his command; and so are confirmed in a condition of everlasting
blessedness. 2. And for the bad; they (as some will) fell from God without any
tempter; And therefore he left them without a mediator. Or (as others hold)
sinned unto death; And so are secluded from all grace and mercy, Iud. 6.
reserved in the everlasting chains of darkness, against the judgment of the
great day. Heb. 2.16.
Howeuer it be (sure I am) that Christ assumed not their nature: and therefore,
he is none of their Savior.

And Christ Jesus is man's savior, if we consider his Sufficiency. Efficiencie.


His Sufficiency is that whereby he is able to save the lapsed posterity of
Adam.

And it consists in his two natures the Godhead Manhood


God, our Savior must be, for these following reasons.

1 Timothy 2.6.
1. That Adams sin, and his satisfaction might be proportionable: an infinite
justice being ofended, requires an equal satisfaction. Man's sin was
infin^te in regard of the object Person he offended: Christ's sufferings are
infinite in respect of the dignity of his Person who satisfied. And as finite
sins, infinitely offended the infinite God? So finite sufferings, infinitely
satisfied the infinite God.

2. And had not our Savior bin God, how could he have overcome Satan, Death,
Hell, and all the Churches enemies? Luke 11.22.
If a strong man possess the house, a stronger than he must dispossess him,
take the spoil from him. This is he, Isa. 63.1.2.
who came from Edom with Garments dyed, from Bozrah travailing in his strength,
speaking in righteousness, mighty to save; whose apparel was red, like him
who treads the wine fat.

3. And what? May a surety undertake a debt, the discharge whereof would bring
damage to himself? were not this, Eccle 7.16
to be just overmuch? To exceed, and go beyond our bounds? Now of Christ had
not bin God, how should he have laid down his life, which took was part of
the payment, and took it up again without detriment and loss to his own
person? But being God, he might, he did; And gained glory by so doing.

4. This also was necessary, that the justice of the Father might certainly
be satisfied; and man's salvation not contingent, doubtful. For Christ the
surety, being God, it was impossible he should sin, be seduced, or fail in
the performance of his promise, keeking of his covenant: had he bin as Adam
was, but a mere man, he might have bin overcome by temptation; and then the
Creditor had come short of his paymen^, the debtor of his Salvation. ^er. 17.5.
And is not a curse threatened to him, who trusts in man? Job. 15.15.
Makes flesh his arm? And was there any stedfastnes found in the very Angels?

And man Christ must be; else no sufficient savior.

1 Job. 19.25
1. That being our kinsman according to the flesh, he might have a true title
and propriety to redeem us, who by sin like Esau, have sold our
inheritance. Lev. 25.24.
And this the Law required; for the redemption of a brothers land, Ier. 32 7.
recovering his possession, And raising up of seed unto him. Ruth. 4.4.

2. And in that he might be subject to the Law, liable to passion: Gal 4.4.
for the Godhead is not bound to obedience, is impatible; neither in any
tolerable sense, may be reputed accursed.

3. It was the Humane nature, Heb. 7.22.
whereby God was offended, that suffered, and through the which his justice was
to be satisfied. And is not this equal? Romans 3.26.

4. Finally, he must be man, Heb. 2.27. and 4.15.
else how could he have a fellow-feeling of our infirmities? Comfort us in all
our miseries? And succor them who are tempted? It remains therefore for an
infallible truth that the sufficiency of our Sav our consists in his two
natures; the manhood, made subject to passion, passion; And the Godhead, gave
dignity to his sufferings. Now we are to speak of Christ's efficiencie; what it
is, and wherein it consists.

The efficiencie of Christ is that, whereby he works all in all things
necessar ly required for man's salvation:

And it consists in Doing. Suffering.


The Law after man's fall exacted a double debt: the one, in that it was not
observed; the other, for that it was transgressed. Wherefore Christ our Savior
must not only by his active obedience, discharge the principal: but by his
passive, give satisfation also for the forfeiture. And has he not wrought this
great work for us? Is not his Sufficiency brought into act? For Jesus is
dead, risen again, 1 These. 4.14.
has fulfilled all righteousness, and fitteth at the right hand of God to
make intercession for us. 1 Ioh. 2.1.
When he said it was finished, it immediately was finished. For the debt is
discharged, the payment accepted; the bond cancelled, and the Quittance
received. May we not then conclude, that Christ Jesus is man's Savior? Man's, I
say, not the Angels.

Origin, who defended, that after fifty years of Jubilees, the Devils should
through Christ be saved. But are they not rejected of God? Is not their final
doom denounced? Where have they any promise made to them in the holy letters?
Were the Prophets and Apostles sent to preach to the Apostat Angels? And do
they not, in that saying, Mat. 8 29.
(art thou come to torment us before the time?) manifest despair and condemn
themselves? Some affirm, that this was a Godly error: but the least
abberration from the truth, is a sin: And why should any man seem more
merciful, than his maker.

of the Jew, who denies Christ Jesus, and expects another Savior. But where
is the tribe of Judah, out of which he should spring? The family of David, of
whose seed he should come? Bethlehem, wherein he should be borne? Jerusalem
into which it was Prophesied, he should ride on an Asses foale? The second
temple, in the which he was to be seen? Or the Arc of the Covenant, that was
a real type of him? And what people can those be, whom the Prophet has
foretold, that for many days, shall be without a King, a Prince, Hos. 3.4.
a Sacrifice an Im^ge, an Ephod, and a Teraphim, if not the Jews? For of them,
and none other nation under heaven, at this season can it be verified. They
cried crucifi^, crucify h m; and let his blood be upon us and our posterity:
and does not the curse follow them as they wished? Who so ignorant, but may see
it? Or incredulous, does not believe it? Certainly, the fell opposition of the
Gospel, the success, not withstanding it has, and the great portion of the
Spirit which is powered on the common people, had we no other arguments, may
seal this truth unto us, that Christ Jesus is alre^dy come, 2. Cor. 3.16.
and is our only Lord and Savior. Pray we therefore for this dispersed and
despised generation, that the veil may be taken from their eyes, and they
turned to the Lord. Let us again and again petition the God of all spirits,
to open their dark minds, that they may see him whom they have pierced, mourn,
as Hadadrimon in the valley of Megiddo return to their maker that there may be
one sheep and one shepherd. The time was, when we were without God, without
Christ, and they remembered us; then, in the depth of this their misery, let not
us be unmindful of them: but wish unfeignedly and continually, that Judah may
dwell in the Tents of Iaphet.

Christ Jesus be man's Savior: Let us all be acquainted with him, love him,
praise him; And place our whole confidence in him. Who would be ignorant of
such a friend? Not affect him of whom he is so much affected? Bless him, from
whom we receive all good things? And rely on him, who is all-sufficient to
relieve them that seek unto him? For whom do thou keep the prime of thy
affecti ns? Is any more worthy of them? In whom dare thou fix thy faith?
Man? Or Angel? Who des rues the glory of this great work? Any but Christ,
who trod the wine press alone? And that this doctrine might the more mo^e thee
to ex^cute all obedience due to the Lord Jesus, cons^der wi h thy self, what
it is to be saved.

In the Scriptures Salvation has a sweet sound: it, like the nomination of a
King, carries a great Majesty with it; the one and other rings a pleasant
peale to the soul, as Aarons bells did to the ear in the Sanctuary. Mark, I
pray thee; Is it a small matter, to be son in law to a King? Naball made a
feast, like a King. The Corinths did reign as Kings, under this word King,
what is not, to be desired, comprehended? Shall we not hear as much of that we
have now in hand? Hear my beloved brethren! Lord! Thou art my s^rength, and my
Salvation. Behold, I bring you glad-tydings of Salva^ion. Let me now go hence
in peace: for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Restore me to the form^r joy
of thy Salvation. But because many h^are it, f^w vnd^rstand it; we will insist a
little to unfold it:

Salvation, strictly taken, Salvation defined.
is a preservation from evi l. God first creates, then conserveth: for a thing
must have a being, before it can be saved. Non Ens is not incident to
perdition, damnation. For accidents cleave to real subjects, as the Art of
Logic truly teaches Conserva^ion immediately succeeds, Creation; and
gub^rnation, conservation. For when a thing is, it may be conserved: And being
so, governed. Now be it person or thing, if kept from evil, it may be said to
be saved: Psalm 36.6.
In this sense the Lord saves m^n, beast; all cr^ated things, the which are
not consumed annihilat^d.

Consider, that the evil from the which he saves, is or sin, or punishment;
And the former is the cause o^ the latter. The evil of sin ^s twofold;
^riginall, and actual: both of which Christ has freed us from. For our
depraved nature, through the powerful operation of his Spirit, by degrees shall
be repaired: And our actual transgr^ssions shall be remitted, never laid to our
charge. Now for the evil of punishment, it is manifold; some whereof we will
mention.

1. The principal is, the wrath and revenging justice of God the Father, Heb
10 31
into whose angry hands it is a fearful thing to fall: For his frowning
countenance, like a pinching frost the tender grass causes the whole glory
of man to dye, to wither. Rom 5.20
But through the death of Christ, of enemies we are made loving friends.

2. A second is, the rigor and cruel heavy threat of the m^rall law; Acts
15.10.
a burd^n that we nor our fathers were able to bear; but being imposed, press
us down into the lowest depth of the bottomless pit. Now Christ has took
this yoke from off our shoulder, Mat. 3.15.
by fulfilling all righteousness; so making peace.

3. Another is, the rage and implacable malice of the Devil. For our Captain
Christ, Genesis 3.15.
has loosed his strong holds, 1 Ioh. 3.8.
dissolved his cursed works, bruised his head, and made frustrate his
exploites: So that we shall combat with, conquer, overcome him. For does not
the Lamb take our part? Rev. 17.14.


4. The fourth is, the guilt, and sting of conscience, whose worm would have
still knawed us at the heart, sucked our blood and haunted us, as the evil
Spirit did Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14.
till the day of our dissolution. A ^ounded Conscience, who can bear it? Pro.
18.14.
A bide it? It is the extremest of all extremities: not to be matched.

5. A fifth is, the many ugly fearful m^shapen form s of death. Has not
the sight of this horrid monster, made the stoutest, strongest hearts to
trem^le? Was Pha^aoh (think we) a puling babe? Exodus 12.31
Bal^hazzar, and Naball, Dan. 5 6.
No bodies? Yet hearing of this Sergeant, 1 Samuel 25.
did not their spirits fail within them? But, thanks be to ^od, we have
obtained victory, 1 Cor. 15.55.
against this guest, through Jesus Christ.

6. The last is, from hell: Job. 10.22.
an house of darkness, dread, terror; Mat 8.12.
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Psalm. 120.5
Egypt to this place, might have been a Paradise; Meshech and Kedar, Cities
of content. Thus you see in parcells (though but in part) what we are saved
from. But consider Salvation in his largest latitude, then this is not all. For
it is not only, a preservation from all evil of s^nne and punishment: but a
procuration of every good thing; and an everlasting tenure in respect of both.
For that which makes man's Salvation complete, is the constant freedom from
all the evils, Rev. 21.4.
with the fruition of all good things which can be mentioned; Yea much more, 1
Cor. 2.9.
than eye has ever seen, ear heard; or has entered into the heart of man and
that for ever and ever. Psalm. 16.11


Objected, that we are not thus saved: For original sin is not abolished,
actual prevented, nor the evil of punishment from mankind remooved: we are
also weak in grace, of small ability to do well, and dwell among the
Serpents seed, in a land of war.

Resol.
What of all this? Consider, that the Scripture calls things which yet are not
(for the certainetie thereof) as though they were already consummat, Psalm. 2.7.
perfect.

Gods justice, to defer a discharge, when by the Surety his justice is
satisfied, and the full deb^ discharged?

Why not? 1. For when the Law was violated, Resol.
the highest measure of Death and damnation was not immediately inflicted, but
by degrees: may not the Lord then for a season, reserve the liberty of his
mercy, as he did of his justice? What lets? 2. Again, though Christ
undertook the payment for man's ransom, and was the Lamb slain from the
beginning; Yet was it not actually discharged, until Christ had actually
suffered; which was, after man's fall, many hundreds of years. Now if the
Surety defer the payment, why may not the Creditor the remotion of the
punishment an equal season? 3. Thirdly, the promises, as the threats of God,
for the times execution of them, are with limitation, reservation. The threat
runs thus: Thou shall dye: The promise thus: Thou shall live: no distinct
time being mentioned. Who then has cause to complain against Gods
proceedings? At the fullness of time, which he with him self has reserved,
man shall be saved. 4. And Finally, were we borne withour original corruption,
kept from actual transgression, freed from all kinds of afflictions; And
should in a moment, partake of the fullness of Salvation, we should not so
clearly apprehend the justice and mercy of God the Father, the love and
p^ttie of Christ our Sureti^, nor the worth of our Salvation. What if a father
ransom his child, is it amiss to let him lie a time in bonds? Fetters? No,
no: his purchased freedom by that means, will be in his apprehension, the
more wor^h, better welcome, being afterward inioyed. Thus you have a glympse,
as through a small crevise, Ioh 13.17.
of your Savior whom; and of Salvation, what they are: Now blessed are ye, if
you make the true use of them. Prove 3 3.
Wherefore, set these things before thine eye, press them on thine heart; And
let them never slip out of thy mind. Psalm. 1.2.
Was it so great a favor for the Israelites, 2 Samuel 18.3
to have David for their King? To be freed from the Law of the Medes and
Persians? Hest. 8.16.
Delivered, after seventie years Captivity, out of Babylon? Genesis 33.10
For Jacob to be reconciled, to his angry brother Esau? Naaman to be cured of
his Leprosy? 2 King. 5.15
The poor woman, healed of her bloud^e issue? And Nabuchadnezzar, Mar. 5.2.5.
to be restored to his kingdom? Dan. 4.36.
Than, what is this we have in hand? What words can suffice, to chalk out the
worth of Christ's Person? Or man's salvation? All mercies, are miseries: all
miseries, mercies to it, and him. May not a Christian, upon a far better
ground, 2 Samuel 1 26.
than David of his Jonathan, say of Jesus, very kind have thou been unto me?
Make inquiry, is ther^ none of Gods family, 2 Samuel 9.1
to whom I may show favor for Jesus sake? Exodus 15.
Did Moses make a Psalm, being delivered out of the hands of Pharaoh? Judge. 5.
Deborah sing a song, when Sisera was slain? The people shout, when the Arc
came back, that the earth rang again? 1 Samuel 4.5.
And old Jacob, weep for joy, Joseph being yet alive? Gen 45.14
Will it then well become Christians, to be sad, dumpish, melancholy, seeing
Christ and Salvation be come to their houses? When I cast mine eye, take a
strict view of such as are accounted Christians, would be reputed forward
Professors, how they hang the head, fould their arms, fetch deep sighs and
bitter, think I then, Jesus? Thou art sure but a name; salvation but a sound:
else why should men be so dead? So heauie-hearted? May not worldlings, who only
have their portions in this life, rise up in judgment against us? For are not
they more merry? More iocund than we Christians? Whence should this wrong to
Christ, this disparagement to salvation proceed? Is the sacred blood of the
immaculate Lamb, exhausted? Heb. 12.24.
Does it not still speak better things, than that of Abels? What? Is Salvat
on, worn away? Grown worse, in this last age of the world? Or do men
imagine, that now they are borne without souls, as some of H^ly-fax Nuttes
grow ripe, yet want kernels? Surely we may fear, there be some who think so.
For what do our Gallants, but swear by Jesus: Our poor* the shame and stain
of our nation, except beg in his name? O Jesus? Thou art little known, less
regarded: And Salvation? Seldom talked on, naught set by. But O thou man of
God, who by experience have felt the worth of thy freedom, run to Jesus,
hug him in thine arms, Romans 16 16
salute him with an holy-kisse, make him the Crown of thy joy, and thy only
Companion: Build him a Temple, sing praises to his sacred person, and
consecrate thy whole self, not a Leg, or an Arm unto him. 1. Cor. 4.7.
For what have thou, that from him, and by him, and for him, Rev. 4.11.
thou have not received? Christ to a Christian, must be all in all; all in all
things. What is wealth without Christ, but rotten stinking dung? Purple, and
fine linen, but polluted menstruous clouts? A stately Palace? But a very
Pesthouse? I say more; how that all love without Christ, is but passion, zeal
fury, joy madness; And hope but despair. All therefore he must be, or we are
nothing at all. Would thou be that wise Merchant? Mat. 13.
Then sell all the little that thou have, to buy this Pearl, to compass this
Commodity. What wealth of more worth? What gain equal to this? Wherefore go,
get thee to Jesus, for the matter of thy justification. Mix not thy puddle,
with his Purple blood; thy rags, with his Kingly costly raiment; thy best
deeds, with his unmatchable dignity: Blend not thy Pigeon plumes, with these
Eagles feathers; thy sour gourd, with this swtete Grape, least thy garments
defile thee, thy food empoyson thee; and death be found in the pot. Flee to
the fountain Jesus, to fill thy empty vessel with the water of
Sanctification. Drink heartily thereof, and be satiate. Shall he save thee,
and want power to Sanctify thee? Or is the Spirit unable, unwilling to apply
the whole purchase? Is it safe to think, that the second Adam has not
recouerd, what the first lost? And if he have, shall not we be partakers of it?
Then lay thy policy, bend thy might, and endeavor thy self, to support his
praise, reserve his fame, who has Saved thy Soul. But, (alas!) many esteem,
prize, value an Hawke, an Hound a Cock, a Card; a Ruff, and Cuffe before
Christ and Salvatition: I say no more of such, or to such; but I wish that
another day, it be not deeply laid to their charge. Amen.

FINIS.

