THE ESSAYS OF APRENTISE, IN THE DIVINE ART OF POESY.

Imprinted at Edinbrugh, by Thomas Vautroullier. 1584.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

THE CATALOGVE OF THE workis heirin contained.
THe tvvelf Sonnets of Inuocations to the Goddis.
The Vranie or heavenly Muse translated.
The Metaphorical Inuentioun of a Tragedy, callit Phoenix.
A Paraphrasticall translatioun out of the Poet Lucane.
A treatise of the airt of Scottis Poesy.
The CIIII. Psalm of David, translated out of Tremellius.
A Poem of Time.
SONNET.
IF Martial deeds, and practice of the pen
Have won to ancient Greece a worthy fame.
If Battles bold, and Books of learned men
Have magnified the mighty Romain name:
Then place this Prince, who well deserves the same:
Since he is one of Mars and Pallas race:
For both the Godds in him have set in frame
Their vertewes both, which both, he does embrace.
O Macedon, adornde with heavenly grace,
O Romain stout, decorde with learned skill,
The Monarks all to thee shall quite their place:
Thy endless fame shall all the world fulfill.
And after thee, none worthier shall be seen,
To sway the Svvord, and gain the Laurel green.
T. H.
SONNET.
THE glorious Grekis in stately style do blaise
The lawde, the conqurour gave their Homer old:
The verses Caesar song in Maroes praise,
The Romany in remembrance deep have rolde.
Ye Thespian Nymphs, that suppe the Nectar cold,
That from Parnassis forked topp does fall,
What Alexander or Augustus bold,
May sound his fame, whose vertewes pass them all?
O Phoebus, for thy help, heir might I call,
And on Minerue, and Maias learned son:
But since I know, none was, none is, nor shall,
Can rightly ring the fame that he has won,
Then stay your travels, lay your pennis adowne,
For Caesar's works, shall justly Caesar crown.
R. H.
SONNET.
The mighty Father of the Muses nine
Who mounted them upon Parnassus hill,
Where Phoebus fair amidd these Sisters syne
With learned tongue satt teaching ever still,
Of late yon God declared his woundrous will,
That Vranie should teach this Prince most rare:
Syne she informed her scholar with such skill,
None could with him in Poesy compaire.
Lo, heir the fructis, Nymphe, of thy foster fair,
Lo heir (o noble Jove) thy will is done,
Her charge compleit, as deid does now declaire.
This work will witness, she obeyed the sone.
O Phoebus then rejoice with glauncing glore,
Since that a King does all thy court decore.
M. VV.
SONNET.
WHen as my mind exemed was from caire,
Among the Nymphis my self I did repose:
Where I gave ear to one, who did prepaire
Her sugared voice this sequel to disclose.
Conveine your selfs (o sisters) do not lose
This passing time which hastes fast away:
And you who wrytes in stately verse and prose,
This glorious Kings immortal gloire display.
Tell how he does in tender year is essay
Above his age with skill our arts to blaise.
Tell how he does with gratitude repay
The crown he wan for his deserved praise.
Tell how of Jove, of Mars, but more of God
The gloire and grace he has proclaimed abrod.
M. W. F.
SONNET.
CAN goldin Titan shyning bright at morn
For light of Torchis, cast ane greater shaw?
Can Thunder reard the heicher for a horn?
Craks Cannons louder, thought ane Cok sold craw?
Can our weak breath help Boreas for to blaw?
Can Candill low give fire a greater heit?
Can quhytest Svvans more quhyter make the Sn^vv?
Can Virgins tears augment the Vinters weit?
Helps pyping Pan Apollos Music sweit?
Can Fountanis small the Ocean sea incresse?
No, they augment the greater nocht a quheit:
Bot they them selves appears to grow the less.
So (worthy Prince) thy works sall make the knawin.
Ours helps not thine: we steynie bot our awin.
A. M.
De huius Libri Auctore, Herculis Rolloci coniectura.
QVisquis es, entheus hic exit quo Auctore libellus,
(Nam liber Auctorem conticet ipse suum)
Dum quonam ingenio meditor, genioque subactus,
Maiora humanis viribus istacanas:
Teque adeo quisis expendo: aut Diuus es, inquam,
Aut a Diuum aliquis sort secundus homo.
Nil sed habet simile aut Diuis, aut terra secundum:
Quanquam illis Reges proximus ornat honos.
Aut opus hoc igitur humano semine nati
Nullius, aut hoc sic Regis oportet opus.
ACROSTICHON.
I Nsigne Auctoris vetuit praefigere nomen
A uctorus cuncta pectus vacuum ambitione.
C uius praeclaras lauds, heroica facta,
O mnigenasque animi dotes, and pectora vere
B elligera, exornat coelestis gratia Musae.
V era ista omnino est virtus, virtuteque mayor
S ublimis regnat generoso inpectore Christus.
S cottia fortunata nimis, bona situa nosses
EX imij vatis, plectrum qui pollice docto
T emperat, and Musas regalem inducit in aulam:.
V icturus post fata diu: Nam fama superstes
S emper erit, semper florebit gloria vatis.
Pa. Ad. Ep. Sanct.
EIVSDEM AD LECTOREM
EPIGRAMMA.
SI quaeras quis sit tam compti carminis auctor,
Auctorem audebis Musa neg are tuum?
Ille quidem vetuit, cuite parere necesse est:
Quis tantum in Diuas obtinet imperium?
Cui parent Musae, Phoebus quo vate superbit,
Et capiti demit laurea serta suo.
Cui lauri, and sceptri primi debentur honores,
Cui multa cingit laud tyara caput.
Quo duce spes certaest diuisis orb Britannis,
Haud diuisa iterum regna futura duo.
Progenies Regum, Regnorumque vnicus haeres,
Scilicet obscurus delituisse potest!
ANE QVADRAIN OF ALEXANDRIN VERSE.
Immortal Gods, sen I with pen and Poets airt
So willingly hes servde you, though my skill be small,
I pray then every one of you to help his pairt,
In granting this my suit, which after follow shall.
SONNET. 1.
FIRST Jove, as greatest God above the rest,
Grant thou to me a pairt of my desire:
That when in verse of thee I write my best,
This only thing I earnestly require,
That thou my vein Poetique so inspyre,
As they may suirlie think, all that it reid,
When I descryue thy might and thundering fire,
That they do see thy self in very deid
From heaven thy greatest Thunders for to leid,
And syne upon the Giants heads to fall:
Or cumming to thy Semele with speid
In Thunders least, at her request and call:
Or throwing Phaethon down from heaven to eard,
With threatening thunders, making monstrous reard.
SONNET. 2.
APollo nixt, assist me in a part,
Sen unto Jove thou second art in might,
That when I do descryue thy shyning Carte,
The Readers may esteem it in their sight.
And grant me als, thou worlds o only light,
That when I like for subject to deuyse
To write, how as before thy countenance bright
The years do stand, with seasons dowble twyse,
That so I may descryue the very guyse
Thus by thy help, of years wherein we live:
As Readers syne may say, heir surely lies,
Of seasons four, the glass and picture viue.
Grant als, that so I may my verses warpe,
As thou may play them syne upon thy Harp.
SONNET. 3.
AND first, o Phoebus, when I do descriue
The Springtyme sproutar of the herbs and flowris,
Whom with in rank none of the four do strive,
But nearest thee do stand all times and howris:
Grant Readers may esteem, they sie the showris,
Whose balmie dropps so softly dois distell,
Which watrie cloudds in mesure such down powris,
As makis the herbis, and very earth to smell
With savors sweit, fra time that onis thy sell
The vapouris softly sowkis with smyling cheer,
VVhilks syne in cloudds are keiped closs and well,
VVhill vehement Winter come in time of year.
Grant, when I like the Springtyme to displaye,
That Readers think they sie the Spring always.
SONNET. 4.
AND grant I may so viuely put in verse
The Summer, when I like theirof to treat:
As when in writ I do theirof rehearse,
Let Readers think they feel the burning heat,
And graithly see the earth, for lack of weit,
With withering drouth and Sun so gaigged all,
As for the grass on field, the dust in streit
Does rise and flee aloft, long or it fall.
Yea, let them think, they hear the song and call,
Which Floras wingde musicians maks to sound.
And that to taste, and smell, believe they shall
Delicious fruictis, whilks in that time abound.
And shortly, all their senses so bereaved,
As eyes and earis, and all may be deceived.
SONNET. 5.
OR when I like my pen for to employ
Of fertile Harvest in the description true:
Let Readers think, they instantly conuoy
The busy shearers for to reap their dew,
By cutting rypest corns with hooks anew:
Which corns their heavy heads did dounward bow,
Else seking earth again, from whence they grew,
And unto Ceres do their service vow.
Let Readers also surely think and trow,
They see the painful Vigneron pull the grapes:
First tramping them, and after pressing now
The grenest clusters gathered into heaps.
Let then the Harvest so viue to them appear,
As if they saw both corns and clustersneare.
SONNET. 6.
BUT let them think, in very deid they feill,
When as I do the VVinters storms unfold,
The bitter frosts, which waters dois congeill
In VVinter season, by a pearsing cold.
And that they hear the whiddering Boreas bold,
With hiddeous hurling, rolling Rocks from hie.
Or let them think, they see god Saturn old,
Whose hoarie hair owercouering earth, maks fly
The little bird's in flocks, fra time they see
The earth and all with storms of snow owercled:
Yea let them think, they hear the birds that die,
Make piteous moan, that Saturnes hairis are spread.
Apollo, grant their foirsaid suitis of mine,
All five I say, that thou may crown me syne.
SONNET. 7.
AND when I do descriue the Oceans force,
Grant syne, o Neptune, god of seas profound,
That readars think on leebord, and on dworce,
And how the Seas owerflowed this massiue round:
Yea, let them think, they hear a stormy sound,
Which threatnis wind, and darkness come at hand:
And water in their ships syne to abound,
By weltring waves, like highest towers on land.
Then let them think their shipp now low on sand,
Now climmes and skippes to top of rageing seas,
Now down to hell, when shippmen may not stand,
But lifts their hands to pray thee for some eas.
Syne let them think thy Trident does it calm,
Which maks it clear and smothe like glass or alme.
SONNET. 8.
AND grant the like when as the swimming sort
Of all thy subjects skaled I list declare:
As Triton monster with a manly port,
Who drowned the Troyan trumpetour most raire:
As Marmaids wise, who wepis in wether fair:
And marvelous Monkis, I mean Monkis of the sea.
Bot what of monsters, when I look and staire
On wounderous heaps of subiectis serving the?
As whailes so huge, and Sea eylis rare, that be
Mile longs, in crawling cruikis of sixty pace:
And Daulphins, Seahorse, Selchs with oxin ee,
And Mersvvynis, Pertrikis als of fishes race.
In short, no foul does fly, nor beast does go,
But thou have fishes like to them and mo.
SONNET. 9.
O Dreidfull Pluto, brother third to Jove,
With Proserpin, thy wife, the queen of hell:
My suit to you is, when I like to loaue
The joys that do in Elise field excel:
Or when I like great Tragedies to tell:
Or flyte, or murne my fate: or write with fear
The plagues ye do send forth with Dirae fell.
Let Readers think, that both they see and hear
Alecto, threatening Turnus sister dear:
And hear Celaenos wings, with Harpyes all:
And see dog Cerberus rage with hiddeous bear,
And all that did Aeneas once befall.
When as he past throw all those dongeons dim,
The foresaid feilds syne visited by him.
SONNET. 10.
O Furious Mars, thou warlyke soldier bold,
And hardy Pallas, goddess stout and grave:
Let Reidars think, when combats manyfold
I do descriue, they see two champions brave,
With armies huge approaching to resaue
Thy will, with cloudds of dust into the air.
Syne Phifers, Dru^mes, and Trumpets cleir do crave
The pelmell chok with larum loud alwhair,
Then nothing hard but gunnis, and rattling fair
Of spears, and clincking swords with glaunce so cleir,
As if they foght in skies, then wrangles their
Men killd, vnkilld, whill Parcas breath reteir.
There lies the venquisht wailing sore his chance:
Here lies the victor, rewing else the dance.
SONNET. 11.
AND at your handis I earnestly do crave,
O facound Mercure, with the Muses nine,
That for conducting guide I may you have,
As Well unto my pen, as my Ingyne.
Let Readers think, thy eloquence deuyne
O Mercure, in my Poems does appear:
And that Parnassis flowing fountain fine
Into my works does shine like cristall clear.
O Muses, let them think that they do hear
Your voices all into my verse resound.
And that your vertewis singular and seir
May wholly all in them be also found.
Of all that may the perfyte Poems make,
I pray you let my verses have no lake.
SONNET. 12.
IN short, you all forenamed gods I pray
For to concur with one accord and will,
That all my works may perfyte be always:
Which if ye do, then swear I for to fill
My works immortal with your praises still:
I shall your names eternal ever sing,
I shall tread down the grass on Parnass hill
By making with your names the world to ring:
I shall your names from all oblivion bring.
I lofty Virgill shall to life restoir,
My subjects all shall be of heavenly thing,
How to delate the gods immortals gloir.
Essay me once, and if ye find me swerue,
Then think, I do not graces such deserve.
FINIS.
THE VRANIE translated.
To the favorable Reader.
Having often reuolued, and red over (favorable Reader) the book and Poems of
the divine and Illuster Poet, Salust du Bartas, I was moved by the often reading
and perusing of them, with a restles and lofty desire, to preas to attain to
the like virtue. But s^n (alas) God, by nature has refused me the like lofty
and quick ingyne, and that my dull Muse, age, and Fortune, had refused me the
like skill and learning, I was constrained to have refuge to the secound, which
was, to do what lay in me, to set forth his praise, sen I could not merit the
like my self. Which I thought, I could not do so well, as by publishing some
work of his, to this isle of Britain (swarming full of quick ingynes,) as well
as they are made manifest already to France. But knowing my self to unskillful
and gross, to translate any of his heavenly and learned works, I almost left
it of, and was ashamed of that opinion also. Whill at the last, preferring
foolehardines and a good intention, to an utter despair and sleuth, I resolved
unadvisedly to assay the translating in my language of the easiest and shortest
of all his difficile, and prolixed Poems: to wit, the Vranie or heavenly Muse,
which, albeit it be not well translated, yet hope I, ye will excuse me
(favorable Reader) sen I neither ordained it, nor auowes it for a just
translation: but only set it forth, to the end, that, albeit the Proverb
says, that foolehardines proceeds of ignorance, yet some quick sprited man of
this isle, borne under the same, or as happy a Planet, as Du Bartas was, might
by the reading of it, be moved to translate it well, and best, where I have
both evil, and worst broyled it.

For that cause, I have put in, the French on the one side of the leif, and my
blocking on the other: noght thereby to give proof of my just translating, but
by the contrair, to let appear more plainly to the foresaid reader, wherein I
have erred, to the effect, that with less difficulty he may escape those
snares wherein I have fallen. I must also desire you to bear with it, albeit it
be replete with innumerable and intolerable faults: sic as, Ryming in terms,
and diverse others, whilkis ar forbidden in my own treatise of the Art of
Poesy, in the hinder end of this book, I must, I say, pray you for to
appardone me, for three causes. First, because that translations are limitat,
and restraind in somethings, more then free inventions are, Therefore reasoun
would, that it had more liberty in others. Secoundlie, because I made noght my
treatise of that intention, that either I, or any others behooved astricktly to
follow it: but that only it should show the perfection of Poesy, whereunto
few or none can attain. Thirdlye, because, that (as I show already) I avow
it not for a just translation. Besides that I have but ten feet in my line,
where he has twelve, and yet translates him line by line. Thus not doubting,
favorable Reader, but you will accept my intention and trauellis in good part,
(sen I require no farther,) I bid you fair well.

L'VRANIE, OV MUSE CELESTE.
IE n'estoy point encor en l' Auril de mon aage,
Qu'vn desir d'affranchir mon renom du trespass,
Chagrin, me faisoit perdre and repos, and repas,
Par le brave proiet de maint scauant ouurage.
Mais comme un pelerin, qui sur le tard, rencontre
Un fourchu carrefour, douteux, s'arreste court:
Et d'esprit, non des pieds, de ca de la discourt,
Par les diverse chemins, que la Lune luy monstre.
Parmi tant de sentiers qui, fleuris, sevont render
Sur le mont, ou Phoebus guerdonne les beaux verse
De l'honneur immortel des lauriers tout-iour verds,
le demeuroy confus, ne scachant lequel prendre.
Tantost i'entreprenoy d'orner la Grecque Scene
D'vn vestement Francois. Tantost dvn verse plus haut,
Hardi, i'ensanglantoy le Francois eschafaut
Des Tyrans d'Ilion, de Thebes, de Mycene.
Ie consacroy tantost a l'Aonide band
L'Histoire des Francois: and ma saint fureur
Desmentant a bon droit la trop commune erreur,
Faisoit le Mein Gaulois, non la Seine Alemande.
Tantost ie desseignoy dvne plume flateuse
Le los non merit des Rois and grands Seigneurs:
Et, pour me voir bien tossed rich d'or, and d honneurs,
D'vn coeur bas ie rendoy mercenaire ma Muse.
Et tandis ie vouloy chanter le fills volage
De la molle Cypris, and le mal doux-amer,
Que les plus beaux esprits souffrent pour trop aimer,
Discourse, ou me poussoit ma nature, and mon aage.
Or tandis qu'inconstant ie ne me puis resoudre,
De ca, de la pousse d un vent ambitieux,
Vne saint beauty se present a mes yeux,
Fille, comme ie croy, du grand Dieu lance-foudre.
Sa face est angelique, angelique son geste,
Son discourse tout divine, and tout parfait son corpse:
Et sa bouche a neuf-voix imite en ses accords
Le son harmonieux de la dance celeste.
Son chef est honor d'vne rich couronne
Faite a sept plis, glissans d un diverse mouuement,
Sur chacun de ses plis se turn obliquement
Ie ne scay quel rondeau, qui sur nos chefs raionne.
Le premier est de plomb, and d'estain le deuxiesme,
Le troisiesme d acier, le quart d or iaunissant,
Le quint est compose d electre pallissant,
Le suyuant de Mercure, and d argent le septiesme.
Son corpse est affuble d vne mante azuree,
Semee haut and bas d un million de feux,
Qui d un bell art sans art distinctement confus,
Decorent de leurs raise ceste beauty sacree.
Icy luit le grand Char, icy flambe la Lyre,
Icy la Poussiniere, icy les clairs Bessons,
Icy le Trebuschet, icy les deux Poissons,
Et mill autres brandon^ que ie ne puis descrire.
Ie suis [dit elle alors] ceste docte VRANIE,
Qui sur les gonds astrez transporte les humains,
Faisant voir a leurs yeux, and toucher a leurs mains,
Ce que la Cour celeste and contemple and many.
Ie quinte-essence lame: and fay que le Poet
Se surmontant soy mesme, enfonce un haut discourse,
Qui, divine, par l oreille attire les plus sourds,
Anime les rochers, and les fleuues arreste.
Agreeable est le sonde mes doctes germans:
Mais leur gosier, qui peut terre and ciel enchanter,
Ne me cede pas moins en l art de bien chanter,
Qu'au Rossignol l'Oison, les Pies aux Syrenes.
Pren moy donques pour guide: esleue au ciel ton aisle
Saluste, chante moy du Tout-puissant l honneur,
Et remontant le luth du Iessean sonneur,
Courageux, brosse apres la couronne eternelle.
Ie ne puis d un oeil sec, voir mes soeurs maquerelles,
Des amoreuz Francois, don't les mignards escrits
Sont pleins de feints souspirs, de feints pleurs, de feints cris,
D'impudiques discourse, and de veins querelles.
Ie ne puis d un oeil sec voir que l on met en vente,
Nos divines chansons: and que d un flateur verse,
Pour gaigner la faueur des Princes plus peruers,
Un Commode, un Neron, un Caligule on vante.
Mais, sur tout, ie ne puis sans souspirs and sans larmes
Voir les verse employez contre l autheur des verse:
Ie ne puis voir battu le Roy de l'vniuers
De ses propres soldats, and de ses propres arms.
L'homme a les yeux sillez de nuits Cimmeriennes,
Et s'il a quelque bien, tant soit peu precieux,
Par differentes mains il l a receu des cieux:
Mais Dieu seul nous apprend les chansons Delphiennes.
Tout art s'apprend par art: la seule Poesy
Est un pur don celeste and null ne peut gouster
Le miel, que nous faisons de Pinde degoutter
S'il n'a d'vn sacre feu la poitrine saisie.
De ceste source vient, que maints grands personnages
Consommez en scauoir, votre en prose diserts,
Se trauaillent en vain a composer des verse:
Et qu'vn ieune apprenti fait de plus beaux ouurages.
De lavient que iadis le chantre Meonide,
Combien que mendiant, and sans maistre, and sans yeux,
A vaincu par ses verse les nouueaux, and les vieux,
Chantant si bien Vlysse, and le preux Aeacide.
De la vient qu'vn Nason ne peut parler en prose,
De la vient que David mes chants si tossed aprit,
De pasteur fait Poet, and que maint ieune esprit
Ne scachant point nostre art, suyuant nostre art compose.
Recherche nuict and iour les ondes Castalides:
Regrimpe nuict and iour contre le roc Besson:
Sois disciple d'Homere, and du saint nourrisson
D'Ande, l'heureux seiour des vierges Pierides.
Lis tant que tu voudras, volume apres volume,
Les livers de Pergame, and de la grande cite,
Qui du nom d' Alexandre a son nom emprunte:
Exerce incessamment and ta langue, and ta plume.
Ioin tant que tu voudras pour un carme bien fair
L'obscure nuict au iour, and le iour a la nuict,
Si ne pourras tu point cueillir un digne fruit
D'vn si fascheux trauail, si Pallas t'est contraire.
Car du tout horse de l homme il fault que l homme sort,
Sil veut fair des verse qui facent test aux ans:
Il fault qu enter nos mains il sequestre ses sens:
Il fault qu un saint ecstase au plus haut ciell emporte.
D autant que tout ainsi que la fureur human
Rend l homme moins qu humain: la divine fureur
Rend l homme plus grand qu home: and d vne saint erreur
Sur le ciel porte-feux a son gre le promeine.
Cest d un si sacre lieu que les diuins poets
Nous apportent ca bas de si doctes propos,
Et des verse non suiets au pouuoir d Atropos,
Truchemens de Nature, and du Ciel interpretes.
Les vrais Poets sont tells que la cornemuse,
Qui pleine de vent son, and vuide perd le son:
Car leur fureur durant, dure aussi leur chanson:
Et si la fureur cesse, aussi cesse leur Muse.
Puis do^ques que les verse ont au ciel pris naissance,
Esprits vrayment diuins, aurez vous bien le coeur
De prononcer un verse and profane, and moqueur
Contre cil, qui conduit des cieux astrez la danse?
Serez vous tant ingrats, que de render vos plumes
Ministres de la chair, and serves de peche?
Tout-iour donques sera vostre style empesche
A remplir, men songers, de songs vos volumes?
Ferez vous, o tro^peurs, tout-iour d'vn diable un Ange?
Fendrez vous tout-iour l'air de vos amoureux cris?
He! n'orra on iamais dans vos doctes escrits
Retentir haut and clair du grand Dieu la louange?
Ne vous suffit il pas de sentir dans vostre ame
Le Cyprien brandon, sans que plus effrontez
Qu'vne Lays public, encor vous euentez
Par le monde abuse vostre impudique fla^me?
Ne vous suffit il pas de croupir en delices,
Sans que vous corrompiez, par vos nombres charmeurs,
Du lecteur indiscret les peu-constantes moeurs,
Luy faisant embrasser pour les vertus les vices?
Les tons, nombres, and chants, don't se fait l'harmonie,
Qui rend le verse si beau, ont sur nous tell pouuoir,
Que les plus durs Catons ils peuuent esmouuoir,
Agitant nos esprits d'vne douce many.
Ainsi que le cachet dedans la cire form
Presque un autre cachet, le Poet scauant,
Va si bien dans nos coeurs ses passions grauant,
Que presque l'auditeur en l'auteur se transform.
Car la force des verse, qui secrettement glisse,
Par des secrets conduits, dans nos entendemens,
Y empreint tous les bons and mauuais mouuemens,
Qui sont representez par un docte artifice.
Et c'est pourquoy Platon horse de sa Republique
Chassoit les escriuains, qui souloient par leurs verse
Render meschans les bons, plus peruers les peruers,
Sapans par leurs beaux mots l'honnestete public.
No^ ceux qui dans leurs cha^ts marioient les beaux terms
Auec les beaux suiets: ore entonnans le los
Du just foudroyeur: ore d'vn saint propos,
Seruans aux desuoyez and de guides and d'Hermes.
Profanes escriuains, vostre impudique rhyme,
Est cause, que l'on met nos chantres mieux-disans
Au rang des basteleurs, des boufons, des plaisans:
Et qu encore moins qu'eux le peuple les estime.
Vous faites de Clion vne Thais impure:
D'Heloicon un bordeau: vous faites impudens,
Par vos lascifs discourse, que les peers prudens
Deffendent a leurs fills des carmes la lecture.
Mais si foulans aux pieds la deite volage,
Qui blece de ces traits vos idolatres coeurs,
Vous vouliez employer vos plus saints fureurs
A fair voir en France un sacre-sainct ouurage.
Chacun vous priseroit, comme estans secretaires,
Et ministres sacrez du Roy del universe.
Chacun reuereroit comme oracles vos verse:
Et les grands commettroient en vos mains leurs affairs.
La liaison des verse fut iadis inuentee
Seulement pour traitter les mysteres sacrez
Auec plus de respect: and de long temps apres
Par les carmes ne fut autre chose chantee.
Ainsi mon grand David sur la cord tremblante
De son luth tout-diuin ne son rien que Dieu.
Ainsi le conducteur de l'exercite Hebrieu,
Sauue des rouges flots, le los du grand Dieu chante.
Ainsi Judith, Delbore, au milieu des gens d'armes,
Ainsi Job, Jeremy, accablez de douleurs,
D un carme bigarre de cent mill couleurs
Descriuoient saintement leurs joys and leurs larmes.
Voyla pour quoy Satan, qui fin se transfigure
En Ange de clarte pour nous ensorceler,
Ses prestres and ses dieux faisort iadis parler,
Non d vne libre language, ains par nombre, and mesure.
Ainsi, sous Apollon la folle Phoemonoe
En hexametres verse ses oracles chantoit:
Et, par douteux propos, cauteleuse affrontoit
Non le Grec seulement, ains l'lbere, and l'Eoe.
Ainsi l antique voix en Dodone adoree,
Aesculape, and Ammon en verse prophetizoient,
Les Sibylles en verse le futur predisoient,
Et les prestres prioient en oraison nombree.
Ainsi Line, Hesiode, and celuy don't la lyre
Oreil^oit, comme on dit, les rocs, and les forests,
Oserent autre fois les plus diuins secrets
De leur profond scauoir en doctes verse es crire.
Vouz qui tant desirez vos fronts de laurier ceindre,
Ou pourriez vous trouuer un champ plus spacieux,
Que le los de celuy qui tient le frein des cieux,
Qui fait trembler les monts, qui fait l'Erebe craindre?
Ce suiet est de vray la Corn d abondance,
C'est un grand magazin rich en discourse faconds,
C'est un grand Ocean, qui n'a riue, ny fonds,
Un surjon immortel de divine eloquence.
L'humble suiet ne peut qu humble discourse produire:
Mais le grave suiet de soymesme produit
Graves and masles mots: de soymesmes il luit,
Et fait le saint honneur de son chantre reluire.
Or donc si vous veulez apres vos cendres viure,
N'imitez Erostrat, qui pour viure, brusla
Le temple Ephesien: ou celuy qui moula,
Pour estendre son nom, un cruel veau de cuiure.
Ne vueillez employer vostre rare artifice
A chanter la Cyprine, and son fills emplume:
Car il vaut beaucoup mieux n'estre point renomme,
Que se voir renomme pour raison de son vice.
Vierges sont les neuf soeurs, qui dancent sur Parnasse,
Vierge vostre Pallas: and vierge ce beau corpse
Qu'vn fleuue vit changer sur les humides bords,
En l'arbre tout-iour vert, qui vos cheueux enlace.
Consacrez moy plustost ceste rare eloquence
A chanter hautement les miracles compris
Dans le sacre fueillet: and de vos beaux esprits
Versez la, mes amiss, toute la quinte-essence.
Que Christ, comme Homme-Dieu, soit la croupe iumelle
Sur qui vous sommeillez. Que pour cheual aile
L'Esprit du Trois-fois grand, d un blanc pigeon voile,
Vous face ruisseter vne source immortelle.
Tout ouurage excellent la memoire eternize
De ceux qui tant soit peu trauaillent apres luy:
Le Mausolee a fait viure iusqu auiourd huy
Timothee, Bryace, and Scope, and Artemise.
Hiram seroit sans nom, sans la saint assistance
Qu il fit au bastiment du temple d' Israel.
Et sans l'Arche de Dieu l Hebrieu Beseleel
Seroit enseueli sous eternel silence.
Et puis que la beauty de ces rare souurages
Fait viure apres la mort tous ceux qui les ont faits,
Combien qu'auec le temps les plus seurs soient deffaits
Par rauines, par feux, par guerres, par orages.
Pensez, ie vous suppli, combien sera plus belle
La louange, qu heureux, ca bas vous acquerrez,
Lors que dans vos saints verse DIEV seul vous chanterez
Puis qu un nom immortel vient de chose immortelle.
Ie scay que vous direz que les antiques fables
Sont l'ame de vos chants, que ces contes diverse,
L'vn de l autre naissans, peuuent render vos verse
Beaucoup plus que l'histoire au vulgaire admirables.
Mais ou peut on trouuer chooses plus merueilleuses
Que celles de la Foy? he! quel autre argument
Auec plus de tesmoins nostre raison desment,
Qui rabat plus l'orgueil des ames curieuses?
I'aymeroy mieux chanter la tour Assyrienne,
Que les trois monts Gregeois l'vn dessus l' autre entez
Pour dethrosner du cielles dieux espouuantez:
Et l'onde de Noe, que la Deucalienne.
I'aymeroy mieux chanter le changement subite
Du Monarque d' Assure, que de l' Arcadien,
Et le viure second du saint Bethanien,
Que le recolement des members d' Hippolite.
L'vn de plaire au lecteur tant seulement se mesle,
Et l'autre seulement tasche de profiter:
Mais seul celuy la peut le laurier meriter,
Qui, sage, le profit auec le plaisir mesle.
Les plus beaux promenoirs sont pres de la marine,
Et le nager plus seur pres des riuages verds:
Et le sage Escriuain n'esloigne dans ses verse
Le scauoir du plaisir, le ieu de la doctrine.
Vous tiendrez donc ce rang en chantant chooses tells:
Car enseignans autruy, vous mesmes apprendrez
La reigle de bien viure: and bien-heureux, rendrez
Autant que leurs suiets, vos chansons immortelles.
Laissez moy donc a part ces fables surannees:
Mes amiss, laissez moy cest insolent Archer,
Qui les coeurs otieux peut seulement brescher,
Et plus ne soyent par vous les Muses profanees.
Mais las! en vain ie cry, en vain, las! ie m enroue:
Car l un, pour ne se voir conuaincu par mon chant,
Va, comme un fin aspic, son oreille bouchant:
L'autre Epicurien, de mes discourse se jove.
L'autre pour quelque temps se range en mon eschole,
Mais le monde enchanteur soudain le me soustrait,
Et ce discourse sacre, qui les seuls bons attrait,
Enter par vne aureille, and par lautre s'envolle.
Las! ie n en voy pas un qui ses deux yeux dessille
Du bandeau de Venus, and d un profane fiel
De ses carmes dorez ne corrompe le miel:
Bien que de bons esprits nostre France fourmille.
Mais toy, mon cher mignon, que la Neufuaine saint
Qui de Pegase boit le surjon perennel,
Fit le sacre sonneur du ^os de l' Eternel,
Mesme auant que de toy ta mere fust enceinte:
Bien que cest argument semble vne maigre land,
Que les meilleurs esprits ont en friche laise,
Ne sois pour l auenir de ce trauail less:
Car plus la gloire est rare, and tant plus elle est grande.
SALVSTE, ne perds coeur si tu vois que l Envy
Aille abbayant, malign, apres ton los naissant:
Ne crain que sous ses pieds elle aille tapissant
Les verse que tu feras, comme indignes de vie.
Ce monstre blece-honneur ressemble la Mastine,
Qui iappe contre ceux qui sont nouueau venus,
Par donnant toutes fois a ceux qui sont congnus,
Curtoise enuers ceux cy, enuers ceux la mutine.
Ce monstre semble encor vne fameuse nue,
Que le naissant Vulcan press de toutes pars,
Pour, noire, l estouffer de ses ondeux brouillars:
Mais ou plus ce f^u croist, plus elle diminue.
Sui donc (mon cher souci) ce chemin non froyable
Que par ceux, que le ciel, liberal, veut benir,
Et ie iure qu en brief ie te feray tenir
Enter les bons esprits quelque rang honorable.
Cest par ce beau discourse que la Muse celeste
Tenant vne couronne en sa pucelle main,
Attire a soy mon coeur d un transport plus qu'humain,
Tant bien a ses doux mots elle adiouste un doux geste.
Depuis, ce seul amor dans mes veins bouillonne:
Depuis, ce seul vent soufle es toiles de ma nef:
Bien-heureux si ie puis non poser sur mon chef,
Ains du doigt seulement toucher ceste couronne.
FINIS.
THE VRANIE, OR HEAVENLY MUSE.
SCarce was I yet in springtyme of my years,
When greening great for fame above my pears
Did make me lose my wonted chere and rest,
Essaying learned works with curious breast.
But as the Pilgrim, who for lack of light,
Cumd on the parting of two ways at night,
He stays as soon, and in his mind does cast,
What way to take while Moonlight yet does last.
So I amongst the paths upon that hill,
Where Phoebus crowns all verses ever still
Of endless praise, with Laurers always grene,
Did stay confusde, in doubt what way to mean.
I whiles eslaide the Greece in French to praise,
Whiles in that tongue I gave a lusty glaise
For to descryue the Trojan Kings of old,
And them that Thebes and Mycens crowns did hold.
And whiles I had the storye of France elected,
Which to the Muses I should have directed:
My holy fury with consent of nane,
Made french the Mein, and nowyse dutche the Sein.
Whiles thought I to set forth with flattring pen:
The praise untrue of Kings and noble men,
And that I might both goldeard honors have,
With courage basle I made my Muse a slave.
And whiles I thought to sing the fickle boy
Of Cypris soft, and loves to-swete anoy,
To lofty sprits that are therewith made blind,
To which discourse my nature and age inclynd.
But whill I was in doubt what way to go,
With wind ambitious tossed to and fro:
A holy beuty did to me appear,
The Thundrers daughter seeming as she wear.
Her port was Angellike with Angels face,
With comely shape and tongue of heavenly grace:
Her nynevoced mouth resembled into sound
The dance harmonious making heaven resound.
Her head was honorde with a costly crown,
Seuinfolde and round, to diverse motions boun:
On every fold I know not what does glance,
Above our heads into a circuler dance.
The first it is of Lead, The seuin Planets.
of Tin the nixt,
The third of Stele, the fourth of Gold unmixed,
The fyfth is made of pale Electre light,
The sixth of Mercure, seuint of Silver bright.
Her corpse is couured with an Asure gown, Firmament

Where thousand fires ar sown both up and down: Fixed Stars.

Whilks with an art, but art, confusde in order.
Dois with their beams decore thereof the border.
Heir shynes the Charlewain, there the Harp gives light,
And heir the Seamans stars, and there Twinnis bright,
And heir the Balance, there the Fishes twain,
With thousand other fyres, that pas my brain.
I am said she, that learned VRANIE,
That to the Stars transports humanity,
And maks men see and twiche with hands and ene
It that the heavenly court contempling been.
I quint-essence the Poets soul so well,
While he in high discourse excede him sell,
Who by the ear the deafest does allure,
Reuiues the rocks, and stays the floods for sure.
The tone is pleasant of my * Nine Muses.
sisters deir:
Yet though their throts make heaven and earth admire,
They yield to me no less in singing well,
Then Pie to Syraine, goose to Nightingell.
Take me for guide, lift up to heaven thy wing
O Salust, Gods immortals honor sing:
And bending higher David's Lute in tone,
With courage seek yon endless crown above.
I no wais can, vnwet my cheeks, behold
My sisters made by Frenchemen macquerels old,
Whose mignarde writts, but faynd lamenting vain,
And feigned tears and shameless tales retain.
But weping neither can I see them spyte
Our heavenly verse, when they do nothing write,
But Princes flattry that are tyrants rather
Then Nero, Commode, or Caligule ather.
But specially but sobbes I never shall
Se verse bestowde against him made verses all,
I can not see his proper soldiers ding
With his own arms him that of all is King.
Man's eyes are blinded with Cimmerien night:
And have he any good, beit never so light,
From heaven, by mediat moyens, he it reaches,
Bot only God the Delphiens songs us teaches.
All art is learned by art, this art alone
It is a heavenly gift: no flesh nor bone
Can preif the honnie we from Pinde distill,
Except with holy fire his breest we fill.
From that spring flows, that men of special chose,
Consumde in learning, and perfyte in prose,
For to make verse in vane dois travel take,
When as a prentise-fairer works will make.
That made that Homer, who a songster been,
Albeit a beggar, lacking master, and ene,
Exceded in his verse both new and old,
In singing Vliss and Achilles bold.
That made that Naso noght could speak but verse,
That David made my songs so sone rehearse,
Of pastor Poet made. yea yongmen whiles
Unknowing our art, yet by our art compyles.
Seek night and day Castalias waltring waas,
Climme day and night the twinrocks of Parnaas:
Be Homers skoller, Virgill
and his, was borne in Ande,
The happy dwelling place of all our band.
How often thou lykes reid over book after book,
The books of Troy, and of that town which took
Her name from Alexander Monark then, Alexandria

Exerce but cease thy tongue and eke thy pen.
Yea, if to make good verse thou hes sic cure,
Iovne night to day, and day to night obscure,
Yet shall thou not the worthy fruit reap so
Of all thy pains, if Pallas be thy fo.
For man from man must wholly parted be,
If with his age, his verse do well agree.
Amongst our hands, he must his wits resing,
A holy trance to highest heaven him bring.
For even as humane fury maks the man,
Les then the man: So heavenly fury can
Make man pas man, and wander in holy mist,
Upon the fyrie heaven to walk at list.
Within that place the heavenly Poets sought
Their learning, syne to us hear down it brought,
With verse that ought to Atropos no dew,
Dame Naturs trunchmen, heavens interprets true.
For Poets right are like the pype always,
Who full does sound, and empty stays to play:
Even so their fury lasting, lasts their tone,
Their fury ceast, their Muse does stay aslone.
Sen verse did then in heaven first bud and blume,
If ye be heavenly, how dar ve presume
A verse profane, and mocking for to sing
Against him that leads of starrie heavens the ring?
Will ye then so ingrately make your pen,
A slave to sin, and serve but fleshly men?
Shall still your brains be busied then to fill
With dreams, o dreamers, every book and bill?
Shall Satan still be God for your behoue?
Still will ye riue the air with cries of love?
And shall there never into your works appear,
The praise of God, resounding loud and clear?
Suffisis it noght ye feel into your hairt
The Ciprian torche, unless more malapairt
Then Lais commoun queen, ye blow abrod
But shame, athort the world, your shameless god?
Abusers, staikes it not to lurk in lust,
Without ye smit with charming nombers just
The fickle manners of the reader slight,
In making him embrace, for day, the night?
The harmony of number tone and song,
That makes the verse so fair, it is so strong
Over us, as hardest Catos it will move,
With spreits aflought, and sweet transported love.
For as into the wax the seals imprent
Is like a seal, right so the Poet gent,
Does grave so viue in us his passions strange,
As maks the reader, half in author change.
For verses force is sic, that softly slydes
Throw secret poris, and in our senses bydes,
As makes them have both good and evil imprented,
Which by the learned works is represented.
And therefore Platos common wealth did pack
None of these Poets, who by verse did make
The goodmen evil, and the wicked worse,
Whose pleasant words betrayed the public corse.
Not those that in their songs good terms alwaise
Joined with fair Thems: whiles thu^dring out the praise
Of God, just Thundrer: whiles with holy speech,
Like Hermes did the way to strayers teach.
Your shameless rymes, are cause, o Scrybes profane,
That in the like opinion we remain
With Iuglers, buffons, and that foolish seames:
Yea les then them, the people of us esteames.
For Clio ye put Thais vile in ure,
For Helicon a bordell. Ye procure
By your lascivious speech, that fathers sage
Defends verse reading, to their younger age.
But lightleing * Cupide
yon fleing godhead slight,
Who in Idolatrous breasts his darts has pight.
If that ye would employ your holy trance,
To make a holy hallowde work in France:
Then every one would worthy scribes you call,
And holy servants to the King of all.
Echone your verse for oracles would take,
And great men of their counsel would you make.
The verses knitting was found out and try it,
For singing only holy mysteries by it
With greater grace. And after that, were pend
Longtyme no verse, but for that only end.
Even so my David on the trembling strings
Of heavenly harps, Gods only praise he sings.
Even so the leader of the Hebrew host,
Gods praise did sing upon the Redsea cost.
So Judith and Delbor in the soldiers throngs,
So Job and Jeremy, preast with woes and wrongs,
Did right descryue their joys, their woes and torts,
In variant verse of hundredth thousand sorts.
And therefore crafty Satan, who can seame
An Angel of light, to witch us in our dream,
He causde his gods and preests of old to speak
By number and measure, which they durst not break.
So fond Phoemonoe ynder Apollos wing,
Her oracles Hexameter did sing:
With doubtsum talk she craftily begylde,
Not only Greece, but Spain and Indes she sylde.
That old voce serude in Dodon, spak in verse,
So Aesculap did, and so did Ammon fearse,
So Sybills told in verse, what was to come:
The Pre^sts did pray by nombers, all and some.
So Hesiod, Line and he * Orpheus
whose Lute they say,
Made rocks and forests come to hear him play,
Durst well their heavenly secrets all discloes,
In learned verse, that softly slydes and goes.
O ye that would your brows with Laurel bind,
What larger field I pray you can you find,
Then is his praise, who brydles heavens most clear,
Maks mountains tremble, and howest hells to fear?
That is a horn of plenty well repleat:
That is a storehouse rich, a learning seat.
An Ocean hudge, both lacking shore and ground,
Of heavenly eloquence a spring profound.
From subjects base, a base discourse dois spring,
A lofty subject of it self does bring
Grave words and weghtie, of it self divine,
And makes the authors holy honor shine.
If ye would after ashes live, bewaire,
To do like Erostrat, who brunt the fair
Ephesian temple, or him, to win a name,
* Ferill^^
Who built of brass, the crewell Calfe vntame.
Let not your art so rare then be defylde,
In singing Venus and her fethred child:
For better it is without renown to be,
Then be renowmde for vile iniquity.
Those nine are Maids, that dance upon Parnaas?
Learnd Pallas is a Virgin pure, like as
* Daphne
That fair, whom waters changed on wattry banks
Into * Laurel
that trestill grene, your hair that hanks.
Then consecrat that eloquence most rair,
To sing the lofty miracles and fair
Of holy Scripture: and of your good ingyne,
Pour out, my friends, there your fifth essence fine.
Let Christ both God and man your Twinrock be,
Whom on ye sleep: for that * Pegasus
horse who did fle,
Speak of that * Holy ghost.
thryse great spreit, whose dow most white
Mote make your spring flow ever with delight.
All excellent work bear record ever shall,
Of travelers in it, though their pains be small.
The Mausole tomb the names did eternise
Of Scope, Timotheus, Briace and Artemise.
But Hirams holy help, it war unknown
What he in building Izraels Temple had shown,
Without Gods Ark Beseleel Jew had been
In everlasting silence buried clean.
Then, since the bewty of those works most rare
Has after death made live all them that ware
Their builders: though them selves with time be failde,
By spoils, by fyres, by wars, and tempests quailde.
I pray you think, how mekle fairer shall
Your happy name heir down be, when as all
Your holy verse, great God alone shall sing,
Since praise immortal commes of endless thing.
I know that ye will say, the ancient rables
Decores your songs, and that * Metamorphosis
those diverse fables,
Ilk bred of other, does your verses make
More loved then stories by the vulgar pack.
But where can there more wondrous things be found,
Then those of faith? o fools, what other ground,
With witness mo, our reasons quyte improues,
Beats down our pride, that curious questions moves?
I had far rather Babell tower forthsett,
Then the * Offa, Pindus, and Olympus
three Grecian hills on others plett,
To pull down gods afraid, and in my mood,
Sing Noe s rather then Deucalions floode.
I had far rather sing the sudden change
Of Assurs monark, Nabuchadnezer.
then of Arcas strange.
Of the * Lazarus
Bethaniens holy second living,
Then Hippolitts with members glewde reviving.
To please the Reader is the ones whole cair,
The other for to proffite mair and mair:
But only he of Laurel is conding,
Who wisely can with proffit, pleasure ming.
The fairest walking on the Sea coast been,
And suirest swimming where the braes are grene:
So, wise is he, who in his verse can have
Skill mixed with pleasure, sports with doctrine grave.
In singing keep this order showen you heir,
Then ye your self, in teaching men shall leir
The rule of living well, and happily shall
Your songs make, as your thems immortal all.
No more into those oweryere lies delight,
My friends, cast of that insolent archer quyte,
Who only may the idle hearts surpryse:
Profane no more the Muses with yon cries.
But oh! in vain, with crying am I horce:
For lo, where one, noght caring my songs force,
Goes like a crafty snaik, and stoppes his ear:
The other godles, mocks and will not hear.
Ane other at my school abydes a space,
While charming world withdraw him from that place:
So that discourse, that maks good men reiose,
At one ear enters, and at the other goes.
Alas, I se not one vnvaill his ene
From Venus vaill and gal profane, that been
To golden honnied verse, the only harm,
Although our France with lofty sprits does swarm.
But thou my deir one, whom the holy Nine,
Who yearly drinks Pegasis fountain fine,
The great gods holy songster had received,
Yea, even before thy mother the conceived.
Albeit this subject seame a barren ground,
With quickest spreits left ley, as they it found,
Irk not for that heirefter of thy pain,
Thy glore by rairnes greater shall remain.
O Salust, lose not heart, though pale Inuye
Bark at thy praise increasing to the sky,
Fear not that she tread under foot thy verse,
As if they were unworthy to rehearse.
This monster honnors-hurt i like the urr,
That barks at strangers coming to the durr,
But sparing always those are to him known,
To them most gentle, to the others throwin.
This monster als is like a rauing cloud,
Which threatnes alwayis kendling Vulcan loud.
To smore and drown him, with her pouring rain,
Yet force of fire repellis her power again.
Then follow forth, my son, that way vnfeard,
Of them whom in fre heavens gift has appeard.
And hear I swear, thou shortly shall resaue
Some noble rank among good spreits and grave.
This heavenly Muse by such discourses fair,
Who in her Virgin hand a rich crown bair:
So drew to her my heart, so far transported,
And with sweet grace, so swetely she exhorted:
As since that love into my brains did brew,
And since that only wind my shipsailles blew,
I thought me blessed, if I might only clame
To touch that crown, though not to wear the same.
FINIS.
ANE METAPHORICAL INVENTION OF A TRAGEDY CALLED PHOENIX.

A Colomne of 18 lines serving for a Preface to the Tragedy ensuyng.
























and murne with
me. From Delphos syne
Apollo cum with speid: Whose
shining light my cairs will dim in deid.
The expansion of the former Colomne.
Elf Echo help, that both together w E
(S ince cause there be) may now lament with teari S
M y murnefull yearis. Ye furies als with hi M
E uen Pluto grim, who dwells in dark, that h E
S ince chief we se him to you all that beari S
T he style men fearis of Dirae: I reques T
E che greizlie ghest, that dwells beneth the S E
With all yon three, whose hairis ar snaiks full ble W
A nd all your crew, assist me in their tw A
R epeit and sha my Tragedy full nei R
T he chance fell heir. Then secoundlie is bes T
D evils void of rest, ye move all that it rei D
W ith me, indeid, like dolor them to gri V
I then will liv', in lesser grief therebi I
K ythe heir and try, your force ay bent and quic K
E xcell in sik like ill, and murne with m E
From Delphos syne Apollo cum with speid,
Whose shining light my cairs will dim in deid.
PHOENIX.
THE diverse falls, that Fortune geuis to men,
By turning over her quheill to their annoy,
When I do hear the^ grudge, although they ken
That old blind Dame, delytes to let the joy
Of all, such is her use, which dois conuoy
Her quheill by gess: not looking to the right,
Bot still turnis up that pairt quhilk is too light.
Thus quhen I hard so many did complain,
Some for the loss of worldly wealth and geir,
Some death of friends, quho can not come again,
Some loss of health, which unto all is deir,
Some loss of fame, which still with it dois beir
Ane grief to them, who mereits it indeid:
Yet for all their appearis there some remeid.
For as to geir, like chance as made you want it,
Restore you may the same again or mair.
For death of friends, although the same (I grant it)
Can noght return, yet men are not so rair,
Bot ye may get the like. For seiknes sair
Your health may come: or to ane better place
Ye must. For fame, good deids will mend disgrace.
Then, fra I saw (as I already told)
How men complaind for things whilk might amend,
How David Lindsay did complain of old
His Papingo, her death, and sudden end,
Ane common foul, whose kind be all is kend.
All these hes moved me presently to tell
Ane Tragedy, in griefs their to excel.
For I complain not of sic common case,
Which diversely by diverse means dois fall:
But I lament my Phoenix rare, whose race,
Whose kind, whose kin, whose offspring, they be all
In her alone, whom I the Phoenix call.
That foul which only one at onis did live,
Not lives, alas! though I her praise reviue.
In Arabie called Foelix was she bredd
This foul, excelling Iris far in hew.
Whose body whole, with purpour was owercledd,
Whose taill of color was celestial blew,
With skarlat pennis that through it mixed grew:
Her craig was like the yallowe burnisht gold,
And she her self three hundredth year was old.
She might have lived as long again and mair,
If fortune had not stayde dame Naturs will:
Six hundredth years and forty was her scair,
Which Nature ordained her for to fulfill.
Her native soil she hanted ever still,
Except to Egypt whiles she took her course,
Wherethrough great Nylus down runs from his sourse.
Like as ane horse, when he is barded hail,
An fethered pannach set upon his heid,
Will make him seame more brave: Or to assail
The enemy, he that the troops dois leid,
Ane pannache on his healme will set in deid:
Even so, had Nature, to decore her face,
Given her ane tap, for to augment her grace.
In quantity, she dois resemble near
Unto the foul of mighty Jove, by name
The Aegle called: often in the time of year,
She used to soir, and fly through diverse realm,
Out through the Azure skies, whill she did shame
The Sun himself, her color was so bright,
Till he abashit beholding such a light.
Thus whill she used to scum the skies about,
At last she chanced to sore out ower the sea
Called Mare Rubrum: yet her course held out
Whill that she past whole Asie Syne to fly
To Europe small she did resolve. To dry
Her voyage out, at last she came in end
Into this land, ane stranger heir unkind.
Ilk man did marvel at her form most rare.
The winter came, and storms cled all the field:
Which storms, the land of fruit and corn made bare,
Then did she fly into an house for beild,
Which from the storms might save her as an shield.
There, in that house she first began to tame,
I came, syne took her forth out of the same.
Fra I her gat, yet none could gess what sort
Of foul she was, nor from what country cum:
Nor I my self: except that be her port,
And glistring hewes I knew that she was sum
Rare stranger foul, which often had used to scum
Through diverse lands, delyting in her flight;
Which made us see, so strange and rare a sight.
Whill at the last, I chanced to call to mind
How that her nature, did resemble neir
To that of Phoenix which I red. Her kind,
Her hew, her shape, did make it plain appeir,
She was the same, which now was lighted heir.
This made me to esteem of her the more,
Her name and rarenes did her so decore.
Thus being tamed, and thoroughly weill acquent.
She took delight (as she was wount before)
What time that Titan with his beams vpsprent,
To take her flight, amongs the skies to soire.
Then came to her of fowlis, a woundrous store
Of diverse kinds, some simple fowlis, some ill
And ravening fowlis, whilks simple onis did kill.
And even as they do swarm about their king
The hunnie Bees, that works into the hyue:
When he delyts forth of the skepps to spring,
Then all the leave will follow him belyue,
Syne to be nixt him bisselie they strive:
So, all their fowlis did follow her with beir,
For love of her, fowlis reuening did no deir.
Such was the love, and reverence they her bure,
Ilk day whill even, ay whill they shedd at night.
Fra time it darkened, I was ever sure
Of her return, remaining whill the light,
And Phoebus rising with his garland bright.
Such was her truth, fra time that she was tame,
She, who in brightness Titans self did shame.
By use of this, and hanting it, at last
She made the souls, fra time that I went out,
Above my head to fly, and follow fast
Her, who was chief and leader of the rout.
When it grew lait, she made them fly, but doubt,
Or fear, even in the closse with her of will,
Syne she her self, perkt in my chalmer still.
When as the countries round about did hear
Of this her byding in this country cold,
Which not but hills, and darkness ay dois bear,
(And for this cause was Scotia called of old,)
Her lyking here, when it was to them told,
And how she greind not to go back again:
The love they bure her, turned into disdain.
Lo, here the fruicts, whilks of Inuy dois breid,
To harm them all, who virtue dois embrace.
Lo, here the fruicts, from her whilks dois proceid,
To harm them all, that be in better case
Then others be. So followed they the trace
Of proud Inuy, their country is lying neir,
That such a foul, should like to tarry heir.
Whill Fortoun at the last, not only moved
Inuy to this, which could her not content,
Whill that Inuy, did sease some fowls that loved
Her anis as seemed: but yet their ill intent
Kythed, when they saw all other fowls still bent
To follow her, misknowing them at all.
This made them work her undeserved fall.
Their were the rau^ning fowls, whom of I spak
Before, the whilks (as I already show)
Was wount into her presence to hald bak
Their cruelty, from simple ones, that flew
With her, ay whill Inuy all fear withdrew.
Their ware, the Rauin, the Stainchell, and the Gled,
With others kynds, whom in this malice bred.
Fra Malice thus was rooted be Inuy,
In them as sone the awin effects did shaw.
Which made them syne, upon ane day, to spy
And wait till that, as she was wount, she flaw
Athort the skies, syne did they neir her draw,
Among the other fowlis of diverse kynds,
Although they ware far dissonant in mynds.
For where as they ware wount her to obey,
Their mind far contrair then did plain appear.
For then they made her as a commoun prey
To them, of whom she looked for no dear,
They struck at her so bitterly, whill fear
Stayde other fowlis to preis for to defend her
From their ingrate, whilks now had clean miskend her.
When she could find none other save refuge
From these their bitter straiks, she fled at last
To me (as if she would wish me to judge
The wrong they did her) yet they followed fast
Till she be^uix my legs her self did cast.
For saving her from these, which her oppressed,
Whose hot pursuit, her suffered not to rest.
Bot yet at all that servd not for remeid,
For noghttheles, they spaird her not a hair.
Instead of her, yea whiles they made to bleid
My legs: (so grew their malice mair and mair)
Which made her both to rage and to despair,
First, that but cause they did her such dishort:
Nixt, that she laked help in any sort.
Then having taken ane dry and wethered stra,
In deip despair, and in ane lofty rage
She sprang up heigh, outfl^ing every fa:
Syne to Panchaia came, to change her age
Upon Apollos altar, to assuage
With outward fire her inward raging fire:
Which then was all her chief and whole desire.
Then being careful, the event to know
Of her, who homeward had returnde again
Where she was bred, where storms dois never blow,
Nor bitter blasts, nor winter snows, nor rain,
But summer still: that countray does so stain
All realms in fairnes. There in haste I sent,
Of her to know they slew and event.
The messinger went there into sic haste,
As could permit the farrnes of the way,
By crossing ower sa money countries waste
Or he come there. Syne with a little stay
Into that land, drew homeward every day:
In his return, like diligence he show
As in his going there, through realms anew.
Fra he returned, then sone without delay
I speared at him, (the certeantie to try)
What word of Phoenix which was flowen away?
And if through all the lands he could her spy,
Where through he went, I bad him not deny,
But tell the truth, yea whither good or ill
Was come of her, to wit it was my will.
He told me then, how she flew bak again,
Where fra she came* and als he did receipt,
How in Panchaia town, she did remain
On Phoebus altar, there for to compleit
With Thus and Myrrh, and other odours sweit
Of flowers of diverse kinds, and of Incens
Her nest With that he left me in suspens.
Till that I charged him no ways for to spair,
Bot presently to tell me out the rest.
He tauld me then, How Titans garland their
Inflamde be heat, reflexing on her nest,
The withered stra, which when she was oppressed
Heir be you fowlis, she bure ay whill she came
There, syne above her nest she laid the same.
And syne he told, how she had such desire
To burn her self, as she sat down therein.
Syne how the Sun the withered stra did fire,
Which brunt her nest, her feathers, bones, and skin
All turned in ash. Whose end dois now begin
My woes: her death maks life to grief in me.
She, whom I rue my eyes did ever see.
O devils of darkness, contraire unto light,
In Phoebus foul, how could ye get such place,
Since ye are hated ay be Phoebus bright?
For still is seen his light dois darkness chase.
But yet ye went into that foul, whose grace,
As Phoebus foul, yet ward the Sun him sell.
Her light his staind, whom in all light dois dwell.
And thou (o Phoenix) why was thou so moved
Thou foul of light, be enemies to thee,
For to forget thy heavenly hewes, whilkis loved
Were both by men and fowlis that did them see?
And syne in hew of ash that they sold be
Converted all: and that thy goodly shape
In Chaos sold, and noght the fire escape?
And thou (o reuthles Death) sold thou deuore
Her? who not only passed by all men's mind
All other fowlis in hew, and shape, but more
In rarenes (sen there was none of her kind
But she alone) whom with thy stounds thou pynde:
And at the last, has perced her through the heart,
But reuth or pity, with thy mortal dart.
Yet worst of all, she lived not half her age.
Why stayde thou Time at least, which all dois tear
To work with her? O what a cruel rage,
To cut her off, before her threid did wear!
Wherein all Planets keeps their course, that year
It was not by the half yet worn away,
Which sold with her have ended on a day.
Then fra their newis, in sorrows soped haill,
Had made us both a while to hold our peace,
Then he began and said, Pairt of my taill
Is yet untold, Lo here one of her race,
Ane worm bred of her ash: Though she, alace,
(Said he) be brunt, this lacks but plumes and breath
To be like her, new gendred by her death.
L'envoy.
Apollo then, who brunt with thy reflex
Thine only foul, through love that thou her bure,
Although thy foul, (whose name does end in X)
Thy burning heat on nowayes could endure,
But brunt thereby: Yet will I the procure,
Late foe to Phoenix, now her friend to be:
Reviving her by that which made her die.
Draw far from heir, mount heigh up through the air,
To gar thy heat and beams be law and neir.
That in this country, which is cold and bair,
Thy glistring beams als ardent may appeir
As they were often in Arabie: so heir
Let them be now, to make ane Phoenix new
Even of this worm of Phoenix ash which grew.
This if thou dois, as sure I hope thou shall,
My tragedy a comike end will have:
Thy work thou has begun, to end it all.
Else made ane worm, to make her out the laue.
This Epitaphe, then beis on Phoenix grave.
Here lies, whom too even be her death and end
Apollo has a longer life her send.
FINIS.
A PARAPHRASTICALL TRANSLATION OVT OF THE POET LVCANE*
LVCANVS LIB. QVINTO.
CAesaris an cursus vestrae sentire putatis
Damnum posse fugae? Veluti si cuncta minentur
Flumina, quos miscent pelago, subducere fontes:
Non magis ablatis vnquam decreverit aequor,
Quam nunc crescit aquis. An vos momenta putatis
Vlla dedisse mihi?

If all the floods amongst them would conclude
To stay their course from running in the sea:
And by that means would think for to delude
The Ocean, who sold impaired be,
As they supposde, believing if that he
Did lack their floods, he should decresse him sell:
Yet if we like the verity to wye,
It pairs him nothing: as I shall you tell.
For out of him they are augmented all,
And most part creat, as ye shall persaue:
For when the Sun does souk the vapors small
Forth of the seas, whilks them contain and have,
A part in wind, in wete and rain the laue
He render dois: which does augment their strands.
Of Neptuns woll a coat syne they him weaue,
By hurling to him fast out ower the lands.
When all is done, do to him what they can
None can persaue that they do swell him mair.
I put the case then that they never ran:
Yet not theless that could him nowise pair:
What needs he then to count it, or to cair,
Except their folies would the more be shawin?
Sen though they stay, it harms him not a hair,
what gain they, though they had their course withdrawe^?
So even siclike: Though subjects do conjure
For to rebel against their Prince and King:
By leaving him although they hope to smure
That grace, wherewith God maks him for to ring,
Though by his gifts he shaw him self bening,
To help their need, and make them thereby gain:
Yet lack of them no harm to him does bring,
When they to rewe their folly shall be feign.
L'enuoy.
Then Floods run on your wounted course of old,
Which God by Nature dewly hes provided:
For though ye stay, as I before have told,
And cast in doubt which God has else decyded:
To be conioynde, by you to be divided:
To kythe your spite, and do the Deep no skaith:
Far better were in others ilk confyded,
Ye Floods, thou Deep, whilks were your duties both.
FINIS.
ANE SCHORT TREATISE, CONTAINING SOME REVLIS and cautelis to be obseruit and
eschewit in Scottis Poesy.

A QVADRAIN OF ALEXANDRIN VERSE, DECLARING TO QVHOME THE Author hes directit
his labor.
To ignorants obdurde, quhair vvilfull error lyis,
Nor it to curious folks, quhilks carping dois deiect thee,
Nor it to learned men, quha thinks them only vvyis,
Bot to the docile bairns of knavvledge I direct thee.
THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
THE cause why (docile Reader) I have not dedicat this short treatise to any
particular personis, (as co^mounly workis vsis to be) is, that I esteem all
thais quha hes already some beginning of knawledge, with ane earnest desire to
atteyne to farther, alyke meit for the reading of this work, or any other,
quhilk may help them to the atteining to their foirsaid desire. Bot as to this
work, quhilk is intitulit, The Reulis and cautelis to be obseruit and eschevvit
in Scottis Poesy, e may marvel paraventure, quhairfore I sold have writtin
in that matter, sen sa money learnit men, both of auld and of late hes already
written thairof in diverse and sindry languages: I answer, That
nochtwithstanding, I have lykewayis writtin of it, for two caussis: The ane is,
As for the^ that wrait of auld, like as the time is changeit sensyne, sa is the
ordour of Poesy changeit. For then they obseruit not Flowing, nor eschewit
not Ryming in terms, besides sindrie other thingis, quhilk now we observe, and
eschew, and dois weil in sa doing: because that now, quhe^ the world is waxit
auld, we have all their opinionis in writ, quhilk were learned before our time,
besides our awin ingynis, quhair as they then did it only be their awin
ingynis, but help of any other. Thairfore, quhat I speik of Poesy now, I speik
of it, as being come to mannis age and perfectioun, quhair as then, it was bot
in the infancy and chyldheid. The other cause is, That as for them that hes
written in it of late, there hes never ane of them written in our language.
For albeit sindrie hes written of it in English, quhilk is lykest to our
language, it we differ from them in sindrie reulis of Poesy, as e will find
be experience I have lykewayis omittit diverse figures, quhilkis are necessare
to be vsit in verse, for two causis. The ane is, because they are vsit in all
languages, and thairfore are spokin of be Du Bellay, and sindrie vtheris, quha
hes written in this airt. Quhairfore gif I wrait of them also, it sold seem
that I did bot repete that, quhilk they have written, and it not sa weil, as
they have done already. The other cause is, that they are figures of Rhetorique
and Dialectique, quhilkis airtis I profess nocht, and thairfore will apply to
my self the counsale, quhilk Apelles gave to the shoemaker, quhe^ he said to
him, seeing him find falt with the shankis of the Image of Venus, after that he
had found falt with the pantoun, Ne suitor vltra crepidam.

I will also wish ow (docile Reidar) that or e cu^mer ow with reiding their
reulis, e may find in our self sie a beginning of Nature, as e may put in
practice in our verse many of their foirsaidis preceptis, or ever e sie them as
they are heir set down. For gif Nature be nocht the chief worker in this airt,
Reulis will be bot a band to Nature, and will make ow within short space weary of
the haill airt: quhair as, gif Nature be chief, and bent to it, reulis will be
ane help and staff to Nature. I will end heir, lest my preface be langer nor my
purpose and haill matter following: wishing ow, docile Reidar, als good succes
and great proffeit by reiding this short treatise, as I tuke earnist and
willing panis to blok it, as e sie, for our cause. Fare weill.

I Have insert in the hinder end of this Treatise, may kyndis of versis
quhilks are not cuttit or brokin, bot alyke many feit in every line of the
verse, and how they are commounly namit, with my opinioun for quhat subiectis
ilk kind of their verse is meitest to be vsit.

TO know the quantity of our lang or short fete in they lines, quhilk I have
put in the reule, quhilk teachis ow to know quhat is Flowing, I have markit
the lang fute with this mark, -- and abone the heid of the short fute, I have
put this mark v.

SONNET OF THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
SEn for our saik I write upon our airt,
Apollo, Pan, and e o Musis nine
And thou, o Mercure, for to help thy pairt
I do implore, sen thou be thy ingyne,
Nixt after Pan had found the quhissill, syne
Thou did perfyte, that quhilk he bot espyit:
And after that made Argus for to tyne
(quha kepit Io) all his vvindois by it.
Concur e Gods, it can not be denyit:
Sen in your airt of Poesy I write.
Auld birds to learn by teiching it is tryit:
Sic docens discam gif e help to dyte.
Then Reidar sie of nature thou have pairt,
Syne laikis thou nocht, bot heir to reid the airt.
SONNET DECIFRING THE PERFYTE POET.
ANe ripe ingyne, ane quick and vvalkned wit,
With sommair reasons, suddenly applyit,
For every purpose using reasons fit,
With skilfulnes, where learning may be spyit,
With pithie vvordis, for to expres ovv by it
His full intention in his proper leid,
The purity quhair of, vveill hes he tryit:
With memory to keip quhat he dois reid,
With skilfulnes and figuris, quhilks proceid
From Rhetorique, with everlasting fame,
With vthers vvoundring, preassing with all speid
For to atteine to merit sic a name.
All their into the perfyte Poet be.
Goddis, grant I may obtain the Laurel try.
THE REVLIS AND CAVTELIS TO BE OBSERVIT and eschewit in Scottis Poesy.
CAP. I.
FIRST, e sall keip just cullouris, quhair of the cautelis are their.

That e ryme nocht twyse in ane syllabe. As for exemple, that e make not prove
and reprove ryme together, nor houe for houeing on horse bak, and behoue.

That e ryme ay to the hinmest lang syllabe, (with accent) in the line, suppose
it be not the hinmest syllabe in the line, as bakbyte ovv, and out flyte ovv,
It rymes in byte and flyte, because of the lenth of the syllabe, and accent
being there, and not in ovv, howbeit it be the hinmest syllabe of ather of the
lynis. Or question and digestion, It rymes in ques and ges, albeit they be bot
the antepenult syllabis, and other two behind ilkane of them.

e aucht alwayis to note, That as in their foirsaidis, or the like wordis, it
rymes in the hinmest lang syllabe in the line, althoucht there be other short
syllabis behind it, Sa is the hinmest lang syllabe the hinmest fute, suppose
there be other short syllabis behind it, quhilkis are eatin up in the
pronounceing, and na wayis comptit as fete.

e man be war likewayis (except necessity compel you) with Ryming in Termis,
quhilk is to say, that your first or hinmest word in the line, exceid not two
or three syllabis at the may, using thrie als seindill as ye can. The cause
quhairfore e sall not place a long word first in the line, is, that all lang
words hes ane syllabe in them sa very lang, as the lenth their of eatis up in
the pronouncing euin the other syllabes, quhilks ar placit lang in the same
word, and thairfore spillis the flowing of that line. As for exe^ple, in this
word, Arabia, the second syllabe (ra) is sa lang, that it eatis up in the
prononcing [a] quhilk is the hinmest syllabe of the same word. Quhilk [a]
althocht it be in a lang place, it it kythis not sa, because of the great lenth
of the preceding syllabe (ra). As to the cause quhy e sall not put a lang word
hinmest in the line, It is, because, that the lenth of the secound syllabe (ra)
eating up the lenth of the other lang syllabe, [a] makis it to serve bot as a
tail unto it, together with the short syllabe preceding. And because this
tail nather seruis for color nor fute, as I spak before, it man be thairfore
repetit in the nixt line ryming unto it, as it is set down in the first:
quhilk makis, that e will scarcely get many wordis to ryme unto it, ea, nane at
all will e find to ryme to sindrie other langer wordis. Thairfore chiefly be
war of inserting sic lang wordis hinmest in the line, for the cause quhilk I
last allegit. Besydis that nather first nor last in the line, it keipis na
Flowing. The reulis and cautelis quhairof are their, as followis.

CHAP. II.
FIRST, e man understand that all syllabis are deuydit in thrie kinds: That
is, some schort, some lang, and some indifferent. Be indifferent I mean, they
quhilk are ather lang or short, according as e place them.

The form of placeing syllabes in verse, is this. That our first syllabe in
the line be short, the second lang, the third short, the fourt lang, the fyft
short, the sixth lang, and sa forth to the end of the line. Alwayis tak heid,
that the number of our fete in every line be euin, and nocht odd: as four,
six, aucht, or ten: and not thrie, five, seuin, or nine, except it be in broken
verse, quhilkis are out of reul and daily inuentit be diverse Poetis. Bot gif e
wald ask me the reulis, quhairby to know every ane of their three foirsaidis
kyndis of syllabes, I answer, our ear man be the only judge and discerner
thairof. And to prove this, I remit to the judgment of the same, quhilk of
their two lynis following flowis best, Into^ the Sea^then Lu^cife^r vpspra^ng.
In the^ Seathe^n Luci^fer to^ vpspra^ng.


I doubt not bot our ear makkis ou easily to persaue, that the first line
flowis weil, and the other nathing at all. The reasoun is, because the first
line keips the reule abone written, To wit, the first fute short, the secound
lang, and sa forth, as I show before: quhair as the other is direct contrair
to the same. Bot specially tak heid, quhen our line is of fourtene, that our
Sectioun in aucht be a lang monosyllabe, or ^llis the hinmest syllabe of a word
alwais being lang, as I said before. The cause quhy it man be ane of their two,
is, for the Music, because that quhen our line is ather of xiiij or xij fete,
it will be drawin sa lang in the singing, as e man rest in the mids of it,
quhilk is the Sectioun: sa as, gif our Sectioun be nocht ather a monosyllabe,
or ellis the hinmest syllabe of a word as I said before, bot the first syllabe
of a polysyllabe, the Music sall make ow sa to rest in the mids of that
word, as it sall cut the ane half of the word fra the other, and sa sall make it
seem two different wordis, that is bot ane. This aucht only to be obseruit in
their foirsaid lang lynis: for the shortness of all shorter lynis, then their
before mentionat, is the cause, that the Music makis na rest in the mids of
them, and thairfore their obseruationis seruis nocht for them. Only tak heid,
that the Sectioun in them kythe something langer nor any other feit in that
line, except the secound and the last, as I have said before.

e man tak heid lykewayis, that our langest lynis exceid nocht fourtene fete,
and that our shortest be nocht within four.

Remember also to make a Sectioun in the mids of every line, quhether the line
be lang or short. Be Sectioun I mean, that gif our line be of fourtene fete,
our aucht fute, man not only be langer then the seuint, or other short fete,
bot also langer nor any other lang fete in the same line, except the secound
and the hinmest. Or gif your line be of twelf fete, our Sectioun to be in the
sext Or gif of ten, our Sectioun to be in the sext also. The cause quhy it is
not in syue, is, because five is odd, and every odd fute is s^ort. Or gif
your line be of aucht fete, our Sectioun to be in the fourt. Gif of sex, in the
fourt also. Gif of four, our Sectioun to be in two.

e aucht likewise be war with often composing our haill lynis of monosyllabis
only, (albeit our language have sa many, as we can nocht weill eschew it)
because the may pairt of them are indifferent, and may be in short or lang
place, as e like. Some wordis of diverse syllabis are likewayis indifferent, as
Thairfore, restore.
I thairfore, then.


In the first, thairfore, (their) is short, and (fore) is lang: In the other,
(their) is lang, and (fore) is short, and it both flowis alike weill. Bot their
indifferent wordis, composit of diverse syllabes, are rare, suppose in
monosyllabes, co^moun. The cause then, quhy ane haill line aucht nocht to be
composit of monosyllabes only, is, that they being for the may pairt
indifferent, nather the secound, hinmest, nor Sectioun, will be langer nor the
other lang fete in the same line. Thairfore e man place a word co^posit of
diverse syllabes, and not indifferent, ather in the secound, hinmest, or
Sectioun, or in all thrie.

e man also tak heid, that quhen their fallis any short syllabis after the last
lang syllabe in the line, that e repeit them in the line quhilk rymis to the
other, evin as e set them down in the first line: as for exempill, e man not
say Then feir nocht
Nor heir ocht.
Bot
Then feir nocht
Nor heir nocht.


Repeting the same, nocht, in both the lynis: because this syllabe, nocht,
nather serving for color not fute, is bot a tail to the lang fute preceding,
and thairfore is repetit lykewayis in the nixt line, quhilk rymes unto it, euin
as it set down in the first.

There is also a kind of indifferent wordis, asweill as of syllabis, albeit
few in number. The nature quhairof is, that gif e place them in the beginning
of a line, they are shorter be a fute, nor they are, gif e place them hinmest
in the line, as Sen patience I man have perforce.
I live in hope with patience.


e se there are bot aucht fete in ather of both their lynis above written. The
cause quhair of is, that patience, in the first line, in respect it is in the
beginning thairof, is bot of two fete, and in the last line, of thrie, in
respect it is the hinmest word of that line. To know and discern their kind of
wordis from vtheris, our ear man be the only judge, as of all the other parts
of Flowing, the very twichestane quhairof is Music.

I have teachit ow now shortly the reulis of Ryming, Fete, and Flowing. There
restis yet to teach ow the wordis, sentences, and phrasis necessair for a
Poet to use in his verse, quhilk I have set down in reulis, as after followis.

CHAP. III.
FIRST, that in quhatsumeuer e put in verse, e put in na wordis, ather metri
causa, or it, for filling forth the number of the fete, bot that they be all sa
necessare, as e sold be constrainit to use them, in case e were speiking the
same purpose in prose. And thairfore that our wordis appear to have cum out
willingly, and by nature, and not to have been thrawin out constrainedly, be
compulsioun.

That e eschew to insert in our verse, a lang rabble of mennis names, or names
of tounis, or sik other names. Because it is hard to make many lang names all
placit together, to flow weill. Thairfore quhen that fallis out in our purpose,
e sall ather put bot two or three of them in every line, mixing other wordis
amang them, or ellis specify bot two or three of them at all, saying (With
the laif of that race) or (With the rest in they pairtis,) or sic other like
wordis: as for exemple, Out through his cairt, quhair Eous was eik
With other three, quhilk Phaeton had dravvin.


e sie their is bot ane name there specifeit, to serve for other thrie of that
sort.

e man also take heid to frame our wordis and sentencis according to the matter:
As in Flyting and Inuectiues, our wordis to be cuttit short, and hurland over
heuch. For thais quhilkis are cuttit short, I mean be sic wordis as their, Iis
neir cair
for
I sall never cair, gif our subject
were of love, or tragedies. Because in them our words man be drawin lang,
quhilkis in Flyting man be short.

e man lykewayis tak heid, that e waill our wordis according to the purpose:
As, in ane heich and learnit purpose, to use heich, pithie, and learnit wordis.

Gif our purpose be of love, To use commoun language, with some passionate
wordis.

Gif our purpose be of tragical materis, To use lamentable wordis, with some
heich, as rauishit in admiratioun.

Gif our purpose be of landwart effairis, To use corruptit and vplandis wordis.

And finally, quhatsumeuer be our subject, to use vocabula artis, quhairby e
may the mair viuelie represent that persoun, quhais pairt e paint out.

This is likewayis neidfull to be vsit in sentences, als weill as in wordis. As
gif our subject be heich and lear nit, to use learnit and infallible reasonis,
prouin be necessities.

Gif our subject be of love, To use wilful reasonis, proceeding rather from
passioun, nor reasoun.

Gif our subject be of landwart effaris, To use sklender reasonis, mixed with
gross ignorance, nather keiping form nor ordour. And sa forth, ever framing
our reasonis, according to the quality of our subject.

Let all our verse be Literal, sa far as may be, quhatsumeuer kind they be
of, bot specially Tumbling verse for flyting. Be Literal I mean, that the
may pairt of our line, sall rynne upon a letter, as this tumbling line rynnis
upon F.

Fetching fude for to feid it fast forth of the Farie. e man observe that their
Tumbling verse flowis not on that fassoun, as vtheris dois. For all vtheris
keipis the reule quhilk I gave before, To wit, the first fute short the secound
lang, and sa forth. Quhair as their hes two short, and ane lang throuch all the
line, quhen they keip ordour: albeit the may pairt of them be out of ordour,
and keipis na kind nor reule of Flowing, and for that cause are callit
Tumbling verse: except the short lynis of aucht in the hinder end of the verse,
the quhilk flowis as other verses dois, as e will find in the hinder end of
this buke, quhair I give exemple of sindrie kyndis of versis.

CHAP. IIII.
MARK also thrie special ornamentis to verse, quhilkis are, Comparisons,
Epithetis, and Prouerbis.

As for Comparisons, take heid that they be sa proper for the subject, that
nather they be over bas, gif our subject be heich, for then sold our subject
disgrace our Comparisoun, nather our Comparisoun be heich quhen our subject is
basse, for then sall our Comparisoun disgrace our subject. Bot let sic a
mutual correspondence and similitude be betwix the^, as it may appear to be a
meit Comparisoun for sic a subject, and sa sall they ilkane decore other.

As for Epithetis, It is to descryue briefly, en passant, the natural of
every thing e speik of, be adding the proper adjective unto it, quhairof there
are two fassons. The ane is, to descryue it, be making a corruptit word,
composit of two diverse simple wordis, as Apollogyde-Sunne The other fasson, is,
be Circumlocution, as Apollo reular of the Sun.

I esteem this last fassoun best, Because it expressis the authouris meaning
als weill as the other, and it makis na corruptit wordis, as the other dois.

As for the Prouerbis, they man be proper for the subject, to beautify it,
chosen in the same form as the Comparisoun.

CHAP. V.
IT is also meit, for the better decoratioun of the verse to use sumtyme the
figure of Repetitioun, as Quhylis joy rang,
Quhylis noy rang. etc.


e sie this word quhylis is repetit heir. This form of repetitioun sometime
vsit, decoris the verse very mekle* ea quhen it cu^mis to purpose, it will be
cumly to repete sic a word aucht or nine times in a verse.

CHAP. VI.
E man also be war with composing any thing in the same manner, as hes been
ower often vsit of before. As in special, gif e speik of love, be war e
descryue our Loves makdome, or her fairnes. And siclyke that e descryue not the
morning, and rising of the Sun, in the Preface of our verse: for their thingis
are sa often and dyuerslie writtin upon be Poetis already, that gif e do the
like, it will appear, e bot imitate, and that it cummis not of our awin
Inuentioun, quhilk is ane of the chief properteis of ane Poet. Thairfore gif
our subject be to praise our Love, e sall rather praise her other qualiteis,
nor her fairnes, or her shaip: or ellis e sall speik some lytill thing of it,
and syne say, that our wittis are sa small, and our vttera^ce sa barren, that e
can not discryue any part of her worthelie: remitting alwayis to the Reider, to
judge of her, in respect sho matches, or rather excellis Venus, or any woman,
quhome to it sall please ow to compaire her. Bot gif our subject be sic, as e
man speik some thing of the morning, or Sun rising, tak heid, that quhat name
e give to the Sun, the Moon, or other starris, the ane time, gif e happin to
write thairof another time, to change their names. As gif e call the Sun
Titan, at a time, to call him Phoebus or Apollo the other time, and siclyke the Moon, and other Planettis.

CHAP. VII.
BOT sen Invention, is ane of the chief vertewis in a Poet, it is best that e
invent our awin subject, our self, and not to compose of seen subiectis.
Especially, translating any thing out of other language, quhilk doing, e not
only essay not our awin ingyne of Inuentioun, bot be the same means, e are
bound, as to astaik, to follow that buikis phrasis, quhilk e translate.

e man also be war of writing any thing of materis of co^moun weill, or other
sic grave seen subiectis (except Metaphorically, of manifest treuth opinly
knawin, it nochtwithstanding using it very seindil) because nocht only e essay
nocht our awin Inuentioun, as I spak before, bot lykewayis they are to grave
materis, for a Poet to mell in. Bot because e can not have the Inuentioun
except it come of Nature, I remit it thairvnto, as the chief cause, not only
of Inuentioun, bot also of all theyther pairtis of Poesy. For airt is only
bot ane help and a remembrance to Nature, as I show ow in the Preface.

CHAP. VIII.
tuiching the kyndis of versis, mentionat in the Preface.
FIrst, there is ryme quhilk seruis only for lang historeis, and it are nocht
verse. As for exemple, In Maii when that the blissful Phoebus bricht,
The lamp of joy, the heavens gemme of licht,
The goldin cairt, and the etheriall King,
With purpour face in Orient dois spring,
May angel-lyke ascending in his sphere,
And birds with all their heavenly voces clear
Dois make a svveit and heauinly harmony,
And fragrant flours dois spring up lustely:
Into this season svveitest of delight,
To walk I had a lusty appetyte.
And sa forth.

For the descriptioun of Heroique actis, Martial and knichtly faittis of
arms, use this kind of verse following, call it Heroical, As Meik mundane
mirror, myrrie and modest,
Blyth, kind, and courts, comely, clean, and chest,
To all exemple for thy honesty,
As richest rose, or rubie, by the rest,
With gracis grave, and gesture may digest,
Ay to thy honnour alvvayis having eye.
Were fassons fliemade, they micht be found in the:
Of blissings all, be blyth, thou hes the best,
With every berne belouit for to be.


For any heich and grave subiectis, specially drawin out of learnit authoruis,
use this kind of verse following, callit Ballat Royal, as That nicht he ceist,
and went to bed, bot greind
it fast for day, and thocht the nicht to lang:
At last Diana down her head recleind,
Into the sea. Then Lucifer vpsprang,
Auror as post, whom sho did send amang
The Ieittie cludds, for to foretell ane hour,
Before sho stay her tears, quhilk Ouide sang
Fell for her love, quhilk turnit in a flour.


For tragical materis, complaintis, or testamentis, use this kind of verse
following, callit Troilus verse, as To thee Echo, and thou to me agane,
In the desert, amangs the vvods and wells,
Quhair destiny hes bound the to remane,
But company, within the firths and fells,
Let us complein, with woeful outts and else,
A shaft, a shotter, that our hearts hes slane:
To thee Echo, and thou to me agane.


For flyting, or Inuectiues, use this kind of verse following, callit
Rouncefallis or Tumbling verse.

In the hinder end of harvest upon Alhallovv ene,
Quhen our good nichtbors rydis (nou gif I reid richt)
Some bucklit on a benvvod, and some on a been,
Ay trottand into troops fra the tvvylicht:
Some sadland a sho ape, all grathed into grene:
Some hotcheand on a hemp stalk, hovand on a heicht.
The king of Fary with the Court of the Elf queen,
With many elrage Incubus rydand that nicht: There ane elf on ane ape ane
vnsell begat:
Beside a pot both auld and worn,
This bratshard in ane bus was borne:
They fand a monster on the morn,
War facit nor a Cat.

For compendious praising of any bukes, or the authouris thairof, or any
argumentis of other historeis, quhair sindrie sentences, and change of purposis
are requyrit, use Sonet ver^e, of fourtene lynis, and ten fete in every line.
The exemple quhairof, I neid nocht to shaw ow, in respect I have set down two
in the beginning of this treatise.

In materis of love, use this kind of verse, quhilk we call Commoun verse, as
Quhais answer made them nocht sa glaid
That they sold thus the victors be,
As even the answer quhilk I haid
Did greatly joy and confort me:
Quhen lo, this spak Apollo mine,
All that thou seikis, it sall be thine.


Like verse of ten fete, as this foirsaid is of aucht, e may use lykewayis in
love materis: as also all kyndis of cuttit and brokin verse, quhairof new
forms are daily inuentit according to the Poetis pleasour, as Quha vvald have
tyrde to heir that tone,
Quhilk birds corroborat ay abone
Throuch schouting of the Larkis?
They sprang sa heich into the skies
Quhill Cupide vvalknis with the cryis
Of Naturis chapel Clarkis.
Then leaving all the Heauins above
He lichied on the eard.
Lo! how that lytill God of love.
Before me then appeard,
So myld-lyke
With bovv three quarters skant
And chyld-lyke
So moylie
He lukit like a Sant.
And coylie
And sa forth.

This only kind of brokin verse abone writtin, man of necessity, in their
last short fete, as so moylie and coylie, have bot two fete and a tail to
ilkane of them, as e sie, to gar the color and ryme be in the penult syllabe.

Any of their foirsaidis kinds of ballatis of haill verse, and not cuttit or
brokin as this last is, gif e like to put ane owerword till any of them, as
making the last line of the first verse, to be the last line of every other
verse in that ballat, will set weill for love materis.

Bot besydis their kinds of brokin or cuttit verse, quhilks ar inuentit daily
be Poetis, as I show before, there are sindrie kinds of haill verse, with all
their lynis alyke lang, quhilk I have heir omittit, and taken bot only their
few kinds abone specifeit as the best, quhilk may be applyit to any kind of
subject, bot rather to their, quhairof I have spokin before.

THE CIIII. PSALM, TRANSLATED OVT OF TREMELLIVS.

O Lord inspyre my spreit and pen, to praise
Thy Name, whose greatness far surpassis all:
That syne, I may thy gloir and honor blaise,
Which cleithis the over: about the like a wall
The light remainis. O thou, whose charge and call
Made Heavens like courtenis for to spread abreid,
Who bowed the waters so, as serve they shall
For cristall syilring over thy house to gleid.
Who walks upon the wings of restles wind,
Who of the clouds his chariot made, even he,
Who in his presence still the spreits does find,
Ay ready to fulfill ilk just decrie
Of his, whose servants fire and flammis they be.
Who set the earth on her fundations sure,
So as her brangling none shall ever see:
Who at thy charge the deip upon her bure.
So, as the very tops of mountains hie
Be fluidis were onis ouerflowed at thy command,
Ay whill thy thundering voice sone made them fly
Ower hiddeous hills and howes, till noght but sand
Was left behind, syne with thy mighty hand
Thou limits made unto the roaring deip.
So shall she never droun again the land,
But brek her wawes on rockis, her mairch to keip.
Their are thy workis, who maid the strands to breid,
Syne rinn among the hills from fountains cleir,
Whairto wyld Asses often dois rinn with speid,
With other beasts to drink. Hard by we heir
The chirping birds among the leaves, with beir
To sing, whil all the rocks about rebounde.
A woundrous work, that thou, o Father deir,
Maks throtts so small yield forth so great a sound!
O thou who from thy palace often letts fall
(For to refresh the hills) thy blessed rain:
Who with thy works mainteins the earth and all:
Who maks to grow the herbs and grass to gain.
The herbs for food to man, grass dois remain
For food to horse, and cattle of all kind.
Thou causest them not pull at it in vain,
But be their food. such is thy will and mind.
Who dois rejoice the heart of man with wine,
And who with oil his face maks cleir and bright,
And who with food his stomach strengthnes syne,
who nurishes the very treis aright.
The Cedars evin of Liban tale and wight
He planted has, where birds do bigg their nest.
He maid the Firr treis of a woundrous hight,
Where Storks dois make their dwelling place, and rest.
Thou made the barren hills, wild goats refuge.
Thou maid the rocks, a residence and rest
For Alpin ratts, where they do live and ludge.
Thou maid the Moon, her course, as thou thought best.
Thou maid the Sun in time go to, that lest
He still sold shine, then night sold never come.
But thou in ordour all things hes so dressed,
Some beasts for day, for night are also some.
For Lions young at night beginnis to raire,
And from their denns to crave of God some pray:
Then in the morning, gone is all their caire,
And homeward to their caves rinnis fast, fra day
Begin to kythe, the Sun dois so them fray.
Then man gois forth, fra time the Sun dois rise,
And whill the evening he remanis away
At lesume labor, where his living lies.
How large and mighty are thy workis, o Lord!
And with what wisdom are they wrought, but fail.
The earths great fulness, of thy gifts record
Dois bear: Heir of the Seas (which diverse skaile
Of fish contenis) dois witness bear: Ilk sail
Of diverse ships upon the swolling wawes
Dois testify, as dois the monstrous whaile,
Who frayis all fishes with his ravening Jaws.
All their (o Lord) yea all this woundrous heap
Of living things, in seasoun craves their fill
Of food from thee. Thou giving, Lord, they reap:
Thy open hand with good things fills them still
When so thou list: but contrar, when thou will
Withdraw thy face, then are they troubled sair,
Their breath by thee receavd, sone dois them kill:
Syne they return into their ashes bair.
But notwithstanding, Father dear, in case
Thou breath on them again, then they reviue.
In short, thou dois, o Lord, renew the face
Of all the earth, and all that in it live.
Therefore immortal praise to him we give:
Let him rejoice into his works he maid,
Whose look and touch, so hills and earth do is greiue,
As earth do is tremble, mountains reikis, afraid.
To Iehoua I all my life shall sing,
To sound his Name I ever still shall cair:
It shall be sweit my thinking on that King:
In him I shall be glaid for ever mair:
O let the wicked be into no whair
In earth. O let the sinful be destroyde.
Bless him my soul who name Iehoua bair:
O bless him now with notts that are enioyde.
Hallelu-iah.
ANE SCHORT POEM OF TIME.
AS I was pansing in a morning, air,
And could not sleip, nor nawayis take me rest,
Forth for to walk, the morning was sa fair,
Athort the feilds, it seemed to me the best.
The East was clear, whereby belyue I gest
That fytie Titan cumming was in sight,
Obscuring chaste Diana by his light.
Who by his rising in the Azure skies,
Did dewlie helse all them on earth do dwell.
The balmie dew through birning drouth he dryis,
Which made the soil to savor sweit and smell,
By dew that on the night before down fell,
Which then was soukit by the Delphienns heit
Up in the air: it was so light and weit.
Whose hie ascending in his purpour Sphere
Provoked all from Morpheus to flee:
As beasts to feid, and birds to sing with beir,
Men to their labor, bissie as the Be:
Yet idle men deuysing did I see,
How for to drive the time that did them irk,
By sindrie pastymes, quhill that it grew mirk.
Then woundred I to see them seik a wyle,
So willing lie the precious time to tyne:
And how they did them selfis so far begyle,
To fashe of time, which of it self is fine.
Fra time be past, to call it bakwart syne
Is bot in vain: therefore men sold be war,
To sleuth the time that flees fra them so far.
For what has man bot time into this life,
Which gives him day is his God aright to know:
Wherefore then sold we be at sic a strife,
So speedily our selfis for to withdraw
Euin from the time, which is on nowayes slaw
To fly from us, suppose we fled it noght?
More wise we were, if we the time had soght.
Bot sen that time is sic a precious thing,
I wald we sold bestow it into that
Which were most pleasour to our heavenly King.
Flee ydilteth, which is the greatest lat.
Bot sen that death to all is destinat,
Let us employ that time that God has send us,
In doing weill, that good men may commend us.
Haec quoque perficiat, quod perficit omnia, Tempus. FINIS.
A TABLE OF SOME OBSCVRE WORDIS WITH THEIR SIGnifications, after the ordour of
the Alphabet.
VVordis Significations Ammon Jupiter Ammon. Ande A village beside Mantua where
Virgill was borne. Alexandria A famous city in Egypt, where was the notable
library gathered by Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
B
VVordis Significations Bethaniens secound living was revived be Christ,
Lazarus of Bethania, who reid John II Chap.
C
VVordis Significations Castalia Parnassus. A well at the fute of the hill
Celaeno The chief of the Harpyes, a kind of monsters with wingis and women's
faces, whom the Poets feyneis to represent theuis. Cerberus The thrie headed
porter of hell. Cimmerien night Drevin from a kind of people in the East,
called Cimmerij, who are great theuis, and dwellis in dark caves, and
therefore, sleeping in sin, is called Cimmerien night. Circuler dance The
round motionis of the Planets, and of their heavens, applied to seuin sindrie
metallis. Clio One of the Muses. Cypris The dwelling place of Venus, tearming
continens pro contento. Cyprian torche Lovis darte.
D
VVordis Significations Delphien Songs Poems, and verses. drawn from the
Oracle of Apollo at Delphos. Dirae Three furies of hell, Alecto, Megera, and
Tesiphone. Dodon A city of the kingdom of Epirus, besides the which, there
was a wood and a Temple therein, consecrated to Jupiter.
E
VVordis Significations Electre A metal, four parts gold and fifth part silver.
Elise field In Latin Campi Elisii, a joy full place in hell, where as the Poets
feineis all the happy spreits do remain. Esculape A mediciner, after made a
god.
G
VVordis Significations Greatest thunders Jupiter (as the Poets feineis) had
two thunders, whereof he sent the greatest upon the Giants, who contemned him.
H
VVordis Significations Hermes An Aegiptia^ Philosopher soon after the time of
Moses, confessed in his Dialogues one only God to be Creator of all things,
and granted the errors of his forefathers, who brought in the superstitious
worshipping of Idols. Hippolyte After his members were drawin in sunder by
four horses, Esculapius at Neptuns request, glewed them together, and reviued
him.
M
VVordis Significations Mausole tomb One of the seauin miracles which Artemise
caused to be builded for her husband by Timotheus, Briace, Scope, and sindrie
other workmen. Mein A river in Almanie. Sein A river in France.


The Authors meaning by these two rivers is, that the original of the Almanis
came first out of France, contrary to the vulgar opinion.

N
VVordis Significations Nine voiced mouth The nine Muses, whereof Vranie was
one.
P
VVordis Significations Panchaia A town in the East, wherein it is written,
the Phoenix burnis her self upon Apollos altar. Pinde or Pindus A hill
consecrate to Apollo, and the Muses. Phoemonoe A woman who pronounced the
Oracles of Apollo.
S
VVordis Significations Seamans stars The seven stars. Semele Mother of
Bacchus, who being deceived by Juno, made Jupiter come to her in his least
thunder, which neuertheless consumde her. Syrenes Taken heir for littill gray
birds of Canaria.
T
VVordis Significations Thais A common harlot of Alexandria. Triton A monster
in the sea, shapin like a man. Turnus sister, Named Iuturna, a goddess of the
water, who in the shape of her brothers waggonner led his chariot through the
fields, ay till Alecto appeared unto them in shape of an Howlet.
V
VVordis Significations Vranie. The heavenly Muse.


FINIS.
Sonnet of the Author.
THE facound Greek, Demosthenes by name,
His tongue was ones into his youth so slow,
As evin that airt, Rhetorique.
which floorish made his fame,
He scarce could name it for a time, e know.
So of small seidis the Liban Cedres grow:
So of an Egg the Egle does proceid:
From fountains small great Nilus flood does flow:
Evin so of rawnis do mighty fishes bried.
Therefore, good Reader, when as thou dois reid
These my first fruictis, dispyse them not at all.
Who watts, bot these may able be indeid
Of fyner Poemis the beginning small.
Then, rather loaue my meaning and my panis,
Then lak my dull ingyne and blunted branis.
FINIS.
I HAVE INSERT FOR THE FILLING OVT OF THEIR VACAND PAGEIS, THE VERY wordis of
Plinius upon the Phoenix, as followis.
C. PLINII Not. Hist. Lib. Decimi, Cap. 2. De Phoenice. Aethiopes atque Indi,
discolores maxim and inenarrabiles ferunt aues, and ante omnes nobilem Arabia
Phoenice^: haud scio an fabulose, vnum in toto orb, nec visum mag nopere.
Aquilae narratur magnitudine, auri fulgore circa colla, caetera purpureus,
caeruleam roseis caudam pennis distinguentibus, cristis faciem, caputque plumeo
apice cohonestante. Primus atque diligentisimus togatorum de eo prodidit
Manilius, Senator ille, maximis nobilis doctrinis doctore nullo: neminem
extitisle qui viderit vescente^: sac^um in Arabia Soli esse, viuere annis DCLX.
senescenrem, casia thui isque surculis construere nidu^, replere odoribus, and
superemori. Ex ossibus deinde and memedullis eius nasci primo ceu vermiculum:
inde fieri pullum: principioque just a funeri priori reddere, and totum defer
nidum prope Panchaiam in Solis vrbem, and in ara ibi deponere. Cum huius alitis
vita magni conuersionem anni fieri prodit idem Manilius, iterumque
significationes tempestatum and siderum easdem reuerti. Hoc autem circa
meridiem incipere, quo die signum Arietis Sol intrauerit. Et fuisse eius
conuersionis annum prode^te se P. Licinio, M. Cornelio Consulibus. Cornelius
Valerianus Phoenicem deuolasse in Aegyptum tradit, Q. Plautio, Sex. Papinio
Coss. Allatus est and in vrbem Claudij Principis Censura, anno vrbis DCCC, and
in comitio propositus, quod actis testatum est, sed quem falsum esse nemo
dubitaret.

FINIS.
I helped my self also in my Tragedy thairof, with the Phoenix of Lactantius
Firmianus, with Gesnerus de Auibus, and diverse vthers, bot I have only insert
their foresaid words of Plinius, Because I follovv him may in my Tragedy.

Farevveill.

