An Attestation of many Learned, Godly, and famous Divines, Lights of
Religion, and pillars of the Gospel, justifying this doctrine, viz. That the
Church-governement ought to be always with the peoples free consent.

Also this, That a true Church under the Gospel contains no more ordinary
Congregations but one.

In the discourse whereof, specially Doctor Downames and also D. Bilsons chief
matters in their writings against the same, are answered.

Calvin. Instit 4.3.2. He labors the destruction and ruin of the Church,
whosoever either seeks to abolish this order and this kind of government
whereof we treat, or makes light of it as not so necessary.

ANNO DOM. 1613.

To my Christian and beloved friends in London and elsewhere in England, Grace
and peace be multiplied in JESUS CHRIST our Lord.
THe great and long afflictions which it has pleased God to call me unto,
only for testifying his heavenly truth against the grievous corruptions of the
Church in our Land, are well known unto you all, my most dear and loving
friends. In the midst of which my troubles what comfort J have received from
you, though I publish not, yet both a most thankful remembrance thereof
remains in my heart, and with God a most precious recompense is laid up for
you at the last day. I confess, I might ^og since have been discouraged through
many things which I find both within and without me. Besides, I have not
escaped the bytings of false brethren. Also I am not ignorant that diverse (yea
of those that least should) do not only distaste, but also speak evil of my
innocence without all cause. In very deed they can not tell why: But God the
righteous Judge sees it, who yet still sustayneth and strengthenth my
infirmity, by whose grace J am that I am. Wherefore in his Name J do still
bear witness to the truth denied by many men; and do now take in hand to
entreat here concerning the Christian peoples power and right of Also
co^seque^tly, that a true Church under the Gospel contains no mo ordinary
Congregations the^ one: and is not Diocesan properly.
free consent in their outward spiritual government given the^ by Christ
Jesus in the Gospel. And therefore to his gracious assistance herein I also
do trust. In the which affair I think it very behoofull for the better
manifestation of my lawful and just endeavor, and no less needful for Gods
glory, to speak to this matter propounded in this Treatise, not my self
alone, but to show openly unto all (who have but a spark of love to the truth)
such an Attestation of faithful and worthy Witnesses with me in this matter
being the maine foundation of our greatest controversy touching Church
government, that I hope hereafter none will set against this my seeking both
of mine own and your souls good, nor cavil at it, but such as are too
worldly and too earthly minded. In my Discourse upon this cause, as touching
objections, D Down Defenc Anno. 1611.
chiefly I gather out of Doctor Downame such as seem to any purpose, and J
answer them. Him beer J specially deal with, because of a friend he is not
long since turned from us, and become our adversary, yea the latest (I thinkc)
which openly shows him self against us, and so is like to be (now) most in
men's eyes: also he has heaped together the most things that the best of
such Defenders have heretofore written. Besides all this, the manner of his
writings is with such an Defense. 1. page 16 17. 2. page 122.
insolent conceit of him self, and with such Defense 2. page 55. 15.
contempt, indignation, and despite against us, as commonly is not seen in any
but those that slide back from the truth which they had once tacted of. And
withal, though in his Defense he deal with another, yet in many passages he
very sharply provokes me in particular, besides other wrongs that he has done
me, well known. For these causes both I write this that I do, and I chiefly
nominate him for our adversary; as in this treatise, so also In the
Declaration.
elsewhere. My Christian and loving friends, for whose sake most of all, I
labor and have labored to make our said question which is long, intricat, and
trouble some, to be short and plain, and to make the matter it self also
appear so weighty, as indeed it is: Now your parts are wisely and
religionsly to ponder in your hearts, and to make use of this same. As the
Apostle spoke to Timothy, so do I unto you: Consider, Brethren, what I say:
and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Amen. July 18. Anno 1612.

Yours ever in the Lord HENRY JACOB.

The contents of this Book, divided into Nine Chapters.
CHAP. I. The great importance of the matter here handled; viz. That the
people ought to have their free consent in their own Church government. And
the causes of publishing this Attestation to it. Page 9. CHAP. II. The Method
and order of this Treatise. Page 20. CHAP. III. The Testimonies of many
particular late Writers, of blessed memory, making for us in this matter. Page
21. CHAP. IIII. The public consent of many late, yet excellent Churches,
herein with us. Page 48. CHAP. V. The Testimonies and practice of the best
Antiquity, after the New Testament, heerin likewise with us. Page 52 CHAP. VI.
Our very Adversaries sometimes do acknowledge with us the truth of this
doctrine in plain terms, and sometimes to the same full effect, specially
when they deal against the Papists. Page 70. CHAP. VII. Consequences of
exceeding great importance following upon the peoples free consent in their
Church-governement, and inconveniences intolerable following from the
contrary. Page 84. CHAP. VIII. An answer to diverse chief Objections of the
Adversaries of this cause; noting also briefly their immodest, and not
Christian like reproaches against this Evangelicall doctrine. Page 199. CHAP.
IX. A short Advertisement to the upright hearted and Christian Reader, touching
this Writing and Cause. Page 316.
An Attestation of many Learned, Godly, and Famous Divines, Lights of
Religion, and pillars of the Gospel, instifying this doctrine, viz. That the
Church government ought to be always with the peoples free consent. etc.
CHAP. I. The great importance of the matter here handled; viz. That the
people ought to have their free consent in their own Church-governement. And
the causes of publishing this Attestation to it.
WHEREAS many things at diverse and sundry times heretofore have been written,
which prove a plain necessity by Gods Word to reform the Church and
Church-governement now in England; verily among them all there is almost no
other point so evident, so direct, and full to this purpose, that is, Chap. 1.
none (in a manner) so absolutely imports the said necessity of reformation,
as this does (which is utterly wanting among us) nam^ly: That the
Church-governement ought t^^^e exercised always with the peoples free consent.
One, or two ma^^^ grounds of our whole controversy.
It is true, another ground thereof there is likewise, and that of no less
importance in this matter, which is, That Christ's true Visible and
Ministerial Church under the Gospel consists not of many ordinary
Congregations, but only of one. Which I have at large prooved to be a truth,
and have made it manifest in my Declaration, page 10.11.12. etc. and in Reas.
for Reform. page 19.20. and 65.66. And again Chapt. 8.
here after I do show it further. Yet the former point in some respect may be
thought rather the chief, because this second is a depe^dant on the former, and
follows by a necessary consequence from it, as partly is showed in the said
Declarat. page 13.14. and more fully in the VII. Chapt. of this present
Treatise ensuing.

Again, that requiring the peoples free consent, notes Christ's Visible
Churches nature and essence intensive, The Churches nature intensive.
as the Schools do speak: that is, it shows the ground of the power and life
thereof. The other shows the essence of it extensive, Extensive.
that is, the largenes of the Body of the Church, and just extent, or the due
limits and bounds thereof outwardly. Wherefore that requiring the peoples free
consent, is manifestly a most proper and special Argument in our cause, and
such as touches the quick in the matter of the said reformation most nearly.

D. Downame erreth greatly, in his late Defense making his first book thereof
(full long and tedious) only to disprove Lay Elders, as he calls them.
Thinking without all reason, that if he speed well therein, he has gotten the
victory. Whereupon he most fondly infers thus: Defenc. 1. page 62.
Who sees not that the disproofe of their Presbyteries, is a direct proof for
our Bishops? And in another place: Defenc. 2.2.
Who sees not that upon the overthrow of the Presbyteries, the government by
Bishops is necessarily inferred? Who sees not? Verily neither he, nor any man
living, sees it. He was told sufficiently by his Refuter, Ibid. pa. 10.
of this his vain and frivolous inference. But he seems so in love with his
own folly, that he ca^ endure no man to show him his error. Nay, such a mind
he bears, that in his Defense he goes about with pretended Logike, to make
this his idle conceit seem reason, and thereupon he says his adversary must
Defen. 1.6.
confess him self ignorant in Logike, if he will deny this his inference.
And so Page 62.
this passage concerning Lay Elders, (he hops) will be acknowledged not to
be impertinent. Never a whit truly. The question of Elders wholly impertinent.
For this passage still is not only impertin^nt and idle, but even a false
defense of those whom he peadeth for, if he will yet hold his opinion still.
He has not Logike at command; neither can he by his Sophistry, (among men
of any understanding) make that to seem, which is not. Where he says, it
is Page 61.
presupposed on both sides, it is his folly to say so. And in saying, his
Refuter witnesses it, he grossly abuses him. He does the contrary in the
same place which he alleges out of him. For the Doctor leaves out his
Refuters words presently following those which he alleges. Which later
words are flat against him. So justly and truly our Doctor deals in his
writings. Like to this is his great boast which he makes here in his book,
and often afterward also, viz. that he has found out two sorts of
Disciplinarians, (as his wisedometermeth them) one Defenc. 1.60. and 2.147.
elder and more learned, the chief of whom (he says) are Calvin and Beza;
Another, new, shallow, and ignorant sort: of whom he makes Defenc. 2.2. 82.130.
Master Cartwright chief, adjoining others of us since unto him. But what
difference ^ndeth he in these Disciplinarians? ^orsooth, the elder (he says)
hold ^resbyteries in Cities to govern ^hole Dioceses and Provinces, and
^erein he avoucheth Defenc. 2.2
they join with ^e Bishops in England against the new sort of ^isciplinarians.
The new sort Defen. 1.60.
boldly and ^^noran^ly hold Parishionall Presbyte^ies. Naythis, Doctor
slandereth either ^gnorantly or maliciously. For we who^ he makes of the new,
shallow, and ignorant sort) we, I say, We agree with Calvin and Beza in
substance.
differ not ^ne hair from Calvin and Beza tou^hing the substance of this
matter. We as they, and they as we do acknow^edge both the one and the other;
that ^s, both the Parishionall and the Dio^esan Presbyteries, yea the
Provinci^ll, and larger too, if occasion serve. ^t is false which he imputes
to Calvin and Beza, that they maintain the Church-governement by Diocesan and
Provincial Presbyteries absolutely without any relation to the peoples ^onsent
in the ordinary Congregations. Also, that herein they join with the Bishops
in England, or that they materially differ from us. All which God willing, we
shall show to be untrue, and that most clearly in the 3. Chapt. and also in the
7. and 8. here following. Wherefore these be all slanderous forgeries of the
Doctors devising, of purpose to make our innocence odious by all the shifts be
can, and to cast some Defen. 1.53
color of just cause, or show of reason for his leaving of our acquaintance,
Wherefore D. Downame left his first profession.
to whom heretofore he joined him self, namely while there was some expectation
of his Majesty's favor toward us. And this is fully enough for answer to the
substance of his whole first book. Seeing to trouble our selves much with
impertinent stuff, would be in us also great folly.

Yea, to speak the truth, the prosecuting of all the rest of his Defense
besides, is such likewise: that is, clean from the maine purpose, and touches
not the chief question between us. Indeed he propou^deth one part of the
question well in the title of the second book of his Defense: but his
prosecuting of it both there and every where else, even to the end, is as if we
denied Bishops and their government in the Churches of Christ. We deny not
Church government by Bishops.
Which is nothing else but lies, and malicious forgerie against us, by
equivocating falsehood and slander to make us seem, as if we were against both
the express letter of the New Testament, Equivocato^
and also of the most ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, where (we know) any man
may see Bishops and their government to be commended as from God, and as the
ordinance of the Apostles. Which is the very practice likewise of Doct. Bilson
against us in his book Of the perpetual government of Christ's Church. Whose
trace our Doctor follows step by step. But as I said, both their great and
large volumes about this matter, are nothing else but two heaps of
equivocations, or sentences wholly impertinent, and such as we admit with them,
or some conclusions wherein they plainly contradict themselves elsewhere. Little
cause therefore had they who lately published that book of D. Bills. in Latin,
so to do: unless they meant to show abroad further his most impertine^t,
ambiguous and uncertain writing, and yet fraught with bitterness enough against
us. In a word, we desire that all men should know that our question is not,
whether Bishops and their government be Apostolical, about the proving
whereof the greatest part of these two Doctors books are spent. Further,
though we deny Diocesan and Provincial Bishops of any sort to be
Apostolical, yet we do not See Reas. for Reform. Page 7. and 38
simply deny but that some kind of them also may be lawful, were it not that
certain weighty circumstances in these our days do stand against them. Yea,
there are Circumstances now very evident and pregnant against the best sort of
Diocesan Bishops, which were not in 200. or 300. years after Christ. So that
no reason can be made; because they were lawful in the second or third age,
therefore they are lawful now. The case being thus, it is to be noted that the
DD. do not propound the true question between us. For if the peoples free
consent in their own Church-governement were not (as it is) Christ's ordinance
in the New Testament, certainly no Circumstance, nor any thing else could make
Diocesan or Provincial Bishops at all reproveable. For which cause the true
question indeed between the Prelacie and us, or the principal and maine
question is, Whether the people ought to have always their free consent in
their own Church government. But this (specially See his Defen 1 38.47 and
4.80.99.
D. Downame) puts away from him with high disdain, contempt, railing,
hateful accusations, and exclamations. So that with this he will not
vouchsafe to meddle. Wherein truly we may see him to be, I can not say learned,
but a cunning, bold, and exquisite Sophister. And this may be in general a
sufficient Answer even to his whole Defense. Although for some other respects
I hope some body will one day examine his particular passages more exactly in a
place for the purpose.

But to our point in hand. We cleer^y see by this, that it is the peoples
co^^ent in the affairs of their own spi^ituall (that is, Church) government
which makes the matter, and puts the difference in deed between the
Ecclesiastical Reformation which in all dutifulnes we seek, and that
Church-governement which the L. Bishops in Engl. do exercise. I say, this
concerning the peoples right herein is it, which toncheth the life of our
controversy. Where understand, Note.
that I mean only such people as are not ignorant in religion, nor scandalous
in their life. For only of such Christ's Visible Church ought to consist.

Well; to proceed the^ with our point. Questionles hence it is, that generally
the Adversaries of the forenamed Reformation do so strangly reject, yea so
hatefully resist, and strive against this same Christian doctrine here
propounded (concerning the churches only true government with the peoples free
consent) as they do. Wherein they express and show little Christian patience:
for they prosecute those that hold and teach the same (though out of mere
conscience) with all bitter reproaches, base skoffings, injurious slanders, and
unmerciful dealings. And all this (it is plain) not for any manner of evil
that they find in this doctrine, or for any inco^venience therein. For in truth
there is none at all: as partly I have showed Reas. for reform. page 28
heretofore, and it will further be manifested hereafter. But they so hate
this doctrine only because of the inevitable consequence of the said
reformation, which it brings with it. Which crosses and overturneth wholly
their diverse enormous, worldly, and carnal desires; as any man that looks
into the case, may easily see.

Howsoever it be, yet the truth and the agreeablenes hereof, with the holy
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and with the assuring of our souls in the way to
eternal life, as it has appeared to the world ever since the discovery of
Antichrist, more clearly then it did for many years before: so doubtless it
will more and more appear yet still, and be made further manifest to al men
even where the Gospel is received (as it is in many places yet) not so
sincerely as it ought to be. See chapt. 7. page 156. etc.
For my part, because I well perceave that the Antichristian idolatry and
tyranny of the Church of Rome cannot by Divinity be sou^dly resisted (as
experience in time will show) neither was it resisted by our Forefathers at the
beginning, but by maintayning this Evangelicall point of doctrine among others,
therefore I have co^descended the more willingly (after diligent inquiry
thereinto) to approve the said point of doctrine, viz. that the Church
government ought to be exercised always with the peoples free consent. Which
also even for For that the Papa cie else will come in. See Chap. 7.
this same cause I can not but believe to be the holy ordinance of Jesus Christ
for his Church under the Gospel, and to have been delivered unto us by the
Apostles in their perpetual practice of Church-governement. But specially,
seeing for the same we have the most sure evidence of Gods word in the New
Testament, which I Argnm. 3. and 9. of the Divine beginning of Chrsts Visible
church Declarat page 20 ^1 Reas. for Reform. page 45. 46, 47. 48.
have heretofore gathered and observed at large. Secondly, seeing we have for
it a plentiful, and clear Attestation of many Learned, Godly, and famous
Divines both New and Old, confirming our faith, and strengthening our
consciences therein.

Which Attestation I have thought it needful at this time and in this place to
gather and produce for many causes. First my desire is that it may ly open to
the sight of all men, what a great and holy agreement of good men herein we
have; which being added to the forenoted fundame^tal certainty thereof in Gods
word, gives so full a satisfaction to every good Christian, that who can
desire more? Secondly, all Christian Civil Magistrates may hereby take good
content and be satisfied touching the innocence of this way in the Church
government which we hold. For when they shall see with what a cloud of such
witnesses we are compassed in defense of this matter, they can not imagine any
inconvenience by it to their government, notwithstanding all the clamours and
invectives of partial Adversaries against it. Lastly, hereby also our
adversaries virulent tongues and pens (if it be possible) may be ashamed to
abuse us as they do with all kind of unworthy reproaches and slanders, when they
shall see whom they hate, and persecute, and revile together with us.
Wherefore for the publishing of this matter there appears every way very
great and necessary reason.

CHAP. II. The Method and order of this Treatise.
NOw herein I purpose to proceed therein: whom I put first, namely, for their
singular perspicuitie and resolutnes in it. Then I will rehearse the practice
of the most ancient times after

CHAP. III. The testimonies of many particular late Writers, of blessed
memory, making for us in this matter.
BEGINNING therefore with the New Writers, I judge it meet and convenient to
allege in the foremost place the resolut determination of Master Beza, Beza.
because he of al others is thought by some unadvised persons, to be most
against us in this point. Now he disputing this question at large in his
Epist. 8^. sets down this conclusion; Populo invito nihil obtrudatur: Let
nothing be imposed on the people (or Congregation) ag^a^t their wills. Then
the which verily we desire no more: this is all in substance that we seek in
our assertion. Again, unless it be so, the Church-governement either is a
Monarchy, or a very Oligarchie. But Master Beza expressly condemns both
these: and the later namely on Math. ca. 18.17. Wherefore howsoever Master
Beza interprets some things otherwise then we do, and uses some times other
phrases then we perhaps do think so fit, or so frequently to be used, yet
touching this point in question, he agrees wholly with us in substance, and in
effect. For let this which he in these words sets down be yielded unto us,
the^ we are satisfied for the substance of Church-governeme^t. To which
purpose Master Beza says also in Confess. 5.35. The Apostles intended in the
Churches which they planted, that no Pastor should be obtruded on a flock
against their wills. Yet moreover I pray the Reader to note, that even he
also strongly maintayneth this right of the people (in the affairs of their
souls) many times in more free and large terms. As where he says: Confess.
5.34.
I find no where in any Christian Church built up that any is promoted either
to the Ministry of the word, or Deaconship, or Eldership, any other way, then
by a public and free election. And, Sect 35.
I repeat again that which I said before, It was never received in Christian
Churches established, that any should be admitted to an Ecclesiastscall
function, but being freely and lawfully chosen of that Church which it
concerns. Again, ibid.
Pastors are not to be chosen without the consent of the whole Church. Also,
ibid.
They (whosoever they are) bring Tyranny into the Church, if they call any man
to a public function at their own will, the consent of the multitude being
neglected. Again, ibid.
Presbyters were chosen by the voices, at least, by the allowance of the whole
assembly. Upon the Act. 14.23. he says: See Oecumen. in hunc loc. Also Badei
Commentar.
The force of this word Chirotonein, is to be noted, that we way know Paul and
Barnabas did nothing by their private will, neither exercised any tyranny in
the Church. He means, that they here made Ministers by the peoples voices, or
free consent, and not otherwise. And upon 1. Time. 5.22. All the authoriti^ (of
making Ministers) was not in Timothy alone; but election being made by the
consent of the whole Church, then the President of the assembly did consecrate
him by laying on of hands. And on 2. Cor. 2.8. By the public consent of the
Church declare that you embrace that penitent sinner again as a brother, even
as by the public judgment of the Church he was cast out. In all the which it
is easy to see Master Bezaes mind and resolution in this question to be
clearly with us. As for that which D. Downame Defens. 4. page 81.
obiecteth out of him, where he calls one Morellius De^grad. Ministr. 6.23
Fanaticall, because he pleaded in like manner for the popular government. The
D. abuses Beza, and us all. Morellius pleaded for the popular government in
far unlike manner. He sought in Churches perfectly established to bring all
things in particular, and ordinarily to the peoples hearing, examining,
judging, and voice-giving. But neither Beza, nor we intend so. We acknowledge
that the ordinary sway of all Ecclesiastical authority ought to be in the
true Bishop, or Pastor of the church: and we affirm that right well so it may
be, although never any thing be imposed on the Church by him against their
wills. Which thing D. Downame him self also acknowledges may be, and Def. 4.
p. 21
was heretofore in a state of the Church ( Rather about 420.
about 400. years after Christ) which he seems to allow of. Saving that he
cunningly falsifyeth the words of the Council which there he mentions: to
wit, in saying the assent or connivence of the people, where the Council
says, Council. Carth. 4. Can. 22.
the assent and connivence. But to proceed: By this before alleged, all men
may see May. Bezaes judgment in this cause to be (as I said) clearly with
us. And so much concerning him.

In the second place we will consider Master Calvin, 2. Calvin.
a Pastor and Guide of the Church of Geneva before May. Beza. He also every
where in all his writings is a most earnest patron of this point which here we
profess. I will note certain of his sentences to this purpose. Says he:
Instit. 4.5.15.
Est haec ex verbo Dei legitima Ministri vocatio, vhi ex populi consensu and
approbatione creant qui visi suerint idonei. Preesse autem Electioni debent
alij Pastores, nequid per levitatem, vel per malae studia, vet per tumultum a
multitudine peccetur This is the lawful calling of a Minister by the word of
God, where they which seem fit, are created by the consent and approbation of
the people Indeed other Pastors ought to moderate and order the Election, least
the multitude should offend through lightues, or ill affection, or tumult. And
a little before, Videmus ipsum (Paulum) ex populi suffragijs Episcopos creare
solitum. We see that Paul him self was wont to create Bishops by the voice
giving of the people Again, Falluntur qui putant vel Timotheum Ephesi, vei
Titum in Creta regnum exercuisse, vt suo vterque arbi^rio omnia disponeret.
Praefuerunt enim tantum vt bonis and salutaribus consilijs popul^ praeirent:
non vt soli exclusis alijs onnibus agerent quod placere^t. They are deceaved
who think either that Timothy at Ephesus, or Titus in Crete did practice a
kingdom, that either of them disposed all at their own will. Only they were
over the people in going before them with good and wholesome countails; not that
they alone did what pleased them, excluding all the rest. And presently he
shows, they did no more but crave the voices, and moderate the people in
chosing. And affirms that this is, Commune ius and libertas Ecclesiae, the
common right and liberty of the Church, and that, not to be diminished. And
in another place he says, Cap. 5.2.
Etiamsi nihil aliud mali foret quitamen hoe excusare poterunt quod it a
spoliaverint suo iure Ecclesiam? Although there were no other evil, yet how
can they excuse this that they have so spoiled the Church of her right? And,
Sect. 3.
Est impia Ecclesiae spoliatio, etc. It is a wicked robbing or spoiling of the
Church, so often as a Bishop is put upon any people whom they have not
desired, or at least have not approoved with a free voice And, It it is a ly
that they say, this is a remedy against the peoples tumultes. They had other
ways Either to prevent these faults, or to correct them being committed But
to say the truth, when the people began to be somewhat too negligent in holding
their Elections, and did give over this care to the Presbyters, as a thing not
so beseeming the^ selves, they (the Pres byters) abused this occasion to take
to the^ selves a tyranny, which afterward they confirmed with Canons. And upon
the Acts thus he writes: In Act. 3.^.
Est tyranicum, etc. It is tyrannical if any one man make Ministers at his
will. Therefore this is the lawful way, that they be chosen by common voy^^^
who are to exercise any public office in the Church. And this is the mean
between tyran^ ^e and confused liberty, that nothing in deed may be done
without the consent and allowance of the people: and yet the Pastors should
moderate them etc. Likewise rouching Ecclesiastical censure, and judgment in
general, says he: Instit. 4.11.6.
Contra ius and fas quod Ecclesiae datum erat, sibi vni vendicavit Episcopus.
The Bishop against right and equity, has taken to him self alone, that which
was given to the Church. And, Fuit facinus aimis improbum. etc. It was to
wicked a fact, that one man, in translating to him self the Common power, made
way for tyrannous lust, and took away that which was the Churches ow^e, and
suppressed the Eldership ordained by the Spirit of Christ. A game.
Animadvertendum quod Paulus quam vis Apostolus forei, non pro sua libidine
excommunicavit solus, sed consilium cum Ecclesia participat, vt communi
authoritate res agat ur. It is to be marked that Paul though an Apostle, yet he
did not excommuni are alone after his own will but did participat the matter
with the Church, that it might be do^^ by common authorttie. Thus plainly does
Calvin maintain the peoples free consent in the Church government always.

To these we will add Master Viret, 3. Viret.
a rare light of the Gospel, a pillar of the truth, and partner with May.
Farell in planting the Church of Geneva before Calvin came there, Dialog. 20.
The Church (says he) in respect of the government which Jesus Christ
instituted, is a holy and free communaltie: which for the same cause is called
a Communion of Saints, to the which generally (and not to any one person
particularly) Jesus Christ gave the whole power and authority to edification
and not to destruction. Quest. But if you so take it, there seems to me no
order at all, but rather great confusion. Answer. That follows not from that
which I said. For first, the Church is not Headles, having Jesus Christ for a
Head. Moreover, although the power and authority be given to the whole
Communaltie of the faithful, as it is in a Democratie; yet nothing lets but
the Church should choose by her common consent out of the body of this
Community certain men to have the special charge of exercising and
administering the public offices which are ordained of God. etc. Question. Your
meaning then is, that all the authority and power of Ecclesiastical
government generally is given to the whole church. and therefore that it
pertains to the same according to Gods word to choose them whom she knows
most worthy to exercise the public Offices. etc. Answer. All that time
wherein the Church was rightly governed according to Gods word, and not
oppressed with tyranny, she used that order always And therefore it is more
then necessary, that she should always keep her right her power, and
authority, which she receyved of God, etc. Question. And if they which execute
special charge in the Church, do tolerate one another in ill doing, and them
selves do give matter of sca^dall and scattering, has not the^ the whole
Church together power to correct them and to procure remedit to such evils?
Answer. Seeing the power whereof we speak is by Christ Jesus given to the
whole church, who can take it from the^? Can they, to who^ the church it self
has given it? No truly, unless they be tyrants etc. And again. Dialog. 21.
The Ministers ought not to give to the^ selves alone the power which God gave
to the whole church: unless so as they execute their Office in the Name of the
church, and after that her judgment has gone before. This is well to be noted
that injury be done to none, and that the Minister, exercise not tyranny in
the Church and that the government serve not their affections. Thus plainly
Master Viret.

From these let us ascend to the very Zuinglius and Luther. Zuinglius says
thus: Zuinglius Aruc. 31. Explanat.
Quid audio* What do I hear? Can a Bishop alone excommunicate? I thought it
had been given to the Church Christ says, Tell the Church. Does the Bishop or
Abbot signify the Church? Excommunication is not one man's part, whosoever it
be: but it is the office of the Church. None therefore can excommunicate but
that Church in wh^ a (...) dwells who offends by his sin. The right of
pronouncing against him is in the Church and the Pastor of the Church It
remains then, that Christ commaunde^h that the sinner be showed to the Church
which we^ call a Parish.

In another place likewise, Ad Valentiu^m Compa (...).
Excommunicatio non in Episeoporum (in Synodo Congregatorum) sed in
vntuscutusque paroeciae potestate and arbitrio sita est, eu^us^ (...) est
impudentius peccantem ab Ecclesiae communione excludere. S^ Christ's veroa quae
Math. 18. habentur penitus inspiciamus, hune demum exc^municatum esse
deprehendere licebit quem communis Ecclesiae in qua quis habitat, cons^nsus
exclusit. Excommunication is not in the Bishops (gathered together in a Synod)
but it is in the power and free liking of every Parish, who only have power to
exclude from the Churches communion the impudent sinner. If we look
thoroughly into the worde^ which are in Math 18. we may find him only to be
excommunicate* whom the common consent of that Church, where the man dwells,
has shut out.

Again, Epichirifis de Ganone Missae.
Est particularis Ecclesia ea cu^ preceptum est vt morbidum membrum resecet,
Math. 18. quales ea Corinthi ad quam seribit Paulus, and aliae quarum se curam
gere^^dicat, and quibus se pari modo docere asserit ^nquiens, Sollicitudo
omnium Ecclesiaru^: and sicut (...) omnibus Ecclesijs doceo. That is a parti
ulat Church which is commanded to cut of the infected member Math. 18. Chap. ^.
Such as that of Corinth is, to which Paul writes, and others which he says
be has care of, and in which he affirms that he taught altogether alike,
saying, The care of all Churches, and, As I teach in all Churches. And
concerning Calling to the Ministry, he says: Ecclesiaste^
It seems that there is nothing so agreeable to the ordinance of God. and to
the old institution, as that all the whole Church of the faithful amongst a
people, together with certain learned and godly Bishops and other faithful
men having skill in things, should choose a Pastor. And after again, Let
therefore these proud Bishops and foolish Abbots go shake their ^ares, For it
is convenient that the right of the Election should be in the power of the
church of the faithful instructed by the counsel of learned me^. Moreover he
writes thus: Ad Valent, Compar.
He that with a Council of Bishops shall impose on Christian people any law
or observatio^ at their own liking (he means, without the peoples consent)
hic violento imperio ius Ecclesiae invadit. He invadeth the Churches right by
a violent command And therefore such Bishops as thus do, absque Ecclesia,
without the Churches consent, statuentes sua libidine, Artic. 64.
decreeing at their own pleasure, he says, are nomine tenus Episcopi, revera
tyranni, in name Bishops, but in deed tyrants.

And thus much out of this holy man of God and noble witness of Christ, Master
Zuinglius.

Master Luther another mighty and Luther.
principal champion for Gods truth at the same time, wrote a special treatise
which has this title, Tom. 2. page 374.
Quod Ecclesia ^us and potestatem habeat indicandi de quavis doctrina, item
vocandi Ministros Evangelij;, aut si fideles esse desierint, deponendi. That
the In this word he signifies the Congregation of the people
Church has the right and power to judge of any doctrine, also of calling the
Ministers of the Gospel: or, if they cease to be faithful to depose them.
What can be more for us then this is? In another place he says: Page 369. b.
Chemnic. examp. part. 2.27. a.
Claves sunt totius Ecclesia. The Keys belong to the whole Church. In his
book of the Private Mass, he speaks to the Bishops of his time, thus:
Spiritus Sanctus vui Civitats plures constituit Episcopos: Vos singuli (estis)
pluribus. Qua authoritate? Nonne ipsius Satanae etc? The holy Ghost appointed
to one City many Bishops, but you are one Bishop to many Cities. By what
authority? Is it not of Satan him self, by you opposing against the
authority of the Holy Ghost? We conclude therefore boldly, that you (according
to the Scriptures and the H Ghosts decree) are not so much as to be called
Bishops, but rather adversaries and destroyers both of Bishops, and of the
Divine decree concerning the appointing of Bishops. Again in his book against
the falsely named Order of Bishops, he says: page 322.
At citra iocum vides palam. etc. But without jest thou see openly that the
Apostle Paul calls only them Bishops, which do preach the Gospel and
Minister Sacraments to the people, as in our time the parish Ministers and
Preachers do. Therefore I believe without doubt, that they by fight possess
the title and name of Bishops.

And in another treatise: De Minist^. Eccles. instituend^, page 365. b.
Donabo hoc ordmibus Papisticis, quod solius Episcopi autoritate instituuntur
quos vocant Sacerdotes: consensu aut suffragio populi, cui preficiendi sunt,
neque requisito nec obtento: cuius tamen cum sint populus Dei maxim intererat,
vt non sine suffragijs suis quisqua^ eis imponeretur. I will yield this (says
he) to the popish orders, that Priests (as they call them) are instituted by
the authority of the Bishop alone: the c^nsent and voice giving of the people
over who^ they are to be set, neither sought nor obt^yned: whose chief right
nevertheles it was (seeing they are Gods people) that not any one should be set
over them without their voyce-giving. Thus teach these Pillars of the Gospel
Zuinglius and Luther.

To whom we will ad our two Bucer, and P. Martyr. Bucer.
Bucer has these words: In Math, 16.^9.
Haec potestas penes omnem Ecclesiam est: authoritas modo Ministerij penes
Presbyteros and Episcopos. Ita vt Roma olim potestas populs fuit, authoritas
Senatus. This power and sway of the government is in the whole Church: but the
authority only of ministration thereof is in the Presbyters and Bishops. So as
in old time at Rome the power was in the people, but the authority or
direction was in the Senate.

In an other place he says De regno Chr^^^. 1.^.
The Apostle accuses the Corinthian^ for that the whole church did not cast
out of their company the incestuous person.

P. Martyr says: 7. P Martyr.
In ^. Cor. 16.15.
Fatemur claves Ecclesia vniversae datas. We confess the Keys are given to
the whole Church. By the Keys he means Government, and Ecclesiastical
power. Also he says: verse. 3.
it is no mervaile that it is the Churches right to chose Ministers, seeing we
see the Civil Laws do give power to Towns to choose their Physicians and
Scholemaisters at their own liking. In an other place thus he says: In cap.
5.11.
Quoniam in Ecclesia de negotijs gravioribus. and quae sunt maximi momenti, ad
plebem ^efertur (vt patet in Actis Apostolicis) ideo polit^ae rationem habet.
Because in the Church matters of weight are referred to the people to determine
(as it is manifest in the Ac^es) therefore the Church has a respect of the
Popular government, or Democracie. For so P. Martyr here means by politia,
as we may see if we look in the place. Also namely of Excommunication, he
says: Consentiente vniversa Eccsesia Excommunicetur. Hoc debet is it ad
iudicium antecedere. Let Excommunication be with the consent of the whole
Church This ought to go before that judgment. And, Non absque consensu
Ecclesiae quispiam excommunicari potest. lus hoc ad Ecclesiam pertinet, neque
ab illa eripi potest. Witthout the consent of the Church, not any one can be
excommunicated. This right belongs to the Church, neither ought it to be
taken away from it. And, the consent of the people is still to be observed in
Excommunication, both that tyranny may be avoided, and that it may be done
with great^er fruit and gravitie.

The same worthy man greatly commends the piety of a Bishop at Troie in
France, who about the year 1561. left his Popish state and did betake him to a
flock of Christians there, Epict. ^^.
and taught them the word of God purely. But quia ei gravis scrupulus ^iectus
est de sua vocatione quod in ed Ecclesis ac populi Elestionem seu
Censirmationem u^ is habuerit, ideo etc. Because he had a great scruple in his
conscience about his Cal^a^g, seeing he had not therein the El^ction or
Confirmation of the Church and people, Therefore he sent for the Elders of the
reformed Church, and desired the^ that they would consider godly and wisely,
whether they would chose, confirm, and have h^n for their Bishop. Which if
they thought good to do, he would do his endeavor that as he began, so he
would go on as he was able, by teaching and exhorting to edifi^^ and increase
the Church committed to him But if they thought him not fit for so great an
Off^^^ they should speak it freely and openly, he was ^eadie to give place,
etc. And he desired that they would speedily de^berate with the Church about
the matter. Which when it was done, he was acknowledged ^a^ re^eaved of all
with one consent as a true Bishop. Wherefore his authority and p^^i^ does much
profit the Church of Christ. God be praised who governs and g^ideth the
kingdom of his Son in this manner.

O where shall we see such Bishops in these days!

8. Musculus.
Musculus also speaks and reasons clearly with us herein. He says: Com.
plac. Of Min. Elect.
There is no doubt but the Apostles ke^t that manner of ordayning, viz. after
the church had chosen. And, After fasting and praying (which was wont to be
done in the Congregation of the faithful) They ordained Elders which were first
chosen of the faithful. And this form of Electing and ordayning Elders and
Bishops the Apostle commended unto his fellow workman Titus, and Timothy,
saying: Ti^. 1- 5.
For this cause I left thee in Crete. etc. For who would believe that he
ordained that Titus should do otherwise, then both he and the rest of the
Apostles were accustomed to do. Therefore both by example and ordinace of the
Apostle, in the primitive church Elders, Pastors, Bishops and Deacons were in
the Ecclesiastical Meetings, chosen of the people by lifting up of hands.
Also he says, The Form of Election used in the Apostles times, is
conformable to the liberty and privilege of the Church whereof Cyprian made
mention: and that form of choice whereby men began to be thrust upon the
people of Christ being not chosen of it, does agree to a Church which is not
free, but subject to bondage, And this form of election by the peoples choice
he calls the Old, the Fittest, the Divine, the Apostolical, and lawful
election: the other to come from the corrupt state of the Church and Religion.

9. Bullinger.
Bullinger assirmeth thus; Deca^. 5.4.
The Lord from the beginning gave authoritio to the Church to chose and ordain
fit Ministers. And, Those which think that the Bishop and Archbishop have
power to make Ministers, use these places of the Scripture, Tit. 1.
Therefore I left thee at Crete* that thou might appoint Elcers Town by
Town: And again, 1. Tim. 5.
Take heed that thou lay not thy hands rashly on any. But we answer, that the
Apostles did not use any tyranny in the Churches, nor themselves alone to have
don these things which pertayned either to Election or Ordination, other men
in the Church shut out. For the Apostles and Elders did create Bishops and
Elders in the Church, but communicating their counsel with the Churches, yea
and with the consent and approving of the people.

Yea of Ministers that govern anic Church without or against their consent,
thus he says: In 1. Co^. 5.4.
V^bem prodere di^untur Legati qui diversum ab eo quod ab vrbe prescriptum est,
agunt. Those ambassadors are said to betray the City, who do any thing diverse
from that which is prescribed them by the City.

10. Gualter.
Gualter likewise is as plain as can be, Says he of the calling of
Ministers: Ho^^il. in Act 13.1.
Divinitus vocatos esse censebimus qu^scunque Dei spiritus donis necessarijs
instruxerit, and legiti^^s Ecclesiae suffragijs elegerit. Aliquas enim in hac
causa parts Ecclesiae mandatas esse hi^ locus perspicue tradit. Ecclesiae
calculum spiritus requirit. We will esteem them to have a calling from God,
whomsoever Gods spirit has ^^abled with necessary gifts, and has chosen by
the Churches lawful givi^g of voices. For this place plainly shewe^h that in
this cause there are some parts committed to the Church The Spirit requires
the Churches iudg^ment Afterward he says, In Act. 14.^^.
Foeda tyran^ide Ecclesiarum slatus opprimitur. The state of the Churches is
oppressed by filthy tyranny where at this day the Churches have not this
liberty to give their free consent at least. For here he respects that
right and just order according to the rule of the Gospel which before he had
described: In Act. 1.^^
Ministrorum verbi and Ecclesiae Electiones atque ordinationes non occulte
intra privatos parietes a paucis homini^us, sed public ab Ecclesia and in
totius Ecclesiae conspectu fieri debent. Neque no^ movet quod Paulus alibi vni
Tito vel Tim^theo ius and potestatem Episcopo^ eligendi tribuere videtur. Non
enim illos privata auth^ritate qui^quam agere voluit, sed pro antist^tum
^fficio iubet curare vt Ministri digni and idones legittime crdinentur. Nec
verisimile est, illis plus concessum fu isse quam Apostolis ipsis, qui
inconsulta Ecclesia nihil in hac causa vnquam statuerunt. Nam and paulo post
Diaconos coram Ecclesia public eligunt, and Paulus oum Barnaba collectis
viritim suffiagijs Presby^eres per Ecclesias singulas ordinavisse leguntur,
Act. 6. and 3.4. The Elections and ordinations of the Ministers of the word and
of the Church, ought not to be made secretly within private walls by a few men,
but publikly by the Church and in the face of the whole Church. Neither does it
moove us, that Paul inan other place seems to give right and power of chofing
Bishops to Titus alo^e, or to Timothy. For he would not that they should do
any thing by their private author^tie: but he commands them to take care that
worthy and fit Ministers be ordained, a^cording to the office of Guides and
Overseers. Neither is it likely, that more was granted to them then to the
Apostles themselves, who determined nothing in this cause at any time without
the churches cousaill, or witbout taking the churches advise. For a little
after they both chose Deacons publikly in the presence of the church, and Paul
with Barnabas are read to have ordained Presbyters throughout every Church,
gathering the voices of every man. Act 6 and 3.4.

Arguitur exemple hoc corruptissimus idemque perniciosissimus Ministros
eligends mos, quem tam seculis aliquot hac in causa imper^um obtinuisse
constat. Quofit, vt non raro v^us aliquis in pluribus Ecclesijs privata
authoritate Ministros and Eligat and Ordinet. Quaete potissimum ab Abbatibus,
Episcopis, and Prapositis peccaiur. Nec meitus rem administrant nonnulli inter
eos qui Evangelij nomine gloriantur, and Ecclesiarum reformatores baberi
volunt. Dum enim isis male vsurpata possessione Monachos and Episcopos (vt par
est) eijeiunt, Ecclesijstamen libertatem illorum tyrannide ereptam non
restituunt: Sed pro su^ arbitrio administrant quae olim ab Episcopis and
Monachis administrari solebant. Quod malum, nisi brevi reprimatur, and Simoni^m
and exitialem omnis Ecclesiasticae Disciplina confusionem nobis pariet. Atque
omne bo^ Romany Pontificibus debetur, etc. Maxim Calisto secundo: ex quo
tempore Ecclesia libertas ceu lethali morbo contabescens tandem in vniversum
evanuit. Quam quicunque restitutam volunt, sive illi verbi Ministri sint, sive
Magistratus, huc incumbendum sibi esse sciant vt vetus Ministrorum eligendorum
consuetudo in ducatur. By this example is reproved that most corrupt, and also
most pernicious manner of chosing Ministers, which it is manifest, has gotten
Dominion and Lordly rule in this affair now these certain ages. Whereby it
is, that not seldom one both choseth and ordayneth Ministers in many Churches
by his private authority Wherein chieflic the Abbots, As in England. etc.
Bishops, and Rulers offend. Neither do diverse others (among those that glory
in the name of the Gospel and would be counted Reformers of Churches) order
this matter better. For while they put forth the Monks and Bishops (as it is
meet they should) out of their possession wickedly usurped, yet the liberty
which they took away from their tyranny, they restore not to the Churches:
but administer those things at their own will, which in time past were wont
to be administered by the Bishops and Monks. Which evil, unless it be shortly
repressed, it will bring forth among us both Simonie and also a deadly
confusion of all Church D^^ciplice. And all this we have from the Bishops of
Rome, etc. Chiefly from Calistus the second. From which time the Churches
liberty as it were languishing with a deadly sickness, at last vanished away
wholly. Which whosoever do desire that it may be restored, whether they be
Ministers or Magistrates, let them know they must labor for this, that the old
custom of chosing Ministers be brought in again.

11. Vrsimus.
Unto these we will add Vrsinus who teaches thus. Math. 18.17. If he refuse to
hear the Church, Catech. pa. 799.800. Printed at Oxfor. An. 1589
let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican: In these words Christ
expressly commands all, whosoever (being after this sort admonished by the
Church) will not repent, to be by the common consent of the Church
excommunicated until they repent. And whosoever are excommunicated, they
again professing and showing in their actions amendment, are altogether in
lake sort received into the Church as they were exiled from it, namely by the
judgment of the Elders, by the consent of the Church, and the authority of
Christ and the Scripture And that de^untiation whereby one is excommunicated,
is not in the power of the Minister of the Church, but in the power of the
Church, and is done in the name of the Church, because this Commandment was
given by Christ unto the church. For he says expressly, Tell the Church.

12. Danaus. In 1 Timothy 5.22
Here also Danaus is worthy to be remembered: He says, " Approbatio eligendi
(Ministri) ad plebem and totum populum Ecclesia sane pertinet. The approbation
of the Minister to be chosen pertayneth truly to the whole people of the
Church.

Again, Plebem non esse ab ordinationib^ vocandorum and preficiendorum
muneribu; Ecclesiasticis exclud^ndam demonstant exampl^ veteris Ecclesiae etc.
That the people ^ught not to be excluded from the ordinations of Ministers,
the exam^les of the old Church do demonstrat, in which without doubt the
Election by voices of the whole Church was used as it is easy to be showed in
Act 6. and 14. Therefore they do perfidiously deprive the Church of her right,
Perfidie.
who thrust a Pastor on a people without their knowledge and consent. For they
do the Church the greatest injury, when they spoil her of her judgment and
voice giving. Sacrilege, or Church robbing.
Who therefore are truly to be called Sacrilegious, or Church-robbers. Neither
indeed is he a lawful Pastor which is over a flock being ignorant of his
coming, or against their will or not consenting. Which presently after he
sticks not to apply to the callings of the Ministers in England, saying: Ex
his omnibus apparet quam nulla sit, vel non legitima little verbi Ministrorum
Vocatio etc. By all this it appears how that calling of Ministers is none, or
not lawful, which is made by the authority letters, commandment, and
judgment of the King alone, or Queen, or the Patron, or Bishop, or
Archbishop, etc. veluti in media Anglia: as it is used in England. Id quod
dolendum est, which I speak with grief.

Moreover concerning Excommunication he says, In verse. 1.
Hac iurisdictio est totu^ quidem Ecclesia ratione potestatis: Prepositotum
autem ratione exercitij and adminisirationis. This jurisdiction is the whole
Chur^hes in respect of the power thereof: but it be^ongeth to the Guides of the
Church in respect ^f administering it, namely populo assentiente, with the
peoples consent: as he adds a ^ittle after. And again, Executioni pu^lica
censura intervenire debet notitia and con^ensus Ecclesia. The knowledge and
consent of the Church ought to be in the execution of the public censure.

13. Tilenus.
Neither shall Tilenus testimony be unremembered, who aunswering the Co^nt
Lavl, that required him to show what calling Calvin had, says: Respons. ad Com
Lavallium. quest. 3
The people of Geneva professing the Gospel, did first call Farel to be their
Pastor, and then he and they called Calvin to be likewise. Applying Ciprians
sentence thereunto, who avoucheth, Epist. 14.
That the people most of all have power to chose worthy Ministers, and to
refuse their unworthy ones. After which he shows that the other churches
els-where professing the Gospel and refusing Popery, did likewise. They who
had a calling from the church of R^me renounced it, resting on that which they
have according to the rule of the Gospel.

14. Iunius.
Also Iunius says, Ecclesiastie. 3.1.
Simplicissimam quidem probatissimamque Eligendi and Vocandi viam illam esse
constat ex Scripturae Sacrae testimonijs, quam Apostoli in Ecclesijs tenuerunt
olim, and prisca Ecclesia aliquamdiu eos imitata observavit. Eligebat tota
Ecclesia, id est, corpus ex Presbyterio and populo seu plebe constitutum, equis
and communihus suffragijs. Haec iusta electionis ratio. It is manifest that
that way of chosing and calling Ministers is most simple and most approoved by
the testimonies of holy Scripture, which the Apostles in old time did keep in
the Churches, and the ancient Church sometime imitating them did observe. The
whole Church did chose, that is, the Body consisting of the Eldership and
people or common sort) by equal and common voices. This is the just manner of
Chosing Ministers. Afterward he says, This the old Church did observe very
long, doneo res coeperunt (vt fit humanitus) in peius ruere, atque retro
sublapsa referri. Until (as through men's corruption it comes to passs) things
began to grow worse, and to run to ruin. And after that corruption in the
Church government was come in, Yet (says he) id semper obtinuit, vt Ecclesia
actioni toti interesset, camque prasentia sua haberet raetam. That always was
in force, that the Church was present at the whole action, and ratifyed it with
their presence. But neither this in England is seen any where, neither will
be allowed. Also Iunius says, Where the Church at any time does no more (but
ratify matters by their presence only) the Guid^t ought to certify the
Church, that if they can them selves take care for, and do their own affairs,
non fore pen^^^^l^um Episcoporum Seniorumve coetum vt (...) si^i cum damno
Ecclesia, iniuriae, and ignomina arroget: It shall not be in the power of any
as^e^bly of Bishops or Elders to arrogat so much to them selves with the
Churches damage, injury, and shame. Where he professes that this is the
Church ^s damage, injury, and shame, if (being understanding Christians) they
be only present at the chosing and ordayning of their Ministers, if they do not
also them selves chose, or at least freely and expressly consent to the chosing
and ordayning of them. After, noting the tyranny which was in this behalf
under the Pope, he says: Iam de populo, que^ Christus redemit suo sanguine and
Ecclesiam sibi ex eo compararet, verbum nullum: Now of the people there was not
one word, whom Christ redeemed with his blood, that they might be his Church.
And he adds, Hinc illa barbaries, hinc colluvies selelerum omnium, hinc illa
fraudum and nundinationu^ sentina exundavit. Hence came that barbarous
ignorance in those times, that heap of all sins, that sink of deceit and
selling of the souls of men. The^ speaking of some Churches and Magistrates
who have worthily freed themselves from the Pope, yet he leaves this foul
blot upon them; Ius illud Eccesiasticum institutionis and ordimationis restitut
non curant Ecclesijs: They care not to restore to the Churches this right of
theirs, viz of making and ordaining of Minister. Finally he answeceth some
objections.

At nescit populus, dixerit quispiam. Doceatur, and sciet. At nescit vti. Imo
nesciet vnquam, Siture suo non vtatur vnquam. At factiosus est plerumque, and
in diversas parts studiaque scinditur. Revocetur adpace^ monitis salutaribus,
and compescatur authoritate verbt, virorumque bonorum officijs, vt conciliatis
and compositis animis faciant quod sui turis est. But some will say, The people
is ignorant of their duty and right herein. Let them be taught, and they will
understand it. But they know not how to use this their right. They will not
know it ever, if they use it never. But they are factious often, and are
divided into parts. Let them be reduced to Peace by wholesome counsel, and
let them be ruled by the authority of the word, and the endeavors of good men,
that their minds being ordered, they may do that which is their right to do.

15. Piscator.
About Exco^municatio^ Piscator says, Observe. ex ^. cap. 1. Cor.
Excommunication ought to be don by the Church, or by the Presbytery judging
in the name of the Church. Where all me^ may see his meaning to be this, viz.
that the Presbytery may exco^municat, howbeit always with the Churches free
consent. For so he signifies by these words, judging in the name of the
Church. It can not be that he should mean, that they may Excommunicate by
their own power and right only, or whether the Church will or no. After the
same manner also (I doubt not) some, others do speak concerning the making king
of Ministers. Whose sense and meaning is to be taken altogether to that
purpose likewise. In the Churches ^am^, that is, Executing the Churches
^uthoritie and power, and doing that which they do with their free con^ent and
approbation.

16. Chemnici^^.
Chemnicius, a man most famous and of ^are learning among the followers of
Luther in the matter of the real presence, yet in our cause he says thus:
Exam. part. page 226. 227. 228.
Non sine consensu Ecclesiae Paulus and Bar^abas invitis obtruserunt
Presbyteros. Paul and Barnabas did not thrust Ministers on the Church being
unwilling, or without their ^onsent. And, Exempla Aposiolica bistoria ^^are
oftendunt, etc. The examples of the Apostles story do clearly show that
Election or Vocation did belong to the whole church. And, Haec est Apostolicae,
primitiva, and vete^^ Eccesia sententia de legitima Electione and Vocatione
Ministrorum, etc. This is the judgment and way of the Apostolic, primitive,
and ancient Church concerning the lawful Election and Calling of Ministers
which judgment and way has place in those Churches which are co^stituted
according to Gods word. And he adds, In our Churches it is so: meaning in
those that follow Luther.

17. Whitake^.
Neither can I forget, that among ^ur own Countrymen D. Whitaker ^eacheth
thus: De Cone^^. page 44.
Quod omnes attingit* ab ^^^^bus approbari debet. That which touches all,
Chap. 4.
ought to be approved of all. Meaning that nothing should be obtruded upon any
people (in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual regiment, no not by Synods) except
the people consent to it. And this consent of the people (hitherto avouched)
verily many other worthy Divines both among us, and abroad do maintain
likewise. But I forbear to nominate any mo Knowing that to whom any thing will
be enough, these are enough.

CHAP. IIII. The public consent of many late, yet excellent Churches, herein
with us.
NEvertheles yet I will not spare to add hereunto also certain public voices
of most famous Churches. The Co^sestion of the Bohemian Churches has these
words, Bohemie. Confess. cap. (...).
Animaru^ Curatoribus and singulis Ecclesiasticis Co^munitatibus (sive parvae
sint sive magna) Claves concreditae sunt and concessae. Sic Dominus dixit
Ecclesi^s, Amen dico vobis, quacunque ligaveritis in teria, erunt ligata in
coelo: and quaecunque solveritis in terra, erunt soluta in coelo. Et mox, Nam
vbi duo aut tres congregati fuerint in nomine meo, ibi in medio eorum sum. The
Keys (that is, Ecclesiastical government) are given in trust and granted to
the Pastors and to every Ecclesiastical Communaltie (that is, ordinary
Congregation) whether they be small or great So the Lord said to the Churches:
Verily I say unto you. Whatsoever you bind in earth shall be bound in heaven:
and whatsoever you loose in earth, shalb^ loosed in heaven. And by and by* For
where two or three shall be gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

The Helvetian Confession says; Helvet. confess.. prior Artic, 17.
Quae cum vera Dei Electio sit, Ecclesiae suffragio and Sacerdotis manuum
impositione recte comprobatur. Which when it is Gods true Election it is
rightly approoved by the Churches voyce-giving, and the laying on of hands of
the Minister.

The Genevian Liturgy sets down expreslie, Genev.
the peoples consent to be necessary both in their Calling of Ministers, and
Excommunication of impenitent offenders. Beza also witnesses the same use in
the Elections at Geneva. and likewise in other places where there are free
Churches. Says he, Bez. de grad. Minist* cap 11.
Presbyters here are chosen not without the knowledge and consent of the
people. So every where in other free Churches (according to the condition of
the place) the like choice is made. Elsewhere also he says of the same thus:
Annotat in Act. ^4 2^.
Habemus nos Dei benefic^o certas nostrae vocationis notas, legitimo ab
Ecclesijs nostris and vita and doctrinae testimonio ernati, and ab
y^sdemelects, ac demurn etia^ in nostro ministerio confirmats. Cus Domia^^ (vt
spero) e^ectis tum furibus, tum mercenarijs benedicet. We have by Gods
goodnes^ certain notes of our Calling, having good testimo^e from our Churches
both for our life and doctrine and being by them Chosen and Confirmed also in
our Ministry, Which I hope the Lord will bless, when he will ca^^ out both
thieves and hirelings.

According to this order out of question the Savoyan Churches, Savey.
and the French also generally are constituted. French.
Which the French Liturgy does likewise prove.

The Churches of Scotland (before the late woeful breaking off from their
former consent) did approove the same public Order of the Churches of France
and Geneva aforesaid. Scottish.


Also the public Order set forth in the Low countries consents herewith.
Belgi^.
The Synod of Middelburgh Anno 15^1. decrees thus of the Chosing of Ministers:
Arti^.
Electio sit penes Ecclesiam, and fiat per suffiagium in templo public. Let
the Election of the Ministers be in the power of the Church, and let it be
done by voices publicly in the Temple. Afterward they determine thus: Nulla
Ecclesia, nullus Minister, Nullus Senior, nullu^ Diaconus vllum ^abeat primatum
super alterum. No Church, no Minister, no Elder, no Deacon may have any kind
of primacie above other. Chap 4.


The Synod of Tilleburgh in Nasovia Anno 1582, Nasson.
receaveth these Points for them selves also: as Zepperus shows in the end of
his Politia Ecclesiastica.

There is a public Order publ^^ed in Middelburgh Anno 1602. (agreeing withal
the former) which touching the Chosing of Ministers says thus: The party as
chosen with the free consent of the Ministers, Elders, and the whole
Congregation to be ordained, is to frame his Sermon. etc. Touching Deposing of
them thus: By the like authority as he was elected, he is to be Deposed.
Touching Excommunication thus: It is ordained that nothing be attempted in that
behalf without the determination of the whole Congregation.

Whereunto the Churches under the Palsgrave do agree, Palatin.
in whose public Catechism thus we read. In the end of part. ^.
The Church (by the commandment of Christ and his Apostles) using the Keys
ought t^o drive the wicked from this Supper, till they shall repent and change
their manners. Which Vrsinus (the approved interpreter thereof) does show to be
with the peoples free consent, as page 41.
before out of Vrsmus we observed.

Finally, Other churches.
this same is allowed by those Churches also which follow Luther according to
Chemnicius testimony of them page 47.
before alleged: Chap. 5.
where at least he signifies that many of them do allow it. Which many other
churches besides do also, who^ here I name not.

Hitherto I have truly and plainly declared, as touching these later times) who
they are who have been our Master* and Teachers in this matter of the Church
constitution and government, viz. that it ought to be always with the
peoples free consent. Verily now it appears, I hope, that we need not be
ashamed either of these noble lights of Religion, or of this doctrine which
manifestly we have learned and received from such worthies.

CHAP. V. The Testimonies and practice of the best Antiquity, after the New
Testament, herein likewise with us.
HOwbeit furthermore, that it may not be thought noveltie or unbeseeming
Christian Religion, (although no honest man will once think so of any thing
which such a uniform consent of so renowned late Christians does justify,
yet) I judge it very co^ venient to produce also some testimonies of the most
ancient times of Christianity after the Apostles downe-ward, even while any
soundnes of the Gospel did openly show it self in the world. I say, such
testimonies I purpose hee^e to show of famous Christians as have been always
continually after the Apostles, by which the practice of the peoples free
consent in their Church government is approoved: yea in peace as well as in
persecution, till the tyranny of Antichrist would bear it no longer in any
public state. And this (God willing) I shall perform in this manner.

To begin therefore, we will first observe the Church of Ierusalems practice in
this point immediately after the decease of the Apostle James that dyed there,
as Eusebius records. Says ^ee; Ann^ circoter 70.
Eusebius 3.10
After James was dead it is reported that the Apostles and Disciples out of all
places (near about Jerusalem) came together into one, and took counsel
together who might be judged worthy to su^ceed in James his pla^e. Therefore
all with one consent did think Simeon the son of Cleophas meet and able to
have the government of the Church there. And again out of Egesippus; 4.^1.
After that James was slame, Simeon the so^e of Cleophas was made Bishop: whom
in t^esecond place all the Disciples appointed by voices to that government.
This was the first and most notable example of the Christians pract se in this
matter, neither ca^^^^ we read of any nearer to the Apostles after the times of
the New Testament, then this. Also we see it was in the very Mother Church of
all Christianity. Wherefore this order of Calling to the ministry, rather
then any later, is most worthy, yea necessary to be observed and imitated by us
every where and for ever. The like we read of there again, thus: 6^. Anno 205.
When Narcissi^ (the Bishop) had withdrawn himself and was gone no man knew
whither, they who governed the neighbor Churches thought good to make another
Bishop. But how? By the peoples voices. And so Dius was chosen. Afterward
Narcissus returning, the Brethren desired him to take again^ the government of
the Church. Unto whom was adjoined Alexander for his fellow, the people of
Jerusalem with the common consent of the neighbor Bishops constrayning him
necessarily to tarry with them. These were the means that made these Ministers.

Ignatius of Antioch teaches, and says to the Church at Philadelphia, that
Ignat. ad Philad.
It was me^te for them as being a Church of God, Anno 112.
by voices to chose their Bishop. (...) It can not be denied, but that this
writer shows in the word (...), that is. Lifting up of hands ^n thepeoples
voice giving, that Elections of Ministers were then made by the peoples free
choice. Seeing he signifies Ordination and Laying on of hands, by another
proper word, viz. (...).

The practice of the Church of Rome was also the same in this matter. Anno 240.
Of which we read, Eusebius, 6.2 and
"When all the Brethren were come together in the Church for the purpose to
chose a Bishop (whose place now was void) the whole people with one consent
cried that Fabianus was worthy of that dignity, and presently he was placed in
the same. Afterward again we read of Cornelius that he was chosen in like
manner. For so writes Cyprian of him, saying: Cyprian. Epist. 4.2.
Factus est Cornelius Episcopus de Dei and Christ's eius iudicio, de plebis (qua
tune affuit) suffragio, etc. Cornelius was made Bishop by the judgment of God
and his Christ by the voice giving of the people which was then present. etc In
an other place also he says, He was 3.13.
de Dei iudtcio and Cleri ac Plebis suffragio ordinatus: Ordained by the
judgment of God, and by the voices of the Clergy and people.

The practice of the Church of Carthage was the same, Anno ^5^.
as Cyprian also (speaking of him self) shows, saying that he was chosen
Cyprian. Epist. 1.3.
Populi vniversi suffragio in pace, by the voyce-giving of the whole people in
peace, and quietly: also he calls this 1.8.
their voice giving, Gods judgment. And he writes of another Church in Afrike
at Legio (as we may gather) that there one Sabinus was made Bishop 1.4.
de vniversae fraternstatis suffragio, by the voyce-giving of the whole
brotherhood, and by the judgment of the Bishops that were come together.

But above all other, that place in Cyprian is singular for our purpose, where
his own judgment and sentence with many other Bishops besides, is to be
noted concerning this power and right of the people. It is in this same Epistle
a little before, thus: Ibidem. viz. 1.4.
Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis and Deum metuens a peccatore praeposito
separate se debet, nec se ad sacrilegi Sacerdotis sacrificsa miscere, cum ipsa
maxim babeat poteslatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos
recusandi. Quod and ipsum videmus de Divina authoritate descendere. etc. A
people obeying the Lords Commandementes and fearing God ought to separate them
selves from a wicke^ Minister, and not join them selves to the Divine Service
of a Sacrilegious Priest, seeing they (the people) chiefly have power to chose
worthy Ministers and to refuse unworthy ones. Which thing also we see comes
fi^ Divine authority etc. Lo what Cyprians judgment is of the peoples power
and right in the making of Ministers. He with diverse other his fellow-Bishops
does here profess that it comes from Divine authority. So before he called
it Gods judgment and his Christ's.
What can be more full and absolute to our purpose, then this?

The same also he holds touching the peoples power in Church ce^sures. As
where he wills Stephan Bishop of Rome to write Epist. 3.14.
ad plebem Arelate consistentem, to the people at Arles in France. His intent
is here that their Novatian Bishop Martianus should be removed and another
set in his place by them together with Stephans help. And elsewhere touching
one Victor a Presbyter fallen from the Church and returned again, Cyprian
greatly misliketh and rebukes Therapius the Bishop for receaving him 3.8.
sine petitu and conscientia plebis, without the desire and knowledge of the
people: and advises him that he do so no more. And as touching himself he
shows in many places his own constant practice to be such also. Or, without
the desire etc conscience of the people.
First of some rash and proud Presbyters he says, if they persisted in their
scandalous behavior, they should answer it 3.14.
apud plebe vniversam, before all the people, as judges with himself and
others of their misdemeanor. Again writing severally to his people about some
that desired to be reconciled to the Church at Carthage, he says, 3.16.
Examinabuntur singula praese itibus and iudicantibus vobis: Every thing shall be
examined, you (the people) being present and judging of it. And thus he
means where he says he must 3.1^.
dispomere omnia consilij communis religione, disoose all things by a religious
observing of such common advise. Lo, he puts and acknowledges Religion
herein And therefore it is, that to a few Presbyters of his Church, who had
written to him being then absent from Carthage about some of his church
affairs, he says; He could not so much as write back to the^ thereof. 3.10.
Seeing he had determined to do nothing privately of his own mind without the
Presbyters counsel and the peoples consent, And promises that when he
should return he will handle matters in common, both such as were past while
he was absent, and also such as were to come after his return. Yea and
therefore in an other place he says: 3.19.
Praiudicare ego, and solum mihi rem communem vendicare non audeo. I dare not
praeiudge, and take to my self alone common matters Add unto this that he
says also, ^.4.
Apud nos quoque, and fere per Provincias vniversas te^etur: Thus custom and
practice is observed with us at Carthage, and almost through out all Provinces.

By all which it is manifest that D. Bilson vainly answers, that Cyprian did
yield to the people their free consent in the Church-governement out of D.
Bil^. perpet gover. page 171. 176.
a private moderation, and but of his own free will. Nay, he says (as we
heard) that he durst not do otherwise, and that he observed it out of religion,
and that this power of the people comes from Divine authority. Yea doubtless,
such a general and perpetual custom, even from the Apostles times, and
appearing in the Apostles practice also (as the New Testament shows) can not
be in Cypriaen a private moderation only, but even an unchangeable law. Neither
is that any truer where he says, that Page 178.
Cyprian him self was the first that cas^iered his own confession, Page 18^.
and brake that custom. He brake it not: He did not cassier his own
confession. Though that is a thing not impossible. Cyprian is not so persit,
but he might thus fail thorough affection to him self: and yet his former
testimonies of the peoples right and power before said may be (as they are) most
true. But as I said, Cypria^ neverbrake this his own and others custom. Verily
as touching the substance of the matter he never brake it. What instances has
he against us? Says he, Cyprian without the people made Epist. 4.5.
Celerinus, 2 5.
Aurelius, and 3.22.
Saturus Readers: and Optatus a Subdeacon. What of this? None of these come
into our question. We have no care of making Readers and Subdeacons. But
without the people he made 4.10.
Numidicus a Presbyter. The place shows no such matter; nor yet that he was
made Presbyter then. But rather being absent he shows the Presbyters and
people at Carthage, that Numidicus was to be made a Presbyter. Saying in the
future tence, Et promovebitur quidem dum tempus permiserit, ad ampliorem locum
religionis suae, cum in presentia, protegente Domin^, venerimus. He shall be
promoted, when we shall come in presence among you. So that he says not, that
he alone had now made him a Presbyter. Beside, it is most manifest in all
these places that Cyprian showed a special care to have the peoples liking and
free consent to all which he did: and that in his absence he would attempt
not any thing, but that which he presumed and was sure of that their liking
was to it as much as his own. So that he makes it apparent even here, that
he would do none of these things against their wills. Which is all that we
seek also in our assertion, as touching the substance of it, as before we have
often showed. Last of all, he says of Numidicus, that he was to be a
Presbyter dignatione Divina, by Gods special Divine will: and that Celerinus,
and Aurelius had their places so I kewise. But we speak of no such
extraordina^e and Divine calling. This also touches not our question. We hold
the peoples right of giving consent to be only for the ordinary callings in
the Ministry. D. Bilson further urges that Cyprian received some into the
Church Page 17^
without the peoples consent: yea when the people withstood it, because he
says in one place, Vix plebi persuade^, immo extorqueo, I scarce persuade the
people, Epist. 1.3.
or rather I wring it from them. etc. And obnitente plebe and contradicente, I
received the^ the people striving against it, and gainsaying it. I answer,
Seeing he says, I scarce persuade the people, therefore they were persuaded
and did consent to his mind. Indeed he shows that this matter was hardly
gotten at their hands, yea a while they spoke against it: but they were
persuaded at last, and so in conclusion they agreed to do as he thought good.
Thus he did not this thing plainly and simply without the peoples consent, or
against their w^^s simply: but with their consent and ag^eement, so as I said.
Whereby it appears how frivolous exceptions are taken against Cyprians
concurrence and correspondence with us in this cause: whose most clear, and
unanswerable, and frequent speaking on our part herein, we have seen before.

Now only one place more I will note in him describing fully his ordinary
practice in Church governeme^^, and may be a singular example and pattern for
us. Epist. 3.11. showing how he received again certain p^enitents who had
schismed from the Church. He says thereof first; 3.11.
Omni actu ad me perlato placuit co^trahi Presbyte^u^: Every act of their
repe^ta^ce being brought unto me, I thought good to call together he
Presbytery or Eldership. Whether here were any Lay Elders in this
Presbyteric, or whether all were ordinary Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, it is nothing material. Though D. Bilson and D. Downame do make
all their stir about this question, yet as I said (even in the page 11. 12.
23.
entrance of this Treatise) it is nothing to the substance of the controversy
between us: but it is impertinent and from the maine purpose altogether. To
pass this therefore: Secondly Cyprian in this place adds, His ita gestis in
Presbyterium venerunt, etc. Then the pe^ntentes came into the Eldership,
earnestly praying that the things they had committed might be forgotten, etc.
Thirdly, Quod e^at consequens, omnis hic actus populo fuerat ^nsinuandus. It
remained, that all this action was to be signified to the people Magnus
fra^ernitatis concursus factus est. There was a great Meeting of the brethren.
Vna vox eras ^mnium. Maximum Presbyterum locum suum agnoscereiussimus. Caeteros
cum ingenti populi suffragio recepimus. There was one voice of us all. We
willed Maximus the Presbyter to know his place. The rest we received with a
great voycegiving of the people allowing it. Here we see what place and order
and consent the people under Cyprian had in the ordinary Church governeme^t.
Certainly it is a plain example, and right worthy to be followed of us. And
so much concerning Cyprian is sufficient,

A while after this time, Antioch.
at Antioch the neighbor Bishops coming together, Anno 27^.
do acknowledge that even the Churches thereabouts co^curred and joined with
them in the act of Excommunicating and deposing Paul the Bishop there, and in
ordayning Domnus in his room. This they signify i^ the title of their Eusebius
7.24.
Epis^le which they all together do write about this matter. Now questionles
among these Churches, the Church (that is, the people) of Antioch it self were
the principal in this action. For they were the proper Body of which that
wicked Bishop was the proper Ministerial Head also there the Meeting about his
deposing, was held; and they were they which were specially grieved with him,
who yet for fear of his pride and tyranny durst not themselves alone accuse
him, as it is there signified. The point is, we see here at Antioch the
Churches (that is, the peoples) concurrence and consent with other Bishops and
Teachers near adjoining, in the Excommunication and Deposition of one, and in
Ordayning to them selves another Bishop.

After this again the Council of Nice decreed, Council. Nicen.
that the people should chose their Minister, as appears where they say,
Anno. 330.
If any Church Minister dye, let one of the Chuch succeed in his place, so that
he seem fit, and be chosen of the people, and the Bishop consent, and confirm
the peoples election. Socrat. 1.6.
This order was written by this Council, Theodoret. 1.9.
namely to the Alexa^drian Churches, because of a particular occasion, but it
served as a rule generally for all places as the Council was general. Which
does plainly appear by that which afterward the Council of Constantinople did
in Theodores. ^.9.
observing this Nicen ordinance as an order belonging to them.

About the year 420. the fourth Council of Carthage decreed thus: Council.
Cartha. 4 C^n 22 Au c^c. 420.
E^^^^^pus sine Concilio Clericorum su^rum Cle^^^s non ordinet; ita vt Civium
assensum, and ^^^ventiam, and testimonium quarat. Let (...) a Bishop ordain
any Clergie-man wichout an assembly of his Clergy: so that let him ^^eke the
peoples consent, and connivence, and Mimonie. This Canon will have Ministers
made in no wise without the peoples consent, contentment, and testimony of
their worthiness. Here D. Downame with little show, but with great falsehood
turns this word Et and, into Or: saying assent, or connivence, where he
should say assent and co^nivence, as Page 24.25.
before I briefly touched. Whereby he would make the Council seem to mean
that either of these was sufficient in the making of Ministers, and that their
assent was not simply necessary: but if they did connive or hold their peace,
the Council was content and required no more. But both the present words, and
all circumstances of these times do plainly declare that the Council here
requires in making Ministers, the peoples express consent, and testimony
also of their worthiness, as before I noted. Of these times Calvin says thus:
Insti^. 4.4.10.
Cum paroch^^ no vt Presbyters destinabantur, tunc loci multitudinem nominatim
consentire oportuit. When new Presbyters were appointed to the parishes then
the people of the place must consent expressly.

This, with the rest of the Councill^ of Carthage, was confirmed in the
general Council of Constantinople holden in Trullo about the year of Christ
682. Con^ll. Constantinop. A^. 682.
Wherefore so long, and longer also we may well think, particular
Congregations kept their spiritual right and power in this behalf. Which
Calvin says was such, that though the Governors sometimes did of them selves
first chose, and then brought the matter to the people, yet Instie. 4.4.1^.
they (the people) were not bound to those foreiudgeme^ts. And when the Church
was deprived of this her right, it is by him called Impia Ecclesia spoliatie,
quoties alicui popul^ ingeritur Episcopus quem non petierit, aut saltem libera
voce approbarit. It is an ungodly robbing of the Church so often as a Pastor is
putvpon any people whom they havenot desired, or at least approved by free
voice. I grant by this time many great preparations were made to bring in that
Antichristian apostasy and tyranny, which afterward followed and overflowed
every where. Howbeit yet thus long the Churches even by public laws retained
their life: at least wise that injury and violence and spiritual robbery and
tyranny which afterward prevayled against them, as yet was not general.

It is to no purpose here to inquire when or by whom this wrong first entered;
I mean, this withholding from the people of God their free consent in
spiritual government. It is sufficient that we see this their freedom to be
Apostolical: also to be taught and observed in the Christian Churches next
succeeding the Apostles, yea even till after the time that Antichrist began the
desolation of abhominarion, which since has been everywhere set up, and with
strong hand maintained. Also, that we see the most undoubted instruments of
God in these later times so clearly to avouch this most singular means of
overthrowing Antichrist, and so earnestly to defend it, as they do, viz. as if
without it there were neither any way to repel him at first, nor security
afterward for us to stand long against his incessant endeavors, laboring
still to return and tyrannise over our souls again.

This, I say, is sufficient for our present purpose at this time and in this
place. Which also being well considered, can not but cause every honest man to
mourn and sigh before the Lord, beholding this foundation of piety and godly
life to be so despised, yea so maligned, and resisted, as by many it is now
among our selves, where the Gospel is, and has been entertained (thanks be to
God) these many years. From which most just cause of grief it proceeds also
necessarily that we cannot but open our mouths (as we do) to bear witness in
the behalf of this cause of Christ, being also the only true and assured
means which does most nearely concern us (as we well understand) in the
matter of the salvation of our souls. And so much touching this point.

Only this moreovet for a Conclusion I desire may be hoere noted, the ground
whereof I take out of our adversaries. Namely, Whatsoever the whole Church
militant ever since the Apostles, has held, and was not instituted by
Councills but has been always retained, that is most rightly believed to be
delivered by the Apostles.

The whole Church Militant over since the Apostles has held the peoples
consent in then own Church government, and it was nor instituted by
Councills, but it bath ben always, retained.

Therefore the peoples consent in their own Church government is most rightly
believed to be delivered and ordained by the Apostles.

The first Proposition is our adversaries. p^rp^^ govern. page 258.
D. Bilson and D. Downame do much magnify it out of Sermon page 56. 57. Defen. 4
Austin. And we acknowledge it to be true. The Assumption is proved here
before in this 5. Chapter so fully and plentifully as any thing can be by
Humane records and testimonies. For we have none extant better the^ these, At
least by these it is prooved so fully as our adversaries do intend in the
Proposition. Wherefore the Conclusion is most certain and clear against them,
viz. that the peoples consent in their own Church government is an
institution and ordinance of the Apostles. Whence also consequently it will
follow, that those textes of Scripture usually alleged for proof of the
same, mentioned also page 76.
and which I have to that pur^ise handled in my 3. and 9. Arguments of the
Divine beginning and institution of Christ's Visible and Ministerial Church,
do well show and testify to us so much.

CHAP. VI. Our very Adversaries do acknowledge with us the truth of this
doctrine, sometimes in plain terms, Chap. 6.
and sometimes to the same full effect; specially when they deal against the
Papists.
THE force and evidence of this truth, (viz. touching the peoples right for
their free consent in Church government) is such, that also our very
Adversaries sometimes in plain terms, sometimes to the same full effect do
acknowledge it. Among many, I will content my self with two for the present,
viz. D. Bilson, and D. Downame. The first of these in his Answer to the
Apology of the Seminary Pristes and Jesuits writes thus: D. Bila. against
the Seminar. part. 2 353.356.
We have the words and warrant of the H. Ghost for that which we say etc. viz.
That the people can and ought to disceme and try the doctrine and spirits of
the Teachers, etc so to chose and refuse the^ as they by the word should see
good. Thus says he. And what can be spoken by any of our selves more plainly,
and more fully to our purpose? If the people can and ought to chose their
Teachers, and to refuse whom they find worthy to be refused, then why are they
not allowed so to do in England? If the words and warrant of the holy Ghost be
for it, then who may impeach it? Who may resist it? What are they that revile
and persecute this way? He adds here in this place that the people Page 355.
have skill and leave to discern both, viz. to discern the Teachers and their
doctrine. Where also he discourses much upon this right of the people as
being Christ's ordinance, and presses it against the Papists. Yea, in another
book where he pleads to the contrary purpose against us, yet he writes
thus: Perpet gov. page 300.
*The Apostles left Elections indifferently to the people and Clergy of
Jerusalem The people had as much right to chose their Pastor as the Clergy
that had more skill to judge. Page 339.
Well may the peoples interest stand upon the grounds of Reason and Nature, and
be derived from the rules of Christian equity. Page 359.
The late Bishops of Rome have not ceased cursing and fighting, till excluding
both Prince and people they reduced the Election wholly to the Clergy. But he
tells them, that by their leave, (applying hereunto the words of Christ
Mat. 19. 8.) it was not so from the beginning. Again he says, Page 330.
I a knowledge each Church and people stand fr^e by Gods law to admit,
maintain, and obey no man as their Pastor without their liking. Where in deed
he adds to the contrary, unless by law, custom, or consent they restrain
themselves. But this he him self els-where answers roundly; Page 221.
What authority had others after the Apostles deaths, to change the
Apostolic government? And that it was not so from the beginning (which before
he answered) is a full confutation also of this exception. As also where he
calls Men's ordinances in Church government Page 19.
Corruptions of times inventions of Men, and a transgressing of the
Commandment of God for the traditions of men. And where he calls such
ordinances Page 111.
intrusion, and presumption.

As for that he says elsewhere in this book, Page 82.
the Multitude (he means the Christian people) neither could not can judge
of the gifts and abilities of Pastors no more then blind men of colors. This
shows plainly his variable mind and contradiction to him self. As for the
matter, it is spoken merely out of an humor, and partiality against us, and
that his Lordship in spiritual things over Christ's people might be
stablished. But before against the maine adversaries of the Gospel (the
Papists) he taught the truth, as the Scripture there alleged does show: but
here in this last place he turns about, and joins with them, rather then
he would seem to consent with us. Nevertheles his former most clear and
sincere testimony on our behalf can not be blotted out.

Again in the same book speaking of Bishops, in plain terms thus he says,
page 340.
They have no power to impose a Pastor on any Church against their wills, nor
to force them to yield him obedience or maintenance against their liking. If
this were ingenuously acknowledged and professed, and practiced likewise
religiously, we should desire no more for the substance of the matter, as it
has been often said. Our agreement together touching Church-governement,
would soon appear. But he, when he lists, will tell us that Timothy and
T^^s (whom he esteems Bishops) had power to make Presbyters to Churches (and
the Apostles also) page 88.
without the people, or their consent. Wherefore what to reckon of his sayings
and speeches, we know not. Only his foresaid agreement with us in words, is
manifest.

Next to him we will consider of Doctor Downame. He in a certain place (though
it seems full sore against his will, yet through the force of the truth being
compelled) acknowledges and yields unto us, that D Down. Def. 4.99.
the power of ordination and jurisdiction by right is seated in the whole
Church or Congregation in case of necessity: wherein both the succession of
their own Clergy failing and the help of others wanting, the right is
devolved to the whole body of the Church. In which words I desire all men to
observe how this Doctor grants us the cause in full effect, and agrees
wholly to our purpose. For that which here he says, and which necessarily
follows from these words, is all that we^ desire. Wherefore I pray the
Christian Reader to mark well these seven Consequentes which follow from
these words of D. Downame, and cannot be denied by any honest and true-hearted
Christian. First, in that he holds that the power of ordination and
jurisdiction by right is seated in the particular Congregation in case of
necessity, it is certain therefore that he must hold that this right and power
is seated in the whole particular Congregation by Christ, and by the ordinance
of God. For no person or persons can at any time nor in any respect have such
power by Man's ordinance. It can not be either Naturally or Civilly given or
received. Wherefore in whom soever that power is seated, and at what time
soever, doubtless, it is in them Supernaturally: God by his special grace
gives it, and Christ by his holy ordinance seateth it in them. Yea though it
be in any case of necessity whatsoever. For thus it is written: Job 3.^7
A man can receave nothing, except it be given him from heaven. That is, No
dignity, no authority, no power in the Church can be, but from God. And it is
spoken absolutely touching all times, places, and persons, without any
limitation. The like proof is that also in another text, viz. Hebr. 9.^^
No man takes this honor to him self but be that is called of God as Aaron
was. But I will press this no further. For I suppose every Christian advised
will acknowledge it, and I have showed it at large in a special treatise for
the purpose, viz. The Divine beginning and institution of Christ's true
visible, and Ministerial Church. Secondly, If Thirdly, This being contained,
in the cited and alleged in the third and 9. Arguments of my forenamed
Treatise of the Divine beginning and institu^^^ of Christ's true visible, and
Ministerial Church. For there can be no other instance showed, at least, none
can be showed of any other tenor then those are. Which special places are
these: Math. 18.17. and 1. Cor. 5.13. and 2. These. 3.14. and 2. Co. 2.8. Also
Act. 14.23. Act. 6.3.5.6. Act. 1.23.26. and Act. 15.22.25.28. as it appears
in the foresaid Arguments of the said Treatise. Fourthly, indefinitly: Nor take
that away from ^is people at any time, which he has given them simply. 2. Cor
2.24.
What is proud ^lesh and blood to inhibit or lessen Christ's unlimited free
grant and gracious gift to his Church? Or how can our souls rest assured,
when we yield to such presumption of men? Whereupon we may fee that this
restraining clause of our Doctor here added, that this acknowledgement of his
is not true of any particular Congregation but in pase of necessity, is both a
false and absurd addition. False, as being contrary to the generality of
those special places of Christ's Testament above mentioned: absurd, as
implying by necessary consequence a contradiction to himself in one and the
same sentence. For his present acknowledgement (such as it is) implies the
contrary to this his limitation by necessary consequence, as before in this
fourth point I have showed. Fifthly, this power of Ordination and Jurisdiction
being by Decla^^^ Page ^. 35.
where I say that this power is co^vertible with the Congregation. I affirm
therefore that this power indeed is only in the whole Congregation. Although
D. D. Downame has skill to go two ways to Heaven (for the true
Church-governeme^t is the way to heaven) yet our good, holy, and wise God
approoveth but one way; as where he says: Isa. 30.21
This is the way, walk ye in it. Turn not therefrom, neither to the right
hand, nor to the less. And where Christ says, Ioh. 14.6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life. He allows simply but one way, even
that which is his own ordinance, and none other. Vas via, vna veritas. One
way, one truth. Also, Veritas simplex, error autem multiplex. Truth is but one,
Error is manifold. Wherefore it can not be, but the power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction being by Christ seated in the whole Congregation, it is also only
in them.


Here the adversaries think they have a great advantage against us. They say,
it appears in the Scripture that 1. Tim. 5.22.
Tamothie and Tit. 1.5.
Titus had power of Ordination and jurisdiction. Therefore only the
Co^gregations had not that power.

I answer; This consequence is utterly false: it follows not at all. For
Timothy and Titus had the power of Ordination and jurisdiction with the
Congregations, Now the Congregation only had power.
not without them. Being parts of them and being present in them for the time;
not being personally out of them, or absent from them; So as the L. Bishops do
exercise their power in England Again, as Paul says to the Corinthians, that
2 Cor ^.24.
he was not (...) Lord over, their faith, but a helper to them for their ^oy:
So these, viz. Timothia and Titus in the Congregations were not Lords but they
were Helpers to them in the managing of these affairs. They did not alone
without the Congregations concurrence what themselves listed: but they ordered
and guided the Congregations in this their business as Directors, and chief
Counselors, and as the most worthy to be Actors thereof for them. And the
like was the power of the Apostles also toward the Congregations. It was such
(I say) and none other. Indeed in their Doctrine and teaching they by them
selves alone instructed them, and sometime commanded them in the name of
Christ: but in outward government they did not any thing alone, or Lordly,
that is, without the Congregations free consent. Wherefore much rather the
power of all ordinary true Bishops and Pastors is such, and no greater. They
have power of Ordination and jurisdiction, but yet evermore with the
Congregations presence and free consent, as their instruments doing their acts
in the Churches name, and by their authority; not in their own name, no^
solely as Lords. So it remains evident, that Bishops primitively, yea and
Timothy and Titus, and the Apostle^ themselves had power of ordinary Church
government: and yet the Congregations only had this power. Because they
evermore were parts of the Congregations in them, when they had and used their
power. Downame here says truly, the succession of their own Clergy failing,
and the help of others wanting the right is devolved to the whole body of the
Church. If the Doctor will reply and say, that this power and right is not
essentially in the whole Congregation always nor at all times, but sometimes
only, that is, in the case of necessity aforesaid. I answer, then the D.
folly, and want of true reason will be manifest to all men. For what soever is
essential to any thing at sometime, is essential to the same always and
evermore. That which is essential once, is essential still. So that if the
Congregations power and right to consent in making of Ministers and in Censures
be essential at sometime (as he acknowledges it is) then certainly it is
essential therein at all times and evermore. The truth hereof can never be
denied. And hence it is that Luther says, If Titus would not, Luth. de
Ministr Eccles. instit prop^ finem.
the Congregation might ordain Ministers to them selves. And of
Excommunication Zuinglius says, Artic. 31.
Non quod solus Episcopus hac facere debeat, quisque hoc ^^^est, si Episcopus
fuerit negligens. Any man may do this, if the Bishop be negligent. He means
any Man appointed by the Church may do it. In which respect also that sentence
of Epiphanius that Epiph. haere^^ 75.
Bi^^ops can beget Fathers to the Church, but Presbyters can not, is to be
refused as untrue and erroneous. For before we have seen that only the
Congregation does beget Fathers (that is, makes Ministers) essentially, the
Bishop does it but instrumentally and Ministerially. And so a Presbyter may do
it as well as he whom they name a Bishop: yea any other also may do it (as
Luther and Zuinglius before affirm) when the Church imployeth them to that vs^
Our two Doctors before cited (even a^ the Papists also do) hold strongly with
those words of ^aere^. 75.
Epephanius, to the great prejudice of the Gospel. But their bare opinions, and
names are nothing to our clear and certain reason for the contrary before set
down. Neither are the bare opinions and naked names of any other men
whosoever, any better worth. Seventhly (...) Downame, or surely that he ought
to acknowledge them all; seeing by force of true reason they al do follow from
those his words which he affirms and holds, as before I have declared. Now
this is all that we profess touching the pleoples right t^ Church government.
For we deni^ not but in the ordinary, and peaceable* and right state of the
Church when al things are carried well, the chief di^ection and sway of the
whole government belongs to the Bishop or Pa^tor; the people being on their
part ^o hearken to their Teacher and to fol^ow their Guide obediently and
dutie^ully. D. Down. De^^ 1.41.
Their power to judge and to provide otherwise for themselves being, when they
see their Guides to fail. Which seeing it is his mind also, set down in his
own words before re^earsed, I have truly affirmed that ^ouching our present
cause even this Doctor agrees with us sometime in ^ull effect, and by good
consequence of ^eason from his express words. Though at other times he do, as
some report Cicero said to Salust, Orat. (...) Cicer. (...) Salust,
Aliud stans, ^^^^d sedens de repub. sentis. Of the common ^ealth thou think
one thing standing, another sitting. Of Christ's Visible Church and the
government thereof, verily our Doctor does likewise.

CHAPTER VII. Chap. 7.
Consequences of greatest importance following upon the peoples free consent in
their Church government, and inconveniences in Religion not sufferable
following from the contrary.
AFter the forerehearsed Witnesses for this Doctrine, we will now show certain
clear and necessary Consequences which follow from the same: also some true
and great Inconveniences (to faith, and godly life, and to Civil authority)
such as are not to be tolerated, which yet cannot be avoided where men
professing to be Christians, embrace not this point. Of all fortes I will here
observe eight great and weighty Consequentes heerevpon.

First this being received as the Ordinance of Christ and the practice of the
Apostles, 1. Co^sequent
that the Church government ought to be always with the peoples free consent,
it follows that every Church is only As is also showed in the Declaration
page 12. 13. 14. 35.
one ordinary Congregation and not any proper Diocesan or Provincial Church,
or larger. Understanding always the peoples free consent to be orderly, and
conveniently taken and practiced, so as Christ intends that 1. Cor. 14.40.
every thing should be done in his Church. For where the peoples free consent
is orderly and conveniently practiced always in the Church government, there
the Body of the Church can not be so large as a Diocese, much less as a
Province or Nation, and least of all so large as a Universal Church. Seeing
all this people can not possibly by any means give their free consent in the
ordinary Church-governement (neither can any person take it of all them)
justly, orderly, and conveniently. This (to say the truth) is not possible. For
in such a state when only some maine parts of the Church government are
exercised, it will be always with much defect, and also with great
disturbance, and tumult oftentimes I say, where it is extended so largely, and
so wide, and with concurrence of such multitudes of people.

This is true, first in very reason: and withal often experience has showed
it in former times under most Christian and careful Princes after the Nicen
Council; as at Alexandria, at Antioch, at Rome, at Constantinople, and in
infinite places mo, a great part whereof the Euse^. Socrat. Zozome^. Theodoret.
Evagrius.
Stories do record. In which Church actions though done with to inconvenient
liberty of the people, yet the greatest part of the people who^ the effect of
those businesses reached unto were absent, and so wanted their right; and those
which were present were full of confusion, and tumult: neither could it be
otherwise. But God is the God of equity, of order, and of peace. Wherefore
this disorder can nor be fit for Gods Church. And so neither can a Diocesan
circuit, R^as. for reform. p. 26.27
or larger; in which this disorder will arise necessarily, if all that people
together have their free consent in their Church-governement. Which the whole
people of every Church always ought to have by Christ's and the Apostles
ordinance, as Page 19. and chap. 3.4.5.
before we have seen.

Nay, to come nearer. No proper and perfect Diocesan Church, or larger, ever
did or does admit the peoples free consent in their ordinary government.
Universally and always it is so: and indeed it can not be otherwise. For where
each ordinary Congregation has their free consent in their ordinary
government, there certainly each Congregation is an entire and independent
Body politic Spiritual, and is endued with power in it self immediately under
Christ. And so every of them are true and proper Churches. So that these
Congregations admit not (where they are) any proper Diocesan Church, or larger:
neither does the proper Diocesan Church (or larger) admit entire and
independent ordinary Co^gregations, Which (as I said) have their free consent
in their ordinary government. They are indeed (...) such as Reas. for (...)
form page 23.25.
cannot stand together possibly. And therefore it is likewise, that which
heretofore Ibid page 8^
I have affirmed (and so do still) in the New Testament there is not any
Diocesan Church, or larger, to be found. Which point though I have in my
Declaration proved it by this and 6. other reasons, yet I will here draw it
into this Syllogism again.

No Church holding the peoples free consent in their ordinary government with
just and decent order, is Diocesan or larger.

Every Visible Church in the New Testament holds the peoples free consent in
their ordinary government with just and decent order.

Therefore No Visible Church in the New Testament is Diocesan or larger.

The first proposition is manifest of it self, and I have showed it more Page
84.8^ 86. etc.
fully before. The Assumption, or 2. proposition is at large proved and
confirmed in those places which are noted in the margin before, viz. page 19.
and are mentioned again particularly page 76. To which purpose also the whole
3.4. and 5. chap. do help. Where I am to add moreover, that this Conclusion
is true, not only in the New Testament, but also in the ages following a long
while after. That is, no such Diocesan churches were found till 420. years
after Christ, yea til 680. and more, were past. Which I showed before in the
end of the fifth Chap. as also I touched it in my Declaration page 24.25.

But let it be remembered, that here I speak precisely of proper Diocesan
Churches, and larger. There is therefore necessarily a distinction to be made
of Diocesan Churches. There are proper Diocesan Churches, and larger; and there
are improper. The proper Diocesan Church, and larger, is where the people have
no power freely to consent in the affairs of their ordinary Church
government. The improper Diocesan Church, and larger, is where although there
be a kind of Diocesan, or larger Consociation of many ordinary Co^gregations
in Spiritual government under one general Presidencie or Superiority, yet
the ordinary Congregations have their free consent, at least they have nothing
by their Spiritual Governors imposed on them, against their wills. Which kind
of Dioces. church, being duly ordered, we do not gainsay. There are hereof
also two kinds. The one is Act. 15.2.3.6.7.
Apostolical, viz. where many ordinary Congregations consociating together
in their spiritual government, have a Diocesan (or larger) Synod, or
Presbytery over them for their better direction. Such the foreign reformed
Churches at this day do enjoy. The other kind is, where many ordinary
Congregations so consociating together, have one person (a constant President
during life) over them, whom men after the Apostles called a Diocesan Bishop
(and some a Metropolitan) and such like other names. Albeit of these there were
(without question) diverse kinds and sorts, some exercising greater power and
authority, some less: that is, the ancienter had less, the later for the
most part always had their power greater and greater. Ad ^vagr. and in Tit. 1.
For of these Jerome says most truly, both that their Matoritie over the
Presbyters of Congregations was by Humane ordinance, and also that it came in
and grew greater pa^latim by little and little; that is, by degrees. Albeit, I
say, therefore that these Diocesan Bishops were of diverse kinds and sorts,
yet the first of them neither were in the Apostles times, neither were they
immediately after the Apostles.

Contrariwise D. Downame affirms that Mark the Evangelist ordained in
Alexandria a Diocesan church consisting of many ordinary Congregations. Which
he thinks to prove by some words of Eusebius. 2.15.
Eusebius, who says Mark first D. Down^. Def. 2.124.
constituted churches (...) in Alexandria it self, as he falsely translateth
it. I say, this he falsely translateth (as 3.137. and 3.25.16.
Doct. Dov^ also did before him) whereupon the whole ground of their error does
rest. Def page 17 ^^.
Which their falsificatio^ I shall (by Gods help) show plainly out of Eusebius
him self, even in this very place. The preposition (...) does not here
signify in a place, as they untruly imagine, but it signifies to a place, and
so it ought to be translated. In Latin we should say, ad Alexandria^ ipsam, or
vsque ad, that is, to Alexandria, or unto Alexandria it self. This is Eusebius
true meaning: For he would show that Mark was the first that constituted
Churches in the country of Egypt. and withal that he did so even unto the
chief City thereof, viz. Alexandria. And this is all that he means here.
Twice in this very place besides Eusebius uses (...) in this same construction
and sense. Both immediately before the words in question, and immediately after.
Before, thus; (...) to Egypt. or unto Egypt, After, thus: (...) to Rome, or
unto Rome; not in Rome, nor in Egypt. Wherefore, so (...) signifies likewise
in this place which we have in hand, seeing it runs in one co^text together
with the former, and is all one manner of phrase. Besides, Eusebius straight
after alleging Philo concerning this same people, whom Mark converted, says
that he spoke (...) of the Churches about in the Country, and (...) about
Alexandria, not in Alexandria. Last of all, Eusebius utters this (as he does
the next foregoing clause likewise) with this term (...) they say, or some
report. By which and the like terms he uses to relate uncertain and
apocryphal things, yea sometimes fabulous and untrue. For Eusebius is not
precise in setting down all his matters, chiefly those which he has only upon
rumor and report. And where he seems to require credit in deed, he is not
sparing to name his authors, as Egesippus, Clemens, Dionysius. and such other.
Wherefore diverse ways D. Downames presumptuous assertion, and which he does so
boast of (that Mark instituted many Churches in Alexandria) wa^teth proof.
For indeed Eusebius. does not avouch it. Yea, D. Bilson also denies it generally,
saying: D. Bills perper govern. Page 306.
Each place, were it never so great, had but one Church and one chief Pastor.
He speaks of those first times.

Peradventure (if Eusebius write true, and if he had good intelligence
hereof) Iulianus the tenth Bishop of Alexandria was a Diocesan Bishop in some
measure. For I will not deny, but Churches may begin to be mulplyed in
Alexandria about that time. So that some small beginning and show of a Diocesan
Bishop (which heretofore I called fitly a Rem. for refor. page 7.
Titular Diocesan) was in him peradventure. And I say peradventure, because
this grant is gotten from us only by reason of a few words in Eusebius. 5.9.
Eusebius, whose words yet always are not Gospel. Yea in history Rain.
confess. page 257.
he is not always so sure, at that we may build on him. Which also before I
insinuated. Howbeit I will not stick to acknowledge Iulianus to have been such
a Diocesan Bishop, as I said. But withal I affirm, that (for any thing we
find) he was the first that ever was: and that by no record any Diocesa^ can
be showed before him. Now this was Under Commodus Emperor.
near upon 200. years after Christ. Yet for the Westerue parts of
Christendom I agree with Platina, who out of one Damasus says, that Dionysius
Bishop of Rome first ordained Dioceses, which was about the year of Christ 260.

Against this D. Downame excepteth, urging that D. Down. Def. 2.99.
Platina says not, Dionysius did it first. I answer and will avouch it that in
effect he says so much. For he says, that Dionys. being made Bishop of Rome,
Platin. in Dionys.
straightway divided Churches in the City of Rome. Which cannot be otherwise
meant, but that he did it first, and that before him the Congregations there
were not divided. As for that he says before of Evaristus Bishop of Rome, that
In Evaristus
he divided titles to the Presbyters. I answer, this verily is meant of diverse
praecincts and quarters belonging only to one entire Congregation and ordinary
Assembly. Reason requires that in great Cities when Christians multiplied,
first there should be such praecinctes and quarters designed, before many
ordinary churches were divided and constantly set in them. The French and Duch
Churches in London have such praecinctes and quarters, yet they have each but
one ordinary Congregation. And questionles so it was in Rome: for diverse
ordinary set Congregations were not appointed there long after this, no not in
the time of Cornelius B. of Rome; nor in Carthage under Cyprian. Which may well
be gathered out of their Writings. They both flourished together about the
year of Christ 250. Wherefore though such Titles as are praecincts belonging
to one ordinary Congregation might well be instituted by Evaristus, and
multiplied afterward: Yet this nothing hinders our assertion, that Dionysius
first instituted distinct Churches there, and so a Diocesan Church improper.
And Doc. Downame presumes too grossly where he affirms that these titles
signified D. Down. Def. 2.100.
Parish Churches then in Rome. What soever the word may signify sometime,
questionles here in this business touching Evaristus it signifies (as I have
said) diverse quarters and praecincts of one ordinary Congregation, and nothing
else.

And this is the cleerest and most certain notice that we have touching the
first Diocesan Bishops and Churches improperly so called. Which after they were
erected, continued in the Christian world in diverse kinds and sorts, as I
said before. They were begun and set up at first, I doubt not, out of a good
intent: yet it as plain as may be that error always accompanied them even
from the first. The best of these Bishops, not wanting some ambition and
partial respect toward them selves, and all of them possessed with that
erroneous opinion that the peereles authority of one Bishop over the Churches
was the best means of true unity, and chiefly Gods purpose being that thus
the Universal Papacy should at last be adva^ced (which otherwise never could
have been) so I say it came to pass, that these Diocesan Bishops and Churches
and their authority in continuance of time, grew still greater and greater,
yet (as Jerome says, and as reason also shows it to be likely) it proceeded
paulatim, by little and little, by small degrees, and by increasings not spyed of
every one, till at last they all grew to be transformed into proper Diocesan
Bishops and Churches, and got the power of Spiritual government absolutely
into their hands, clean excluding all power of the people (in the ordinary
Congregations) freely to consent, which formerly they had ever held, more or
less. But this was not fully brought to pass, till after that the great
Apostasy and tyranny of the Universal Bishop (the Roman Antichrist) was
begun to be set up, as Page 06. ^^^ and 88.
before I declared.

I grant here, that the improper Diocesan Churches (as I note them) were
called and named Diocesan many years ago, and are also at this time, by many
learned men. But yet indeed they are such Churches, viz. Diocesan, or larger,
improperly; and are called so by a catachresis, an abusive manner of speaking.
The reason is, because truly these Churches are not each of them one proper and
entire Diocesan Body, as a proper diocesan Church is; but has so many distinct
Bodies and independent, as there are Ordinary Congregations in each of them
inioying their free consent in their several governements. Yet each of them is
called a Diocesan Church, or larger, for other respects, to wit, because it
has a certain kind of Diocesan or larger consociation of so many Churches
together, and a kind of dependence under one general Presidencie or
Superiority, as before I observed.

Again, Page 88. 89.
both the kinds of these improper Diocesan Churches above specified (that is,
the Synodall and Episcopal) do guide and rule much alike. In respect of the
several Congregations under them they rule not absolutely, nor as entire and
sole governors, but with relation to the said Congregations free consent,
which is their ancient right and immunitie as they are Churches of Christ.
Which immunitie and free power they may lawfully take to them selves, and use
whenever they see necessary cause for it, as even our adversaries
"acknowledge. D. Down. Def. 4.99.
Whence it is, that both stand well (being duly ordered) with the good
proceedings of the Gospel. Neither did any man of understanding ever deny
this. Howbeit yet we affirm that of these two the consociation by Synodes or
Presbyteries is most convenient, most profitable, and most safe for us; at
least wise now, that is, in respect of these times in which we live, and of the
circumstances in them. The government of Diocesan Bishops (though of the best
sort) is not so good, nor safe, especially now. Whereof it is easy to yield
many good reasons, which here I pass over.

But what is this to approve the government of a proper Diocesan Church, or
larger (of which all our question is) where the peoples free consent is wholly
and altogether denied them: such as I know not clearly either at this day to
be, or to have been any where, but under the Papacy, and now in England.
Certainly against this, that is, the proper Diocesan Church and government all
our controversy at this day is intended. Which also I have noted in my
Declaration, page 21. 22. So that the Diocesan Church which I absolutely speak
against in In Reas. for reform. Exposition of the a Com. The Divine beginning
and institution of Christ's Visible Church etc.
other places, is to be understood of this proper Dioc. Church: and so
likewise questionles it is meant in the Offer of disputation, and in the
Petition for toleration also. Now no proof can be made from the law fulness or
toleration of the improper Piocesan Church for the lawfulnes or tolerablenes of
the proper Dioces. Church. Because they differ formally and essentially, as
elsewhere Declarat. page 12. 13. 34. 35.
I have showed. These can not by any means sustifye the one the other. In
which respect D. Downames foul abusing of Christian people in his Defense by
his perpetual Equivocating, and bringing in infinite matters which are nothing
to the intent of our question, is to be marked and confidered of all men. For
he taking in hand to prove our Diocesan, or rather Provincial Churches in
England, and our Bishops (who do all things in Ecclesiastical government
without any free consent of the several Congregations) to be for the substance
of their calling and condition Apostolical, he pleads only in general for
Diocesan Churches, or larger: and for Bishops in general. His proofs (such as
they be) are only for the improper Diocesan Churches, and larger, and for their
Bishops. As if simply we did deny them. Or, as if our Diocesan Churches and
Bishops in England were such. What intolerable doubling and deceaving of Gods
people is this? What altering the question? What Equivocating, as bad as
Jesuitical? This is all that he does in his second book of the said Defense,
where the proper place is for this point, and where is the very foundation of
all his writing beside. Yea indeed he does nothing else throughont his whole
Defense. Wherefore even this which here is spoken, is enough for a just
confutation of his said whole Defense.

The very like dealing Doctor Bilson uses also in his Perpetual government,
chapt. 12.13.14. where he deals about Bishops and Dioceses out of the
Fathers. Chiefly in page 260. where he sets down 4. Ranks of Bishops, which
I deny not were in those four Chief Churches there named, viz. Jerusalem,
Antioch, Rome, Alexandria. But the truth is, touching his purpose, these are so
many Catalogues of Equivocations, and changings of the question. For neither
were those Bishops all of one kind and power, neither were any of them of that
kind and power as ours now in England are. For whose allowance and approbation
they are notwithstanding by him here produced, and mightily urged.

But hitherto I have digressed speaking of the diverse kinds of Diocesan
Churches and Bishops, and of their original: likewise of the deceit of the
Defenders of our Church state in England by Equivocating so palpably and by
changing the question. The maine point here in this place is: Seeing the
Church government under the Gospel ought to be always with the peoples free
consent (which before we have sufficiently showed) therefore every true Church
under the Gospel is only one ordinary Congregation. And consequently, no
proper Diocesan Church or larger, is lawful.

A second Consequent also is here hence to be considered, To wit, This being
admitted that the Church government ought to be always with the peoples free
consent, it follows that such Synods or Presbyteries can not be approoved
which rule imperiously over the Co^gregations, and impose on them (whether they
will or no) their acts and Canons under some spiritual penalty, as
Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, Degradation from the Ministry. etc.
To which purpose many excellent men also do speak expressly. Zuinglius of all
other is herein peremptory. Says he, speaking to such Synodes: Zuignl.
Artic. 8. Explanat.
Quod Ecclesia sitis representativa libenter eredimus, vera enim non estis.
etc. We willingly believe that you are a representative Church: for a true
Church you are not But I pray you show us whence you fetch this name? Who has
given this name? Who has given you power to meet and conspire together? Who
has given you power to make Canons and Decrees differing from Gods word? Who
has suffered you to impose these things on men's shoulders? Who has persuaded
you to grieve men's consciences? etc. And a little before he says, Deista
(representativ^ Ecclefia) in Scripturis Sanctis nihil invenis. Ex hominum
commentis fingere quisquis potest quidlibet. Nos Scriptura netimur sacra,
contraquam nec it is quidquam tentabis si Christianus es. Of this (represe^tative
church) I find nothing in the holy Scriptures. Our of man's devises any may
faigne what they list. We rest in the holy Scripture, against which thou may
not attempt any thing, if thou be a Christian. And they that impose their
Decrees without the peoples consent (says he) tviolento imperio ius Ecclesia
invadunt. Ad Valent. Comp.
They invade upon the Churches right by violent command. And such are Artic. 64.
nomine tenus Episcopi, revera tyranni, in name Bishops, but indeed tyrants. As
Page 31.
before also is observed. No less sharp he is likewise herein els-where,
saying, Epichirisis de Canon, Missae.
Est particularis Ecclisia ea cut praceptum est vt morbidum membrum resecer,
Math. 18 qualis est ea Corinthi ad qua scribit Paulus, and aliae quarum se
curam ge^ere predicat, and in quibus se part modo dace^e asseres, inquiens,
Sollicitudo omnium Ecclesiarum, and Si^^^ in omnibus Eeclesijs doce^. Superest
us concursantium Eispeopor um ne dicam conspirantium Ecclesia non sit alia quam
cut Propheta Malignantium nomen dedit. Quod enim vlera verum est, a malo est.
Verax autem est solus Deus. and omnis homo mendax. Quiequitigetur a Deo est,
equum, verum, bonum est: quiequid als homine profectum, iniquum, mendax, and
malum est. Hac horum Ecclesia a Deo non est, a malo igitur est. Siquis vberiora
desideret Conclusionum nostrarum farraginem legate. It is a particular Church
which is commanded to cut off the infected member, Math. 18. Such as that is
of Corinth to which Paul writes; and others, of which (he says) hes had care,
and in which he affirms that he taught alike, saying. The care of all
Churches and is I teach in all Churches. It remains that the Church of
Bishops tunning together, I will not save, conspiring together, is no other
Church hen such as the Prophet names Melignant. F^r that which i^ besides the
truth is of evil. And God only is true, and every man alyar. Therefore what
soever is of God, is just, true, and good: whatsoever comes of man, is vnrust,
false, and evil. This their Church is not of God: it is therefore of evil. If
any defire more hereof, let him read out Conclusions: he means those
Articles above cited. Last of all see his judgment of the Church of Ephesus
mentioned in Act. 20.28. Says he, In Archir^^^
Ecce gregem, ecce speculatores, ecce concionem pascendam, non regendam: ecce
Concionem non homenis, sed De^. Behold a flock, behold watchmen, b^hold a
particular Congregation to be fed, not to be rused (he means not to be ruled
by the watchmens absolute power, but with relation to the liking and consent of
the flock) behold not man's, but Gods Co^g^egation Now I desire the Reader to
note, that Zuinglius, though he speak indeed against Popish Bishops and Synods
in the places above cited, yet he speaks directly against those points in
them which some Protestant Bishops and Synods do stand upon. And therefore
thus far they are al togeathet in one and the same condemnation, according to
his doctrine. Secondly note, that here he does plainly condemn all Imperious
Synods, and representative Churches: and that also with more vehement and
sharp terms then are used now adays. Thirdly, he affirms here the Church
in Math. 18.17. and the Church of Corinth, and of Ephesus under the Apostles,
yea all Churches in the world at that time, to be each of them but a particular
ordinary Congregation. For here he calls the same Co^cio, and portion laris
Ecclesia, a particular assembly: Elsewhere a parish, as where he says a church
is Ad Valent, Compar.
Vnaquaque paraecia, and Ibid.
Singula paraecie, and Artic. 31.
quam paraeciam vocamus, and Artic. 8.
quo commode in vnum locum convenient, which meet conveniently in one place.
And Pastor.
Episcopus, Parochus, Plebanus, Praedicator, and Pastor, that is, a Bishop, and
a Parish Minister he makes all one. Fourthly, he most peremptorily affirms,
that only God may institute his Visible Church and the form of outward
government therein. And that such a form of a Church and government, as is
not instituted by God or not found in his word, is altogether unlawful and
wicked, yea malignant. So that here it is manifest how he condemns every
Diplodophilus, Diplodophilus
that is, whosoever approves two ways, or forms of Church-governeme^t, viz.
every one who likes the Divine and Apostolic ordinance where it may be had,
and yet holds that upon necessity it may be altered, and another form may
be used. Which D. Downame very Divine-like Des. 4.104, and Answ. to the Pres.
page 3. 9.
maintayneth. Neither is he alone such a Diplodophilus: he has too many
consorts in this profane opinion with him. Fifthly, Zuinglius here expressly
teaches that the particular Congregation is commanded in Math. 18.17. to ^^t
off the infected member. So that he holds it to be Christ's very
Commandment (not a permission only) that the people should have the power of
Church government, at least to consent freely therein. And the truth is, that
the words in the text are imperative, Tell the Church, etc. Wherefore, why
ought they not so to be taken? Certainly it is Christ's very Commandment in
deed, and therefore never to be altered by any means,

But to return to the matter of Synods: this man of God, Zuinglius, here (we
see) reprooveth not so much Popish Synodes, as the very nature of those Synods
which are held to be a representative Church, and to have power to impose
their decrees on the people of their circuit, whether they will or no, yea
though the same grieve and burden their consciences. Which very thing our
adversaries at this day do hold likewise against us. And D. Downame presumes
that he has Des. 1.109, and 2 4.
found such Synods in the New Testament, which Zuinglius could find As above
page 101.
no where. Now unto this noble Witness of Iosus Christ I will ad others mo
consenting in effect with him. Calvin to this purpose says thus; It.stit.
4.9.^.
Quicquid de Ecclesia dicitur, id mox Papista ad Concilia transferunt, quum
little opinione Ecclesiam representent. Whatsoever is spoken of the Church, that
presently the Papists refer to Councills, because in their opinion Councills
do represent the Church. Where he notes this opinion to be Popish, viz. that
a Council is a church representative. Another learned Divine, one Iacobus
Acontius condemns vehemently likewise this kind of Synods or Councills: in
his fourth book Iac. Acont. lib 4.
Stratagematum Satana. At home Doctor Whitaker joins with those abroad: For
concerning Synods in these days, whose decrees may be imposed on a Nation or
Country, he says thus: Whitak. de Council pa 35
Etsires ipsa de quibus in Concils deliberatur and consultatur; sint sacrae and
religiosae tamen hoc ipsum Congregare Episcopos est mere (...). Although the
things considered and consulted of in a Council be holy and religious, yet
this thing to assemble Bishops or Pastors of diverse Churches together, is
merely Civil. And then consequently the imposing of their Decrees is Civil.
Yea so, such a Council it self is Civil, that is, it stands and has life
and force by Civil power. All which we willingly agree unto. Again, this
learned man writes of these Councills thus, Page 23.
Concilia si simpliciter necessaria sint, Christus alicubi precepisset
celebrari, aut cius saltem Apostoli. Quod tamen nusquam ab illis factam esse
legimur. If Councills were simply necessary, Christ somewhere would have
commanded that they should be kept, or at least his Apostles would have so
commanded. Which yet we read they did no where. Here he plainly denies that
Councills exercising spiritual jurisdiction and government (for such he must
mean of necessity) are not at all of Divine institution in the New Testament.
Wherein he expressly says, as Zuinglius before said, contrary to D. Downame
But yet nevertheles I grant D. Whitaker in this book allows and approves
Councills even spiritually exercising government, if withal the people whom it
concerns, be not bereaved of their free consent therein. For so I understand
him where he says, Page 44.
Quod omnes attingit, ab omnibus approbari debet. That which touches all,
ought to be approved of all. And so do we also affirm. Lastly, Doct. Bilson
says; Do Bills. against the Semina. part 2. page 371. Also see him alleged in
Reas. for reform page 2^ And Perp. gov. pa. 382 383.
A general Council is not the Church. And a little after. If you would be
further taught that a general Council is neither the Universal Church nor
represents the Universal Church etc we can send you to a merchant of the
same stamp that your selves are of, where you shall see as much as I say
debated and commended with no small braverie. Pigh. hierarch. lib 6. cap 5. and
4. I grant this man in an other place is Perp. gov. page 370. 371. 372.
contrary to this. But that is no news in him. For I know nothing almost
which is controverted, but if he affirm it in one place, he denies it in
another. As touching the Scriptures which he produces for his warrant, they
are the same which D. Downame also Def. 2.4.
me^tioneth, and are often alleged by many men at random. For God knows
they come nothing near to the purpose. The textes are Math. 18.17. Act. 15.22.
Both which indeed are to be taken properly and literally, and not improperly
and figuratively, as they in an idle imagination do think. Their imagination I
say herein is idle, because they have no reason for them in the world
requiring that this word Ecclesia here should be figurative. Which is ground
D. Down. Def. ^.33.
enough for us and assurance also, that it ought here to be understood as
proper. Besides, those two Doctors are both learned in the Greek tongue. Let
them show, that this word was ever used by any good Author living in the
Apostles times or before, for a Confistorie of Governors only, or else they
ought to acknowledge they speak idly and untruly. If no such place can be
showed, as I am very sure there can not, shall we think the Apostles spoke and
wrote Greek in such a phrase, as none in all the world ever spoke either
before or in their days? What absurdity and unconscionable presumption were
it so to think? I know, they and others do allege some Greek Fathers that do
take the word Ecclesia sometime for the Governors only. But those Fathers
lived 300. years after the time of writing the New Testament, and later. Now
the Aposties framed not their language to the manner of speaking so long after
their own age. Many and great alterations were come in by that time, by
reason: whereof their speech began much to alter also. And we following them
must needs Equivocat. Some points therein I noted Rea^ for ^ef page 4^. 64.
^5.
herefore; but our adversaties will not remember nor consider that. The effect
of all that I say is this: Eus^bius, beodoret, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and such
other of those times are not our Apostles, nor masters of our faith, nor
equal interpreters of the true Apostles, chief^y in the matter of Church
government. There was to much iniquity, to much anomie entered then, and
increased still afterward, till Antichrist him self stood up, which was anon
after. ^n such case therefore let us retire our selves as we are commanded, to
the plain, and impartial, and sincere evidence of Christ's Law and Testimony:
if any speak not according this word, it is because there is no light in them.
Sure the vniversad sense and meaning of this Greek word Ecclesia in all pure
and vncorrupt times is, to signify the whole Assembly, even the people
evermore together with their Guides, unless their state were such that they had
no Guides, as at some instant happily the case might be. But always it
signified the people, and those asse^bling together in one place. Which also is
the proper signification of the Latin word Concio, and nothing else. Concio is
the just exposition of Ecclesia.
It were madness therefore to go from the native and proper sense of the
Apostles words without cause. And if the Humane Politic reasons where with
Doct. Bilson Perp. gov. pa. 370. 372. 374. 376.
flourishes, were warrant for us (without Christ's word) to erect such a
spiritual government as is in absolut Synods over Christendom, besides that
then Men's Traditions and politic in^entions may be received as spiritual
instruments in the work of the salvation of our souls (which impiety I
thought all good Christians had long since abhorred) moreover a plain and
direct way is opened for a Universal Papacy, and for a Universal consistory
of Cardinals to be placed over all Christ's people. I say the Humane reasons
alleged do enforce this as well, yea much better, then that each Christian
Nation should be ordinarily left to them selves, and not be ruled Spiritually
by some one general ordinary Superior, by whom all in all Countries may be
reduced to unity. This might easily be adorned with more flowers of Rheto^^ke,
then he there does, or can set upon his matter. Again over and besides this,
there is an other plain Logical consequence which will induce a Pope, if any
Representative Church be acknowledged to be of Divine institution in the New
Testament. For if any Representative Church be in the New Testament of Divine
institution, then such a Provincial Representative Church is; Nay, then a
Universal representative Church is of Divine institution in the New Testament.
Areprese^t^t^ve Church
By a representative Church I mean the Guides, one or more, having power to
exercise Spiritual governem^et without any consent of the people. Which also is
a Church figuratively, viz. by a Syneedoche. And this all men agree unto.
Again, if a Universal representative Church be of Divine institution in the
new Testament, then a Universal church represented (or such a proper Church,
whereof the figurative is a figure and a representation) is of Divine
institution also in the New Testament. This sequence is of Relativa fuut simul.
Ar^sto^.
infallible truth. Some have thought the figurative Universal Church, viz. the
Universal Synod may represent not one Universal proper Church, but a number
of particular independent Churches. But this is untrue, and impossible, as any
shall see that well considers it. As for our present adversaries, they do
acknowledge and maintain the effect of this Sequence, at least they say it in
plain terms. D. Bilson teaches that Christ has Perp. gov. pa. 372. 377
one Church in general, which is a whole, having all particular Churches
parts, to be ruled by the whole: and that this one whole or general Church is
the body of Christ. Doct. Downame expreslie says, Def. 3.4.
the whole Church is but one body. Thus in plain terms they acknowledge and
teach (as I said) One proper Church Universal under outward government. What
meaning they have herein, God knows. Now from hence I reason further; If one
Universal proper Church subject to out ward government be of Divine
institution in the New Testament, then a Universal ordinary Pastor is of
Divine institution in the New Testament. This consequence though in truth it be
undeniable and inevitable, yet they in words deny it with vehemence without
sense and reason. D. Downame says, Defenc. 1.17. and 3.4.6.
He is Antichrist that assumeth to him self the government of the Universal
Church which yet he acknowledges is to be governed out wardly. M. Gabr. Powell
(like a wise man) makes it an heresy in the Pope, to hold as he does, Gabr.
Powel de Antichristo. page 254.
In Eccesia oportere esse Visibile caput. That in the Visible Church, there
ought to be a visible head. What do I hear? A visible Body instituted by
Christ without a Visible Head? A Church and no Pastor? A multitude to be
governed, and no Governor? These are strange assertio^s, whosoever, and how
many soever do affirm the^. For I grant there are not a few others also which
use so to speak. But in deed there is no color of truth, nor reason in these
sayings. Some will say, D. Perp. gov. page 372.
Bilson and D. Def. 3.4.
Downame both do show that this one Body and Church Universal is to be
governed by a Universal Synod. Do they so? Very well. Then who shall call this
Synod? The calling of Provincial Synods Perp. gov. pa. 377.39^
they make a good reason for a Metropolitan or Archbishop. Certainly the
calling of a Universal Synod does far better and more necessarily require a
Pope. A Universal Synod ablosute.
Nay, ^t requires a Pope certainly. Besides, it is a question whether a
Universal Synod has ever ben, or can possibly ^e rightly and duly had. At the
most, it is plain that such Synodes are exceeding rare, and seldom, and hardly
effected. Math. 18.15.16.17.
But the causes of the Churches government are frequent, continual, and every
day. What shall we think? Has Christ left his Body, and dear Spouse without
help, without government in such daily and continual necessities? Or can an
ordinary body be governed without an ordinary Head? To use D. Bilsons words,
Perp. gov. page 376.
this were an heathenish, if not a hellish confusion. Wherefore these
consequences all do follow certainly and necessarily. A Universal Church must
have a Universal ordinary Pastor. And so much touching the Proposition of
this reason. My Assumption is this: But no Universal Ordinary Pastor is of
Divine institution in the New Testament. And this they all affirm with me
constantly. Therefore the Conclusion is true, viz, No Universal proper Church,
and consequently also no Universal, nor any other representative Church is of
Divine institution in the New Testament.

Hitherto I have showed our reasons and witnesses against Synods exercising
absolut power spiritual over Christian people, which are also churches
representative. To which business I have been forced by Do. Downames importunat
flannders, both generally against us, and against my self in particular. Who
herein first compares us to the Def. 1.4^.
Pope: from whom he knows we are far enough of. Where as indeed his absolut
Synods do agree with the Pope too well, and do make to much for him, as Page
110.111 112.113.114.
before we saw. Then he vpbraideth us that we will not be ruled by Synodes. I
answer: We submit our selves to be ruled spiritually by Christ's true visible
Church instituted in his word. And what would he have more? Thirdly, he goes
about to deny, that we subject our selves to the Kings Supremacy. Whether he
does this with more malice or foolishnes, I know not. For he can not be
ignorant, that though we affirm that the Church government is independent and
immediately derived from Christ, yet we affirm also (and it stands with good
reason) that the Civil Magistrate is even therein Supreme Governor Civilly. And
though nothing may be imposed on the Christian people of a Congregation,
against their wills by any Spiritual authority (for so only we intend) yet we
affirm withal that the Civil Magistrate may impose on them Spiritual matters
by Civil power (yea whether they like, or dislike) if he see it good. This we
al gladly acknowledge. Wherein we refer our selves to that which we have
Petit. for toleration. Offer. etc.
publikly written, and protested in this behalf. Fourthly, he falsely charge
me by name, that I in my book of Reasons for reformation, do not acknowledge
in Synods any lawful authority Def. 3.4.
to determine. He might Perp. gov. pa. 382.383
thus charge Doctor Bilson. But I in that book and place which he wrangleth
with, do expressly say, Reas. for reform. p. 31
Synods determinations are most expedient and wholesome always. In which
respect I See before page 89.
allow also the Apostles practice in Act. 15. as being both a Synod, and an
authentike rule and pattern for Synods. Where the Apostles with others (when
an occasion and cause was given them) did not only meet together and consult,
but also they did define, determine, and decree certain points: yea they
delivered the same to diverse Churches to be kept, who had no Deputies for them
present in that Apostolic assembly. Howbeit these Apostles delivered abroad
these their Decrees only so, and in such wise, as informing and teaching all
men thereby what they ought to do: that is, in manner of doctrine. To the Church
of Antioch, whom it most concerned, only this they say: If ye observe these
things, Act. 15.29.
ye shall do well. They say not, The Minister that imbraceth not these
ordinances is deprived of his ministry: the person receyving them not, is
excommunicat ipso facto: or, he is Anathema accursed. As some Synods do
pronounce. I grant Synods may discuss and determine of errors, and may
pronounce them wicked and accursed errors. But actually excommunicat men's
persons, the Apostles never did without the concurrence and consent of that
Congregation where they were members. Wherefore more then this no Synod at any
time may do by the rule of the Gospel. If any do impose any of their acts on a
Congregation (whether they like, or dislike) upon pavne of some spiritual
censure, yea if it be on any one person without the same Congregations consent
of which he is, certainly (as I said) it is more then the Apostles ever did in
the Church-governement: and therefore we can not out conclude, that it is now
unlawful for us so to do. Also it is that point which all the forenoted
sentences of those late Writers (most excellent lights of the Gospel) do
condemn. Wherefore we willingly take that Apostolic practice in Act. 15. both
as being a Synod, and also a good pattern of Synods for ever. Neither do we
in deed mislike any Christian Synods, but greatly approve of them: though some
out of malice do object to us the contrary. Always the Apostles practice we
take for our rule. And so much touching the second co^sequent in this Chapter.

Thirdly, it being admitted as Christ's Lord Bishops in several, are unlawful
and contrary to Christ. Now a Lord Bishop, Who is a Spiritual Lord.
and a Spiritual Lord we always understand him to be, who exercises sole
authority Spiritual, or sole government Ecclesiastical, yea though over but
one Congregation. Much more him, who exercises such spiritual Lordship over a
great many Co^gregations? Also, What is Sole authority Spiritual in our sense?
sole authority Spiritual, and sole government Ecclesiastical, we call that
which is exercised without the Christian peoples free consent.

D. Downame labors with diverse vain shifts to defend the English L. Bishops
herein. He can not abide that it should be said of them that they exercise
Def. 1.58.47.43.
sole authority, or sole government. Yea in many places he Def
3.118.11^.126.142
shows indignation that such wrong should be done them in being so reported
of. But it is strange. Are they ashamed to hear of that which they cease not
to practice and maintain every day? and that in the sight of the world; yea
each of them over diverse hundreds of Congregations. For the people with us no
where enjoy any free consent. But the D. says, Def. 1.43.44.
The Bishop has the Archbishop above him Yea, but who is above our 2.
Archbishops spiritually? No body. Again he says, Provincial Synods are above
the Bishop. Idly spoken. Is the Diocesan Synod above their own Bishop? Or, is
the Provincial Synod above their Archbishop? Surely no more then the
Universal Council is above the Pope. Which is clean contrary. Now this is
it which he should have affirmed: buthe durst not. He shifteth further,
saying: Page 44.
Do we not all with one consent acknowledge the Kings Majesty to have the
Supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical? Yea verily, we do. But that is
Civilly, as Reas. for ref. p. 62. ^^
els-where I have showed. He has no authority in causes Ecclesiastical
Spiritually: that is, his authority properly makes no Church Minister, nor
Excommunicateth any person. Which I suppose your selves do hold, even as we do.
But this is the point: in England the Archb. is Spiritually Supreme, or has
Supreme authority spiritual in his Province. I say thus, he is Supreme and
sole, viz. spiritually. Wherefore the Doct. Ignorantia Elenchi.
grossly sophisticateth in shifting from the po^^t in hand to an other matter.
Where he speaks of Def. 1. p. 43
Chancellors adjoined to the Bishops, and of Presbyters consent with him, and
that Page 42.
Presbyters have power to rule their flock in public Ministry and in private
attendance, and that some of them have voices in Synods, etc. I wot not what
all this is. Sure I am it is as idle as the rest. For so much (at least) is
seen in the Popish Church, where yet is found spiritual Lordship and sole
government in their Bishops, yea oppression, violence, and tyranny also over
the peoples consciences, as we well know. So that the Page 43.
Supreme and lowdest by, and Page 47.
the plainly, which he gives to us, he ought to take to him self. Another
shift of the Doct. is, where because the Hebrew Adoni, the Greek (...), the
Latin Dominus may be given to Bishops, therefore Def. 3.147
he would conclude that in English they may be called Lords. D. Bilson
reasons Perp gov. page 58. 59.
so likewise, and that very largely. He would prove the same also from the Duch
term Here, and from the French Monsieur, etc. But I deny this reason
absolutely. For herein there is no consequence. Our English term Lord and
Lordship does always imply Sole government: but none of those foreign terms
does so always. Wherefore such reasoning is Equivocating also. Ioh. 13.13. and
1. Cor. 8.6 and 12.5. and 2. Cor. 1.24.
Again, Christ only is our Lord in respect of Spiritual Lordship: he only is
to be called a Spiritual Lord. But our Bishops are Lords, and are so called
with us in respect as they be Spiritual Lords, as the Doctor Def. 3.150.
observes well. Wherefore our Bishops Lordship is unlawful, and derogatorie
to Christ. Doct. Bilson says further, Perp. gov. page 62.
If we stick at titles, Christ calls them Gods. Lo, how nothing satisfyeth
these men. Would he have Bishops called by the name of Gods also? But I would
know of him, where does Christ call them Gods? Surely it is but his fancy.
They are in deed so called no where. D. Downame presses, that Bishops are
called Def. 3.146.150.
Angels, which is a more honor able title then Lord. And therefore that
Bishops may be called Lords. I deny that the name Angel is so honorable a
title as a Spiritual Lord, which is given to our Bishops. This is proper to
Christ only, as before is said: the name Angel is not. And so his reason is
false. Again, though the name Angel be given to Bishops sometime and in one
respect, yet it is very false to say they may lawfully be styled and called by
the daily appellation of Angels, or that they may ordinarily use that title,
as they do the title and name of Lord. Again, the name of Lord is given them
as importing their sole government, as before is said. But the name Angel
imports not so much, neither is it given to any Creature in such respect.
Therefore from the name of Angel the title of Lord follows not. Indeed the
name of Angel is given to Bishops because they are Gods messengers to show us
his will: not in respect of their government at all, though the Doct.
presumes so to say without An Allegory is no proof.
proof. Lastly, he knows that all Preachers are in the word called Angels,
or Messengers: but for all Preachers to be called in English Lords, or your
Lordship, surely it would be a very arrogant thing. And though he Def. 1.34.46.
allege that the Angel of the church of Ephesus in Rev. 2.1. be one, and but
one, before many Ministers, yet neither does this importe any Lordship in him
either in name or practice, neither is this precedence or praeeminence
signified by the word Angel: but it is gathered by co^paring this word with the
known circumstances of those times. Further he alleges that Def. 3.152.
Princes are called Pastors, and for the same cause are Lords. Wherein there is
no truth, nor indeed any good sense. The like is that where he adds, the
title of Father is as great as Lord. Nay, the name of Father is amiable: but
Lords may, and also they use to force and compel. Neither did the Pope at
first take the name of Father peculiarly to him self to note thereby any
Lordship as his due, but to deceave the world by his pretended love over all,
wherein he desired to seem a common Father. In another Def. 4.71.72.
place he teaches that Bishops in the New Testament were called Apostles. Upon
which ground he Def. 3.15^.
would conclude, that therefore the name of Lord is lawful for them. I answer,
The name of Apostle and also of Bishop may be used sometime generally and
improperly: sometime strictly and properly. And we ought always to speak
thus, viz. properly, when we reason and dispure of any matter. If the Doct.
think generally and improperly Bishops may be called Apostles, and likewise
that Apostles may be called Bishops, and if Def. 4.72.
Theodores mean so, I will not gainsay, but in the time of the New Testament,
yea and now still, these names may be interchangeably used. But this will prove
nothing for the D. purpose. For so there is nothing but mere Equivocation
therein. If he or any other think that Bishops were in the time of the New
Testam. called Apostles, in the strict and proper sense of those words,
doubtless they err egregiously. Or, that Bishops then were called Apostles by a
daily, ordinary, and familiar a p^llation, as our Bishops are called Lords:
Which yet must be proved, or else they have no color from hence. He makes
great ado about Phil. 2.25. that from hence Epaphroditus might be proved to
have been the Philippians Bishop. Defenc. 4.65. etc.
Though he might be their Bishop, yet the circumstance of this place shows,
that this is meant of his bringing relief unto Paul from the Philippians, as
some did to the Saints at Jerusalem from the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 8.23. As for
Theod^ret who seems to be the Author of the D. opinion herein, he is
insufficient, and no equal nor just foundation of this matter. I know Bellarm.
de Cleric. 1.15.
Bellarmine and other Prelates would feign make somewhat of this unhandsome
shift in their own defense; yet they know not how. All this is true: and yet I
grant (as I said) Epaphroditus might be the Philippians Bishop, as some write
that he was. But indeed I think rather he was with them as an Evangelist
properly, like as Timothy, and after him Tychicus was at Ephesus, and Titus in
2. Cor. 8. and 9.
Achaia, and afterward in Crete; and Mark in Alexandria and Egypt, as some say.
Well, but let it be granted (which yet is not to be granted) that Bishops in
the New Testament were by a daily, ordinary, and familiar appellation called
Apostles. Yet neither hence can it follow that they may be Lords, or may be
so called. For no Apostle was ever so great (in respect of outward
jurisdiction) over any one Congregation; none (I say) was ever a sole governor
over one Congreg. as our L. Bishops are over many hundreds. Beside this, the D.
Def. 3.148.
would have the terms given to Prelates by Prelates and by their dependants in
the time of Constanti^^ and since, to be reason and warrant now unto us to call
our Bishops Lords and most honorable Lords. Which is like to that where he
says, Page 13.
He sees no reason why the Church in Constantines time should not rather be
propounded as a pattern for imitation, to Churches that live under Christian
Princes, then the Churches of former times. A saying fit for a Diplodophilus:
fit for one who cares not to take from Christ his Office and Honor, and to
give it to Prelates and Princes. For this is Christ's due, and immutable right,
and divine glory in his Testament, to set the pattern of his Visible Church
for us to imitate, for ever and every where, even in peace as well as in
persecution. As touching Constantine and the Bishops then and after for some
hu^dreds of years, though they were godly and virtuous, yet it ca^ not be
denied but the Bishops even then presently Nazianz. Orat. post. redit. in vrb.
Socrat. 7.11
were carried with much ambition, and strove for praeemine^ce and outward
greatness. And the Princes let them have it, thinking that therein they did
service to God. But they knew not that they did amiss. Yea indeed under
Constantine began the Dioces an ruling Bishop; who till this time had but a
name, and no power Diocesan. Reas. for reform. page 8.
Heretofore I guessed they might have been elder. But the truth is they had no
life nor strength of Diocesans till under Constantine and the Nicen Council.
Which I have declared in Declar. pa. 24.
an other place likewise. After which time, ambition and dominion
Ecclesiastical did still grow and increase more and more, eve^ in the best
Fathers. Whereby Antichrist at the last did easily come up. In which regard
Master Brightman judged that the Prophecy of the woman's being driven into
the wilderness by the Dragon, T. Brightm. in Apoc. 12.
Rev. 12. began to take effect under Constantine: and to be accomplished still
more and more, till in the end utter darkness and tyranny overflowed. Now then,
are the deeds and words and practice of the Bishops of these times meet rules
for us to follow, namely as touching Prelacie and Church government? Is it
equal to make these our judges herein? No, by no means. Which I have
signified also Page 109^
before. Yea, if there were no peril (as there is much) in following their
words and deeds in the matter of Church government aforesaid, yet we ought
not to offer so much wrong to Christ and his word, as to seek for direction
and warrant in a matter of conscience any where but in his word. Howbeit
notwithstanding all this, though those titles given to Bishops under Constantine
and after (as here he alleges them) are too glorious and stately for
Ministers of the Gospel, yet none of them implies such Lordship nor Sole
authority Spiritual, as with us the English words Lord Bishop do imply. For
the^ they had not such sole authority (as I have Page 64.63 66.
already showed) nor long time after, as now they * have. Wherefore neither do
these allegations of the Doct. (that is, the titles given to Bishops under
Constantin, nor 100. years after) fit his turn, neither will they serve his
purpose. Finally it is to be noted, how the Doct denies that Def. 3.15^.
Bishops may behave them selves as Lords of the Churches, and yet holds they
may be called Lords. Surely his conscience tells him that it is to much
which he gives them. For else why may they not behave the^ selves answerably
and according as their just name is. Where he says, Page 153.
the title of Lord Bishop is not given with relation, but as a simple title of
honor and reverence. And, the relation is not in the word Lord, but in the
word Bishop. This is plainly a mere shift, and an untruth. For the relation is
in both these words Lord Bishop jointly. That is, to their people they are
Bishops with Spiritual Lordly power; that is, they have sole authority
spiritual over them. And so they are called Lords Spiritual, which Page 150.
he seems in an other place to acknowledge. Thus all in vain has the D.
labored to make good the lawfulnes of our L. Bishops.

Page 68. 69
before to be certainly true) hence it follows that it is a plain untruth
and a falsehood (which the Doct. so often Def. 1.28. and 4.2.3.38.39.46.
affirms) viz. that the Bishops in the Apostles time were such for the
substance of their calling, as ours now in England are. Ours are sole
governors, they were not so. They admitted the Congregations consent in all
important matters of their government: ours do what they please without them,
yea commonly against their liking. Besides, the Apostolic Bishops had not any
addition of Civil coactive power, as ours have. Last, they had no mo ordinary
set Congregations to their pastoral charge but only one: ours are the Pastors
(each of the^) of many hundred Congregations. All which are evident
substantial differences in the churches and Bishops estate; as has been also
observed purposely Divine beginning of Christ's true visib Church page 3. 4. 5.
Declarat. page 12. 13 14. Reas. for ref. p. 41. 42. 43.
else where. In which respect the very ground which the D. builds on is false:
his very text (Rev. 1.20.) is misinterpreted and abused, and so his Sermon and
whole Defense standing thereupon is frustrat. And he does Equivocat plainly.

Fifthly, where the Christian people false Teacher. And as their Pastor and
Guide is, such will they be also (in a manner) always and every where. The
adversary confesses that D. Bills. perp. gov. page 344
The wisdom of Gods Church in taking the consent of the people in the Election
of their Bishops, he can not but commend: he finds so great and good
effects of it in the Church stories. For thence it came to pass, that the
people when their desires were accomplished, did quietly receave, willingly
maintain, diligently hear, and heartily love their Pastors, yea venture their
whole estate and hazard their lives, rather the^ then Pastors should miscarie.
Verily this shows it to be Gods ordinance, in that he accompanyeth it with
such and so great blessings. Contrariwise, Pluralist-Pastors and Nonresidents,
who of any conscience can allow? Who that has any spark of religion, or care
of good life does not detest and abhor them, and most worthily; as being in
deed of the relics of Antichrist, and instruments of Satan. All blindness in
the people, and wicked conversation flows from these as from fountains.
Continual iarres and wars between the Pastor and his flock. And therehence
grows contempt of Religion. Yea questionles, that which the Pest is in man's
body, the same are Nonresidents and Pluralitie-men in Christ's Church. Whose
fruits are too plentiful among us. Archb. Whitgift says Answ. to the Admon.
page 44. 45.
Now the Church is full of hypocrites, dissemblers, drunk ands, whoremongers,
Ignorant, Papists, Atheistes, and such like. D. Bilson also, Perp. gov. page
155.
Toom Church comes all sorts, Atheistes, Hypocrites. etc. All which filth
ought verily to be imputed chiefly to Nonresidentes and Pluralists. Now in
Diocesan and Provincial Churches and larger (where the people have not their
free consent in the Church government) there must of necessity be
Nonresidents and Pluralitie-men. First, the chief and best Pastor of a very
large Country (he whom they call the Angel of such a Church) is no other
indeed then a great Pluralist and Nonresident. For he has the proper charge
of souls over Def. 3.145. and 2.67.
all his Circuit, as D. Down. professes, and they all hold. That is to say,
over many hundred ordinary set Congregations, where for the most part they
themselves are never present; and never do fo much as see the faces of so many
people of whom yet they undertake to be their proper Pastors. Are not these
huge Pluralists and Nonresidents in the time of the Gospel? And thus he Def.
2.127.
approoveth Theodorets taking to him self to be Pastor of 800. parishes. Yea
it comes to pass that some Bishops are Pastors to many mo. Again note how
Do. Belson shrinketh not to make Pluralistes and Nonresidentes a Divine
Ordinance and Apostolic, which he does to the end that Diocesan Bishops might
seem to be Divine: Says he against the mislikers of Plurality and
Nonresidencie: Perp gov. page 328.
Saint Paul him self knew not these curious positions when he appointed Titus
to take charge and oversight of the whole Island of Crete: and saw no cause why
one man might not perform many Pastoral and Episcopal duties to all that
were in the same Country with him. And this touching the chief, and best, and
Page 247.
only proper Pastor in a Diocesan Church and larger. Secondly, his Substitutes
will all seek to be in proportion like their Superiors. Whereof in deed
there is great cause. For if the most Angelike Pastor, and he who in his Office
comes nearest unto Christ be such, that is, so great a Pluralist and
Nonresident, then who in conscience can mislike No^residents? Who would not
desire to be plurifyed abundantly? Who would not judge the greatest Pluralist
the worthiest Pastor, and most excellent servant of Christ? I say, even
inferior Nonresidents and Pluralistes in such Church estates must needs not
only abou^d, but also superabou^d. True reason requires it, and experience
among our selves does show it. Whereby what woeful wrack and havocke of men's
souls is happened in our Land everywhere, any that look about and consider,
may see. And he that sees, can not have so flintie a heart as not to sorrow
and mourn for it. Against which Spiritual desolation, yea rather ruin and
destruction, no remedy can be had, without giving the Christian people their
free consent in their spiritual government. For none have that care of other
men's souls, as Christian people would have of their own.

Sixthly, here are other Consequents viz. that the peoples consent in the
Church government is the Apostles ordinance, and Christ's immutable
commandment for us; then Christ in his New Testament is not the Teacher,
Institutor, Framer, Impious opinions.
Lord and Lawgiver of his Visible Church, which is the Kingdom of heaven upon
earth. At least, he only is not. And the New Testament is not complete nor
all-sufficient for matters of Religion. Nor so complete as the Old Testament
was. And Christ's divine Offices of Prophecy and Kingdom are not absolut and
perfect toward us: but are diminished and changed now in respect as they were
to the Jews of old. And the very form of Christ's said Visible Church is
changeable by men, and may be instituted first by men. Whence it also
follows, that a noble part of Christ's divine honor and glory may be by men
diminished, and taken from him, and may lawfully be attributed to men. Every
one of these consequents is certain: neither can any of them be denied nor
shifted off by our adversaries who reject the said opinion of the peoples
necessary Consent in the Church government. Now this I earnestly desire all
men to take notice of: that they may see what it is that has moved me (and
still does) to embrace the opinion contrary to the course of the Church
government in England. God is my witness that, were it not for these
unavoidable Consequents which touch the very life and soul of all true
religion and godlynes, I should long since have conformed, and now would, in
this bebalfe. For otherwise what reason have I to care for the people. But
because my heart and conscience can not endure to admit these Consequentes
(which I hope is both honest, yea necessary, and Christianlike, and so will
be acknowledged by every good man that considers it) therefore do I believe
this said opinion as an Evangelicall truth, viz. that the peoples consent in
church government is an Apostolic ordinance, and Christ's immutable
Commandment to us. And therefore principally did I write that Treatise which I
entitled The Divine beginning and institution of Christ's true Visible or
Ministerial Church. Also the Unchangeableness of the same by men, viz. (...)
the form and essential Constitution thereof. Which is all the matter that I
have regard unto, even that I may in no wise be guilty of that fearful
sacrilege of spoiling God of his Honor and of giving his glory to another,
which be so mainly Isa. 42.8.
forbids. Which I am sure is not don by acknowledging the foresaid right of
the Christian people: I am sure that thus all the fore named wicked and impious
Consequentes As by ou^ Attestators before may be seen.
are avoided, and the whole glory and honor of Christ our Savior i^ preserved
safe and sound. For thus we easily hold him even in respect of instituting the
form of his Visible Church and government thereof under the Gospel to be our
absolut Prophet and King: and his New Testament to be entire and perfect: yea
fully so perfect for us, as the Old Testament was for the Jews: and so the
form of his said Church and government to be absolutely unchangeable by men;
Even altogether no less then it was under the Law. All this in holdinge our
opinion (I say) wre are sure of. Wherefore let me reason thus: That opinion
which yields Co^sequents so godly and pious, must needs it self be godly and
pious, and questionles comes from God. But our opinion aforesaid yields
Co^sequents so godly and pious: yea such in deed, as are principles and
fundamental grounds of Christian faith. Therefore this our opinion it self is
right godly and pious, and proceeding from God. Contrarie-wise, That opinion
which necessarily forces men to such impiety and unchristian Consequentes as
Page 133. 134.
before I noted, eve^ to the overthrow of principles of faith, the same it
self is not of God neither stands with truth. What autors and fautors so
ever it have. But the opinion of our adversaries verily is such. It forces men
of necessity to those impious and unchristian Consequents, as I showed. They
can not possibly avoid them. Therefore the opinion of our adversaries, viz. who
deny the Christian peoples consent in Church government to be an Apostolic
Ordinance and an immutable commandment of Christ: and so do hold the form of
a proper Diocesan Church and government to be lawful and good; their opinion
(I say) is not of God, neither stands with truth.

Now the case standing thus (as most clearly it does) no man can deny but that
in consideration of these certain co^sequents aforenamed, as also in other just
respects, that faithful man of God (whosoever he was) that made that An
humble Supplication, etc. An. 1609
Petition to the Kings Majesty for a Toleration of our way and profession with
peace and quietness in England, had great reason so to do, and also his
Excellent Majesty (be it spoken with reverence to his Royal Estate) to admit
of it. For what evil can ensue from us, when we strictly hold fast (as we do)
such holy and Divine principles of Christian faith, as before are mentioned;
and when our inconformitic to the common course in England is only for these
causes, as I for my part do call God to witness to my soul, it is. I say, in
regard of Religion thus what evil can probably be thought will ensue from us?
And as touching our tractablenes under the Kings authority and government,
Doc. Downame our bitter adversary, Def. 1.66.
acknowledges that we submit our selves enough. Nay, he holds it to be too
much: and proudly he calls it a desperate or frantike mind in us so to do.
But we hold it our bounden duty in the presence of God, to submit our selves
to any Civil Magistrate, be he never so mean, if the King appoint him over us.
But, says he, Def. 1.83.
The sum of our suite in that petition is, that we may be tolerated
Schismatikes. I challenge this rude Doctor, and will prove that we, seeing we
hold only those fundamental Grounds of Christian faith above mentioned, and
that which is evidently built upon the same, are not Schisma^^kes. Again, I
will prove and make it manifest that indeed him self and his consortes are
Schismatics, Who are the Schismatiks in England.
seeing he and they deny those foresaid fundamental grounds of faith, for
which only we contend. They therefore them selves are the Schismatikes, and
Romans 16.17 and 1. Tim. 6.3
the maker^ of the division which is now in England. All wise men know, that
not the difference but the cause makes a Schismatike. Let me once again
therefore press them with Augustin^ sentence against the Donatistes, which
once already Ang contra Peril. 2.25.
I did heretofore. But they love not to hear of it. Says Augustine, Reas. for
ref. page 77.
Virum Schismatici nos sumus an vos, nee ego nec tu, sed Christus interrogetur,
vt indicet Eeclesiam suam Lege ergo Evangelium and respondet tibe. etc. Whether
we or you be Schismarikes, ask not me, nor yourselves, but ask Christ that
he may show his own Church. Read the Gospel therefore and (...) answers
thee, etc. Our Doctor has an absurd and profane distinction, which though he
apply it to another matter, yet peradventure he would use it in this cause
against us, if he could find that it would be taken as current. He says,
somewhat in the Church may Def. 1.7.
be of Apostolical institution, D Down.
and yet not straightwayes Divini iuris, of Divine right. And, every Page 29.
Apostolical and so Divine Ordinance is not generally, perpetually, and
immutably necessary. Which he does often repeat in his 4. book. It seems to
be taken from Bellarmine the Jesuit, Controv. 1. lib. 4. cap. 2. I am sure it
is contrary to holy Scripture, which shows that the Apostles whole practice
in the Churches was Christ's very commandment, The Apostles practice was
Christ's commandemet.
and unchangeable by men. Christ says to his Apost. Math. 28.20.
Teach all Nations to do whatsoever I have commanded you. And Paul testifyeth
to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.23
He received of the Lord that which he delivered to them. And he charge
others, 2 These. 2.15
To stand fast, and to keep the Ordinances which they had been taught either by
word or by his Epistle. Therefore whatsoever is Apostolical, is indeed Divine,
and it is Christ's very commandment, and (in respect of us) generally and
immutably necessary. And so we affirm that the peoples consent in Church
governeme^t being a practice Apostolical (as by those Scriptures Page 76. and
the margin of page 19.
above specified it is proved) therefore it is also Christ's Commandment, and
therefore also unchangeable by men. Yea touching Church Censures, it is
expressly Christ's Commandment, Math. 18.17. Therefore I conclude, seeing we and
not they do stand with the All-sufficie^cie of holy Scripture, with the entire
and absolute Offices of Christ our Savior, viz. his Prophetical and Kingly
Offices, even in teaching and inioyning a certain form of his Church and
government absolutely and unchangeably for ever: and seeing we, not they, do
thus asscribe unto Christ this Divine Honor (due in deed to his own person)
wholly and only, it must needs be easily perceaved that we, and not they, have
the truth: also we, and not they, are free from schism.

Will any defend our adversaries herein, and deny that they thus teach against
the honor of Christ, or of his Word in his New Testament: Or that the points
which they hold, do force me^ to any such impious co^sequents? First therefore
I will show that such Consequentes must of necessity fol^ow from their
opinion: then I will ^ote their express words. Whosoever will not hold one
uniform opinion of the Church and government thereof, (as we do, who believe
the peoples consent therein to be always necessary) but do prefer the
Diocesan and Provincial Church-governement by L. Bishops; and yet do also allow
of that form of a Church and governent where are no Diocesan Bishops at all,
yea where the peoples free consent and voyce-giving is received: they of
necessity must say that the form of Christ's Visible Church and of the
government thereof may both be instituted and also changed by men. Of force
they must say that Christ in his New Testament is not the Teacher, Institutor,
Framer, Lord, and Lawgiver of his Visible Church, as he was in the Old
Testament. They must deny Christ's Prophetical and Kingly Offices toward us in
respect of appointing his Visible Church, and government: as also they must
deny, that Christ's Testament is a sufficient rule for us every where, and for
ever. But that uniform opinion our adversaries do deny. Therefore such are the
Consequents which men are forced to acknowledge, who will hold as our
Adversaries do. Now hear their words. D. Downame says, D. Down. Def. 4.104.
Where the government by Bishops can not be had, another form may be used.
Yea he affirms, Def. 1.29. Def. 4.103.
The Apostolical and so Divine Ordinance of government Page 82.
by the Bishop alone (as he thinks Timothy and Titus were * commanded to
govern) is changeable by men. And this in his 4. book he often inculcateth
and repeateth. But he says, he teaches thus Def. 3.107.
Out of charity to those Churches which have no L. Bishops, and in Page 108.
favor of them. See this Doctor, how for favor of men, he will spoil Christ
Jesus of his due honor and glory. Such is his charity to me^, that it makes
him uncharitable and undutiful to his Savior, and to his blessed Gospel. But
he will say perhaps, that he grants this change of the Apostolic
Ordinances and Precepts only Upon necessity. Fie! What necessity may break
the Apostles Ordinances and Precepts? Yea such precepts, whereof the Apostle
says, 1 Timothy 6.13 14.
I charge thee in the sight of God who quickens all things, and before Jesus
Christ, etc. that thou keep this Commandment without spot, and unrebukable,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again what necessity have the
French and Dutch Churches, etc. to be without Diocesan and Provincial L.
Bishops? Nay, how easily might they have such, if they thought them Apostolic?
And, woeful it were (God knows) if they had need of this faver and charity
of the Doctor to maintain them selves withal against the Papists objections.
But let us go on. Gabriel Pawell also in that which he punished with the great
allowa^ce of the L. Bb. of Canterburic and London the^ being, says expressly,
G. Powel. a Prefat. ^d Adiaph.
Christ is not the Law-gives of his Church. Archbishop Whitg^fe against Master
Cartwright (of blessed memory) says that to hold the form of the Church and
government thereof to be constant, always one, and unchangeable by men, is D.
Whitg^ against T. C. in the Presa.
a false principle, and rotten pillar. So rottenly writes that great Atlas of
the Prelacie in England. D. Bilson makes it the maine drift of the third
Chapt. of his Perpet. government, to deny this part of Christ's Kingdom. He
says, D. Bilson. Perp. gov. page 14. 15.
The Kingdom and Throne which Christ reserved to himself, far passes
directing and ordering of outward things in the Church, which he has left to
others. Nay, sure he has Isa. 42. (...).
not left it to others. He still reserveth this authority and dignity to him
self under the Gospel, as well as he did under the Law. And it is more then
frivolous, by advauncing Christ's inward kingdom by his Spirit (which the
Doct. does in this Chapter) to deny his Outward Kingdom, which orders the
Outward Spiritual things in his Church. Such as are the instituting of
Sacraments, the Ordayning of the Ministry, the appointing of Excommunication,
the Commanding of Sacred Societies and Assemblies, etc. Is the power of these
Outward things left to others? It is not, it may not be. He says here indeed
that Page 16.
the outward face of the Church where the good and bad by the Word and
Sacraments are gathered together, may be called the kingdom of heaven and of
Christ. And he says well. But in this he either contradicts his general
purpose and discourse; or else he means that it may be so called, but not
truly. Which is but double dealing. For presently after he says, Page 17.
He separateth the true Kingdom of Christ from the external Order and
Discipline of the Church: which some in these days more zealous then wise, do
not separate. So he calls the faithful worshippers of Christ. But is it such
wisdom, I pray, to seperat from Christ this his Divine honor and glory, and
to give it to others? Nay, this is accursed wisdom. Then, a Ministry
supposed to be settled by the Apostles in the Primitive Church, he denies to
be any part of Christ's Kingdom. Has he any reason for it? Yea, a strange
one. Says he, Christ's kingdom is proper to his person. As though the power
and authority to institute, and setle such an ordinance might not be proper to
Christ's person, and yet the execution thereof committed to his Officers and
Deputies. And nevertheles all is Christ's still. Christ has a Kingdom
Commissive.
It is the Kings authority which the Deputy of Ireland executes. And may it
not be Christ's power and government which his Ministers and Deputies on earth
do execute? Yea, certainly. Which this D. acknowledged before, saying, it may
be called the kingdom of heaven and of Christ. Yet he does further strive
against the truth in this cause; making the Minister, the Master of a family,
and the Magistrate to be Gods ordinance alike. Which surely never any sound
Divine would say. If we look but to Moses law, the falsitie hereof is soon
seen. Every Ministry in the Jews Church, must have express and particular
institution from God: but natural reason and Humane contractes were sufficient
to institute both the other. And is not the case so with us now also under the
Gospel? Yeas truly. Wherefore these in deed are now Gods ordinances, but not
alike. He concludes, that the Ministers may not arrogat any part of Christ's
honor and power as incident to their calling or function, They may take to them
the execution of that, which to ordain is only Christ's right. That power of
his which he has in his word committed to them and (as the D. speaks)
trusted them with, they may take to them, viz. the Keys and Mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. Which they arrogate not: but it is their right to take and
use the same as Christ himself has specially appointed. From this dissolut
opinion aforesaid, and so derogatorie to the holy Offices of Christ it flows,
that this D. teaches Page 339. 348.
the peoples interest in Church-governement stands only upon the grounds of
reason and nature, and is derived from the rules of Christian equity and
society. And that this is both lawful and Page 334.
much to be commended. And yet also that Page 349.
the people may willingly forsake, and worthily loose the right which they had.
Nay more, he holds the Apostolic and Page 299. 300.
Divine form of Church-governement by sole governing Bishops (as he
maintains Timotihe and Titus and the Angel of Ephesus, etc. to have been) may
give place on occasion to those forenamed grounds of reason and nature and Page
348. 334.
humane government. Thus he by denying the peoples consent to be Page 368.
essential in the choice of their Pastors, does indeed make nothing essential
to them. For that which is Essential, must evermore be had to the true being
of any thing it can never be altered, nor absent from it, as before Page 8^.
I have also noted. These our adversaries say our assertions are raw and
undigested fancies: but what raw and undigested, yea irreligious assertions
they do hold and maintain, it makes me afraid even to think of it.

It shall not be amiss to observe somewhat contrary to their opinions, out
of some both of the Ancient and the late writers. Cyprian notes this in
general as an odious error in the haeretike Novatian, though he aim at an
other point in particular. But in general this which they hold, Cyprian
makes noe less then haereticall in him. His words are Cypr Epist. 4.2.
Ille post Dei traditionem, humanam conatur Ecclesiam facere. This man letting
go Gods ordinance, indeavor^th to make a Humane Church. Again touching the
order and form of the Church and administration thereof, he in another place
flies only to Christ and his word for authority, and says: Epist. 1.8.
Quisquis alibi collegerit, spargit. Adulterum est, impium est, Sacrilegu^ est,
quod^unque humano furo^e instituitur, vt dispositio divina violetur. Procul ab
huiusmodi hominum contagione discedite. Whosoever gathers elsewhere, he
scatters. It is adulterous, it is impious, it is sacrilegious whatsoever is
instituted by men's madness, that Gods order should be violated. Depart far away
from the infectio^ of such me^. And a little after, Nemo vos frat res errare a
Domi. via faciat. Nemo vos Christianos ab Eva^gelio Christi rapiat. Brethren,
let no man cause you to err from the Lords way. Let no man pull you Christians
from Christ's Gospel. Of the church co^stitution and order again he says:
De Vnitat. Eccles.
Verbis Christi insistere, quaecunque and docuit and feat, discere and facere
debemus. Crederese in Christum quomodo dicit, qui non facere quod Christus
facere praecepit? We ought to insist in Christ's words: whatsoever he taught
and did, we must learn and do. How can one say, he believes in Christ, who
does not that which Christ commands? Thus in the order, constitution, and
government of Christ's Church this holy man of God lays a necessity on us to
cleave always to that which is in Christ's Testament, not to Humane reason,
nor to Civil disposition at any time. Which our adversaries do Perp. gov. page
339. Def. 2.73.
teach and maintain to be lawful. Augustine also of the visible Churches
constitution (beside that Page 138.139.
above cited in him) elsewhere writes thus: August. contra Crescon. Gram. 1.33.
Ecclesiam sine vlla ambiguitate sancta Scriptura demonstrat. Ibi quaeramus
Ecclesiam, ^ De Unit. Eccles. cap. 3.
ibi discutiamus causam nostram. N^lo humanis documentis, sed divinis oraculis
sancta^ Ecclesiam demonstrari. The holy Scripture demonstrateth the Church
without any doubt. There let us seek the Church: there let us try our cause. I
cannot abide that the holy Church should be showed by men's doctrines but by the
Divine Oracles. And in that sense Jerome calls Christ's Visible Church as it
is under outward government, Hieron. d^ 7. Ordin. Eccles.
Fabrica De^, a Frame which God him self has buil^. Thus these Ancientes.
With whom herein the godly learned of late do consent also. Zuinglius said
enough Page 101.102.104.
before. Calvin to Cardinal Sadolet says; Calvin ad Sad.
Non te adeo pracise vrgebo vt revocem ad illam Ecclesiae forniam quam Apostols
constituerunt, in qua tamen vnicum habemus verae Ecclesiae exemplar: a quo si
quis vel minimum deflectit, ab^rat. I will not press you so precisely, as to
call you back to that form of the Church which the Apostles set. In which
form notwithstanding we have the only pattern of a true Church. From which if
any decline never so little, he erreth. He means, be would take it well at
the Cardinals hands, if he could reduce him to the form of the Church which
Instit. 4.4.
the Fathers used, suppose, about 200. till 300. years after Christ, and after
for some while. Howbeit he absolutely affirms that in the form which the
Apostles set in the Scriptures, the only patte^ne of a true Church is to be
had. And that if any decline never so little from it, he erreth. Which is all
one with that where he says, Extern^ Instit. 4.1.1.
subsidia quoque Deus addidit, quo infirmitati nostrae consuleret. The Outward
helps and Means God has added also, to the end that he might provide for our
weakness. If God have added them and appointed them for us, what arrogancy
shall it be for men to alter them? And chiefly the form of the Visible
Church. Like to these P. Martyr says: P. Mart. in Romans 3.21.
Forma reipublica quandoque variatur: quod attinet ad Ecclesiam, non mutat
formam. The Form of a Civil state sometime is changed: but as touching the
Church it changes not her form. All this is very contrary to our forenamed
adversaries. Nay, which is to our great shame, the very Papists in this
general point are nearer to the kingdom of God, then such unworthy
Protestants are. For they religiously and most strictly do hold this, that
Sander. Vifib. Monatch ^.6.
Christ only is the Teacher and Instituter of the form of his Visible Church:
and that no men may ever change it from that same which is set down in
Christ's Testament. In the particular indeed they err: in setting up under the
Gospel a Universal church exercising governeme^t; which is not Christ's
spouse, but the Queen of pride. Nevertheles in the general they hold
clearly the truth (as I have showed) whereby they put many of us to shame who
bear a name of professing the Gospel. And so much of the Consequentes which
highly touch the Honor and Office of Christ, and the Dignity of his New
Testament.

There are also Consequentes from our adversaries opinion, which greatly touch
our selves. First, whosoever of the Protestants do refuse our foresaid
Uniform Opinion of the peoples consent, must of necessity hold two distinct
forms of Christ's Visible Church, Two ways to heaven.
and two distinct forms of Church-governement to be lawful: that is, both
that where the people are absolutely excluded, and that where they are admitted.
The one ordinary and best (as they say) the other extraordinary and only in
case of necessity, as before has been showed. Now to hold two distinct and
opposite forms of the Visible Church and Church-governement, is directly all
one as to hold two ways to heaven, distinct and opposite in them selves.
Which is very scandalous in religion, and that which can not stand with truth.
For the Visible Church and Church-governement is plainly the way to heaven and
the Outward means which must bring us thither, or else ordinarily we can not
come there. That is, Ordinarily faith, repentance, sanctification, and at last
glorification in heaven, comes only by the Ministry of Gods word; and none
can lawfully administer, but being sent (now in these days) by the Visible
Church, according to their authority in this case given them of Christ. Thus
the only Outward means and way to heaven is Christ's Visible Church and the
exerci^ing of her authority in such form and manner as Christ her Lord has
appointed her. Which is only one way; it can not be two ways. There is only
one form ordained of Christ. And so only one is true, and one lawful, which
soever it be. As before also I noted. page 78.
Two ways cannot be. D. Dewname answers that there be other ways which he
allows, which are Def. 3.108. and 4.99.
by necessity: and necessity has no law. Nay, him self is lawles. Gods
servants at no time are freed from Gods Law. As well in necessity as in
ple^tie, in adversity no less then in prosperity they are so tied to the
rule of his word (which is always one) that they profess it always unlawful
for them to take up any invention of their own upon any pretense. Indeed in
Humane affairs sometime Necessity does excuse us fto^ following man's law. And
so the proverb is verifyed, Necessity has no law. But in Gods matters, and
in the affairs of the Church, which are causes touching our souls, no
necessity nor prosperity can free us (as I said) from Gods law and ordinance
appointed for us. So far (at least) that we may never take up any invention of
men, which in Gods Service is evermore the way of See my Exposition of the 2.
Commandment.
error and not of truth. As for Do. Dwname I remember the time, when he was
stout and resolut for Vnica Methodus in Philosophy. But the world is so
changed with him since, that in Divinity he is now a professed Diplodophilus,
one that thinks there are two ways to heaven, Dioplodophilus.
two ways and forms of administering Christ's Visible Church, of Calling the
Ministry, of exercising holy Censures. Which matters (as before I showed) are
the ordinary way to heaven for every soul: the Outward isntrumental Means
sanctified of Christ to save his people by. Now he professes two forms of
administering them, essentially distinct and opposite the one to the other, and
yet both to be lawful. Which indeed is evidence enough that he is in error.
For the way of truth is only one (as before has been noted) but error is
manifold. Wherefore among the Protestants seeing only we hold a Uniform and
constant opinion in this matter of Christ's Visible Church, (which is for the
peoples consent in the Ordinary Government) it is certain that we only have
the truth, and our adversaries are in error.

And here withal this follows from our opinion, that we only have
comfortable assurance to our consciences, Comfortable assurance on Christ's
Ordinances, not in Men's.
which the adversaries can not soundly have. We hold only upon the institution
of Christ and practice of his Apostles. Of which we have reason to be
confident; and wherein we may well have assurance. For when we build the
form and frame and whole administration of Christ's Visible Church upon the
Rock mentioned in the Gospel Math. 16.18. that is, upon Christ and his word
alone; who can make us to doubt, but that God will crown his own work, and
bless his own Ordinance, and sanctify his own way. Certainly we ought with
all cheerfulnes to expect, and to conceave assurance to our souls of Gods
gracious favor and everlasting goodness, if we stand in that way which plainly
is Christ's. Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. But contrariwise our adversaries allowing of two ways
in the Churches spiritual government and administration, the one Apostolic
the other Humane, both good (as they say) and both changeable by men; but
neither of them any certain Ordinance or Commandment of Christ. Again, when
they make many Those which follow the doctrine of our Attestators before
alleged.
thousand several Churches in the world to use no other Calling of their
Ministers but such as is of Men's institution and from natural reason: do they
in this give assurance to men's consciences? Nay, it can not be. At the least,
men standing in such state, will often doubt and make question whether the
spiritual blessings and graces of God in Christ be promised, or may be
instrumentally wrought in them by such a Ministry no otherwise authorized and
called then so. For as it is most certain that God saves no man Ordinarily but
by Outward means, and that these Outward means are ordinarily Christ's
Visible Church, the Ordayning of Ministers, and the administering of Gods Word,
Sacraments, and Censures therein; so it is most uncertain and much to be
doubted, whether God will acknowledge any of these Outward means and
instruments to be his, or will give his ordinary blessing unto them, working
says, repentance, sanctification, and hereafter his heave^ly glory in us, by
the^, unless the said Outward means and instruments be simply of that form
and nature, and be exercised by the power and authority of such persons only,
as he himself has specially ordained and sanctified in his word to that
purpose. This doubt, I say, at least, As also to stand under a No^reside^t, may
breed this doubt.
will and must needs arise from the opinion of our adversaries. And it can not
but weaken the faith of many, if in the end it do not wholly subvert it. Which
indeed may come to pass from this original, diverse, and sundry ways. But our
uniform co^stitution of the Church and administration thereof, cutteth of all
occasion of such doubting, and leaves our consciences safely resting on Christ
alone. And so much for this.

viz. that the peoples free consent ought to be always in the Church
government, there necessarily the Visible Catholic Church of Rome is ruined,
quite overthrowen, and destroyed. Yea, this assertion of ours being made good,
her spiritual tyranny and usurpation is easily demonstrated. And there is no
man who sees not this. But contrariwise many see not, and many will not see
(till they feel) that which yet is as certain and as sure a Consequence in
true reason; viz. that where the peoples consent in the Church government is
condemned and hated, Advantage to the Pope by a Diocesan Church.
there the Church of Rome will get adva^tage, and in time advancement again,
notwithstanding that Civil Magistrates for a season do what they can to
resist the same. I know many will at the first think this a Paradox: yet
verily it will prove true. For the Church of Rome not only in reason, but by
clear rules of Divinity and Religion; must needs get ground of us, if we
willingly give away this invincible Bullwarke and Fortress against the^. I
mean Christ's Visible Churches true and proper Nature: and that both
intensive, Christ's Visible Churches Nature Intensive.
which is the power of Spiritual government received from Christ her Author
and Founder, wherein the Peoples free consent is comprehended, as before I have
often rehearsed; Extensive
and also the Extensive quantity and Outward Body of the said Church, which in
the Gospel never reaches to many Ordinary Congregations nor to any Set
circuit of ground at all (as a Diocesan Church does) but to one ordinary
Congregation only, as I have Declarat. page 18.
elsewhere plainly declared. This is the true and proper Nature of Christ's
Visible Church in the New Testament. And I would all men did consider this;
viz. that the effectual defense of our faith against Popery is and must be
the alleging and pressing against them this Nature and proper Constitution of
Christ's said Visible Church. Without which we shall labor against them al in
vain; and which our forefathers Zuinglius, Luther, and the rest, wisely
holding and maintayning (as Chapt. 3. and 4. and page 102. 103. 104.
above we have seen) have easily and mightily from thence by the sword of the
Spirit (which is the word of God) put them to flight and quelled them. And so
may we do still: but no otherwise. In which regard it greeveth me often times
when I see many of our Defenders of the truth against the Papists, being
otherwise learned and godly, yet dealing in this matter very uncircumspectly,
and I may say praeposterously. Who make no great reckoning to stand with the
Papists upon the proper Nature of Christ's Visible Church; A great cause why
cur controversies com not to an and.
or if they meddle with it, they do not strictly hold to that Nature and form
thereof which is left us in the N. Testament, being plainly another and
distinct from that of the Jews under the Law. This verily our men against that
Adversary do consider too little, and they prosecute it less. They treat more
of Christ's Invisible, or Militant, then of the Ministerial Church. So leaving
the question in deed, and laboring in things which touch not the point.
Whereby it comes to pass, that they resist the^ not with that fruit as they
might. For we must know that ordinarily the Church Ministerial is the Means
and instrument of true faith. If the Means and procuring cause (which is most
sensible to us) be not first well cleared, and men's consciences therein
satisfied, and the same demonstrated plainly to be of Divine institution, the
doctrine of faith besides will be but uncertain.

If any say, Our Forefathers overcame the Papists by the word of God cutting
down their other foul errors, viz. Purgatory, Free Will, Auricular
confession, Real presence, Images, Praying to Saints, Justification by works,
etc. They overcame them not by affirming that the people ought to have always
their free consent in Church government. And so may we also overcome them
still. I answer, Men are much deceaved that do thus think. had been true,
neither could the first Protestant Pastors be truly authorized and called,
neither could any of the Protestants at first lawfully have forsaken the Roman
Church, whereof they all stood members. And then, I pray, how could they have
overcome them? Nay, it had never been possible. For it had been to small purpose,
if they had oppugned those their other errors only, and withal had justified
the form of the Roman Church, and the calling of their Ministry; which our
Forefathers must have done, if our said Assertion had not ben true. And so they
must have tarried still ordinary members under the government of the same
Church. Again, to small purpose had they oppugned those other errors, if they
had left to obloquie their own Ministry. Which likewise they must have done,
if our said Assertion were not true. For as in warfare, good weapons, and much
strength without iustifyable authority, A Similitude.
will in short time bring ruin and confusion to them that use the same: Even
so it is in this cause; yea much more here it is true. Though we seem to cut
down Popish errors with the sword of Gods word, yet if we do not clear our
Ministry, and iustifye our Calling, and give good satisfaction to men's
Consciences for the lawfulnes of our handling the Word and Sacraments and
Spiritual government, we shall quickly labor in vain. And that appears
certainly to much at this day in England; the greater is our woe. Not only in
respect of Popery, but in other respects also.

Well; will our adversaries say. The Protestants Ministry is justified
sufficiently against the Papists, albeit the people have no consent in their
Ministers Calling. Oh would God our learned men in England would show this
substantially. Then would I (for my part) quickly conform, as before also I
protested. But otherwise, let them be assured the Church of Rome, do what they
can, will get ground of them in England. And this makes me to lay this to
heart, as I do. Every day we are challenged by the D. Kelliso^. Treatise of
faith, A. D. John Fraser, etc.
Papists to prove the lawfulnes of our Ministry in England, and of our
Calling to it. What say our learned men hereunto? A direct and a full and a
steadfast answer must be made to this. Men's consciences will not be satisfied
with dilatorie and shifting answers. Nor, if we leave Scruples and
Difficulties in that we speak. To justify the Calling of our Ministry in
England and to prove the lawfulnes thereof, The true justification of the
Protestants Ministry.
we must plainly show that the persons who give this Calling with us, have
good authority in deed to give the same. This is the very point. Let our
learned men make this clear, and then the Papists are stopped; then all men
are satisfied. For it is a plain case and granted of all, that every true
Ministry in the Church must be received from some persons who have good and
just authority to give it. And this is essential to every true Ministry.

Some there are in England who affirm, the Ministers authority is only an
Inward Calling, and gifts of the mind. And so has no absolut necessity to be
Outwardly received from any other. Which in deed is not fit for any wise man,
or honest Christian to hold. It is the worst answer of a thousand, and in a
word merely Anabaptisticall. Some others there are who say that this
authority of the Ministry (and of exercising Excommunication also) is
derived originally from the Magistrate, even from the King and Parliament with
us. And so they expound that ordinance of our Savior, Mat. 18.17.
Tell the Church; to be, Tell the civil Magistrate. Verily they may also as
well expound these words, Mat. 86.18.
Upon this Rock I will build my Church, to signify, Upon the Civil
Magistrate, upon the Prince Christ builds his church. For thus they make
Christ's Visible Church under the Gospel only a Civil Society, and a Humane
polity. Which profane opinion is so unworthy of all true Christian people,
that it deserves to be exploded no less then the other. These answers
against the Papists (we may think) will do but little good. For as it is
absolutely necessary that a true Minister of the Gospel have his calling given
him outwardly from some persons, and that these persons have good and just
authority to give it: So likewise, it is absolutely necessary that every true
Minister of the Gospel have his calling given him by those who are by Christ
him self (or his holy Spirit in the Apostles) authorized to give it. For thus
only can an Ordinary Ministers Calling be of God (which is Ioh. 3.27. Heb.
5.4. Mat. 21.25. 1. Cor 12.5. Romans 10.15.
necessary) and not of men. And this is that which we call Essential in every
Ordinary Ecclesiastical Minister. Who are the persons that have power from
Christ to make Ministers.
Again, as I said, this will soundly answer the Papists, and nothing else.

But now all the matter will be, who are the persons which have power and
authority from Christ to give a Calling to a Minister of the Gospel. Here,
as touching my self, when I deal with Papists (as often I have don) I
affirm as D. Tilenus in this case answered the L. Lavall in France, which Page
43.
before I remembered: viz. that the people consenting together in the truth of
the Gospel, have from Christ power and authority, first to forsake all
Sacrilegious Priests and their ministry; and then to give a true and lawful
calling of Ministry to some whom them selves do like. Wherein Tilenus showed
Cyprians judgment also agreeing with his. Cyprian there affirming likewise,
that this power of the people is from Divine authority, as Page 56. 57.
before also is showed. And other very plain proofs hereof (Act. 1.23.26.
and 6.3.5.6. and 14.23) I have Reas. for reform. page 45. 46. 47. etc. Divine
beginning of Christ's Visib Church. Argum. 9. A Definition general.
twice set down at large out of the New Testament. Beside all which, there is
very pregnant reason also for the same. For Christian people, whether few or
many, joined together in a constant society of one ordinary Congregation to
serve God according to his word, are a true Visible Church of Christ. Every
true Visible Church of Christ is his Kingdom upon earth, his dear Spouse, his
own Body. etc. Now it ought not to be doubted but Christ has given power to
his Kingdom, to his Spouse, to his Body to govern it self, to preserve it
self, to provide for it self (when it wants) all things ordained for it, in
the best manner it can. This may not be doubted. Therefore such a Society
under the Gospel wanting Ministers, must have power to ordain Ministers for
her self. Likewise the Apostle says, All things are theirs, and they
Christ's, and Christ Gods. Then, 1. Cor. 3.2^.23.
when they want Ministers they cannot want power to provide them to them
selves. Seeing God has made them theirs. Further, the Apostle requires the
christian people to try the Spirits of their Teachers whether they be of God or
no. 1. Ioh. 4.1.
And Christ says, His sheep hear his voice: a strangers voice they will flee
from. Ioh. 10.27.3
But they can not thus discern and try, unless they may reject their Teachers
being false and erroneous. And if they may reject, they may chose. Yet always
(as I said) in the best manner they can. Some here object and say, The people
in deed have power and right, but they have not means thus to do, when they
want Ministers. I answer, if they have power, from whom have they it? It will be
said, from God. If the people have power from God, then they have means also.
Otherwise God gives power in vain. But that is absurd etc false; that God
gives any power in vain, or such as can not be acted. If God intend an end
(as he does) in giving all power, then sure he intends Means also to effect
the said end. And so a Church wanting Ministers, but having power from GOD,
has Means also to make Ministers, and so likewise to do every other
Ecclesiastical action. They are not utterly and altogether destitute of just
and lawful means to perform any such action for their own use in the fear
of God: That is, the best means they have is sufficient, when they have not
such as they would and should have otherwise.

So then, this was the answer which the said Tilenus gave to that French Lord.
But in deed this is not only Tilenus answer in this matter: for it has been the
common defense of all sound Protestants always when they be opposed, touching
their Ministry. Which the common consent of all our Attestators before cited,
See our very Adversaries beeren Above pa. 73. 74. etc.
and many other, makes manifest. If any have given other answers, yet only
this has been the firm and sure anchre to trust to. Other answers are all to
weak and uncertain: this only is clear and constant. Though Perpe. gov. Page
335.
D. Bilson do unjustly deny it. A most certain deduction of this power and
right of the people, from Christ's ordinance in the Gospel, I have plainly
showed before in the sixth Chapter. Also the benefit and fruit of this defense
we see in all Churches abroad; namely it is evident in those of France. Against
which the learned of the Papists have nothing soundly to reply. So that the
Churches there flourish and increase mightily, blessed be God. Who, but for
this answer, would certainly both then when Tilenus so did write, and before,
and since, have been much troubled, and staggered, and no less then shamed. As
many are now with us in England, who do shun and despise this answer. Whereby
I see, that to lay against the Papists their other errors (before we have
cleared the lawfulnes of our Ministry) is in deed unseasonable, and little
availeable. For if we be shamed in the eyes of understanding people, or have
not certainly what to hold, and stand to, when we be urged to make good the
Calling and lawfulnes of our Ministry, Papists will easily with distinctions
and subtle answers make a fair show in reconciling other matters (between
us in controversy) to Gods word, though I grant they be gross. When we are
shamed in so maine a point as the Calling of our Ministers is, in no other
matter afterward we shall, neither can we have good success.

But our adversaries of the Protestants in England, what say they to this?
How defend they the Calling of our Ministers against the Papists? D. Bilson
denies vehemently that Perpet. gov. page 335. 368.
the peoples consent is essential in the making of any Ministers. I desire him
then to tell us what is essential in it. There is no question but somewhat is.
The very question is, Who have power essentially to make Ministers.
Then what is it, which is essential in making a Minister? If the peoples
consent be not, surely I know not what else they will assign to be. And yet, as
I said, somewhat must be. Wherefore I conceave the peoples consent may be said
to be essential by Gods word in the making of a Minister under the Gospel,
because no other thing else can be assigned by Protestants as Essential
therein. The common answer in a manner of all men is, that in England our
Diocesan and Provincial Bishops do give our Ministers their Calling and Office.
Here I demand, is this Essential in the Calling of our Ministers, or is it
not? I think few advisedly will say, it is Essential. For whatsoever is
Essential any where, the same is essential every where; as Page 81.
before I have observed. And so they must deny the true Essence of Ministry
in the foreign reformed Churches where they have no such Bishops at all, and
where at first they had no Minister at all. Therefore they will not say, I
think (I know they can not) that the Ordination by Bishops is Essential to
Christ's Ministry under the Gospel. Yet again, if they say not so, they
answer the Papist nothing: they satisfy not the question. So that what they
will resolve on in this point, Surely no man can well tell. Wherefore here the
crafty Priests and Jesuits among us will persuade vehemently their
disciples, that they have got the victory. Seeing we can not affirm whence
our Ministry is essentially derived and given us. In the end I doubt not, the
common defense will be this, that our said Bishops by their sole authority and
power do essentially give the Calling of all our Ministry. And that from
Archb. Cranmer and Ridley (our first Protestant Bishops) they have still so
done. Let what inconvenience soever follow thereof. Be it then so. Yet even
they likewise must have it given to them. They ( viz. those our first Bishops)
must have it derived unto them from others. From whom had they their authority
and power? Briefly it will be answered, they had it given them from the Bishop
and Church of Rome. And that in deed is the truth the Pope is he, who made
Archb. Cranmer and Ridley, etc. such Bishops. They had no other Ordination
since. And from them all the rest of our Ministers have had their Ordination to
this day. And so the effect of all is, that our whole Ministry in England
successively and derivatively comes from the Pope. See the Supplication for
Toleration, pa. ^.
Doct. Downame, Doct. Bilson, and all that maintain the Church state in
England will thus answer. But O miserable defense, and woeful unto us. Which in
deed though it be false, yet it is such as the Pap^s^es desire, and do triumph
in. It is false two ways. First, whatsoever the Church of Rome did give to
Archbi. Cranmer, etc. that wholly they took away again, namely when he fell
from them. For then they both deposed him, and excommunicated him. So that they
left him no whit of that power and function (so much as lay in them) which they
had given him. But questionles if they could give it, they could take it away.
Wherefore (so soon as he was ours) being thus cut off and excommunicate from
the Church of Rome, he could not after that have any power (as derived from
them) to make Ministers, nor to do any other Bishoplie act. Secondly, we all
know the Church of Rome to be the very Antichrist, chiefly in respect of
their Clergy and Spiritual government, and most chiefly of all in respect
of the Pope, from whom all the rest (as from the Head) do take their power and
authority. Now shall we say that very Antichrist can have power from Christ to
make Ministers? Or that we can have a lawful Ministry derived from those who
had their power only from him? It can not be. 2. Cor. 6.14, 15.
What communion has light with darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial?
And so, what has Christ to do with Antichrist? Nothing at all. Thus then our
consciences can have no assurance, we can not have confidence in such estate
of the Ministry. But certainly Christ's true Ministers among us in England,
have a better Original the^ this. Wherefore this answer of our State
Protestants must needs be false. Yet in this answer who sees not how the
Papists do rejoice, triumph, and insult? Who sees not, how by this they are
encouraged, strengthened, and multiplied among us exceedingly? Truly it would
pity a man's heart to behold how this one point puts life into thousands to
stand up against Christ's Gospel, and the liberty of their Country also. For
when they hear our selves openly to ascribe to the Church of Rome and to their
means such a gift of grace, even that which is our glory, even the holy
instrument of our faith to salvation (for so is our Ministry) they will say,
if the branch be holy, the root is more; if the rivers be sweet, the
head-spring is delicious. And so how can it be chosen, but the Papists thus
will be graced, and get great adva^tage among us? Many here have another
refuge, but that also helps nothing. Say they, as Popish Baptism is so far
acknowledged by us, The last refuge of our Adversaries taken away.
as that with it only we are held to be sufficiently Baptized and not to need
Baptizing again when we com from them to the Church of England: So likewise
we may acknowledge the Popish Ordination to the Ministry thus far, and yet
nevertheles condemn their Church and separate from them. I answer, the case
is nothing like between Baptism the sign of our initiation in Christ, and
the Calling to the Ministry. In the word there is express warrant for not
repeating the sign of our initiation in Christ (which of old was Circumcision,
and Baptism now is the same) though ministered by a false Ministry and
Church. As we may see in the 2. Chron. 30.11.18. and 35.17.18: Ez^. 6.21.
not Recircumcising of such Jews as had received that sign in the Apostasy
of Israel, and turned from the same to the truth. But there is no warrant at
all in Gods word for any to retain the outward Calling to the Ministry, or
to stand in that power and authority which is derived from such a Church.
There is no such thing can be showed in all Gods book. Therefore we may not
conclude the like in this matter of Ordination to the Ministry, which may be
done for not repeating of Baptism. For by Gods word Ordination may be
repeated, yea certainly, after a Ministry received in Christ's true Church:
much more after it has been received in a false Church. So that these two
ordinances of Christ are nothing like in this point. Wherefore out of question,
Ordination to the Ministry as it is derived from Antichrist, must be wholly
reuounced of every faithful man: and may be (as is said) renewed and repeated
in Christ's true Church, as occasion serves. At Rome, there is in it both an
impiety, and a nullitie. In their administering of Baptism there is not a
nullitie altogether; as in that correspondent example of Israel in Apostasy
before alleged, it well appears. And this is sufficient for this; though
other answers may be given also. Wherefore this remains, that when we grant
the descent of our Ministry in England to come lineally from the Church and
Pope of Rome, (which we must grant, will we nill we, if wedeny it to arise
essentially from the Christian peoples consent in each Congregation, all the
world sees that we give the Pope a maine advantage against us, and we put into
his hand a strong engine to draw us back again unto him. Which also he
effects daily upon many among us, as woeful experience shows in our Land:
yea even upon some of my very friends, and near acquaintance.

Beside this, there is another point of the Churches government, The causing
of Unity.
namely their Jurisdiction in co^pounding Schisms, in making peace and unity
and consent among Christian people, which being ascribed as proper to Diocesan
and Provincial Bishops (as they in England do say it is, and as Def. 3.36. etc.
D. Downame with great vehemency defends) certainly true reason will carry it
further, it can not possibly stay there. This will serve a Popes turn a great
deal better: and to such a one it belongs in deed as a very true and
forcible ground for his Universal Government over all Christians in the
world, if there were any Divine and Evangelicall truth in it at all. But there
is no truth in it. Because this is no Divine and Evangelical way for Unity in
religion. viz. to constitute one Visible Head with absolute power of Spiritual
government whether Diocesan, or Provincial, or Universal. Or, to take from
the Christian people their free consent. There is not in the Gospel any such
Means to Unity. It is a Humane policy, a carnal device: it is no
institution of Christ Jesus. Gods writt^ word is the cause of Unity.
Who in his word and by his word (with the help of the Ministry therein
ordained) provideth sufficiently for true peace, and holy Unity among all his
people. For he says, Mat. 28.29.
Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. And, Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures: for they are they which testify of me. And chap. 14.6
Romans 16, 17.
I am the way, the truth, and the life. Likewise the Apostle testifyeth, that
those are the makers of Schisms and divisions, who teach and hold any thing "
besides the doctrine learned from the Apostles. So that indeed the means
appointed of GOD to make Unity in the Church, is Gods word: and not one
Superior overruling Minister over many distinct ordinary Co^gregations,
which the word knows not. But in truth such a one is the very proper cause of
dissension and schism. For he not willing to submit to Gods word, by his power
draws many with him: and yet he cannot lightly prevayle with all. Whereupon
follows dissension and schism. And then he with his company (being the
stronger in the world) may cry out loudest against those fewer that dissent
from him, that they are Schismatickes and peace-breakers: but look unto the
word of God, and the^ them selves will be found to be the makers of the
Schism in departing from the said word of God by their Traditions, The true
cause of Unity.
We see then by this that the true and just cause of Unity in the churches of
Christ is to cleave unseparably to Christ's Testament. Which me^ not willing to
follow always, but seeking to walk rather in the ways and customs and
inventions of men, thereby they give occasion indeed of much strife, The true
cause of dissension in Religion.
discord, and dissension. This is the true cause of our differences in
religion. It is as fensele^ which D. Downame maintains, that Diocesan and
Provincial Bishops (having no Superior Ecclesiastical) can be causes of
Unity. Def. 2.114. (...)
For none of these can do any thing, but each in his own circuit. Now what is
that to Christian Unity, when nevertheles there may be (for all the^) so many
opinions as there be independent Provincial Bishops. Only a Universal Church
and Bishop (if we list to follow Men's policies, and not Christ's Testament) may
in deed cause a kind of Unity. But again, such Unity without Verity, is
unto Christian people plain tyranny. And we profess, that absolute Unity
under a Visible Head is not so good, as the Tyra^nie of such a one is
mischievous. Christ rather would his faithful servantes should be prooved and
exercised by Schismatikes, then their consciences oppressed by tyrants.

Some perhaps will say, that thus we seem to desire dissentions, seeing we
refuse reasonable and likely means of Unity. I answer. First, The Pope has
better color so to object, then Provincialls, as before is said. Second. our
means of Unity which we embrace, are far more likely to effect the same, then
their way. For they have a Provincial L. Bishop without the word: but we have
Christ's written word, and his churches help also. These means among us will
settle more unity and peace in truth a hundred times, (especially within the
body of our Churches) then our adversaries have or can have by their L.
Bishops. The Magistrates favor a special cause of Unity.
If our Magistrates would show us their favor and aid (which our adversaries
enjoy) this that I say would quickly and universally be evident. But for want
of the Magistrates said favor, I grant mo differences do appear among us,
then would otherwise. In which case yet no Christian ought to be offended, but
to consider both that under the Apostles it has been so, and that Almighty
God she weth hereby that it is See D. Downam. Def. 3.67.68.
better so to be, then under Humane tyranny though pretending Unity. Doct.
Downame sets up his rest upon a Def. 3.4.6.
Universal Synod for Unity. This is his chiefest buck lar. But alas, how
vain is it? For first, a Universal Synod indeed is impossible to be had:
especially by us in these days. For when and where had any Christians the
least benefit by a Universal Synod, since the Pope has been detected? What a
means then of Unity is that which our Adversaries pretend? Namely, which is
not possible to be had; or howsoever, most rare and difficult. Secondly, such a
Synod at the D. stands for, viz. Setting down Decreta tanquam Dictatoria and
(...) Ecclesijs, Decrees as it were uncontrollable, and not under the
examination of the Churches, is by the learned Page 101. etc. 105. 106 etc.
before plainly condemned: to whom I will add M. Chemnicius, Exam. Council.
Trid. part 1. page 3.
condemning the Council of Trent for this very cause and in these very words;
denying also that any of the Primitive Councills were such. And yet a
Universal Council (if it may be had) and other Councills so far as they may
be had, we allow, and embrace, and do acknowledge great benefit by them:
namely, so that their Decrees may be examined and tried (by Gods word) of
them to whom Gods word appertains. This use (I say) of a General Synod we
allow as well as he: which in deed is the only true use of Synods. Certainly
Provincial and Diocesan Synods we allow more then he does. For he so
admits these Synods, that yet the Head Bishop in any of the^ is to Def.
4.82.83. and 2.114.
over rule all. And what use of them is there then? The L. Bishop may have as
good Counsel and advise with less trouble and charge. But these are not that
Means of Unity which he pretends: It is (as I said) the Synod Universal;
and that of supreme and absolute power spiritual over all Christians, and that
from Christ's express ordinance. Which verily also takes away Sovereign
power from all within England, Note this ill Consequent.
to reform our selves in religion, what need so ever there be. Which I leave
to the wise to consider of. Yea this his opinion does in the end necessarily
induce a Pope, as I have said.

Hitherto of perverting the true intensive Nature of Christ's Visible Church,
viz. where the people of the ordinary Congregations are barred their free
consent in the Church governeme^t. Where we have seen what great and
lamentable evils follow thereupon: even to the making of a plain path way for
the Popes reentrance among us. What extent or limit is there of a Church in the
New Testam.
Now we shall see that the same mischief comes likewise by extending the
Churches outward Body larger and further then it ought to be. The just extent
of the outward Body, or the true bounds and limits of Christ's Visib. Church
always under the Gospel is one ordinary Congregation only. See also before
page 10. 157.
The reason is, because so we find it to be in the whole New Testament of
Christ. All the which I have proved and declared plainly else where, viz. before
page 87. and Declarat. page 10. 19. 20. etc. It is to profane and unchristian,
advisedly to affirm, that in the New Testament Christ or his Apostles have
limited and defined no Church. O^ that men may change those bounde^ which
Christ or his Apostles have se^ The Papists them selves are not (...) gross,
as Page 150.
before I have noted: and they would desire no greater hand upon us then that
we should so answer them. Some certain limits therefore and bounds of a Church
questionles Christ has set. But our adversaries, and namely Def. ^. etc.
D. Downame refuses the ordinary Congregation. They avouch and maintain a
diocesan and Provincial Church to be of Divine institution in the New
Testament. What maintain they? A Diocesan Church? Nay, in deed Christ's
Visible Church ^hen must be not only Diocesan, A Diocesan Church requires a
Universal Church.
nor only Provincial, no nor only Patriar^hall, but eve^ Universal. I say,
where Christ's Visible Church is not believed to be by Christ limited only to
one ordinary Congregation, there all reason and rules of religion will require
Christ's said Church to be no less then Universal. For no man can show that
Christ's said Church in the New Testament is limited and restrained to a
Diocese or Province only, No limiting of a Dioces-Church in the N. Test.
and that it is there forbidden to be a Universal church. Our adversaries seem
not to desire to show it. For as they weakly and slightly affirm Diocesan
and Provincial Churches to be in the New Testament, (yea even against Grammar)
so they openly acknowledge that Christ has upon earth See before page 112. and
Hook. 126.132.
one whole Church being but one Body subject to governeme^t. So that they yield
the Church not to be limited to a Dioces or a Province. And what can the
Papists wish more? They will never desire more to be yielded them from
Protestants (if we stick to our own words) then to acknowledge all Christ's
Diocesan and Provincial Churches, (and therefore our own in England) to be
but Membrall Churches, not entire and independent, not endued with authority
for the government of them selves immediately from Christ; but to be parts and
dependants of one whole Church being one Body subject to government. For the^
we must by Christ's ordinance refer our selves for religion and spiritual
government to that one Body Visible, whereof we say we are a part. Here a
hundred Before page 179.
difficulties will come upon us. The Doct. acknowledges also Def. 3.5.
a highest Senate of the Universal Church for the government of it. And
certainly in all true reason there must be so. For there must be by Christ
ordinance a correspondent government to the Body of every Church which is of
Christ. Master Hooker truly acknowledges it, saying: there Hook. 3.132.
must be a correspondent Church-polirie to every Visible Church. But Doct.
Downame will perhaps turn this to a Universal Council or Synod. If he do it
is yet a simple evasion. First, I noted Page 113. and 178.
before, that there never was: right Universal Synod, how so ever some have been so named. But if any Synod have been held for Universal, yet such are
exceedingly rare and extraordinary, in deed in these days not to be had. But
the Churches Body being ordinary, and continuing always, it must have a
correspondent government (as is said) that is, ordinary, daily, and
continual. And this is it which we speak of. If the Doctor will grant such a
highest Senate of the Universal Church, that is, ordinary, constant, and daily
exercising government to this constant Body, the^ what is this else but a
College of Cardinals? And in every such Consistory or Senate, I hope he will
grant a President, yea constant and during life; not for a week, or a short
time. And what is he but a Pope? Neither is it material whether this President
be subject to his Senate, or not. Which he idly casts in a little Page 6.
after. Many Papists do hold the Pope to be inferior to his Council; and yet
they are very Papists. And the Doct. holds a Provincial Bishop to be by
Divine ordinance Superior to his Provincial Synod. Why then may not the
Universal Bishop be superior likewise to his Universal whether Synod, or
Senate? Without question he ought to be as well. Thus no marvaill if Popish
Walsingham (who conferred with this Doctor) went from him worse then he came.
For holding such grounds, he can never make any sufficient defense against
Popery, as I have said.

His four other reasons of difference between a Provincial and a Universal
Bishop (which he sets down page 6.) are as frivolous as that which is
most. First he alleges Calvin's authority. But what is that to a Papist, or
to one tempted that way? And yet he abuses Calvin also. For though Calvin
say, Instit. 4.6.2
There is not a like reason of one Nation and of the whole world: yet he
means this upon supposition. That is, if a Nation have Gods word for their
warrant as the Jews had: and if the whole world have not Divine warrant, as
the Catholic Visible Church now in deed has not, then there is not the like
reason between a Nation and the whole world. But otherwise verily there is.
For a Bishop to both is necessary, if both have Gods ordinance for it self: a
Bishop to neither is lawful, if neither have Gods ordinance. And this Calvin
him self plainly signifies in Sect. 9. Saying: Nihil proficiunt (Papistae)
nisi prius ostender int hoc Ministerium (Universal) (...) Christo esse
ordinatum. Noting by this, that it is Christ's ordinance that makes the
difference between a Nation and the whole world, not the odds of the Circuit.
But this the Do. wholly suppr^sseth as also Calvin's second answer to the
Papists immediately following in the former place. Says he, Est altera
citamnum ratio cut illud (Iudaicum) in imitationem trahi non debeat. The high
Priest was a figure of Christ, which now cease.
Summum illum Pontificem typum fuisse Christi nemo ignorant. Nune traslato
Sacerdotio ius illud trasferri co^venit. Wherefore Calvin rejects the Jews
High Priests National Ministry, and denies the use of the like now for
another reason, which the Doct. also dissembleth. So that his abusing of Calvin
herein, is manifest. Again, these last mentioned words of Calvin do confute
the Do. in another place, where to resist Reas. for reform. page 5.
me, Def. 25.
he denies the Jews High Priests Government to have been a type. No
mortal man is able to wield the government of the whole Church. It is true.
Nor yet of a Province nor of a Diocese. For the least Pastor of these shall be
a huge Pluralist and Nonresident, See page 150 and Reas. for Refor. Reas. 3.
which are contrary to Christ, as before has been showed. The cause then of all
this unableness is, the want of Christ's ordinance. Which to both is alike, as I
have said: and so their unableness is both alike. Otherwise both should be able
and sufficient for such a charge well enough. The Doctors third exception
prove dangerous and pernicious if that one Head should fall into error. So
also it is dangerous and pernicious to many thousands when a Provincial Bishop
falls into error. Yet the D. will not hold this a reason to prove him simply
unlawful. And therefore neither is it for the Universal. Specially seeing a
Provincial Bishop can not make unity: a Universal may, as I have said. viz.
that it is infinite trouble and much inconvenience to repair from all parts of
the world to one place. There is no such matter, if Christ's ordinance for it
were manifest. If any inconvenience may seem therein to be, it is
superabundantly recompensed with far greater blessings, when we practice
Christ's ordinance. And truly this must be so, Such a Bishop to such a Church
must be.
if the Do. opinion be true, that Christ has in the New Testament appointed a
Universal Church Visible being but one Body subject to government, as above
we have seen. He adds, These reasons may suffice. Yea truly, they suffice
to make 10000. Papists: but they will never reclaim one.


Unto this we may add, that the very Natures of a Diocesan or Provincial
Church, and of a Universal, have no essential difference in them. The very
Form and Order of administering the^ differs not in any substantial point.
Only a Church limited to one ordinary Congregation differs essentially from a
Universal Church, as also from a Diocesan and Provincial, as Declar. page 11.
12. 13.
I have showed elsewhere. Whence it is, that where the Church is Diocesan or
Provincial (as it is now in England) there is an easy passage to the
Universal: and sooner they may be combined into one, then where the Churches
are limited each to one ordinary Congregation, the people inioying their free
consent in Church-governement. Nay, there are many strong seeming reasons
inducing men of reason to yield that the Diocesan and Provincial Forms of
Churches not only may easily, but also ought necessarily to be combined, and
to come into one Universe. Church. For whatsoever is or can be brought by
Doctor Downame or any other, to maintain Diocesan and Provincial Churches,
the same is much more pregnant for a Universal. And what warrant allows them
to rule over the particular Congregations, that same requires them to be ruled
also by a Universal Church. If Diocesans and Provincialistes go about to
produce Scripture for their origin and institution, they do it so weakly, so
untowardly, and so unlikely, that any man seeing and considering it without
partiality, would be ashamed. But here the Catholics step in boldly, and
foorth-with they name sundry places in the New Testament for their "Universal
Church Visible. Ephesians. 4.4. and 12. and 16. Math. 16.18. 1 Cor. 12.28 Rev 20.9.
Gal. 4.26. And in the Creed, I believe the Catholic Church.
Which indeed have more show for it, then any places have for Diocesan or
Provincial Churches independent, as ours be in England. Again, if Unity,
concord, and peacemaking be a reason for Diocesan and Provincial churches, it
is much better for a Universal Church. For it is true, a Universal Church may
cause in Christendom a kind of Unity and peace: but Diocesan and Provincial
Churches can never. For among these there may be easily so many opinions, as
there be Provinces: Their Bishops being (...), Heads by them selves. Where
the D. says, The Church was freer from Schisms before the Papacy, Def.
3.66.67.
then under it. It is most untrue; and it bewrays in him much ignorance,
though he disdain to have that once imagined in him.

The case being thus, what resistance can be made to the subtle and mighty
persuasions of Jesuits and Popish Priests urging tender souls and
consciences upon these adva^tages? Chiefly when they shall show them withal
that our great learned Divines and Doctors confess that Christ has ordained
in the New Testament that his true Visible Church should be one Body subject to
government: A strange oversight in our Defenders against Popery, granting a
Universal Church Visible in the N. Testam.
and that a Universal Church Visible is Christ's ordinance now under the
Gospel. Seeing it is plain, that a Universal Church Visible at this day in
all the world there is none, but the Roman. And the Roman Church in deed is a
Universal Visible Church, intending to have, and having members in every
Nation under heaven. Yea, it has seemed to have been such for these thousand
years past: but the Catholics avouch it to have been ever since Christ. And
why may not that be likely, if a Universal Visible Church be Christ's
Ordinance? Certainly Christ's Visible and Ministerial Church must continue
Math. 28.20.
always from the time of his Asce^tion unto the Worlds end. And some-where
extant it must be. But this has not ben any where since in all Christendom,
except at Rome. Whence it will follow (if those our Doctors sayings be true)
that the Roman Church has been and is Christ's Universal Church Visible. It is
fond to object (as some do) that No particular Church can be Universal;
because they are opposite. And so neither can the Roman Church, seeing it is
particular, be Universal. I say, this is fond. For a Universal Church
Visible must have some particular Visible Church to be their Head. As, from
King David till Christ the Universal Church had the particular Church at
Jerusalem for their Head. So the Roman^ Church may be the Head of the
Universal Church visible now (if Christ have ordained any such which those our
D.D. seem to grant) and in that respect it may be well called a Universal
Church, though it self be but particular. Thus the Catholics will have
strong advantage still upon the Provincials. And they will press, that we
ought rather to embrace the Universal Church then any Diocesan or Provincial
independent, as ours in England is. Nay, they will show that (if we will be
saved) simply we must be professed members of Christ's Universal Church
Visible, seeing Chirst has ordained it. And this absolutely can not be mo then
only one in the world. And in this case we must suspect our opinions in
religion which differ from the doctrine of Christ's only true Church: we must
think it at least probable, that the doctrine of the said Church is the very
mind of Christ, though otherwise we might make question of somewhat therein.
And such doubts must be decided and tried within the said Church, not without
it. So that first we must provide that our selves be in the communion of the
said Church. And this, after the former reckoning will prove (as I have
showed) to be the Roman Church. And so Doctor Downame, and the rest, have spun
a fair thread. Which fearful inconvenience and mischief follows by denying
this true Christian Assertion, viz. that Christ's true Visible Church under the
Gospel is only one Ordinary Congregation: as also this, that the peoples free
consent in the Church government ought to be always admitted.

To grant a Universal Church Visible under the Gospel, is the ground of all
mischief.
Where may be added an other unspeakable and intolerable mischief, (which
comes by this magnifying of a Universal Visible Church) against the Kings
Majesty's Soveraigntie, and against al other Civil Magistrates free
government. A Universal Visible Church is the very ground and reason that so
many do give their lives against the oath of allegiance to our King, as now
there do, and (as it may be feared) many mo will. For the Universal Pastor or
Bishop of the said Universal Visible Church (whom the members are bound to
hear and obey in all doubts of conscience and questions of faith) will easily
make a great show that he is the common Father, and that all Princes ought to
be his Sons, and that their States are appointed of God through Christ for
the said Churches inheritance. And therefore that they may be brought under
this Churches and Holy Fathers obedience By what means soever.
vijs and modis, if the said Church and her friends can any way effect it.
Yea, so far they may endeavor the advancement and enlargement of this Church
into the possessions which Christ has left to his Vicar, if he can get them,
that in procuring the same they may (ordine ad Deum) lawfully destroy all
obstinate resisters and hinderers thereof. But most of all, where any States or
Princes have been formerly of that Church. In such case (they think) by a
double right they may justly, and ought necessarily, seek their conversion or
confusion. But all honest and truly religious Christians do herein plainly see
the pride of Antichrist. Wherefore I will unfold this pack of spiritual and
temporal mischiefs no farther. Only I would to God that Governors and people
also, did mark the true Origin and fountain of all this, as they feel the
harm that comes of it.

Last of all, from the due consideration England, are but for trifles and
things indifferent, and about Circumstances only, not for any Substantial
matters. They who have any sense of their own good, or fear of future falling
away of brethren, can not but perceave the vanity, yea in deed the plain
folly and untruth of such sayings. First, P. Martyr says, P. Mart. epist. ad
Domin. Polon.
We must confess the Church government to be not the least part of
Christian religion: and that the Gospel seems to be neglected by them who
put away from them so excellent a part thereof. Master Cartwright affirms
that it is, T. C. 1. page 48. and 2 247
of the Substance of the Gospel; and that T. C. 1.26. and 2.570.
the kind of government is a matter necessary to salvation and of faith. And
so Calvin says (as before I noted) Calv epist. ad Sadole^.
In illa Ecclesia forma quam Apostoli constituerunt vnicum habemus verae
Ecclesia exemplar: a quo si quis vel minimum deslectit, aberrat. In that Form
of the Church which the Apostles se^ down we have the only pattern of a true
Church: from which if any bend aside never so little, he erreth* And thus in
another place he says: Instit. 4.1.1
Externa subsidia Deu^ quoque addidit, quo infirmitat^ nostra co^suleret. God
has also added Outward means and helps whereby he may provide for our
infirmity. Showing that eve^ touching Outward means our infirmity is not
helped but by such only as God ordains for us. See the Divine beginning and
institution of Christ's Visible Church.
And that it is the work of God to institute the Outward means in the
exercise of religion: the principal whereof is the Form of the Visible Church
and Government. Men can not institute this, neither ought any to attempt so
much, for that is to intrude in Gods office. Agreeable hereunto is that, which
I have written in my Declarat. page 38. etc.
Declaration, where I show that under the Gospel the form of Christ's Visible
Church, the kind of government, and Calling of the Ministry are matters of
substance in religion, and fundamental. And more fully in a proper place for
this point, viz. in my Exposition of the second Commandment. A true and plain
Exposition of the ^. Com.
Where I make it manifest that Men's institutions in these matters are a direct
breach and violation of Gods sacred Law and Divine Commandment to us, even of
the ^cond Commandment in the Decalogue: and withal that Christ's ordinances
herein are in deed parts of Gods true worship, matters of doctrine, matters
of faith, matters of substance in religion, and ordinarily necessary to
salvation. For these Outward Means where they are right and true; that is, of
Divine institution, Before page 155.
they are the isntrumental work is and causes of inward grace and life to our
souls: and those that are of men are contrary. Nothing in religion more
important, no thing more weighty then the Controversies now in England.
For by the true Outward Means as by ordinary Instruments God co^veyeth to us
his grace, gives us faith, and brings us to salvation. God saves us not
without means, nor ordinarily without these means before named, nor with or
by these means being of Men's institution, and invention, and tradition. His
own ordinances only he sanctifyeth and blesses. He promises a blessing
only to them: to Men's devices, though they seem never so plausible or probable
in the reason of men, yet he gives nothing, he promises nothing, we can be
assured of nothing by them, unless it be of Gods anger. Which indeed we may be
sure of. These then are no small matters (I am sure) nor Circumstances in
religion, but matters of substance (as I said) and such as we ought first to
know and understand in our Christian profession before we can reap firm
assurance to our souls. Without our understanding the truth and falsehood of
these Outward means, our whole faith and religion may soon be shaken, and
overturned, specially in these distracted times. Yea the manifold ill
Consequentes before noted do all hang upon the vniustifyable form: and nature
of Christ's Visib. Church, the Ministry, and their Calling. Which are the
special matters of controversy now in England. And particularly the Church of
Romes advantage against us I have somewhat opened Page 156.157. etc.
before, viz. because the sacred right of Christ's faithful people touching
their free consent in Church government is denied. But in this I have been to
long. The waightines of this matter touching the lawful and right making of
Ministers, and the peril of erring therein has drawn me to say so much.

In regard of all which we may se^ also the great cause which they had who
published the Offer of Conference and disputation, The Offer of Conference why
it was published.
not long since. Whereby they desired a just and equal trial (which hitherto
they could never have) of these things which do so certainly touch the safety
of our souls. Chiefly considering how violently, they have been overborne,
afflicted, and despised in this cause, as also they still are. Moreover, by
this before delivered their affirmation is showed evidently to be true (which
the Doctor so ignorantly Def. 1.3^
skorneth) where they say, that Consider^tion. 6.
some of the propositions which they offer to maintain are such, as if they
were not true, we can not justly separat from the Church of Rome, nor stand
out against it. Those some Proposittions which they mean, are namely the
fourth and eight set down in that Offer. Which affirm that a Church is but one
Ordinary Congregation: and that the people ought to have their free consent in
the spiritual government thereof. Unto which may be added the 5.6.7. and 10.
as being all of one nature by clear and certain consequence. The soundnes and
firm truth of all the which, has been sufficiently prooved and declared
heretofore, and might by such a right Christian trial as there they desire,
be brought to further light. Wherefore D. Downames absurd reproaches against
that treatise, calling it most senselesly Def 1.382 and 4.81.
an Unchristian and immodest Offer, and the Positions therein, Schismatical
novelties, do declare with what gall of bitterness his heart over-floweth
against the truth, against his brethren (as Def. 2.48.
he dissemblingly calls us) and also against those noble Pillars of the
Gospel before alleged, (our Attestators) who are herein his utter
adversaries, whatsoever he pretends to the contrary. He as a cock on his
own dunghill, may crow^ what he list. But if the Offer had been or might be
accepted in such equal order as is there tendered, he would be made to eat
his words, I doubt not: and all the infamy of Schism and Noveltie would fall
upon his own head. Without which acceptanc, elet the Doct. know that his
tedious and Sophistical writing, and all other such like, will be held by wise
men to be vain boasting, and no better conquest then of such Champions as
draw their weapons, strike, fight, and take on at adversaries whose hands they
will be sure, them selves have first tied fast. Yea, whom they will be sure
to have in their power to imprison and persecute if any presume to move against
them. Neither will they endure to be showed the imminent danger from the
common enemy, till all come about their heads. And so much touching the
important Co^sequences of our present Assertion.

CHAP. 8. An answer to diverse chief Objections of the adversaries of this
cause; noting also briefly their immodest, and not Christianlike reproaches
against this Evangelicall doctrine.
FIRST we will consider here D. Downames second book of his Defense, D.
Downames Defense. 2. Book, answere^^
affirming and maintaining that there were proper Diocesa^ Churches under the
Apostles. Which being true, the people then certainly had not a free consent in
Church-governement. A clear reason whereof I showed before page 85. And I
willingly acknowledge it still. Yea and likewise that neither now they ought to
have. That under the Apostles the Churches were properly Diocesan, the D.
affirms in the title of this second book of his Defense: and does his best to
maintain it in the whole process thereof afterward.

Where indeed I commend him above al others that ever wrote in this cause
against us; D Downames commendatiors.
namely for that he does more fitly and rightly set down the point of the
controversy which has so long troubled Christian people in England, Chap. 8.
then any other before him has don. Which Whether proper Diocesan Churches
were under the Apostles.
point only, if it were Christianly and plainly decided, would bring great
contentment and a joyful Unity, I am persuaded, to many thousands. But the
proofs of his assertion here do all fail him: Nay, they are strangely abused
and perverted by him, specially his Scriptures. And herein he is little to be
commended. Let us examine therefore his Scriptures: and then the rest. Yet by
the way we will Define a proper Diocesan Church, The Definition of a Diocesan
Church.
before we begin with him. A Diocesan Church is a Societi^ of professed
Christians, whose spiritual government is practiced without the peoples sie^
consent, and whose Pastor has a plurality of ordinar^e Congregations in his
charge. Such a Church we deny to have been under the Apostles: and I pray the
Reader to have recourse to those seven Reasons of mine which I have Declarat.
page 20.21. etc.
elsewhere set down to prove this my denial and to disprove his assertion.

Now what does the Doctor bring to prove his opinion? Expect not (good
Reader) that I should follow him in his vain flourishes, and needles
amplificatio^s, repetitions, invectives, and other passages more fit for
ostentation, and to satisfy his inte^perate humor, then for profit. My desire
is, so as I may with perspicuitie in the cause to use brevitie: and if not to
de^iver multa paucis, yet to take heed not to deliver pauca multis, as he
does. Wherefore I will pick out that which (...) see material in him: the rest
I will ^et pass. In his first Chapter page 4. he ^etteth down a most confused
distri^ution of the diverse senses of the Greek word Ecclesia, D. Down. Defen.
2.4.
(in the New Testament) which we usually translate (...) Church. Wherein he
commits 5. errors pertinent to our question. First Mat. 18.17. Act. 15.22.
he ^ould make a Synod or Consistone which have answered before pa. 108. etc.
Se^ondly a National Church of the Jews, Act. 7.38. Which likewise I have
an^wered, in Reas. for Reform page 5. in the margin. Thirdly, Christian
National in the nober plural, as he spea^eth: namely in Romans 16.4. 1. Cor.
16.1.^9. 2. Cor. 8.1. Gal. 1.2.22. Which places ^e abuses and perverteth most
rudely and desperately. The words do ex^resly signify nothing but a nom^er of
Ordinary Congregations; Such we mean by Parishes.
^ath of them assembling in one ^lace, or at most containing See my Declarat pa
10. and 18.19. and 28.29.31.32.
no mo ordinary assemblies then one: and he without, yea contrary to the
express ^etter fancieth to him self a National Church, from no ground, nor
show of ground in these places. Fourthly, he brings Act. 5.11. and 8.1. and
11.12. and 12.1.5. Cor. 1.2. 2. Cor. 8.23. 2. These. 1.1. 1. Tim. 5.16. Iam.
5.14. Apoc. 1.4.11.20. and 2.1. etc. to prove a Church of a City and Country
adjoining. Where his error is like to the former. What should I say to this
man? Not one of all these signifies a Church of a City and Country adjoining,
if he mean it to be extended or intended to mo ordinary Congregations then
only one. Which is his meaning. It is true the Churches of these Cities here
specifyed ( viz. of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, Thessalonica, etc.)
might have members then which dwelt scatteringly, and some a good way of from
the place of their ordinary maine meeting, and such also as did assemble often
in diverse uncertain companies (as in times of trouble there is reason, and it
often comes to pass) but yet in those primitive times they all in each
Church then made no mo but Which in a good sense ^ay becalled a Parish.
one ordinary assembly, as I have said. The true Grammar sense and proper
meaning of the word Ecclesia in those times does prove it. What Diviniti^
shall we expect from these Doctors, wh^ will pervert Grammar? Which ou^ Doctor
is not ignorant of: but his error herein is wilful. All sound See my Declarat
page 18 32.
Autors of the Greek tongue, according to whom the Apostles do speak, do show
that Ecclesia in the times then, and always before signified one ordinary
Congregation only, and not many.


His fifth error here is, that the New Testament notes some Churches not
defining whether an entire church, or but a part And he cites Act. 9.31. and
15. 3.4.41. and 18.22. Romans 16.16.23.1. Cor. 4.17. and 6.4. and 11.16. and
14.33. with a great many other. But all these are likewise by him grossly
abused. For in all these places the Scripture speaks entirely and properly,
not by a figure, whereof there is no cause appearing in the text. Only in Act.
15.4. the Church signifies a part, namely the People: because the text
expressly distinguishes it here from their Guids, who were a part also. Thus
in all the whole Writings of the Apostles there is not one word which shows a
Diocesan Church to have been then. Wherefore in this point he is quite
overthrowen: The D. perverteth his text. on which his Sermon and Defense
rests.
yea his very text Apoc. ^.20. which was the whole foundation of his Sermon and
Defense, is found to be utterly perverted and abused together with the other
places. So that all which be builds upon it and follows in his writing
after, is nothing but cavillation. And namely that against my self, in his
page 6. where he says, I have first strongly conceited that there is no true
Visible Church but a Parish, and then have haled the places of scripture where
Ecclesia is mentioned, to the confirmation of my conceit. Let him not abuse
people, as he does, by the Equivocation of the word Parish. For I mean not
that the Apostolic Churches were Parishes, as we call a Parish now in England:
that is, limited within a certain circuit of ground. Though a Church may be
so limited, yet it is not necessary, neither was it so then. But then every
Church was such a Parish as I noted a little Page 201. and Declar. page 18.19.
and Reas. for ref. pa. 5.29.
before. And so it is very true. Then, why says he that I have first
conceited that there is no true Visible Church but a Parish. He might have
seen it conceited before me by those noble and sacred instruments Before page
103.104. and 32. etc. And after page 214.215.
Zuinglius, Luther, and the rest of our Attestators. But malice drove him
against me, as it has driven him against me in other slanders likewise.
Wherefore rather he might have said, that in this not I, If in this the
Scripture be haled, Zuinglius has don it, etc.
but they have haled the Scripture from whom I have learned it. But I hope
those worthies knew the meaning of the Greek Ecclesia better then our Doctor,
though he be conceited enough of his own learning: and they maintained it
prosperously against stronger adversaties then he ^is, or ever will be. But
in deed he ought to blush to charge me in this case with haling the
Sciptures, Him self haler of Scripture.
when him self is thus found to hale them and pervert them most
unconscionably, as before is showed. He is often upon this, Def. 2.104.65.
that the Church of Cenchreae, Romans 16.1. was a Membrall Church to the Church
of Corinth, and subject to it. But I have Declarat. page 30.
els-where showed this his presumption in taking the Apostles words
figuratively here also without cause. As if the Apostle called but a part of a
Church by the name of a Church, there being no reason in the text why he should
here speak Synecdochically. Nay, to take the Apostle so, is contrary even to
his own rule. I will press him with his own words; I would know of him what
reason he has to forsake the grammatical sense? Def. 1. page 33.
And where the Holy Ghost speaks properly, how dares be to expound him
figuratively? Here I could leave of this point concerning his proofs from the
New Testament for Diocesan Churches. But that he Chap. ^.
resumeth Rev. 1.20. which was his text, and labors to make show of some
reason therein. First he says; Page 42.43.44.
those 7. Churches contained the Cities and Countries adjoining. This is his
Minor. Which is not only contrary to the property of the word Ecclesia before
noted, but also contrary to the express text beside; which says this Ephesian
Church was (...) in Ephesus; Rev. 2.1.
not without: nor containing that large Country and Territory adioying, as he
says it did then. The like the text says of the Church in Smyrna, and of the
Church in Pergamus, and so of all the rest. Signifying expressly that every of
these Churches was contained (at least when they met) within their Cities, His
shifting heereabout page 105 is nothing. And that of ^^keni^g (...) to it is as
little. For Act. 24.12 (...) is, in the City.
and did not extend it self to the Country adjoining, viz. to the Civil
Province of each of them. This reason therefore of his is very untrue. Yet he
would fortify it further, Page 43.56.
assuming again that Our Savior writing to all the Churches of Asia nu^breth
but seven. If he wrote to all, then it may seem that these 7. were general
Churches, containing in and under them many other inferior Congregations. For
it is not like, but in Asia properly so called (which was the Roman Province,
and Cicer. Orat. pro L. Flacco.
contained Phrygia, Mysia, Caria and Lydia) there were more ordinary Christian
Congregations, then only 7. at that time. Nay, it is plainly false: our Savior
here writ not to all the Churches of Asia. The text beside mentions Act.
20.7.
Troas, Colos. 4.13.
Coloss^, Hierapolis, which were questionles within these ^^undes. Magnesia and
Trallis in all like^^hood were now also: Mentioned in Ignatius Epist.
and were no ^embers now of any of those seven (...) the Revelation. And it is
more then ^^kely that many other besides these ^^^ere named, were also. Indeed
Christ should that all within Asia, yea and out ^f Asia too, should exemplarily
take ^dmonition by this which he writes ^etsonally and directly to these
seven ^one: which is all that he means in those words Rev. 2.1^.
Let him that has an ear ^eare what the Spirit says to the Churches. ^ut
this is nothing to prove that all ^hese other Churches were Members subject to
those seven. Yet two reasons ^^ore Chap. 4.
he has. One is this; Page 65.
The Apo^les appointed Ministers to whole Cities and Countries adjoining, to
labor so far as they ^ere able the conversion of all. True. What ^hen?
Therefore they appointed them ^o stand Ministers still to whole Ci^ies and
Countries adjoining. I deny ^his consequence. It is a plain fallacy ^b eo
quod est secundum qu^d, Fallaci^.
ad simpliciter. (...) pray Sir, when Logike fails you, play not the
Sophister. The Apostles appointed Ministers to convert what they could in great
Cities and Countries adjoining, yea and in the whole Math. 13.33.
world: but not to stand Ministers and Pastors to all them when they should be
converted: But only, according t^ the order and form of a Church se^ down in
the New Testament. Which represents to us each Ordinary. Congregation as an
entire Church. Wherefore they might not remain as Pastors to all, when all
were converted, because so Ordinary Pastors after the time of the New
Testament should become substantially contrary to the ordinary Pastors
constituted in the New Testament. It i^s blasphemy to avouch that the Apostles
intended the Churches form should be substantially contrary to that which is
in the New Testament.
Which certainly was never the Apostles intent: it is no less then blasphemy
for any that will persist in saying the Apostles intended so. You will ask;
how are Pastors so large and so general, contrary substantially to Pastors of
but one ordinary Congregation? I answer, they are substantially contrary in
that these may and do admit the Christian peoples free consent in Church
government, the other can not: these ca^ personally administer to their whole
flock, they possibly can not, but by Substitutes and Curates, as we call
them. For there the proper Pastors them selves are, and of necessity must be
grand Pluralistes and No^residents. Which plainly are substantial differences
in Pastors. Besides that, the one can execute a whole and entire Pastoral
Office, the other can not. etc. as Declarat. Page 12.13.14 15 16. and^
els-where I have more fully declared. His 2. reason is this, Def. 2.69.
In the Apostles times the Churches were not divided into Parishes, ^or
Presbyters assigned to their several Cures. Therefore then a Church was not a
Pa^ish. I answer. Here again he does nothing but Equivocat. Let him
understand a Parish in that sense as before have defined it, Pa. 204.205.
and so I affirm that by the very Apostles the Churches were divided into
several Parishes. That is, ^ach Church was it self a distinct Pa^ish, and
severally divided from all other. Also the Presbyters then were assigned to
their several cures, viz. to these Parishes or Churches. But if he ^ake a
Parish as it is a Congregation li^ited within a certain circuit of ^round, and
as a Dioces is subdivided unto many of them (as they are now) so ^ve speak not
of them. Yet commonly ^r altogether Page 77.
he does so speak of them. Wherefore here every man may ^^e his vanity. He
does fly the true ^uestion, and shufleth in things that ^e never intended.
Then, his gross vn^ruth and vnschollerlike assertion ought (...) be marked,
where he says: Page 75.
The lord Ecclesia is of a larger extent, then to sig^^fy only one assembly. I
appeal to all au^entike Greek Authors, Thucidides, De^osthenes, Plato,
Aristotle, Isocrates, etc. Out ^f whom plentiful allegations may be brought,
all of them showing that this word Ecclesia did evermore signify only one
assembly, and never a dispersed multitude holding many ordinary set meetings in
far remote places, as Diocesan and larger Churches do. Now according to these
and other Greeks living in the Apostles days, do the Apostles speak. And
this I have heretofore often Reas. for ref. page 64. Declarat page 31. 32. and
above pa. 110.
propounded and affirmed, as a principal ground, and cause of our dissent from
the Church state in England. And the ground is certain: it can not be with
reason spoken against. The D. here Page 14. 15.
puts in to the contrary, the use of the word Ecclesia, in Eusebius, who
uses it to signify sometimes a Diocesan and Provincial Church. He does so
sometimes, I deny it not. And so after him the Fathers do use the word
likewise, as Epiphanius, Theodoret, Chrysostom, and the Councilles, and
History writers, etc. All this we know well. But what have we to do with
these Authors, so late, and so partial, as these all were touching the
exposition of the Greek word Ecclesia? The time that Eusebius wrote in, When
Eusebius wrote.
was about 340. years of Christ, or little less. All the rest wrote after
him. At which time, or before, viz. presently under Constantine the outward
form of the Church did so alter and change from that under the Apostles, even
in substantial points of Church polity, or in such points as did come near
to the substance of it, that it appeared outwardly to be almost not the same.
And as the state of the Church altered, so the Fathers and Councills which were
then (much affecting that state) did alter the old use of ^he words pertaining
to these matters. As they practiced, so likewise they spoke and wrote. And so
have most men followed after them. Whereby at the last Antichrist was
undoubtedly advanced. But our noble Our Attestators before mentioned: and
specially page 104. and after page 214.
forefathers of late, having discovered this mystery of iniquity, have found
out also the corruption and depravation even of this word Ecclesia which has been extended larger, and farther then Apostolically it was. The which abuse of
this very word doubtless was a pregnant reason and means (among other) to
extend the Church and Government thereof to that Universality which it came
to, and is still vehemently challenged by the Catholics. Wherefore great cause
have we ad originem reverti to go back even up to the first original and
beginning, as Cyprian well advises us. For so, says he, cessat error humanus:
thus, and not otherwise, error which has begun from men, will cease. Wherefore
we must refuse Eusebius, Epiphanius, Theodoret, and all either in or after
their times for judges or interpreters of matters or words specially touching
Church-governement. The form whereof inclined toward alteration, yea somewhat
before them (as we may perceave in Can 6.
Nic. Concil^) through Humane ambition and desire of greatness, which is
incident even to the godliest and best men. But under Constantin and after, it
degenerated much more. Wherefore in See before pa. 125. 127.
conscience to God, and to his blessed word, we must leave all men, when they
so palpably differ from the Scripture, as in this cause they do, and cleave
only and unseparably to the plain and Math 22.29 Ioh. 5.39.40. Isa. 8.20.
proper writing of Christ's Testament.

He In his chap. 5.
indeavoureth to make void some of our reasons against Diocesan Churches under
the Apostles. Which he does very poorly. 1. He shows that the Church of
Jerusalem Page 84.
exceeded the proportion of one particular assembly, ordinarily meeting in one
place. I grant it, and have granted it Reas. for ret. page 19. 65. 66.
heretofore. But he can not show that this Church now had in it mo ordinary,
set, and constant assemblyes then one. Which is the point. He adds, Def. 2.
p. 87
It was never intended to be one Parish among many, but to be a Mother Church,
when by Gods blessing it should beget others to be severed from it in
particular assemblies, and yet to remain subordinate and subject to it, as
children to the Mother. The very same was affirmed by Page 7.
him before of all the Primitive Churches. But all this is fall ^t was intended
by the Apostles that Ierusalems Church should be one Parish among many others:
and indeed to be as a Mother Church in reverence and reputation, yet as a
common Sister with the rest in power and jurisdiction. They also intended both
in Jerusalem, and in every other City that the Bishop and his presbytery
should be set over no more but one particular Congregation and that as more
Congregations should be constituted, Every Cong^^gation (...) to be an int^^
Church, and every Church bu^ a Congregation.
every one should have a Bishop, and also a Presbytery, if it might be. All
this I say the Apostles intended both in Jerusalem and every where else in the
world. And first, this my reasons Page 208. and Dec^^^ pa. 12 13. 14 15 etc.
before rehearsed do soundly prove. Also Ignat. epistles do plainly show that
the practice was so then every where: yea in the Country, as well as in the
Cities, wheresoever there were any Churches then. Ignatius words are these,
Ignat. Ad Trall.
(...). Without these there is no Church, no meeting together of the Saints,
no holy assembly. This is Universally spoken. So again: Ad Phila.
(...) To every Church (for so it may well be translated) there is one Bishop
with a company of Persbyters and Deacons. Where Ignat. meaning is that every
where it ought at least, so to be. In which Calvin likewise consents; Saying,
Calv. Instit. 4.1.9.
Vnaquaeque nomen and authoritatem Ecclesiae iure obtinet. Every one of the
Congregations (which were dispersed And 8.15.
Oppidatim and Vicatim in the Country towns and Villages) obtains by right
the name and authority of a Church. Again, Instit. 4.3.6.
Quod orbi Vniver so prestiterunt Apostoli, id gregi suo debet Pastor
vnusquisque. That which the Apostles were to the whole world, the same ought
every Pastor be to his own Flock. Zuinglius also (before hin) is herein of
all other the most clear and resolute. I touched many of his places Page 102.
103. 104.
before. But here I think it fit to lay forth his words more fully. First, to
show that every Church ought to be but one ordinary Congregation, and that in
the N. Testament it was so, he says, Zuingl. ad Valentin. Compar.
Vox Ecclesiae proprie exposita non aliud quam cetum vel populi Co^gregationem,
and totum plebis collegium significat. Vnde singulas paraecias Ecclesiae
vocabulo not are licet, cum per hoc cetus and co^gregati in vnu^ populi
multitudo intelligatur. The word Church, what it is.
The word Church properly expounded signifies no other thing then an assembly
or meeting together of the people, and the whole gathering together of the
people. Whence by the word Church we may note and signify every particular
Parish: Seeing by this word is understood the multitude of an assembly and of
the people meeting together in one place. Of the Church of Corinth under the
Apostles, he says, Ad Valent Compar.
Non equidem negare poteris Paulum hoc loco communem totius populi fidelis
Ecclesiam intelligere, qui in vnum collectus Scripturae sensus ab alijs
expositos attentus percipit. Populus ergo, and fidelis Christianorum oninium
Ecclesia Doctores suos dijudicat, and de illoru^ doctrina, sana ne sit vel
impia, pronu^ciare solet. Truly thou can not deny that Paul understands in
this place the common assemby of the whole faitful people, which being gathered
together in one place attentively hears the senses of the Scripture expounded
by others, wherefore the people, and faithful assembly of all the Christians
judges of their Teachers, and is wont to pronounce of their Doctrine whether
it be found or wicked. Likewise elsewhere he says "that the Corinthian Church
In Pasto^.
erat Paraecia, was a Parish. And again likewise. The Ephesin Church the^ was
Above page 103.
Concio, a particular assembly. And questio^les as he thought of these, so
likewise he thought of Ierusale^s Church: yea of every true visible Church
indefinitly. Of which he says, Artic. 8, Explanat.
Capitur Ecclesia pro peculiaribus Congregationibus, qui ad auditionem verbi,
ad Communionem Sacramentorum commode in aliquem vnum locum convenient. Graeci
parikia^ voc (...). De huiusmodi Ecclesia Christus loquitur, Math. 18 Sic
Paulus 1. Cor. 1. and 14. The Church is taken for the particular Congregations,
which to the hearing of the word and re^eaving the Sacraments do come together
commodiously into one place The Grecians call them Parishes. Of such Christ
speaks, Math. 18 17. and Paul 1. Cor. 1. and 14. And that every of these
Churches and Parishes should have the Sea before page 30. 31.
power of government and judging of causes among themselves, and that we must
follow herein only the Scriptur, he shows a little before that it is his
meaning. Where expressing what Church he speaks of, and also the very cause
why there is such strife among men about the Church, he says: A multis iam
seculis ad nostra vsque tempora quae sit Ecclesia, certamen fuit, ortum nimirum
ex regnanai cupiditate. Nam hoc sibi quidam arrogarunt, vt se dicerent esse
Ecclesiam, vt omnia little manu administrarentur. Omissis autem hominum
commentis quibus quidam hac in re nituntur, ex Scripturis sacris and mente
spiritus de Ecclesia scribemus. Quod Graeci Ecclesiam, Hebraei Kahal vocant,
Latini Concionem. There has been controversy of old even to our times, what
the Church is, which rises indeed from a greedines to rule. For this some men
do arrogat to themselves that they say themselves are the Church, to the end
that all things may be done by their hand. But we letting go men's devises
whereon in this cause some do rest, we will write of the Church out of the
holy Scripturs and mind of the spirit. That which the Greeks call a Church, the
Hebrews call a Congregation, the Latine^ an Assembly. See how lively he
painteth out and taxes also our Church state in England, though primarily he
intends the Papists. And remember that to every of these Churches he allows
a Bishop, as Page 104.
before I have noted. So that the D. might have spared his proud boast, that
Page 7.
All the Disciplinarians in the world are not able to show that there were, or
ought to have been after the division of Parishes, any more then one Bishop for
a whole Diocese. Neither should he have called us for this our assertion Page
14.
New foolish Disciplinarians. His worship doubtless is wise, when all these our
Attestators and abbettors be fools. Also, that Page 21.
his great challenge to his adversary is thus answered. Now to proceed: he
says, it is not probable that Ierusalems Church in the Acts Page 89.
did ordinarily meet in one place. I answer; yet it is certain they had not
then many ordinary, set, and constant companies meeting together. Which is the
point we stand on: will he never see it? Further he says, Page 90.
The Apostles were never intended to be members, all, or any of them, of one
Parish. Which is not so; they were truly Members of every Church or Parish
occasionally, that is, where and when, they were present; though cons^antly and
necessarily they were not of any one. Again he says, The meetings Act. 6.1.
and 15.22 26 were not Parishionall, bur Synodicall. They were Parishionall.
Indeed the later was both, I take it. Where the Apostles and Elders met first
Synodically a part to debate the controversy: but Parishionally, or with the
whole Church, when they decreed and set down their resolution. Before he said
these meetings of the Church were Page 8 9. Panegyrical meetings.
Panegyricall, and not ordinary. Which again is not true. Such meetings are out
of many Cities and Countries: but here the Church of Jerusalem only assembled,
and (in the 15 of the Acts) 2. or 3. out of Antioch. Again those are, when
sundry ordinary set assemblies do meet in one: but these all were of one
Church (as I said) having in it not many ordinary set assemblies. Lastly here
matters were handled which pertain to a Church to perform ordinarily so often
as occasion is. Therefore they are not to be called extraordinary; much less
were they like the meetings at Paul's Cross or at the Spittle, as he says:
least of all were they Panegyricall. His objection from Act. 21.20. of the many
10000. believing Jews, I have answered Declarat. page 30. 31
els-where. The rest is of no moment.

In his 6. Chapter he sets against some other of our reasons, viz. touching
the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Antioch under the Apostles. Of all of
them he says, Def. 2.103.
Though it should be granted that each of these Churches in the Apostles time
did ordinarily assemble together in one place, yet would it not follow that
therefore each of them was but a Parish: much less that all Churches should be
but Parishes, and that every Parish should have a Bishop. Verily all this does
follow: neither has he with any true reason denied it: but all reason is for
it, as Pa 208. 213
before I have showed. Then beginning, with the Church of Corinth, Page 104.
he deals deceitfully, leaving out our principal proof, viz. 1. Cor.
14.23. The whole church came together in one. Which can not be such as might
be written to the Church of England, as he says most untruly. Of this I have
said more Declarat. page 26. 27.
elsewhere. To Act. 20.28. of the Church of Ephesus he says, it needs not
signify only the Congregation of a Parish. Yet the words are, Attend, or
(...).
Cleave close unto all the flock: and the Apostle names it also (...).
a Congregation. Which being taken for a Visible Company, is ever more with
authentike Grecians an ordinary Congregation only, as I have often observed. So
that properly and truly it can not be (as he would have it) either the
Universal, or a National, or Provincial, or Diocesan Church. Neither can the
Pastors of such cleave close to all such s^ockes, nor possibly be present to
the whole. But they must be No^residents, which questio^les these Ephesin
Pastors were not, as has been said. Wherefore this place still is a good
argument for us. And so is that touching Antioch also, where Act. 14.27. Paul
and Barnabas gathered the Church together into one particular assembly, as the
text imports. It is untrue and against the letter of the text, to say (as he
does) some of the chief, perhaps not many, perhaps not any, beside the
Clergy. The^e perhapses are miserable and desperate shifts. And what
forbids Husbands, Wives, Servants and children of ripe years and
understanding to have been there:

Hitherto he has labored to show that the Churches mentioned in the New
Testament were not each of them only one ordinary Congregation, but that they
were Diocesan Churches. Which how insufficiently he has done, every child
may perceave. By the way, he obtrudeth a foolish conceit on us, as if by Def.
2. page 102.104.
these aforesaid places of the N. Testament, we intended to prove that the
Churches still remained (till 200. years of Christ) such as we hold they were
at the first. But let him take that collection to himself: it is none of our
meaning, Yet where he makes so much a do about the space of 200. years, that
we should say for so long time there was no Diocesan Church. The truth thereof
is very perspicuous and certain, and let the D. know that I can easily
maintain it. For the space of 200. years after Christ there was no Diocesan
Church.
Therefore let us see what he has against it.

Where first I will note what a cavil he has against us for abridging and
restraining the primitive Church to 200. years only. To which I answer, in
respect of taking the Primitive Church as a pattern for us to follow, so we
restrain it yet shorter, even to the Apostles times only, yea to the times of
writing the N. Testament, yea to the N. Testament it self only. And we
affirm, if any do follow any authority beside, they do profanely,
irreligiously, adulterously, and no better. So that in this our D. and D.
Bilson likewise, where being without all proofs in Christ's Testament, they
heap up Fathers upon Fathers, and most eagerly cry out that we hold against
Def. 2.128.142. and Def. 4. etc. Perp. gov. 25^ 259. etc.
the Universal and perpetual practice of the Church of Christ, if they could
make some show hereof, yet I say seeing they have not, nor ca^ bring one sound
proof for themselves in Christ's Testament, therefore they use here but a
carnal reason, and contrary to the honor of God. They Ier. 17.5^
make flesh their arm, and put not their trust in the living God. Chap. 2.13
They dig to themselves pits that can hold no water. It is true, the
Universal and perpetual practice of Christ's Church is to be held always
good and holy. This I grant: but it is because such practice evermore has the
Apostles plain writing for it, and with it. Which the Churches said practice
can not be destitute of. But yet suppose our adversaries had some kind of
general consent of men for the^ as they pretend, seeing they can not indeed
produce the Scripture more then the Papists do, who also pretend the like
Universal consent for their turn; or suppose that they do but pretend all this
Universality and perpetuity, being far from it indeed; then why (I pra^)
should not we answer them as D. Bilson sometime answered the said Papists,
Saying, Answ. to the Seminar. part. 4. pa. 360
If you want the foundation of faith and religion (he means the Scripture) in
vain you do seek to make a show of Catholicisme with such patches and
pamplets, etc. When you muster the Fathers to disprove the Scriptures, and to
establish an unwritten faith under the credit of traditions, you corrupt the
Writers, and abuse the Readers. Page 362.
Now cite not only 9. but 9. skore Fathers if you will for Traditions, and the
more you stir the worse you spcede. Page 300.
Truth (he means the Scripture) is authority sufficient against all the
world. Page 301.
One man with truth is warrant against all the world: yea every private man for
his own person may embrace Gods Laws, whosoever say nay. And as Tertullian
has, against this no man may prescribe, nor space of time, nor patronage of
persons, nor privilege of places. Page 299.
Though the whole world pronounce again the word, yet God will be true, and
all men liars. Page 384.
God speaks not now but in the Scriptures. How excellently are these things
written, if he himself and his associats would follow the same, or would
suffer us to follow it? The effect whereof is, that not only we are bound
evermore to hold fast Gods word and never to admit the carnal reason of Humane
consent in Divine matters (such as our question of the form of Christ's Church
is) but also it notifyeth D. Bilsons open co^tradictio^ to himself, who
presses hardly against us that which he denies to the Papists. Is God an
accepter of persons? Is it ill for Papists to plead Universal consent, and yet
must we content our selves with it and rest thereon? Shall he say to us, Perp.
gov. page 223.235.
Is not the whole Church a lawful and sufficient witness in that case? And that
it is enough, Page 228.
if any christian persons deserve to be credited. And yet shall he say to
Papists, Lib. 4.38^.
It is alike Haereticall to believe without Scripture, a^ to believe against
Scripture. Yea, even to ourselves when he list he can say, Perp. gov. page
286.
Make us good proofs out of Scripturs, or leave tying Gods ordinances to your
appetites. Wherefore we must crave leave in our cause also to answer him and all
of his mind with his own words before rehearsed. And likewise with D. Rainold,
that Cons. 257.
No Humane proof is sure in Divinity: and Page 19^
Truth is not to be tried by consent of Fathers: and Page 45^
For my self, I assure you that neither dead nor quick, Fathers nor children
shall persuade me any thing in matter of religion, which they cannot prove by
Moses and the Prophets, or (which he means) by the Apostles writings.

Now thus the Churches Universal and perpetual consent being no good proof
in Divinity, the whole Churches consent at some time only, is a proof much
worse, and by no means to be admitted. Though Augustine in a certain place, (it
seems) held it good yet it is his error: as where he says, August. epist,
118.
Si quid tota hodie per orbem frequentat Ecclesia, hoc quin ita faciendum sit
disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. If the whole Church through out the
world at this day observe any thing it is insolent madness to reason against it.
Certainly there have been and may be As sometime Polygamie was
Catholic errors, which yet questionles may be, yea ought to be reproved by
all them that understand them.

Well: but have our adversaries a Universal consent of the whole Church at any
time? Alas, they are far from it. Neither D. Bilson, nor D. Downame, nor they
al have alleged, neither can they allege, half a quarter of the whole Church
at any time. What then? Then they are to lavish of their words, in saving they
have the Universal consent of the whole Church. They indeed come short of it
by many hundred thousands. A poor few God knows they cite, in comparison of
all. It may be they name some of the chief and most famous in their days: Yet
it follows not that all who lived then were of their mind. D. Bilson against
the Seminar. lib. 1. part. 2. page 402.
Neither is it necessary that all differences should be recorded in writing:
nor that all Records should be preserved, and come to our hands. So that they
are far from proving a Universal consent at any time, much less at all times
of the Church.

But what speak I of Universality and perpetuity? Let our adversaries not
equivocat. Let them deal plainly. Let them use no deceit in words, nor force
to men's consciences. And then I assure thee (good reader) nothing but noveltie
and iniquity is in their Defense and assertion against us. I have showed
before, that in our controversy which we have at this day. Above pa. 98.97.^^.
we speak against only a proper Diocesan Church and the Bishop thereof, where
the peoples free consent is wholly denied them, as it is in England: and our
adversaries defend namely this Diocesan Church and Bishop. Of this
particularly and precisely is all their Def. 2.114. Epist. to the King. page 1
great and glorious commendation and praise, which they publish. Now to the
point. Is this kind of Diocesan Church, and this kind of Bishop Apostolical?
Have they Universal and perpetual approbation for this? Nothing less. I
appeal heerin to our right worthy Attestators before alleged, yea to all
indifferent and impartial witnesses; yea to the partial also in times of Page
64. 65. 66.
antiquity, who do stand with us. By all true evidence it will be as clear as
the light at noone day, that this foresaid proper Diocesan Church and Bishop
were not in the world till after 200. years of Christ, which is the time
limited by us: Indeed, not till after 300. Nay, it was after 400: and longer
also. As I have showed Page 66. 67. 88.
before. So that both D. Bilsons and D. Downames Defenses which they have made
for the present Church State in England, even in the substantial points of
government therein, are clean frustrat. Neither is the same Apostolical,
neither has it Universal, nor perpetual, nor indeed any old approbation
among Christians, as they colourably pretend. But it is proved to be novell, A
proper Diocesan church is novell.
and merely of the wit, and will of men, and that after the time of
Antichrists rising.

The contrary obiectons of our adversaries I will here observe, D. Doves 3.
falsifications of Eusebius.
as near as I can. First, that which D. Downame borrowed of D. Dove. viz. that
Mark constituted a Diocesan Church in Alexandria. But this I have showed Page
90 91.
before to be a mere forgerie of these two D. D. grounded upon a false
translation of their author Eusebius. And here I can not but remember a
second, and a third like falsifying of Eusebius by D. Dove in his Defense. The
former of these is page 13. where he says, Eusebius words be these, Eusebius.
lib 3.4.
Timothy was the first Bishop of the whole Precinct of Ephesus in as ample
manner as Titus of all the Churches of Crete. Eusebius says not that Timothy
was: but he says, it is reported that Timothy was the first Bishop of
Ephesus, as Titus of the Churches of Crete. Again, Eusebius says not of the
whole precinct of Ephesus, nor in as ample manner. There are no such words in
Eusebius. This is no translating, but perverting an Author.
Thirly, that which Eusebius has indeed, viz. Timothy was said to have been
Bishop of the Parish in Ephesus: this he renders not, but perverteth. For in
Ephesus, is not without the City, much less the whole precinct of Ephesus
containing the large Country adjoining. Yea that the Church in Ephesus was but
a Parish then, Ignatius shows writing to the whole Church of Ephesus, and
saying to them, I^nat. a^ Ephesians.
When you come often together into the same place, etc. Therefore the whole then
did come together in one place. And it is not only false, but absurd to say
that the like may be spoken now of the Can they all come together in one place?
Diocesan Church of London. Thus therefore Eusebius is perverted twice by D.
Dove. His 3. falsifying of him is, where Eusebius says of John the Apostle in
a certain City Eusebius. lib. 3.23. Graec.
(...), having refreshed the Breth^en, and looked on the Bishop that was set
over all the said brethren of that place, he committed a young man to him. But
the D. sets it down thus, John the Apostle committed the charge of a young
man to a Bishop Page 15. 18.
qui super cunst^s Episcopos erat constitutu^, which was set over all the rest
of the Bishops thereabout. As if then there had been an Archbishop, or a Bishop
over Bishops. So says this Doctor, as out of Eusebius. But he abuses his
author. Eusebius has not such a word. And yet D. Downame also Def. 4.112.
alleges the same place, though he cunningly forbeareth to mention the words.
Doct. Downame further presses Eusebius in that he says (...) it is reported
that Titus was Bishop of the Churches of Crete. As also Perpet. govern. page
233.
He translateth, it is recorded in Histories. But he can not make that good in
this place. For the word signifies any relation, or narration, or report of a
matter. And Eusebius uses always to name his author, and at full to set down
the words, when he groundeth upon any written history. So he cites very
often Egesippus, Clemens, Dionysius, Tertullian, etc. Wherefore question^es
here he means some other report, or tradition, and speech of me^, I know not
whom. And in setting down such matters, he is nothing curious many times, as
Page 91. 92.
before I have signified. Not seldom he reports fabulous things, yea when he
names his author, Eusebius of no absolut credit.
as is well known. And yet he is all the warrant and ground which any writer
has (either young or old) for Tius his being Bishop of Crete. Theodoret,
Epiphanius, Chrysostomus, Jerome, etc. Dorotheus Synops. is not worth the
naming*
have al their inducement so to think from hence. All these also them selves
were great Prelates, or lovers of Prelates, and therefore we may hold them
partial in setting down and receaving such reports. What wisdom then is in
Do. Downame to say it is an uncharitable and unlearned part, yea intolerable
impudency to deny credit to such authorities? It is rather intolerable
impiety and plain idolatry, to set up these and such like for rules of our
faith, and warrants to our conscience (as the D. labors to do) in this
cause. Howbeit further, Eusebius says not that Titus was said to be Bishop of
Crete; but only so as Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus. Where he seems to mean
that both of the^ were then thought to be not proper Bishops, but in the
general sense and understanding of the word Bishop. And so he seems to mean
also that Mark was said to be Bish. of Alexandria: whom yet he names an
Apostle and Evangelist: and James (an Apostle in deed) Bishop of Jerusalem. I
say, in a general sense; but not Bishops properly. And so truly the other
Fathers after Eusebius, do seem to mean: and we accord thus with them.
Otherwise we must needs deny credit to them herein, viz. if Eusebius etc. say
these were proper Bishops. For it is not possible that they could be so:
seeing they were both Superior, and also Divinely distinguished from proper
Bishops, as anon we shall see further, where further occasion will be given us
to answer D. Downame about Timothy and Titus Bishoprikes.

Again, Def. 2.23. and 116.
D. Downame cites out of Council Carthage 3. and Ephesians. 1. (...) from the
beginning, and even from the Apostles, as Perpet. gov. page 324.
Doct. Bilson before him avoucheth. But both of the^ wrest the Councilles. For
they say not so: only they say, that Dioceses should remain such as they were
from the beginning, that is, ever since Dioceses were appointed. Not from the
beginning simply: but from the beginning of Dioceses, which though it were long
before these Councills, yet as I judge it was not before About the year 260.
See before page 92.93.
Dionysius Bishop of Rome. And touching the Apostles, the Ephesin Council
speaks of the Apostles Canons. Being strangely deceaved in attributing them
to the Apostles, as any one may perceave if he see the Can. 4.5.8.17,
18.27.47.49.65. 68, 84.25. Wherefore they are falsely fathered on the Apostles,
being but base and bastardly stuff in respect of them. And yet they intend
no See before. page 88. 97. 98.
proper Diocesan Church, viz. like ours in England. Neither were these Canons
before Constantines age. So that our D. D. do argue from hence very unworthily.
But D. Down. Def. 2.106.
boasts much that Ignatius calls him self Ignat. ep^ad Romans
Bishop of Syria. Why? What then? Ignatius here shows his Nation, not the
extent of his Bishoprike. He shows he was a Bishop of Syria, or a Syrian
Bishop; and not the Bishop of all Syria. Likewise to the Ad Magnes.
Magnesians that his Church was a most famous and notable Church in Syria, not
the only Church there, much less extended over all Syria. Neither was Philip
Archbishop of Crete, as the Doctor Defenc 4.8 and 2.125
would make him seem by perverting and abusing Eusebius again. For his words
Euse. ^.^3
(...) their Bishop, are to be referred to the Church of Gortyna mentioned a
little before. Not to the very next words, which are to be understood by
themselves as it were in a parenthesis, thus; (((...)) together with the rest
of the Churches in Crete. To take Eusebius thus, is the right taking of him
here. For presently him self opens him self, saying it was the Church of
Gortyna which was (...) under him. Under Philip.
And yet more plainly after, where with special respect to the former place in
question, he says of this Philip, Cap. 23.
(...), who^ we know by Dionysius i^ordes to have been Bishop of the Parish in
Gortyna. So then he was not Bishop of all Creete by Eusebius testifying. The
Doc. in another place contradicts him self, and makes Pinytus at this very
time to be Bishop of Def. 4.9.
Candie, that is, of all Crete, as he means. In deed Eusebius says, that
this Pinytus was Eusebius. 4.21.
(...) Bishop of them in Crete. But all men understand that he means here
to show but his Nation, not the extent of his Bishoprike. For Eusebius
declaresh Cap. 23.
after, that Pinytus was Gnossita^^ paraciae Episcopus, the Bishop of the
parish in Gnossi. Which certainly was not Over all Crete, neither was Gnosi^
the mother City of Crete. That which the Doctor Def. 2.93.100.
presumes of Evaristus Bishop of Rome, that he there constituted a Diocesan
Church and divided parishes, I have answered it Page 93. 94.
before. His testimonies out of Tertullian, Cornelius of Rome, and Cyprian for
a Diocesan Church, prove nothing. Touching the Def. 2.97.98.
first, Tertullian says not that in Rome or in any City then, the Christians
were divided into many set, constant, and certain companies, Tertallian.
and so had diverse such ordinary assemblies. Tertullian says no such matter,
which yet is the point. Indeed, like a Rhetorician he amplifieth the multitude
of Christians and Christianlie affected in his days; and that is all that he
does Apol 37. and ad Scapul* They are in truth Rhetorical amplifications.
Yet, I say, In the Roman Empire.
he comprehe^deth in these great nombers all Christianly affected, and all
their favorers; not only the open members of the Church. Cootiarily he says,
they were one singular Cetus and aggregatio. Def. 2.
Now such may be so many, as he there notes. Nothing of all this we deny. But
he shows not, that yet in any City the open resolut Christians were divided
into diverse ordinary set companies, as I said. The like do I answer to Page 9^.
that of the very great and innumerable people under Cornelius Bishop of Rome.
They were so many, that no man among them knew the first number of them. And so
I suppose at this day the church is in Paris, in Rouan. etc. Where yet the
Church is not divided into several constant and set Meetings: but all belong
only to one certain and constant assembly. Again under Cornelius the
Christian people were not so many but one Trophimus a Presbyter drew away from
him Cypr. epist. 4.2.
the greater part of them after Novatian; and repenting, he brought them back
with him again. Also the Church assembled in one place to elect Cypr. Epi.
3.13. and 4.
Cornelius, and a little before Eusebius. 6.22.
Fabianus, to be their Bishop. Wherefore they were not absolutely innumerable.
But this is plain, and it can not be disprooved, that yet the Church in Rome
had not diverse set, constant, ordinary assemblies. Nor yet Cyprians Church in
Carthage. Anno 250.
All the which came together for See page 55.56.57.58.
his election, and under him also for all ordinary Church business. The Do.
says untruly of him that Def. 2.40.
he was Bishop of Afrike. Nazianzen does make him Bishop Hesperiae Vniversae,
of all Spain at least, as well as of Afrike. And Prudentius goes further:
says he, De Passi^^^ Cypr.
Vsque in ortum Solis, and vsque obitum: from the rising of the Sun, to the
going down thereof. But does any man believe that Cypri^^s Bishoprike was so
large? or that these Authors meant so? Nothing less. They meant only that the
example of this holy man, and his doctrine did good thus far. I grant also
that by his letters he admonished and informed diverse other* Bishops near
about Carthage: and so he did Cornelius of Rome, etc. But this was out of his
singular zeal for the truth and love to his brethren. Also he prevayled much
in so doing. Howbeit this was through his great credit and reverence they had
of him: it was not out of any Metropolitan power that he had, or superior
office which he exercised over the^. For he had none such, though he were a
Metropolitan in respect of the place where he was Bishop. And altogether
Defen. 4.8^
so did Policrates of Ephesus, (...) he lead or guided the Asian Bishops. And
no otherwise Def. 2.115.
Irenaeus B. of Lions (...) did look unto certain Churches thereabout in
France. And Victor B. of Rome was a Metropolitan no otherwise also. Although
without any prejudice to us, we might well grant these to have been then such
Metropolitans and Diocesans, viz. with Prioritie of order, not Maioritie of
power*
as before we acknowledged Iulianus of Alexandria to have been, who was somewhat
ancienter then they. Other Diocesan or Metropolita^ Bishops after these, whom
both D. Downame and D. Bilson do name ple^tifully, as they hurt not our maine
Assertion, viz. that no proper Diocesan Church was in the world before 200.
years after Christ, so neither do we envy their appearing which was See page
88. 94. etc.
so late as it was. These D. D. do argue earnestly from Ierom saying that
Ierom. ad ^vagr.
Bishops above Presbyters were at Alexandria even from Mark the Evangelist.
Which we willingly agree unto. For they were not Diocesan Bishops, not over
many ordinary Congregations. And such also were those Angels of the Churches,
which are mentioned in the Rev. 2.1.
Revelation. This we constantly avouch, these we allow, and what get our
adversaries by that? We hold that such Bishops be Apostolic and Divine: yet
Diocesan both titular, and ruling Bishops, and also Lord Bishops came in
^a^latim by little and little, by Humane policy, and ambition, and tyra^nie
long after. But Ierom there says that these Bishops were in a higher degree
above Presbyters: Bez. Anno^at. in Apoc. 2.1.
which Beza denies. Also they were constant Presidents in the Meetings: which
Beza also denies. Beza says, Bishops and Presbyters then differed not gradu,
in degree; meaning in degree of power: that is, in Maioritie of power they
differed not then. But in degree of Order, he grants they did differ: which I
call Reas. for 1^.
Prioritie of Order. Which also Ie^om means by his higher degree in this
place. And so herein we all agree. But as touching Bezaes conjecture of the
Angel of Ephezus, viz. that peradventure he might be a President not
continuing, but changeable, I suppose few approve it. For my part, I do not.
Though I greatly honor the name and memory of Master Beza, yet there is no
need to be of his opinion in this. A changeable Presidencie (no doubt) was
among those Bishops Act. 20.28. But I am of mind that none of these Bishops
(meant by the Angels) Rev. 2. and 3. were changeable. In all likelihood they
were constant and continuing for term of life. And such a difference
(Presidentiall) might well com in among the many joint Pastors of the Church at
Ephesus by this time, and yet they all remain Declar^^, page 15.
equal in honor and power Pastoral. Howbeit, these constant Presidents were
Bishops then to no Diocesan multitude dispersed abroad in many ordinary set
assemblies, but to one ordinary assembly only, as is noted often before. And so
the great argument of these Doctors which they take from the Perp. gov. page
260. D. Down. Def. 4. and^.
Succession of Bishops, to prove our Bishops as they are in England to be
lawful, may appear to be a mere Sophisme and deceit. For the Bishop of Rome
also may by such a show of Succession prove his Office and Function lawful, as
in deed he does endeavor to do, and does it as well as they. But though all
these Bishops have one name, viz. Bishops; yet between the first and the last
of them there are seen many real and substantial differences in their
Offices. To observe therefore this egregious Equivocation, I remit the Reader
to page 98. 99. 128. 129. 211. 212. before.

Yet Doctor Downame sticks hard to this, Defenc. 4.50. etc.
that James the Apostle was a Bishop. James no proper Bishop.
What? a proper Bishop? It is simply impossible, whosoever say otherwise. Let
the Reader mark that all our question is about Bishops properly so called, and
not about the name Bishop used in a general sense. There is Rain. confer. pa.
263. 267.
a general taking of the word Bishop, and there is a proper taking of it.
Apostles and Evangelistes may generally and improperly be called Bishops, the
rather if they reside long in one place, and do execute a Bishop like Office
there. As James, I grant, did in Jerusalem, and Titus in Crete, yea by
assignement of the Apostles. And questionles so the Ancient Writers mean,
where they: call James Bishop of Jerusalem, and Titus Bishop of Crete. For
neither James nor Titus were, nor could be proper Bishops there. Which I show
thus.

Every Bishop is appropriated limited and confined only to one Church.
James neither was, nor could be appropriated and confined only to one Church.
Therefore James neither was nor could be a Bishop.
The Proposition is most evident, and granted of our D. Bilson page 227. 232.
adversaries. The Assumption they neither ought, nor dare deny. For James
having from Christ a Ministry and Calling to all Churches throughout the
world, this he retained still, he never lost that, it were sacrilege to
reduce him from it, and to shorten him of this his right given him from heaven.
Neither could the Apostles do it, if they would. Here it will be an absurd
evasion to say; James had in him two Offices, viz. an Apostles, and a proper
Bishops Office. In respect of the former he was still unlimited: in respect of
the later he was limited to the Church of Jerusalem. This I say, is so absurd
and frivolous, as nothing can be more. And yet it is the only thing that can
be answered. I pray, can one and the same man by any distinction be capeable
of privative contraries at one time? Can the same man be in fetters and at
liberty at once? Can one be blind, and see also? Can a man be a Christian, and
an insidell too? No more could James be both appropriated to Jerusalem, and not
appropriated at one time. Neither could the proper Bishops Office be conjoined
with an Apostleship. For it were in vain. Seeing the Apostleship contains
the whole Bishoply Office, and more too. But the Apostles in the Churches
administration did no thing in vain, and idly. Again, though the Apostleship
contained in it the whole office of a proper Bishop, yet this was Declarat. page
30.
Materially, not Formally. As a Privy Counsailler in England has in him the
Office and power of a Justice of peace: also a Shilling contains a Groat. But
no man that means plainly, will say; A Shilling is a Groat: or, a Privy
Counsailler is a Justice of peace. If any do, it is not rightly nor truly
spoken. For not the Matter, but the Form does give the proper name. Yet I do
not deny all use of improper speeches. I grant, on some occasion men may speak
generally and vndistinctly of things, In reasoning we must always speak
properly.
as I deem those Ancients did of Bishops. Nevertheles in ordinary teaching,
and specially in reasoning and disputing we must ever use exact and proper
terms, avoiding generalities and words improper. Otherwise we equivocate. To
this reason, that the Apostles gave not James any power which he had not
before, as an Apostle. D. Downame answers that which is both false, and also
most presumptuous. For plainly he says, Def. 4.5^^
James the Apostle had not the power of Jurisdiction before he was designed
Bishop of Jerusalem. O hautie Bishops! Who arrogat to themselves a power beyond
the Apostles. No marvel if he say, Page 59.
it is no depressing of an Apostle to become a proper Bishop. For only this may
l^ft up a Bishop above an Apostle; his other idle Page 62. 63.
respects and considerations neither did, nor could.

Titus and Timothy were no proper Bishops.
Nay, but Titus, and Timothy, and their Bishopriks, do make the most business of
all. Of whom D. Bilson says, Perpet. gov^ page 300.
Here I must pray the Christian Reader advisedly to mark what is said and
answered on either side. This indeed is the maine erection of the Episcopal
power and function* if our proofs stand; or subvertion, if your answer be
good. For if this fail, well may Bishops claine their authority by the
custom of the Church; by any divine precept expressed in the Scriptures, they
can not. Says he so? Let us see then how soundly this will stand. But first,
I desire him to remember, if it happen that this his proof out of the
Scrip^^^^ (...) subverted, and then he be forced to fly to the Churches Custom
for succor, that himself has ruined, cast down, and defaced that weak hold
all ready. So that there he can have no relief. Now then to his proofs out of
scripture that Titus and Timothy were Bishops. He frames 4. Arguments for it.
1. That power to ordain sit Ministers, to convent and discharge unfit
(prescribed to Titus and Timothy) was no power proper to Evangelists. We
grant this wholly, even the Conclusion. It is another point: and nothing against
us. The Conclusion of his 2. argument is like to the former: therefore we grant
it also. For this proves not that Timothy or Titus were proper Bishops, which
is the question. Yet in the Minor where he says, that Presbyteries claim
this power committed to Timothy and Tite, even to ordain, examine, censure, and
deprive Pastors. I deny this to be true: Presbyteries claim not this power.
Neither have they it properly and originally, as Bucer showed Page 33.
before. Properly and originally the whole Church has this power: the
Presbytery has only the authority of administering the same, and that in the
name of the whole Church, as Piscator and V^sinus Page 46. ^1.
before do express. And further I answer (by that distinction above noted;)
This power of ordayning, examining, censuring, etc. committed to Timothy and
Titus, the Presbytery in deed has and executes Materially, but not Formally.
Which makes his Minor Proposition to be false most clearly. His 3. argument
is concluded in no form. But where he Perp. gov. Page 391.
says, The precepts of Ordayning, and Censuring, are delivered to Timothy and
Titus, and to those that should succeed them unto the end of the world. Ergo
Timothies power and function in this behalf must be perpetual. This is true
likewise Materially: but not Formally. Their Successors are to execute the same
in deed always as touching the material actions. Those things must be done:
but under diverse forms of Ministeries, or manners of administration. Here
Timothy and Titus being properly Evangelistes did these actions under the
form of an Evangelisticall Ministry. Sometime Apostles did the same actions,
but under the form of an Apostolical Ministry. After them, Bishops did the
same actions also: but under the form of a proper Bishops office. etc.
Wherefore the perpetuity of these actions materially which Timothy and Titus
did, proves not the Office and Ministry of Timothy and Titus formally to
be perpetual. This is a very weak conclusion, and very crooked. His 4.
argument is, The whole Church of Christ since the Apostles times without
exception has so constred the Apostles words to Timothy and Titus touching
their government. And he names Eusebius, Jerome, Ambrose, etc. D. Rainolds
answers Heart the Priest; Confer. page 267.
I perceave the Pope must fetch his Supremacy from Earth and not from Heaven.
You are fallen from Scripture to Eusebius. Even so our adversaries, when all is
done they must fetch the Diocesan L. Bishops Office from earth and not from
heaven. They fall from Scripture to Eusebius. etc. And yet not Eusebius not the
rest do conster those precepts to Timothy and Titus, as belonging only to
Bishops: much See before page ^24. ^^5.
less did the whole Church of Christ since the Apostles times without
exception. This is a strange Hyperbole. But these writers acknowledged Timothy
and Titus to have been Bishops. Nay, not Diocesan L. Bishops; they neither
acknowledged nor knew any such in their times, as before has been showed. Yet
only of these our question is. Again, they held Timothy and Titus not to be
Bishops at all properly, but in a general sense; as Page 230. 238.
before I observed. If they meant otherwise, they missed the truth, says D.
Rainolds. Conf. p. 267
Howbeit, They suffered none but Bishops either to ordain or degrade
Presbyters. Yet as I said before, not absolutely with out the peoples consent as
our L. Bishops do. If any among them inclined to neglect the people herein,
they did contrary to the Canons of those times. Lastly it is true, these
ancients to much rested on Custom, and Counsaills of men, and humane policy
in setting the Church governeme^t: they (as Jerome) inclined to much to approve
Diocesan, Provincial, and Patriarchall Bishops with too absolute power, only
grounding upon the Custom of the Church, though they knew they wanted Divine
disposition. Whence afterward Antichrist easily sprang up. Now then I pray,
with what color can Doct. Bilson from those precepts to Timothy and Titus
plead for our Diocesan and Provincial L. Bishops, whom they nothing concern,
and say, The words be singular, the charge is vehement, the parties were
Bishops? Perp. gov. page 299.
And how vainly does he insult, without reason charging us that Page 30^.
Fire will better agree with water, then we with our selves. Which is his
familiar custom, not ours.


After him, let us see what D. Downame says for Timothy and Titus
Bishoprikes. Truly in effect he says nothing more, for he follows D. Bilson
most diligently. Yet he has a Cart-load of words, about this point which he
knows well to be his only refuge. Wherein yet he can find no help. First
I will examine the pith of his discourse: and the^ I will set down reasons of
mine own, proving sou^dly that Timothy and Titus were not proper Bishops.
First, he says, Def. 4. p. 75
It is presupposed in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, that the Apostle
committed to them Bishoply authority. It is untrue, this is not presupposed.
Then, the Epistles be the very patterns and precedents of Bishoply function.
etc Well: what then? Then Timothy and Titus were Bishops. I deny this
consequence. There is no truth in this. And T.C. answer to D. Whitgifts like
argument is sound and good, though this great Logician calls it Page 76.
slight and frivolous. The directions to Timothy and Titus about Ordination
and jurisdiction being not Page 77.
peculiar to Bishops, as he untruly adds in the end. For him self gives
this power (and that rightly) to other Christians Page 99.
in case of necessity: and the truth gives it to Apostles and Evangelists the
Ephesians 4.11.
Superiors of Bishops. His reason, Page 77.
these are perpetual directions, is an excellent reason to prove that this
power is indeed essentially seated by Christ in the Congregation of the people.
The power of Ecclesiastical government essen^ially in the people.
For it is certain, that such Christian Congregations only are perpetual.
Apostles are not perpetual, Evangelistes are not perpetual; also Bishops, yea
Presbyters are not perpetual in Churches under the Gospel. But a Congregation
is perpetual: absolutely Math. 16.^^
the gates of destruction shall never overcome it. Wherefore this power is
essentially in the Congregation. And so the consequence is false; Page 77.
These directions are perpetual: therefore peculiar to Bishops. I say, this
sequel can not be true. Wherewith is conjoined an other false reason, viz.
They were not common either to other Christians, or other Ministers: therefore
peculiar to Bishops. Nay; they were common. They may be, and are exercised by
diverse forms of administrations, as before I showed; and not all ways by
Bishops. And yet I grant, thy are to be exercised most commonly, usually, and
ordinarily by Bishops, I mean true Bishops. His own distinction here is
good. There is Pa. 102. 147
potestas and forma vel modus potestatis. The power, and the accidental form
and manner of the power. It is true, the power is perpetual: the accidental
form or manner thereof is variable. In which respect the consequence also of
his new Pa. 77.
Proposition, which Page 78.
once again he takes for granted, once again I deny. The proof of his
Assumption we grant, yet with a distinction In the Epistles to Tim. and Tit.
the office of Bishops is described generally, but not as peculiar to Bishops:
materially, not formally. And only so that power was to continue in the Church
till the end. Also this viz. materially that power was not a higher power then
Episcopal. But formally it was. And so his consequence is false. For an
Evangelists power was higher: yea the Churches power (by whom simply sometime
both the making of Ministers and Censures are performed) is 1. Cor. 3.22
higher then the Bishops power. Again he says, this power of Bishops is so
much of the Apostolical power as was to continue to the end. But then he
should not make the Bishops power more then the Apostolical, as See before
page 240. 248
he does. Which thus also appears, viz. the Apostles excluded not the
peoples consent: but his Bishops do. How then says he, it is Apostolical.
Besides, in all this he Equivocateth: for this power of Bishops is the
Apostles (as I said) generally not properly, materially not formally. He would
find Page 79.
a difference in his Refuter: but it is easily reconciled; viz. understanding
him of diverse kinds of Bishops, thus. Some kind of Bishops are in Christ's
Testament: some absolutely have noe place there. The former have power from
Christ, the later have none. After, he makes great outcries of Page 80. 81.
Schismatical novelties, and dreams, and dotages, fantastical and fanaticall
spirits, and frenzy. Right as the Papists cry out, Haeretiks, Haeretiks.
Themselves being the greatest Haeretiks of all. But the Chritstia^ reader may
know that this is the Doctors fury, and malice against our Attestators before
cited, and against others also who follow them. Yea, against See before page
73. 74. etc.
himself it is, and some of his frindes. His sla^der, that we maintain such
popular government, as Morellius strived for, is sufficiently answered Page 24.
before. Some of the Separation I grant, are to offensive this way: which I am
heartily sorry for. They take the words in Math. 18.17. Tell the Church more
popularly the^ there is need, or then reason or good order would. Howbeit in
this yet they hold the substance of the true Church-goverm. They err but in
the Circumsta^ce of order, though it be to Bera An^^. cat. in Math. 18.17.
foul. That is, they will examine al scandalls, etc. whatsoever in the
presence and under the judgment of the whole multitude perpetually and
necessarily. I say perpetually and necessarily. Wherein I wonder they see not
the many very ill Consequents, which will and must ensue many times As touching
us, what we hold heerin I have showed Page 22. 24. 82. 83.
before. And our Docts. do most injuriously Def. 4.81. Perp. gov. page 355.
wrong Beza and the Geneva discipline (if that be Geneva discipline which
Viret, Calvin, and Beza taught the^) in saying they differ materially from us.
Our D. asks, Is there any show in Scripture or in reason, that the sheep
should rule their sheapheard, or the flock their Pastor? The very voice of a
Jesuit, and not of a Minister of the Gospel. Bellarm. argues just so Bellarm.
de Clersc. 1. 7.
against the old Procesta^ts. As to the point let him know that reasonable
sheep under the Gosp. have more to do in their spiritual government, the^ brute
beasts have to do in their government sensual. Lastly, here he can easily
skoffe and revile the modest and Christian offer of disputation, and those that
favor it, and some of us he will help to persecute: but undertake that Offer
honestly and plainly he never will. He says, Page 82.
we understand the speech of 1. Tim. 5.22
Laying on of hands as directed not to Timothy, but to the people; and to
Titus, Tit. 3.10.
Avoid an haeretik, or excommunicat him, that is, thou people. Which is falfe:
we understand it not so He does therefore heerin sla^der us. We know these words
are directed to Timothy and Titus: yet to them not as Lords over the people,
nor as Sole rulers; but as Guides and directors of them. As Fathers to inform
them, not as Masters to overrule them and force them. To them therefore by
name, as the principal Agents in all ordinary government, the Epistles and
these precepts were written. And so the Apostle here held it not needful to
mention the people, though neither does he exclude them. Seeing their consent
in such affairs is See before page 76. Also toward the end of this chap.
elsewhere in Scripture sufficiently proved. And the Apostles practice in this
behalf they knew well enough. Which known practice of the Apostles, it here
behoved Timothy and Titus to have regard unto, together with these precepts
written to them. For they stand together well enough. He says, the Churches
at first were governed by the Apostles, etc. I answer, they were. But not
without the peoples concurrence and consent, as presently before is observed.
But D. Downame avouched, Def. 4.8^.
Our Bishops at this day have not greater autho^^tie in menaging Church causes
then Timothy and Titus had Which is, notoriously untrue. These (following the
Apostles) took the peoples consent with them: our Bishops do not. They only
taught them and persuaded them, and used spiritual power: ours, if they can
not persuade the people or their Pastors, will cast them in prison punishing
their bodies and their purses. He says, Timothy and Titus might use the
presense or consent of the people, or the counsel and advise of the Presbyters
in (...) of greatest moment, as Princ^s do in Commonwealths. I thought it was
a stately and princelike Prelacie which this Doctor hunteth after: though in
many places of his book he dissembleth, and would not have them called Sole
governors. Here he plainly shows that he holds the Bishops may take the
peoples consent and Presbyters advise, if they like it; if not, then they may
nevertheless proceed and not stand upon it, as Princes may do in Common
wealths. Truly all found writers ever have held this in Church-governement to
be right See our Attestators. page 23. 25. 26. 27. 29. 31. 32. 33. 35. 36. 37.
42. 45.
tyrannical and wronghfull oppression of Christian Men's consciences. And yet
(as I have often said) we grant the sway of the Ecclesiastical government to be
indeed in the Bishop ordinarily; but not absolutely.

The consequence of his Page 83.
next Proposition, I deny also: viz. The things written to inform not Timothy
and Titus alone as extraordinary persons, but them and their Successors to the
end of the world, were written to inform Diocesan Bishops. They were not.
Diocesan Bishops are no Successors of Timothy and Titus, nor intended by the
Apostle. They came after by reason of that apostasy, which through Gods
determinat counsel was to come over Christendom. Without which going before,
Antichrist could not have stood up. He adds Page 84.
the authority committed to Tim. and Tit is perpetually necessary. It is true;
Materially, not formaly, as before is said. Beside, Tim. and Tit. themselves
had not the authority which Diocesan Bishops have. It was far less. Therefore
these are not their Successors. Where he would prove it, first disjunctively;
Page 86.
Either they, or the Presbyteries, or the Congregation were their Successors. I
answer, this disjunction is insufficient. He reckons not Pastors or Bishops
of one ordinary Congregation only. They were the immediate Successors of
Timothy and Titus; speaking of such a succession as they had, and might have
being Evangelists. About 200. years after Christ, Titular Diocesans succeeded
them. After 300. years, These improperly succeeded, viz. in place, not in
Office.
Diocesans with Maioritie of power and rule succeeded. After them long, came
the proper and complete Diocesan Prelates, the Diocesan Lord Bishops. of whom
our question is indeed. But among all these whosoever was a Bishop really of mo
ordinary Congregations then one, therein he succeeded not Timothy, nor Titus,
nor any Apos^le, Who never intended any such ordinary Successors. And
succession in place with dissent in doctrine, is a false succession. Beside, a
Presbytery did Act. 20 17.28.
preceed Timothy in Ephesus. Therefore they may lawfully succeed, as they do
now in the Dutch and French reformed Churches. The people also have in act
succeeded lawfully at sometimes, as the D. himself Page 99.
knows: and therefore so they may again on occasion. Then he would Page 86.
87.
name Bishops that succeeded Timothi^ and Titus. Means he proper Diocesan L.
Bishops? If he do not, he trifleth. But who are they? First, the Angel of
Ephesus, and Onesimus. Nay, these were Bishops only of one ordinary
Congregation, and that within the City Ephesus, as Page 206. 227.
before I have noted. That Policrates, and Philip of Gortyna in Crete were such
also, I have showed Page 235. 231.
before: as also the Doct. falsehood about Philip. Where he says, Page 87.
Every Metropolitan is a Diocesan, it is untrue. The first Bishops were
Metropolitans, that is, Bishops in Mother-cities: yet they were not Diocesan
Bishops, viz. over mo ordinary Co^gregations then one. He says, he reads
not any where of the next Successor to Titus: indeed he reads of no proper
Successor to Titus at all, nor to Tim. etc. Ordinary Pastors of Congregations
succeeded these extraordinary men, as they also succeeded the Apostles, viz.
improperly, not in their whole and proper Offices.

Our D. (following D. Dove.) would prove that Timothy and Titus had Page 89.
their ordinary residence in Ephesus and in Crete: because one was willed 1.
Tim 1.^^
(...) to abide at Ephesus, "Tit. 1.5.
the other (...) to redress further the things which he found there amiss.
It is true, for a time each of them was so resident. But not always, nor till
they dyed. For not long after Timothy was 2. Tim. 4.9.
called away, and Tychicus an other Evangelist was sent to Ephesians. 6.2^.
Ephesus in his room. When, if Timothy had been there still, it seems there
had been no need of Tychicus, neither would Paul have left him unsaluted and
unnamed in that epistle to the Ephesians. Also the Apostle Philip. 2.1^
intended that Timothy being come from Ephesus should undertake the charge of
Philipps. Therefore he was now loose and free from Ephesus. Writers also say
that John the Apostle afterward was at Ephesus doing a Bishoply office: when
surely Timothy was not Bishop there, yet as may be thought he was then living.
Our D. adds, that Bishops and other Pastors may be absent from their cures
upon special and extraordinary occasion. It is untrue, they may not. Now
residen^^
All religion and piety forbids it, unless it be with their Churches
express consent. Which Timothy here had not. The Apostle, as he alone
placed him at Ephesus, so he alone without the Church called him away. You will
say, and he alone might do so. True, the Apostle alone might do so with
Evangelists, but he might not with Bishops and Pastors. These were more in
their Churches power then so. Neither indeed had it ben Page 93.
a matter of good report, nor of good example (as his refuter says well) if
Timothy being the Ephesians proper Bishop had without their special grant
gone from them, chiefly so long time, and so far of, and to take charge of
another place. Neither verily had Paul any need so to take away a proper Pastor
from his flock. The same likewise is to be said of Titus his departure from
Crete, first to Rome, then to Dalmatia. But he will prove that Page 91.
they lived and dyed in Ephesus and Crete. If they did, yet it follows not
that therefore they were Bishops there; nor yet that they had ordinary reside^ce
there all their life time. It might happen that travayling to and fro they
might in the end of their days die there. For somwhere they must die. And yet
they are not therefore Bishops of that place: neither had they therefore
ordinary residence there till their end. But who says they dyed there? Some,
whose testimonies whosoever refuse to believe, do themselves deserve no credit.
Yea, are they so infallible? Who are they? Dorotheus in Synopis, and on his
word some other, he knows not well, who. The^ all this matter stands on this
Dorotheus, whose credit Page 104.
him self fears. Indeed justly, for he is the most egregious fabler that
ever writ. Dorotheus a fabler
Here I wish it may be noted, that the Doct. seems to take delight to abuse
the people with bastard writings, fabulous, false, and apocryphal stuff,
which he uses as his familiar friends and witnesses very often; as the
Epistles of Clemens and Anacletus, Dionysius Areopagita, the Canons of the
Apostles, Bastard writing^.
Dionysius Areopagita, the Canons of the Apostles, the Subscriptions of the
Apostles Epistles, and this Dorotheus, from whom the other witnesses here by
him cited, do take this report. Therefore in this it is not necessary to
credit them any more the^ him. Further, to these and the like reasons of ours,
If Timothy and Titus (who first were Eva^gelists) did become proper Bishops
afterward, then men may co^ioyne things which God has severed: yea limit and
depresse them whose Ministry God has made general, unlimited, and superior.
He answers Page ^^*
these are nice points, which none of the Fathers did ever understand. Certes
we have a gross Doctor, who makes nice to sever those whom God has severed.
Evangelists and Bishops or Pastors are so plainly severed by God and made
diverse Ephe. 4.11 ^ Cor. 12.28
persons, that nothing can be more plain. Where also it is as clee^e that
Evangelists are by God made Superior in the Church, and Bishops or Pastors
inferior; whom he makes clean contrary. He excepteth against 1. Cor. 12.28.
because Evangelists Page 95.
are not mentioned there. Yet there it appears that all Church-ministeries
are severed by God, of which Evangelists are one, as in the Ephe 4*11.
appears. By comparing these textes together.
So that also even from 1. Cor. 12.18. Evangelists distinction from Bishops and
their Superiority to them is proved well enough. Himself gra^teth Evangelists
to be extraordinary, general and unlimited Ministers; and that Timothy and
Tit^^ were such. Which is the truth. But this is false, when they Page 94.
betook them (...) certain Churches, that they were appropriated and limited
to them. Wherefore neither were they proper Bishops of them. Again; The D. can
not leave his equivocating, any more them (...) Black-amore can change his
skin. For though vulgarly sometime an Evangelist is understood to be a writer
of the Gospel, yet the Apostle understands not so Ephesians 4.11. But here they
are unlimited Companions and Coadiutors to the Apostles. An Evangelist.
In this sense (and so we also do mean) Mat^hew and John neither were, nor
could be Evangelists, nor Mark a Bishop. Whosoever says otherwise, they
plain ^y contradict the Apostle. But he pretends that the ancient Fathers
held that Evangelistes and Apostles also might be Bishops. See Page 222. 223.
Vnreverent behavior toward Antiquit^e.
before what a frivolous reason this is. Also see how vnreverent he is to
Antiquity, whom he pretends devoutly to honor. He will have them indeed to
seem fighters with God and resisters of the plain letter of the text, rather
then defend them (as we do) with an honest excuse. It is honest to say, they
called Eva^gelists and Apostles Bishops in a general sense; or, if they did
not well herein, yet that they did it in not sifting, nor much minding that
which now with us is a maine question, and therefore is and ought to be more
exactly considered now. But to say of them, either that they deny Temoth. and
Titus were Evangelists; or that they deny Evangelistes were by God made
several from Bishops, or that those were superior to these, or that those were
extraordinary and general Ministers: or to say they hold the Apostles did and
could make them being such to become ordinary Ministers, limited to one Church,
and one with Bishops: and that they hold this out of consideration and due
sifting the matter. I say, thus to affirm of the Fathers (as the D. does) is
to make them resist the plain letter of the text, and to fight with God.

Yet, he for his part boldly says, or rather shamelesly, that Page 95.
it was no debasing to Timothy and Titus, when they were made Bishops, but an
advanceme^t; Albeit he knows the text above noted ( viz. Ephesians. 4.11.) makes a
Bishop or Pastor inferior to an Evangelist. And prove it he would: 1. Page ^6.
Timothy received a ne^e 1. Tim. 4.14 2. Tim. 1.6.
Ordination: and so more authority. This is utterly untrue. He received no
new Ordination. This was only when he was taken by the Apostle to be an
Evangelist. And after this he never received more authority. He^ adds, were
men admitted to the extraordinary function of Evangelists by the ordinary
means of imposing hands? I answer, Yea^ some Evangelists might be, like as some
Apostles ( viz. Paul, and Barnabas, whose functions verily were extraordinary
were Act. 13.3
so admitted. Then says he* may we think that any but the Apostles ha^ that
authority wheresoever they came, which Timothy had at Ephesus, and Titus in
Crete^l answer, yea questionles. Evangelists had, wheresoever they came;
specially in the absense of an Apostle. He obiecteth, Philip the Evangelist had
Act. 8.14.17.
not authority to impose hands. I answer, though here he follow Perpe. gov.
page 83.84.
D. Bilson, yet both do miss the purpose. This imposition of hands here is an
other thing: it was to give the miraculous gift of toungs. It was not to
ordain to the ministry. Happily it was to furnish men for the ministry
afterward: but this made them not Ministers. Indeed only the Apostles could by
laying on of hands give the gift of toungs and the gift of prophecy: but in
the Apostles absense others (as Evangelists, etc.) might lay on hands to
ordain Ministers. Wherefore this is to rove fare from the point. The rest is
answered Declar^^. page 29.
elsewhere, viz. Paul spoke not in the general and improper sense (whereof there
is noe reason nor cause) but properly where he wills Timothy after he was at
Ephesus, to do the work of an 2. Tim. 4.5.
Evangelist. The Fathers Page 244.
before are answered: to whom Zuinglius also here may be adjoined.

He would seem to bring new matter, but it is his old stuff; viz. that Page
98.
Timothies and Titus function in Ephesus and Crete, was not to end with their
pe^so^s, but to be continued to their Successors It is answered Page 243.
before. That is, Materially it ended not, but formally it ended with their
persons. It continued to their Successors, but under an other form of
ministry, viz of proper Bishops. Which also I noted in my Declarat page 30.
He says, their Page 100. Apostles were so assigned sometime. Act. 8.14.
being assigned to Ephesus and Crete was an ordinary function? I deny it, as
touching them. He has not a word to prove it. He says, in Timothy and
Titus as Evangelists Page 101.
nothing was extraordinary but their not limitation to any certain Churches.
Which is untrue: their calling to the ministry was not ordinary. It was
without the peoples voice-giving: which was then ordinary in Pastors calling.
Timothy I say came not to Ephesus by the peoples election, nor Titus to Creet.
Paul only authorized them to that Ministry. Therefore their calling or sending
thither was also extraordinary. And T^mothie attained gifts by extraordinary
means viz: by the Apostles miraculous laying on of hands; though the D. deny
it. Then he adds 3. other errors. 1. The power of ordination and jurisdiction
was wholly in Timothy, and (...) Titus. Our Attestators Above pa. 23 26
36.38.4^.
disprove th^^ 2. The function may be the very sam where one person governs
the church wholly and alone, and where the people do necessarily co^cur with him
Though his words be not these, yet his sense is clearly so. And all the next
page he beats upon the same. Fearfully affirming, that the difference Page
102.
seems not to be so essential. Though he hold so, yet see how he
faltereth. 3. Where he adds, the title or calling to a Church seems to be
variable. Which are all gross untruths: co^uted in my Page 12 at 34 35. 38 etc
Declarat. and the 3. runs among those evil opinions here Page 133.134.
before censured. That which he adds as it were a proof for him, the Jews
Church governors came to their places Page 103.
by succession and lineall descent: but in the Churches of Christ, by free
election, is absolutely against ^imselfe. For neither of these titles or coming
to the Church-governement had been lawful by any means, but because God so
ordained. And it being so ordained by God in his word, it was the^ absolutely
unchangeable by men, as in the Law, so likewise under the Gospel which is the
Law of Christ. Where he says, the Apostles committed not the power of
ordination and jurisdiction to all Ministers, I answer, they did: as I have
Declarar. page 25.
elsewhere showed. Their committing it to Page 104.
Timothy etc. denies it not to the other Presbyters in the several Churches.
neither does the Angels power in the Revelatio^ 2. exclude the joint power of
his fellow presbyters with him, nor yet the peoples free concurrence with them
all. His last reason is, If while the Apostles lived, it was behoofull to
substitute Bishops in the Churches, then much more after their decease. But the
former is evident. Therefore the later also. This I wholly grant: we mislike not
Bishops. In the end he falls to the authority of those bastard Page 105.
subscriptions, and namely of the epistles to Tim. and Titus. Touching the
which I refer him to Mr. Cudworth in his Supplement to Mr. Perkins on the At
the end of chap. 6.
Galatians. Where he shall find them to be of no Page 106.
greater antiquity nor better credit then such counterfeit dross may be. The
Page 107.
testimonies of the Fathers which follow Page 244.259.
have been sufficiently answered.

Now I will gather briefly our Proofs, that Timoth. or Titus were not proper
Bishops. Proofs that Timothy, etc. was no Bishop
They are 8. in number. First, the H. Ghost made Ephe. 4.11
Evangelists and Bishops or Pastors, distinct Timothy and Titus being
Evangelists (as is known) neither were, nor could Sec: An Eva^gelist had an
Office Ibid.
superior, extraordinary, temporary, and unlimited: a Bishop was inferior,
ordinary, perpetual, and limited to one Church. Now these qualities are
inco^patible: they can neither be together, nor successively in one person.
Therefore Timothy and Titus Evangelistes, neither were, nor could be proper
Bishops at any time. Thirdly, After Timothy 2. Tim. 4.5.
For Paul charge him so to be and carry himself. Neither is there cause nor
reason why Paul here should speak improperly and generally. Therefore he spoke
properly, See page 240.
and he was still a proper Evangelist, and consequently not a proper Bishop.
And so likewise Titus. Fourt: Timothies viz. to Smyrna, to Sardis, to Pergamus,
to Colossi, to Hierapolis, to Laodicea etc. and not to the Church in Ephesus
only. But the Bishop of Ephesus ministry was limited and appropriated to the
Church in Ephesus only; as also of Smyrna to Smyrna, of Sardis to Sardis. etc.
As the Angels in Rev. 2. do show. Therefore Timothy was not properly the
Bishop of Ephesus. And then neither Titus of Crete. Fifth: Timothy was the same
and no other at Ephesus, then he was at So likewise Declarat. Page 29.30.6.
Titus in Crete. Sixth: proper Bishops in those days were not called without
the co^^ent and voices of their Church, as before Page 164.251.
has been showed. But Titus came to Crete and Timothy into Asia only by the
Apostle Paul's sending, utterly without the peoples calling to whom they
ministered in all those Churches. Therefore Titus in Crete and Timothy in
Ephesus were no Bishops. Seave^th: If Titus were a proper Bishop in Crete,
Titus in Crete many distinct and entire Churches were committed; and not one
only. Therefore Titus in Crete was no proper Bishop. The Assumption is plain,
because he had many Tit. 1.5.
Cities in his charge. And every City had a distinct and entire Church, for
(...) Act. 14.23
(...): In every City, and in every Church do signify all one thing. And
Eusebius Euse. 4.22
makes them so likewise. But every proper Bishop is limited and appropriated
to one Church only. The D. says assigned But that word is to loose. Indeed a
Bishop is limited and appropriated, and as it were confined to one Church. D.
Bilson says Perpet gov. page 227. 232.
affixed. Therefore Titus was no Bishop, nor Timothy neither. Titus and
Timothy Provincial Bishops in Crete, and in Asia, the same serves to make
Paul or Peter Universal Bishops and to have Universal Bishops their
Successors, at Rome. But no reason is sufficient to make Paul or Peter
Universal ordinary Bishops of Rome, nor that they should have Universal
Bishops their Successors. Therefore no reason sufficient to make Titus in Crete
or Timothy at Ephesus Provincial Bishops. And so much of Timothy and Titus,
that they were indeed no proper Bishops: which point yet Doct. Bilson See
before page 241.
confesses to be their only hold.


After this, let us now show how D. Downame grossly Def. 2.14^.
abuses Calvin and Beza, affi^ming that they join with the Bishops of England
in maintayning Diocesan and Provincial Churches, Calvin and Beza, abused.
and that therein they are against us. First, though Calvin do note in this
Chapt. the Churches state Institut 4.4.1.
before the Papacy, yet he says not, neither was it before Papalitie began.
Again, your government may be not withstanding from the Pap^sts (as indeed
it is) though this Church state there noted by Calvin were before the Papacy.
Chap. 4.
For your government is by him described in his Chap. 5.
next Chapter, where he says; Sect.
I am in eligendo totum illud ius populi sublatum est. Ad solos Canonicos
integra potestas translata est. Ills in quem volunt conferunt Episcopatum: eum
mox in conspestu plebis producunt non examinandu^, sed adora^dum. Now all the
right of the people to chose their Pastor was taken away. The whole power was
transferred to the Chanons or Prebendaries only. They bestow the Bishoprike on
whom they will: him they bring forth before the people not to be tried, but to
be worshipped of them. And though he says this was In the title of chap. 5.
tyrannide Papatus, by the tyranny of the Papacy, yet every one sees it to
be the same kind that is used in England; and which differs substantially
from the ancient form of Church government, yea from that by him noted in his
4. Chapter, which is not it that you exercise, and labor to maintain. So any
may see, from whom in deed you have received your government. almost nothing
dissonant from Gods word. Where he grants, they had somewhat. And therefore
he would not that this Church government should be See before page 149.
our pattern, though he held it not wholly intolerable. What means the vain
Doctor to say, we Page 146.
our selves do extend our assertion to two hundred years? We do not extend our
pattern so far. Indeed we say, a proper Diocesan Church was not before that
time. But we take our pattern of a Church only from the New Testam. as we
ought. Against which fundamental point of Christian religion see how profanely
(and yet absurdly) he reasons; As Well they may allege that no whole
Country ought to be converted, because none was in the Apostles times, as to
deny a whole Country to be a Church, Should we^ not use that form of a Church
which the Apost. vsed^
because it was not so in the Apostles times. Never did I hear a more senseles
speech, and yet it savoureth all of impiety. Every visible Church may contain
no mo ordinary Congregations then the New Testament shows that a Church
contained then, which was but one: and yet a whole Country may be converted to
the faith, and being converted may be reduced into many Churches in number,
according to the form Galat. 1 ^ 21. and ^. Cor. 8.1. and 1 Cor. 16.19.
exta^t in Christ's Testament. And God forbid we should profess to do
otherwise. As for Calvin, beside that above noted in him, Page 149.
speaking of the Order set down in Scripturs, he says the same is it, Instit.
4.^.^.
quo Ecclesia^ suam gubernari voluit Dominus, wherewith the Lord would have his
Church to be governed always. Again, Sect. ^.
Ecclesiae disitpationem vel ruinam potius and exitium molitur quisquis ordinem
hunc de quo disputamus, and HOC GENVS regiminis vel abolere studet, vel quasi
minus necessarium elevat. He seeks the ruin and destruction of the Church
whosoever indeavoureth to abolish this order and THIS KIND of government
whereof we treat, or makes light of it as less necessary: speaking (as I
said) of that same kind of ordinary government which is found in the New
Testament. Which being Calvin's mind, can we think that he would like of the
Doctors mutabilitie? No, nor of his calling him and Beza Defen. 2. page 140.
Authors of Discipline, and him the first or chief founder of it? Beside, is
not this Doct. a cunning dissembler, who can say of Calvin that his memory
with me is blessed: and yet curse^h and revileth his Thirdly, is it truth, and
must we abide it, that Calvin agrees with the Do. against Lay Elders, as he
calls them? And his Refuter reproving him for that speech, he mocketh,
saying; What shall become of me now? He says, he will salve it. But how?
Forsooth he confesses Calvin is against him both touching the Scripture, and
also the practice of the first Churches. How salveth he the matter then? Calvin
says, that afterward Every City had a College of Elders, all which were
Teachers. What then? Can not Calvin think that this might somewhat differ from
the Scripture? and that this was thus about, and after the Nicen Council
hitherward, and yet in the first age of the Church after the Apostles there
were some such lay Elders? Is it not possible that Calvin may thus mean, but
that he must needs agree in this matter with the D. and grossly contradict
himself? Thus forsooth our D. will needs have it: in words commending Calvin
and Beza for the learned Disciplinarians; but indeed making them (what he can)
to seem fools. Fourthly, neither Calvin nor Beza Page 14^. 144.
agrees with them, nor materially a Diocesan Church, as he almost every where
repeateth that they do, and is still beating upon it. But falsely. For first,
Calvin makes not even then the City and Country to be but one body. He says,
Instit. 4.4, 2.
velut Corpus, as it were a Body. He means not that it was a persit Body,
but that there was some resemblance of one Body, because of the consociation of
all under one Bishop. Yet indeed he makes each Parish then a Body
substantially, Saying, Sect. 1^.
Cum Parochijs novi Presbyters destinabantur, tunc loci multitudinem nominatim
consentire oportuit. When new Presbyters were appointed to Parishes, then the
multitude of the place must namely consent. This power made them a Body indeed:
and to the Diocese they belonged but as it were to a Body, or as having some
resemblance of a body. Which yet consisted in deed of many distinct bodies, and
someway independent. This is the Diocesan Church which Calvin and Beza also
speak of, and is constituted at Geneva, and in France, and in the
Lowcountries, etc. But this is not the Sea before page 88. 89.
proper Diocesan Church, which is in England. There is a substantial
difference between this improper and imperfect Diocesan Body, and that which is
proper and persit. Now then, how do Calvin and Beza agree with the Bishops of
England touching a Diocesan Church, as he so often vaunteth and boasts that
they do? Or how do they dissent from us? We see they do not. The Doct. does
but slander them. Neither Def. 2.147.
does Beza mean that any first Presbyter in a Church was formally appointed to
(...) Diocese under the Apostles. Some kind of See before Page 89.
Diocese was Apostolic. But he shows sufficiently that these Bb. Dioceses
began somewhile after the Apostles, in that he says Bez. de grad. min. 6.24.
they were first framed according to the division of the Pr^vinces under the
Roman Empire. Which verily was nor regarded in the Apostles time, nor in the
next age after Wherefore Beza meant the first Presbyter thus assigned formally,
was after the Apostles, and their abused name Bishop also.


Lastly, I cannot pass how insolently the D. Def. 3.15. etc.
taunteth me for observing many sorts of Bishops, and namely for In reas for
ref. page 7.
setting down six sorts of them: also for being ignorant whether Jerusalem or
Caesarea had the Patriarchship, and for supposing Diocesan Ruling Bishops might
begin with Dionysius at A^exandria, and for not speaking any thing of
Metropolitans beginning. Let the D. know, I was not ignorant that Jerusalem had
the Patriarchship: but it is a question (and that I meant to " touch) whether
Jerusalem exercised ordinary jurisdiction over Cae^area and the Province
thereof, or not. page 8. in margin.
But it is a matter of no worth: therefor I pass it. Metropolitans,
Diocesans, Patriarchs, all one in substance
Metropolitans (in his sense) (...) spoke not of when I reckoned up the livers
sorts of Bishops, because in substance of their Office they are all ^ne with
Diocesans, Archbishops, and Patriarchs. Of whom whosoever holds ^ne lawful,
will hold all so to be: and ^e who holds one Apostolic, will acknowledge
them all Apostolic. This therefore also is no matter, what ^oever he makes of
it. Touching Di^^ysius of Alexandria, I confess I was to ^lame in thinking he
might be the ^uthor of Majoritie of power and rule ^n Diocesan Bishops. It was
because I ^udged it to be ancienter then indeed ^t is, or then reason gives
it. Maioritie of power when it began.
Now therefore I profess, it cannot be roved to be ancienter then the Nice^
Council, or Constantine the Emperor, as I noted before. Once D. Bilson was
also of this mind with me, where he shows that it was not Against the
Seminar. part. 2. page 318.
by the institution of Christ, nor his Apostles, but long after by the consent
of the Churches, the custom of the times, and the will of Princes. And
touching my making many sorts of Bishops, and my distinguishing of the word,
the Doct. misliking that, shows his ignorance not a little: or else he shows
that which is worse. If he mislike that I made so many sorts, as six. Truly it
was my fault that I made so few. Ierom witnesses that the Bishops of his time
came to that power paulatim, by little and little,. And the Universal Monarch
of the Roman Church came not to his greatness at once. Papacy had Papalitie
going before in diverse and sundry degrees. The Word, reason and experience do
show in such alterations of government, at least so many distinct differences,
yea mo also. Now therefore I desire the Reader to give me leave upon better
consideration to set down the distinction of Bishops in 7. differences.

Seven sorts of Bishops.
I affirm therefore that the name Bishop in Christian Writers is given to
seave^ diverse sorts. Which to observe is right needful, and most profitable
to end this great controversy. First, the name is generally given, even to
Act. 1 20.
Apostles. Yea Evangelistes also may so be called Bishops, as Page 238. 240.
before is showed. Secondly, it is given to Pastors. equal, and Act. 20.28.
Philip 1.1.
many, in one ordinary Congregation. To who^ also the name Presbyter was
common. Such is the Ministry now in the Dutch and French Churches. Thirdly,
One Pastor of a Church containing no mo ordinary Linus was at Rome: Anianus at
Alexandria: Onesimus at Ephesus: Ignatius at Antioch: Polycarpus at Smyrna,
etc. Such also was the Rev. 2.1.
Angel of the Church in Ephesus, and in Smyrna, etc. The Scripture gives not
him the name Bishop peculiarly, when he has other assistant Pastors with him:
but other Writers do. Which truly I will not strive against. Fourthly, the
name Bishop is given to a Titular Diocesan Bishop. Of who^ none can be proved
ancienter then Iulianus the tenth Bishop in Alexandria. Fifthly, Diocesan
Bishops with Declarat. page 24. 25.
Maioritie of power are called Bishops. These began Nice, or otherwise under
Constantine. Though the Council speak of Metropolitans long before; yet their
power over their brethren was not ratifyed by any law Fifthly, Diocesan Bishops
with Declarat. page 24. 25.
Maioritie of power are called Bishops. These began Nice, or otherwise under
Constantine. Though the Council speak of Metropolitans long before; yet their
power over their brethren was not ratifyed by any law or public ordinnance
till then: it was before but arbitrary, by the churches affection, and no
otherwise. Sixthly, Bishop. Such are ours now in England. Of the original and
first beginning of such, I have spoken Page 66. 67.
before. Seaventhly, Pope or Universal Pastor has this name Bishop. He began
at Rome about 600. years after Christ, but came not to his absolut greatness
till diverse hundred years after. And this distinction will assuredly with case
be justified. Reason and experience do show such degrees in proceeding. And
thus far the Answer to D. Downames Defense of Diocesan Churches.


Objections are made also inte^sively, viz. against the Christian peoples right
to consent in Church govern. Objections against the peoples power answered.
It is fit we should answer these likewise, so far as is needful. Frst, great
and much pains have been taken by the adversaries of the truth to deprave the
plain and easy words of Matthewe 18.17. Tell the Church. They are content to
take them any way, so it be not the right way. Doct. Bilson spends a D.
Bilson. perp. gov. chap. 4.
whole Chapter to make them seem to signify a Senate or bench of Jewish Civil
Magistrates, which he learned only from a Physician Erastus. But there is a
sufficient refutatio^ of this opinion in the third Argument of The Divine
beginning and institution of Christ's true Visib. Church. Secondly, D. Bilson
contradicting himself, understands these words of an Ecclesiastical Senate,
or Synod. Thus also Do. Downame understands them, as Pa. 107.108
before we have seen; where is a sufficient answer likewise thereunto.
Thirdly, Master Johnson of the Separation (since in this point he turned his
opinion vpside down) Treat. of the exposit. of Mat. 18.19 Anno. 1611.
affirms that these words signify that the Jewish form of government is
by Christ ordained for the Gospel. I discern not well, whether he mean that
this rule for the Christian Church government should be formed after the
pattern of the Jewish Civil government, or Ecclesiastical, or both.
Whatsoever Jewish form of government he mean, his meaning can not be true.
For first, if Christ in these words meant the Jewish governors, the^ here is no
direction at all for the Christian Church government. Here is nothing then
that sounds to any such purpose. Christ says not here, Let my Disciples
hereafter in their Churches follow the form and order Judicial. In this
place there is no such thing. But as I suppose even May. Johnson him self
holds, Christ here in this place sets an order of government for his
Church under the Gospel. This in deed is most certainly true. Therefore his
othet opinion (that Christ here sends his Disciples to the Jewish governors)
is false. I grant Calvin and Beza think that Christ here alludeth to the
Jewish Church government in their particular Synagogues: but verily I cannot
co^ceave why, or how it should be so. Be it spoken with revere^ce to these rare
servants of Christ. Howbeit, Cal^i^ and Beza touching Mat. 18.17.
this nevertheles they hold from this place of Matthew, that the people have
right so far that nothing in Church government be obtruded on them (by any
Ecclesiastical Monarchy or Oligarchie) against their wills. Now this is the
truth, and we willingly agree unto it. Yielding the sway of all government to
the Pastor with his assistants in ordinary cases: yet reserving still a power
in the people to consent. And when a Church is destitute of Guides (as it has
fallen out, and may again fall out on occasion) then the people themselves
have full power to accomplish any Ecclesiastical action in the best order they
can, and particularly Church censures, even by virtue of this text. So that
then the Jewish Church-governement can not be here alluded unto; much less
required to be kept and practiced by Christians. Concerning which together
with all other Jewish ordinances, the Apostle teaches and confirms unto us
that all 2. Cor. 3.17.
those old things are passed away, and that all things (of such nature) under
the Gospel, are made new: and that the same things are Hebr. 12.27.
shaken and changed, and remain not now unto us. Wherefore fowerthly, they who
understand these foresaid words, Tell the Church, Math. 18.17. to be meant of
the whole Christian people assembled in an ordinary assembly, As our
Attestators do.
viz. that they are to be told, and that they are to be heard, (always in the
best and most Christian order that can be, which I grant does and must in
circumstances sometime differ) they, I say, do truly and rightly understand this
place according to the intent of Christ. Of which D. Bilson him self once
taught soundly, saying, Against the Semina^ lib. 3. pa. 70.
In Math. 18.17. The whole multitude of the faithful where he and they (the
Offender, and the Offended) live, are signified. And Lib. 2. page 170.
in Act. 20.28. The Church is taken for the people. Yea, The Church is never
taken in the New or Old Testament for the Priests alone, but generally for the
whole Congregation of the faithful. Let me ask a question; Was D. Bilson a
Brownist, was he an Anabaptist when he wrote thus? Why then does May. Downame
call us these odious names only for the same judgment? Or is he offended at
us, because we can not change and turn our professions to and fro, as they do
for advantage? Some will say, if this sense of these words be true, Separation
do hold, which also it seems was Cyprians usual practice of old. Answ.
I answer, this consequence is far from truth. For the sense of the words (in
Matthew 18.17.) certainly is thus, and no otherwise to be taken, viz. plainly
and literally for the whole Congregation. Seeing there is Def. 1.226.
no cause nor reason to the contrary, as elsewhere is observed. But yet it
follows not that that manner of hearing and sentencing of causes must be in
every Church perpetually and necessarily. Before page 108. etc.
I grant it may be so in some Churches, at some times: and so Cyprians practice
was, and now it may be again in some estates of a Church, good and
commendable. But to hold those popular Circumstances in every Church
Separation it self is no such error, as this is.
perpetual and necessary absolutely as the Separation does, it was neithtr
Cyprians meaning, nor Chrsstes, nor any well advised Christians. And yet again
no man may take from the people absolutely all manner of free consent, as the L.
Bishops do. This is a Substantial breach on the other hand. Incidit in Scyllam
qui vult vitare Chary^din. Extremities on both sides are to be avoided.

As this, so other textes likewise Do. Bilson would wrest from us in his Perp
go^^ page 95.
8. Chap. touching jurisdiction. First Act. 15.22.23.25.28. where manifestly
the Apostles joined the people with them selves in determining a controversy,
It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us to lay no more burden on you. Now
this he grants expressly, saying: Page 9^.
The matter was handled in the audience and presence of the whole Church and
with a general consent letters were written in the names of all. To which
Horn against Fecknam. pa. 11^
B. Horn before him agrees also. Nay, D. Bilson goes further, saying: Perp.
gov. page 373.
This course the Apostle taught the Church of Christ to follow by their
example. Which is all that we desire. Yet he labors to frustrate this act
of the Apostles and to make it of no use to us. To which intent he has 4.
exceptions. 1. Page ^7.
Paul stood not in doubt of his preaching, neither needed he the consent of
Apostles or Elders to his doctrine. I answer, he doubted not of his doctrine,
nor submitted it to any to be censured. Yet he needed the consent of other
Apostles and of the Church at Jerusalem, for more countenance to his teaching.
And that was all Paul's purpose here. 2. Page 97.
The Apostles wanted neither authority nor sufficiency to determine the
matter. But they did, in this case. We must know therefore, there is a twofold
dertermining and deciding of questions. One is particular and personal, which
every true Pastor may perform in his ordinary teaching. Much more the
Apostles singly might. And so Paul was sufficient, and did him self resolve
many doubts to the Romans, to the Corinthians, to others without a Council.
Another determining and deciding of questions is Cumulative, (as I may call it)
when it is done with more countenance and credit. The former may be of as
certain truth: but this later always has more weight among men. Thus Paul
was not sufficient in this case. Yea the H. Ghost in this case would not have
diverse other Apostles with Paul to seem sufficient by them selves, without the
Whitak. de Council. quest. 3. c. 3.
whole Church there: and specially so far forth, as it was to bind this
present Church. Thirdly, There were Page 96. 97. 98. 389.
reasons which they had why even the whole Church was herein to concur. What
then? There are, and ever will be special reasons still for the like. I say,
such reasons are now for us as those the^ were, yea more weighty. Wherefore
the imitating of this Apostolic Act is still necessary. 4. He says, Page 98.
Who decided the controversy but Peter and James? If he mean, they 2. were
the principal men whose credit drew the rest to consent; It is true. But it
shows not that they only decided the doubt. Rather they all decided it, who
being present expressly concurred in the decree and promulged it, saying; It
seemed good to the H. Ghost and to us. In all this therefore he has nothing to
infringe his own grant. Yea thus this ought to be imitated evermore.


Next, 1. Cor. 5.12.13. Do ye not judge them that are within? But God judges
them that are without. Put away therefore from among your selves that wicked
man. This Page 2^^
he would make void: yet he knows not how. He says, here are 2. great
doubts. First, what it is to deliver to Satan: Secondly, by whom it was. For
the first, whatsoever Delivering to Satan is, he himself grants that this
here is excommunication, saying; page 10^.
That he was excommunicated I make no doubt. He shows also here by the
very text that the Corinthia^ Church should have done it. Which is enough: what
need we more? Yet he striveth against it, saying: Page 102.
Paul decreed it alone. page 99.
He asks not their consents, he prays not their aid, he refers not the
matter to their liking. How vain is this? A King may decree to make a law to
punish Adultery: yet he may intend to have his Counsel and Parliament to
join therein with him. He may decree and determine to war on his enemy: yet
not without his Nobles and Commons joining with him. Neither needed the Apostle
in this case to pray their aid, etc. The matter in Nature was odious: also it
was open, old, and unrepented. He him self was their Father in the Gospel,
their Apostle, and Guide. It stood not therefore with the Corinthians piety,
nor his dignity to pray the^ in this business, but Yea, and to command them
doctrinally: not in order of government.
to admonish them and to show them what they should speedily do. So then he
prays not their aid, nor asks their consent in this; yet he presumes of
it and uses it, verse. 4. Yea 2. Cor. 2.8. etc.
for his absolving, he prays their aid, and asks their consent. Therefore
in casting him out, he used it also. Again, if Paul alone excommunicated him,
then it was fully finished. For he did all that lay in him, to accomplish it,
saying; (...).
I have now judged it as if I were present. But the man was not yet
excommunicat. See 2. Cor. 2 6.
Therefore he requires the Church to proceed so as he had determined, verse
4.13. Where the text saying: You being come together and my Spirit in the name
of the Lord Jesus, shows their joint concurrence and consent was to be had
for this action. In the name of the Lord Jesus, signifying that holy work and
ordinance of Christ which also should be to the honor and praise of the Lord
Jesus. He interprets my Spirit apparently amiss; that is, They shall find
the force of my Spirit present. But the Circumstances show it to be only, the
consent of his heart or Spirit. For else the very same thing is twice noted in
one line, ( viz. the same force and power). 1. my Spirit. 2. with the power of
the Lord Jesus. Which whosoever marketh, will see it to be here nothing so.
Beside, how could it be? This in 1. Cor. 5.5.1^ no bodily tormenting by Satan.
The force of his Spirit could not be present, his body being so far absent.
Never did any Apostle give any to the Devil to be tormented, without seeing the
party, without speaking with him. But the consent of his Spirit to
Excommunication might well be present at Co^inth signified in his present
letters, though his person were far absent, as then it was. Again, the text,
Therefore also this was no bodily tormenting.
you being come together, and my Spirit with the power of the Lord Jesus, to
deliver such a one to Satan, etc. shows that they were to com together to
deliver him to Satan: this the words import as well as that Paul did it.
lastly, he grants, the Apostle Page 102.
rebuked them for not putting the transgressor from amongst them. Therefore he
confesses they had power to do it. And that again is enough. Where note also
that this Do. in his striving to the contrary, striveth against our worthy
See before page 24. 27. 33. 34.
Attestators before named. Who are against him in his other point also, viz.
that this delivering to Satan is Page 100.
to be smitten with some grievous plague or disease, miraculously inflicted by
the Apostle. Yea, herein he stands against him self teaching at large that
here in 1. Cor. 5. was Against the Seminar part. 3. p. 58
nothing but Excommunication. But what reason makes him now thus to think?
How should The power and might of Christ be showed in excluding a man from the
Word and Sacraments? Pronouncing a few words is sufficient for that matter. A
strange speech. Has not Excommunication the power and might of Christ in it,
because pronou^cing a few words is sufficient for that matter? In preaching the
Gospel pronouncing a few words is sufficient for that matter: and yet it is
the power of God, Romans 1.16. In sanctifying the Mystical signs, pronouncing a
few words is sufficient for that matter: and yet the virtue of Christ is in
them. Even so Excommunication, an other of Christ's Spiritual Ordinances,
though it be done by his Servantes pronou^cing but a few words, yet the power
of Christ the author and Lord thereof, is not wanting in it, either to convert
the Sinner or the more to condemn him. Which answers him also, that (...) in
Paul is often taken for Miraculous power in the Apostles. Pa. 101.10^
For in that to the Romans before cited, any may see it to be otherwise, a
place very like to this in 1. Cor. 5.4.5. Neither is him self confident in
this reason. For if it be but often, then he grants it is not so always. And
then it may be otherwise here, as indeed it is. Beside, I remember not above 1
Cor. 12.28. which is not often
one such place as he signifies, and yet there it is in the plural number
(...) powers, not in the singular. Between which place and ours in hand, there
is apparently very great difference. Again he says, To deliver unto Satan,
is more then to Excommunicate. It is not. Yea, and him self held so likewise
Against the Semina. part. 3. page 58.
heretofore. He which is excommunicat and as a Heathen, is out of Christ's
Kingdom. And being out of Christ's Kingdom, he is in the power of Satan.
Therefore it is all one. Neither is it true that many are secluded from the
company of the godly for a time that are not yielded to Satan: or that many
were delivered to Satan (by the Church assembled together, as this was don
here) without Excommunication. Or that Ananias and Elymas were delivered to
Satan; Which him self Against the Seminar. part. 3. page 53 54.
once contradicted. He touches here many things beside to no purpose, viz.
This Sinner was delivered to Satan, that it might bring him to repentance. Why,
and that is the proper end of Excommunication. Again the end of this action
was the destruction of the flesh: which in Excommunication has no sense,
except it be Metaphorical. It is not so. This destruction of the flesh ( viz.
the lusts of the flesh) has great sense in Excommunication. And it seems
rather a Metonymicall phrase, then a Metaphorical, as he names it. He adds,
Excommunication indangereth the Spirit, and touches not the flesh. Nay, it is
intended to save the Spirit, that is, the Regenerat man by repentance. So the
Spirit is 1. Cor. 5.5.
here understood. Also Excommunication touches the flesh: for it serves to
humble and mortify the lusts of the flesh, or the unregenerate man. He says,
this is dome not by Excommunication, but by repentance. Strangely spoken. I
say, it is done by both. For these are Subordinat, not opposite. As well he
might say, the lusts of the flesh are not destroyed by Gods word, but by
repentance. The truth of both is alike. Here also the one of it self is no
consequent to the other. For many are preached unto, that never repent:
aswellas Excommunicated that never repent. And yet who knows not that God
has ordained that repentance should follow from both, as it does indeed in
many. Who would not wonder to see such dallying, in such a man, in a cause so
serious? The like is also where he says, Excommunication is before and after
in other words expressed. Yea, and this is not against our sense of Delivering
to Satan: but much for it. Seeing all the Circumstances and coherence of the
text here, both before and after, speak only of Excommunication; and the
phrase it self, to deliver to Satan, is so fit and agreeable to express the
same, even according to Christ's description of it, Mat. 18.17.
Let him be to thee as a Heathen, that is, without the Church Christ's Kingdom,
under the power and rule of Satan, in like state and condition as the very
infidelles and unbelievers are. This therefore is much for us. But (says he)
Page 100.
This is no such new found or vain exposition. Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose,
Theodoret, Occumenius, Theophilact etc. embrace it. Wonderful! This opinion
and these very testimonies he cited Against the Semin. part. 3. page 54.56.
heretofore as being the Papists. Then he Page ^5.
resisted and refuted the sam^ at large by Ambr. in 1 Cor. 5.
Ambrose, August. in que^t. vet. and nov. Test. 49.
Austin, and Ierom ad Hiliod. and ad R^par.
Jerome: insinuating that this Ierom. in 1. Cor. 5.
Jerome, (which now he grou^deth on, and which then the Papists alleged) was
a cou^terfait, or suspected at least. Is this fidelity? is this upright
dealing? For adva^tage to join with the Antichristian Enemies, yea against him
self: to allow of the self same witness which him self then branded with
infamy: opposing Chrysostom to Chrysostom, Jerome to Jerome, Ambrose there
to Ambrose here: and (which passes) interpreting the same words of Theodoret
contrary here, to that he did Page 59.
there. What mutabilitie is this! But to the point, I answer; This his sense
out of Chrysostom, etc. here, can not be true. viz. that this delivering to
Satan, was to be tormented corporally by Satan. For then the whole Church of
Corinth had this miraculous power given the^ at Paul's appointement. They were
then the visible isntrumental doers of this Apostolic Miracle in Paul's
behalf. Also, then the Apostles had power, and did use to strike men whom they
never saw nor spoke with being far from them in other countries. All which how
absurd they are, who sees not? Again, this Sinners 2. Cor. 2.
restoring, was without Miracle: his casting out therefore was so likewise.
Neither can it be thought that 1. Tim. 8.20.
Paul corporally tormented Page 103.
Hymenaus and Alexander. He only excommunicated them: and yet not he alone, but
with the Churches concurrence and consent whereof they were. For so was his
practice in other actions of Church-governement, as we see.

In Page 226.
another place he reads, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. not as it should be. He reads, If
any obey not our saying, note him by a letter. It should be, Bez. in These. 3.1^
If any obey not our saying in the Epistle, note him. That is, Excommunicat
him, and withdraw your selves from him, as it is in verse. 6. This he requires
the whole Church of the Thessalonians to do: not to signify such a one to
Paul, that he might do it. The word is not (...) signify to me: but (...) set a
mark on him: viz. of Excommunication. For it can bear no other sense.

Now touching Calling to the Ministry, Chap. 7. page 66.
he labors to take from us quite, First Act. 1. about Mathias election to be
an Apostle. It is true (as he says) An Apostle might not be chosen by me^. Yet
here Gods will was that men should, and they did go about this Election, and
proceeded in it, and managed the same so far as possibly men might. That is,
men performed many weighty and remarkable parts therein: not that there was
any simple necessity for men to concur herein, but only it pleased God it
should be so for an example to posterity to follow, and to practice all that
was ordinary in the same. D. Bilson excepteth, it is not expressed that the
Church intermedled in the choice of Mathias. Which is not true. For first, all
this action was performed Act. 1.15 verse. 23.
in the midst of the Church: Secondly, verse. 24.
they appointed two; and verse. 26.
they prayed; and " they cast lotts; and he was accounted by common consent,
as it were (...).
by voices, with the Eleaven. He says, prayers and lotts were performed by the
Apostles, as the principal directors of that action; therefore they also
presented the two. Indeed they that did the one part, did the other. The
cohere^ce of the text shows it well. But the truth is not as he says. For
these things were performed only by Peter, as the principal director of the
whole action at this time. The Apostles are no where mentioned in this business;
there is not one tittle of the^. To the point: all those particular actions in
this Election before Plurally named.
named, are and must be referred to all the Disciples, who are here expressly
mentioned, and in the midst of who^ all these things were done. I say, Peter
alone did them as the Moderator and director: but jointly with him all the
Disciples concurring and consenting presented these two, prayed saying, cast
lottes, All the Church joined with Peter.
and accounted the Elected with the Eleaven. Thus this is decided in the text;
the force and coharence of the words convince it, though the Doct. denies it.
He shows Hom. 3. i^ Act.
Chrysostom saying, page 67.
Peter might most lawfully have chosen Mathias. I understand Chrysostomes
meaning to be that he might lawfully have nominated and propounded one, or mo.
And this is true. Otherwise Chrysostomes speech is amiss, and the D. knows
it to be untrue, acknowledging that an Apostle can not be chosen by men, as
before I noted. This therefore he can not take hold of: the Bellarm. de Cler.
1.7.
Jesuits catch at it likewise as he does, but none of them all get by it. Why
does he not rest on Chrysostomes other words here, that Peter him self did
not appoint those two, but all did it. And he did all by the common sentence of
the Disciples nothing by his own authority, nothing by command. This is
true, this is plain, this is for imitation for ever: yet this he (as also the
Jesuit) rejects, though Cypr. Epist. 1.4.
Cyprian also say as much, and our Rain. Co^fer. pa. 153
late Writers. May. Calvin justly taxes the Papists pervers boasting of the
Fathers, and we are to tax our present adversaries likewise: Seeing they seem
to draw against us all in one line. Says he of them to the French King; Ists
pij scilicet filij (qua sunt and ingenij, and iudicij, and animi dexteritate)
Patrum tantum lapsus and errores adorant. Calvin. ad Reg. Gall.
Quae benedicta sunt, vel non observant, vel dissimulant, vel corru^punt. Vt
dicas prorsus illis cura fuisse in auro legere stercora. Such good children
they are to these Fathers, that only their faults and errors they adore, and
it is all their care amongst their gold, to gather dirt.

Next, Act. 6.5. The multitude chose 7. Deacons. First, P^^pet. gov. page 67.
68.
he grants this. Then he would make it void for any use with us, as
Bellarmine does likewise. Says he, That the people should very well like and
fully trust such as should be Stewards of their goods had evident reason. And I
pray, is there not more reason that they should very well like and fully trust
such as must be the Guides of their souls? Those by whose means they shall
go to heaven, or to hell? I trow there is much more reason for this. Neither
is this Page 82.
a matter exceeding the reach of Christian people, viz. to discern, and try,
and like their Ioh. 10.3.4.5. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Oct. 17.11. 1. Cor. 10.15.
Teachers. Against Act. 14.23. he Page 70.
obiecteth word for word out of Bellarmine that (...) is not to be taken here
for the peoples voyce-giving as the profane Orators among the Grecians applied
it. I answer, it is necessary so to be taken. Are not they the true authors
of the Greek language? Do not all men try the true property of Greek words
and phrases by them? Nay, but the Church-writers understand it for Laying on of
hands in Ordination. I answer, they have changed the native and right use of
the word; they keep not the original property of it, as they do not in Reas.
for refor page 64 65 and before Pa. 109.127.218.211.
many other words mo. Time cha^geth many words from their original verity.
Wherefore the Apostles doubtless spoke and wrote Greek, not like the phrase
which came up 300.4000. years after them: but as the authentike Grecians before
and in their time did speak. Thus then it were folly, yea madness to interpret
them by those so long after them. Again he says, this word signifies never
to take the consents of others. Which is not true, as I have Reas for refor.
page 47
showed out of Demosthenes contra Timocrat. Where he says thus; (...): which
of the laws the chief Authors shall appoint by the peoples voice-giving, the
same is ratifyed. Here the word plainly signifies the Guids taking the
consent of others. Further he obiecteth, that this word sometime signifies Act.
10.41.
generally to apoint, and no more. I grant, there is a Synecdoche.
figurative and improper use of the word. The necessity of the Circumstance
there makes that it must be so. But here, in Act. 14.23. there is no
necessity, nor reason at all to take it improperly, or otherwise then as al
authentike Grecians do use it, viz. for appointing by the peoples voices, or
free consents, as I have said.

These are D. Bilsons special objections against our texts of Scripture for
the peoples consent in Church government under the Apostles. Bellarmine
deals against one or two more. He says, Ioh. 10.
we are commanded to hear Christ's voice, and not a strangers, and to try the
Spirits, only by atte^ding to the doctrine of other Pastors holding their old
custom, and chiefly to the doctrine of Rome. Where he presumes that those
other Pastors can not err, and chiefly they of Rome. But the Apostle tells
us that Romans 3.4
Every man is a liar, that is, subject to error. Wherefore the Holy Ghost
bids the people to attend Isa. 8.20.
to the Law, and to the Testimoni^ in such cases; and Ioh. 5.39.
to Search the Seriptures, and shows that in so doing, 2. Pet. 1.19
we do well. Again, the Jesuit makes a show of answering: viz. to 1. Pet.
5.2. that Ministers may not be Lords over the Church. But he answers not:
only he says Bishops are servants to the Church, as Scholemaisters are to
their Scholars, and Magistrates to the people, who yet do command and rule them
solely. Which is nothing to the text, forbidding Ministers to be Lords over the
As also 2. Cor. 1.24.
people: he answers not that point. Last, to this 1. Tim. 3.1^.
The Church is the pillar and ground of truth, he says it is true by hearing
Peter (the Pope) always. Absurd: the Pope is not Peter, nor Peter's true
Successor. The text shows that the Ephesian Church then, and every Church
still, is a pillar and ground of truth: to whom the members are therefore
ordinarily to hearken, and therefore they have the Keys and Church government
Mat. 18.17.
committed by Christ unto them.

But D. Bilson gives not over so. Chap. 9.
He has some general objections against our grounds of Scripture. First, Page
10^.
None can give Imposition of hands but they that first received the same. They
must have it themselves, that will bestow it on others.

Lay men have it not.
Therefore they can not give it.
I answer, the Proposition fails. Under the Law some of the Nomb. 8.10.
people Imposed their hands on the Levites: in the Gospel the 12. Apostles
imposed their hands in making Ministers. Yet these received no impositio^ of
hands them selves. Again, we must note here two distinctions: and so the
Assumption is false. First, Lay men (as he calls them) are considered singly,
or jointly. They have no Ecclesiastical power singly. But as they are joined
together in a Visible Church which is a Spiritual Body politic, and a
Mystical Body of Christ, (whether they be many, or Mat. 18.20.
few) so even these Lay men have received the power of all the holy things of
God, all Gods ordinances spiritual. As the Apostle says unto them; 1. Cor.
3.^2.23.
All things are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. The whole
Congregation is Christ's Church, his Spouse, his Kingdom, his sacred Body, as I
Page 164. 165. 166.
have said. From whence by a necessary and undeniable consequence it follows
that Christ has given the power of Imposing hands, of Censures, of
Sacraments, of Preaching the word, and all, unto the Congregation to be
performed in the best order they can. And so it is, that our Attestators Page
32. 33. 34.
before have taught, that the Keys are given the whole Church. Yet consider
secondly, that the people thus have received all these spiritual things, and
so can give the^ only potestative (as I may say) that is, they have the power
of them. But active, actually they only can administer them who are the
Churches instruments for that purpose by them assigned. Thus Tertullian may
mean well, saying, that sometime Tertull. de Baptis.
a Lay man may Baptize: namely, if the Church assign him in a case of
necessity, when an ordinary Minister can not be had. Otherwise I can not
justify his speech. Yea, the Ordinary exercise of Prophecy, that is,
Prophecy.
Interpreting of Scripture publicly in the Church, is to be performed by the
1. Cor. 14.1.31.34.
particular people being by the Church orderly appointed thereunto. Touching
the excellency and most profitable use of which Apostolical exercise, (though
now it be every where almost out of use) I wish the Reader to see Ma Zuingl.
ad Valentin. Compar. et Antibol. advers. En^ser.
Zuinglius, and Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 14. Iac. Acont. Strat. Sat. 4. Calv.
Inst. 4 1.12. and 1. Cor. 14.
others also.

Further, touching Imposition of hands the D. seems here to esteem it as
the very Ordination it self, that it gives the power to Preach and Baptize,
etc. But it is not so. There are two Essential parts of Calling to the
Ministry, Election and Ordination: The imposing of hands is but a Ceremony
of putting the Minister (before made) into possession of his right, and a
commending of him to the blessing of God. Though all these actions belong to
the people so, as before I have showed; yet Imposition of hands (the
Ceremony) may possibly be wanting in a true Minister, and sufficient
Ordination may be without it. Yea, true Ministers have been without it. Howbeit,
I suppose Christ's Church offends in omitting it: for though it be but a
ceremony, yet it is Apostolic. Where also that which follows, in answered;
though to give power to preach and baptize be more then to preach and baptize,
yet the people have the power of both. And, though Imposition of hands to
Ordination may be said to be a kind of Sacrament, yet the people have the
power of it, as I have showed. But Calvin says, Institut. 4.3.16.
Only Pastors did it. Be it so: and let them only do it still (for they are the
fittest instruments for that purpose which the Church can assign) viz. when
they are to be had. This the^ is nothing material. Seeing we seek only that
the Pastor should not ordain in his own name and power (but in the churches)
next after Christ, and by their free consent. Also, if no Pastor can be had,
that then some other (the fittest they have) may act the Churches godly
determination, for them, in their name, and by their right received from Christ
their Head. For people so joined together, as Page 164.
before I showed, may essentially be a Church, though they want a Pastor. And
Master Calvin gainsayeth nothing of this: but See before, page 43. 164 80. 81.
he joined in Geneva to the practice of it, and in their places Luther and
Zuinglius did also, etc. Finally, we cannot but note this speech of Doct. Bills.
more then strange. Page 109.
To create Ministers by imposing hands, A strange speech.
is to give them not only power and leave to preach the word, and dispense the
Sacraments; but also the grace of the holy Ghost to make them able to execute
both parts of their function. Alas, why then do they create so many unable and
ungracious Ministers in England, which there do swarm? Why do they so, If
their imposing of hands can give all this grace? Where also is answered, that
he would Page 110.
bar the people from the power of Excommunication, because they have no power
to administer the Word and Sacraments. I have showed how the people have power
of all these, and of all spiritual actions beside. Where he says; The Pastors
shall yield account of them to God. So shall the Church also. But therefore
none may compel the Pastors. What? may not the Magistrate, if he see need? I
suppose he will retract that. Yea; and say I, the Church may compel Pastors in
her manner, viz. when she sees urgent need. And yet properly he can not be
compelled: his own will carries him: vohint as non cogitur: So that how soever
the Church (when they see need) may inioyne him, yet his own will is it which
he shall answer for. Pastors therefore shall indeed give account to God for their
administering the Word and Sacraments, and for their not administering. Namely,
for their part. But none of them are therefore Lords of the word and
Sacraments, nor absolut arbitrary disposers of them under Christ; Where he
adds, that Page 111.
the moderation of the Keys and imposition of hands were at first settled in
the Apostles: and that this cannot be doubted. It is not so. I do both doubt
it, and am sure of the contrary. Christ settled the moderation of the Keys
first in Mat. 18.17.
the Church. His commission to his Apostles was given Mat. 28.19. Ioh. 20.23.
after. Not depriving the Church of her former power, but joining the Apostles
and their successors to her as her Guides. Withal two things further are to
be noted. 1. Doct. Bilson here makes all Pastors indifferently to have power
to Minister and deny Sacraments and Censures. Whereby it follows that the
Diocesan Bishops only have not this power. For says he, they (the ordinary
Ministers) must be trusted with both, or with neither: Page 110. 133. 162. 199.
162.
You must free them from both, or leave both unto them. Wherein also none may
compel them or force them. Sure, this quite overthrows his own practice and
state, and the whole order in England. 2. We may observe a Syllogism in his
own words here and elsewhere. Speaking indefinitly of those which have
authority in the Church, he says; page 111.
They must look not only what they challenge, but also from whom they derive
it. If from the Apostles, then are they their Successors: if from Christ, as
Colleagues joined with the Apostles, we must find that consociation in the
Gospel, before we clear them from intrusion. No man should take this honor
unto him self, but he that is called of God as the Apostles were. If they be
called by Christ, Heb. 5.
read their assignation from Christ: if they be not, surcease that presumption.
And to do otherwise, is to Page 19 Mat. 15
transgress the commandment of God for the traditions of Men.

Against the Seminar. part. 2. page 318.
The authority of Patriarchs, Archbishops, meaner Bishops over other
Ministers, was not by the institution of Christ or his Apostles, but long after
by the consent of the Churches, the custom of the times, and the will of
Princes. Therefore (the Conclusion follows of it self) the authority of
Patriarchs, Archbishops, meaner Bishops over Ministers, is intrusion and
presumption, and transgressio^ of Gods commandment. At us Doctor Downame would
rage, if we should conclude so: but I hope he will take it better in Do.
Bilsons words. His Page 114. 115. and
Fathers and Councills, if they absolutely exclude the peoples consent, I leave
under his own censure Here and also pa. 22^
before observed. But I take them to mean otherwise, though indeed a very
great power and almost absolute was now exercised by many Diocesan Bb. in
Exco^municatio^ and Absolution. He says Cyprians and Augustines yielding the
people a consent, was Page 119.
not for any right they had, but to prevent scandalls. But their right both by
precept, and practice of the Apostles, is sufficiently showed before. Yet
indeed it was to prevent scandalls among the people also. Which very point is a
firm reason likewise, that this spiritual liberty of the people then was
their right. For first, they could not be scandalized so often, fearing to loose
their consent in such affairs so many ages together, and in so far distant
countries, but that they were then taught and they learned from time to time
that this was their right. If the contrary then had been taught, then they could
not have been scandalized, nor made jealous least they might be wronged in this
behalf as they were. That they were, is manifest by all monumentes of those
times, and by our adversaries confession. Therefore the peoples free consent in
their spiritual government was then taught, and it was their right, in the
ages after the Apostles. And truly this ever has been, is, and will be scandalous
and offensive justly to a Christian understanding Congregation, viz. to have
any thing Spiritually and Ecclesiastically forced on them. The case is
perpetual. But Mat. 18.7
woe to them by whom offenses come, specially to such. Therefore woe to them who
yield not this liberty to such people perpetually. Yet he says, Page 112.
In Scripture he finds neither Example of it, nor reason for it. Who can let
words? If men list to speak, who can stay them? Some will shut their eyes, and
say they see not light at noone. Against Election with the peoples consent, he
said before, Page 69.
Examples are no precepts: As it were acknowledging Examples. How beit besides
that this is the Bellarm. de Cleric. 1.7.
very Jesuits shift, he him self co^futeth al these evasio^s, though they be
his own. First, yielding that Perp. gov. page 373.
the Apostles taught the Church by their example. Then testifying thus, Page 49.
This Prerogative to be best acquainted with the will and meaning of our
Savior, and to have their mouths and pens directed and guided by the holy
Ghost into all truth as well of doctrine as of Discipline, was proper to the
Apostles. Again, Page 43.
They set an order amongst Christians in all things needful for the
government, continuance, peace, and unity of the Church. And Page 106.
The Scriptures once written suffice all ages for instruction.

And here I beseech the Christian Readers of all degrees, that they take me
not amiss (to which some men's humors are to prone) viz. where in an other
place I have said, The particular Congregations of England are true Churches
Declar^^. page 6.
accidentally. My meaning is, that as those particular Congregations have in
them godly and holy Christians consociated together to serve God (so far as
they see) agreeablie to his word, so they are in right from Christ essentially
true Churches of God, and are so to be acknowledged by us, and in public not
to be absolutely separated from. But in respect as these Congregations are parts
of proper Diocesan and Provincial Churches, so they are true Churches of
Christ accidentally. In respect of them, it is an accide^t.
For proper Diocesan and Provincial Churches being not in the N. Testam. have
in them by accident the true essential form of Christ's Visible Churches.
Seeing also this form is repugnant to the constitution and form of the other;
as hertofore I noted, Reas. for ref. page 23.
and by comparing their diverse Definitions in Page 200. and 318.
this Treatise it will most plainly appear. And so these two diverse respects
and acknowledgementes (as I conceave) may well bs yielded to the particular
Congregations now in England; neither do I see any just exception against it.

In vain also does Doct. Down. vpbraid us, that Def. 4.81.
we seek to overturne as well those Churches where the Geneva discipline is
established, as ours. That Def. 1.10.
we agree with no reformed Church in the world. That Page 38. 47.
non^ are of our mind but Brownists, and such like. He makes the Brownistes
happy men. Can he reproove them if they follow Zuinglius, Luther, Bucer, P.
Martyr, Viret, Calvin, Beza, Danaeus, Vrsinees, Gualter, etc. And not the later
only, but the elder Christians also. For all these (we have seen) do consent
with us in our profession. And it is a slander, that in Geneva, or any where
else, the reformed Churches do substantially differ from our judgment. As may
be seen through out the 3. and 4. Chapters before. If any thing dissona^t from
those testim. may now be found in some of these Churches (which I will not
deny) then it comes to pass with the^ as with goodly and fair Houses: A
Similitude.
which being inhabited by men, will need sweeping very often. If they be not
swept and cleaned, they will soon become foul. And so truly it may be, in
some of the Churches before named. Which can be no prejudice to us, who seeing
transgression creep in, do wish all men, and even them also, ad originem
reverti, Cyprian. cont. Epist. Stepha^. De Unit. Eccles.
to return to the original and first Plantation both of them selves in
particular, and specially of all Churches* at the first. In the which only
there is safety. As for this intemperat Doctors railing words in calling this
our doctrine Def. 1.41. and 4.80.99.
Brownisticall, Anabaptisticall, Def. 3.142. and 4.81.
fanaticall, fantastical, dotage, frenzy, etc. We will bear it, knowing (as
Cyprian said of some such in his days) Cyprian Epist. 4.2.
Non possunt laudare nos, qui recedunt a nobis. We must look for hateful and
^^^lent words from them that fall from us. Yet in the mean while let him know
also, that in this he reprocheth not so much us, as those pillars of the truth
and lights of the Gospel before named zuinglius, Luther, Bucer, Martyr, Viret,
Calvin, and the rest; of whom we have directly received this doctrine and
profession. These are our Masters herein, as in the beginning I said.

Our Do. obiecteth often that these are partial, and that this is their own
cause. And that as well we might cite Def. 4.30.
May. Cartwright and May. Travers, as some of these. Yea he will have Jerome
also to be Def. 4.137.
partial. Yet we frankly acknowledge Jerome to be theirs, touching the
lawfulnes of Dioces. Jerome not ours simply.
Bishops. Although he, and many other of the Fathers beside, are with us in
this, that Diocesan Bishops are not Apostolical but Humane. And this verily
they teach far from partiality. Partial they may be for the said Prelacie,
not against it. And the truth is, they were notoriously partial for it; it was
indeed their own cause. Who are partial.
They may be partial and are wont so to be counted who are likely to get by
their opinion some "temporal commodity; not they who loose by it. Now the
Fathers, Cui bono? Cassianu^ erotema.
specially under Constantine and after, by approoving Diocesan Prelacie, got
great honor, power, and rule among the people, and wealth and pleasure, what
they desired. Which, by opposing against it, they should have lost. Whence
certainly it is, that D. Downame might as well cite B. Whitgift, B. Bancroft,
and B. Bilson for his authors, as some of those ancientes, viz. as well as B.
Eusebius, B. Epiphanius, B. Theodoret, B. Damasus, B. Leo, B. Chrysostom, etc.
Who questionles in this point were very partial. And no les (if not more) may
be thought of some of those Diocesan L. Bishops who began our Church
reformation in England. They by proceeding no further did get much temporal
commodity; which, by setting the Church state nearer to the form Apostolic,
they must needs have lost. And so they, though otherwise (as likewise those
Ancientes) were good and godly Fathers, yet they were me^, and might easily be
partial in this. Good and godly Fathers; ye^ Men.
Which, and more we may think of many of our Diocesan Lord Bishops since.
Most of all, of D. Downame himself; who besides these temporal hopes, being
a Diocesan L. Bishops fonne, had need of much grace (I confess) to cause him
to degenerat. But, I pray then, has he done wisely to object (as he does
every foot) against those singular instruments and very effectual reformers,
our Attestators, and others like them, that they were partial* and that this
was their own cause? Indeed they were partial, that is, they took part
thoroughly with the sincerity of the Gospel, and stood against all Papal and
Pontifical overruling of Gods people spiritually: and so should this Doct.
and others do well, if they were partial likewise. But partial otherwise they
neither were, nor could be, viz. they did not get, but lost by this their
proceeding great worldly honor, much power, and rule among the people, large
wealth, dainty pleasure, and ease; which ours now do abound with, as all the
world sees. Whereby the world sees likewise, which side may rather plead
partiality to be in those, whom they take to be their adversaries.

In many places D. Downame signifies that the godly late defenders of the
Gospel do mislike only Def. 4.151.157.158.161.
popish tyrannizing Bishops, not orthodoxall Bishops, as he presumes ours to
be. But let him know, that those are Orthodoxall who imitate the Apostles and
the pattern of the Church left us in the New Testament. And they are
tyrannizing and not Orthodoxe viz. in this.
nor truly believing, who imitate the popish, though otherwise they be not
papists. Cicero said well to Antonie; Cicer. Philippic. 2.
Miror te Antoni, quorum fasta imitere little exitus non perhorrescere. I wonder
Antonie (said he) that thou fear not their judgment, whose deeds thou
imitatest. Now how we imitate the very form of the Popish Church Government,
all the world sees, and the Gospel rueth. What means the rack and the
wrack of many consciences, viz. the Oath ex officio? What, the Bishops
depriving and imposing of Ministers without, Imitation of Popish
Church-governement.
yea contrary to the Congregation? What mean also such Excommunications?
What, their imprisoning of Christians? and punishing their purses with fees,
fines, etc. Are these the parts of Orthodoxe Bishops? Are these things
approved of those godly Writers? Nothing less. Likewise his vain and
frivolous seeking to avoid the Waldenses, Wickliffe, Hus, Zuinglius, Luther,
Oecolampadius, Bucer, Martyr, Calvin, etc. our Tindal, Fr. and Ioh. Lamberts,
Bradsord, Bale, etc. is of no worth. Some of the^ signify that they disalow
not Diocesan Bishops simply. Well, no more do I, as I have showed Page
15.16.73.89.97.
before. Yet hereby appears no allowance of ours in England* Our old English
translators of the New Testament, and some other Writers since, do express
the word Church by Congregation. But says our Doctor, here by they mean the
Def. 2.106.107.108.
Vnivesall Church. Which answer is untrue, and absurd. That is, where they
speak of a Visible and Ministe. Church: of which only our question is.
Speaking of this, that they should by a Congregation signifye either
Universal, or Provincial, or Diocesan Church, is a most false, and unlikely
conceit. Can any of these be one Visible Congregation in the singular number?
He alleges (as he thinks) textes for his pupose Matt. 16. Ephe. 1. and 5.
Which surely may well, yea they are to be understood of a Visible
Congregation, viz. indefinitly taken. See hereof the Divine beginning and
institution of Christ's Visible Church. Argum. 26. and 23. Of May. Beza Def.
4.166.
he affirms, that he wished with all his heart for the Diocesan Bishops
governeme^t in Geneva. Which is as true as that which the Jesuits blazed
abroad, how Beza before his death recanted his religion. Beza lived to co^vince
the Jesuits of untruth to their faces. If he were now alive, he would do the
like to this Doct. and those other of who^ he says he heard it. The like
audacitie is in that his report, that the most learned and judicious Divines in
France and Geneva, could be content that Diocesan Bb. government were renewed
among them. The most learned in France and Geneva? Verily as they were who
renewed it Scotland of late. Most learned, and most judicious were they? Laus
proprio sordescit in ore. And I fear rather that known parable to be herein
verifyed; When the trees would have a King, the Olive, Figtree, and Vine
refusing, the Bramble took it on him, and said to the trees, Judge. 9.15
Come and put your trust under my shadow.

When all shifts fail, the adversaries will calumniate us as not dutiful to
the King, and Civil government. Which though D. Downame says, Def. 1.45.
he will not dispute, yet he maliciously insinuates. As touching dutiful
affection to the Kings person, none can say more (if he list) then D. Downame
him self in my particular. Yea, what words I spoke when he held his peace to
a Noble Lord of Scotl. An. 1601.
when neither of us durst be seen nor heard abroad, for fear of whom? Verily
of those who were his best friends since. If I was the^ so dutifully animated
toward the K. when we only hoped for his Majesty, God forbid I should be
less now, when we have him. Being so maligned and traduced as I am, I could
not but speak of this. Touching our duty generally to his Majesty's authority
and place, the evidence of reason and sense plead for us. Tertull. ad Scapul.
We acknowledge with Tertullian, that he is Solo Deo minor: Less then God
only. In Church government we impeach not his Soveraigtie, neither in matter,
nor manner. Therefore no way at all. The matter is only about Ezcommunication
and Making of Ministers, and such like things. Of the essential form whereof
Christ only is institutor, his Ecclesiastical servantes be the Ministers. The
King is neither Author, nor Minister. Unto this I suppose all agree. For the
manner, Seeing we hold each whole Church in the greatest extent can be no mo
ordinary Congregations then one, how can these either by their coming
together, or by their consenting in any Spiritual business only for them
selves: I say, how can these impeach the Kings power one hair? His Supreme
Universal overseeing and ordering them, and all others, yea his chastising
them (when they do any thing amiss) how can it be let, how can it be hindered
by such a handful? And because he must use Substitute Rulers in his general
overseeing the Churches of his Dominions; we from our hearts do honor them
also, and submit to them as to Gods Lieutenants in their several places. Only
we testify, that if the Kings power be committed to any Ecclesiastical person
(especially Civil coactive power) it draws with it both a breach of Christ's
ordinance, (who said to such Ministers, Luc. 22.25. Math. 20.25. 2. Chro. 19.11.
You shall not be so,) and also a torture to Christian subjects consciences.
Wherefore we desire of God, that the King would be pleased to appoint, as
Ichosaphat did, a Zebadiah to be general Governor under him in Church causes,
(so far as it pertains to the King to deal in them) and as King Henry 8. a
L. Cromwell his Vicegerent in rebus Ecclesiasticis, and as his Majesty him
self did (as I have heard) in Scotland before he came among us. Which may be
far more easily performed (with inferior subordinate Officers under them also
for this purpose in every place) in a Monarchy, then in any Popular, or
Aristocraticall Common wealth. Unity, how*
And verily this is it (and not a Diocesan Bishop) which would bring great
unity, and that according to God. If D. Downame will urge (which he grateth
upon in this said Def. 1.45.
page 45.) that the Churches indepe^dent authority stands not with the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, and that which else where we say, viz.
nothing may be obtruded on the Church against their wills. I answer, indeed
every Churches power is independent spiritually, and immediate under Christ: our
meaning therefore is, that by ptetended Spiritual authority, Chap. 9.
nothing may be obtruded and imposed on any true Church against their wills.
But we grant that Civil Magistrates may and sometime ought to impose good
things on a true Church against their wills, if they stiffly err as sometime
they may. And me thinks Doct. Downame also should be of this mind with us.
This is thus answered often before page 115. etc.
Hitherto our answer to some of our Adversaries chiefest objections, and evil
words. And so I draw to an end.

CHAP. IX. A short advertisement to the upright hearted and Christian Reader,
touching this Writing and Cause.
YET first I desire the Christian Reader to be advertised of a few things
pertaining to this Cause. Seave^ things I entreat him to take notice of. First,
how great a blame and Downame, a principal Logician to treat so largely (as
in his Sermon and defenc. he has done) concerning the Nature, Form, and
Constitution of Christ's true Visible Church, and yet in all this not once to
define the same. Which defect of D. Bilson also is to be noted in his
perpetual government of the Church. Surely this one matter, viz. a Definition
of Christ's true Visible Church under the Gospel, well performed, would have
saved a great deal of pains and trouble, and would have preve^ted much error.
And thus it is wisely taught by Cicero that Cicer. Offic. 1.
all purposes reasonable ought to be begu^ with a Definition of the matter in
band. For the avoiding therefore of this imputation, I have in The Divine
beginning and institution of Christ's Visible Church.
another Treatise defined the said Visible Church of Christ. Which I did, and
rested not on some others who have Defined the Church heertofor, because I
desired to distinguish clearly between the Jewish Church, and the Christian;
which verily differ not in Accidents alone, but in kind of government and in
essential constitution. The Jewish and Christian Church government differ
substantially.
Which difference I know not who has touched heretofore, and included in any
Definition? In so much that from hence has arisen no small occasion of
grievous errors. Howbeit yet for the precise name of Definition or Description,
I strive not: let men call it what they will. Only I take mine to be
convertible with Christ's true Visib. Church under the Gospel, and that
suffices me. Further, some think it long. For whose sakes I will here again
set down in effect the same Definition, though in other words, and more short.
Thus it is. A Definition of Christ's true Visible Church.
A Visible Church of Christ under the Gospel, is a Spiritual Body politic of
no mo ordinary Congregations then one; the people also having power of free
consent in their This is shorter, and yet as full as the other. Secondly,
whereas Do. Downame in his book of his Sermon and Defense picketh out me in
particular (besides his proper antagonist) to traduce and calumniat, I held it
necessary to Answer him in the points that concern me, and by the way some
other adversaries now and then, who oppugn this cause also which is the
original of all their il will against me. Professing (for my part) that my
purpose is hereafter to cease this manner of dealing in this matter, unless I
might do it upon more equal conditions, which I do not expect. The Lord (I
doubt not) will raise up others, that shall more effectually bear witness unto
this truth in due time, Even until the Toleration hereof in England, which
has been most Christianly Supplicated for, shall find grace and favor in his
Majesty's eyes: for the which I shall not cease to pray continually. Thirdly,
whereas the intricat, and tedious; I have here endeavored to make the
understanding thereof short, easy, and perspicuous. Namely by reducing the
whole substance of this controversy only to 2. Heads. The sumn^^ and
substance, of all our controversy.
viz. the Peoples free consent in their ordinary Church government: and that
the extent of Christ's true Visible Church under the Gospel contains one, and
not many ordinary Congregations. Which 2. points being plainly and honestly
handled, will bring an end of other differences also which are usually
considered in our general controversy. I hope therefore this my endeavor
will be profitable to such as would understand this cause briefly and
distinctly: at least my intent was that it should be, being my self very
desirous to draw our long contention (as much as I could) to a short issue.
Fourthly, I desire that this and all other my writings Reasons of my dissenting
herein. Also I have been constrained by Do. Downame and such other, to clear
and confirm the said reasons. And this is the only true cause (as the Lord
knows) of all my writing. Which how just it is, I desire all fearing God
uprightly to consider. Co^sequent 5.6.7, 8. page 129. etc.
7. Chapter in diverse and sundry respects. It preserves Christ's Honor and
Ordinance, and casts out Humane Tradition, it brings to our selves true
assurance, and cutteth of from the Papists (and others) all pretense which
otherwise Sixthly, the very Attestation of those most worthy Divines and
Churches, which here I allege, gathered out of their public records, shall
I hope abundantly acquit both my self and many other faithful servantes of
Christ in the judgment of all honest and sound Christians, from the most
injurious slanders given out by D. Downame and other adversaries, to our
reproach among the ignorant, as namely where they call us, Shismatikes,
Innovators, Enemies of Unity, etc. When men shall perceave that we are indeed
taught these assertions which we hold (not to speak of the Scripture) out of
Zuinglius, Luther, Bucer, F. Martyr, Viret, Musculus, Bullinger, Gualter,
Chemnieius, Vrsinus, Iunius, Danaeus, Calvin, and Beza, with many other like
rare men of God, all co^senting together in the substance of these points, as
before I have showed more at large; then it will be a sufficient satisfaction
to them on our behalfes. And our adversaries shall find it to be well with
them, if they themselves can stand clear of the said crimes of Schism,
Noveltie, Enmity to unity, peace, and truth of the Gospel. Nay, verily they
can not stand clear of these crimes. Last of all, these Attestators and
Teachers shall (I hope likewise) yet have so much credit and honor yielded to
them in England, that their Disciples shall not (for their doctrine only) be
afflicted, imprisoned, and more severely punished then those that profess to
be the Disciples of the Romish Enemy. An enemy indeed (not conceited) both to
Christ, to our King, and the Realm. In which hope and full persuasion, I
humbly commend all this that I have Lud to Gods holy providence and gracious
blessing, and to all Christians chatable and upright judgment. To God only
wise, through Jesus Christ, be praise for ever and ever. AMEN.


An Addition.
THAT the abusers of May. Beza and May. Calvin about Mat. 18.17 may see their
ill doing, I thought good to set down here some more of their testimonies a
part by themselves. Which show plainly, that howsoever they seem sometime to
speak not so warily as they might touching the word Ecclesia in this place,
calling it the Church-Senat or Presbytery: yet their true and right meaning
indeed is that here Ecclesia signifies not the Church Senate only and merely,
as some obstinatly charge the^ to mean. They do here in this word comprehend
also the people, and their power of free consent in Excommunication, which is
the matter spoken of by Christ in this place of Math. I say, here in this word
they include the people also, and teach that they must be told, and that they
must be hearkened unto, in a degree, and in a certain order, viz. mediatly and
finally. They intend not, that Christ here commits this business to the
Presbytery only and absolutely. Thus says Beza upon this word; Bez. Annotat.
in Mat. 18.17.
Doceo Aristocratiam non esse novum institutum, Dei verbo and Democratiae
Ecclesiastica repugnans, sicut nonnulls ex vnica vocula temere arrepta sunt
arbitrati. And presently before ^e says; Neque vero Oligarchiam velim in
^cclesiam Dei invehi, quae illam tantopere de^rmavit atque adeo penitus
transformavit. ^lso, In Mat. 16.18.
Vocabulo Ecclesiae significari Civium ^nventum, nemo est qui ignoret.

Calvin says; In this place Mat. 18.17. Calvin Instit. 4.11.1
Ius Iudaici Synedrij transfertur ad Christi ^egem. And, Instit. 4.12.7.
Illa est legitima in Exco^mu^cando homine progressio, si non soli Seniores
^orsum id faciant, sed conscia and approbante ^cclesia, etc. 4.1.15.
Totius Ecclesia hac cognitio est. Clavium potestatem Dominus fidelium so^etati
contulit. 4.1.22.
And he calls Excommunication, 11.2.
Fidelium judicium; and the ^xcommunicat (says he) is Ibidem. and 12.4.
Fidelium ^uffragijs damnatus. Thus must these (and ^ther) worthy men of God be
vnder^tood, and not to contradict themselves.

Beza also of the Calling of Ministers, ^aith, Bez. Co^fess. 7.1^
Per quod ostium sunt ingress? Quis ^os vocavit? etc. Vbi electio Presbyterij?
Vbi ^opuli suffragia? By what door entered they? Who called them? Where was the
Election of ^he Elders? Where was the peoples voice-giving? By this showing
that he held the peoples free consent to be necessary also in the making of
Ministers.

FINIS.
Math. 6.10. Thy will be do^.


A Table of the chief matters contained in this Treatise.
A.
HOw a true Church may be Accidentally. Page 306. The Angel of Ephesus a
President during life. page 237. The name Angel or Apostle given in Scripture
to Ministers, also Dominus in Latin, etc. proves not that they may be called
Lords i^ English. page 121. 123. etc. All Apostolic Ordinances are Divine, and
unchangeable by men. pa. 139. 142. The practice of Antiquity for many ages,
with us. page 53. etc. Asia properly taken, how large. page 206. Comfortable
Assurance, where page 77. 154. 155. 159. Our Attestators were no Brownistes,
Anabaptists, Schismatiks, Fantastical, Fanaticall, doaters. page 249. 279. 306.
B.
Belgike Liturgy and Synod, with us. pa. 50. Beza consents with us fully in
effect. page 22. etc. 49. 50. 322. Beza abused. page 13. 22. 270. etc. 322.
Beza fails. pa. 237. D. Billons chief matters in his Perp. gov. answered,
page 99. 107. 108. 110. 112. 116. 120. 121. 132. 143. etc. 146. 148. 239. etc.
250. 261. 276. etc. D. Bilsons Contradistions. pa. 70. 71. 73. 107. 144. 146.
150. 225. 281. 283. 286. 288. 289. 290. 293. 302. 303. 305. We deny not Bishops
simply. page 14. 264. Seven diverse sorts of Bishops. pa. 274. Bishops next
after the Apostles differed from ours in substance of their Calling. p. 98. 99.
128. A Bishop to a Parish. page 32. 104. 213. etc. Bohemian Confession for us.
page 48. Bucer for us. page 33. Bullinger for us. page 37.
C.
Calvin fully with us. p. 25. etc. 149. 193. 214. 269. 323. Calvin much abused
p. 13. 267. etc. 322. 323. Calling of Ministers must be by the Congregation, or
else we shall go to wrack. page 159. 160. 161. 167. Calling of Ministers
essentially by the Congregation. page 246. 247. 78. 79. 80. 81. 164. 166. 168.
The truth is not so fruitfully defended where Christ's Visible Church and
Calling to the Ministry is not well cleared. pa. 158. 167. Circumstances in
Church government changeable by men. page 280. 247. Chemnicius for us. page 47.
178. The Church-controversie in England for u^ trifles. pa. 193. 195. 269. 320.
A Visible Church, what? See Ecclesia. The dignity and power of each Visible
Church page 164. 165. Christ's Visible Churches Divine constitution, pa. 74. 75.
142. etc. 147. 102. 104. 154. Christ's Visible Churches form unchangeable by
men. page 134. 135. 139. 142. 147. 149. 150. 153. 281. A true Visible Church
essentially sometime with out Guides. page 164. 165. 278. 298. 300. Why some
strive to change the proper sense of the word Church (Ecclesia) in Mat. 18.17.
pa. 216. Protestants may justify their Church and Calling to the Ministry
soundly, if they will. page 262. 264. 266. 267. What God has given to the
Congregation, men can not take away. page 76. 77. The Offer of Conference not
without necessary cause, and reason. page 196. 250. The true cause and reason
why we Conform not. page 137. Two maine points of our whole Controversy.
page 10. 303. But the chief of all is about the peoples free consent in Church
govern. page 10. 16. 17. Cornelius B. of Rome prooveth no Diocesan Church, nor
Bishop. page 233. 234. Cyprian teaches the peoples consent to be juris
Divini. page 57. 59.
D.
Danaeus strongly with us. page 41. 42. A Definition of Christ's true Visible
Church. page 318. A Definition of a Diocesan Chuch. page 200. A Diocesan Church
proper, and improper. p. 88. One kind of improper Diocesan Church is
Apostolical. page 89. The best sort of Diocesan Bishops not Apostolic. pa.
15. 89. 90. Yet not simply evil. page 16. 89 97. Nor yet expedient now. ibid.
All our question is against the proper Diocesan Church page 15. 88. 97. 98.
131. 225. Substantial differences between a Church and Ministry of one
Congregation, and of a Diocese. page 208. 128. 129. A Diocesan church but in a
shadow till Constantines time. p. 126. 226. etc. 231. etc. 253 No proper
Diocesan Church can be where the people freely consent. page 84. 85. etc. 88.
Apropre Diocesan Church is new. page 226. A proper Diocesan Church induces the
Pope. page 157. 179. The Papists shame Diocesans about their church
constitution and calling to the Ministry. page 161. 167. 169. 171. 172. 183.
150. Diocesan Bb. are plurality men, and Nonresidents page 131. 185. Diocesan
Bd. Metropolitans in Office, Archbishops, Patriarchs, in substance are all one.
page 273. Yea a Universal Bishop also. page 181. 184. 186. 189. 191. In a
proper Diocesan Church a true church may be, but accidentally. page 306. 87.
Dionysius the first titular Diocesan Bishop in the West. page 92. 93.
Diplodophilus, one holding two ways to heaven. page 104. 125. 151. 153. D.
Dove turns Eusebius falsely for his advantage 3 times. page 226. 227. 90. D.
Downames Defense answered. pa. 11. etc. 98. 199. etc. 221. etc. 245. etc. D.
Downame makes Apostles and Evangelistes inferior in jurisdiction to Bishops.
page 241. 260. 251. D. Downames levitie. page 14. 74. 83. 313 D. Downames vain
boast. page 217. D. Down abuses Scripture. p. 201. 202. 203.
E.
Ecclesia, a Church Visible is only one Ordinary Congregation. pa. 102. 103.
104. 108. 110. 201 202. 203. 205. 209. 213. 214. 322. 323. The question of
Elders or Presbyters, wholly impertinent. page 11. 12. 62. Our adversaries still
Equivocat, or contradict them selves, page 14. 15. 98. 99. Their Equivocation.
page 120. 121. 148. 204. 209. 240. Evaristus Titles, were but precincts or
quarters in one Congregation, not Parishes. pa. 93. Eusebius of no persit
credtt. 91. 92. 229. And yet in many things for us.
F.
Fabulous and bastard writings cited by Doct. Downame. page 257. Raw and
undigested Fancies. page 147. Fathers after 300. years of Christ, no fit
judges of the sense of the word Ecclesia. pa. 109. 209. 210. 211. 308. French
Liturgy with us. page 50. Genevian Discipline with us. page 49. Gifts, no
calling of a Minister. page 162. Gualter with us. page 37. 38. 39. 40.
H.
The world Hates our profession, and why pa. 17. 18. Helvetian confession with
us. page 49.
I.
James no proper Bishop. page 238. 239. The Jewish Church government differed
substantially from the Christian. page 158. 317. The form of the Jewish church
government is ceased. page 184. 185. 279. Iunius with us. page 43. 44. 45.
Iulianus of Alexandria the first Diocesan Bishop; and yet but a Titular
Diocesan. page 92.
K.
Christ's Kingdom commissive. page 145.
L.
Lord and Lordship unlawful for the Ministry, page 118. A Spiritual Lord,
who? page 118. Christ only ought to be a Spiritual Lord. p. 121. Luther with
us. page 31. 32. etc. And Lutherans. page 51. 52.
M.
P. Martyr with us. page 34. 35. 150. 193. The civil Magistrate advanced by our
profession page 18. 20. 115. 137. 313. 315. Every Metropolitan not a Diocesan.
pa. 254. Metropolitans in place, not in office. page 231. etc. 235. 213.
Outward Means necessary to salvation: and namely Christ's. page 150. 152.
154. 155. 194 195. 269. They who make Ministers must have Divine authority to
do it. pa. 163. 74. 75. 194. 147. Musculus for us. page 36.
N.
We desire things Necessary. page 18. 19. 193. The grievous hurt by
Nonresidents. page 129 To mislike Pluralists, and Nonresidents, are curious
positions with our adversaries. p. 132.
P.
The Palatine Catechism with us. page 51. Who cause Papists to increase in
England. pa. 183. 186. Papists more sound in the general opinion of the
Church, then some protestants. p. 150. 180 A Parish in our reasoning what it
is, page 201. 202. 209. A Church no more but a Parish. page 30. 103. 104. 108.
214. See Ecclesia. Partial who are. pagt 301. In Church government the Peoples
consent is Apostolical. page 68. 69. Evident Scriptures for the Peoples
consent in church censures. page 279. 140. 281. 282. Likewise in making of
Ministers. page 70. 164 165. 291. etc. Power in the People; administration in
their Guides, page 33. 42. 298. 278. 82. 83. What manner of People. page 17.
Great good comes to Religion by granting the Peoples consent in church
governeme^t. p. 130 The Papacy not to be overthrowe^ but by holding the
Peoples free consent. p. 18. 156. 157. etc. Our maine question is about the
Peoples free consent in church government. page 10. 16. The Peoples necessary
freedom, power, and right in church gov. what, and how much ordinarily. page
18. 22. 48. 61. 73. 82. 83. 278. Piscator for us. page 46. O^^ Profession
gives good satisfaction, chiefly to the Magistrate. p. 19. 20. 191. 313. 315 In
reasoning we must always speak Properly. page 240. Some Protestants opinion
(holding changeablenes in the Churches form and government) not without
impiety page 133. 141.
R.
Rebaptizing refuted page 172. Reordayning lawful and fit page 173. To receave
our Ministry derivatively and successively from the church of Rome, a
miserable answer. page 170. 173.
S.
Who are Schismatiks. page 138. 176. The Separation, how they err. page 249.
280. Sole government. page 252. Succession, a popish reason page 238. The
Archb. with us spiritually Sapreme. pa. 119. ^ynods, some lawful, Apostolic.
and necessari^ 116. 117. 179. Some not Apostolic, nor lewfull, p. 31. 48. 100.
etc. 111. etc. 117. 178. A Synod absolut induces a Pope. p. 105. 110. 111.
etc. 179.
T.
Tertullian proves not a Diocesan church, or Bishop. page 233. Tilenus for us.
page 43. 164. 166. Timothy and Titus, no proper Bishops. page 241. 264.
Toleration of us not unmeet e. page 137. 193. 194. 195. 318.
V.
Viret for us. pa. 28. 29. No Unity by Diocesan or Provincial Churches, and
Bishops. page 174. 176. 188. Gods written word the true cause of Unity. pa.
175. 176. After Gods word the Magistrates help is the chief cause of Unity.
page 177. 315. The hurtful error of some Protest antes granting one Universal
Visible Church under the Gospel. page 112. 181. 182. 189. 190. A Universal
Church Visible, induces a Pope. page 112. etc. 181 etc. 187. 189. To deny the
peoples consent in Church government to be a Divine ordinance, brings in a
Universal Church Visible. page 157. 180. 189. and by a likely consequence will
set the Pope above the King. page 191. 192. Universality a popish reason. page
221. 222. 223. Some Universal errors. page 233.
W.
D. Whitaker for us. page 47. 106. 107.
Z.
Zuinglius for us. page 29. 30. 214. 215. 216.

