THE JOY OF THE UPRIGHT MAN. IN A SERMON PREACHED AT GRAYES INN: BY I. B.
WHEREIN IS DECLARED THE hidden comfort, the sure reward, the present condition
of the vpright-hearted

PSALM. 126. 6. They went weeping, and carried precious seed: but they shall
return with joy, and bring their sheaues.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold
at his shop under Saint Peter's Church in Corne-hill, at the sign of the
Star, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1619.

TO HIS MVCH RESPECTED AND APPROVED FRIEND, Mr. DA. M.
IT has been the custom of them that penned the Book of Books, the Bible,
to direct several writings to some particular and private persons, although it
was in their minds, that the Church in general should also receive
edification and comfort by them. So then I have in this respect trod in their
stepps, whose pattern cannot but be worth the imitation. Were it as
convenient, as lawful, I would fully have set down your name: but (to avoid
the least appearance of evil) I have omitted that; and though many reasons
might be produced, why I made choice of you before others, yet it would be
tedious, and to no purpose to relate them; wherefore let these following
suffice. I assure my self that it will be well accepted, and (as from the
hands of a true (though mean) friend) received. I also (so far as my
judgment leads me) verily believe, that the Lord has begun his good work in
you: wherefore, though the means be but weak, the powerful Creator can use
it, as an instrument to fur-ther the same. He that could cure the blind man
with clay and spittle, can produce the like effects by an ordinary means, who
doubts? I will not proclaim to the ears of the world, what kindnesses I
have received from you (for that might seem to smell of flattery; or by a more
secret manner of begging, to crave some future favor). But this I will only
mention, that it is out of Christian affection, and a singular desire of your
good and comfort; as also to declare my remembrance of you, that I have in this
kind put pen to paper. And to say much in one word: If I have more than an
ordinary affection to any private person, the current thereof runs toward
your self. Let these lines (what ever they be) therefore the rather find a
friendly entertainment: and not so only, but especially strive to apply them
to what end I have aimed at, in the penning of them. They will plainly declare
unto you, by what means we are to stand just before God; of which mystery the
vulgar people are (for the most part) ignorant of, or not thoroughly grounded in*
Again, you shall find in them, that the spiritual estate of a Christian is
secret, not only to others, but often hidden from himself, especially at the
time of his effectual vocation; for then he is like the late manured field,
naked and bare, without the least true apprehension, or sight of saving grace,
and good grain in the furrows of his soul. By this you may understand, who
are the reapers of Gods greatest benefits. And finally, you shall evidently see
confuted the opinion of those, that hold there is no mirth or comfort in a
Christian course; who cry out, what? turn Puritan? become a Precisian? then
farewell all joy, and welcome melancholy. But we say (leaving those names to
whom they of right pertain) that faith in the promises of God, and obedience
to his precepts, will expel fear, quiet the troubled soul, and make a sad
heart the merriest man in the world: for faith in the Gospel sets us even with
God; and obedience to the Law, will bring us to his presence, where all the
righteous and vpright-hearted, shall bathe themselves in Rivers of pleasure,
that shall never be dried up, but spring, flow, and be full for ever. To the
which the Lord bring you in a convenient season, through the merits of his
Son, by the hand of his blessed Spirit. Amen, Amen.

Your friend, if friend to any, I. B.

THE JOY OF THE UPRIGHT MAN.
PSALM. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in
heart.
THese words consist of a double proposition; but some understand that, like
Pharaohs dreams, though diverse, the same thing is only meant. Others thus;
Romans 8. 1. Psalm. 32. 2.
that the first part of the verse is understood of Justification, the latter of
Sanctification; for they both usually go together, and the one is never in
Gods children separated from the other: for if the Lord justify any person
through Christ, in some measure he sanctifies the same by his Spirit; these
(like Naomi and Ruth) run together.

In the former proposition are two things to be considered: first, that light
is sown: secondly, for whom, and that is for the righteous. Again, in the
latter proposition, are two things also to be noted; the one, that joy is
sown; the other, who shall reap it, viz. the upright in heart.

But for the better understanding of the words, we must know, that this Text is
an Allegory; that is, a continued similitude, wherein we may observe four
things.

First, the sower; and that is God.

Secondly, the seed; and that is joy and light.

Thirdly, the reapers, and they be the just and upright in heart.

Fourthly, the ground where, and that is in Gods Word and works, earth and
heaven, within us and without us.

This metaphor of husbandry is often used in the Scripture: for

First, it is of antiquity; our first parents were to till the ground.

Secondly, it is of good report; therefore to be thought upon.

Thirdly, it is profitable; for he that sows shall reap.

Lastly, it is of necessity; for grounds must be plowed up, or they will not
bring forth any good fruit, but briars, thistles, and all unprofitable
rubbish. Now we will proceed to the meaning of the words.

And first for Light: Light is either taken literally, or tropically.
Literally two ways:

First, either for an accident or quality in a subject, as in the Sun, Genesis
1. 3.
or any clear body: or

Secondly, as an effect, proceeding from its cause; and so the Fire, Moon and
stars are said to be Lights, and to give light, Genesis 1. 15. Eccles. 11. 9.

Again, light is metaphorically applied many ways.

First, God is said to be light, 1. John. 1. 5.

Secondly, Christ is called the light, John 3. 19.

Thirdly, the Ministers are styled Lights, Matthew 5. 14.

Fourthly, the Gospel; walk in the light, John 12. 36.

Fifthly, the precepts and word was to David, a Lantern, or light, Psalm. 119.
105.

Sixthly, Grace is called light, Ephesians. 5. 13. 14.

Seventhly, deliverance from danger, Esth. 8. 16.

In a word, light is taken for all true comfort, and spiritual blessings that
we receive from God, through Christ, temporal or eternal; and so it may be
taken in this place (though more particularly) of deliverance from trouble, or
some present danger the people of God were cast into: for the Kingdom of
Christ is fore-spoke of, Heb. 1. 6.
and prophesied in this Psalm, so that we may without danger expound it of
Christ the true light, of his coming, and all blessings that accompany the
same.

Is sowne] that is, prepared, purposed and appointed of God, to be received in
due time and convenient season: Colos 3. 3.
for as seed lies in the earth covered for a while* 1. John 3. 2.
so is the joy of the just secret, hidden.

For the righteous] We must understand, that there is a twofold
righteousness; and that either personal, or by imputation.

Personal righteousness has in it two things; first, integrity; secondly,
conformity: for there is one frame of the person, another of his actions.
Integrity of nature must be in him that is personally righteous, Eccles. 7 vlt.
so was Adam, Eve and Christ by creation: hence some conclude, that only they
three were created in the image of God, and none other: for God (in the
beginning) made man righteous (righteous in respect of his nature and being),
and Christ (afterward) as he was man; for the Spirit did ouershadow the
Virgin, and purify the matter and mass of which his humane body consisted, so
that it was perfect, and without the stain of the least original sin. And
again, conformity of action is also of necessity, to make a man personally
and absolutely righteous: the first Adam had the one, but failed in the other;
therefore because he kept not the rule of justice, he was never actually and
personally righteous: the second Adam, Christ, had both; and so was able to
abide the Law, yea, the very rigor of it, either for purity of nature, or
holiness of conversation; and he only, and none but he. 1. John 2. 1.
Hence he is called, Jesus Christ the righteous: for he was righteous every
manner of way. And although the first may be without the second, yet the
second cannot be without the first; because the latter (as an effect, springs
and flows from the former, as his true and proper cause, Ephesians. 4. 24.

And thus having declared what personal righteousness is, we come to see
what is meant by righteousness imputed.

Now imputed righteousness, is that righteousness which is not in man's self,
or from himself, but from and by another; not by creation, but imputation.
This seems to me to be prefigured by the skins, wherewith the Lord, after
the fall, clothed our first Parents; the bodies of the beasts were for
sacrifice, the skins to put them in mind, that their own righteousness was
like the figgeleaues, imperfect; and therefore they must be justified another
way. Yet howeuer that be, Paul is plain for this distribution of double
righteousness: for (says he) I labor not to be found in mine own
righteousness, which is by the Law, but that which is by faith in Christ, Phil.
3. 9. So that it is manifest, there is an imputative, as well as a personal
righteousness. And here we are to note two things in righteousness imputed:
first, what it is that makes righteous: secondly, how or by what means we are
made partakers of this that makes us righteous. The thing or matter is Christ
and his obedience; Christ is made our righteousness, etc. 1. Cor. 1. 30. And
we must have both his person and actions to be the matter of our justification:
for we are conceived in sin; therefore we must have a righteousness to
satisfy the justice of the Law in that: for the parts of Divinity at the
Creation, seem to be Holiness of nature, and Perfection of life; so that this
rule being just and good, must be fully satisfied, either by our selves, or
some other, else no flesh should be justified, or saved. Again (I say) his
obedience must be imputed also, and that active and passive (the which some,
but without just reason, deny; affirming, that the passive is of it self
sufficient).

And the reason is this: the Law after Adams fall required a double debt; the
one, that the breach thereof might be repaired; the other, perfectly obeyed;
that, that was done, must be undone; and that which was undone, must be done:
and by whom? even by Christ our surety. And observe how fitly the active and
passive obedience of Christ answer these two: for his passion removed the
curse, and his active obedience brings the blessing, and confirms man being
reconciled. And this is that which the Apostle intends (though some otherwise
expound the place) where he says, If by the death of Christ (that is, his
passive obedience) we be reconciled to God, when we were enemies; much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life (that is, his active
obedience); Romans 5. 10.

For the better understanding of this, let us compare Adam unto a pot, or some
such earthen vessel; first, it is framed, molded, and well figured; then it is
put into the oven or furnace, and hardened. Now suppose that this vessel be
hit with a foot, and dashed in pieces before it was hardened; must it not have
a double act to make it perfect, one to mould it anew, another to season and
harden it? Why, man by Creation was by God excellently framed; but he was not
hardened and confirmed by the obedience of the Law, but broken to pieces in
dashing himself against it: so that now he stands in need of more than at
his creation; for he is broken, therefore wants molding, and then hardening
too; else notwithstanding his case were mutable, and his condition subject to
breaking still. Now the passive obedience of Christ does frame him anew, that
is, set him in that condition, wherein he was at the first by creation; and
then his active obedience like the furnace, does confirm and make him a
vessel unchangeable, and fit for the Lords use for ever. And does it not stand
with justice, that death should remove death, and life procure life? I write
my opinion (submitting my self to the judgment of the reverend and learned),
that the ground of this error had its beginning from misunderstanding of
personal righteousness: for Adam was just by creation, in respect of his
essential properties: but never actually righteous in the obedience of the
precepts by practice; so that Adam was no sinner, yet not justified: for not a
sinner and a righteous person are not equal and equivalent terms, they may
not be converted; for Adam, though just by creation, yet not by action; so
that he did but answer to one part of the rule, not the other; neither could
he, until this created righteousness had been produced into act; for as the
breach of the Law made him actually a sinner and unjust, so the performance of
it would have made him actually righteous, the which he never was. The death of
Christ will restore us to that estate, from which we fell in Adam, and that is,
of enemies to make us friends; and to heal (meritoriously) our wounded nature:
but his life must confirm us, and make us actually just: and there can be no
danger at all in holding this doctrine; and I wonder that any man can either
ascribe too much to Christ, or believe too much in him: for if the breach, and
the not keeping of the Law be debts (as in truth they be), then (as Paul
writes to Philemon concerning Onesimus) let us (in all humility of heart by
the hand of faith) set both on Christ's score.

And thus much for the matter of our justification, by which we are made
righteous. The manner how or by what means it is applied, follows, and that
is faith, Romans 4. 3.
and faith only: for we are justified by faith only, Heb. 11. 6.
as by an isntrumental cause; for faith lays hold on the object matter of
our justification, Christ and his obedience; Romans 5. 1. 10.
and so uniting the believer to him, he is justified, though not by his own
inherent and actual righteousness. So that God the Father accepts of this
satisfaction, as if we in our own persons had, both for holiness of nature,
and perfection of obedience, absolutely answered and fulfilled the Laws
justice.

And from this that I have said, we may gather these conclusions.

First, that None was ever personally righteous, but Christ only.

For if his Father would mark what was done amiss, yet he was, and is, and
ever shall be able to abide it: for he was holy for nature, and perfect for
life.

Again, Romans 3. 9.
hence it will follow, that all men stand in need of Christ's merits; and all
cause of boasting is totally excluded from mankind: yea (whatsoever Papists
babble) the blessed Virgin her self. So that the person for whom light is
sown, is he that by faith applies Christ and his obedience (being offered by
the Father) to himself in particular.

And thirdly, we may from this safely conclude, that

They who have no faith cannot be justified, and consequently saved.

For we must of necessity have faith to apply Christ as an instrument; Romans
13. vlt.
for faith is as a hand to receive, and put on the righteousness and merits of
the second Adam. Hab. 2. 4.
We are said to live by faith: that is, in believing in the Lord of life. They
therefore that have no faith, Ephesians 2. 1.
are dead in trespasses and sins. Adam had life in himself at the creation:
now we have it out of our selves from Christ at our justification.

And last of all we may collect, that the object of faith and matter of
justification is not within us, but without us; and that we stand in need of
the same, else no salvation; whence these three Corollaries follow.

First, that sins before conversion cannot hinder man's perfect justification.
Let this be well obeserued.

Secondly, that good works after our effectual vocation do not further our
justification before the Lord, they will help to assure us, that our faith is
sound; and justify us in the eyes of the world, but no other ways.

And lastly from this I also conclude, that They are in a great error, who
hold the bare act of faith without the application of Christ and his obedience
to justify. We are said to live by our hands, yet we understand, that it is
meant by that we get by labor and travel; for no man eats his fingers: so we
may truly be said to be justified and saved through faith; but we must know,
that it is by what faith rests on, and applies to the person, and no
otherwise; this is the plain meaning.

And now I come to the second branch of my text, and ioy]. Some expound the
first part by the second, and say, that by light is meant joy; and by just,
upright in heart. But I rather understand, that sanctification is meant in this
clause: for many are apt to say, they have faith, yet want holiness; therefore
the spirit would take away that false cavil.

Again, good and righteous persons call the soundness of their faith
sometimes into question, doubting of the truth of their spiritual condition;
therefore to remove that scruple, and to comfort and settle their wavering
minds, the Prophet annexeth as a help this other clause, wherein is
comprehended sanctification. And usually in the holy Book, these two are
coupled together, and they may not be put asunder, 1. Cor. 6. 11.

Now for the interpretation of the words: some read joy, others gladness; the
difference of these two I take to be this: Joy is in the heart, secretly
hidden: and gladness may be seen in the face, or by some outward sign
discerned: for where one Evangelist writes, Rejoice and be glad; another
says, Rejoice and leap. Fear and joy are internal, but trembling and
gladness external: See Mat. 5. 12. Luke 6. 23. Psalm. 2. 11. Matthew. 28. 8.

Vpright] Seems to be a Metaphor took from a pillar, or thing that stands
(as we say) bolt upright, not inclining more one way than another; or some
read it Right or Straight of heart; that is, in whose thoughts, intentions and
conuersations is no guile, like Nathanael, or Ezekiah; and heart is added, to
show the true root of sincerity, as also to condemn outward hypocrisy: for
some, like the old Pharisees, are just outwardly, but inwardly full of
rottennes; the heart is not upright, what show soever they make of holiness
and righteousness: or it may be annexed for the comfort of the just, that though
they fail sometimes in outward act, yet it falls forth contrary to the
intent and former purpose of their heart: for the most faithful has his
failings, whatsoever his resolutions have been to the contrary.

And now in few other words, thus may we plainly resolve these. What if the
faithful be afflicted? overwhelmed with the waves of sorrow? compassed about
with great and manifold evils? drowned in the depth of depths? and well near
swallowed up of overmuch heaviness? shall they not hear of glad tidings? will
not joy break out as light in the morning? and all tears be wiped from their
eyes? yes, this is an eternal truth, that, All such as are justified by faith
in Christ; sanctified (having hearts without guile) by the word and spirit;
though they sow in tears, plow in pain, and all their crop seem to be
blasted; yet there be great blessings appointed by God for them; which (though
for a season they be covered, and hidden like corn in the furrows) they shall
one day reap and receive in earth and heaven, according to the sure promise of
the Lord.

Thus to our power having picked out the true meaning, we come to gather some
profitable instructions; and out of the word sown, we may first observe, that



It lies like the corn covered in the ground; Their life is hid; Col. 3. 3.
and, it is not manifest what they shall be: 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
No eye has seen, or ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
what the Lord has laid up for them that love him. Name what you can, and it
will be a mystery, a secret thing, that belongs to the upright in heart.

First, is not the decree of God a hidden thing? a depth unsearchable? and able
to make a man astonished? Romans 11. 33.
Did not Paul cry out, Oh the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and
counsel of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out?

And is not the incarnation of Christ a secret too? what more to be admired, 1.
Tim. 3. vlt.
than, That God should become man, 1. Pet. 1. 12.
and be manifested in the flesh? The very Angels desired to peep into this
mystery. This is one of the Lords wonderful works, Isai 7. 14.
The way of a virgin with a man.

Nicodemus a great Doctor could not see into it. Ioh. 3. 4.
And if natural births be so strange, what shall we judge of this?

Moreover, Peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost, 2. Cor. 1. 22.
is no open matter; None knows it, but he that has it. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
So is the earnest of the Spirit, and true seal of salvation; the power, life
and sweetness of the word, 2. Cor. 2. 14.
The remission of pardon for sin, with Certainty of salvation. 1. Pet. 1. 8.

The secret purpose of God; Romans 11. 34.
and who can understand it? 2. Pet. 3. 16.
A second is his word, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
and how hardly is that to be searched into? ler. 17. 9.
A third is a man's own heart: and is not that both secret and deceitful?

And last of all, the very principal part of the harvest is hid with Christ in
heaven; 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
and when he appears, it will appear what it shall be.

Righteous man's harvest secret and hidden Then the profane must learn not to
speak evil of their ways; as though, of all time it were the worst spent
time that is spent in the service of God. 2. Pet. 2. 12.
Why should thou report basely of what thou art ignorant of? Do thou know
what delight is in reading, praying, hearing, singing and meditating, that art
dead, and never could awake to go to work? 1. Cor. 2. 11.
Can thou see into the heart of another and tell of his treasure? 2. Cor. 12.
4.
When wast thou in the third heaven, to take view of the great things that
there be by God provided for his servants against the great day of Reaping?
Math. 7. 1
Therefore indge not, lest thou be judged: understand the truth, and then
speak: for its wisdom to conceal any thing we know not, as it commendable to
speak the truth of a known good matter.

Thou art to learn that Gods children are a hidden people, and have hidden
comforts, such as the world knows not of. Ioh. 4. 32.
Sometime you shall have a man commended on this manner (when peradventure his
suite is not of the costliest) Oh Sir, as mean a man as he seems, there is
few such in the parish, he is an unknown man, there is no end of his good.
This may truly be said of all the faithful (though they should go in sheep
skins, camels hair, and fare meanly every day) that there be but too few
such in the parish, they are unknown men, and (of a truth) there is no end of
their good: for are they not called Gods stored or hidden ones? Math. 13. 44.
Psalm. 83. 4. Is not their kingdom a treasure hid in the field? How much is
that goodness, Psalm. 31. 19.
O Lord, thou have laid up for them that trust in thee? David admired, or
desired, (as one doubtful) to be resolved.

the God of this world. What if they, Exodus 5. 2.
like Pharaoh, cry out, Who is the Lord, that we should serve him? Mal. 3. 14.
and is there any profit in serving the Almighty? Why? they cannot judge of
thy estate, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
they perceive not the things of the spirit of God, but count them
foolishness: They think that Gain is godliness, and are out of the way. How
can a blind man understand and judge of colors? and are not great and secret
things too high for a fool? Prou. 17. 7.
Say therefore with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4. 3.
I pass not for such men's judgments: Luke 23. 34.
or rather pray with thy Savior; Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do: cry out in compassion with Stephen; Acts. 7. vlt.
Lord, lay not this sin unto their charge: Is it to be expected, that such as
counted Christ to be without form, Isai. 52. 14.
reputed him a wine bibber, John to have a devil, Mat. 11. 18. 19.
and the chief servants of the Gospel (filled with the spirit) to be drunk
with new wine, Acts. 2. 13.
and out of their wits; should judge and esteem charitably of thee and thy
proceedings? Never expect this; for it is a thing impossible: Nature cannot go
beyond it self, and natural men cannot discern of things that are spiritual.

1. These. 1. 6.
when they think their own state to be miserable. 2. Cor. 6. 9.
What if afflictions compass thee like a garment? 1. Pet. 4. 12.
the fiery trial seem to burn thee? Psalm. 77. 7. and51. 12. 13.
wicked men rise up in arms against thee? or Satan shoot his sharp shafts to
wound thee? Suppose the Father seem to frown upon thee, Christ to reject
thee, and the fellowship of the Spirit to be departed from thee? Yet must thou
hope still; for thine harvest is secret, and often blasted in thine own eye.
Was not David himself sometime as one rejected? Did he not cry, Lord restore
me to the joy of thy salvation? Job was in a great strait, when he set down
this peremptory sentence, Job. 14. vlt
While man's flesh is upon him he shall be sorrowful, and so long as his
spirit is within him it shall mourn. And have not the dearest of Gods Saints
been strangely (for a time) perplexed? Assure thy self, that No new thing is
befallen thee, or strange matter come unto thee; 1. Cor. 10. 13.
but such as are incident to the Lords beloved ones. He that reads David's
Psalms, would imagine the man to be mad that penned them, if he had not some
experience of spiritual desertions. What is liker to good grain than grass,
at the first sprouting or shooting up of both? and what does more resemble
faith than infidelity, especially at the first instant of a man's conversion?
Young Conuerts (to speak with reverence) are not unlike some of your London
Cockneyes; tell them when they come into the Country, that wheat is wheat,
having but covered the earth, and not grown up to a blade and ear, they will
not credit you, for they have no experience in matters of that nature; they
have bought it only (winnowed) in the market, and therefore imagine so to
find it growing: but the skillful husbandman knows full well, that the corn
in his close will be as good wheat at harvest, as any that is sold in all
their City: So he that is not an old disciple, and has not skill in this
kind of husbandry (because he finds not faith, and hope, and love perfect
at the first breaking up of the field of his soul by the plow of the word)
fears that he has no grace at all: but a grounded Christian knows the
contrary. Learn then this lesson, that after plowing, comes sowing; after
sowing, the seed lies under the clots; after, springs to a blade, ear, and
last of all, a full corn: and these degrees are to be expected in this
spiritual harvest also.

I have known others troubled, because they cannot distinctly tell the time of
their conversion: Why? do not some women conceive, and know it not for a
season? yet before long they can easily discern it. And in like sort may the
new birth be wrought, and yet some while the person be ignorant of the same:
Ioh. 3. 8.
For as the spirit blows where and when, so, how he lists. Thou must try
it by the effects. If therefore the daily course of finne be stayed; 1. Ioh. 3.
9.
the breasts of thy understanding and heart, Psalm. 119. 11.
with the sincere milk of the word, be filled, and thou travel in mind and
will, that good works may be produced: Romans 7. vlt.
thou art borne of God, and one of his adopted children.

Ruth participated of the gleanings. The very chief of the harvest is gathered
into heaven, and there they shall have it: the upright are in the wilderness,
and have but tasted of the good things of the world to come: yea, this doctrine
should cause all of us to thresh out the word, to break our hard hearts, to
sow apace both the seeds of good works, and the rich and precious grain of
prayer. Oh that we did but conceive aright, how these seeds will fructify;
and the full sheaues that we shall reap, either in life or death, or at the
last day! Truly not one of these corns shall miscarry, but all take root,
spring, and bring forth fruit in great abundance. I say then, be not weary
in this course of husbandry; judge not, that The harvest is past, 2. Tim. 2. 18.
but scatter this seed every where, and cry aloud, 2. Cor. 5. 6.
that the great day of reaping may come, and the principal time of gathering:
yea it should move thee to wish to be loosed, and to desire Christ's coming to
judgment, and then it will appear what thou shall be: for whatsoever good
thing any man has done, Ephesians. 6. 8.
that same shall be receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

It cannot be denied, but that, as in the days of Elias, the children of God
in this world, like the corn, covered with chafe, may be hidden and not
discerned; but at that day Christ shall single them out, call them by name, and
reward them according to their works. Matthew. 10. vlt.
Every good intention of the heart, each sentence powdered with salt, the still
prayers that have been powered out in the poorest corner of a cottage, and every
good action done in secret, shall come to light, and have his blessing; and
then the difference will be discerned between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that served God, and him that served him not. Mal. 3. vlt. Go on
therefore, and be not dejected: For the husbandman must first sow, that he may
reap the fruit; and he that sows liberally, 2. Tim. 2. 6.
shall reap also liberally. 2. Cor. 9. 6.

And now we come to observe a second point, the which we gather out of the
consequent part of the first proposition, which is, that



Light and gladness be sown for them only, and for none other: Balaam saw
this full well, therefore he desired to dye the death of the righteous, Numb.
23. 10.
and that his last end might be like unto his. David cries out, ^sal. 37. 37.
Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man shall be
peace: yea, the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance: Psalm. 112. 6.
and, such shall want no manner of thing: Prou. 10. 7.
for their memory shall be blessed here on the earth, Prou. 21. 21.
and their names for ever engraven in heaven. But with the wicked it shall not
be so: ler. 17. 13.
for their fame shall rot, their names shall be written in earth, their hopes
make them ashamed, and at the last day, Psalm. 1. vlt.
their image shall be despised: They shall be as chafe before the wind, and
shall not be able to stand in the presence of the Lord: but be deprived of the
kingdom of heaven, and thrown down into the nethermost hell. We deny not,
but that they may flourish for a time, Psalm. 37. 35.
spread themselves like the green bay tree and big Cedars; send out their
children as sheep, Job. 21. 7.
place them on the highest hills, play upon the tabret and harp; spend many
days in carnal pleasures, yet for all this, in a moment they shall descend
into the pit. This shall be the portion of unjust and wicked men, but the
contrary to the righteous. And it also stands with good reason.

Christ their husband and head; Ephesians. 5. 30.
they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: therefore they shall
partake (in truth, though not in degree) of all his privileges. And from this
union, we are said to be heirs of God. Gal. 4. heirs annexed with Christ.
Romans 8. heirs of grace. 1. Pet. 3. heirs of the kingdom. Iam. 2. 5. heirs
of eternal life. Tit. 3. yea, coheires with Christ of all things present or to
come: For the righteous are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23.
And as they that are thus grafted into the second Adam shall be partakers of
all his goods; so the unjust, not being in him, shall taste of all the heavy
judgments of God the Father. He that is not a branch of this Vine, shall be
cut off, wither, dye, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Jude 7.

Heb. 11. 1. 2. Many may say, that They are Abraham's seed, Mal 3. 9.
have true title to heaven, and boast much that They are free: Ioh. 8. 33.
but they that so think, may deceive their own souls, and be far from the
kingdom of heaven. For Godliness, only, has the promises of this life, Ioh. 8.
36.
and the life to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. And if the Son make man free, then is he
free indeed. But (alas!) the wicked, unjust and profane have no promise to
inherit heaven; all the threats in Gods book are denounced against them: Psalm.
32. 10.
For, Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, and they that do commit sin
shall not be unpunished. And the Apostle is round in this thing: Be not (says
he) deceived: for the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1.
Cor. 6. 9.

2. These. 3. 2.
yet All men have not faith: and he that believes not is condemned already.
Mark 16. ^6.
Many in their fond imaginations, think, 2. Sam. 21. 20.
that like the Giant of Gath, they have upon the hand of their faith six
fingers; yet (alas) when they come in the day of death, or time of trial to
feed on the promise, to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Judge. 1. 5. 6.
they, like Adonibezek, will lack their thumbes, and dye for want of feeding
on the food and true bread of eternal life. Now the righteous have not only
the precious promises, 2. Pet. 1. 1. 4.
but also precious faith, the which two being united, carry the whole man into
the garner of God, and large field of the kingdom of glory: Ephesians. 2. 8.
for me are saved by faith. And as the sickle is to the hand of the reaper, so
is faith to the soul of the righteous and true believer.

Gal. 4. 30.
and that the Lord of glory may come in. He must cast out the bondwoman, and
her son, Satan and all the seeds of sin; 1. Cor. 5. 7.
purge himself of the old leaven; cleanse the inside of the cup and platter of
his soul; and this will none but the righteous do: ungodly men lodge their
Lord in the Inn, they cast him into a cratch, suffer him to knock, yet permit
him not to enter and suppe with them. They will not dress and sweep the
floor of their souls, cast out the rotten goundsell in the barnes of their
hearts, and empty themselves of that rubbish that shuts the door, dammeth
up the room, and shouldreth out this heavenly ricke, this harvest of the Lord:
But the righteous, they sweep the house, make way for the harvest, Psalm. 24. 7.
open the door, pluck up the everlasting gates, and give the King of glory,
good, great and royal entertainment; Reu. 3. 20.
so that he will sup with them, they with him, and partake of all his fatlings.



And here in the first place we may see the vanity of our profane and ungodly
persons; who cry out (as the people in former times) if we preach this
doctrine (that Only the righteous reap these great favors) you take too much
upon you, Moses and Aaron; for all the congregation is holy. Thus they in this
clear light of the Gospel, say (what? in their hearts, with the fool? No: in
public, and seek to defend it) that All shall be heirs of Gods greatest
benefits; not one shall perish. And we say too, that if they be righteous (and
for number as the dust of the earth, or stars in heaven) that they shall all
inherit the kingdom of God and of glory: but if they be proud, unjust,
deceitful, and want upright hearts (were they as the sand on the sea shore,
drops in the huge Ocean, grains on the ground, or fishes in the water, for
multitude) that so living, and so dying, they must reap nothing but wrath,
vengeance, and the largest fields of Gods highest displeasure every mothers
son: Darkness, trembling, terror, and the sting of the second death shall be
the sheafe of their field, the corn of their barn, and the best grain that
shall be preserved for the garner of their souls; for they were never united
to Christ, have any right to the promises, truth of faith in their hearts,
neither would open the gates of their souls, that the King of glory might
come in, and find favorable acceptance: And yet for all this, in the land of
vprightnes, they will do wickedly. What shall I say? or where shall I begin? and
when make an end? Have we not the biting usury; the cursed covetousness; the
devouring oppression; the destroying extortion; the shop of dearth, darkness and
deceit the unequal weight, mixed ware, and counterfeit stuff? And, as sure as
the word of God is true, and holy and just, that upon whom these foul sins
shall be found, he shall dye the death. I know that this is a hard position to
settle in their minds, yet he that denies this for a truth, must turn
Atheist, gainsay that there is a resurrection, a judgment to come, and a just
Judge that reuengeth all wrong. Psalm. 50. 21. 2. Pet. 3. 3. 4.

upright in heart. Gal. 6. 9.
For whatsoever the Lord has sown in earth or heaven (if thou faint not) thou
shall reap in due time. In earth thou shall have food and raiment fit and
convenient, and, if need be, in great abundance. Let the waters swell, the sea
rore, the earth tremble, the wind blow, and the floods come, yet thou shall
escape all danger. Let the Sun be dark, the Moon turned into blood, the
Stars fall, the heavens burn, and the elements melt with heat; yet just Lot
shall be delivered; Noah escape drowning; for righteousness is written in thy
forehead, and the destroyer shall not destroy thee. What if thou sow in tears,
plow up thy ground in a time of mourning, yet thou shall reap with joy, and by
the hand of the Angel, Job. 5. 26.
be carried, like a rick of come, in due time, into the garner of God: 1. These.
5. 24.
For faithful is he that has promised, and will surely do it. He has
sown, and his sons shall reap; though the harvest be long in coming, the
crop shall be the bigger, the better. Therefore in the midst of all thy
sorrows, let this meditation comfort thy soul, that the righteous and upright
in heart (of which number thou art) shall be the reapers of Gods greatest
benefits.

Job serves not God for naught; neither does righteousness prevent riches. The
fools proverb is, that He that uses plain dealing shall die a beggar: I say
no: and add more, that he that does not use it, shall dye, like Judas, a very
beast; and judge, whether is the better? I can tell you, that when the heavy
sentence shall visit us that did Ezekiah, Isai. 38. 1.
Thou must dye, and not live; then will the worth of a well led life be a
matter of moment, a thing much set by, seen into: and this tidings shall come,
and will not tarry; Heb. 10 38.
and then shall the just live by his faith, have boldness of spirit, and reap
that riches, the great husband in heaven had sown and prepared from the
beginning for the upright. Then shall he have all tears wiped from his eyes,
rest from his labors, Job. 33. 28.
and his life shall see the everlasting light; yea he shall reap fulness of
joy, freedom from all bondage, Psalm. 16. vlt.
and pleasures for evermore.

Seedsman of the earth and heaven has provided; why then, strive to be upright
in heart. Noah was a righteous Preacher, Lot was just, Paul had a good
conscience, Ezekiah walked before the Lord with an upright heart; and these
were freed from many dangers on earth, died at the last with honor, and now
are reapers of that unspeakable light in the kingdom of heaven. But because
many boast of their own righteousness: cry, Stand apart, I am more holy than
thou, yet are not of this number: we will give some true trials and notes of
upright and just men.

Notes of an upright man.
Zacheus, if he be of ability, then he makes full restitution: if he be not,
yet will he make confession to the party; (if convenient) crave pardon, with a
resolution, that if ever the Lord enable him, he will restore to the uttermost
farthing; and will not fail, in the mean time, to invoke the Lord, that he,
who by him has been injured, may some way or other gain more, through his
bounty, than by his wickedness he has been deprived of. This is a true note of
one upright in heart: for restitution is of absolute necessity to
righteousness; at the least in resolution and will, where wealth to restore is
wanting. And Judas in this, went beyond many, and will rise up in judgment
against many; for he (so will not they) made restitution.

as the thief, that (when the sore is worn out of his hand, and the print of
the burning iron) falls to filching: but an honest heart will steal no more,
neither willingly wrong any man, either outwardly in action, speech; or
inwardly by cogitation, resolution: for he holds, that the least motion of the
will, whereby his brother is wronged, is a sin, and to be abandoned. And
(mark this) he will proportion his alms according to his ability, and the
poor man's necessity: For the righteous measures all his affairs by
judgment.

Thus much of his carriage toward man: now follow trials or signs of his
justice toward God.





Christ Jesus for remission and justification; he hates man's merits as he
loves the Lords mercy.



would have the corrupt part of serve God, as well as the regenerate. And this
is only to be found in the righteous, and in none other: for he would give all
his members, and all of all his members, as so many weapons to serve the Lord
in righteousness.

Christ would come to judge the earth: for then they shall have their
faithfulness discovered, ratified, rewarded.

If thou find these things in thee, thou art one that shall reap all good
fruits in the land of righteousness: but if not, the weeds of Gods wrath in the
land of wickedness.

And this shall suffice for the first proposition: the second succeeds to be
handled in its order, whence we collect, that



Nay, he is already the joyful man: Few think so, but it is so. This doctrine
may be confirmed by the several actions done by the righteous, being in diverse
conditions, and of contrary vocations, functions. Was not the King glad when
the people said unto him, Psalm. 122. 1.
Come, let us go up to the house of God? Neh. 8. 12.
Did not the people go home and make great mirth that they understood the word
that was taught them? Acts 2. 46.
Are the Christians said to continue with one accord in the Temple, and 16. 25.
and to eat their meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart. The
Apostles sung Psalms in prison: 1. These. 1. 6.
The Thessalonians received the word with great joy in affliction. Did not some
return home rejoicing, Acts. 5 41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Christ? Job. 5. 22.
Job says, The righteous shall laugh at death. Acts 7. 55.
And Stephen had boldness at his departure: And thete is never an action in
Christianity, but as every flower has his smell, so it has, and yields
comfort and consolation: for all her ways are ways of pleasure, Prou. 3. 17.
and all her paths prosperity. Paul prayed and gave thanks with great
rejoicing; Phil. 14.
and wonderful is that joy which the upright have and do feel, in these
private and hidden duties: for then the Lord reueileth himself most clearly,
answers the poor petitioner familiarly; yea God, like man, gives his
greatest gifts to his dearest children in private: for he vpbraideth no man's
person. And how have the upright been ravished in mind, with the meditation of
the glory of God and his wonderful works? Psalm. 19. 1.
Surely as a man beholding the Sun with a corporal eye, in his brightness,
dazeleth, turns back his face, and cannot endure it; so may the upright man
with the eye of his faith see such excellency in the Son of righteousness,
that for the time, he may be astonished, vary the object, and say, I have enough.

These things be secret, yet most certain; and the reasons be as clear as the
noone day.

castaway hears but of such a matter, how will his dead heart rejoice, his
cold spirits dilate them. themselves, and his sorrowful soul gather
consolation? From this ground, Christ, unto the man that was sick of the
palsy, Math. 9. 2.
said, Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Remission of sin is
the mother of great mirth; and this the upright man is assured of. Psalm. 32. 2.

Christ, and adorned with all the saving graces that are peculiar to the Lords
people: and is not this a matter of mirth, great moment? Shall a man rejoice
and march cheerfully, in being garnished with the ornaments of nature; and be
dead in the nest, when he is wrapped in this pure and white linen? What says
the Church in this respect, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, Isai. 61. 10.
and my soul shall be glad in my God: Why? for he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation, and covered me with the robe of righteousness; he has
decked me like a bridegroom, and as a bride tireth her self with her jewels;
this is the garment of true gladness.

Prou. 15. 15.
Is not this a continual feast? No color so pleasand to the eye, wine to the
palate, or any object to the outward sense, as this is to the inner man, the
reasonable soul. Oh that men did but know what music this does make! what
joy it carries to the right owner of it! then would they never doubt of the
truth of this doctrine: but they do not, they cannot; for they be strangers
from it, it from them.

Romans 8. 1.
peace in heaven; the resurrection of the body, and eternal salvation. Psalm.
16. 9.
This made David's heart glad, and his flesh rest in hope. This comforted just
Job in all his troubles, that he should live and rise again: the believing
Jews in the expectation of this, Job. 19. 26.
had joy unspeakable glorious: Paul went on cheerfully in the assurance of the
same. And (beloved) let the world think what they will or can, here is the true
root and fountain, out of which all sound joy and mirth springs, flows.

Oh (say such) become so strict, so precise? then farewell joy and all true
comfort; for it brings nothing but melancholy and vexation of spirit. This is
the Devils old shift to make men unwilling to take the path to heaven, and see
into the consolations of a Christian course. I remember that the Spies who came
back from Canaan, commended the country, but said they saw great Giants and
fenced Cities, to dishearten those which should enter: and so does Satan Gods
Saints and servants at this day. And when all is done, that can be done, the
upright man shall be the only merry man: for his yoke is easy, and his burden
light. Me thinks this might confirm the point, and convince any person that
thinks otherwise. Why do not men cast off this course, if there be no joy in
it, and take another? If we should see a man that has great variety of
suites, still wear one and the same, lay the rest by him, would we not
affirm, that he is much affected with that he wears? If a man have diverse
walks in or about his Orchard, yet is always found to be in one, and no
other; will it not be concluded that his delight in that exceeds? So the
children of God still wear one suite, keep one path; pleasure or profit does
not alter them; then may we not absolutely conclude, that they find mirth in
running the ways of Gods commands; pleasure in his precepts, and joy in
putting on the robes of righteousness?



laughter, the heart may be sorrowful; so under a sad countenance, the heart
may be merry. And as the wicked have many a secret sting, the righteous feel
not; so have the upright hidden comforts, that the wicked know not.

glad the heart, the other only force a fained kind of laughter. And seldom
have thou seen a man (outwardly) merry in the fruition of great matters:
neither do we read of Christ, that he (and who ever had greater cause?) in
all his life time laughed. The wine of the grape and water of life, will glad
the soul, and work (inwardly) a depth of comfort; though it always break
not forth and be conspicuous in the beholders: so the things of this world may
make a man outwardly merry; but this mirth is not sound, constant, and will but
end (...) mourning.

Christ is his perfection; and that the Spirit will one day clean dissolve and
root out the cursed work of Satan, and finish the good work of grace he has
begun in him: then he gathers comfort, plucketh up his heart, and is a right
merry man.

Neh. ^. 3.

But what for all this? Is not the doctrine sound? Yes: for joy shall break
forth in the morning, peace will come* and thy bitter tears shall be as a
fresh and cool (...) to a weary and thirsty tra^eller, to comfo^^ (...)
ouer-tyred spirit. And I dare set down this peremptory conclusion, that, In
the greatest (...) the upright man is the subject of (...) mirth, the only
merry man: for the cause of his joy is always great and constant, though the
effects be not proportionable.

their ^ghter shall be turned into mourning, their wine to wormwood. And who
would not wonder (but that their hearts are seared) that they have any figure
or show of mirth and gladness at all? But we will omit them, and commiserate
them, seeing their joy is not sound: and sudden sorrow shall surely follow.

Hebrew songs, with delight, in a strange land: Then what joy shall he have in
heaven, in the presence of the Lord, and communion of all the blessed Saints
and Angels? Can the Apprentice rejoice in his bondage, and not in his freedom?
Shall the captive sing in his shackels? what will he do when the prison door
is opened, and he at liberty? If David could dance before the Arc, how will
he leap before the Lamb? Shall Peter cry out, It is good to be here, (being
but in the transfiguration)? Oh! what will he say, when and where he is not
deceived? Is it possible for an Hebrew to sing and play in Babylon? and not be
ravished with joy in the house of Bethel? will strangers do thus from home?
what then will they do in the heaven of heavens? And how should this carry the
minds of the upright to think of their latter end, to desire the coming of
the Lord, and restoration of all things? Truly this, if it were felt in part,
tasted here below, and seriously thought upon, it would fill the heart with joy
unutterable glorious; make our Paul's long to be loosed, and John's to cry, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. The little experience that we have, what joy is in an
upright heart here, must make us wonder at that which shall be in heaven
hereafter. A cluster of grapes, brought from Canaan, proved that there was a
very good land, wine pleasant, and in abundance.

David's counsel, and taste how good the Lord is; drink of this water, though
it be brackish on the top, like the salt sea, yet it will prove sweeter in the
bottom: Men are in this thing (as the proverb is) worse feared, than hurt.
Children cast away the new coat, because at the first it pincheth them; but
after two or three days wearing, they would pine and pule, if it should be
took from them.

Sinners are like the sluggard; when the wind blows in at the creuises of
the walls and windows, the curtains drawn about him, and he wrapped in the
warm rags of his bedding; Oh how loath he is to peep out, leave his pillow,
and to put on his cold apparel: yet when he has leaped forth of his bed,
and clothed himself with his old attire; he would not for a piece of silver,
be in his former place and patches he was cast into, and folded in: So an
unrighteous person he finds warmth in the old rags of sin, is unwilling to
put off the relics of his father Adam, yet if once he had but done it, and
clothed himself with the righteous robes of Christ Jesus, he would not for a
world be in his former condition of clothing. And name the worst and hardest
thing in religion; yet it will bring joy to the doer: yea, they that mourn (in
the very act) shall have (or in the event) great comfort; and the greater
sorrow, the more solace.

Peter's sin caused Peter's weeping; but his weeping did procure matter of
mirth: Zacheus in restoring had more comfort than in deceiving. But men will
not try and wash in this poole of Siloam; Jordan is not regarded of the
leprous Naamans and Syrians of our days.

I have observed that when boys go to bathe, they feel with a finger, touch
with a toe; and if it be cold, at the first they shrink, draw back, put on
their apparel, and vow they will not wash till weather and water be warmer;
when as one of more experience and better resolution leapeth in, and after he
has swom one or two bouts, feels no part so cold as that which is cut of the
river: So fearful and irresolute persons come to this poole of Repentance;
but either they think its hard, cold and painful, or that the time to come
will be better and fitter, and so the sun of their life sets, they neither
wash at all, nor find out this hidden comfort.

But let me entreat thee to make trial of this matter; mourn for thy sin;
restore the wrongs done by deceit; get faith in Christ; labor for an honest
heart; and then if thou find not the doctrine true, cast off righteousness, go
to thy old course, count me a false prophet, and curse me when thou die.

FINIS.
Soli sapienti Deo gloria.

