A DEFENSE OF THE CHVRCHES AND MINISTRY OF ENGLAND.

Written in two Treatises, against the Reasons and Objections of Master
FRANCIS JOHNSON, and others of the separation commonly called BROWNISTS.

Published, especially, for the benefitt of those in these parts of the low
Countries.

MIDDELBVRGH, By Richard Schilders, Printer to the States of Zealand, 1599.

THE PVBLISHER TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
ABout Three Years since, Master Jacob having some speech with certain of the
separation before mentioned, concerning their peremptory and utter separation
from the Churches of England, was requested by them, briefly to set down in
writing, his Reason for defense of the said Churches, And they would either
yield unto his proofs, or procure an answer unto the same. Whereupon, the
Argument following this Preface, was set down in writing by Master Jacob:
which the said parties did send to Master Fr. Johnson, being then prisoner in
the Clinke in Southwark, who made an answer unto the same, containing 3.
Exceptions and 9. Reasons in denial of the Assumption: Whereunto Master Jacob
Replied. Afterward Master Johnson defended his said Exceptions and Reasons:
And finally, Master Jacob Replied again. As by the particulars themselves
appears.

Now having weighed and considered with my self, the great ignorance and
errors, wherewith those of the separation aforesaid, are and have been lately
carried away: namely, to affirm, That all that stand members of the Churches
of England, are no true Christians, nor in state of salvation, And such like
most ungodly sentences, which would grieve any Christian soul once to think
on, much more to publish to the view of the world: And weighing likewise
withal, the great weakness of many Christians among us, who (through want of
experience, or due consideration of things as they are) may easelie by their
delusions be drawn away into those errors with them: I have therefore: (As Well
in hope of reclaiming of the said parties from their said extremities, (which
now I judge the most of them, for want of means see not:) As also for the
staying of others from running into the same grievous excess with them) now
published this discourse to the view of the world, which has line buried in
the hands of some few. Many being desirous of it, who by reason of the largnes
in writing out of the same could not obtain it: Whereunto I am so much the
rather induced, For that the Reasons herein by Master Jacob alleged, have
(by Gods blessing) reclaymed many from their former errors, and satisfied
others, who have been doubtful, and subject to fall into the same.

In the examining of which Discourse, I shall desire the Reader to observe a
few notes for his better proffiting in the same.

1. And First, (among the rest) to note this, as a token of the strange and
obstinate dealing of Master Johnson and others of them, viz. That heretofore,
(until such time as the Argument hereafter mentioned, was framed aganst them,)
they never denied, That the doctrine and profession of the Churches of England,
was sufficient to make those that believed and obeyed them, to be true
Christians, and in state of salvation: But always held, professed and
acknowledged the contrary: As by the public confessions of themselves, namely
Master Barrow, Master Penry, and Master Johnson himself, in this discourse
mentioned in Page 81. appears: But now, they seeing; That if they should
acknowledge the said Doctrines and profession, to be sufficient to salvation:
That then this conclusion would of necessity follow, that those that hold and
practice the^, are a true Which yet Master Penry confessed, see Page 82.
Church, And so their own former judgments should be crossed. Rather I say
then they would be drawn to that, They now stick not to deny their own
confessions (which they think to be the saifest way for them,) and like
unnatural children, so vehemently hate, contemn, and despise their mother who
bare them, nourished, and brought them up: from whose breasts they sucked that
sweet milk of the means of everlasting life and salvation, (if ever they had
any taste of it at all.) Being notwithstanding, not abashed now in a desperate
manner, in the hardness of their heart, to affirne: Which appears, generally
by denying the Assumption of Ma. Jacobs, and particularly in these pages 13.
62. 63. 64.
That none by the doctrine of the Churches of England, can be a true Christian,
or saved: But that they all worship God in vain, Are abolished from Christ,
Are Babilonians, Idolaters, departers from the faith, worse then Infidels; And
such like most unchristian sentences, making them all one with the Church of
Rome, etc. Which impious affirmations, would cause any Christian heart to
lament and bleed for grief; Whose unchristian sentences, and false and
deceiptfull Reasons, (the very naming whereof were sufficient to refute them,)
are most plainly taken away, and clean overthrown, by these brief Replies of
Master Jacob unto every of them, unto which I refer you. Only this I add
with all, which I would desire might be noted: That if they continue in their
former confessions, That the doctrines and profession of the Churches of
England are sufficient to salvation; (As they ought, it being the very truth)
Then are they all in a most grievous schism, in so peremptorily condempning,
and separating, from such true Christians and Churches. And if they deny it:
(as they have begone to do:) Then do they run headlong, into an
intolerable sin and extremity, without all warrant of Gods word: And
besides give just occasion to be called fearful Which name they unjustly give
to those, that justly for this their extremity forsake their fellowship
Apostates, in so wholly falling (and that advisedly, for advantage sake, as it
seems plainly to appear) from so notable a truth which before they
embraced, and acknowledged.

2 Secondly, I would desire the Reader not to be carried away with the
multitude of corruptions, from the Question or matter in hand, (viz. Whether
the good doctrines of the Churches of England are sufficient to salvation in
them that in simplicity of heart believe and embrace them, notwithstanding the
multitude of errors and corruptions which Master Johnson repeateth to the
contrary:) But to have an especial regard unto the same. Which is the maine
poinct that has and does altogether deceive them, viz. To have an eye to the
corruptions in the Ministry, worship, and government of the Churches of
England: But never to look unto the nature and force of them, whether simply
of their own nature, they overthrow faith and Christianity, or whether they
be held of obstinacy and a convicted conscience, or not. Therefore I pray you
mark and examine the errors which they reckon up, (and I desire the same also
of them, for whose good especially I published this Treatise.) And after due
consideration, see if those errors are simply of that nature which before we
have noted. If they be not, (as Master Johnson nor all the men in the world,
shall ever be able to prove they are:) Then do they get no advantage by those
errors, to this purpose which they urge them for, although they were Thrice as
many Notwithstanding they are too many already.
more as they are. Thus they may see how they have all this while ben deceived,
and are now to seek a new for defense of their separation. For I hope they
will not say, That every error, held in simplicity by Christians, does cut
them off from salvation in Christ; Then should they condemn themselves,
unless they hold Anabaptisticall perfection, which surely though I think they
hold it not simply in their consciences; Yet in their practice (by condempning
others so peremtorily; that iump not even with them in every poinct) they come
very near it: But let this pass; we see then, That of necessity, the nature
of the errors must be regarded, Every sin is not a like. Me thinks then,
that they should affoard that favor to others, which they would have others to
offoard unto them: namely, That as they would be accounted true Christians,
through their faith in Christ, notwithstanding their errors (which they must
acknowledge Psalm. 19.12 1. Cor. 13.9.12
are infinite many in this life.) So they should account of others in the like
case: which even common sense and humanity would require them to grant.

To impresse this thing a little better in their minds, I will a little turn
my speech unto them. And I would pray them, to call to mind the many errors
and corruptions which they bear with among themselves, and lay them and the
errors with us together, and they shall see their equality.

Some of you, hold it utterly and simply unlawful, to swear by a book, to
prove a will, take an administration or sue in the Ecclesiastical Courts: To
shut up your shops upon Holly days and Festival days, etc. And that these
are the inventions of Antichrist, etc. And others of you, hold these things
altogether lawful, and have and do put them in practice, with many other
such like things which I could name. But these shall suffice.

Now the thing which I would from hence note is this. Can you among your selves
bear with such weighty poinctes as these, which you say are the inventions and
traditions of Antichrist that man of sin, which (in your account) are the I
would you knew the marks of the Beast a little better.
marks of the Beast, Reu. 14.
which who soever receives, shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and
shall be tormented in Hell fire for ever? And will not your stumackes serve you,
to bear with the Churches of England, in the like, or rather in far lesser
matters? What equity is there in this? Surely you are (for the most part) so
wholly given, and bend your wits and minds so much, to look into the estate
of other men and other Churches, and to apply the scriptures to the^: As you
sildome or never look into your own estate, or apply the scripturs to your
selves: But look unto it, it will be your decay in the end. You may see the^ by
your own practice all errors are not alike: But yet, will some say, are not all
the scriptures and commandments of God fundamental, and to be obeyed alike?
etc.

fundation Christ Jesus, and yet be a true Christian still: For which see
further Master Jacobs answer in Page 88. Again there are errors simply
fundamental, which of their own nature clean abolish from Christ; such are
the errors of the Arians concerning the Deity of Christ: of the Anabaptists
concerning his humanity: of the Papists concerning Justification by works,
praying to, and trusting in Saints, and such like, which directly raze the
very foundation. But that any one, or all, of the errors in the Churches of
England are of this force (as you would seem to hold by all your 9. Reasons)
is most impious and ungodly to affirm: And as Master Jacob very well notes
in his answer to every one of them: You thereby overthrow the Martirs in Queen
Mary's days, from being Christians, who held the very same corruptions in
their ministry, worship, etc. which is now held in England: But say you, the
Martirs saw no further. Then you confess against your selves, that our errors
do not simply abolish from Christ (as you every where affirm most ungodly,
especially in defense of your 7. Reason.) But that if men in these things see
no further, they are in the same estate with the Martirs. Now if you would have
your Reasons hold, you must prove the Churches of England all convicted in
conscience, which I hope you will not go about to do.

Thus much concerning the nature of our errors, whether they be of obstinacy,
or against the fundation directly: Which is the Second note I desire to be
observed.

3 Thirdly, I would desire the Reader to observe, the wresting and misaplying
of certain places of scripture, which (partly in this Treatise, and also in
other their wrytings) they allege for their absolute and peremptory
separation from the Churches of England: which I have thought not a miss here
to set down, that thereby the Reader (and them selves, upon better
consideration of the end and scope of the holy Ghost in these places) may see,
how they wrest and misapply them, clean contrary from the true and natural
sense thereof.

The scriptures which they allege for their separation, are these.

Then the sons of God saw the daughters of men. Genesis 6.2. Ye shall keep
therefore all mine ordinances and all my judgments and do them, that the land
whether I bring you to dwell therein spew you not out, therefore shall ye be
holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy, and I have separated you from other
people, that you should be mine. Leu. 20.22.26. So the children of Israel
which were come again out of captivity, and all such as had separated
themselves unto them from the filthiness of the Heathen of the land, to seek
the Lord God of Israel, did eat, etc. Ezra. 6.21. Depart, depart ye, go
out from thence, and touch no unclean thing, go out of the midst of her,
be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord Esa. 52.11. Fly from the
midst of Babell, and depart out of the land of the Caldeans. Ier. 50.8. And
Fly out of the midst of Babell and deliver every man his soul from the
fierce wrath of the Lord. Ier. 51.6.45 Come not ye to Gilgall, neither go ye
up to Bethauen. Hos. 4.15. Come to Bethell and transgress, and to Gilgall and
multiply transgression, etc. Seek not Bethellner enter into Gilgall, and go
not to Beersheba. Amos. 4.4.5. Save your selves from this froward generation.
Act. 2.40. And when certain were hardened and disobeyed speaking evil of the way
of god before the multitude, he departed from them and separated the discipels,
etc. Act. 19.9. Therefore come out from among them, and separate your selves
says the the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you. 2.
Cor. 6.17. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, go out of her my
people, etc. Reu. 18.4. These are the very main grounds, on which their
separation is builded, which being duly weighed with the scope of the text, you
shall very easily find, that not one amongst them all, will hold in
proportion with this time, nor bear the separation they gather from them.
First because either they concern such times and states as the people that
lived in th^^^; were professors of, or subject unto, open gross Infidelity,
and either Heathen or Antichristian Idolatry, not in some particular customs
and outward ordinances, but in the whole body and power of Heathen and
Antichristian religion, such as could not possibly stand with true faith and
religion at all: Which can not be said of these times and present standings,
without open untruth. 2 Or else because if they be not of that sort, they
affoard no such absolute separation at all, but only from wilful, rebellious,
and obstinate disobeyers, and evil speakers, and from apparent gross
corruptions, but not from the whole public body of those Assemblies, nor from
the lawful and good things used in such times and standings, as have not wholly
swarued from the faith, though there were diverse grievous faults, both in
doctrine and practice, suffered among them. As by the example of the Jewish
Churches in the times of the Prophets, especially of Christ him self, may
plainly appear. The Evangelists make mention in diverse places, That they
worshipped God in vain, teaching for doctrine men's precepts. They made their
proselites the Children of Hell Two fold more then they were before. They made
the commandments of God of none effect by their traditions. Such as believed
in Christ they excommunicated, etc. Yet were they a true Church,
notwithstanding these, and many other grievous enormities: with whom Christ
himself and his Apostles, had communion and fellowship, sometime in those good
things that were among them. And so might they with the Churches of England,
without justifying or allowing these things, which they see to be evil. All
which things do more fully appear in the conference it self, as it follows
hereafter.

But unto the examples of these Churches, me thinks I hear already that
common answer and last refuge of theirs: which is this. Those Churches (say
they) were in a true outward constitution, And therefore were the true Churches
of Christ, notwithstanding those gross errors which they held in other poincts
of doctrine and practice: But contrariwise (say they) the Churches of England
have a false outward constitution, and therefore they are no true Churches of
Christ, notwithstanding their truths of doctrine, etc.

9 Reasons.
writings, to allow them to be lawful by 2. Chron. 24.2.3.
Zadok and Ahimelech, and by 2. King 25.18.
Seruiah the chief Priest, and Zephaniah the Second: which make against
themselves:) For there was never but one high Priest, as they confess Answer
to Master Hild. Page 50.
(Ergo not two as here were) the rest were indeed inferior to him: And yet
amongst those, there was a chiefty also, who were called, sometimes Second
Priests, or Priests of the Second order* 2. King. 23.4. and sometimes chief
Priests, Mat. 27.1. These scriptures being compared with those in the margin by
them cited, do make it more plain. Now, if the chief offices, were so
corrupted and altered through covetousness, as the Histories make mention: It is
not likely, that the inferior offices did remain sound, but were as much or
more altered: The Priests (generally) being such covetous wicked persons, their
offices being very gainefull: and besides they living under the authority of
the Heathenish Romans, who ruled over them. All these things considered, it is
very likely that ye offices and outward constitution (on which they so much
depend) were wholly altered from the right institution, and therefore would make
nothing for the^. As for their allegation of Mat. 23.1. Where they say, Christ
testifies that they had true offices, by saying they satt in Moses chair: It
will not help them, any whit at all. For Moses was no Priest, as they were, but
a Magistrate: and therefore Moses chair must be understood of some what else:
and themselves May. Barrow and May. Greenwood, in diverse Letters and
Treatises.
have understood it heretofore, of Moses doctrine. 2. Secondly (to let their
constitution pass, which yet as I have said, would be found as badde or worse
then ours) we will examine their corruptions in doctrine: Wherein I would know
of the^, which are the greater sins, of these two sorts, viz. 1. A false and
corrupt outward constitution: 2. Or false and corrupt doctrines.
I think they will say, the corrupt and false doctrines are the greater, as
they are indeed: For that they, do wound, fester and corrupt the very
conscience, and do deceive the hearers thereof, Whereas the errors in the
constitution of a Church, (especially in some circumstances (as the errors with
us are) and those of no small controversy, in matters also not fundamental)
are nothing nere so hurtful: by how much the Tithing of Mint, Annis, and
Commin, are of lesser force then the other weightier matters of the law. Now
from hence, I Reason thus.

If the greater sins (namely in doctrine) do not simply overthrow a company
of Christians, from being a true Church: Then much less will the lesser sins
(namely in the outward constitution, etc.)

But the false doctrines (which are the greater sins) themselves confess by
the example of the said, Churches do not. Therefore neither will the lesser.

For the better explayning of this poinct, I would pray them resolve me of this
question. What if a company of Arians, Anabaptists. or Papists, shoud be
gathered and established in a true outward constitution, and still reteyne
their fundamental errors before page 4.
named: Whether should their outward constitution make them a true Church, yea
(...) no? I think they will say no. Thus I hope then it appears, That the
outward constitution whether falty or true, avails nothing to the
overthrowing or making of a true Church, unless other doctrines of the
foundation, either false or true, do concur therewith. And thus their
Objection of the Jewish constitution, is (I trust) fully answered: So that
still their peremptory separation and condempning of the Churches of England,
for some outward corruptions, temayneth still a grievous sin upon their
heads: for which (without hearty repentance) they shall one day answer before
God, which will be too heavy a burden for them to bear.

Lastly, concerning our corruptions: As we cannot justify them to be no
corruptions, (but must needs acknowledge, that there are many yet remaining in
our land, which were left by that man of sin and are as thorns unto our
sides, Judge. 2.3.
which we hope God will in time abolish): So dare we not run into your
extremities, to condemn our Churches for such corruptions, but weight the
appoincted time of God for the redress thereof. Yet in the mean time, so
long as those most excellent truths and doctrines of salvation, (for which
God make us thankful) are still retained and held, as soundly as by any Church
upon the face of the earth (the other errors not simply overthrowing the same,
being not held of obstinacy, and being also for the most part, of great
controversy and disputation among the learned:) So long I say, communion in
things lawful, is to be kept with them, as before is noted in the example of
other Churches: Otherwise, it will come to pass, (by reason of the Mat. 25.13.
to 23.
diversity in opinions and judgments which by the corruption of our nature we
remain in, in this tabernacle, as has Leu. 4. Psalm. 19.12.
been in all ages, and 1 Cor. 13.9, 12.
shall be, so long as this life of imperfection indureth,) that no communion can
ever be had with any Church living, no nor any one Christian with another:
Which to affirm, were most absurd and ungodly.

These observations being considered, I doubt not but the Lord will add a
blessing to this work, That such as are simple hearted, and have exceeded in
eagerness of zeal: may see their extremity, in so rashly and unadvisedly
separating from, and condempning the Churches of England, sometimes their
Nurses and Mothers, as before is noted: Whereby God may have the glory, and
themselves the comfort, even the salvation of their souls through Christ.

D. B.

AN ARGUMENT PROVING THAT the Churches of England are the true Churches of God.
Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian and in
state of salvation; That is sufficient to make a company so gathered
together, to be a true Church.

But the whole doctrine, as it is publicly Book of Articles published Anno
1562.
professed, and practiced, by law in England, is sufficient to make a
particular man a true Christian, and in state of salvation ( See further for
these words in Page 3.
and our public Assemblies are therein gathered together.)

THerefore it is sufficient to make the public Assemblies true Churches.

H. JACOB.

Against the Assumption of the said Argument, Mr Johnson made 3. Exceptions and
9. Reasons, which hereafter follow in order: Together with Mr Jacobs Replies
unto the same.
But before we come to the examination of the said Assumption, let us see
first what he says against the Proposition.
Fr. JOHNSON.
TO omit the Proposition, until it better appear by their defense of the
Assumption how to take and understand it, we will for the present only show
the weakness of the Assumption: and this also the rather, because they seem
wholly to depend upon it.

H. JACOB.
THe answerer omitteth the Proposition, for in deed it is most certain: But he
denies the Assumption, (which yet is as certain also), That the doctrine in our
book of Articles is sufficient to make a true Christian.

Fr. JOHNSON.
In our former answer to this argument, we omitted the proposition, not
because of the certentie of it every way (as the Replier dreameth) but until
we might see by his defense of the The Assumption is examined and maintained
Page 4.
assumption how to take it, as the^ we noted. Now therefore (having seen in
his reply the unlearned, ungodly, and unconscionable pretenses, by which he
would seem to defend the Assumption, when in deed he does nothing else but
cast a miste before the eyes of the simple): we give him to understand, that
the whole argument is lame and faulty in every part thereof. The Proposition
is not absolutely true, as it appears he understands it, by his defense of
the Assumption. The Assumption is not only false, as we proved in our former
answer, but also lacks a foot whereon it should go, if it were perfect and
entier.

For whereas in the Proposition, mention is made, not only of the making of a
true Christian, but also of a company so gathered together: he should (in the
Assumption, if he would have had it sound and perfect) not only have assumed,
that the doctrine etc. is sufficient to make a true Christian: but have added
also, that their assemblies be companies so gathered together. Which being not
done, both the Assumption wants one of the feet, and the conclusion
inserreth more then was in the premises, and so the whole silogisme is faulty
and disfigured.

Thus might we, without any further answer, return this argument to the first
framers of it, to be better fashioned: Yet in hope, that they may be brought
(through the blessing of God) to receive the love of the truth, that they may
be saved, and with their gifts no more to plead for, and deck the whore of
Babylon, and to help forward the building and beautifying of Sion, we will more
particularly lay open to them, the weakness of this his reply.

And first, whereas he affirms, that the Proposition is most certain, and yet
in his defense of the Assumption, he declares, that he so takes it, as
whatsoever amongst them, be jointly together held, and joined with that, which
otherwise might make a ture Christian, or a true Church: yet notwithstanding,
they are so to be reputed, as if there were no such additions or commixtures:
we answer that in this sense, the Proposition neither is, nor can be
absolutely true, as it ought to be, if they would have their argument good. For
who knows not, that such Gal. 5.2.4.
things may be joined with Christ, as abolish from Christ. And again, 2. Cor.
6.14, 25.
that Christ and Antichrist can not accord together. Either therefore the
Proposition is not general, but admits limitations, and then is not the
Argument good: Or if it be general, without any limitation, so as whatsoever
be added too (or co^mingled with) that which otherwise might make a true
Christian, or a true Church, yet it hinders nothing at all: The^ is it not
absolutely true in such understanding, as may appear by the former exceptions,
and diverse other that might be alleged.

Next touching the Assumption, besides that it is lame, as before is showed, it
is also untrue, as in our former answer appears. Some balm in deed this man
brings to cure it: but it has no other effect, save only to manifest to us
so much the more, that the soar of their Assemblies cannot be healed. In our
former answer, we first took 3. Exceptions against them, comparing together
their profession and practice, then we alleged 9. Reasons, directly
concluding the falsehood of the Assumption.

H. JACOB.
BEfore I examine this your answer, I would desire you, and all others, to
note, that all your Exceptions and Reasons, with your defense of them,
hereafter following, do consist of these three general points. 1. That
every person in England, holding our publik faith, is no true Christian. 2.
That all the Christians and Churches in King Edwards time, and namely Master
Cramner, M. Ridley, M. Hooper, M. Latimer, M. Philpot, M. Saunders, M. Rogers,
M. Tailor, etc. were all lims of Antichrist, and no true Christians. 3. That
every soul in England, is convicted in conscience, that the Praelacie is
unlawful and intolerable.


The First of these, is our maine question, and the ground of all our
reasoning, which you gainsay. The Second, though it be not expreslie spoken,
yet it is directly, evidently, and undeniably concluded, by all and every of
your arguments against us. As in the seueralls hereafter we shall see. The
Third, you are driven unto, for defense of your former Assertion, which else
falls to the ground. And this you affirm flatly in your defense of your
1.6. and 7. Reasons.

Now my desire is, that all men would take notice of these your 3: Assertions,
and consider indifferently, whether they proceed from an honest, a sober, or
a Christian mind. And you M. Johnson, if you list hereafter to say any more,
defend these 3. points directly and plainly, that your answers may be
briefer, and more certain, then now they are.

Now I come to the particular examination of your former answerere.

First you say, You omitted the Proposition before, not for the soundnes of it,
but only, because you would see how I meant it. Why? He that has but half an
eye, may see the meaning of those words, where is no darkness nor doubtfulnes
of sense at all. What fault find you in it now? Forsooth, first a want in the
Assumption, and then untruths, both in the Proposition, and Assumption of my
Sillogisme. There wants (you say) that I should express in the Assumptio^,
That our Assemblies be companies gathered together in the doctrines and
ordinances which we all by law publicly profess and practice. Who but a
wrangler would not understand that I meant so much? Nay do not my express
words imply as much: when I say, We by law publicly profess and practice
them? Then are not our Assemblies (which are by law) gathered together in
this profession and power? Fie for shame, these are senseless cauilations. But
because what in me lies, I would not have you any more to stumble at a
straw, I have to satisfy you vvithall, Not that the Argument is unsound
without this addition: But because ye Reader may see how you will play at a
small game rather then sit out, vt aiunt.
now added those words to the Assumption aforesaid in a contrary letter
which you desire, viz. and our public assemblies are therein gathered
together.

Secondly, you say, that my proposition means, that what soever is held
together and joined, with that which otherwise might make a true Christian, or
a true Church: Yet notwitstanding they are so to be reputed, as if there were
no such additions or comixtures. O strange dealing: in all my writing I have no
such word, no silable, no letter, sounding to that sense I have directly
contrary, in my answer to your Fourth Reason, as your self notes there. Yet
you M. Johnson, with out al shame, in the view of the world, do Father on me
this foul untruth, and most senseless error, in your first entrance.

Further, where as it seems you reprove my Proposion, requiring to to have it
set thus: Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian
(and has nothing added with it distroying the foundation of faith) That is
sufficient to make a company so gathered together, a true Church.

You must know Mr. Johnson, that that were an idle and vain addition: for
wheresoever there are any such things added distroying faith, there whatsoever
else seems sufficient, indeed it is not sufficient to make a true Christian.
Wherefore nodum in scirpo quaeris, this is to find a knot in a rush. Thus much
concerning the trunes of my Proposition.

The Assumption examined by the Exceptions and Reasons following
Lastly you come to deny my Assumption, or rather to maintain your denial
heretofore given. Where first note that by denying my assumption, you affirm
the first general poinct noted in this beginning.

That every particular person in England, holding our public faith here, is
not true Christian. Which (O Lord) who would not tremble to think on? Even
that which this man above two years a go affirmed, and now again advisedly
and wilfully defends. I take heaven and earth to record this day, whether
this be not desperate madness, yea or no. But let us examine your exceptions,
and reasons against my Assumption more particularly, and we shall see what
stuff it is. Your first exception against the same is as follows.

Master Iohnsons I. Exception against the former Assumption: with Master
Jacobs Replies to the same. EXCEPTION. I.
FIrst let here be considered the 19. Article of that doctrine and book, which
is alleged by themselves for their defense, and see if their profession and
practice be not contrary one to an other: Yea whether even by their own
doctrine and confession, contained in that book, it be not monifest, that they
have not a true visible Church of Christ.

The words of the Article are these.

The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, Artic. 19.
and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all
those things, that of necessity are requisite to the same.

These are their own words and doctrine: Now if they cannot prove their
Assemblies to be such, they may see that their own witnesses, (even their own
doctrine and book alleged) give verdict against the^. If they can prove them
to be such: where and what are their proofs, touching the particulers,
mentioned in this their own description of a visible Church of Christ.

H. JACOB his I. Reply to the 1. Excep.
THis his first Exception, is the 19. Article of this very book which we
allege, wherein a visible Church is discribed to be a Congregation, where the
pure word is preached, and Sacraments ministered, according to all those
things, that of necessity are requisite. Now this description, he rejects
not, but our practice (says he) is contrary: and therefore we have no true
visible Churches, nor Christians.

I answer: wherein is it contrary? in what things that of necessite are
requisite? does not all this Christian world see and confess, that our public
practice, is agreeable to our profession in that book? Nay (says he) but prove
you your assemblies to be such, and if you can prove them, where and what are
your proofs? if you do not, you are confuted. A worthy confutacion sure, and
very Clercklike: As if my Tenant should deny me rent for my house and land,
yea and go to law with me for the fee simple, which he has holden in ferme of
me these 40. years and I have hitherto, quietly enjoyed from my Ancestors,
time out of mind: Now he suing me at law, for that which I thus possess,
faith, prove your right to this land which you have; if you can, what, and
where, be your proofs? let me see them: Or else I your Tenant will have it:
This were goodly dealing, were it not, and very lawful. Even so do you,
asking proofs of us for that which we possess, and have possessed before you
made any question about it, nay you your selves, held part of this possession
of us and with us, till yesterday, when you began first to lay claim in this
sort to the whole. Now your reason is, let us prove it to be ours, where be
our proofs? Or else you will not acknowledge us any longer: see I pray you your
own equity. If this suffice not to make you desist, I leave it to the Judges
to give sentence.

Secondly note further: Our Article says, A Church is where the word is
preached, and Sacraments ministered according to all things that of necessity
are requisite. Where we plainly insinuate, that many errors may be added, and
truths wanting in a visible Church: but nothing which is absolutely necessary:
Now, what does our practice, in Preaching, or Sacraments, want, that is
absolutely necessary, without which, there cannot be any true preaching or
Sacraments at all, show it us because we see it not our selves I assure you;
until then, your first reason has no reason in it.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 1. Excep.
HOw fit or unfit the said description of a visible Church (mentioned in the
19. Article of the said book) is, we neither did, nor do examine. Only
because this is their own profession, and we see their practice is contrary
unto it, we did therefore from hence take our first exception, requiring of
them, to show their assemblies to be such, or else to know, that their own
description, is a witness against themselves.

Now in their reply, have they according to the particulers of that
description, justified their Church Assemblies? nothing less. Let this
therefore be first observed. But what then have they done? Surely this. First
pretending as if they repeated our exception, and their own description, they
leave out diverse perticulers, of special moment there expressed, as first,
where the visible Church is discribed, to be a congregation of faithful men,
they leave out these words (of faithful men) belike knowing that their
Congregations, which are holds of all foul spirits, and cages of every
unclean and hateful bird, Revel. 18.2.
cannot therefore justly be accoumpted congregations of faithful men.
Secondly, where the description speaks, that the Sacraments be duly
ministered: they leave out the word (duly:) because it crosses their women's
Baptism, private Communion, receiving of the most profane and their seed,
etc. Lastly, where in the description it is reqaired, both for preaching the
pure word and due administration of the Sacraments, that they be done
according to Christ's ordinance: they leave out altogether these words
(according to Christ's ordinance:) belike because this clause quite
overthrows both their Antichristian Prelacy, from which all the inferior
Ministers amongst them receive power and authority to preach, and minister the
Sacraments, and their Priesthood and Deaconery, wherein they all administer,
and their stinted imposed prayers, exhortations, crosses on the forehead,
questiones to the infantes, use of the same words in English in ministering
the Lords supper, which the papists used and still use in Latin, not reteyning
the words of Christ's institution, and such like.

Now thus having left out such perticulers as were of spetiall moment against
them, they next demand wherein their practice is contrary to their profession,
and description of a visible Church, in what things that of necessity are
requisite? We answer, in all the particulers of that description aforesaid.

For first, their Church Assemblies, are not congregations of faithful men,
but a confusion of all manner of people though never so wicked and profane.
The D. Whithg last book, page 176. and 178.
Prelates and Formalistes affirm, that their Church is full of Atheistes,
Papists, Idolaters, Drunkards, Whoremo^gers, and such like. The Sermon on Romans
12. page 65. and 66. Demonstration in the preface.
forward Preachers likewise auerre, that in their church are swarms of
Atheists, Idolators, Papists, erroneous and heretical sectaries, Witches,
Charmers, Sorcerers, Murderers, Thieves, Adulterers, Liars, etc. Finally, that
a man may be any thing amongst the^, saving a sound Christian. These things
being so, as both their estate and writings bear witness: let themselves
judge, whether their Assemblies can be accounted Congregations of faithful
men, or no: which is the first poinct of the description aforesaid.

Secondly, in the same description is required, That the pure word of God be
preached, according to Christ's ordinance. But amongst them, are allowed
besides the word of God, the Apocripha books: and in stead of preaching the
word, the reading of Homilies: as may appear in that book of Articles
alleged by themselves. Yet who knows not, that in those books, are diverse
untruths, errors, contradictions, blasphemies, and such like? So far are
they from being the pure word of God, or agreeing therewith. Moreover, when and
where the word is preached among them, it is done by virtue of a false office
and calling, never appointed by Christ. And the Ministers that preach it, do
in their constitution stand always subject, to be silenced, suspended,
excommunicated, and degraded by the Prelates and Ordinaries, to whom (when they
are made Priests,) they promise, and (when they enter upon a benefice) they
swear, Canonical obedience. Neither are they suffered any further to preach
the word, and truth of God, then agrees with the Articles, Injunctions,
aduerticements, and caueats, in that behalf provided. If any preach the word
of God any further, they are subject to be silenced, banished, and put to
death. That these things accord with the ordinance of Christ, or with their
own description of a visible Church, we suppose themselves will not for shame
affirm it.

Lastly, in their description it is required, That the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to the ordinance of Christ, in all things, that of
necessity are requisite to the same. Now by the ordinance of Christ, in the
administration of the Sacraments, there are necessarily required 1. A lawful
Minister. 2. A lawful people. And thirdly, A lawful administration, according
to the Testament of Christ: In all which, their practice is conerarie to the
ordinance of Christ, and their own description aforesaid. Their Ministers all
of them are either Prelates, Priests, or Deacons (which amongst them is a step
to the Priesthood:) none of which Christ has ordained in his Testament for the
work of his ministry. Their people are not separated from the world, but
stand in confusion with it, and in subjection to the Antichristian Prelates
and Prelacie: See John. 15.19. and 17.14.16. 1. John. 4.5, 6 Act. 2.40. and
19.9. Revel. 18.4. and 14.9.
And therefore can not be deemed a true church of God, and the people of
Christ, unto whom in such estate the Sacraments (which are seals of the
covenant of grace) do apperteyne, and may be administered. Finally, their
administration is according to the inventions and precepts of man, with stinted
prayers, exhortations, Epistles and Gospels: and besides those in Baptism,
crossing on the forehead, and questions to the infant: in the Lords supper,
translating, and using out of the Mass book, other words then the words of
Christ's institution, and such like, as may be seen at large in their book
of common prayer, which is picked and culled out of the Mass book, full of
all abominations, as Admonition to the Parliament, second treatis.
themselves have published heretofore.

These things we have been forced thus to mention at large, both because they
twice demand (as if they knew not themselves) wherein their practice is
contrary to that description aforesaid: and because they blush not to affirm,
that all the Christian world sees and confesses their practice to be
aggreeable to their profeession in that book. Whereas the contrary is most
true.

Touching which, what themselves have heretofore written to the contrary: See
in the Admonitions to the Parleament, Replies of T. C. against D. Whitguift,
Demonstration of Discipline, etc, And what the reformed Churches profess to
the contrary: see in the French, Belgicke, and Heluetian Churches, and in the
Harmony of co^fessions, Sect. 10. and 11. which would be too long to set down
at large in this place: Neither is it needful, seeing it is most evident in
the books and places alleged, whether we refer the Reader.

Thus also it appeared, what just cause we had, to put them to prove their
assemblies, to be such, as themselves discribe visible Churches to be: Which,
seeing they have not yet done, and seeing their practice is contrary to their
profession, as now (at their request) we have showed in the perticulers
aforesaid: If they still be minded as before, we do also still ask, where
and what are their proofs, touching the perticulers mentioned in their own
description of a visible Church.

Their similitude of a Landlord and Tennaunt, is against themselves, so wortthy
and Clercklike is their reply. If any have usurped, or otherwise made a false
clame never so long, to a piece of la^d or other possession: may they not
justly be called upon to show their title and bring fourth their evidence? Let
the Judges given sentence. If I deny their clame and title to be such, let him
show their evidence from the Apostles writings: Let us from thence see their
evidence for the offices of Archbs., Lordbs., Suffraganas, Archdeacons,
Chauncelers, Commissaries, Officials, Priests, Parsons, Vicars, Cnraets, etc:
For their entrance into their Offices, according to their Cannons, and Book of
ordering Priests and Deacons, and of consecrating Archbishops and Bishops: For
their administration by their stinted imposed Liturgy, and by their Popish
Cannons, Officers and proceedings: For their Churching of women, praying over
the dead, Holidays to Saints and Angels, Fastes on their Eaues, etc. For their
maintenance by Tithes, Chrisomes, Offerings, etc. For their confused communion
of all sorts of people, though never so wicked, in the body of their Church,
etc. Let them (I say) show us evidence for those, from the Apostles writings,
if they deny their claim to be such, as we have noted. Otherwise if they
Isay. 8.20.
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them,
neither any right to that they challendge.

Where they say, we held part of their possession with the^ heretofore: If
they mean, that we with them received the beasts mark, and drunk of the cup
of Babels abominations, we deny it not: but acknowledge Gods mercy, that
passing over our sins, has given us grace and strength at his Reave. 18.4. 2
Cor. 6.17, 18 Acts. 2.4.
commandment, to forsake that way of Antichrist, and to come out of that
spiritual Babylon, to salvation of our souls, which mercy we wish also unto
these men, that so being saved from this froward generation, they may become
the sons and daughters of the Lord almighty in Christ our Savior.

Touching their Article, Preaching, Sacraments, Ministration, etc. enough is
said before. Only where they say, they see not themselves wherein they fail,
touching Preaching or Sacraments, in things necessary, It is too impudent
untruth, as their Admonition to the Parliament: T. C. his replies in defense
thereof: Demonstration of discipline. Declaration and defense of Ecclesiastical
discipline, etc.
former writtings do and will always testify to their faces, which we will
not stand here to relate. That shall suffice which we have touched before,
which till it be answered, it will be found that our first exception has
both reason and weight in it whatsoeuerthey do or can pretend to the contrary.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 1. Excep.
HEre is much ado to no purpose. You observe 4. points in our Article omitted
by me, wherein our practice is contrary to our profession. First, our
Article requires a visible Church to be an assembly of faithful men: But our
assemblies (say you) are not so. This is false, they are so, you shall never
prove in us the contrary, more then appears was in the Church of the Jews,
both Ancient and in the time of Christ, And yet they then were the true
Church: As I have elsewhere in this Book sufficiently proved and showed against
you. That which you bring of D. Whitgift and other writers amongst us of the
profaneness of many in our assemblies, you deprave their meaninges utterly:
for though they grant very many such to be amongst us, yet they say not, that
all our assemblies are such, nor our whole assemblies: Neither deny they our
assemblies to be companies of faithful men, or utterly to be separated from:
Nay, the contrary do they: even that only they ought to be reformed.
Therefore you too grossly abuse them.

Secondly, The Article requires the pure word of God to be preached. But (say
you) the Apocrypha books, and reading of Homilies, and other errors are allowed
in our practice: Yea surely and in our profession too as your self observes
in the book of Artic. yet then our profession and practice differ not, as you
charg our Churches. But these poinctes are not the pure word of God: Neither
does the Article mean, that in a visible church, every jot and title, both of
our profession and practice, must needs be out of the pure word. They knew that
every visible Church might and did err in somewhat. Only it means, that a
visible Church might not err in any poinct, that of necessity is requisite,
as their words express. It rests then that you show, that the pure word is
not preached in our assemblies by law, sufficiently to salvation: which yet you
do not, nor can do. Therefore you say nothing. For, I for my part know well,
that our Churches fail from the pure word in sundry lesser points, which
though they be errors, yet are they not Fundamental, neither do they in
their own nature abolish from Christ.

Thirdly, the Article has according to Christ's ordinance: But you say, that
we preach in strange and false functions, such as are not Christ's ordinances.
This is false too, Our ordinary Preachers are true Pastors, as touching the
substance of Pastoral calling, as I have often answered you, albeit they have
a wrong ordination from the Prelacie. See my defense of this poinct, as also of
that concerning the confusion of our people, in my other writing long since
delivered to you, touching the In my answer to the 1. reason of that treatise
following in the end of this book.
comparing of the condition of a Ministry with Mariadge. Now this ordinance
of Christ to have a true Pastor to a faithful people, is sufficient for the
being of a true Church, though not for the perfection of it. Contrary to the
which, you have nothing but words.

Lastly, the Article requires due administration of Sacraments: But our
practice (say you) herein is not due or intier, because there concur diverse
corruptions withal: as stinted prayers, exhortations, Epistles, Gospels, and
Crossing in Baptism, etc. I answer: all these simply of them selves do not
abolishe our Sacraments. If you think they do, say so, and you shall be
refuted. If nay, Then this very Article signifies so much, That corruptions
and faults might be in the Sacraments, but nothing amiss that of necessity
is requisite.

Now, all these 4. poinctes I have omitted (say you.) True in words I have,
but in sense I express them all and every one, when for breuities sake, I
comprehended all in this general clause of this Article, according to all that
is of necessity requisite. How say you, have I not herein contained and
signified all these your exceptions, and that according to the meaning of the
Article? If I have (as it is most true) then do you vnconscionablie abuse me,
in saying, I pretended to repeat our description in the Article, and yet leave
out diverse perticulars of special moment. And let this therefore be first
observed, I have omitted nothing material in that Article. Yea let this be
here noted, that in all this you have most fondly abused your pen and
tongue. Yet will you still demand how our practice agrees with our profession
in that 19. Article? Still I answer you with that similitude of a foolish and
importinate Te^naunt against his Landlord. If I have held possession, and my
aunestors before my time out of mind, indeed the King laying claim to it, he
may call for my evidence, because Time prescribes not against the Prince.
nullum tempus occurrit Regi, But against my fellow subjects, possession and
inheritance (so long without interruption) is of it self evidence in law
good enough, except the plaintiff can bring better to the contrary. Therefore it
were absurd and senseless before any Judge in England, for a Tenant to put
such a Landlord to show his evidence in such a case. Even so, as absurd it is
for you, seeing at first you were of us and now are gone out from us, to put us
to prove our selves to be such as heretofore you never doubted of. If now you
doubt and contradict it, show you your reason as better evidence, or else all
men will condemn your folly.

Where you put me to prove all our offices of the Hyerarchie, their ceremonies,
etc. What needs it? I never took it upon me: Except first you do show, that
these corruptions all or any of them, absolutely in their own nature do
abolish us all clean from Christ, and make us impossible to be saved, which
until you do, still I say, I see not any piece of reason in all these your
words.

And lastly where you say, it is an impudent untruth, that I say we see not,
that any thing necessary is wanting in our Church, And to this end you quote
to convince me, The Admonition. T. C. his Replies, Demonstration, Declaration,
and the Defense of Discipline, etc. This is indeed too bold an untruth, and a
wilful perverting of your allegations. None of all these do grant any thing
to be wanting with us that is necessary to the being of a Church simply, nor to
the being of a true Ministry or Sacraments: But only to their well and
convenient being. How honest then are you to falsify your own witnesses so
openly?

Master Iohnsons 2. Exception against the former Assumption, with Master
Jacobs Replies to the same. EXCEPTION 2.
SEcondly let them tell us, whether they hold and profess Jesus Christ to be
the Prophet, Priest and King of his Church, to be obeyed in his own ordinance
only, and in no other. And if they do, then let them show us how their
practice agrees with this profession.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 2. Excep.
TO this Second Exception That Christ is our Prophet Priest, and King, I
answer: The book of Articles, our Ministers now, and Congregations
generally, do hold and profess the same (our practice being answerable
likewise thereunto) even as before time Master Cranmer, Ridley Latimer, and
such like, with their Congregations did then: viz. That Christ is our Prophet,
Priest and King, and to be obeyed in his own ordinances only and in no other.
This I say we generally profess and practice. Howbeit this note with all, we
hold Christ's ordinance to be of two sorts, written or unwritten, the first
necessary, the second arbitrary, The first touching doctrine, that is,
touching faith and the inward opinion only, such as these, The doctrine of God,
his Nature, his Persons, his Properties, of the Messiah Christ Jesus, of
Justification, of Sanctification, of the Resurection, etc. Wherein stands the
1. Cor. 3.12.23.
foundation of saving faith. All these must be in the written word or else to be
none of Christ's. The second touching outward orders in the Church, which are
truly called and accounted Christ's own also, although particularly devised and
appoincted by the Church, whom Christ has authorized thereunto, even as it
shall be thought most fit and profitable for the present times, places and
persons: such we hold all outward government and ceremonies to be, because
they be not simply of the foundation, neither written, nor certain, nor
perpetual, but at the arbitrarie appoinctment of the Church and Magistrate,
and yet to be Christ's own nevertheless, who has left this liberty for the
Church to use; Thus we hold and thus we practice, and we are persuaded no
Scripture to be against all this, but rather for it. I speak now concerning
our Ministers and Congregations generally; that is our public Church state. If
you say, but there are diverse amongst us that think otherwise, I answer, But
this is the general estate both of our Ministers and Churches, howsoever one
or two amongst hundreths or thousands may think otherwise, show the contrary
if you can. And our Churches, they certainly must be deemed after their
general estate and constitution, not as one or two men think. If you say,
this general opinion and practice is an error, Therefore they obey not Christ's
ordinances in truth herein, though they think they do. I answer, let it be
so, it is now An error, though not foundame^tall.
the error of their judgment, as it was in Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. Not
pregnaunt rebellion and disobedience to Christ, not a convicted or seared
conscience, so that their other 1. Cor. 3.12 15.
truths of the foundation are not frustrat, nor Christ made to none effect in
the^. And this is all our question, Whether they remain Christians still for
all these faults, yea, or no.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 2. Excep.
COncerning our Second Exception, it was propounded by way of demand,
requiring that they would show us, if they held Jesus Christ to be the
Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church, to be obeyed in his own ordinances
only and in no other, how then their practice agrees with this profession.
One would have thought that here it had been good and needful (if they could)
to have cleared this poinct by the Scriptures and the Testament of Christ, and
from thence to have manifested, that their Ministry, worship, ministration,
government, etc. which are called in question, are no other then the Lord
Jesus Christ, (that Prophet, Priest and King of his Church) has in his
Testament given and appointed thereunto. And have they not done this? Surely
no. What then do they say? First they tell us, That touching this poinct,
their profession and practice now is so as before time it was with M. Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer and their Cogregations. But what of this? Can the persons or
age of these whom he names, nay can any person or ages prejudice the truth?
Were not they subject to error at all? or must their errors bind us: Did not
John Hus (that worthy champion of Christ) and others also of the Martyrs in
former times, say and hear Mass, even to their dying day, not seeing the
abomin ations thereof? And did not diverse of the^ acknowledge, some the Popes
calling and Supremacy, some 7. Sacraments, some Purgatory, some Auricular
confession, and such like grievous errors, etc, And yet notwithstanding dyed
most constantly for the truethes which they saw and testified, some for one,
and some for another, as God manifested the truth unto them: As may be seen
at large in their several Histories in the Acts and Monumentes, whether we
refer the Reader. But may we now so profess and practice in these things as
they did? Or if we should, were their ignorance and errors a sufficient
defense for us? yet thus would this man bear us in hand. But moreover, let
him tell us, if Master Latimer and others, did not forsake the Prelacie and
functions they had before-time received? And Master Ridley at his death repent
that he had been so earnest for the remnantes of Popery in his time retained?
Besides also, who knows not, that when Master Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc.
dyed Martyrs for the truth of Christ, they neither had them selves, nor joined
in spiritual communion with such as had the Prelacie and Manisterie now
pleaded for? And not that only, but were also members of that persecuted
church in Queen Mary's days, which was separated from the rest of the Land,
as from the world, and joined in covenant, by voluntary profession, to obey
the truth of Christ, and to witness against the abominations of Antichrist, As
they also did even unto death, in the truth which they saw, though otherwise
being but as it were in the twylight of the Gospel they had their wantes and
errors. Yet who is so blind or besotted, as not to see that their errors may
not be our rules, neither can be our warrant, but rather that we ought after
their example, faithfully to stand, in, and for, what so ever truth God
reuealeth unto us by his word, And that otherwise, those holy Martyrs should
rise in judgment against all such, as either withhould the truth in
unrighteousness, or in any respect refuse to walk therein. Finally, seeing
GOD has given us his word, to be the light of our feet, and rule of our
lives and religion: What mean these men to lead us from it, to the aberrations
of any men whatsoever? Should not all people enquire at God, or would they have
us go from the living to the dead? From God and his word to men and their
errors? Doubtless this is that whereunto they would bring us, and whereby they
mislead their followers, as will yet further appear by that which follows.
For what say they next?

Secondly, they tell us, and they wish it to be noted, (as we also do) That
Christ's ordinances be of two sorts, either written or unwritten: the first
necessary: the second arbitrary: the first touching doctrine, that is,
touching faith and the inward opinion only: these (say they) are written: the
second touching outward orders in the Church, and all outward go^uernement, and
ceremonies: These, they say, are not written, but arbitrary at the appointment
of the Church and Magistrate. Thus (they say) they hold and practice, and
think no Scripture is against it.

1 Timothy 3.10 15. and 5. chap. and 6.13.14. Tit. 1.5, etc. Act. 1.3. and 2.40.
etc. and 6. cap* and 14.23. and 15. cap. and 19.9. and 20.7.17.28 Ro^.
12.6.7.8. Ephe 4 11.12. 1 These. 5.12.13.14. Phil. 1.1.5. Heb. 3.1.2.3. and
13.17. Iam. 5.14. 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3. 1 Cor. 4.17. and 5. cap. and 9. cap and 11.
cap. and 12. cap. and 14. cap. and 16.1.2. Gal. 6 1.6.2 These. 3.6.12.14.15.
Mat. 18 15.16 17. and 28.18.19.20.
quoted in the margent, whereunto many other might be added. they not
therefore concern faith? Finally, by this divinity, the Sacraments of
Baptism and of the Lords supper, being ceremonies, shall be no matters of faith
at all amongst them.

But here they stay not, but add moreover, That the outward orders,
government, and ceremonies of the Church, be arbitrarie at the appointment of
the Church and Magistrate, and not certain nor written in the book of God.
Whereupon it follows, that it is not certain nor taught in the scriptures, but
arbitrarie at the Churches and Magistrates pleasure: Whether Christ, or the
Pope of Rome or of Ca^terburie, be head and Archbishop of the Church of God:
Whether Jews only of the tribe of Leui, may now minister the holy things of
God in his Church: Whether Christ have given any gifts, and set any offices in
his Church for the Ministry and guidance thereof: Whether prayer must be in
a known or unknown tongue: Whether the teaching and ruling Elders be to be
had and honored: Whether the church may excommunicate: Whether the Popes, or
any other Prelates excommunication be to be regarded: Whether there be two, or
three, or seven Sacraments: Whether the Passover, Circumcision, and other
ceremonies and sacrifices of the Law, be now to be used: Whether the
Heathenishe sacrifices and worship be to be joined withal: Whether cream,
oil, salt, spitle, crossing and coniuring, be to be used in Baptism: Whether
the bread only and not the cup, is to be given to the lay people (as they
call them:) Whether holy water, holy ashes, holy palms and such like, be of
the holy things of the church: Whether the Jewish and Popish vestimentes,
fastes, and holy days are to be observed: and a thousand such like, which are
all of them, concerning the outward orders, government, and ceremonies of the
Church. By these men's Divinity, these and infinite such like, are unwritten
and uncertain, but left only to the pleasure of the Church and Magistrate.
Moreover, if it please them, the Princes and civil Magistrates may them selves
be the public ministers of the word, Sacraments, and censures of the Church:
any that will may without a calling take upon him to be a public officer in
the church: Women may baptize, or administer the Lords supper: The Jewishe,
Romish, or Heathenish priesthood may be retained: Auricular confession may be
used: The Keys of the kingdom of heaven, may be appropriated to the Pope of
Rome, or the Prelate of Canterbury, or any other whom soever: The Prelates and
their Officials excommunications do bind in heaven: The Apochriphall books
and Decretall epistles are canonical scriptures: The Papes Portuis and the
English book of prayer taken out of it, are the true and lawful worship of
God: The Prelates and Priests are the true and lawful Ministers of God:
Orders, pennaunce, extreme unction, matrimony, etc. are the Sacraments of
the Church: Cap, Surplis, Cope, Tippit, Rotchet, etc. are ornaments of the
Ministry. Finally, all rags and trumperies of the Romish religion, are good
and lawful, if it please the Church and Magistrate. For why? They concern the
outward government, orders and ceremonies of the church: And touching them
(say these men) Christ has not left any ordinances written, certain, or
perpetual, but left them at the arbitrarie appointment of the Church and
Magistrate. Is not this strange Divinity? Yet they stay not there neither,
but as men that have bent their tongues like bows for lies, they fear not to
add moreover, that when the Church and Magistrate appoints any ordinances,
(whether these or any other) touching the outward government and ceremonies of
the Church, we are to account them to be Christ's own ordinances, who has
left this liberty to the Church for to use. O shameless mouth: O unchristian
heart: Can any Papist or Atheist say more? or can any desire a more evident
proof then this, that these men and assemblies thus holding, professing, and
practizing (as here them selves affirm) can not in this estate by the word of
God, be deemed med true Christians and Churches. That the things which concern
outward government and ceremonies, are not of the foundation simply. But this
will help them no more then the other. For first we ask, are they of the
foundation at all, though not simply? If they be, then seeing they are not
written, not certain, nor perpetual (as here is affirmed) it will follow,
that neither the whole foundation is written certain, or perpetual: neither the
Apostles were faithfuull and skilsull master builders in the laying thereof.
If they be not, then why is this word (simply) added, as if they granted
that they were of the foundation, though not simply as they speak. Secondly
we ask, whether the outward government and ceremonies ordained by Christ
for his church under the Gospel, be not of the foundation, as much as the
outward government and ceremonies appointed by Moses for the Church under the
law? Or if they be, whether they are not as faithfully set down by Christ, as
the other were by Moses, and as carefully to be observed by us, as the other
were by the Jews, Heb. 3.2.3.
or rather much more, inasmuch as Christ the Son is worthy more glory and
honor, then Moses the servant. Thirdly we ask, what foundamentall poinctes
Moses and Aaron with the rest of the Jews joining with them, held: that
Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and their companions held not: Differing from them and
erring only touching the Priesthood and Ministry which concerned the outward
orders and government of the Church: was therefore Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and
their companies in that estate the true Jsraell of God? Or were not the other
truths they held by this means frustrate and of none effect unto them? Nay,
were they not therefore wholly to be separated from, and left to the judgment
of God, Number. 16.
which ouertooke them and all that joined unto them? Yet was their error only
in matters of order and outward government of the Church. This may suffize to
convince the adversaries untrue assertions in this place. To that of Master
Cranmer and Ridley etc. is answered before.

For conclusion therefore, this we add, concerning this poinct. That all such
assemblies and people, as hold, profess, and practice, (as does the Church of
England) these abominations following: They can not by the word of God, be
esteemed in such estate truly to hold Christ, their Prophet, Priest, and
King: Towit, The confusion of all sorts of people (though never so wicked) and
their seed in the body of the Church: The offices and callings of other Archb.
and Lordb. then Jesus Christ: also of Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries,
Officials, Priests, half Priests, Parsons, Vicars, Vagrant and Mercinarie
Preachers, etc. The entrance into the Ministry by an other way, and by other
Lord, then Jesus Christ: The executing of it under those strange Lords, and
leaving it at their pleasure: The preaching of the word, administration of the
Sacraments, and governing of the Church, by virtue of the offices and callings
before said, and according to the Popish Canons and constitutions: The power of
Excommunication in the Prelates alone and their Officialls: The confounding of
Civil and Ecclesiastical offices and authority in the Ministers of the
Church: The forbidding of Marriage at certain seasons: The imposing and using of
stinted devised Liturgies: The English Portuis, taken out of the Popes latin
word for word (save that a few of the grosest things are left out) yet
keeping the same frame and order of Collectes, Psalms, Lessons, Pater nosters,
Pistles, Gospels, Versicles, Respondes, etc. Appointing holy days to all
Saints and Angels, to the Virgin Marie, John Baptist, Mark, Luke, and twelve
Apostles severally: together with Fastes on the Eaues and on Ember days,
Fridayes, Satterdayes and Lent: Prescribing the Ministers to pray over the
dead, over the Corn and Grass at some seasons of the year, and over Women at
their Courching or purification: Ioyninge them also to marie with the Ring,
which they make a sacramental sign: And to Baptize likewise with the sign of
the Cross, with Godfathers and Godmothers, with questions demanded of the
infant that can not speak nor understand: Giving power, to Women to baptize:
And ordeyning that the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper be celebrated
kneeling, as when they receive their maker: and with change of the words of
Christ's institution, taking in steed of them, the words of the Popes Mass
book, translated into English, etc. Finally, the upholding of these and all
such amongst them only by carnal weapons, of imprisonment, death,
confiscation of goods, banishment, and such like. The assemblies (I say) and
people which hold, profess, and practice (as does this Church of England)
the abominations before said, concerning the outward order and government of
the Church, what soever truethes they hold besides, yet can they not by the
word of God, be deemed truly to hold the Lord Jesus, their Prophet, Priest,
and King, in such constitution of a church. Neither therefore can they in this
estate by the word of God be accounted true Christians, nor the true
constituted churches of Christ: and this is the question between us and our
adversaries. Contrary to 1. Tim. 3.15. 2. Tim. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 12.32. 1. Corin.
4.6. Reu. 22.18, 19
Scriptures are not sufficient for the building up and guidance of the Church
here on earth: Secondly, that the Contrary to ye 2. Tim. 3.17 with 1. Tim.
3.15. Pro. 2.1.9. Psalm. 119.105.13.
men of God can not by the Scriptures be made absolute and fully furnished to
every good work: Thidlie, that Contrary to Col. 2.3. Heb. 3.1, 2, 3. Esaias.
32.22. Ephe. 4.11.12.13. 1. Cor. 11. and 12. and 14. Romans 12.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Mat. 28.20.1. Tim. 6.13, 14.
Christ him self in whom the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid, yet
was so foolish, careless and unfaithful, as having an house and kingdom
(which is his Church) he has not in his word appointed unto it, any offices,
laws and orders, for the due governing and ordering thereof: Finally, That
the Contrary to the 2. Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Psalm. 94.20. and 119.21.113.128.
Reu. 9.1, 2, 3, and 14.9, 10, 11.
Hierarchy, Worship, Sacraments, Traditions, Canons, and whatsoever
constitutions of Antichrist, concerning the outward orders and government of
the church, being appointed by the Church and Magistrate, are to be accounted
Christ's own ordinances: O shameless impiety: Doubtless this is that same
strange passion, and mere desperatnes, wherewith afterward unjustly they
charge us: which we will not prosecute, as it deserves, but exhort them only,
to take heed least that woe come upon them which is written: Woe unto them
that speak good of evil, and evil of good: which put darkness for light, and
light for darkness: that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto
them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight, Esa.
5.20.21.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 2. Except.
IN this your defense of your second Exception, it pitieth me to see your
extreme folly: which is the more miserable, because it appears to be not of
weakness, but of wilfulnes. You would know of us if we hold Christ to be our
Prophet, Priest and King, and if we profess to obey him in his own ordinances
and in no other. I answered, we do constantly prosesse so, and as we profess
so we practice. But to make our profession and practice in this poinct more
manifest, I noted how our stare means Christ to be our Prophet, Priest and
King, and how he is to be obeyed viz. That the written word ought of
necessity to show us our inward and meare spiritual belief and obedience. As
for the outward Church order, our state holds that it is arbitrary to be
appoincted and abrogated again at the liking of the Church and Magistrate, And
that the word no where forbids this liberty: Where note in this
explication two things.

First, it is foul wrong to our Churches and to my words, to say as you do,
That they mean, no outward orders at all, be matters of faith, or constant in
the Scriptures. Nay it was never doubted, but to preach, to pray to administer
Sacraments etc. though external, yet are perpetual things and necessary and
unchangeable by the Scriptures. My express words, and our Churches meaning is,
That any reasonable kind of Church government, and rites, and orders, are
arbitrary and changeable, no matters of faith, nor written in the Scriptures;
And yet still Christ to be our only, and absolute King and Prophet
nevertheless. Whosoever does urge upon our Churches further, or on my words;
does slander and cavil, and malitionsly deprave them and nothing else.

Secondly, note in my explication, that I justify not this opinion of our
stare, but I say, Thus to believe and practice, simply, destroys no man's
salvation in Christ, which you denying generally and vehemently, in your sixth
answer, You deny directly Master Cranmer, etc. to have held the foundation, or
to be saved: wherein, you openly profess and proclaim, that second general
poinct which in the beginning I charged you with: That all Churches and
Christians here in King Edwards time, and namely Master Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, Hooper, Philpot, Saunders, Rogers, Tailor. etc. held not Christ their
Prophet, Priest and King, and so consequently they were lims of Antichrist (for
they bare his mark even to their deaths) and no true Christians. Alas to see
how malice and prejudice has blinded you. Is there not greater cause for us to
cry and say against you, O shameless mouth, o unchristian heart, which terms,
you vainly charge upon me? Is this you that white the Toombs of those Martirs,
and yet in fine, condemn them for no true Christians, nor their Assemblies
for Churches?

You add a clause, They that profess and practice as does the Church of
England, etc. If you mean hereby to put a difference, between those good men's
holding this opinion, and our Churches now. Yea between your own lately, and
ours now, speak out, what is it? You can imagine none but this. Those good men
Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. and your self of late, held these very same
errors of the outward Church order which we do; But they and you, did (it
seems) of simplicity, we maliciously: they of ignorance, we of plain
obstinacy, and having a convicted and seared conscience: whereby, they and you
might be true Christians for all these errors, but we now cannot be so. If this
be your meaning, then you grant us our Assumption, against which all your
dispute here is bent. You grant it I say, That the whole doctrine, as it is by
law in England, is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian.
Secondly we now err not in these poincts of simplicity, but of wilfulnes and
malice.

Say you so? Speak that plain then. Our whole assemblies? all and every of
our assemblies? of wilfulnes and of a convicted conscience? Are you sure of
this? Do you know every man's heart and conscience so well? If you do, then
you say somewhat indeed. But you are then near as wise as God himself, to know
men's hearts so perfectly, whose faces you never saw; You will say, you know
diverse, whom you dare say are convicted in conscience. That is much also to
affirm. But if you do, that serves not your turn, unless all be so
convicted. Christ knew a great many in the Church of the Jews, yea of the
learned and chiefest in authority, that were convicted in conscience, that
he was the Christ, who blaspheamed in denying him, And yet the Assemblies then
where not convicted, they still were true Churches. Wherefore in this saying,
if you say to the purpose, you then affirm the Third general poinct that I
noted in you at the beginning of this my last Reply: That every soul in
England is convicted in conscience.

But here I marvel that you say, Master Hus and others of the holy Martirs
did hear and say Mass till their dying day, Also that others did acknowledge
the Popes supremacy. I ask you, do you mean that they held and used the
Popish Mass, according to all the abominations that are in it? If you think
so, then surely neither Hus, nor any of the rest, were holy Martirs. For therein
are found errors plainly fundamental, which of them selves abolish from
Christ; They are not to be compared to our public errors now in England, The
like I say of the Popes supremacy. If you think any of the Martirs
acknowledged it in the large and ample meaning thereof, as the Popish Doctors
do set it down; Then verily neither were they any Martirs. The book of Acts
and Monuments whither you send us, affirms not that they held these errors
in the largest and grossest sort. It may be therefore they held many and
greuious errors of ignorance, both in the Popish Mass and in the supremacy,
which might nevertheless stand with Christ crucified, And so they might be and
were holy Martirs: But I affirm, that according to the damnable grossenes of
the very Papists, they neither did nor could hold them. Therefore in these
instances you say nothing to us, nor against the question in hand.

Further, you said before in the beginning of your desence of this Exception,
Page 13.
That Master Cranmer Ridley, Latimer and the rest of the Martirs then, neither
had them selves, nor joined in spiritual communion, with such as had the
Prelacy, and Ministry now pleaded for. Now I see you make no conscience of
untruths, yea you are bold to avouch open and known falsehoods. Did not
Master Cranmer hold himself for Archbishop still, and that he was by the
Pope unjustly and insufficiently deposed, and by Queen Mary forcibly
restreyned from it? Did he ever repent of holding that Office till his death?
Also did not Ridley stand upon his right to the Bishopric of London though
ready to die? Latimer though he renounced his Bishopric, yet he kept his
Ministry, and never repented him of it. Philpot never misliked h^s
Arch-deaconry: Yea when he refused bloody Bonner, Yer he appealed to his
ordinary the Bishop of Winchester. The like mind is to be seen in Bishop
Farrar. And generally whosoever were Ministers then of the Prelates ordination,
they never renounced it, though they died Martirs. Thus appears your bold
untruth in this behalf.

Further in your Sixth answer Page 16. First you will not see what I mean in
saying, That these outward orders be not of the foundation simply: I meant,
not at all of the very 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4. Romans 4.25. 1. Cor. 3.10, 11, 12, 13,
14.
foundation, neither are they. Secondly you ask if our outward orders under
Christ be not fundamental as well as the Jews under the Law, I answer, neither
were the Jews outward orders of the very foundation, without which they could
not be saved. Thirdly you ask how Corah, etc. differing from Moses and Aron
only about the Priesthood and Ministry, were separated from, and damned. I
answer, not that the matter was fundamental, but the Manner was rebellious,
with consciences a thousand times convicted, and so done with a high hand
against God him self.

But now this considered, How vainly do you charge me in your entrance into
this Excep. pa. 13. That I and others of my mind, go about to justify these
matters of order in controversy by Cranmer, Ridlies and Latimers example, and
their Congregations then. For shame do you not see the contrary, that I call
them errors. I only justify by their example that these corruptions abolish
us not from Christ, as theirs did not, And that I trust is sound. Which thing
also you might have remembered, if you had been so charitable, by that which I
wrote in In the next treatise following, of the comparison of the Ministry
with Marriage: Ans. to your first Reason.
another place.

Then in your first answer, Page 14. How vainly do you ask us for
Scriptures to prove those orders, seeing I expressly called them errors.

The like in your Second, where you load up Scriptures to disprove the^.

Also Thirdly, you charge an unconscionable untruth on me (if you mean this
answer unto me) that I should grant and cannot deny, that all outward
ceremonies and government, are arbitrary at man's pleasure: I only said, that
our state holds that general opinion, Not that I my self held it, If you
mean them, write to them, and speak to them, if you mean me, you do me
foul injury.

Fourthly, whether they are Popish shifts or no, let our state, which
mainteyneth these things, answer you.

Your Fifth is answered in ye first poinct of my explication noted before. page
19.

Your Seventh in page 18. is also against the state of our Church, and not
against me.

Master IOHNSONS 3. Exception against the former Assumption: with Master
JACOBS Replies to the same. EXCEPTION 3.
Thirdly, let them show by the Scriptures, how the 36. Article of their
doctrine and book alleged, agrees with the Gospel of Christ and true
Christianity.

The words of the Article are these as follows. The Book of consecrating of
Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons, does conteyne
all things necessary to such consecration and ordering, neither has it any
thing that of it self is superstitious or ungodly. And therefore whosoever are
consecrated or ordered according to the Rytes of that book, we decree all such
to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

Moreover, how it agrees with the Gospel and true Christianity, That
Apocripha books and the book of Homilies, be read in the church by the
Ministers diligently and distinctlie. As is in Art. 6. and 35. of that
doctrine and book aforesaid.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 3. Excep.
YOur third Exception is this. That the 36. Article of ordaining Bishops,
Priests and Deacons. Also the reading of Apocripha books and Homelies in the
Church, agree not with true Christianity: Ergo, the Assumption above is false,
that is, the whole doctrine of that book of Articles is not sufficient, to
make us true Christians.

I answer, you should have said, those poincts destroy utterly true
Christianity, Ergo, etc. Else the Argument follows not: But then we deny
flatly the Antecedent or first part of the reason. But your Reason you will say
shall go as you have put it. Then mark these reasons even as good as yours
and all one. An Ethiopian is white of his teeth, therefore he is a white man. A
Swanne is black of his bill, therefore a Swanne is black. My brother has an
eye of glass, or he has a wodden leg, therefore my brother is no true man.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 3. Excep.
Our third Exception was this. Whereas they referred us to their book of
Artieles 1562. were quired that they should show by the Scriptures how the 36.
Article there mentioned, which is of the book of consecrating Archbiships and
Bishops, and of ordeyning Priests and Deacons: And how also the 6. and 35.
Articles of that book, enioyning the Apocripha books and Homilies, to be
read in the Church by the Ministers distinctlie and diligently. How these, J
say, do agree with the Gospel of Christ, and true Christianitis.

Now I pray you, have they showed us these things by the Scriptures, as we
desired: nothing less. First therefore mark this here and every where also
in their reasons and answers, that though we call never so much to them for
proof and evidence from the Scriptures, yet they never bring it, but labor to
put it off with other shifts and devices of their own: As if our consciences
were to be built upon their fancies, and not upon the written word of God.
But what do they say to our demand? First they tell us, These things do not
utterly destroy true Christianity. Secondly, they grant notwithstanding, that
they agree with it as black does with white, that is, they are clean
contrary unto it: For this their similitudes do import. Now whereas they
allege, That these things destroy not true Christianity, We answer, That
even that Hyerarchie, worship, constitution, and government, which they
profess and practice (as appears by those and other their Articles and
injunctions in our former answer alleged, to which yet we have received no
answer) being directly Antichristian, do Nota
utterly destroy true Christianity. so as the people and Churches so
professing and practizing, can not in that estate by the word of God be judged
true Christians, or the true constituted Churches of Christ. And touching the
similitudes here used, besides that which we have noted before, we add
moreover, that they are not against us, but against them selves, in as much as
comparing the doctrines of the Gospel, which they profess, with the whitenes
of an Aethiopians teeth: And their Antichristian Ministry, Worshop, courts,
and confusion of people, with the blackenes of an Aethiopians body. This and
such like similitudes do fitly declare their estate. And the approouing of
the black constitution of their church Assemblies, by some white doctrines of
the Gospel which they profess: Is even as if they should reason thus: An
Ethiopian is white of his teeth: therefore he is a white man. A black Raven
is white of his bill: Therefore a black Raven is a white bird.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 3. Exception.
YOur Third Exception is, That the 16. Article of co^secrating Bishops and
Priests, and the 6. and 35. Artic of Apocripha and Homelies, do not agree with
the Gospel. What then? Ergo, our Churches profession and practice differ. Most
false: For our Churches do profess, that these things do agree with Gospel
well enough: Also their practice is thereafter, Or do you conclude, Ergo our
Churches hold not Christ to salvation. In deed so I took your purpose at the
first: but now in plain categoricall terms you avouch it, That these things
being directly Antichristian, do utterly destroy true Christianity. So then
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc. were very Antichrists, and no true Christians.
As before also, I trow, you affirmed.

Surely, this gross and wicked absurdity, I could not open better then by
this similitude: This man has a wodden leg, an eye of glass, his nose
deformed, add if you will, both his arms not natural, but framed to him of
wood or what you will: Ergo this is no true man. Yes Sir, for all this he is a
true man. For as much as all this concerns not the very life and being of a
man, though these be most unnatural additions, and very many, The like do I
affirm of these external corruptions in the Church: Which my sentences you
go not about to refute, but only with words, with bare yea, and nay, and no
more.

Mr Iohnsons I. REASON against the former Assumption: with Mr Jacobs Replies to
the same.
Having before noted 3. Exceptions out of their doctrine and book alleged:
we now proceed to show the weakness of their Assumption aforesaid, by these.
9. Reasons following.

REASON I.

THat which joins Christ and Antichrist together, can not make a true
Christian, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. with Ezech. 43.8. and 2. Kings 17.33, 34, 40,
41.

But that does the doctrine and book alleged, as may be seen by comparing
the 35. and 36. Articles with the rest. And furthermore it appears both by
their profession, which is to be seen in their book of Cannons set forth
anno 1571. and in other their Articles, Jniunctions, Aduertisements, etc.
published at other times, and by their practice also, which is to be seen in
their Ministry, Worship, and Church government even to this day:

Therefore, etc.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 1. Reason.
THis your first Reason is thus: That which joins Christ and Antichrist
together, can not make a true Christian: But that does this Book, Ergo, etc.

I say you must mende your improper speech, that Christ and Antichrist is
there joined together, you mean Christ, and some outward ceremonies and
orders of Antichrist: then so speak, and say not Christ and Antichrist simply.
Which things yet we think to be Christ's own, as we Page 12. 18. 19.
showed in the Second Exception before. Therefore, this reason is answered as
the last Exception before. The Swanne is black of his bill, Ergo, the Swan is
black, and my brother has a wodden leg: Therefore my brother is a wodden
man. So here this book joins Christ and some orders of Antichrist: Therefore
it joins Christ and Antichrist together, which are most fond conclusions.

Furthermore, the scriptures alleged 2 Cor. 6. Ezekiel 43. 2. Kings 17. are
wholly mismatched, the joining there forbidden, is unto such idolatry, as can
not stand by any means with Christian faith, and breaks most directly the
First commandment: Our transgression your selves do judge to be but against the
Second, and such as has stood and may stand together with true faith as in
Master Cranmer, etc. Namely, the Idolaters in those places spoken of.
They did not so much as profess the written law to be their rule, neither
for outward orders, nor their inward doctrines of faith. But your selves
know, we profess and practice that, namely, so as is showed before in the
Second Page 11. 1. 18.
Exception. Therefore to apply those scriptures in this unto us, is your great
sin even against the third Commaundment, which is your common custom, as all
do see and pity, viz. To take the name of God in vain, by misusing his word.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 1. Reason.
HIs answer here is First concerning the Proposition of this reason, then
concerning the Assumption: Concerning the Proposition: First Our speech is
improper, that Christ and Antichrist is there amongst them joined together.
Secondly, he takes upon him to expound our words and meaning to be thus,
Christ and some outward ceremonies and orders of Antichrist. To this we
answer: First, that it is meet that we (not he) expound our own meaning,
which together with the propriety of the speech, will afterward appear in
our defense of the Assumption against his answer thereto. His answer
therefore concerning the Assumption is this: First, That the things among them
which we charg to be of Antichrist, they think to be Christ's own: For proof
whereof, here ferreth us to his answer to our Second exception going before,
whether also we refer the Reader for answer to him again. Secondly,
forgetting him self, he grants that in deed they be orders of Antichrist:
yet that they are but as the blacknes of the Swannes bill to the rest of the
body. Well then by his own confession they are of Antichrist, and therefore
not Christ's own, as before he said and labored to prove. Thus at once both
he contradicts him self, and overthrows that which he answered Page 1^.
before to our Second exception.

This were sufficient to manifest their deceiptfull and evil dealing: But that
it may more fully appear, specially seeing be would dazell the peoples of
some outward ceremonies and orders of Antichrist, comparing them with the
blacknes of the swans bill as if they were but a few, and of small moment,
Therefore will we reckon up some of their Antichristian enormities and
abominations (for it vere infinite to number them all): And then let the
Reader judge of his inswere and their estate, whether it be not more like the
black Raven with a white bill, then the white Swanne with a black. Sorry we
are that we should thus trouble the Reader, or our selves: specially
considering that already we have mentioned diverse of the particulars
following: But seeing we are constreyned hereunto by their sly and colorable
answer in this place, therefore can we not but do it, for the clearer
manifestation of the truth, and better discovering of their deceiptfulnes. In
which respects we entreat the Reader also, to take in good part, and duly to
weigh the repetition and recapitulation following.

Antichristian abominations yet retained in England.
1 The confusion of al sorts of people in the body of their Church, even the
most polluted and their seed being members thereof. 2 The offices and
callinges of Arch L. Bishops. 3 Lord Bishops. 4 Suffragans. 5 Prelates
Chauncellours 6 Deanes 7 Subdeanes 8 Prebendaries 9 Cannons 10 Petty cannons 11
Chaunters 12 Virgerers 13 Pistlers 14 Gospellers 15 Queristers men and boys 16
Organistes 17 Organ Flowers 18 Arch deacons 19 Subdeacons 20 Deacons, or half
priests 21 Priests 22 Parsons 23 Vicars 24 Curates 25 Vagrant and Mercinarie
Preachers 26 Churchwardens 27 Clerks and Sexions 28 Chaplaynes 29 Doctors of
Divinity 30 Bachelours of Diuini. 31 Doctors and 32 Proctors in the Prelates
courts 33 Commissaries 34 Officialls 35 Registers 36 Summoners with the rest
of that Antichristian and viperous generation 37 Their Ministration of the
word, Sacraments, and government of their church by voriue of the offices
aforesaid 38 The titles of Primate, Metropolitan, Lords grace, Lordship, etc.
ascribed to the Prelates. 39 The inferior Prelates swearing obedience to the
Metropoliticall seas of Ca^turburie and York. 40 The inferior Ministers when
they enter into the Ministry promising obedience to the prelates their
ordinances: and when they are inducted to benefices, confirminge it with their
oath 41 The Deacons and Priests presentations to a Lord Bishop by an
Archdeacon 42 Their receiving of orders of the Prelates, or their Suffraganes
43 Their Pontifical, or Book of consecratinge Bishops, and of ordering
Priests and Deacons, taken out of the Popes Po^tificall, where their abuse of
scripture to that end their Collects, Pistles etc. may be scone 44 Their
making and being made Priests, with blasphemy, the Prelates saying to them
whom they make Priests, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye forgive,
they are forgiven, etc. 45 Their confoundinge of Civil and Ecclesiastical
offices and authority in Ecclesiastical persons 46 Their reteyning and using
in their public worship, the Apocrypha Books, which have in them diverse
errors, untruths, blasphemies, and contradiction to the canonical
scriptures 47 Their stinted prayers, and Leitourgie, taken out of the Popes
Mass book, with the same order of Psalms, Lessons, Collectes, Pater Nosters,
Pistles, Gospels, Versicles, Responds, etc. 48 The Cross in Baptism 49 The
Hallowed Ponte, Questions to the Infants at Baptism 50 The Godfathers and
Godmothers promisinge that the child does believe, forsake the Devil and all
his works, etc. 51 Weomans baptizinge of children: which main teyneth that
heresy, that the children are damned, which dye unbaptized. 52 Their
howselinge of the sick, and Ministering the communion to one alone 53 The
Ministering it, not with the words of Christ's institution, but with other
taken out of the Popes Portuis 54 Their selling that Sacrament for two pence,
to all comers 55 The receiving of it kneeling, which makes it an Idol, and
nourishes that heresy of receyuinge their maker, of worshipping it, etc. 56
Their Ring in Mariadge, making it a Sacrament all sign, and Mariadge an
Ecclesiastical action: thereby nourishinge the Popish heresy, that
Matrimony is a Sacrament 57 Their praying over the dead, making it also a
part of the Ministers duty, and nourishinge the heresy of prayer for the
dend 58 Their churching or purifying of Women, then also abusing that
Scripture, The Sun shall not burn them by day, nor the Moon by night 59
Their Gang week, and prayinge then over the corn and grass 60 Their
forbidding of marriage in Gang week, in Aduent, in Lent, and on all the Ember
days: which the Apostle calls a doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 61
Their Saints, Angels, and Apostles days, with their prescript service 62
Their fastes, and abstayning from flesh on their Eaues, on Frydayes,
Saturdayes, Ember days, and all Lent through 63 Their dispensations from the
Prelates courts of Faculties, to eat flesh at these times: Which dispensations
also have this wholesome caluse in them, sana conscientia, (that is, with a
safe conscience:) plainly showing, that they make it a matter of conscience.
This is another doctrine of Devils, noted in the scripture before alleged 1 Timothy 4. 64 Their Dispensations in like manner to marry in the times among the^
forbidden, which are noted before 65 Lycenses from the same authority, to
marry in places exempt 66 Dispensations also from thence for Boys and
ignorant fools to have benefices 67 Dispensations likewise for Nonresidents
68 For having Two, Three Four, or more benifices, even tor, quot, that is to
say, as many as a man will have and can get. 69 Tollerations 70 Patronages
of, and presentatio^ to benefices with buying and selling of aduousons 71 Their
institutions into benefices by the Prelates, their Inductions, Proxes, etc. 72
Their suspensations, absolutions, degradations, deprivations, etc. 73 The
Prelates Chauncellours, and Commissaries courts, having power to excommunicate
alone, and to absolve 74 Their penance in a white sheet 75 Their commutation
of penance and absoluing one man for another 76 The Prelates confirmation, or
Bishoping of children, to assure the^ of Gods favor, by a sign of man's
devising 77 The standing at the Gospel 78 The putting off the cap, and making
a leg when the word Jesus is read 79 The ring of peales at burials 80
Beadmen at buriah, and hired Mourners in mourning apparel 81 The hanging and
mourning of churches and heerses with black at burials 82 Their absoluinge the
dead, dying excommunicate, before they can have (as they say) christia burial
83 The Idol Temles. 84 The Popish vestiments, as Rochet, Horned cap, Tippet,
the Surplise in parish Churches, and Cope in cathedral churches 85 The
visitations of their Lord Bishops and Archdeacans 86 The Prelates, Lordly
dominion, revenues and retinew 87 The Priests maintetenance by Tithes,
Chrismes offerings, etc. 88 The oaths ex officio in their ecclesiastical
courts, making men swear to accuse them selves 89 The Church Wardens oath to
present to the Prelates, all the offenses, faults and defaults committed in
their Parishes, against their Articles and Injunctions. 90 The Prelates rulinge
of the Church by the Popes cursed canon law 91 Finally, their imprisonning,
banishing, such as renounce and witness against these abominations a foresaid,
and the rest yet retained among them.
Thus being constreyned, we have repeated and reckoned up diverse of the
Antichristian enormities still remaining and practiced in their church: By
which the Reader may better see and judge, both of the sleightnes of their
answer in this place, and of the black constitution of their church. As also
comparing these and the book by him alleged together, it may hence appear
that our speech is proper; and fitly declaring their estate, when we said
they join Christ and Antichrist together: And therefore his answer in this
place to be frivolous and of no weight.

2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. with Ezekiel. 43.8. and 2 King, 17 33, 34, 40, 41. The
Proposition which we proved by these Scriptures, was this.

That which joins Christ and Antichrist together, can not make a true
Christian.

Now let even the adversaries them selves judge, Whether these Scriptures do
not so evidently prove this Proposition, as none can deny it, but such as are
Wilfully blinded, and strive against the light of their own consciences But
what says he of these scriptures here alleged? Forsooth That they are wholly
mismatched. And why so? Because the ioyninge there forbidden, is unto such
Idolatry, as can not stand by any means with Christian faith, and breaks
most directly the First commandment: whereas their transgression is but
against the Second, and may stand with true faith, as he supposes in
Cranmer, etc. First, this answer of his, concerns our Assumption, whereas
those scriptures were the proof of the Proposition. But to let this pass, let
us consider the answer it self, how worthy and clerk like it is. These
scriptures (he says) forbid joining to such Idolatry, as can not stand with
Christian faith, and breaks most directly the First commandment. 1. Jf
this were so, what then? Do they not therefore forbid joining to Antichristian
idolatry, and that false worship which breaks the second commandment? 2:
Secondly, he can not deny, but as we judge of their way and estate, so it is
a transgression against the Second commandment. Now, Samuel says,
Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and
idolatry. 1 Samuel 19.
See then what advantage he gets by his own answer? 3. Thirdly, as the
Pagans Idolatry breaking the First commandment, cannot stand with true
christian faith, so neither can the idolatry and false worship of Antichrist
breaking the second. To that of Master Cranmer, etc, is already answered in
page 13. whereunto may be added, that their case now, is nothing so as theirs
was then: both for that they suffered to death for the truth which they saw,
And because the things now controuerted, were not then so called into question
and convinced against them by the scriptures, as now they have been against
these: neither were then by them so resisted and persecuted as they are by
these men now adays, even unto bands, bannishment, and death it self:
Otherwise we might justify the callings and estate of the Monks and Friars,
and of the most Popish Priests and Prelates, and the having communion with
them in that estate, because diverse such have been Martirs, and laid down their
lives for the truth which they saw, who yet never doubted of the lawfulnes of
their callings and estate in this behalf, which then were not so called into
question, nor convinced by the scriptures, to be unlawful, as since they have
been. 4. Fourthlie, as there is a double Jdolatrie and false worship the one
against the First commandment when any have others besides the true God for
their God: the other against the Second commaundment, when any having the true
God for their God, yet worship him not as he has commanded, but after the
inventions and prescriptions of men: So also these scriptures alleged, and
the whole course of the word of God, condempneth the joining and having
fellowship with either of these, as well this which is against the Second
commandment, as that which is against the First. See the Reasons alleged
by the Apostle: 2 Cor. 6.14. etc.
Are they not strong and weighty against joining together righteousness and
unrighteousness, light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, whether it be in the
breach of the First or Second commandment? Says not the Lord there, That
his Church is his Temple, in which he dwells and Walks, and therefore
requires of them that they be his people, his sons and daughters, separated
from the world, and touching no unclean thing: whether it be of Antichrist
against the Second, or of the Heathen against the First commandment? Ezech.
43.8.
And touching the place of Ezekiell, who sees not, that he speaks directly
of the breach of the Second commandment, in joining together in the worship
of the true God, their thresholdes with Gods thresholds, and their posts with
Gods posts, that is, their inventions with Gods ordinances: which though it
be done to the name and for the service of the true God, yet says the
Prophet, It is abomination in the sight of God, and they that do so worship
him, set a wall between God and them selves, and defyle his holy Name with
their abominations. Lo here the use and fruict of joining together the
inventions of men (chiefly of Antichrist that man of sin) with the
ordinances of God in his worshipp and service. As Master Jacob and his
accomplices like this, so let them hold on in pleading for it, and practizing of
it. The third place alleged, is out of 2 King. 17. where also it is most
plain, 2 King. 17.
that the scripture speaks of the breach of the Second commandment. For
there is set down that the Samaritans worspipped the Verse. 28.32 41.
same God, and after, Verse. 26.27, 29, 33, 34, 40.
the same manner that the Israelites of the Ten Tribes did, that were carried
from thence: That is, they worshipped the Verse. 28.32 41.
true God, but Verse. 26.27, 29, 33, 34, 40.
not as he had commanded, but by having Images of sundry sorts, by which
they thought God was represented, as Exodus 32, 4.
of old they thought of the calfe that Aaron made, and by other inventions
devised by the Israelites in their defection, and joined to Gods ordinances for
the worship and service of him. That this was the sin of those Samaritans
against the Second commandment, will appear, by co^paring together with this
chapter, these scriptures following, to which we refer the Reader, Ezra 4.1,
2. with Exodus 20.4, 5, 6. and 32.1, 4, 5, 6. Jug. 17.2, 3, 4, 5, 13 Ezekiel 20.39.
Hosea 2.16. Amos 5.21, 22, 23. and 8.14. 1 Kings 12.27. and 18.21. and 21.29.
and 22.12, 24. Esaias 10.11. John 4.19, 20, 25, 26, 29, 30. By these also, as by
that of Ezekiell likewise may appear, how false it is, that he further
says, They did not so much as profess the written law to be their rule,
neither for outward order, nor their inward doctrines of faith. Jf this were
so, how could it be true, which Ezechiell says of them, of whom he
speaks, that they set their posts and threshalls by Gods posts and
Treshalls, that is, their inventions by Gods ordinances. How also was it that
the Samaritans, spoken of 2 King. 17. sacrificed to the true God, even the Lord
God of the Jews, offering unto him burnt offringes, and meat offringes, and
peace offringes? Or how came it, that they still used circumcision, and weyted
for the Messiah to come, as he was promised in the written word of God: yea
knowing also and believing, not only that the Messiah would come which is
called Christ, but also that when he came he would tell them all things? The
corinthian infidels in deed, as the rest of the Heathen, knew not the true
God, nor his written word. But it was not so with the Samaritanes or Ten
tribes of Jsraell fallen from Judah, as is evident by the scriptures and
reasons before alleged. To that which he next adds to their profession and
practice, Referring us to his answer in page 11, 12, 18 to our Second
Exception going before, we have there answered already, page 12. 13. and will
not therefore repeat it.

Only this we add moreover, That seeing the public constitution of Number.
15.39 Reave. 11.8. and 17.1, 2, 3, 4.
spiritual whoredom against him, yea grievous iniquity and hatred of him,
threatening Exodus 20.
to visit it upon the Fathers and children so remaining, to the Third and
Fourth generation: Therefore both by it are the truths which they profess,
made frustrate unto the^ in this estate. Neither will it help them to pretend
that it is their error in judgment, (For what abomination is there that might
not thus be colored?) But seeing their public profession and practice is (at
the best) a joining of Christ and Antichrist together, as has been showed
before, therefore neither can they by the word of God be deemed in this
estate, to be true Christians, on true constituted Churches. And the
Scriptures applied to prove this consequent, are fitly alleged, as has been
seen. Falsely therefore it is, that he says, We sinned against the Third
commandment, in the application of the scriptures aforesaid. That is their
own common custom, and lamentable sin, to break the Third commandment,
in taking the name of God in vain, not only by falsifying and perverting the
scriptures, but also by their Ministration of the Word, Sacraments, and
Government of the Church, by virtue of such offices and callings as Christ
never appointed in his word thereunto, but were first devised, and still are
retained by Antichrist, that son of perdition. Hitherto of his answer
concerning the proof of our Proposition.

To the proof of our Assumption, he Mark this his sound and Scholerlike
d^alinge in this place and afterward.
answers not a word: which yet most of all required answer, if he would in
deed soundly defend their estate, as he pretends. That their profession
and practice joins Christ and Antichrist together, we showed in page 28 etc.
by their Articles, Canons, Injunctions, Aduertisements, etc. published at
sundry times, and by their present Ministry, Worship, and Church-gouernement,
according thereunto. If this be not so, why bringes he not warraunt, for these
particulers from the Testament of Christ, and so take away the proof of our
Asumption? Jf this be so (as by his silence he grants and we are sure he
cannot show the contrary by the Scriptures) then our Assumption stands
firm, and consequently in this constitution, they cannot be accounted true
Christians, nor their Assemblies so gathered, true constituted Churches.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply unto the 1. Reason.
1 IN this your defense of your first Reason, you would first of all fasten on
me a contradiction, for granting, that our Church corruptions are from
Antichrist, which against your Second Exception, J said we hold to be Christ's
own, viz. Because we hold, Christ has given his Church that liberty to
devise them. Alas it pittieth me to see your simplicity, or it greueth me for
your malice; who could not see, that there I spoke in the person of our whole
Church and state, See Page 12. 18. 19.
and showed what they held: And here I speak as I thought my self. This is a
silly contradiction.

2. Then you say, Page 25. I dazell the peoples eyes, in saying some outward
orders and ceremoines are from Antichrist as if they were but a few and of
small moment. Therefore you are content to reckon them up full tediously God
knows even 91. in number: numero Deus impare gaudet. And what of all these;
will you say therefore, That whosoever holds these, cannot hold Christ unto
salvation. And so Mr. Cranmer and the rest of the Martirs were damned. But if
not: Then I say again, These some, these 91. are too few and too slight, and
of too small moment of them selves and of their own nature to abolishe us from
Christ. This ought you to have proved, which you never do, but still your
speech is most false and not improper only, that we join Christ and
Antichrist together: As in the maimed man before Page 25.
noted, there is not life and death joined together, but living things and
dead things are, and yet the man alive and a true man.

3. Then 2 cor. 14. etc Eze. 43.8. ^ King. 17.33, 34, 40, 41.
you will justify your applying the scriptures which I said were mismatched and
were meant against the Idolatry of the First commandment, not against the
Idolatry of the Second only, and meerelie, as our Church orders in question
are. Therefore these scriptures cannot infer any abolishing from Christ by
simple holding of the corruptions in our Church: which they do prove by the
simple holding of those Heathenish Idolatries, whereof they speak. To this you
reply in Four points. (1) Jf these places be meant of Heathenish Idolatry,
which could never stand with Gods truth together: Yet they forbid all other
corruptions against the Second commandment also. That I never denied to be
true after a sort. These places indeed do forbid the breach of the Second,
commandment, but not principally, directly and of purpose, nor in that
measure or fulness. But their immediate purpose is against the Heathenish
Idolatry breaking the First commandment. So that they forbid the breach of
the Second commandment, consequently and proportionatly, but not in that full
manner as they do the First, They forbid the First so as that they show there
is no communion with God, whilst men join in such Idolaty: they simply forbid
the Second, but deny not al communion with God to whom soever erreth therein.
(2) To your Second Reply I say, make much of it, for my part, I never thought
other but our church corruptions are against the Second commandment: your
second scripture here applied, is of Saul, I. Sam. 1^.
a presumptuous and wilful offendour: if you make our whole Churches so, your
sin is the greater. (3) Thirdly, if you mean, any of Antichrists
Idolatry and false worship, and namely this in question (the outward corrupt
orders and ceremonies only and no more) does abolish us from Christ, and that
this can not stand together with true faith, like as the Pagans idolatry
against the First commandment, can not. Then I deny it utterly, you have no
proof in the world for it. And this inwrappeth Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. in
the same course. Your excuse here page 29. That Cranmer, Ridley, etc. forsook
all the corruptions they saw. This belongs to many Thousands in England
now, no less then to them: yea surely there are infinite, that know not so
much of the corruptions, as those learned men did, which yet are not ignorant
of redemption by Christ, etc. Yea your self Master Johnson, though a man of
learning, yea knowing our corruptions, and misliking them a long time before
you forsook us, yet I think you stood not abolished from Christ all that
while. I pray be so good to poor men, as you may: yea to us now also, as well
as to your self and them in those times. Where you say, page 29. That since
that time we are convicted by the scriptures. If you mean some few, that here
and there you could pick out; and do sin still, speak to them, threaten
them: throw out your damnatorie sentence against them, But smite not all
whosoever comes near you: Beware how you judge, least you be judged: The
heart belongs to God, therefore censure not every man's conscience too
hastily. 4 Fourthlie, you would prove in your Third Exception before noted,
page 29. That both the breach of the First commandment, and of the Second
also, is forbidden: I have told you before, page 32, 33. how it is true, and
how not: Nothing at all to serve your turn.

That which you say, page 30. touching your first scripture, 2. Cor. 6.14.
2 Cor. 6.14 etc. in that sense and manner as I suide, is true, and not
otherwise. That which of your Second scripture (Ezekiel. 43.8) page ibid. you say,
Ezekiel. 43.^.
Who sees not but it speaks directly of the breach of the Second
Commaundment, joining together in the worship of the true God their inue^tions
with Gods ordinances, I say it is most manifest, that he speaks not of the
breach of the Second Commandment only, but also of the first, wherein men
have their inventions also. The Prophet shows verse. 4. and 7. That God
returned to his Temple again, whence he was departed for the abominable
idolatries that had been there committed before, to show that he would restore
lerusalem, and the Temple, and worship of God againet He means this
literally, of the returning of the Jews after Babilons captivity, and of the
reedifying of the Temple, and the appointing again of Gods holy worship there:
Also spirituallie he may mean, the erecting of the Christian Church when they
should not fall to such impieties as the Jews had done now in that time
before, for the which he had departed away from them. Now if we ask, what
were those Idolatours in Jerusalem and in the Temple before Ezekiels time, for
the which the Lord forsook them: it is manifest in Ahas, in Manasses, and
Amon: and in the Kings after Josiah, That the Jews idolatry was very
Heathenish, not only against the Second, but against the First Commandment
also, in joining the Heathen gods with the true God of Izraell in their Divine
service and worship: Therefore this place of Ezekiell, is (as I say) Not of the
breach of the Second commandment only and simply, as our church corruptions
are, but ioinctlie touching the breach of the First also. The very same is
that your Third scripture page 30. 2 Kings 17, 33, 34, 40, 41 of the Samaritans
Idolatry, ^ King. 17.
wherein because you are large, I will deferr to explain it till your Sixth
Reason following: where is a proper place for it.

4 Lastly, in page 31. you agrauate the breach of the Second Commandment, as
being spiritual whordome, etc. But I would have you to know: Things may be
mismatched too cruelly, as well as too gently. There is a sin both ways,
when things are not called by their proper and right names. Is it true in some
sense, every breach of the Second Commandment, is spiritual whordome, as
every wanton word, every light gesture and countenance, every immodest thought
in a Woman, is Adultery: yet who so shall angerlie and continually so call a
woman whore, harlot, or baude, that but thinks, or looks, or speaks too
vainly, shall do her great wrong, and in^^^^e the just danger of law.
Neither can she, nor ought she, in such case, be divorced, as an Adulteress
ought. And thus it appears (...) still, that you sin again stabe Third
Commaundment in misapplying of scriptures.

In the end in page 31. where you say. To the proof of your Assumption I
answer never a word, which most of all required answer. This I tell you,
that it is your fancy and not my meaning here, to answer to your
Proposition. First, and then to your Assumption to say nothing. Nay, if you had
not dreamed, you might easily have perceived that all my first words (viz.
where I say your speech here is improper etc.) are bent directly against your
Assumption and the proof thereof. although at this time I expressed not those
terms. Secondly, I show, that your scriptures applied to prove the
Proposition are altogether unfit, and intollerably abused, if you mean them
in that sense as your Assumption must be meant, that is to say, as they touch
us. This, a very child might have seen, Master Johnson. So that your
marginall scoff at my sound and schollerlike dealing. does light on your
self, and bewrays either your deep skill or your ouerflowing charitic. As
for the rest, That I should justify our corruptions, it is no part of my
mind, neither belongs it to our present cause so to do.

Master IOHNSONS II. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master JACOBS
Replies to the same. REASON II.
THat which appoints and ratifieth the worshipping of God in vain, That
cannot make either true Christians or true Churches.

But the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by law in England,
appoints and ratifieth the worshipping of God in vain. Therefore, etc.

Of the truth of the Proposition, none can doubt: And the Assumption is thus
proved.

That which appoints and ratifieth the worshipping of God by the precepts of
man: That appoincteth and ratifieth the worshipping of God in vain. This Christ
affirms out of Esaias the Prophet, Mat. 15.9. compared with Esaias. 29.13.

But the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by law in England
appoincteth and ratifieth the worshipping of God by the precepts of man. This
appears by the 35. and 36. Article of the book alleged, And by their book
of Common prayer, their Fastes, Feasts Holy days, etc, which are executed by
their Popish Courts and Officers. All which are authorized by Law in England.

Therefore the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by law in England,
appoints and ratifieth the worshipping of God in vain. And consequently
cannot make a particular man a true Christian, nor the assemblies so gathered
together, true Churches.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 2. Reason.
THis your Second Reason is. This book and others appoincteth and ratifieth
the worshipping of God in vain, Ergo etc. 1. This also has answer in the
third Exception Page 22. 2 Also, no^e I pray you, this Scripture [Mat. 15.] is
verified of such as were the^ of the true visible Mark his open contrariety
with him self, granting this in Reas. 6.
Church, with whom Christ and his Apostles, both in Christ's time and after his
death, did sometimes join and comunicate. This therefore makes for us and
against you most notably.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 2. Reason.
Our Second Reason is as you see: now what proposition does he deny? Truly
none at all. What defense brings he of their book of common prayers, and the
particulers therein: Of their Prelacie, and other Ministry received from them
according to their book and Pontifical: Of their Canons and Excommunications,
etc. Surely none. What then does he answer? Forsooth he referred us to his
anuswer before in the last exception. Whether also we refer the Reader with
this note, that there he shall find nothing, either for answer of any
proposition of this argument, or for defense of their false worship, Praelacie,
Ministry, and Church government called into question. Is not this then a
worthy and Clerck like answer? And have not these men (think you) good
proof for their present estate and Church constitution: Which thus leave it
altogether without defense, even when it most needs, and as it were, beg
geth their help and succor, if they could affoard it any. But now having no
answer to any part of our argument, yet he bids us note, that this Scripture
(Mat. 15.) here alleged, is verified of such as were then of the true visible
Church, with whom Christ himself and his Apostles both in Christ's time, and
after his death, did sometime join and communicate. This therefore he says
makes for them and against us most notably.

1 But first let him tell us: if many As that of Leu 10. Number. 16.1 etc. Esa.
1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Zeph. 1.12. 1. Cor. 11.19.
things, which are verified sometimes of the members of a true Church, may not
also fitly be applied, and alleged against a false Church, and yet not
justify their estate and constitution, neither make for them, but against them
altogether. Otherwise he condemns at once all the Martirs heretofore, who
usually alleged this Mat. 15.9.
very Scripture against the false worship of the Romish Church, as him self
cannot he ignorant. Yet in his learning it seems the Papists might well have
answered the Martirs again, that this Scripture was verified of them that
were of the true visible Church, and therefore made for them, and against the
Martirs most notably.

2 Secondly, when he says, this Scripture is verified of such as were of the
true visible Church with whom Christ and his Apostles communicated: Let him
also tell us, whether he means that Christ and his Apostles communicated with
them in their vain traditions. If he think they did, that very Mat. 15.2.
Chapter shows the contrary: besides that the whole Scriptures testify, that
Christ was altogether free from sin, which he could not have been, if he
had joined with them in those their inventions. If they did not, (as it is
without all question) then what does this help those men, who all of them
join and communicate with the false worship of these assemblies?

3 Thirdly, we answer, that his note is not worth the noting, being nothing at
all to the purpose for the question in hand. For first, who knows not, that
in the Jewish Church, the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by their
law, did not appoinct or ratify any of those vain traditions, but utterly
forbid them? Whereas contrarily, the very doctrine publicly professed and
practiced by law in England, appoincteth and ratifieth the false worshipping of
God by the inventions of men: Secondly, those vain traditions aforesaid, were
the personal sins of some particular men in the Jewish Church not publicly
established by law, nor generally received and practiced in that Church: Luke
1.5, 6, 8, 9, 10. and. 2.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27.36, 37, 38, 39 Mat. 15.7. and
8.4. and 15, 2. Ioh. 10.34.
Zachary and Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, Mary, Joseph, and Christ himself, and
his Apostles, with many others, kept the ordinance of God given by the hand of
Moses, and observed of that Church. Neither did they join or pollute them
selves with that vain worship aforesaid: whereas in the church of England, the
false worship thereof devised by men, even by that man of sin, is not the
personal sin of some particular men in it, but is publikelie established by
law, and generally receyned and practiced in these assemblies, of all the
members thereof. So then this scripture makes nothing for them, but against
them most notably.

Now, whereas in the margent, he wishes the Reader to mark a contrariety
with our selves, by comparing this and our 6. Reason together: we also refer
it to the Reader to judge, whether there be not even an harmony with this, and
a confirmation of it. Hitherto of the defense of our second Reason.

H. JACOB his 2 Reply to the 2. Reason.
TO this your defense of your Second Reason, I say, you have answer in your
last Exception, page 22. You ask what Proposition I do deny? I answer, I
distinguish your Aflumption as being a fallacy called (...): co^cluding a
thing simply, from that which is after a sort, like unto that Reason which I
framed against you in Page 22. A man has a wooden leg an eye of glass, etc,
Therefore he is no true man. Cranmer, Ridley, etc. held as much as we, after
men's precepts: Ergo, they worshipped in vain. Geneua holds her wafer cakes in
the Supper. Ergo, Geneua worshipeth God in vain. Even so your Assumption
runs. Our doctrine (say you Page 35.) appoincteth Gods worship by men's
precepts. This is false, unless you mean it (...), after a sort, not simply.
For our doctrine appoincteth not all Gods worship by men's precepts, nor the
chiefest part of it: as the preaching of the Gospel of life, Sacraments, and
Prayers, etc. So that it concludes nothing in that sense. Therefore here you
play the false Sophister, not the Christian and conscionable Disputer. Thus you
have answer enough to this in the answer to your last Exception, though you
would not see it.

Further I noted Secondly, Page 35.
That this your Scripture of Mat. 15. Yields the offenders to be of a visible
Church, with whom Christ did communicate, though they held also traditions of
men: Therefore it affirms nothing against us. Is not this true? Why then do
you not admit it? We never denied, but this Scripture condemned our
corruptions: But this only we affirm, it disanulleth not our Churches: Even
as Christ here condemned the Jews corrupt traditions, but he meant not
thereby to disanull their Church. Therefore all this is not against our
purpose, but not ably for us as is before observed.

1. Concerning your First answer in Page 36. I know this Scripture may be
applied against false worshippers which are no true Church: But it proves not
I say, all them, to whom it may be applied, to be no true Church: Therefore
you abuse it against us, Except you had first proved us no true Church nor
Christians, which yet is in question.

2. Where in your Second answer Page 37.
you say That this helps us not, except we say that Christ communicated with
the Pharisees in these traditions, like as we do in the vain traditions now.
For shame leave this folly. I say again, I seek not to justify our partaking
in our traditions, but I renounce it in sobriety as much as you, yea better
then you do: Yet I say this place shall admit those who do in simplicity
partake of them, to be true Christians nevertheless, like as it admits the
Jews then.

3. In your Third answer, Page ibid.
You deny that those Jewish traditions of wasshings, etc. were with them
received generally, or by Law in their Church. Whereto I answer, That they
were generally received, as Mark in his 7. Chapter and 3. verse does
testify, and that they were rebuked who used them not: which is sufficient to
make it their Churches doctrine and practice, though no express law commanded
it. But I suppose verse 5. where they say, [Why walk thou not after the
tradition of the Elders] he means, the ordinances of their Forefathers, which
were to them as laws, besides the law of Moses. What else is their Thalmud,
which is till this day, even like to the Canon law of Popery, and the
Alcoran of Turkey. Some also understand this of the ordinances of the Elders,
that is, their present Governors: and then doubtless it was law. And though
Zachary, Elizabeth, Symeon, Anna, Mary, Joseph, Christ and his Apostles, did
not actuallie join in these corruptions, yet they were general no doubt, and
by law never the less, and a number of the Jews simply used them, and yet
fell not from God, as The Six waterpots of the Iewishe purifyings.
John 2.6. Therefore your Replies here are most vain and false.

Lastly, in page 37. you will not confess your contrariety, that is to say,
between this your Second Reason, and certain words in your Sixth Reason. But
the greater is your sin, to do evil, and defend it too. Here in this
Reason page 35. you would have this scripture Mat. 15. to be meant against such
vain worshippers, that they become hereby no true Church: (Or else what do
you urge it against us?) But in your Sixth Reason following, you say, That the
Jews, even now when these words were applied to them, were the true
worshippers of God. Are not these contrary, I pray you, then reconcile them.

Master IOHNSONS III. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master
JACOBS Replies to the same. REASON III.
IF the whole doctrine, as it is publicly professed and practiced by law in
England, be not sufficient to make a Galatian a true Christian, that should
with all submit unto Circumcision: Then much less, is it able to make him a
true Christian, that together with it, submits unto a false Ministry,
Worship, and Government, of the Church devised by man, even the man of sin.
But the first is true: Therefore also the latter.

The consequence of the Proposition is good, because Circumcision was once the
holy ordinance, and appointment of God himself to his Church and people,
whereas the Ministry, worship, and government aforesaid, never was so, but
is man's device in religion, even Antichrist, that capital enemy of Jesus
Christ.

The Assumption is proved Gal. 5.2.3.4. where the Apostle speaks of them that
held, not only such truethes of the Gospel, as are in that book of
Articles, but more then those: Yet if they should with all submitt unto
circumcision, he says, they were abolished from Christ, Christ would prosit
them nothing.

H. JACOB his I. Reply to the 3. Reason.
THis your Third Reason is from the more to the less negatiuelie to this
effect, A Galatian using Circumcision, is a likelier Christian, then one of our
English holding the Hierarchy and other traditions: But A Galatian is a false
Christian, Ergo, An English professor is much more.

We answer, We deny the Assumption: Galatians were then true Christians, and
their Assemblies true Churches, Gal. 1.2. Therefore this Reason is naught. If
he object, The Apostle says, such are abolished from Christ. That is in deed
some amongst them, as held Moses ceremonies, necessary absolutely to
salvation, as Act. 15.1. And that Gal. 5.3.4.5 Romans 10.3.4.
justification was by the moral works of the law. Now the Churches of
Galatia generally were not such, but held the saving faith sound doubtless,
though many amongst them were tainted with that infection, by reason of some
mischeuous teachers that were crept in, and too well interteyned among them.
Howbeit, with the Church, Communion was kept, And therefore, so with us you
ought to deal. If you say, we are worse Christians then those grofest
Galatians, It is utterly false: prove it if you can, and it must draw in
Master Cranmer, etc. with us also. If you say, there are many amongst us as
bad, or worse then those worst Galatians, you may say it, but prove it, you
cannot. Also, if it were so, yet this disagraceth, it destroys not the
Church, like as has bin said of the Galatians.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 3. Reason.
TO this our Third Reason, His First answer is, That he denies the Assumption:
which is as much in plain terms, as if he had given the holy Ghost the lie,
who by the Apostle Paul affirms it, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. As in the proof of the
Assumption we showed before. But for the more evidence of the truth, we will
set down the proof of the Assumption in a Sillogisme, thus:

If a Galatian submitt to Circumcision, though he hold all the truths of the
Gospel professed in England withal, yet be notwithstanding abolished from
Christ, and fallen from grace, Then is he not in this estate a true Christian.

But the former is true, as the Apostle testifies, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4.

Therefore also the latter.

Next he answers, That the Galatians were then true Christians, and their
Assemblies, Churches, Gal. 1.3. Therefore (says he) this reason is naught.
But he may not thus run away with the matter and deceive himself and his
simple favorers. The question is not, whether any Galatians were true
Christians, or any of their Assemblies, true churches. For who ever doubted of
that? But this is the question: Whether a Galatian holding all the truethes of
the Gospel now professed in England, and withal submit to Circumcision,
were in that estate a true christian Or putting the case that there were whole
Assemblies consisting of such: Whether those assemblies then in that case were
by Gods word to be deemed the true churches of Christ. The Apostle testifies
and says, no: This man says, yea. Now whether of these two we shall believe,
let all men judge. But what is it then that the Apostle terms the assemblies
of the Galatians true churches? Gal. 1.2. This man shows the reason him
self, the light of the truth is so clear and manifest. There were but some
of the Galatians (says he) that were infected with this error of Circumcision.
True in deed (say we) and of such only is the suppositio^ made in the case
before said: But the churches of Galatia (says he) generally were not such, but
held the saving faith sound: which also is most true, they being set in the way
and order of Christ Jesus: and therefore though there sprang up some heretics
and schismatikes amongst them (which is the 1 Cor. 11.19 Acts 20.30.
lot and trial of the true churches of God in all ages) yet was there not
cause to break the Communion with those assemblies, but to proceed with them
in the faith, and order of Christ, and to Gal. 5.12. 1 Cor. 5.7, 11, 13.
cut off and cast out such troublesome leaven from amongst the^. Now this
being duly weighed, it is nothing for, but altogether against, the having of
communion, with the assemblies of this Land, which are not set in the way and
order of Jesus Christ, (as were those churches of Galatia) but in the Apostasy
and confusion of Antichrist, as has been at large declared before, in the
defense of the former Reasons, where also that of Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc.
is answered.

H. JACOB his II. Reply to the 3. Reason.
TO this your Defense of your Third Reason, I answer. First it is too impudent
a cauillation "That you charge me to give the H. Ghost the lie, in denying your
Assumption. I meant not your Assumption, but that which I had made briefer,
containing the effect of yours. This was the Assumption denied by me, But a
Galatian is a false christian. As he that has but half an eye may see.

Secondly, to cease needles strife. I deny therefore your Proposition. Though a
Galatian that is, So holding it, as ye worst did, or else this is a sophistical
Equi uocation.
holding circumcision, cannot be a true Christian, yet an English Christian
holding the Hyerarchie etc. may. The Reason of this denial I gave you then,
but that you would not see it: Namely, because such Galatians, held
Justification by the works, and ceremonies of the Law. Gal. 5.3.4.5. Romans
10.3.4. Act. 15.1. Like the Papists, who by their ceremonial and moral
works do hold the same, and so do err Fundamentally. But our Churches and
state, hold not the Hyerarchie so, but only as an indifferent thing in it
self. This blasphemous opinion of Circumcision, makes it infinitely worse,
(though once it was ordained of God) then our indifferent opinion of the
Hyerarchie, though in deed it were never but naught.

Thirdly and lastly, you have no where cleared Master Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, and the rest of those holy Martirs, from being abolished from Christ,
if the Hyerarchie be simply worse then Circumcision, so hold as those Galatians
did hold, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4, 5.

Master IOHNSONS IIII. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master
JACOBS Replies to the same. REASON IIII.
THe doctrines of faith contained in that Book alleged, would not make him a
true Christian who holding them, should also still executs or join unto the
Ministry of Mahomet, that open Antichrist and enemy of Jesus Christ. 2. Cor.
6.14, etc.

Therefore neither can they make him a true Christian, that holding them, yet
does still execute or join unto, the Ministry and worship of the man of
sin, the covert Antichrist and enemy of Jesus Christ.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 4. Reason.
THis your 4. Reason is Mahomets Ministry and Antichrists Ministry are
both bad alike.

But the good doctrines of our book of Articles cannot save a man that joins
also to Mahomets Ministry.

Ergo, the good doctrines of that book cannot save a man that joins also to
Antichrists Ministry: which thing we in England do.

I deny neither the Proposition, nor Assumption: And yet the Argument is too
bad. It is a fallacy of Equivocation, as we call it: We must therefore
distinguish: Mahomets Ministry, and Antichrists Ministry, have a doubtful
meaning. If you mean, the whole function and exercise of public worship
performed in Mahomets or Antichrists assemblies, that is, in the Turkish or
Popish Churches: The I grant your whole argument is Both are naught alike as
touching abolishing us from Christ.
true. But that we do so in England, (which comes in the conclusion,) Or that
any Christian amongst us thinks so: That I utterly deny. And thus indeed,
that Scripture alleged 2. Cor. 6.14. is rightly understood. But if you mean
by Ministry, the outward manner of calling to the Ministry, and some outward
ceremonies, used by Mahomet, or the Pope: Then I flatly and absolutely deny
your Assumption, and your Scripture is answered before in the First Reason. For
I affirm, and it is manifest: That such errors being joined with the good
doctrines of that our Book, do not destroy faith, and true Christianity, As
before was showed in the Second Exception.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 4. Reason.
HEre the light of the truth does so dazell the Answerers eyes, as he freely
confesses he can not deny any whit of our Reason. And yet forsooth the
Argument is too bad. But why so? There is (he says) an equivocation in it,
and therefore he will distinguish. But First we between the whole function and
exercise of public worship performed in the Turkish or Popish Assemblies,
and between the outward manner of calling to their Ministry, and the outward
ceremonies used amongst them.

An absurd distinction touching the matter in hand: For first, who knows
not, that these latter are of the very same nature with the former: Are not
their outward callings and ceremonies false, Anticristian, and accursed before
God, as well as the rest of their worship and service? Or has God in his word
given any commandment more for these then for the other? Secondly, who sees
not, that the argument here, is not of whatsoever thing is used among the
Turks and Papists, but of the Ministry and worship which they have devised
and executed: As in particular, of the public offices of Ministry retey ned
among them, of their manner of calling, and entrance into them: of their
administration of them: of their stinted imposed Liturgy: their
ecclesiastical government, cannons, proceedings, etc. All which in the church
of England are taken out of Reu. 17.4, 5 2. These. 2.3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
that golden cup of abominations, whereby Antichrist, That man of sin, has
made the Nations of the earth to be drunken: as may appear by co^paring their
Pontificalls, Canons, and constitutions together. If this man will needs be
otherwise minded, then let him prove the particulars aforesaid, by the
Testament of Jesus Christ.

Furthermore also, mark here, that he grants, the doctrine of faith
contained in their book of Articles, cannot make him a true Christian, that
holdinge them, does withal receive and join unto the public worship,
performed in the Turkish or Popish Assemblies. This he says he grants as
most true, Whereupon it follows, even by his own confession: First, that
such thingh then may be joined with the doctrines of faith received among them,
as they in such estate cannot be deemed true Christians, or true Churches,
Neither the truths which they hold, be auaylable to them. Secondly, that
therefore the Proposition of his First and main Argument, is not general, but
admits limitation, and so his greatest defense is of no weight, as before is
showed in the beginning, in our answer to that Proposition. Thirdly, that his
answer to our Second Exception before alleged, is of no force, howsoever
here and every where he refer us to it. For which also we refer the
Reader, to that which is said in that place, in defense of the Exception
aforesaid, As also for the allegation of 2 Cor. 6.14. unto that which is said
concerning it in defense of our First Reason before alleged.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 4. Reason.
IN this your defense of your 4. Reason, you renew your Sophistry; And that
which is worse, you will not be told of it. Is it because of the goodness of
your Reason that I deny no Proposition? Nay, it is for the badnes of it:
because all is naught, all deceiptfull and sophistical. Therefore I must
distinguish even so still as I did before, and my distinction is good,
cleerelie discovering all your fraud. What say you against it: First (you say)
Are not their outward callings and ceremonies false, Antichristian and
accursed, as well as the rest of their worship and service? As Well? Forsooth, I
trow not, (that is, not as much). Their inward impiety and false faith
against Christ, the only all-sufficient Savior, is far more accursed, and
devilish then their bare outward orders, separated from the rest of their
faith. But whosoever joins simply, and indifferently, either to Thukish, or
Popish Assemblies, does join with their whole, and worst abominations, which
have no communion or coherence with Christ in deed, Neither can we also, if we
join therein. The case is not like, when we reteyne and use, some of their
outward orders in our Assemblies.

And here you note that I grant, Some thing may be joined unto our Christian
faith in England, which would utterly destroy it. Most true, And here I note
your most vncristian and false dealing with me, in affirming otherwise of me,
As I have expressed in the beginning, about the taking of my First maine
Proposition there. Which see further in page 4.

Lastly, my reference to the answer of your First Reason, is a fit and full
Refutation of you here, Neither is your Defense any thing against it, as there
appears. Also this your Reason includes Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. to be
no true Christians neither, as has been often alleged.

Master IOHNSONS V. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master JACOBS
Replies to the same. REASON V.
AS the golden vessels taken out of the Lords house, and had and used in
Babylon of the Caldeans, did not therefore make the Babilonians true Jews
touching the faith: Nor their banquets wherein they used them, to be any of the
Lords Feasts (spoken of Leuit. 23.) but they still remained Babilonish people
and banquets notwithstanding:

So the truths of the Gospel (vessels as it were of the Lords house) holden
and received in the spiritual Babylon (whereof that other was a type) do not
make the people so standing, to be true Christians, Neither their Ministry and
constitution to be Christ's appoincted in his Testament: But they still remain
the people, Ministry, and constitution, of Babylon notwithstanding. See the
proofs hereof in Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. compared with Prou. 9.17, 18. and Revel.
17.4, 5. and 18.4. with 14.8, 9, 10.11.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 5. Reason.
Your Reason is this.

THe material vessels of Jerusalem, were of the like power and virtue, to
sanctify the Heathen Babilonians, As the holy christian doctrines in that
Book, are to sanctify us, that hold together with them some Popish
ceremonies and orders as indifferent things:

But those vessels were not sufficient to sanctify those Babilonians, Ergo,
Neither these truths of the Gospel can sanctify us.

An absurd comparison: The Proposition is most false, and so the scriptures
quoted (Dau. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. compared with Pro. 9.17, 18. Romans 17.4, 5. and 18.4.
with 14.8, 9, 10, 11.) are as idely and vainly applied. See the Answer to the
allegations in the First Reason before.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 5. Reason.
THis he says, is an absurd comparison. So belike (if his grave judgment might
go for good payment) the manifold allusions which (in describing the
spiritual Babylon, the Spirit of God Reu. 17.18. and 15. compared with Iere.
50.51. Cap. Isay. 13. and 14. and 21. and 47.
makes to-the material Babilo^ of the Caldeans) were to be accounted absurd
allusions and comparisons. As also the often alluding, and likening together,
the Isa. 66.20.21 Zach. 14.20.21. 1 Cor. 5.7.8. and 10.2, 3, 4. Col. 2.1.12 He.
13.15, 16.1. Pet. 3.20.21 Reu. 15.3. and 21.20, etc.
holy things of the Law, with the holy things of the Gospel, and the 2. Tim.
3.8.9.1. Cor. 10.6, etc. Heb. 12 16.17. Jude verse. 11. Reu. 2.14.20. and 20.8,
9.
transgressions then with the transgressions now, which are so often used in
the Scripture: Are in his account absurd allusions and similitudes. Secondly,
he says the Proposition is most false. Which we answer is most true and most
plainly taught and declared in the fifth of Daniels prophecy, verse. 1, 2, 3,
4. and Leuit. 23. as we alleged before, when we first propounded the reason,
Whereunto we yet have received no answer. So soundly he defends his cause.

Thirdly he says, The scriptures quoted (Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. compared with Pro.
9.17, 18. Revel. 17.4, 5, and 18, 4. and 14, 8, 9, 10, 11.) are idely and
vainly applied. But how shows he this to be so as he says? Very
profondlie, I warrant you. For he bids us see the answer to the allegations in
the First Reason: And this is all the proof he bringes. Well: we have seen
his answer to the allegations there, and find: First, that those scriptures
here alleged, are not so much as once mentioned there. Secondly that his
answer to the allegations there set down, is most friuoulous and of no
weight, but against him self, as there we have declared.

Lastly, in his propounding of our Reason otherwise then we had done (which in
deed is a thing very ordinary, though nothing commendable in them) it
seems, that being not able to answer any part of our Reason, as we had set
it down, yet he thought to help him self by this exception, that the
Material vessels of Jerusalem were not of the like power and virtue to
sanctify the Heathen Babilonians, as the true doctrines received among the
spiritual Babilonians, are to sanctify them. But he shall find, if he will
consider and compare together the Scriptures here alleged, that the golden
vessels being holy to the Lord, and taken out of his Temple, did as much
sanctify the Caldean Babilonians and their Feasts: As the holy doctrines
(vessels as it were of the Lords Temple) had among the spiritual Babilonians,
do sanctify them and their constitution, That is, neither of their Estates
and Assemblies are sanctified thereby at all. For says not the Lord, Eze.
43.8.
That the setting of men's posts and thresholds, (how much more of Babilons
enormities) by his Posts and Thresholdes, that is by his truths and
ordinances, is so far from sanctifying, as it defiles his holy Name, yea is
abomination in his fight, and sets a wall between him and them that do it?
Says not the scripture also, Prou. 9.17, 18. and, 20.17.
that the true doctrines in the false church are among them as stolen waters
and hid bread, which though they be sweet and pleasant, yet there also is the
mouth filled with gravel, and the guestes of those feasts and assemblies, are
so far from being sanctified by those truths in that estate, as they are
before God even dead men, and in the deapth of hell.

To conclude this poinct, has not an Angel from heaven proclaimed it with a
loud voice, that Reu. 18, 1, 2, 3, 3, 11. etc. and 17, 1, 2, 3 4, 5. and,
14.8, 9, 10, 11.
the spiritual Babylon, (notwithstanding any truths she holds yet) is so
vnsanctifyed and abominable, as she is become a cage of all unclean and
hateful birds, and that all her children and Merchants that will not depart
out of her, shall receive of her plagues and damnation, and drink of the wine
of Gods wrath, yea of the pure wine, which is powered into the cup of his wrath,
and be tormented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels and before the
Lamb for evermore. Lo here their fearful estate, which this man will needs
account holy and acceptable before God.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 5. Reason.
IN this your defense of your Fifth Reason, you mislike that J call it an
absurd comparison: Where you affirm that the golden vesses of the Jews were
as available to sanctify the Babilonians, as the truths of the Gospel which
we hold are to sanctify us. In deed your own words be, holden and received
in the spiritual Babylon. By which terms you mean us of England I trow. But
mark sir. Is not this gross sophistery again? Is not this childish vanity,
open beggerie, and craving of that which is the whole question? that is, That
our Churches are spiritual Babylon, and as deeply infected in Babilonish
impiety as those old Caldeans. If they were so infected, I grant in deed your
Reason would follow: But seeing it is the question, And seeing we profess our
selves true Christians by those truths of the Gospel which we hold (and as by
Gods grace we are indeed) Say I not well, that this is an absurd Comparison?
Yes Master Johnson, it is a most To match those outward vessels, (of no
sanctity of them selves) with our inward doctrins, of salvation.
impious, absurd, and senseless comparison, and void of common reason: And it
inwrappeth Master Cranmer, Master Ridley, etc. within the same Iniurions, Yea
irreligious consequence likewise.

All that you have of allusions, and alluding, between the Tipicall and
spiritual Babylon, are mere delusions, and vain cauils. Prove us first to be
spiritual Babylon: Or else you fight with your shadow.

So that still I say, those Scriptures quoted of Dan. 5. etc. As also all the
rest here packed together in your Margen, they are miserably and desperately
abused, according as I rightly referred you to my censure to your First Reason:
which for all your words, you have not refuted. The very same I say of your
other Two scriptures toward the end, Pro. 9.17. etc. Reu. 18.1. etc. As for
Ezekiel. 43.8. I answered it before Page 34.
in your First Reason.

Master IOHNSONS VI. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master JACOBS
Replies to the same. REASON VI.
THe Samaritans (those counterfett children of Abraham, Jsaack and Jacob) did
publicly profess that most excellent doctrine of the Messiah to come: (the
truth of which doctrine how powerful it was to salvation, the Scriptures
testify): yet does our Savior Christ repute them false worshippers of God,
because their worship was a mixed worship, framed after the inventions of men,
and traditions of their Forefathers: Therefore says Christ unto them: Ye
worship that which ye know not, we worship that which we know, for salvation
is of the Jews. By which words of Christ it plainly appears, that
(although at that time, some professed such truths which otherwise were
auaylable unto salvation) yet none that were false worshippers of God, could
truly challendge unto them selves in such estate, the benefit of those
truths, but they only which were the true Church and people of God, to whom
the Oracles of God were committed, and to whom the Couenantes and service of
God did appertain, such as were at that time, (not the Samaritans) but the
Jews, and they which held the faith of the Jews: whereupon (not the
Samaritanes) but the Jews, were then by Christ accounted the true worshippers
of GOD, and heirs of salvation, John 4.22. compared with verse 20.25, 29. and
with 2. King. 17, 24.

In the like manner, the people of these Ecclesiastical assemblies, standing
subject to a counterfett Ministry and worship of God, (being also commingled
together of all sorts of people:) Though they profess some truths which
otherwise are auailable to salvation, yet can not in such estate by the word of
God, he deemed true Christians or true Churches: Neither can, so standing,
challendge unto them selves the benefit of those true doctrines which they
profess, because God has not made his promise unto any false Church or
worshippers of him: neither committed unto any such his holy things, to wit,
his word, prayer, Sacraments, Censures, etc. But he has made his promise, and
committed these things only to his true Church and people, which worship him
aright, and yield obedidience to his Gospel, keeping whatsoever he has
commanded them: Whereupon it follows, that such people only are true
Christians, and true churches of Christ, to whom the promises and holy things
apperteyne, and not to the people and Ecclesiastical assemblies of England,
neither any such, abiding in false worship or false constitution of a church,
as is aforesaid.

H. JOCOB his 1. Reply to the 6. Reason.
THis your 6. Reason is, The Samaritans (believing that Messiah should come,
John. 4.25.) were as near salvation as we of England are. But they were false
worshippers for all that. Ergo, so are we, for all our holy doctrines believed
according to that Book of Articles.

I deny the Proposition. The Samaritans, might know by hearsay and believe,
the Messiah should come, and Baalam did know it, Nom. 24.17. and the Devils do
now know and believe, Iam. 2.17. Yet none of these believed [in] him. It
follows not therefore, that they were as nigh salvation as we of England. In
a word, there is a Reason manifest. These Samaritans joined Heathenish Idols
with the God of Israel. 2. Ki. 17. which wholly destroyed the truth in them,
though they did reteyne some memorial amongst them of Messiah to come.
Wherefore here take the Second Answer to the First Reason before. Page 25.
But I will help them with an Objection, surely one fitter then all these.



Ergo, so are we of England only for our false Ministry and outward worship.

My meaning was the Leuits were not of Aarons line, but ye Priests only.
and Leuits.) Therefore they could not be indeed true worshippers, nor within
the covenant, nor near to salvation, when they all openly rebelled, and
forsook them desperately, whom the Lord had so expressly chosen. Now our
assemblies throughout England have not their consciences so convicted in the
Hyerarchie and Ceremonies. Ergo, we may be in the coueuant, which they were
not, for all our corruptions.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 6. Reason.
THis our 6. Reason, he neither propounded as we did, nor answers directly,
and soundly unto any part of it. But that the nakedness of his answer, and
light of the truth may better appear, we will propound the Reason more
shortly in a Sillogisme, thus.

The people and assemblies, whose Ecclesiastical constitution is such as to
them in that estate the Couenantes, holy things, and service of God do not
apperteyne, they can not in such constitution by the word of God be deemed
true Christians or true Churches, whatsoever truth they profess besides.

But such is the Ecclesiastical constitution of the people and assemblies of
England, as unto them in that estate the Couenauntes, holy things, and service
of God do not apperteyne.

Therefore the people and Assemblies of England, can not in that constitution,
by the word of God, be deemed true Christians, or true Churches, whatsoever
truths they profess besides.

The Proposition none will deny,
The Assumption is proved thus.
The people and Assemblies whose Ecclesiastical constitution is such, as they
worship God after a false manner, never appointed by him self, nor approved in
his word: their constitution is such, as unto them in that estate, the
couenaunts, holy things, and service of God do not apperteyne.

But such is the Ecclesiastical constitution of the people and Assemblies of
England, as they worship God after a false manner, never appointed by him
self, nor approved in his word.

Therefore the Ecclesiastical constitution of the people and Assemblies of
England, is such as unto them in that estate, the Couenaunts, holy things,
and service of God, do not apperteyne.

The Proposition was proved by the example of the Samaritans, and Christ's
speech and sentence of them in such estate, Ioh. 4. and 2 King. 17 Whereunto he
answers nothing to any purpose, save that, what he says, is against him
self. For where he grants That the Samaritans, and Balaam knew and
believed the Messiah should come, yea and that the Devils know and believe
there is a God, and that Jesus is the Christ, the holy one of God. Who sees
not, that most excellent truths may be acknowledged, and yet they which so
profess, be not therefore in their estate true Christians or true Churches, to
whom the Couenauntes, holy things and service of God apperteyne? Where next he
says, The Samaritans believed not in the Messiah, it will be heard for him to
prove it, seeing he takes belief in Christ so, as it is had in the
spiritual Babylon and her daughters, and seeing also the Samaritans professed
and beleened, not only that the Messiah should come, but even he which is
called Christ, and that when he came, he would declare unto them all things. Jn
so much as when Jesus was come, and had spoken but to a woman of Samaria, the
scripture witnesses, that many of the Samaritans of that city believed in
him for the saying of the woman, which testified, he has told me all things
that ever I did, Joan 4.25, 26, 29, 30, 39. Thirdly, where he says, The
Samaritans joined Heathenish Idols with the God of Israel, which wholly
destroyed the truth in them which they held. By this again it is evident,
even in his own confession, Both that such things may be joined with the
doctrines of truth, as in that estate, they which profess those truths, can
not be judged true Christians, or true churches, to whom the promises and holy
things of God do belong: And that therefore also, the Sea further for the
answer of this in Page 4.
Proposition of his principal and maine Argument first propounded, is not
general, but of necessity admits limitations: So as then his maine defense
falls to the ground, as already we have noted both in the beginning of this
writing, in the answer to that Proposition before said: and again in the
defense of our Fourth Reason a little before. Moreover, in that he says, the
Samaritans joined Heathenish Idols with the God of Israel. (2. King. 17.) If
he mean, that they worshipped the Idols them selves, 2. King. 17.
sacrificing to them, and accompting them to be Gods as well as the God of
Israel, and so brake the First commandment, as before he affirmed in his
answer to our First Reason: then we take it, that here again he is deceived,
as there we have showed. The scripture says, Page 30.
they worshipped and sacrifized to the Lord God of Israel. So as their sin
was against the Second commandment, in that worshipping the true God, they
did it in, and by those Images, as also by other devices of their own, and
traditions of their predecessors. That this was their estate and sin,
besides that it appears in that chapter alleged, it is also most plainly
set down, first by them selves, in that book of Ezra, Ezra. 4.1, 2.
where they speak unto the Jews of the captivity that builded the Temple,
saying:

We will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God as ye do, and we
have sacrificed unto him since the time of Esar Haddon King of Asshur, which
brought us up hither. Then also between Christ and the woman of Samaria, Joh.
4. where it is manifest, that the Ioh. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 30.
contention between the Jews and the Samaritans, was not whether only the
true God was to be worshipped, but both of them agreeing in that, whether the
solemn place of his worship was in Jerusalem, or in the mount of Samaria, etc.
Lastly, by this man's own confession, when he says in this place, Page 49.
that the Israelites under Jeroboam at Dan and B^thel, served not Pagan Idols,
but the true God after their own devices. For the scripture testifies, 2.
King. 17.28, 32, 33.
that the Samaritans worshipped the same God, and after the same manner that the
Nations did which were carried from thence. Now the nations that were carried
from thence, were the tenns Tribes that fell away from Judah to Jeroboam: which
likewise feared 1. King. 12.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. with 2. King. 17.32, 33, 40, 41.
the Lord and served their Jmages, that is, God in and by their Images as now
also the Samaritans did that were come in their steed. Hitherto of his
answer, which may seem to concern the Proposition of the latter Sillogisme.

The Assumption was showed by this, that these assemblies being commingled
together of all sorts of people, they have also for the worship of God among
them, a counterfett Ministry and service, devised by man's which he rightly
understands, as we also do, of their Hierarchy, and other abominations
(before rehearsed) which deceiptfully hear again he would smother up under
the name of ceremonies. Touching which flight of his, sufficient is said before
in the handling of our First Reason. But what now says he here, concerning
the Assumption or proof of it? Does he deny it? No. What then does he say
for their counterfeit Hierarchy, worship, etc. Surely nothing but this, That
their Assemblies in England have not their consciences convicted in these, as
the people under Jeroboam, could not but have their consciences convicted then,
touching their worship and Priesthood. But first, if this were so: is this any
just defense of their Ministry, worship, or estate, that they yet see them
not to be unlawful, as it could not be, but they under Jeroboam saw theirs to
be? If this were a sufficient reason, might not the grossest Papist plead
likewise for their Ministry, worship, and estate, as also the Usurers,
extortioners, and persecutors, for them selves and their wickedness? By this
reason, God should not have sent Lions among the Samaritans, because 2. King.
17.26.
yet, they knew not the manner of worshipping the God of Jsraell, neither had
their consciences convicted therein. But Christ has taught us otherwise, Luke
12.48.
that even that servant, which knows not his Masters will, and yet
commits things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten, though with fewer stripes,
then he that knows and does it not. And even of those Jsraelites aforesaid
the Lord him self testifies Hos. 4.6.
that they were destroyed for lack of knowledge. So then neither can this
peoples ignorance (which he pleads) be a sufficient defense for their
estate. Or if it could, yet it seems they of Israel aforesaid, might as well
have alleged for them selves, seeing the Lord witnesses of them Hos. 4.1.
that there was no knowledge of God in the land. And thus the objection also
here brought by him self, remains still vnaunswered. Now where he says,
that Aarons Line were the only Priests and Levites, he is also mistaken
herein, In deed Aarons Line only were the Priests, but the Levites were
generally of the Tribe of Levy, though not of Aarons line. But to let this
pass: We would know of him a sufficient reason, why the true worship and
ministry appointed by Christ in his Testament, should not be as well known
unto them in these days, as in the defection of Israel? He says They could
not but know, that Jerusalem was the only place, and Aarons line the only
Priests. Have not these the scripture as much as the other had? Or has not
Christ Heb. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
the Son, been as faithful in the house of God, and as plainly set down his
will for his true worship and Ministry in the time of the Gospel, as Moses
the servant was and did for the time of the Law? Yea and have not Witness the
public Treatises, Sermons, Admonitions, Complaints, Supplications, and
Demonstrations, to the Parliament, besides ye bands and sufferings of many in
this behalf.
these by the word been made manifest to the consciences of men in these days?
And even to the high Court of Parliament, representing the whole body of the
Land as the other were to the Israelites in the time of their defection?
Finally, does not this Land stand in as open rebellion against, and forsaking
of the true Ministry, worship, and order, appoincted by Christ to his church
now, as the other did then, (if not more open and grievous) not only for the
causes aforesaid, but because also they have Witness the Po^tifical, Portuis,
Canons and Constitution of the Popish, and their assemblies, compared together.
received and still reteyne a false ministry, worship, and confusion of the
man of sin, that son of perdition, and capital enemy of the Lord Jesus
Christ? And yet moreover, least they should lack any thing of the other, and
not every way far exceed them, do also Witness their Actions, Statutes, etc.
persecute unto bands, exile, and death, such as bear witness to the truth of
Christ, against their abominations aforesaid. By this then it appears, that
the adversary here, neither has justified their estate in respect of the
Apostate Israelites, nor answered the objection which him self framed against
their present constitution: which therefore we will here set down as he
propounded it.

The Objection was this.

The Israelises under Jeroboam at Dan and Bethell served not Pagan Idols, but
the true God after their own devises, which yet resembled the ordinances at
Jerusalem. 1. King. 12.32. Amos 4.4. How be it they were false worshippers,
only for their false ministry, and outward false worship, for all that they
believed in the God of Jerusalem rightly. Therefore so these of England, only
for their false Ministry and outward worship.

This is his own Objection and Reason, unto which he has given no sufficient
answer, as before has been showed. So that it still remains upon himself
as a testimony against their present estate. This we neither did, nor needed
to propound, as a several Reason, amongst those which we set down, because it
is of like nature with those we mentioned amongst ours in the Second and Sixth
Reasons before alleged.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 6. Reason.
IN this your defense of your 6. Reason you say, That the Proposition of your
last sillogisme, (They that worship God after a false manner, page 50.
are are no true Christans) is proved by the example of the Samaritans, and
that I answer nothing against it.

First I say, there you sophisticate again. And it seems you can do nothing
else in argumentation. For your Proposition is Aequiuocall and ambiguous. If
you mean they that worship God after a false manner, that is totally, or else
Fundamentally. Then I clearly grant it, and that the Samaritans do prove the
same, seeing they erred Fundamentally. But your Assumption touching us, is then
utterly false. You bring not a syllable or one letter, to prove either of these
Two against us, in all your writing, neither can you, but bare begging of the
controversy which is infinite often. If you mean in your Proposition, They
that serve God after a false manner, that is, in part, not Wholly nor
Fundamentally, As namely in the Hyerarchy and external ceremonies as Cranmer,
etc. Then I say and avouch confidentlie in the presence of God, that such may
be true Christians, though imperfect in many things. Yea infinite, such have
been, are, and may be hereafter, true Christians. The contrary whereof, is no
less then horrible blasphemy against God and his Saints, wherefore your
Proposition, is showed to be again sophistical, as also those were in your
Third Exception, and First and Second Reasons.

Secondly where you say, the Samaritans prove it, and I say nothing against it.
Mark you. First I said, the Samaritans might know by hearsay, and yet not
faithfully believe [in] the Messiah. You cannot be ignorant, that there is a
great difference between an obscure rumor, which some of them might receive
from their neighbor Jews, and yet not have it constantly believed, and held
publicly among them, as their common faith. If thus the Samaritans believed
the coming of Messiah, they are in no comparison with us, we hold our most
holy faith and doctrine by the word professedly, as the public ordinance of
our Churchs shows. But further let it be howsoever they held the coming of
Messiah, yet I answered, The Samaritans joined Heathenish Idols with the God of
Israel which wholly destroyed the truth in them. And this is the very truth
indeed, howsoever you will not yield it. For you say, that they broke not the
First commandment, they worshipped not the Jdols them selves, nor sacrifised
to the^, etc. This is proved apparently false in the Text 2. Kings. 17.29, 30,
31. 2. King. 17.
Enery nation made their Gods and put them in the houses of the high places
which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their Cities wherein they
dwelt. For the men of Babel made Succoth-Benoth, and the men of Cuth made
Nergall, and the men of Hamath made Ashima. And the Auims made Nibhaz and
Tartak, and the Sepharuims burnt their children in the fire to Adramelch and
Anammelech the Gods of Sepharuim: Therefore they worshipped the Idols of the
Heathen, and sacrifised to them, and accoumpted them to be Gods as well as the
God of Israel. And so broke the First commandment, and therefore they touch
not us in this question, As the like I have truly and well derlared before,
page 34.
against your First Reason. ^^ page 51.
Your proofs, that the Samaritans brake not the First commandment are
nothing. (1) That of Ezra. 4.1.2. that they sought the Lord as the Jews did,
etc, was their conterfet hypocrisy and false brag, yea their devilish
conspiracy against the worship of the Jews God. Do you believe their words
here in this place, that they are true indeed? I grant as I noted before out
of 2. Kings 17. they had a mixed worship, some thing of the Jews God, but very
much and (as by that Chapter seems) most of the Heathens Gods. 2. Secondly,
Page 51.
where you say out of John. 4. That it is manifest, there was no contention
between the Jews and the Samaritans, whether A bold assertion.
only the true God was to be worshipped. There appears no word of any such
thing, Our Savior indeed notes verse. 21. One difference between them, that
was, but about the place of worshipping on occasion of the woman's words: But
that there was no difference between them in the observing of the First
Commandment, he says not. The contrary you saw before proved in 2. King.
17.30.31.3. Thirdly you urge my confession, That the Isralites under Jeroboam
served not Pagan Jdols but the true God after their own devices. And you would
prove it too, by 2, King. 17.28, 32, 33. Seeing the Samaritans worshipped after
the manner of the nations that dwelt there before they came, who were the Ten
tribes that Jeroboam drew away. I answer, First it is great shame, that you
make this my confession, when I expressly bring it in, as your Objection,
whereunto I set mine answer, Page 49.
that the Idolatry under Jeroboam seems far grosser and filthier then the
worst is with us, which I make manifest by the scripture, not only 1. King.
12.21. where Jeroboam erected visible Idols, and very filthy ones, even calves
and brute beasts: which if they were but to worship God by, yet who would
compare our Ecclesiastical orders to them, which Viz. the general state.
we profess are but indifferent things, for order and comeliness only.
Further I alleged 2. Chro. 11.15. Where Jeroboam is said to appoinct
Priests, for the high places, for Devils, and for the Calves that he made. So
I confess little to your advantage. Secondly, if the Samaritans worshipped (as
they did indeed) like the Ten tribes before them, then you are clean gone.
For though Ieroboa^ at the First had not joined in ye Heathenish Idolatry. Yet
Ahab did 1. King. 16.32, 33. and his Son Ahaziah had further Baalzebub the
God of Ekron. Yea the Isralites, as they of Jerusalem afterward, were
Idolaters much a like 2. King. 17.19. But we read of the Jews under Ahas 2
Chr. 28.23. and Manasses and Amon. 2 King. 21. and 23.4, 5, 10, 11.12, 13. That
they used the very Pagans Idolatry. Yea it is expressed, 2. King. 17.8, 11,
16, 17. That these Ten Tribes used the very same. Therefore the Samaritans
doing as these Isralites did, Page 54.
held such gross idolatry as could by no means stand with the true serving of
God. Finally as before is noted 2. King. 17.29, 30, 31. does express this
gross Heathenish idolatry of the Samaritans. Surely it appears more gross
and worse then the Isralites before them. And therefore you are greatly
deceived both here and in the defense of your First Reason before: Page 30.
where you expreslie maintain these Samaritans to hold no Heathenish
Jdolatrie, but only to cleave to the God of Jsraell in an outward devised
corrupt worship. They acknowledged him, I grant, but him only I deny, as has been proved.

Further you affirm in your defense of your First Reason, Page 30.
That they professed the written law to be the rule, both for their inward
belief, and outward manner of worship. Where you would prove it For that the
Apostate Israelites did so of whom Ezeck. speaks. Zeck. 43.8.
First this follows not, because the Heathenish Samaritans were further from
sincerity, then the natural Israelites commonly. Secondly, Israel it self
in this wretched Apostasy, held not the written law for their rule, seeing
professedlie they left this rule, and did constantly worship Calves, and
sacrifized at Dan and Bethel. Thirdly, Ezekiell shows, even there, cap.
43.7.8. they kept not this rule, but departed therefrom, and that as appears
professedly, and constantly. Which most of all is seen in Ahab, Ahaziah, Ahas,
Page 34. 55.
Manasses, and Amon, as is before noted. Wherefore in these your sayings Master
Johnson, you are intollerably too blame and foully deceived. As for example,
They professed that which they did in 2. Kings. 17.29, 30, 31. was that after
the rule of the written Law?

Next you oppugn me, for that I alleged our Assemblies throughout England,
Page 52.
have not their consciences convicted in the Hyerarchy and ceremonies, you say
" if this were so, is it any just defense of your ministry, worship, estate,
etc. I tell you it is a just defense for our ministry worship, and estate to
be as touching the substance and foundation of Christianity, sound and
acceptable to God. Refute it if you can. I know it is no just defense of our
whole Ministry, estate, and manner of worship, which I never intended, much
less professed to justify.

Where you would snatch at an advauntage about Aarons line, my meaning was,
that they of Aaron were only for Priests, and their brethren of Leui, only for
Levites.

But you pass this, and you set your self in earnest, to prove us all
convicted in conscience about our Hyerarchie and ceremonies. So that here you
avouch openly, that third general poinct which I observed in my very beginning
above, page 3.
for the which you have this Reason. Have not we the scriptures as much as the
Apostate Isralites had? Or did not Christ as fully and plainly set down our
ministry and worship in the Gospel, as Moses in the Law? I answer, this is
true, as touching the word it self. In the Gospel we are taught as plainly
and as fully for the word it self, as the Jews were in Moses: But it is not
yet so plain for our understanding and use. Why? Because we have had a
discontinuance of the The Pastors of ye Churches since, have had many
corruptions mixed in their callings, they have not been pure and simple ever
since: or at least we cannot prove it otherwise, by any records now extant.
simple offices of Pastors, Teachers and Elders for the space of a Thousand
Three hundredth, or a Thousand Four hundredth Years, and a continuance of the
Prelacie all this while hitherto. Also, for that many ancient, and late
learned, and Godly Christians, have believed it, at least convenient, if not
necessary in the Church. And they have expounded the Scriptures so, that they
carry no small ambiguity in this matter, in infinite Thousands judgment. Thus
it has pleased God in his providence, to suffer this mistaking amongst
Christians, thus long, and thus universally. Whereby it comes to pass, that
infinite Thousand consciences are not easily convicted, though they be
mistaken in this case. With the Jews it was not so in this matter that we
talk of. As Moses and the Prophets were most plain, that Jerusalem must be the
only place of solemn worship, Arons line the only Priests, no Calves, nor
any visible kind of Image or means to worship God in: So also they constantly
and perpetually practiced that course, even from Moses till the Apostacy of
Jeroboam. When any sqared from this course, these were not only rebuked
expreslie by Gods voice in his Prophets, from time to time: but also the
obstinate, were most fearfully smitten with Gods miraculous hand from heaven.
So that for any to offend in these poinctes as Jeroboam did, It could not
possible be but in presumptuous rebellion, with a high hand against God, and
with a convicted and seared conscience. Which I say cannot with any show of
sense, be said of many Thousand Christians in this case touching the Praelacie,
etc.

Further you urge * these Reasons That this cause has been made manifest to
the consciences of men, Page 53.
yea to the Parliament of late times. You say well to the consciences of men:
but not to the consciences of all men, or the most men throughout the land. Yea
or to the most of them that know and fear God, according to the religion now
mainteyned, This is the very question. If you mean so, that all men's
consciences are convicted in this matter, All men surely will either pity your
simplicity, or laugh at your folly. I pray you Master Johnson, consider your
self, you were a true Christian, long before you fell into this separation.
Yea moreover you were learned, yea you knew and acknowledged these very
corruptions a great while, and yet condemned us not, Nay you condemned the
separation earnestly. I pray you is it not possible that numbers, who see not
so far as you did then, should still condemn your separation, and yet be
true Christians, as you acknowledge that your self then was? meipso test.

That which you ad "of persecuting unto bands, exile and death to prove our
utter abolishing from Christ generally: It is a toy. Page ibid.
First if you were merely innocent, yet this could not make us worse then the
Jews in Christ's time: who for all that they persecuted, yet were they not
wholly fallen from God. Secondly you suffer indeed more the^ you need, if that
you would but acknowledge the grace of God with us so far as it is. It is
therefore not Christ's Cross in that regard, but your own that you bear.

Finally let it be noted, if here in this your 6. Reason you be not directly
contrary to your self, as I have observed in your 2. Reason: Master Johnson
his contrariety proved between his 2. Reason and his 6. Reason.
Page 39. For you say here, Page 48. That not the Samaritans, but the Jews,
were then by Christ counted the true worshippers of God, and heirs of
salvation, Ioh. 4.22. But in your Second Reason, Page 35. you say: They that
teach for doctrine men's precepts, as there Christ says the Jews then did,
those in particular are no true Christians, nor their assemblies true Churches.
Math. 15.9.
Therefore you infer, (or else you pretend it) that those particular Jews
were not then true worshippers, nor their assemblies true Churchest which is a
flat contradiction, Or else what is. But if you say you mean not this of the
Jews, then you abuse the scripture and us, turning it clean from them, whom
in your Reason you speak of, and whom Christ therein expressly means.

Master IOHNSONS VII. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master
JACOBS Replies to the same. REASON VII.
IF the Spirit of God account them to be departers from the faith (and
consequently no true Christians) which though they hold other truths of the
Gospel, yet forbid to marry, and command to abstain srom meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving: Then what does the Lord
account of them which forbid the true Ministry and worship of God, and
command a false: and of them also which partake therein? Which to be the
estate of the Prelates, and other Ministers and people of these assemblies,
appears, not only by their practice and persecution, but also by the book of
Articles here alleged, as may be seen in the 35. and 36. Articles, compared
with their book of Cannons, set forth, Anno 1571. and with the Articles lately
set forth by the Richard Eletcher.
Prelate of London, that now is, and inquired of in his visitation Anno 1595.
As also by other their Articles, Cannons, Aduerticements, Injunctions, etc.
which were long here to rehearse.

But the former is true, 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. Therefore, etc.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 7. Reason.
THis your Seventh Reason is: They are departed from the faith, that forbid to
marry, and command to abstain from lawful meats. Also this is worse, then
that: viz. to forbid the true Ministry and to command a false: which we in
England do. Ergo we are departers from the faith.

I deny this Antecedent, that is your Assumption, with a distinction. The
Papists See Rhemi-Testa. in Mat. 15.18.
forbidding of Marriage and of meats, if they had done no worse, does not make
them departers from the faith: that is, not Or not fundame^tally, not simply,
which words I think fitter to be here, used, as in my next Reply is further
declared.
totally. No more could their Hyerarchie and ceremonies simply: Neither do
these things make us (the Protestants) to be such. The Papists fall from
Christ That is fundamentally, and simply: see in the 2. Answer following.
wholly in other poincts, (namely 1. The Papal supreamacy. 2. The sacrifice of
the Mass. 3. Justification by works:
Which blessed be God we are far from. Therefore the Apostle in saying, They
departed from the faith, means, in Viz. in abstayning from Marriage and meats.
these poincts they erred or departed from the faith, but not absolutely and
wholly. 2. Further more touching your Proposition, if you understand Paul, of
Martion the Haeretike, and Tatianus, who did absolutely condemn Marriage and
certain meats, they even therein might wholly fall from the faith, I mean
somewhat like to Balaam, Judas, and those Apostate Israelites lately spoken of,
Page 49. 57.
namely for having their consciences convicted, and seared with a whot iron.
And thus are they in no comparison with us of England, nor with the Papists
neither, if they had erred in nothing else.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 7. Reason.
HEre the adversary being not able with any color to deny the conseque^t, of
our Reason neither to justify their present Ministry, worship Cannons,
Articles, Injunctions, etc. (which yet he must do, and still we call for it,
if he will justify their present estate): yet being desperate sure, for else he
would never have done it, he fears not to gainesay the Assumption, that is,
the very words and testimony of the scripture it self, 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3.
The Apostle says, that they which forbid Marriage and Meats, are departers
from the faith, This man says no. Now, whether of these shall we believe? But
what color has this man for his denial? Forsooth this: That they which do
so, do not depart from the faith totally, and that the Apostles meaning is,
that in these poincts they depart from the faith, but not absolutely and
wholly. So by this man's conceit, none may be accounted departers from the
faith, that depart only in some poinctes, but they which do it totally from
all. And thus then may no heretics or Antichrists that ever have been, or
shall be in the world, be judged departers from the faith, because they depart
from it but in some poinctes, and not absolutely from all. Thus in one word
has he justified at once the Arians, Nestorians, Sabellians, Papists,
Familistes, Anabaptists, and whom not? because they depart but in some, not
wholly from all poinctes of faith. Js it not great pity that Antichrist has so
long wanted this stour Champion, that can thus in one word, justify his
forbidding of meats and marriage, yea and his most detestable Hyerarchie, and
superstitions? Now by this man's learning, all the Martirs and writers
heretofore, that by evidence of this scripture co^uicted the Synagogues of
Antichrist to have departed from the faith, and therefore separated from them:
were utterly deceived. Nay and the Apostles them selves were wholly mistaken,
when speaking of Antichrists church and Religion, they call it a 2. These. 2.7.
mystery of iniquity, 1. Tim. 4.2.
speaking lies through hypocrisy, 2. Pet. 2.1.
privily bringing in damnable heresies, and having a Tim. 3.4.
show of godliness, but denying the power thereof, And John's eyes also it
seems were not matches, when he says, Reave. 17.5.
he saw in the whores forehead, (that is in Antichrists church and Religion)
a name written, A mystery, great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms, and
abominations of the earth. For we would know of this deep Clerk, how
Antichrists church and religion should justly be accounted a mystery of
iniquity, and truly be said, to speak Lies in hypocrisy, also privily to
bring in Damnable heresies, and to have a Show of godliness: if they did
absolutely and wholly depart from the faith, and not only from some points
thereof? But over and above all, it seems by this reason, that not only the
Apostles were mistaken, in giving us sure marks how to know false teachers
and false religions, 1 Timothy 1.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.1. 2 These. 2.7. 2 Timothy 3.4. Revel.
17.5. But also Christ him self, when he said, Mat. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves. And again Mat. 2.23.24.
Jf any shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not: For
there shall arise false christ's and false prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very
elect. Now if they should totally depart from the faith, what sheep
clothing, J pray you, should they have to come in? Or how should either them
selves be said to come in the name of Christ, affirming their Religion to be
Christ's, and showing signs and wonders to draw men thereunto: Or the elect
to be in such unspeakable danger to be deceived by them? This might suffice
to show the falsehood and impiety of his answer: But we will note a few
things more therein. It being granted him, that the popish forbidding of
marriage and meats, if they were not worse, does not make them departers from
the faith totally: yet let him tell us, if holding never so many truths
besides, See in Bales Votaries, Acts and momuments etc. what abominable
filthiness the forbidding of marriage, and what superstition the forbidding of
meats, has wrought in the kingdom of Antichrist.
yet forbidding these, they could by the word of God truly be said in that
estate What man fearing God durst once open his mouth for such Diuelilh
doctrines and estate.
to hold the faith of Christ, and to be true Christians. If they could not (as
the Apostle "testifies) then is this answer in this respect also nothing to
the purpose, but against him self, both for the popish forbidding of meats
and marriages, and for the English Hyerarchie, and other abominations amongst
them received from the Papists, which under color of this answer here he
would defend. Again, where he says, That the Papists fall from Christ in
other poinctes besides the aforesaid, Namely, 1 The Papal supremacy. 2. The
sacrifice of the Mass. 3. Justification by works: which England now is
far from. Let him tell us: First, whether in this sense the Papists can for
these be said to depart from the faith totally? If they can not, then what
weight is there in this for defense of their estate, that the Papists could
not also allege for them selves, to wit, that in these poinctes they depart
from the faith, but not absolutely and wholly. Secondly, let him tell us,
whether there are not other poinctes but these three in the papists religion,
which make them in their estate to be departers from the faith, and
consequently false christians and false Churches? If there be (as he can not
deny it) then of what weight is his answer to defend the present constitution
of these people and assemblies (for whom he pleads) seeing there are diverse
other things besides these, that do and may cause, that they may not be
deemed true Christians or true Churches in that estate.

Many Seruetus, Sabellius, Arius, the Anabaptists, etc.
heretics heretofore have, and at this day do reject these three aforesaid,
are they therefore in their estate to be accounted true Christians or true
Churches? So then, his manner of reasoning here for their defense, is, as if
the Adulterers, to justify their course of life, should allege thus: We are
noe 1. Blaspemers, 2. no Persecutors, 3. No Murderers, as such and such are:
therefore we depart not from the way of life, but our estate and course of
life is good, and such as may be continued in. But the scripture teaches
otherwise, saying: Iam. 2.10.11.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one poincte, is
guilty of all. For he that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, said also,
Thou shall not kill. Now, though thou do no adultery, yet if thou killest,
thou art a transgressour of the Law: and contrariwise. So that what soever
sins the Adulterer be far from, yet (as Pro. 6.32.
Solomon says) He that commits adultery with a woman, fails in heart,
and destroys his own soul. The same is the case of all spiritual
Adulterers likewise: who (what so ever sins they be far from) yet in the
worship of God, run a Number. 15.39.
whoring after their own inventions, Pro. 5.20.
embracing the bosoms of strange women, and Revel. 17.4.
drinking of their cup of fornications. Thirdly, let him show us sufficient
warrant from the scriptures, why (setting these three aside) the other popish
Hyerarchie and abominations received amongst them, can not be judged to make
them in such estate, departers from the faith, and therefore false Christians
and false Churches, whatsoever truths they should hold beside. If he cannot
(as who sees not, that it can not be done?) then by this also it appears,
that his answer^ here is of no force for defense of their estate, but against
it, as we have declared before.

Number. 16.12. etc.
Corah, Dathan, Abyram, and their partakers, were far from the Abominations
of the Heathen, they held also all the poinctes of faith, that Moses and Aaron
held, differing only from them, and departing only from the faith, in a matter
concerning the Priesthood, whereof also they verse the. 3.
showed their reasons why they were so persuaded: yet will he not deny, we
suppose, but that they departed from the faith, and were in this estate neither
to be accounted true Israelits, nor their assemblies true Churches, with which
communion might be kept. If he should, the scripture it self would witness
against him herein, Numb. 16.26. Now compare case with case, and time with
time, and the estate of these people and Assemblies of England, wilbee found
far more grievous, as we have already showed both in the defense of our
Second Exception before, and in In the answer to Master Hildersam, and in the
9. Reasons concerning not hearing the Ministers of these assembties.
other Treatises to which yet we have received no answer.

To conclude this poinct, if their Abominations in England were far fewer
then they are, yet so long as they reteyne that poysonfull leaven of their
Hyerarchie and worship, we must tell them as the Scripture says, and
experience teaches: That 2. Kings. 4.39.40.
a little poison brings death unto the whole pot of pottage. A 1. Cor. 5.6.
little leaven leaueneth the whole lump. And a Eccle. 10.1.
few dead flies cause the oynctment of the Apothecarie to stink and putrify.
Although indeed their abominations are not a few, but swarm in abundance
amongst them, some whereof we have rehearsed before in the defense of our
First Reason, where the Reader may take a view of them.

Now in the next place, fearing belike that the evidence of the scripture we
alleged, could not by these shifts of his be avoided, but that still the
reason deducted from thence stood strong against them, as we have showed it
does: therefore he would have us now pass by them, and not apply this
scripture to them, Nota.
or their mother Church of Rome, but understand it of Martion the heretic, and
Tatianus, of whom he says, that they absolutely condemning marriage and certain
meats, might indeed even therein wholly fall from the faith, somewhat like to
Baalam, Judas, and those Apostate Israelites lately spoken of, namely for
having their consciences convicted and seared with an whote iron: And thus
(says he) are they in no comparison with them of England: Well, But first if
his former answer were of any weight, it might be asked, why then the followers
of Martion and Tatianus, might not likewise have defended them thus, and said,
that their departure from the faith, was but in some poincts, not wholly from
all? Secondly we answer, that if this scripture was verified as he grants)
in Martion and Tatianus, for their condemning of marriage and meats, then we
must needs also think it verified in the Romish whore, and her apostate
children, which are fallen into the very sins, that are here mentioned. Teh
Apostle mentions Martion and Tatianus, no more then he does the whoorish
Babylon, and the children of her Fornication: but comprehends here all such
who so ever they be, as shall fall into this Apostasy.

Now moreover, if the 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3.
words of this scripture be duly weighed, and either other scriptures, or the
estate of the Romish Harlott and her children compared therewith, it will be
found as lively to describe these, as either Martion or any other that ever
were in the world. First when the Apostle says, that this shall be in the
latter times, who sees not that it does most directly poinct at the Romish
whore, though we doubt not, but Martion also and Tatianus, which lived twelve
hundredth years since, or thereabouts, may also be comprehended therein.
Secondly, when it is said, they shall depart from the faith, thereby
signifying that once they held the faith, how plain is this of the Romish
harlot, which in the Romans 1.7.
Apostles time was the beloved spouse of God, and since is fallen into Apostasy,
and become the Mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, as the 2.
These. 2.3. and Reu. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
scriptures in other places witnesses. Thirdly, when it is said, they shall
give heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils, how fitly agrees
this to the Romish Babylon which (as the scripture else Reu. 18.2.
where testifies) is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all
foul spirits? Fourthly when it is said, they shall speak lies through
hypocrisy (not to reckon up the infinite particulars that might be alleged
for proof hereof) how fitly does this describe the Religion and practice of the
man of sin (the Romish Antichrist) which the scripture 2. These. 2.7.
else where calls a mystery of iniquity: as pretending to be with and for
Christ, and to draw men unto him, when indeed it is opposed against and exalted
above the Lord Jesus Christ, and all his holy ordinances. Fifthly, when it is
said, they shall have their consciences seared with an whote iron, how true is
this found upon the throane of the Beast, and his Kingdom, concerning which,
the scripture also testifies in Reu. 16.10.11.
another place that when the vials of Gods wrath shall be powered out upon them,
and they convinced of their impieties and obominations, they shall be so far
from acknowledging and forsaking the^, as they shall gnaw their tongues for
sorrow, and rather the^ they will forsak their wickedness, shall Let their
raylinges, slanders, edictes, articles, injunctions, finally their continual
oppositions and madness against ye truth and people of God, be witnesses of all
this.
fight against God and his truth, blaspheaming the God of heaven for their
pains and for their sores, and not repenting of their works. Lo here a seared
conscience in the beasts kingdom. Finally, when the Spirit of God here gives
two particular instances of his apostacy. 1. The forbidding of Marriage, 2. And
the commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received
with thanksgiving. How directly does he in both these, as it were with the
finger, poinct at the Romish Babylon and her daughters? Jn the one, that is,
the forbidding of marriage, when as the Romish Babylon forbids it to Priests,
Friars, Nuns, and such like, and the English her daughter, to fellows of
Colleges, and prentises, and both of them, to all men and women in Lent,
Aduent, Rogation week, etc. Jn the other, that is, the forbidding of meats
created of God to be received with thanksgiving, when as both of them,
command to abstain from flesh, on their saints eues, Emberdayes, Lent,
Fridayes, and Satterdayes, throughout the year.

Thus then we have showed that this scripture (which he would turn over to
Martion and Tatianus) does most fitly agree unto, and most plainly describe the
Romish Apostasy, whether we apply it to their present estate, or compare this
and other scriptures together, speaking of the same Apostasy and defection. By
this also which has bone said, it may appear, that as he says of Martion and
Tatianus, that they might be said wholly to fall from the faith somewhat like to
Balaam, Judas, and those apostate Israelites lately spoken of, namely for
having their consciences convicted and seared with an whot iron: So also it is
verified, and may be said of the Romish Babylon and her daughters. Touching
which poinct of their convicted consciences, as also of the Apostate Israelites
in particular, compared with them of England, see moreover what is said
before in defense of the sixth Reason at the end thereof.

Now if seeing the evidence of this 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
scripture, so full and plain against them (as has been declared) he would
except, that so it is in the Romish Church, but not in theirs of England:
First by this means he would overthrow his own answer here, which has
denied it, of the popish forbidding of meats and marriages, and would turn it
over from them to Martion and Tatianus: Secondly, this would not hinder but
that the consequent of our Proposition and the Assumption also were good, and
therefore the Argument strong and of force. Thirdly, the particulars before
mentioned, (being found in their Church of England) will testify it also, to
be verified of them. Lastly, although many of the abominations of the whoores
cup of Babylon be now cast out of England, (for which also we praise God) yet
so long as they reteyne the Hyerarchie, Reave. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Stinted Leyturgie, confusion of people, Canons, Excommunications, etc. derived
unto them from that mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, we
must needs believe and allege against them the scripture and common proverb
which says? Ezekiel. 16.44.
As is the Mother, So is the Daughter. And hitherto of the defense of this
reason.

Now moreover let it here be observed, how these men, to defend their
estate, are glad to run into the Papists Tents, and to take up their worn
and rustie weapons, which have been of no force to defend them selves, but have
been often and justly turned into their own bowels. Read the Rhemes notations
upon 1. Tim. 4.3.
Reames Annotations upon this place (1. Tim. 4.) and see if these men here
would not avoid the evidence of this scripture against them, by the very same
shift and answer, by which the detestable Jesuits there would turn it from
their mother of Rome, that is, by posting it over from them selves to Martion
and Tatianus. Read it, and note it well.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 7. Reason.
TO this your defense of your Seventh Reason, I say, Though every where you are
very unreasonable, yet no where you seem more unconscionable and wilful then
here.

First, do I say No to the Apostles Yea, 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. That they who
forbid Marriage and Meats do fall from the faith. Do I say noe? Is this your
conscience? Say I not expressly, They do in these points depart from the
faith, A strange untruth.
but not absolutely and wholly.

Secondly, does it follow by my words, as you affirm, That none depart from
the faith but those that depart totally, wholly, and absolutely, whereby all
the vildest Heretics should be justified, as Arrians, Nestorians, Anabatists,
etc. Do I say so? Is this also your conscience? Again do I say, The text
does not reprove all the Papists in their forbidding of Marriage and Meats, but
only Martion and Tatianus of old? Do I say any such thing? Nay, say I not
expreslie the contrary? Are you then a man of conscience? Do you suffer for
conscience? Know therefore that this I say, and my words before do import so
much. That whosoever do forbid marriage or meats, do depart from the faith.
But note: some do more, some less. There are some that do simply and
fundamentally, and others in some sort. Men depart from the faith Simply and
Fundamentally two ways. First they which do err in such maine poincts as do
utterly abolish us from Christ and destroy the Foundation: thus do Arrians,
Manichees, Seruetus, Papists, etc. Secondly, such as holding the Foundation in
doctrine sound, do desperately profess and teach some what else, against the
manifest light that is in them: so Martion and Tatianus, do Fundamentally and
simply fall from the faith, because they simply forbid those good ordinances of
God, Marriage and Meats, even against the light of conscience and nature:
together wherewith, a lively saving faith cannot possibly stand. Now the
Papists in this do depart from the faith also, but that is only in some sort
or in part: because they forbid these things (not absolutely, but) unto some,
and sometimes. They that depart thus from the faith, may be true Christians
notwithstanding, yea they are certainly, if they be no worse in any thing else,
albeit you deny it here most fondly and without all sense. To which end you
most unlearnedly and ungodly apply those scriptures, Scriptures abused.
A little leaven leueneth the lump, A few dead flies make the ointment to
stincke, and a little poison brings death. Will you have no tainte of evil
in a Christian, but it quenches the life of God in us needs? Is it not
possible your selves might hold some such errors, and yet remain true
Christians notwithstanding? Then if Papists were no worse but in those errors
only, they might be true Christians notwithstanding. But Martion and Tatianus
do wholly depart from the faith, not but that they believed some truths: but
in that they The same did Corah, Da than and Abyram likewise See before in
answer to ye 2. Exception, ye a Reply.
presumptuously quenched the instinct of nature and conscience, as I have said.
Here then it appears how wicked a sclaunder it is that you say, I run into
the Papists tents, and fight with their weapons, and do iump with the Remists
annotations on, 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. Judge now by this that I have said, whether
I do or no.

And note, that I say, that they be either Apostates or departers from the
faith, not only who fall totally, as you sclaunder me that I say: but also
who fall fundamentally, that is, either the first way or second, as I have
before said. And so do these gross Heretics whom you mention, 1 Arius,
Seruetus, Papists, etc. 2. Martion, Tatianus, Judas, Corah, Balaam, the
Apostate Israelites, etc. Thus then your questions and demaundes about the
Papists and their errors, I pass by, as more vain, then pertinent. Only
note withal, if this reason of yours were good, it makes Master Cranmer.
Ridley, etc. to be departers from the faith, and no true Christians.

Master IOHNSONS VIII. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master
JACOBS Replies to the same. REASON VIII.
IF the Apostle accoumpted them denyers of the faith and worse then infidels
(and consequently no true Christians) who (though they held other truths of
the Gospel yet) provide not for their household: Then what will he accoumpt of
them, who (though they profess some truths of the Gospel, yet) are not true
worshippers of God, but execute or submit unto a false ministry, worship, and
government ecclesiastical: Which to be the estate of the Ministry and people
of these assemblies, appears as aforesaid.

But the first is true 1, Tim. 5.8. Therefore, etc.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 8. Reason.
THis your Eight Reason is thus much: viz. Like as it is for a professor, not
to provide for his household so is it to hold the Hierarchy, etc. But that is to
deny the faith, and to be worse then an infidel. Ergo so are we in England.

Those very answers to the last Reason, do fully and flatly satisfy this
also: Either against the Assumption, (namely that it is not meant simply of
denying the faith, nor I mean Fundamentally, as in the last Reason before I
have showed.
wholly, but in this poinct only: Or else the proposition, as being meant of
such, as neglect their families against the light of their consciences, and the
manifest instinct of nature.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 8. Reason.
FOr answer of our said Eight Reason, he refers us to those answers of his,
to the last Reason, which he says does fully and flatly' satisfy this also,
for the proposition and Assumption. But this which he says, we have in the
defense of that Reason, declared to be altogether untrue: Therefore yet we
have received no answer, either to that Reason, or this. That thus it stands
we refer the Reader for it unto that which is said in defense of that Reason
aforesaid: wishing the Reader moreover to observe, both there and here in his
answer to the Reason following, that the power of the truth so prevails
against them, as they cannot but grant, that they depart from and deny the
faith, in their ministry, worship and government ecclesiastical, as
appears in their Canons, book of Common prayer, Articles, Injunctions,
persecutions, etc. All which being mentioned unto them as proofs thereof, in
these several reasons: when now they should defend these particulers, if they
would maintain their standing, behold they are as mute as a fish therein: and
not that only, but in their answer to the next Reason following, grant unto
us, that in these things we may and ought to separate from them. Which is
directly to yield us the cause: Thus soundly they answer us, and dispute for
themselves.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 8. Reason.
TO this your Eight Reason and defense thereof, I answer as before: If you
take the Apostle to mean, such neglecters of their household as deny the faith,
not Fundamentally nor against the instinct of nature, but only against
convenient Christian providence, and no otherwise: Then I deny your Assumption.
If the Apostle mean of such, as neglect their families against the light of
confcience, and natures instinct, then I deny the Proposition. This I say,
because the Apostle may very well mean both these, but in a diverse measure
and proportion of sin: but then this concerns not us, Even so as I have
said to your former Reason. Note also, if this were a true Reason, it makes
Master Cranmer, etc. denyers of the faith, and no true Christians also. For
maintenance where of, you have here not one poor word at all.

Touching that you say we cannot deny, but grant, that we depart from and
deny the faith in our Ministry. I have told you how, in my answer to your 7.
Reason, Also see my Replies to your 2. Exception.

Master IOHNSONS IX. Reason against the former Assumption: with Master JACOBS
Replies to the same. REASON IX.
THey which teach othewise and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, are by the
rule of the Apostle to be separated from, and therefore cannot in that case by
the word of God be deemed true Christians, 1. Tim. 6.3.4, 5.

But that so it is with the ministers and people of these assembles, in regard
of their ministry, worship, and Church constitution, appears by the
Seauentene poincts of false doctrine, etc. which are already set down, and by
the proofs before alleged out of their own cannons, Articles, Injunctions,
etc.

Therefore the Ministers and people of these assemblies, in regard of their
ministry, worship, and Church constitution, are by the rule of the Apostle to
be separated from, neither can in that case by the word of God be deemed true
Christians.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 9. Reason.
THis your last Reason is Separat from the^ that teach otherwise then the
truth: 1 Timothy 6, 3, 4, 5. We holding those Articles, do teach diverse things
in the Hyerarchie etc. that be otherwise then is truth. Therefore we must be
separated from, and consequently we are no true Christians.

This is a falacy also Separate from such, Ergo separate wholly. See my 1. and
2. Reply before to the third Exception, also the Answer to the two last Reasons
of all, the 7. and 8. We grant therefore, so far forth as we hold otherwise
then truth, so far separate from us, but not any farther at all: not wholly,
or absolutely. And so the Apostle here means. Wherefore briefly: Because you
prove us not wholly to deny the truth, nor fundamentally, nor obstinatly,
peruersly, and desperately any part thereof, like those Jews Act. 19.8. whom
Paul separated from, which he did not from all other Jews, Act. 13.14. and
16.3. and 21.23, 24, 26. and 3.1. Therefore you ought not wholly to separate
from us, Neither to condemn us wholly as abolished from Christ, no more then
Master Cranmer and Ridley were with their Congregations in King Edwards time.
And thus our Assumption in the beginning, stands firm, The doctrine in the
book of Articles, is sufficient to make a true Christian.

The contrary whereof, is such a Paradox, Conclusion.
as has not been heard of till this day: All reformed Churches in Europe do
and have always held otherwise. Themselves May. Barrow. May. Penry. May.
Johnson.
heretofore have acknowledged and professed it. The holy Martirs that lived in
King Edwardes days, and died in Queen Mary's days, must be otherwise cut of
from Christ, who were true Christians by virtue of this doctrine and the
practice thereof, or verily not at all. But now it is wonder, what extreme
passion has driven them to this denial. Surely they see that it conuinceth
flatly (as indeed it does,) their peremptory separation: And therefore, rather
then they would seem to have erred in so main poinct: we cannot but think
that mere desperatnes, has driven them to it. Nevertheless, all this we
leave to the Lord, with the judgment thereof, who has the hearts of all men
in his hand: not only to search the seacrets; but also to turn and dispose
them, even as it pleases him.

F. JOHNSON his Defense of his 9. Reason.
Unto our Nineth Reason aforesaid, he answers: That it is a Fallacy:
separate from such: Ergo separate wholly. But how shows he any fallacy to be
in our Reason? He bids us see his answer above to our third Exception, also
his answers to the two last Reasons of all. Well we have seen them, and find
nothing there but against him self, as there has been showed. So this Reason
then, as the rest also, still stands unanswered, and strong against them. And
that we may not doubt, but him self also sees it to be so, how soever he
seems to plead to the contrary before: therefore now he grants it (and
so yeeldes us the cause) both in express words, and by not defending the 17.
poinctes of false doctrine, wherewith they were charged, neither their own
Cannons, Articles, Injunctions, etc. alleged against them. In express
words, when he says, they grant, that so far forth as they hold otherwise
then truth, so far we may and ought to separat from them. Lo here what the
evidence of the truth (against which they have struggeled so long) has now
at length drawn from them. The truth is mighty, and preuayleth. But he
adds, that we must not separate from them any further, then as before: not
wholly or absoluteiy: and so says he, the Apostle 1. Tim. 3.3.
here means. Well, but let us here know what this man him self means
hereby: If he mean that we must not for their other defectio^ forsake the
truths which they hold. We answer that we do it not, as him self knows:
and in this sense also his meaning should come nothing near the Apostles
meaning. Themselves say they have separated from the Papists: yet he neither
ean nor will say, that they have forsaken the As that there is a God: that
there, is three persons in the Godhead: that Jesus Christ is the Savior of ye
world: that God made heaven and earth: that there shall be a resurrection of the
just and unjust.
truths which the papists held, notwithstanding that they have made
separation from them. But if he mean, that because of the truths which they
profess, therefore we should not separate from them: then First he
contradicts him self, having granted that we must separate from them, so
far forth as they hold otherwise then truth. Secondly, he condemns their
own practze in their separation from the Papists, notwithstanding the truths
they profess. Thirdly, in this sense also his meaning should come nothing
near the Apostles meaning. Thus therefore it is evident, both that there is no
fallacy in our reason, but that it is plain and forceable against them: And
moreover, that he has directly in express words yielded us the cause, and
acknowledged our separation from their assemblies, ministry, worship, etc.
And as he does this in express words, so also he shows it in deed, in that
he leaves without all defense (as unlawful and to be separated from) their
Ministry, Worship, and Gouuernement Ecclesiastical, the 17. poincts of false
doctrine objected against them, and their Canons, Articles, Injunctions, etc.
mentioned both here, and more particularly in the First and Second Reasons
going before: Which thing we wish the Reader well to observe. And because we
are fallen again into mention of the 17. poinctes of false doctrine, to the
end that the Reader may yet more see the deceitfulnes of his dealing and
insufficiency of all his answers here and before: therefore it shall not be
yrke some to set down here before the Readers, those 17. poinctes of false
doctrine aforesaid, specially seeing they are but short. They are these as
follows.

Poinctes of false doctrine delivered and spread abroad by the Writings,
Sermons, and practice of the forward Preachers of the Parish assemblies of
England: with answers to the same.
1 That though the open notorious obstinate offenders be partakers of the
Sacraments, yet neither the: Sacraments, nor the people that join with them,
are defiled thereby. Which doctrine is contrary to the truth of God in these
scriptures, 1 Cor. 10, 17. Hag. 2.14, 15. 1 Cor. 5.6. and 10.28 2 Cor. 6.15,
18. Gal. 5.9. Mat. 18.8, 9, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Exodus 12.43. Leuit. 15.4, 5, 6,
7, 31. and 11.24. and 23, 45, 46. and 19.17. Number. 5.2, 3. and 19.21, 22. Joshua
11.12. Ezra 6.21.22. Ier. 3.1. 2 That the planting or reforming of Christ's
Church must tarry for the Civil magistrate, and may not otherwise be brought
in by the word and spirit of God in the mouths of his weakest servants,
except they have authority from earthly Princes: Which doctrine is against
the Kingly power of Christ, and these scriptures, Mat, 28.18. Acts 3.23. 1
Cor. 1. 27. Psalm. 2.6, 9, 10, 12. Esai 9.6, 7. Zach. 4.6. and 6.12.23. Dan.
2.44. and 7.27. and 9.25. Mich. 5.7. Mat. 28.20. 1 Cor. 14.27. with 1 These.
4.8. Phil. 2.6, 12. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.15. Rene. 1.5. and 14.12. and 17.14. and 19
16. and 20.4. 3 That the true visible Church of Christ is not a separated
company of righteouse men and women, from the Jdolaters and open wicked of the
world, but may consist of all sorts of people good and bad: Which doctrine is
contrary to the pattern of Christ's Church, throughout all the scriptures. Genesis
4.26. with 6.2. Exodus 4.22, 23. Leuit. 10.10. and 20.24, 25, 26 Psalm. 24.3, 4.
Ezra 6.21. 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 16. Nehem. 10.28. Eze. 22.26. with 44.23. Zeph. 3.4.
Mat. 3.10, 12. Act. 2.40, 41, 42. and 19.9. Romans 12.1, 8. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1
Pet. 2.9, 10. Reu. 14.9, 12. and 18.4. and 21.27 and 22.14, 15. etc. 4 That
they may mainteyne this error of their confused order and mixture of all sorts
of persons together, they pervert the Parable of the tares, Mat. 13.24.
teaching that all are the Church: Which doctrine is against the truth of the
scriptures, yea against our Saviors own interpretation in the 38. verse, who
teaches, that by the field is meant (not the Church) but the world, in which
his Church is milata^t. And as therein there is the good seed, the righteous,
the Children of the Kingdom: So there are also tares, hipocrites, the children
of the wicked, who as they are often espied in this life, by the righteous
servants of God, so shall they in that great day be perfectly severed from
the godly by the Angels of God, verse 38.43. This their doctrine also is
against the heavenly orders mentioned, Matt. 18.8, 9, 15, 16, 17. 1 Corint.
1.26.29. Acts 2.40.41, 47. and 5.26, 27, 28. and 19, 9. and 5.4, 7. 2 Cor.
6.17, 18. Leuit. 18.29. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 John verse 6.11. Revel. 2. and 3. and
14.9.12 and 18.4. and 20.4. 5 That the people may tolerate and join with open
iniquity in the Church, until by the Magistrate it be redressed: which
doctrine is contrary to these riptures, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Mat. 28.21. Acts. 2.40.
and 3.23. and 4.19. and 9.26. and 19.9. 1 Timothy 5.22. Deu. 5.32. 6 That the
guiftes of interpretation and application of the Scriptures are a sufficient
and lawful calling to the ministry, etc. Which doctrine is both false and
Anabaptisticall, contrary to the scriptures, Heb. 5.4. Rom 12.6, 7, 8. Leuit.
22.25. Ezekiel. 44.8, 9, etc. Number. 1.51. and 3.10, 38 and 16.40. and 18.2 3, 4.
Act. 1.20.26. and 14.23. and 13.2.3. 7 That the Church may yield obedience
unto other laws, cannons, and traditions, officers and offices, then God has
prescribed in his Conenant. Which doctrine is contrary to Genesis 49.10. Mal.
6.24. John 10, 4, 5. Ren. 14.4. and 22, 18, 19. Heb. 3, 1, etc: 8 That the
Church may read other men's words upon a book, and offer them up to God as
their own prayers and sacrifices in the public Assemblies: Which doctrine is
contrary to the scriptures, Esai 29.13, 14. Romans 8.26. 1 Cor. 14.15. Mat.
6.6.9. and 15.9. Mar. 7.7. Ephe. 4.7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.5. 9 That it is lawful to
join with the Ministry of dumb and Jdoll Priests, and to receive the
Sacraments at their hands: Which doctrine is contrary to, Mal. 15.14. and
7.19. and 24.24, 25. John. 10.1.5. Number. 16, 5, 9, 24, 26, 39, 40, etc. 1 Timothy
6.5.2. John verse 6.11 10 That it is lawful for a Minister of Christ, to cease
preaching, and forsake his flock, at the Commandment of a Lord Bishop: Which
doctrine is contrary to, 1 Cor. 9.16. Esaias 62.4, 6, 7. Ier. 48.10. Zach.
11.17. John 10.11, 12, 13. Acts 4.18, 19, 20, and 5.29. Amos 7.12, 13, 14, 15.
2 Timothy 4.2. 11 That the Church of Christ has not always power to bind and
loose, to receive in, and to cast out by the Keys of the Kingdom: Which
doctrine is contrary to Mat. 18.17, 18. Psalm. 149.9. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.12, Number. 5,
2, 3. 12 That it is lawful for the people of God to hear notorious false
prophets in their Ministry: Which doctrine is contrary to Deuteronomy. 18.15. Mat.
17.5. and 7.15.2 John verse 10.11. 1 Cor. 10.18. Gala. 1, 8, 9. Revel. 14 9,
10, 11. and 18.4. John 10.96. 13 That it is the Church and house of God, the
body and kingdom of Christ, where he reigns not by his own Ordinances and
Officers, but the highest Ecclesiastical authority is in the hands of
strange Lords, and Antichristian Prelates, who also govern by Romish
Cannons, and not according to the laws of Christ's Testament: Which doctrine
and practice is condemned by Luke 19.14, 27. John 15.14. Romans 6.16. Luke 22.25,
26. 1 Pet. 3.2 These. 2 3.4. John 3.35.36. Revel. 9.3. and 14.9.10.11 and
19.14.15. 14 That there may be a prescript Leiturgie and set form of service
in the Church, framed by man: which doctrine is contrary to Deuteronomy. 5.8. Esai
29.13, 14. Mat. 15.9. and 7.6.7. Gal. 3.15. John 4.24. Romans 8.26.27. Ephe.
4.7.8. 15 That an Antichristian Prelate, notwithstanding his dignity (as it is
called) spiritual, may be a Civil Magistrate, and obeyed of the people as
their lawful governor, Which doctrine is contrary to Romans 13.1, etc. Mat.
20.25, 26. Mar. 10.42, 43. Luke 22.25, 26. Revel. 14.9, 10, 11. and 17.18. 16
That men may give the titles of Christ Jesus unto these sons of men, and his
mortal enemies, to call them their Arch and Lord Bishops, Reverend Fathers,
etc. Which doctrine is contrary to Mat. 23, 8, 9, 10. Esai 42.8. and 48.11.
Pro. 17.15. and 24.24. Esai 5.20. 2 Cor. 6.14.17. 17 That it is lawful for a
Minister of Christ to be mainteyned in his ministry, by the goods of wicked
and unbelievers, by Jewish and Popish tithes and offeringes: Which doctrine is
contrary to Prou. 27.26, 27. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Phil. 4.10.18. Gal. 6.6. Romans
15.27. Heb. 7.12.
These are the 17 poinctes which were mentioned before in the proof of this
reason: which the adversary has left altogether unanswered, as he has done
also their own Cannons, Articles, and Injunctions: which are to be seen in
their printed books. And thus is he driven again and again whether he will
or not, to yield us the cause.

That which he adds in the next place, of their not wholly denying the truth,
nor fundamentally, nor obstinately, peruerslie, and desperately any part
thereof, is answered before in the defense of our second Exception, and of our
sixth and seventh Reasons.

Now, when he next says, That they are not herein like those Jews (Act.
19.9.) whom Paul separated from, which he did not from all other Jews, Acts
13.14. and 16, 3: and 21, 23, 24, 26. and 3.1. First we ask, What if they be
not in all respects like unto those Jews, are they not therefore to be
separated from? So in deed he would conclude in this place, But then let him
tell us, if Corah, Dathan and Abiram, the Apostate Jews under Jeroboam, the
Corinthians, Papists, etc: might not allege some particular exception,
wherein they were not like to those Jews, Act. 19. Might not therefore
separation be made from these? The scripture teaches otherwise, Numb. 16.25,
26. 2 Chro^. 11.14. 2 Cor. 6.17, Reu. 18.4 Secondly, consider the place it
self (Act. 19.9.) and compare it with their estate and practice in England,
and see if there be not now as great and just cause to separate from the^, as
from the other. Are not these now hardened against the truth? Let their
writings against it, their imprisonning, banishing, and killing, for it, give
evidence. Do they not disobey it? Let their constitution and practice be
witness. Speak they not evil of the way of God before the multitude? Let the
Sermons of their Ministers in the pulpit, and the speeches of the Prelates in
their Courts, bear record: Therefore says that Acts 19.9. Acts 2.40.
Scripture (Acts 19) they are to be departed and separated from. Whereunto
also may be added in this case that which Peter says Act. 2 Save your selves
from this froward generation. Thidly were he obiecteth That Paul did not
separate from all the other Jews, as he did from these, Acts 19. and shows
it by Act. 13.14. and 16.3. and 21, 23, 24* 26. and 3.1 we answer, that the
Apostles had good and just cause so to do. For first the Jews Romans 9.4.
Leuit. 20.22, 24, 26. Luke 1.6.8. etc.
were the people of God, separated from the world, and set in the true waand
order of God. Secondly, Luke 24.47. Act. 1.8. and 13.46.
Christ commanded the Apostles, when he sent them to preach his Gospel,
throughout the world, that they should first preach it to the Jews. Thirdly,
the Jews ministry and ceremonies being the ordinances of God him self, and
given in writing by Moses the man of God, Act. 15.21. and 21.30, 21 22, 23, 24,
25. Heb. 8.5, 13. and 9.1, etc.
were therefore now, when they should cease, to be buried with honor. These
things considered, we see the Apostles had just cause so to do, as they did in
those places mentioned: But what is this to the assemblies of England, which
never yet were separated from the world, nor set in the way and order of
Christ, but stand in the Reave. 13.16, 17. and 18 2. 2 The. 2.3, 4, 8
confusion and defection of Antichrist, whose ministry also and worship,
were never the ordinances of God, But Reave. 17.2, 4 and 18.3. and 9.3. etc.
taken out of the whores Cup of Babylon, for which likewise God never gave
Commandment to go unto them, but to Reave. 18.4. with 17.9. 1 Timothy 6, 3, 5.
depart from them, as being daughters of the great Babylon that mother of
whoredoms and abominations of the earth. Again even from those Jews,
notwithstanding the reasons aforesaid, yet when they put from them the truth,
and would not receive it, the Apostles departed and separated the^ selves, yea
and shook off the dust of their feet against them, teaching others to do so
likewise, Acts 13.46, 51. and 18.6. and 28, 25, 26, 27, 28. and 20.40. and
19.8, 9.

To that of Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc is answered before. And hitherto of
their general Assumption, which was this: That the whole doctrine as it is
professed and publicly practiced by law in England, is sufficient to make a
particular man a true Christian. Which we have showed to be untrue, both by
the Exceptions and Reasons aforesaid, which still stand firm against them, as
is manifest by this our defense.

Touching the conclusion:

And now let the godly Reader (trying all things by the word of truth) judge,
whether we or they hold Paradoxes.

Touching that he says of the reformed Churches, he is deceived, if he think
they allow their present estate and church constitution. Both their public
profession and practice witness the contrary: as we have declared at large
in In ye answers of Ma. Carthwrights reasons: of May. Hildersams letter, etc.
other treatises, which yet remain unanswered, whereunto we refer the Reader
in this behalf.

Where he says, That we our selves heretofore have acknowledged and professed
it, (to wit their general Assumption aforesaid to be true) he is also deceived
therein: we have always You may speak it with shame enough
testified the contrary, both by our profession and practice, and were and are
therefore cast into prison, appoincted to exile, and put to death: besides many
other injuries and grieuances inflicted upon us for this very cause. In deed
we have acknowledged and do acknowledge, that they profess diverse excellent
truths, but that the whole doctrine, as it is publicly professed and
practiced by law in England, does make them in that estate true Christians,
never any of us (that we know of) did once acknowledge. And therefore till he
show us the contrary, we must needs think that he falsely burtheneth us all,
and specially such of us, as he has mentioned here in particular.

To that which he next adds of the Martirs in Queen Mary's days is answered
already in the defense of our Second Exception and First Reason, whereunto may
be added for more evidence of the truth, the particular speeches and
testimonies of the holy Martirs them selves, both then and in former times.

As of Master Bradford, who Acts and monuments 2. vo. in his conference with
Peter Henth.
speaking of the days before Queen Marie) said, The time was, when the Pope
was out of England, but not all popery. And moreover, In his first speech with
D. Harpsfielde, Archdeacon.
That the scripture knows not any difference between Bishops and Ministers,
which men call Priests. And that the scripture speaking of Bishops, can not be
understood of Bishops that minister not, but lord it.

Also of Master Hooper, who held and Hooper on the eight commandment.
published, that a Bishop should be Bishop but of one City: and that till the
Magistrates bring them to this poinct, it shall be as possible to hear a Bishop
wade, godly and simply through the scripture in case of Religion, as to drive a
Cammell through the eye of a needle. And again he says: The primitive Church
had not such Bishops as be now a days. And again, What blindness (says he)
is there befell in the world, that can not see this palpable ill, that our
Mother the holy Church had at the beginning, such Bishops, as did preach many
godly Sermons in less time then our Bishops horses be a brideling.

And John Bale, an exile for the testimony of Jesu, writing upon the
Revelation, Bale in his book called The Image of both churches upon Reu. 13.1.
and 17.3.
affirms moreover, That the names of Blasphemy written upon the Beasts head
(Revel. 13. and 17.) are none other then the proud glittering titles, wherewith
they garnish their usurped authority, to make it seem glorious to the world,
having within them contained the great mystery of iniquity. What other else
(says he also) is Pope, Cardinal, Metropolitan, Primate, Archbishop, Diocean,
Archdeacon, Official, Chauncelour, Commissarie, Deane, Prebend, Parsons,
Vicar, and such like, but very names of blasphemy? For offices they are not
appointed by the holy Ghost, nor yet once mentioned in the scriptures. This
John Bale held and published. Then which, what can be more full and evident
against them?

And again writing upon the 14. chapter of the Revelation, In Image of both
churches upon Reu. 14.9
he has these words:

To receive the beasts mark in their foreheads and hands, is both to agree to
such decrees, traditions, laws, constitutions, acts, and proclamations, as
they under those titles, have made, only for their own covetousness and pomp,
and neither for the glory of God, nor yet for the right maintenance of the
Christian common wealth: And also to be sworn to the same, to subscribe to it,
to give counsel or aid to it, to mainteyne it by learning, to minister in it,
to execute under it, to accuse, punish, and put to death for it, or to think
it lawful and godly, with such like.

And Ibid. upon Revel. 16.12.
afterward upon the 16. of the Revelation, expounding the drying up of the
waters of Euphrates to be this, That the welthy Popes possessions "and pleasurs
of the Clergy (their false feats once known) are and "shall be clearly taken
away from them: He says Moreover, In Mark also by this of what time and
estate he speaks: even of such, when the Gospel was preached, the
Monasteries suppressed.
England by the Gospel preaching have many of these waters been dried up in
the suppression of the monasteries, prioryes, couents, and Friars houses, yet
are not all things brought unto Christ's clear institution. A cincere
Christian-order cannot yet be seen there. And a great cause why. For all is
not yet dried up there. The Bishops reign still in as much vain glorious
pomp, and with as many Heathenish observations, as ever they did, As cruelly
hearted and as bloody minded are they yet, as ever they were before. "No
mischief unsought to hold in the waters. Mark how He means the Prelates
of these Seas.
Winchester, "Durham, York, London, and Lyncolne, work (let us also now add
Canterbury) with such other pleasantly disposed Euphratynes: But be of good
comfort, and pray in the mean time. For the holy Ghost promises here, that
they shall wither away withal that the heavenly Father has not planted. All
which generation will the Lords breath consume, etc.

Likewise may be showed by the testimony of others in former times, as of John
Wickliffe, who Acts and Monumen. 4. edi. 1. vol. pa. 150.
held and affirmed: That Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officialls,
Deanes, Cannons, were disciples of Antichrist.

In like manner of William Swinderby, who Ibid. page 36.8. b.
said that what Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, Prelate or Priest, in manner of living,
or teachching, or laws making, contrary to Christ's living and his laws, or
any other ground put in ruling of the Church of Christ, but by Christ and his
laws, is very Antichrist, adversary to Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

Also Sir John old Castle Lord Cobham who Ibid. page 5621 b. and 563.
held and affirmed, that the Bishops, Priests, Prelates, and Monks, were the
body of the great "Antichrist: And that the possessions and Lordships of the
Clergy, were the "venime of Judas shed into the Church.

Likewise John Ibid. page 639. b:
Cladon burnt in Smithfield, held and professed, that the Archbishops, and
Bishops, speaking indifferently, are the seats of the beast Antichrist, when
he sits in them and reigns above other people in the dark Calves of
errors and heresies. Moreover that the Bishops license for a man to preach the
word of God, is the true character of the beast, that is, Antichrist.

Finally William In his treatises called the obedience of a christian man, and
the pracsise of Prelates.
Tindall and John In his Preface before his Antythesis between Christ and the
Pope.
Frith, held and publissed, That Archb. Lordb. Archdeacons, Deanes, Officialls,
Parsons, Vicars, and the rest of that sort, are the disciples of Antichrist,
yea very Antichrists themselves.

These are the speeches and testimonies of the holy Martirs in former ages,
whereunto diverse other such like might be added. But these may suffice for
the matter in hand. And now compare with these things alleged, the public
profession and practice of England even as it is by law at this day, and see
whether their own proofs be not so many witnisses against themselves. But if
it were so, that the reformed Churches, we our selves, and the Martirs of
former time, had given allowance of their present estate and Church
constitution, what would this help the^, when all the word of God condemns
the^, as we have showed in our Reasons aforesaid and defense thereof. Whereunto
(if they will still justify their estate) we require direct answer from
poinct to poinct, and that from the scriptures, which only can stablish the
conscince.

Now furthermore, that the truth it self, and their estate may better appear
what it is, as also that they may not turn away or obscure the truth by their
subtle shifts and euasions, as their manner is: we will therefore propound
unto them a few questions concerning the poinctes now in controversy in this
land, desiring their plain and sincere answers, thereunto by the word of God,
as they will answer him in his great day.

The questions are these.
1 Whether the Lord Jesus Christ have by his last Testament given unto and set
in his Church sufficient ordinary 1. Offices, with their 2. Callings, 3.
Works, and 4. Maintenance for the administration of his holy things, and for
the sufficient ordinary instruction, guidance and service of his Church to the
end of the world, or no. 2 Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons, and helpers, be those offices appincted by Christ in his last
Testament as aforesaid.. Or whether the present ecclesiastical Offices of
Archbishops, Lordbishops, Suffragans, Deanes, Prebendaries, Cannons,
Petticannos, Gospellers, Pistlers, Virgirers Queristers, Organ-players,
Priests, Deacons or, half Priests, Archdeacons, Doctors of divinity,
Batchelers of divinity, Chaplyns or House-priestes, Commissaries, Officialls,
Procters, Apparitors; Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Vagrant or Mercinary preachers,
Churchwardens, Sidemen, Clerks, Sextons, and the rest now had in these
Cathedral and parishionall assemblies be those offices appoincted by Christ in
his last Testament as is aforesaid, or no. 3 Whether the Callinges and
entrance into these Ecclesiastical offices last aforesaid, their
Administration, and Maintenance, now had and received in England, be the
manner of calling, administration, and maintenance which Christ has
appoincted for the offices of his church above named, or no. 4 Whether every
true visible church of Christ be not a company of people called and separated
out from the world by the word of God, and joined together in fellowship of
the Gospel, by voluntary profession of the faith and obedince of Christ? And
whether the present ecclesiastical assemblies of this Land be such: or no. 5
Whether the Sacraments (being seals of the righteousness which is by faith)
may be delivered to any other then to the faithful and their seed, or in any
other ministry and manner then is appoincted by Jesus Christ the Apostle and
high Priest of our profession? And whether they be not otherwise administered
in the Cathedral and parishionall assemblies of England at this day. 6 Whether
their book of Common prayer with the Feasts, Fasts, and Holy days, stinted
prayers, and Leiturgy prescribed therein, and used in these assemblies, be the
true worship of God commanded in his word, or the devise or invention of man,
for Gods worship and service. 7 Whether all people and Churches without
exception be not bound in Religion, only to receive and submit unto that
ministry, worship, and order, which Christ as Lord and King, has given and
appoyncted to his Church? Or whether in Religion, any may receive or join
unto, another ministry, worship and order devised by man, for the service of
God? And consequently, whether they which join to the present ecclesiastical
ministry, worship, and order of these cathedral and parishionall assemblies,
can be assured by the word of God, that they join unto the former appoincted
by Christ, and not to the latter devised by man, even the man of sin, for the
worship and service of God.
Unto these questions and the particulers thereof, for the causes aforesaid, we
desire their direct answer, with proofs of their answers from the scriptures,
according to which word if they speak not as we said before, so we say
again, with the Esa. 8.20.
Prophet Esaias: It is because there is no light in them.

And now to conclude, whereas this man being not able to answer our Reasons (as
has been declared) yet would in the end of his writting, fasten upon us some
strange passion, yea and mere desperatnes, for separating from them, and
answering of them as we have done. We leave it the godly and discrete Reader to
judge by that which has been said on both parts, whether it be not themselves
which are taken with a strange passion, and driven there unto by mere
desperatnes, when as to mainteyne their estate they will have the scriptures to
fall, (as has been See the answer to our second Exception and 7. Reason, etc.
seen in their answers before,) yea and exalt the Church, and Magistrate
above Christ himself, even flesh and blood above God, blessed for ever. But
for this and oll their unrighteous dealing against the truth and people of God,
we leave them to the Lord, who searches the hearts, and tries the raynes,
even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of
his works. That is, to them that by continuance in weldoing seek glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious: and
disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, Jer.
17.10. with Romans 2.6, 7, 8.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 9. Reason.
IN this your defense of the last Reason, you mislike that I say it is a
fallacy: and you say I show none. Mark what I say, Every one of your Reasons,
I say every one, is a very proper fallacy, and an artificial part of
Sophisterie, as by my several answers to them may appear. Your First Reason
is called in ye schools Fallacia ab co quod est secandum quid ad simpliciter:
proving a thing to be simply, by that which is but after a sort. The Second is
the very same. The Third Fallacia aequinocationis, A fallacy of Ambiguity.
The Fourth is the very same. The Fifth is petitio principij, a begging of the
question. The Sixth the very same fallacy that was in the First and Second
Reasons. The Seventh, Eight, and Ninth, have all the Fallacy of Equivocation,
and if you will, the same with that, in your First, Second and Sixth Reasons,
also.

Further, where you say, that here I grant you the cause, it is very absurd.
The Apostle 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. saying, separate from such, has a two fould
sense, Either such as teach otherwise then the truth fundamentally, and then
separate wholly: Or not fundamentally, but erring only in poincts less then
the foundation: and these diuersely also, Either presumptuously obstinately,
and of a desparate conscience: and then if that apeate, separate from such
wholly: Or else, erring in simplicity and of oversight, and former prejudice,
from such, separate not wholly, but only from the very error or errors, in no
wise from their Christian communion and society, seeing these are true
Christians.

Seeing therefore our corruptions of the Praelacie, and Ceremonies, be of these
latter sort: which thing hitherto, you have not nor cannot overthrow, (and
withal you must utterly overthrow May. Cranmer and the rest of the Martirs
their Christianity likewise): Therefore we in England, by the grace of God,
are still true Christians: and you ought so to acknowledge us, as you will
answer unto God: All which you may do, and yet touch no part of our
Ecclesiastical corruptions at all, to give allowance unto them: And in all
this, there is no contradiction with my self, it is but your distempered
conceit, that seems contrary. Neither is our absolute departure from the
Papists, hereby any whit impeached. We have justly forsaken them clean,
because by their very profession and doctrine, we cannot esteem them true
Christians, neither in case of salvation, while they so remain, but indeed
very Antichrists, as the scripture proves. Which thing also if you say of us,
you say falsely: it is our present question, and you do not prove it, nor ever
can do.

As for your. 17. poincts of false doctrine, which you most falsely lay to our
chardge, what have I to do with them? I list not to meddle at this prsent, but
with that which we have in hand, namely to justify, that our public book of
Articles of Religion (so far forth as that it erreth not fundamentally, As it
does not.
) conteyneth sufficient to make a true Christian: Against the which, hitherto
you have brought nothing worth the hearing, as we have seen.

After, you would prove us to be like those Jews Act. 19.9, whom Paul
separated from: But without all good reason. They were not so many but they
were casely certified of the truth that Paul preached: but how infinitely many
more are there in this land, that know nothing of this controversy. 2. Secondly
Paul was better able to convince them by the scriptures, and did more
effectually, and apparently, then you do (or can) our whole Realm. 3. Thirdly
how many learned are there in this land, that have many probable and seeming
reasons, and allege them, and publish them for the Praelacie against you: and
are unanswered. And yet will you say they are co^uicted, and those infinite
others depending on them? I say convicted as well as those Jews? What if these
speak evil of that which you hold for truth, but they hold to be errors and
schism? Are they all, yea all the Land therefore abolished from Christ? Might
not all this at least, be said of the whole estate of the Jews in Christ's
time, and after as well, yet they ceased not to be Churches? why then are you
so partial against us?

Lastly, you would show Reasons why the Apostles wholly separated not from the
Jews Synagogues after Christ, Act. 13.14. etc. Which you will in no wise have
to serve us. But alas for all your Exceptions against us, you have never a
reason but one, and that is petitio principij, That we were never separated
from the world, nor set in the way and order of Christ, but in the confusion
and defection of Antichrist, whose Ministry, etc. were never the ordinances
of God, etc. This is but craving the whole question. And I have refuted these
quarelles in a short writing (hereafter following) about the comparison of the
Ministry with Marriage, which yet you have no leisure to answer, this whole
three years together, and upward.

And further you do not show any utter and absolitte separation from the whole
Church of the Jews a great while after Christ: but the contrary is seen Act.
21.23, 24, 26. though from some one or two synagogues they separated after full
experience of there obstinate and malicious resistance of the truth, which we
deny not.

Touching the Conclusion.

IN the conclusion of my former Reply, to prove your utter separation from us
a Paradox: First I alleged all the reformed Churches: For who knows not,
but they all hold Communion with us as Churches of God? yet you dare either
deny this, or utterly pervert it. You tell us of your Answers to Master
Cartwright and Master Hildersham that are unanswered. If they by like to this
your answer here, verily they do wisest in yielding silence to such friuolus
and wandering words.

Secondly I alleged your selves to have acknowledged heretofore, That our
public doctrine allowed, would and did make many of us true Christians. You
too shamefully deny it. And say you are for witnessing against it, imprisoned,
banished, etc. Whereto I answer, that if for these things you are troubled, I
know none can pity you. And because you say none of you ever acknowledged it,
I will therefore repeat your own words.

Mr. BARROW (in his last answer in writing to Mr. Gifford, entitled, A few
observations to the reader of Mr. Giff last Reply: Sect. 4.) says thus:

The next calumniations whereby Mr Gifford indeuoreth to bring us into hatred
with the whole. Land, is, That we condemn all the persons both men and women
of England, which are not of our mind, and pluck them up as tares: wherein me
thinks he does us open wrong, if not against his own conscience, yet against
our express writings every where, etc. Have we not commended the faith of the
English Martirs, and deemed them saved, notwithstanding the false offices and
great corruptions, in the worship they exercised, not doubting but the mercy of
God, through their sincere faith to Jesus Christ extended and superabonnded
above all their sins seen and unseen. And what now should let, that we
should not have the same hope, where the same precious faith in synceritie and
simplicity is found? So that they neither neglect to search out the truth,
nor despise the truth when they see it, etc.

Afterward in the same Section.

The faithful servants of Christ (denying the whole constitution and
government of this Church of England) may justly deny the people whilst they
remain in that constitution to be members of a true constituted Church, yet
hereby not condemn them with any such peremptory sentence as Master Gifford
suggesteth, to cut them of from Gods election, Nota. From Christ.
or from Christ.

Mr. PENRIE (in his confession of faith, published in writing a little before
his death,) says thus.

The truth of doctrine touching the holy Trinity, touching the Natures and
Offices of Christ, Justifying faith, Sacraments, Eternal life, and the rest,
established by her Maisties Laws, and professed by her self, their Honors,
and such as have knowledge in the Assemblies of this land: J acknowledge from
my heart to be such, as if J mainteyned not the unity, and held not the
communion, of the same doctrine with them in these poinctes, J could not
possibly be saved: For out of the Communion of the true profession, which her
Majesty has established in these and the like truths, there is no hope of
salvation left: But join notwithding with the public worship in the
assemblies of this Land, I dare not, for the former causes.

J do moreover willingly confess, That many, both of the Teachers, and also
of the Professors within these Parish assemblies, have so embraced this truth
of doctrine, established and professed in this Land, as the Lord of his
infinite goodness, has granted the^ the favor, to show outwardly, many
tokens, whereby (in regard of the Lords election) I profess before men and
Angels, that I judge them to be members of that body whereof the Son of God
Christ Jesus is the head. Only herein the Lord be merciful unto them, (as to
my self in regard of my sins:) That they are not under that outward form of
government that Christ has left, etc.

And in his examination before Master Fanshaw, lately published by your selves
in print, he confesses the Churches of England to be the true Churches of
Christ.

And what say you, Master Johnson? Have you not affirmed this thing your
self, to me, and to Master Philips, namely touching your own self, when you
were of us, That then you doubted not, but you were a true regenerate
Christian. By virtue of what doctrine? By extraordinary revelation? Nay, but
by our public doctrine of our Church, when you stood and continued a
public Minister of the same. If you believed so of your self, (and that
truly) what lets but you may believe the like of many Thousands now?

Further where you say, my applying of the Martirs, is answered before. Let the
Reader judge. You show here, that some of them misliked the Hyerarchie. But it
makes stronger against you, seeing for all that, they them selves refused not
to communicate, and partake with them then, as true Christians: as Hoper, Bale,
Bradford, etc.

After where you say: though the reformed Churches, your selves, and the
Martirs, have thought otherwise then you now do: yet all this is no sound
proof against you. Yes in deed, that now you hold a Paradox, those witnesses
are sufficient for that: whereunto may be added, the whole Churches judgment
and practice, with all the ancient learned Fathers these 1300. or 1400. years
Chrisostom. Epiphanius, Nazia^zen. Hyerom. Austen. Ambrose, etc. They all have
thought, that under the Prelacie, and humane ceremonies, men may be true
Christians. Then these witnesses are sufficient, that your denial hereof, is a
strange and unusual opinion, that is, a Paradox.

Finally to try us, you propound a many of questions. But I leave all this
superfluous stuff to your self to be pondered. First let us clear this
present question, and your Reasons here about: Till then, we have no leisure
to meddle further. The Lord of his mercy open your eyes to see your extremity,
whereby you do greatly hinder, not help the truth, which you would seem to
suffer for. That you may indeed show your self as becomes a Christian Pastor,
not impossible to err, but no lover of error Not a striue^ for victory, but a
loves of ^^th.
(...), not regarding your own, but the praise of Christ in all things. AMEN.

FINIS.
A SHORT TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRVENES OF A PASTORAL CALLING IN PASTORS MADE
BY PRAELATES.

Against the Reasons and Objections of Master FRANCIS JOHNSON, with others of
the separation, commonly called Brownistes.

1599.

An Argument, showing the trunes of a Pastoral calling in Pastors made by
Prelates: Taken from a familiar comparison, gathered out of the confessions of
Master Johnson and others of the separation aforesaid.
The Argument of Comparison is this

AS a couple of ignorant people not contracting, but meaning to marry, and yet
thinking that unless a Priest marry them, their marriage is nothing, whereas
indeed their public accepting each of other makes the marriage: Now being
married, (though As themselves hold.
unlawfully) by a Priest, yet their marriage is true and lawful
notwithstanding.

EVen so, a Christian people, meaning to have a sufficient man to their Pastor,
yet thinking, that unless a Prelate do make him, he is no Pastor at all,
neither can be theirs. Notwithstanding, he being made a Pastor, (though As they
also do acknowledge.
unlawfully) by the Prelate; yet, by their mutual accepting and joining
together, he is now verily a Pastor, yea their Pastor, true and lawful.

H. JACOB.

Against the said Argument, were brought Seven Reasons by Master Johnson and
others: which do hereafter follow, together with Master Jacobs Replies to
the same.
REASON. I.
F. John's.
FIrst, infidels, idolaters, profane and godles persons, may marry together,
with consent, and choice of each other, notwithstanding their prophanenes, and
their marriadge is therein lawful. But it stands not so with the choice of
Ministers in the Church, For 1. profane and godless persons (such as these
assemblies consist of) 2. never rightly gathered together according to Gods
holy ordinance, 3. remaining in subjection and bondage to their false and
Antichristian officers and courts, consisting of all sorts of people, etc. are
not capable of choosing, or joining unto a true Minister in this estate (as
infidels may marry in the same estate). There fore the comparison will not
hold, neither is such choice of a Minister by such people lawful.

But these assemblies consist of such people, etc. Ergo, etc.

H. Jacob
THe strength of this Reason stands in these last words: But these
assemblies consist of such people, 1. profane and godles persons, 2. never
rightly gathered together according Gods ordinance, 3. remaining in subjection
and bondage to their false and Antichristian officers and courts: Ergo, etc.
These three accusations avail nothing at all.

Christian people, but he, of assemblies consisting of profane and godles
persons. If he say, our assemblies all and wholly are such: That is false. If he
say, some are: Of them we speak not. If he say in all and every one of our
assemblies there are some, yea many open profane and godles persons. 1. It is
too bold a saying, and without knowledge to speak so of all. 2. If it were
true, yet it were false to say, our assemblies consist of such, or to think
that whole companies of Christians by such commixtures are made unholy,
profane, and godles: which is contrary to these scriptures, Mat. 23, 2, 3.
Luke 2.21, 22. and 1.6. Act. 21.23, 26. 1 Samuel 2.17. and cap. 1. verse 3.9.
Revel. 2.20, 21, and 3.1, 4. 1 Cor. 3.3. Gal. 3.1, 2. and 4.11, 16. and 5.4.9.

[that our assemblies were never rightly gathered together at the first
according to Gods ordinance.] I deny it: especially touching many famous
Congregations in the Land, where the gospel was not unknown before the
Queens commaundiment came to urge the^ to receive this doctrine. And if the
manner of receiving it then, in those hard and doubtful times and hazardous
beginnings, were not so perfect nor so exact, as should have been, yet we may
see by the example of 2 Chro. 30.17, 18, 19, 20.
Hezechias, and 2 Chro. 33.15, 16, 17.
Manasses, and Zepha. 1.4, 5. and 3.1. Ier. 3.6. etc. and 4.1. etc. and 5.1.
etc.
Josias reformations, That God imputes it not to such godly and zealous
restorers, the pillars and ground of the truth in those days. If you say, the
untaught people then suddenly receiving the gospel by commandment, not by
hearing, could not believe at the first, though they professed, and therefore
at the first were no true Christians nor Churches? I answer, 1. Though many
received the Gospel for the commandments sake, yet who can say, That now
they all generally wanted all knowledge, and all faith? The word then having
been in many places taught, very many books scattered, much conference, daily
consultations and disputations used, and the blood of the Martirs having
preached so loud, and so lately before. 2. It was not so sudden. There was From
November the 17 till Midsomer following.
more then half a year, for the people to hear, learn, and consider, before
the commandment came. So that it can not be counted mere force and
compulsio^, that at the beginning of our Queens reign, brought us to the
truth? 3 I would know, They condemn not (I hope) all reformation commanded
and compelled by the Magistrate, 2 Chro. 34.32, 33. and 33.16. and 15.13.
Seeing therefore, the assemblies thus openly, and advisedly, submitted to the
proclaimed truth, who sees not, but they confessed therein their former
errors, and professed their present faith, and undertook a new life from that
which before they led, though happily not so formallie, nor so perfectly as
were to have been wished.

But they received all together, Papists, Atheistes, ignorant men, and all
dissolute livers, into one communion and fellowship.



That which disanulleth not a Church gathered and settled, That disanulleth it
not in the gathering and beginning.

But such mixtures do not disanull a Church gathered and settled, as appears
above in the scriptures quoted against the First Accusation, Mat 23. Luke 2.
etc.

Therefore such mixtures did not disanull our Churches then in their beginning.

[our Assemblies remain in obedience to the false Antichristian officers,
etc.] Let this be our general sin: yet there is diversity of sins. All
are not of like detestation before God, nor of like consequence against us. I
say not that any sins are venial: but I say, All sins by their nature are
mortal, yet do they not al alike abolish us from Christ, nor deprive us of the
glory of God. Now this sin of outward church orders is not of the most
heinous, nor extremest disobedience. There are sins against the 1 Cor. 15.3,
3. 4. Ro^. 4.25. 1 Cor. 3.10, 11 12, 13, 14.
foundation, and there are sins that stand with the foundation: ibid.
"wherein men living and dying ignorantly without particular repentance, may be
saved. Such were the sins of the Jewish church and estate in Christ's time,
and after, as Beza in Acts 15.20.
some think, even till their Temple and City were destroyed, though they did
personally hate and persecute Christ. Such also was the sin of the ancient
declyning Bishops, Epiphanius, Augustine, Chrisostom, Leo of Rome, etc. No
less was in ours of late Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, etc. in King Edward days:
and no greater is now in ours presently, especially touching our Churches. and
Ministers too, generally. If you say, we are all convicted now, and sin
against our co^scie^ces, as they did not in those times: It is utterly false,
and a palpable untruth. Whosoever knows any thing in our church estate
generally, must needs see it, that this poinct touching the Hyerarchy, is not
acknowledged even of ignorance in a thousand to one: many holding (and not of
the simplest) this present government to be the only true and right kind: but
all men almost, to be indifferent, and lawful: very few indeed, and scarce to
be found, yt see it to be merely naught, or as you term it, wicked and
intolerable. And in King Edwards time, whosoever considers, shall find,
that the godly learned Protestants then, were not utterly ignorant of this
poinct of reformation, and yet sinned not against their conscience in bearing
with the times, neither were abolished from Christ. And surely touching the
Jews, they were all generally more convicted then, that Jesus was the Christ,
then we are now, that the Prelacie is of Antichrist: and yet they remained a
church still, because generally indeed, they were not plainly convicted. Thus
the^ this our sin is See the 2. sorts of fundamental sins, in the 2. Reply
to your 7. Reason before, page 48.
no way fundamental, it destroys not faith and Christianity in our whole
assemblies: Therefore they remain Christian people still, as I affirmed: not
all godles and profane, as he uncharitably speaks. O beware of rash and
hasty judging, even of one brother, Romans 14.3, 4, 13. how much more of such and
so many whole assemblies professing Christ in England? Woe be unto him which
curses, where God curses not, Number. 23.8. As also indeed that blesses, where
God blesses not. We desire you not to bless us in our evil, but we warn you,
not to curse us in our good: which indeed turns us not to any furtherance,
but to a great hinderance and stumbling block, stopping us from that sincerity
which else we should dravve nearer unto. Blessed is he that judges wisely (that
is without affection and partiality) even of him that is despised. Better it
is and more Christian like, even to offend in too much compassion and patience
(especially toward so many hundredth thousands, by whom we know naught save
good in this poinct) then to offend in too much rigor, and severity, and
unjust anger, Mat. 5.^2. Howbeit this were not indeed to offend, as has been
above showed. And briefly in two words, thus I conclude it farther, that.

That faith and religion taught in the book of Articles published 1562. makes
the people that believe and obey the same, true Christians: such as so living
and dying may be saved.

But our Church does so hold that faith,

Therefore they are true Christians.

The Proposition only is doubted. I had thought none so desperate as to deny
it: but lately I understand, they have denied it. Howbeit for answer, I refer
them, partly to that which here has been said before, and especially to that
which is replied to their Answer in the former Treatise: which being well
weighed, I doubt not but all indifferent, and Christian minds will
acknowledge, our public church assemblies in England to be true Christians.

REASON. II.
F. John's.
SEcondly the Priest does not celebrate or pronounce any marriage without the
married first give their consent.

But the Prelates make Ministers without and before the peoples consent.

Therefore the comparison holds not.

H. Jacob
FIrst it is very vain to make this any matter, viz. the peoples co^senting
either before or after the Prelates ordeyning. For whether before or after, it
is in nature and value all one: They in their ignorance having respect only to
the Prelates act. And if it were so, that the Priest should sometimes marie a
couple, the Maid being merely enforced, and denying consent, yet not striving
nor resisting: and a while after shall willingly agree and like: Out of
question there is now true wedlock between them. Even so the case is betwixt
the Church and the Minister. 2. But what will they except here against those
Pastors amongst us, that were first chosen by the people, they first professing
their consent, and are after instituted and inducted by the Praelat. Many are
thus called amongst us: and the most have the peoples consent even together at
their first inducting: at least wise they have soon after, by the peoples
submitting and mainteyning them even presently. 3. Lastly in a word, where he
says "the Praelats make Ministers without and before the peoples consent. We
Beza in Act 14.23. Fenner against Bridges, Page 148.
affirm, that they make not the Pastor at all indeed and in truth; but only
supposedly. It is the Churches consent that makes him truly, whether before or
after the Bishop, that skylleth not. If any think Imposition of hands to be
simply necessary to the being of a Minister: that is also an error, and
cannot be proved.

REASON. III.
F. John's.
THirdly the people cannot choose their Minister unless the Prelate either
before or after make him Minister.

But a couple may choose each other whether the Priest will give his consent or
no. Therefore, etc.

H. Jacob
1 WE deny your saying, the peole cannot choose. They can choose, They have power
in Christ, as being Christians, though they know not their right therein. The
ignorance of this simply, does not cut us of from Christ, nor from this holy
privilege: no more then the blind Papists have lost their right and power of
marrying together without a Priest, because they are ignorant of it. 2. Again
where he says, But a couple may choose each other whether the Priest will
marry them or no: Let him mark: That we speak of blind Papists that think
that the Priest is the whole absolute and necessary marriage maker. If he say,
even such have right and power to marry, though they be far from knowing it,
and farther from practizing; Then let him grant the like in choosing a
Minister, to our Christians: for so the comparison imports, Else if he mean
those words of others that be me^ of knowledge, Then he fights with his
shadow: he touches not our question.

REASON. IIII.
F. John's.
IF any that by the word of God are not capable of marrying together (as
brother and sister, etc.) do notwithstanding consent to take each other for
man and wife: yet are they not therefore lawful man and wife.

So if a people and some man that by the word of God cannot choose one another
as Pastor and Church in their estate (such as now is in this land) do
notwithstanding consent to take each other: yet are they not therefore lawful
Pastor and Church.

H. Jacob
THis is wholly presumed and from the Question also. Like to the first Reason,
and has the same answer as is made to the first accusation there. He reasons
against people not capable of a Pastor; And we speak of true Christians
which are alvvayes capable. He does ill therefore in comparing this action to
marriage between brother and sister; who indeed cannot marry. Happily he may
likelyer compare it to a couple that have lived both of them vvantonly:
Afterward they marry together, and this marriage if self they use not
soberly, nor temperatly. Howbeit for all this, I profess these two are truly
man and wife notvvithstanding: Now even so our Churches and Ministers, etc.

REASON. V.
F. John's.
THe Priests joining of the parties does not make them man and wife at all,
but only the parties mutual consent.

But contrarily, in the present ecclesiastical co^stitution of England, the
Prelates ordination makes the minister, and not the peoples choice at all.

H. Jacob
THe Second Proposition we here flatly deny. It is ansvvered in our last
words against the 2. Reason.

REASON. VI.
F. John's.
IF a woman consent to a man that is another woman's husband, they are not
therefore man and wife.

So if a people consent to a false Minister, they are not therefore true Church
and Minister.

H. Jacob
THis is answered as before in the Fourth Reason. It carries some likelihood
indeed, and some reason against Pluralities, but nothing any further.

REASON. VII.
F. John's.
IF when a man and woman give consent each to other, the man do afterward
give his body to another, and so commit adultery: Then is the marriage knot
broken.

So, if after a people have chosen a man to be their Minister, he give himself
to another and a false Ministry, and so commit spiritual whoredom: Then is
the former knot broken.

H. Jacob
THe taking of orders from a Praelate, after consent given to a Miniter by a
people, is not like adultery in marriage: especially whereboth Pastor and people
are simply ignorant of that error. Therefore that disanulleth not, as adultery
does the wedlock. So this Reason is much like to the last before, and the
answer not unlike to that of the Fourth Reason likewise. For

That which at the First makes not incapable: That same afterward does not
dissolve.

But this error makes not christians incapable at the first: as there is
showed, and in the Third chiefly:

Therefore neither can it dissolve afterward the Covenant between the Pastor
and the people.

This last Treatise, has remained in their hands, these Three years and more,
unanswered.

FINIS.

