A TREATISE OF THE SVFFERINGS AND VICTORY OF CHRIST, IN THE work of our
redemption: Declaclaring by the Scripturs these two questions: That Christ
suffered for us the wrath of God, which we may well term the pains of Hell,
or Hellish sorrows. That Christ after his death on the cross, went not into
Hell in his Soul. Contrary to certain errors in these points publicly
preached in London: Anno 1597.

1598.

That Christ suffered for us the wrath of God: which we may well term the
pains of Hell, or Hellish sorrows.
TO declare faithfully the sufferings of Christ our Savior which for us he
endured, and how he conquered the power of Hell and Satan to free us
theref^o^, is a matter for all Christians (if any other) most worthy of
handling, and necessary to be known: Especially now seeing of late great injury
has been done by no mean Prelate, to this poinct of christ^a^ verity, in
such wise as no Protestant has ever done the like heretofore, neither has
brought more offense to the godly, or disquietnes to the Churches in England.
Therefore I could not forbear, though all other, who are meeter then my self,
keep silence, but imploye my poor talent in this profitable service for the
church of Christ, committing the whole success unto God, whose holy cause I
labor to clear from all the corrupt fancies and vain imaginations of men in
this behalf.

The whole controversy has in it 2. points 1. That Christ suffered for us the
wrath of God. 2. That after his death on the cross, he went not into Hell in
his soul.

The former of these is proved most soundly and evidently diverse ways. First
by a general reason taken from the sufferings of the soul of Christ, then by
other sp^^^^l and more immediate arguments, as afterward by Gods grace shall
well appear.

Now then for the former thus we say and constantly auowe: Christ Jesus did
suffer in his whole manhood for the red^mption and a^^faction of our sins: A
general reason that Christ suffered the wrath of God.
yea he suffered proper^^e and immediat^^e in his soul, and not in his fl^^he
only.

Therefore he suffered for us the wrath of ^OD. This consequent here is
manifest and can not be denied. For what could tou^he the soul of Christ
immediately and prope^ly as he suffered and satisfied for our sins, but the
displeasure and ^ust anger of God alone? What else can Christ's soul be subject
unto properly and immediately in regard of sorrow and affliction, and that ^^^r
sin? But this sequel is not doubted of, or if it be, we shall have occasion
afterward to declare it further, The antecedent, or first part of the former
general reason is denied and confidently rejected: yet ^^ve falsely by Gods
help, by that which follows, shall easily appear.

Wherein it behooves, that first we consider, how we mean and hold this
assertion, which is namely thus: That Christ suffered in his soul not only by
Sympathy or joint feeling with his body and arising from his body. How we
mean that Christ suffered in his soul.
It is true in deed that so he suffered in his soul, as also mutuallie in his
body by Sympathy from his soul, for his body else had been sensele. and dull,
and without all feeling. But here we mean that his soul had further some
sufferings that were proper and immediately risinge in and from the soul: Such
as the flesh of Christ no vvayes caused, neither could fully apprehend. As
fear, sorrow, temptation, anguish of mind, a bitter sense of Gods ^ust and
severe wrath, and all these directly for sin which he undertook on him self
for us.

The antecedent o^ the general reason proved.
My soul is every way sorrowful perilypos unto death, or compassed with
so^^^wes unto death. None will deny but my Soul here is properly the very
humane soul of Christ. Also it is plain, this grievous passion was in his
soul immediately and properly, not growing by any hurt of his flesh, seeing
then his body was not touched with any smart. And lastly that this was for
the bitter punishment of our sins which he now directly sustained in his
soul, and yet was further to sustain, we ought not by any reason to doubt.
For let us mark: the whole text here, and in all the Evangelists does show
that the only matter he was now going about, and especially troubled withal,
was the very sufferings of him self as man for us, the full sacrifice and
sin offering of our redemption. Nothing else now appears in the text to have
disquieted him. Wherefore also he says, Father, save me from this hour. Let
this cup pass from me: if it be possible let this cup pass from me. What
if he also had care and compassion for his countrymen the Jews? What, if he
forgot not his Apostles and poor Church, now to be left behind as sheep
amongst Wolfes? Does that hinder or diminishe this his passion for sin? Or
do not these words and other circumstances of the text declare, that now
chiefly, yea only, he was troubled about his suffering for our sin. His care
of his Apostles and Church he unburdened him self of, John 17 a little before
he entered into this conflict of his passion John 18.1. That for Jerusalem and
the Jews he was particularly touched withal not long before, Mat. 23 37.
and cap. 24. So that those affections do seem there to have their proper place.
And the time after appears, namely in the garden and on the cross to be lest
chiefly, yea only, for his sorrows and sufferings for the redemption of
sins. Thus then let no man think it presumption to say expressly what did
now in this sort grieve the Lord, and cause in him this heaviness. Him self
we see tells us expreslie, therefore we may expreslie say it: This his hour
of suffering for sin, This cup of affliction and sorrow which now he felt
and was to feel yet further, caused him so to mourn and fear. because of his
bodily death and torments which were now near at hand. Or else he feared in
deed Gods wrath toward him for sins, but he felt it not. I answer, 1. That
former is not so: Answer.
It is no less then impious to affirm that only his bodily death and outward
pains should so terrify and dismay him: as in the next more special
arguments we shall further declare.2. Again, he both feared and felt Gods
anger for the sin of the world: as also in the said special arguments we
shall see further. But his observe now: yet this first general reason is
granted. If this in deed were fear of Gods wrath, then Christ suffered for
our sins properly and immediately in his soul, not in his flesh only.
I^p^, per^^^p^s, ^etaracta^, ^^^ambe^^tha^, ademone^, etc.
He feared, he had sorrow, astonishment, misery, and much anguishe of mind,
and that for our sins. Now whether this were only Fear or what so ever
more, this is clear and certain, Christ had these sufferinges in his soul
properly, and from his soul immediately, as being the sufferings for our
sins.

But for all this there is doubt hereof in some, because it is written, 1. Pet.
2.24.
He bare our sins in his body on the tree. Col. 1.20.
He reconciled us by the bl^^d of his cross. verse 22.
He reconciled us in the body of his flesh through death. Rom 7.4.
We are dead to the law by the body of Christ. Revel 5.9.
He redeemed us to God by his blood. 1. John 1.7.
The blood of Christ cleans^th us from all our sins. This is a constant
phrase throughout the scriptures, attributing our whole remission of sins to
the bodily sufferinges of Christ only and to his bloodshed, and not to any
thing of the soul. If all these pla^es of scripture should be figurative,
noting but the part for the while, Christ's body, when therein meant his soul
too, they are strange figures that run always so, Gods word never yielding
any one such proper speech thoroughout the scripture, that Christ suffered for
us in his soul. figurative in deed: they do note but the part for the
whole, sometimes Christ's body, sometimes his flesh, sometimes his blood, when
the whole man Christ is plainly understood consisting both of a body having
flesh and blood, and also of a soul. Otherwise we must say, These very
scriptures before mentioned, are at open jar in themselves, if we take them
literally. Some say his body, some his blood cleanses us from all sin. Again,
his body on the tree only did bear our sins, and his sufferings of all his
life before were not meritorious nor helpful at all for us, not his poverty,
not his shame, not his being rayled upon, nor any his persecutions before his
very death on the tree. For so these places found being literally and strictly
understood: which how false it is. I need not, I hope to de^lare. In like sort
it is said, The figure that saves us is Baptism. What? Therefore does baptism
save v^ only? Does not the ^^rd ^^^per* Does not the word prea^hed also* Th^^^
^d was made flesh: was it only made flesh and not a humane soul to? In the
days of his flesh (...) ^ffr^^ ^p prayers and supplicationes with st^^nge
cries. Was it not in the days when he had both flesh and soul also? He too^e
not the ^^^le of Angels b^t he took the s^^^ of Abiah* He took humane flesh
and soul to, (...) he n^^* I (...) sin ra^gne in your mor^all b^^yes. I hope
he me^neth ^^^ther in our soule^ nor bodies (...) o^fering thou woul^est not
have* but a b^d, thou ^^dayned me: yea both a bo^^ and a soul too. The
s^rn^^ator ^^^^ed (...) our body, and no less su^ely against his soul also.
It were infinite to show you the phrases of scripture, which in speaking of the
outward part only, yet always they signify the ^^^re and whole m^^. The
reason whereof, especially in Christ's suff^^ng, does seem to be this* because
the wounds of his b^dy and sheading forth of his blood, are most aparant and
evident to sense: and therefore are they so commonly named in stead of the
whole sufferinges, the rest whereof were not open to our senses. Again,
because his bodily death on the cross, and his sheading of blood there, was
the final accomplishment of all his sufferings what soever. Therefore this in
stead of all the rest is usually named, and yet the rest never excluded.
Howbeit for all this, note further, that we read the very phrase literallie
further, that we read the very phrase literallie and expreslie Isa^ 53.10. He
made his soul sin, or a sacrifice for sin: The full meaning whereof shall be
more declared by and by in the next proof of this general reason. Also where
it is said, He was Moducea.
broken for our sins: it can not be properly meant of Christ's body, his
flesh and bones. For it is written, not a bone of his was broken: Wherefore the
meaning is, The sorrows and torments of his soul did bruise and break him to
pieces, as the truth shows he was, and became for us in deed. If any reply,
The nails and spears did break him: Nay, they pierced him. But in no sort
can that be called breaking or brusing to pieces, as the former word does
plainly signify.

Further it is objected,

I answer, Answer.
First the proposition is false, taking it generally. The carnal sacrifices
of the Jews signified that which they were apt to teach and signify: but not
any further. Therefore they signified that the redemption of men should have a
true bodily sacrifice with the sheading of blood: yea what soever was carnal
and sensible in it might be signified by them. But not the inward and invisible
things that did necessarily concur in and with this bodily sacrifice: for
the which those carnal types were altogether unfit, neither had they any
resemblance together. As first the meritorious sacrifice must have of
necessity the Deity comoyned in person with it. This sacrifice must be the
body and blood of God: or else it could never satisfy, nor deserve the favor
of God for the world. But the sacrifices of beasts could not prefigure this
personal union of God and man in the true sacrifice together. Therefore they
signified not all the necessary points in the meritorious sacrifice. Again
those beasts sacrifices could not prefigure the immortal and reasonable soul
of Christ: which it was necessary he should have to be our redeemer. Thirdly
it was necessary that this sacrifice of our full redemption, should not only
dye, but also revive again: even the victorious resurrection of his flesh from
death was necessary. As it is written, He died for our sins, and rose again
for our justification. But the sacrificed beasts neither could nor did
signify any such thing. Therefore the proposition before is false, The old
sacrifices of the jews were not resemblances and figures of our whole and
absolute redemption by Christ. They served only to represent such parts thereof
as they were apt and fit to teach and signify. Secondly, I deny the assumption
before going also. The Jews sacrifices, that is certain of them, did signify
more then the bodily sufferings only, they set forth the sufferinges of the
soul of Christ also. In the 16. chapt. ^^ (...) uit. verse 5. we have a sin
offering consisting of Two Goats, the one slain, the other the escape goat:
yet both of them a (...) for sin, as the text speaks. What does the slain
Goat figure but the body of Christ slain, the escape goat the soul which
also bare our sins, and was a sin offeringe, but yet suruiued and dyed not
as the body of Christ did. The scape-Goate here surely must of necessiue
signify the Soul or the Deity of Christ. The Deity it can not signify,
because that can not be a sin offering. Therefore it signifies that the
immortal Soul of Christ was a sin offersage: and being a sin offering, or
a sacrifice for sin, it did properly bear our sins, and suffer for our
sins.

If any say, This scape-goate suffered not as the slain goat did, but was
sent away free and untouched. Thus then the Soul of Christ must escape and not
suffer when his body suffered.

I answer. The scaping of this Goat may signify the Souls immortality,
which died not when the body dyed. But that it suffered in that kind which
the soul can suffer, it is manifest by this, that it was an offering or
sacrifice for sin, and bare our sins as well as the body, which is like the
slain Goat, which sensibly and apparauntlie died. Again, the sacrifice in
Leuit. chap. 6 called the Holocaust, or whole burnt offeringe, does lively
prefigure the sufferinge of the whole Manhood of Christ for our sins, that is
both in his soul and body. For in other sacrifices certain parts of the
sacrifices were reserved and not burnt. But in this the whole, and every whit
being chopped and cut into pieces, it was altogether put into the fire, and
burnt: and so it was by a special name called The whole burnt offering. Even
so, not the body only, but also the Soul of Christ, even every whitt, of his
humanity, was burnt and consumed in the fire of affliction, as a perfect
Holocaust and a whole burnt offeringe for our sins.

By this we may easily see the answer to a like objection of the Sacraments
of the new Testament: but the bodily sufferinges of Christ: We are to answer
as we did before. These are given of God to the Church to teach and represent
that which they are apt and fit by their nature for, They are bodily and
earthly elements: and therefore fit to set forth bodily and aparant effects
in Christ: they can not set out the spiritual and invisible effects in him.
And yet the ceremony of breaking the bread. which is to show forth how
Christ's body was bro^sor us, it can not belong properly to the body, but to
the soul, and to the body by sympathy with the soul, as is before declared.

Isay 53.10. The Lord will break him and make him subject to infirmities, when
he shall make his soul sin, that is to say, a sacrifice for sin. Here
first we may note a plain express phrase, the very letter sounding that his
soul was made sin, or a sacrifice for sin: Neither is there any urgent
reason why soul here should be so figured or disfigured rather, that the
humane soul should be wholly excluded. I deny not but his soul here does
signify him self, that is his humane nature intierlie and wholly. And that may
be notably showed by comparinge the phrase in the Apostle to the very same
purpose, 2. Cor. 5.21. He has made him sin for us which knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Here that which the
Prophet means saying, He made his soul sin, the same the Apostle means
saying, God made Him sin for us. That is to say, him self wholly as man, not
any one part of him only. And this is literal. If any yet doubt, how
Christ was made sin for us in his soul, you may plainly see here in Paul.
For he compares Christ's being sin for us who knew no sin, and our being
the righteousness of God in him, No justifying righteousness.
who have * no righteousness in our selves. As if he should say In like manner,
He has borne our sins, as we have received his righteousness. But we attain
the righteousness of GOD by him both in our souls and bodies: So likewise then,
He was made sin for us, both in his soul and body. Otherwise this similitude
or comparison were uneven, and namely short on his part, which ought not to
be. Therefore surely, he was made sin for us (here in Paul) and his soul
was made sin (in Esaie,) signifies He himself was, that is entirely in
both parts he was a sacrifice for sin, even his soul and body. Esaias, He was
broken, does likewise prove, as I have enough declared thereof before.

Thirdly, I prove this general reason from 14. Because the children took
part of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part with the^, that
he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is the
Devil. 15. And that he might deliver all them, which for feate of death were
all their life time subject to bondage. 16. I or he in no forte took on him
the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham. 17 Wherefore it behooved him in all
things to be made like his brethren, etc.
Heb. 2. where the end and reason why Christ took on him the nature of man,
i^ plainly opened. He is said verse 16. not (...) have taken the Angels
nature, but man's: even for this very cause and purpose, that he might suffer in
that nature which he assumed. and by suffering in it he might save it. Now he
assumed (all men know) our humane soul as well as our flesh, and he saved our
soul as well as our flesh, ergo he suffered both in soul and in flesh: and the
Angels nature he would not assume nor suffer in it, because he would not save
it. This reason is better concluded thus: If he assumed our whole humane nature
to this very end and purpose that he might suffer in it, and by suffering in
it, save it: then he also suffered both in body and in soul. But this is true,
He assumed our whole humane nature to this very end and purpose, that he
might suffer in it, and by suffering in it, save it. Ergo this is true also,
that he suffered both in soul and flesh. Here only the assumption can be
doubted. It conteyneth in it three points.

1. He assumed our whole humane nature. 2. That which he assumed he did assume
to this very end and purpose* that he might suffer in it. 3. That by suffering
in it, he might save it.
These three points being proved, the whole Assumption before is evident and
firm. But they are all proved in these verses of Heb. 2. as the First, verse,
14, 16; 17. Neither does this let, that he speaks, namely but of flesh and
blood, verse. 14. and of the seed of Abraham verse 16. It can not be doubted
but these phrases are set down synecdochicos, the part for the whole: and so
the Author means here, he affirmed the whole humane nature. The second is
proved verse 14, 15, 17, 18. The third is proved verse 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

sympathy or joint feeling from his body, according to the course of nature in
him: but not as properly making to man's redemption, and so this to the Hebrews
here is to be understood.

Nay: that has no reason in it. properly and immediately, even for the very
purchasing of our redemption thereby. Otherwise he had no need to assume
both, but either the one part or the other. I say as the proper and immediate
suffering in one part of our nature only, had been sufficient to save us
wholly, then there was no simple necessity that Christ should assume both
parts. For if God so would, and nothing but natures perfection and sufficiency
had bin respected, then the assuming of one part only and the suffering in
it, by this pretended reason, might have been able to have saved us wholly
thorough the infinite excellency of that person having the Divine nature
conjoined with it to supply the insufficiency of the Humane single part,
either in doing or suffering. Thus Apollinaris heresy will enter at this gap.
Apollinaris Heresy.
He held that Christ assumed humane flesh in deed, but not any humane soul.
For it needed not, said he: His Deity being sufficient to be in steed of a
soul in supplyinge unto it all efficacy for natural operations, and
consequently so far to give assistance to the Flesh that it might be able to
do all things for our redemption without the soul, only through the help of
the Godly power joined therewith: As namely it could quicken it, and make it
move, and live, and have knowledge, and feeling, etc. Therefore his flesh
only thorough the quickening and moving of his Godhead might do the works of
righteousness, and suffer feelinglie the pains sufficient for our justifying
and sauinge: and all this without a humane soul. So that the soul should be
superfluous and needles, which should properly do nothing in the work of our
redemption. And if it were superfluous and needles in Christ, how shall we hold
that he had any at all. Which blasphemy God forbid. Therefore it is vain to
reply, and very false, Heb. 2.14 etc.
that here * is meant, that Christ suffered in soul by sympathy only, or a
natural suffering, when as this suffering properly did not make to our
redemption, nor was absolutely necessary to make Christ's Flesh to have life
and sense: the Souls immediate and proper suffering was necessary to make it a
ransom for sin, and therefore we conclude that here this is specially
signified.

Moreover they object: not by our souls but only by our flesh which only we
derive from him: Therefore Christ only by his flesh and not by his soul has
procured satisfaction for us. proposition. By the same instrument Adam did not
propagate sin into us by which Christ satisfied for us. For Adam propagated
and derived sin into us, only by the flesh (supposing now that our souls are
immediately infused by God, and come not from our parents.) But Christ satisfied
for us both in his soul and flesh. Wherefore in this sense we deny the
proposition as being utterly false. And in steed of this false argument I
return against it this reason better grounded and of certain truth. That
whereby Adam first and we ever since do most properly commit sin, by the
same has Christ our second Adam made satisfaction for our sin. But Adam
first and we ever since m^st properly commit sin in our souls, our bodies
being but the instruments of our Souls, and following the souls direction
and will.

Therefore Christ in his soul chiefly and most properly made satisfaction for
us. Against this conclusion there can not by any reason, be any denial All
which as in it self it is most certain, so also it may well be gathered and
grounded on the Apostle: Romans 5.19.
Like as by one man^ disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience
of one shall many also be made righteous. Where though chiefly the Apostle
compares Adams disodedience with Christ's obedience as both do reach unto us:
yet it is plain he does jointlie signify the Subject also of their
disobeying and obeying, that is their soul, wherein they properly wrought
these things which did reach even unto us. So that hence wereason thus:
Wherein Adam disobeyed and Christ obeyed, by the same he satisfied for us and
made us righteous. But Adam disobeyed God and Christ obeyed principally in the
soul. Therefore principally and chiefly in his soul Christ satisfied for
us, and made us righteous. The proposition only is in question, which here is
plainly gathered from the Apostle: and so both our Assertion is proved, and
their proposition before confuted. Now all this we answer grau^ting that men's
souls are not derived by propagation from their parents. Which yet if any
affirmed, there could follow no impiety nor absurdity: neither reason nor
religion can well overthrow it. And thus also their assumption before is
flatly denied. Howbeit for my part I will not fall into this question here,
being very difficult and not simply necessary, Whether our souls come by
generation, as the body d^eth, or no. Because I content my self with the
opinion of the most at this present, who being excellent learned and godly men
deny this point, and yet notwithstanding for all that the former assumption
may be denied also. For who knows not that the soul is the proper and
perperual Subject of sin? So that where there is no living soul, there never
was nor ca^ be any sin or disobedience at all. The flesh therefore being not
capable of sin and disobedience, but by the soul and from the soul (in the
which always it is properly inhaeren^, if it be at all:) And sin being
properly a spiritual quality always, and no corporal pollution: it will
follow that Adam propagated sin into us by our souls and not by our flesh
only, Zanchius de Oper. D^.
whether our souls come by propagation, or infusion, or how so ever. Yet if
any stick at this, how sin can be derived in propagatio^ by and in the
soul, if the soul be not derived also. Let us not be curious in this hard
point, which needs more Philosophy then Divinity to declare it: holdinge
fast this most evident truth, that sin is a proper and inseperable quality
of the soul, and can not be found being in any thing where a reasonable soul
is wanting. And therefore it is not derived from our parents in Flesh only but
in a Soul also, the Soul being ever united to the flesh when so ever it is
sinful. As for the fleshes sin, we deny that it sins properly: but
only it partaketh of sin from the soul by joining with it and depending on
it.

Further it is said, our bodies, say some, have no good at all by Christ's
death, no more then the bodies of Infidels: seeing we dye still as well as
they. But we have much good no doubt by Christ's bloodshed and mere bodily
death. Therefore the sin of our Souls is purged thereby. And if so, then
that his soul should also suffer for us, is superfluous.

The answer is: body satisfied for our bodies and his soul for our souls,
yea each of the^ in a several and distinct kind of satisfying: so that the
sufferings of the one profited not at all for the other, but his body for our
bodies and his soul for our souls. Which thing we never meant: but
acknowledge the sufferinges of the whole man Christ do satisfy for us wholly,
without any such precise partition. Nevertheless we know by Gods word, and do
affirm, that God in his justice regarded this proportion, that as we have
sinned both in our Bodies and Souls, so he that was made our propitiation did
purposelie and aunswerably suffer both in his Body and Soul. I say answerablie
to the Yea so far forth a proportion was held in all respects as the
possibility of things could admit: as anon after i^ further showed page 26.
27.
proportion of our sinning. Now if any with respect to this proportion do say,
Christ's Body suffered for our bodies, his Soul for our souls, then is it a
godly and wholesome saying, neither gives it any evil sequel at all. But
further then so, we mean not, we allow not. Secondly the proof of the first
proposition what Paradoxe is it, yea what impiety? Have our Bodies no good at
all by Christ's death, no more then the bodies of Infidells, because we Dye
still as well as they? What good our very Bodies have by Christ's death.
Let us consider this poinct: our Bodies have manifold benefits by Christ's
death. 1. Sin is not imputed against us at all, yea we are clothed with
Christ's righteousness both in our bodies and souls, when we are once
justified by faith in his death. 2. Sin is abated and mortified in us day
lie, and righteousness is begun and increased even in our bodies, by the
virtue of his Death and resurrection apprehended and applied by faith. 3 Our
bodies now have assurance of a glorious resurrection through his death and
resurrection. 4. Our bodies are made the true owners of our bodily food,
clothing, riches, and other comforts, whereof the Wicked are but usurpers. Yet
you will say, We dye still, as well as the Infidels. The scripture says Nay:
if you mean Death the curse of the law and the punishment of sin. He was
made sin for us, that is, He took the punishment of sin for us. And
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. 5.
Therefore death, yea bodily death, as it is the stipend of sin, as the
punishment of sin. So The proper punishment for sin is not laid upon two:
not upon Christ, and us also.
He has taken it from us, and us from it, and we are freed by his death: yea
unto us it is now clean changed, and not the same in it own nature as it was.
It is to us the passinge to heaven, and a thing to be prayed for. which the
punishment of sin can not be. I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, says the Apostle. And therefore the scripture takes the name of
death from this departure of the godly: He that believes in me shall not see
death: and he has now passed from death to life. Thus then, have not our
bodies any good at all, any more the^ the bodies of infidels? God forbid: This
is a most unchristian speech. If Christ's bodily death satisfy not for the
sin of our souls, then have we no good by it. First let us know distinctlie
what is meant here by Christ's bodily death. We mean his mere bodily death,
and that say we, being but a part of his most meritorious passion satisfied
not for our sins. The whole abou^dantlie satisfied, no one part or piece
thereof does satisfy: because what GOD has joined together, let no man so
wickedlie separate.

But you will reply, his only bloodshed, his bodily death merely was
sufficient, yea one drop of his blood, being the blood of the son of God,
was sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds.

That we deny: howbeit we reason not what it might have been, if GOD had so
appointed: we speak not thereof. We say only what it was, and is. That only
is sufficient in deed, which God has appointed to suffice for the satisfaction
of our sins. God has appointed both the sufferings of his soul and also of
his body. Likewise all those sufferinges in his life, as well as at his death.
Therefore all these ioinetlie are sufficient, but no part of them severally.
So that One only drop of Christ blood in deed not sufficient for the
redemption of the world.
to say one drop only of Christ's blood was simply sufficient for all our
sins: I hold it a presumptuous and ungodly speech, which so mainlie
crosses the appointment of God, and his revealed will. As is partly before
declared, and shall be hereafter more fully. Further it does flatly cross the
most perfect justice and the love of God: both which together, that is,
justice with love, and love with justice must needs stand entire and sound,
and not a whitt impaired in the mystery of our redemption. 1. Justice
requires that the same nature should satisfy for sin. which properly
committed the sin. But our soul properly, chiefly and immediately sinned.
Therefore Christ's Soul should properly, chiefly, and immediately pay the
price thereof.2. Justice, that an easier punishment should satisfy for a
greater sin, where it is possible that it may be had. But the Soul of
Christ possibly might have suffered properly and immediately. Therefore in
justice it must and did suffer, and not his body only.

If any say, very bod^lie sufferinges were so grievous and vehement, as that
they were comparable to the Souls sufferinges, if it had properly endured
any. flesh is not capable, neither of like righteousness nor sin, neither of
such joys nor punishements according to the capacity of the soul: there is
no equal measure between these. Now this prise equally in iu^tice must be
kept so far as it is possible in all satisfactions. Therefore here in this it
was kept: and how in this it was kept in deed, we shall more clearly perceive
in the other more special arguments hereafter following. Therefore it behooved
Christ's soul to suffer for us properly, as well as his body. If any say, love
to his most dear son to quit him of those extremest torments the sufferings
of his soul, and to admit a Dispe^sation in steed of Co^pensation, that is to
be satisfied with less then God might have exacted of Christ, and less then
he could have yielded. properly to the sifting of our more special arguments
hereafter, where we shall see into it further.2. Gods love must not impair his
justice, but both must stand entire and perfect together in our redemption, as
is above said, or else we destroy the nature of God. But by this devise gods
justice which might be executed by Christ's suffering in his soul, shrinketh,
and is shortened not a little, by reason of his love to Christ which inflicteth
not all the punishment (say they) which being due to our sins, Christ also as
man might feel, and his Father might lay upon him. Nay this, in this case is
no love but partiality. But Gods love in ordeyninge Christ's sufferings, what
it is in truth.
this is the love of God in this mystery, eue^ that which he shows unto us,
his justice being laid upon Christ. I say his love is to us: in that he has
translated our guiltines from us upon Christ his own sons person, and beaten
our fault upon his back. This is the most gracious and heavenly love of God to
be blessed and magnified for ever: and not that he spared his son in paying
our ransom more the^ the possibility of justice would that he should. For so
a less and a far lighter humiliatio^ of Christ then his bodily death also,
might as well have satisfied God for us. I say, what needed those most
pitiefull and woeful bodily wounds, and smarting stripes, so much bloodshed
being so precious, yea that undeserved sundring of body and soul by cruel
death? Nay more then this, what neded al those penuries, ignominies,
persecutions and other miseries in his life time, which he plenteouslie
sustained? When as some one or few such as Christ suffered, yea hi^ incarnation
only might have bin enough and enough meritorious in that divine person to
appease his fathers wrath, if in his fatherly love he meant to dispense and
lay less then the full weight and burden of our sins on him. All those Yea:
Neither the Love nor Justice of God could lay more ^n Christ then was
sufficient. But God laid more on him then the sheading of one drop of blood:
Therefore one drop was not sufficient.
superfluities of sufferinges which Christ did most painfully endure, how
stand they with this infinite love of God toward his most dear and
tenderly beloved son, if they needed not at all, if this his love might
dispense with his justice? We can never avoid this absurd and irreligious
consequent.

Now then will you reply and say. mere bodily death and bloodshead of Christ
not profitable, nor meritorious, if we will not yield them to satisfy for
sin. most profitable and meritorious, yea lesser sufferings then those, as
his poverty, his hatred, his shame, and ignominy, etc. these were all most
profitable and meritorious and satisfactorie also to our salvation. But as an
Army of soldiers do all together get the victory and not any one of them
asunder, and yet for all that each one singly is profitable in fight for the
attainment of victory: even so these Sufferings of Christ both of his body and
of his soul all together do sufficiently merit, but ^ach one in several is
profitable and helps thereunto.

If Christ were emptyed and abased to the uttermost that might be, then he was
afflicted in his soul properly and immediately as well as in h^^ body. But
he was in deed emptied and abased, ex^^^anited, to the utmost that might be.
Therefore he was affl^cted properly and immediately, yea most bitterly in his
soul. Where this word in the Apostle, he He (...) on c^^^e^. P^^^l. ^.^.
empt^ed him self, does testify, he was so far cast down in his
humiliation, that he was clean void of all comfort and dignity, before his
exaltation to joy and glory: Which by no means can be possibly true in
plains of speech, (that he was emptyed) if the soul were untouched, and felt
not such humiliatio^ at Gods hand whereof it was properly capable. And as for
an hyperb^de or phrase larger the^ the meaning is in this place, there is no
cause for any to dream thereof.

He Offered him self thorough the Eternali Spirit. Hebt. 9.15.
What signifies Him self here but his whole Humanity, even his body and
soul, to be the Sacrifice of redemption which he offered to GOD through the
virtue of his De^tie? Therefore seeing his soul also was the sacrifi^e, his
soul suffered also as w^ll as his body.

If both the body and soul of Christ were the Tabernacle of his Deity wherein
he performed his sacrifice for sin, Then he suffered properly as well in
his soul as in his body.

But the Tabernacle of Christ's Deity wherein he performed his sacrifice, was
both Heb. 8. and 9. Col. 2.9.
his soul and body. Therefore he suffered properly both in soul and in body.

Where we have to consider these points: 1. Touching the Jewish Tabernacle,
Moses shows that the typical Priests offered up therein their sacrifices for
reco^^^l^ation to God. 2. Christ's manhood is Heb. 8.2. and 9.11.
called by the holy ghost the Tabernacle of his godhead: that is, he makes it
answerable in Christ in truth to the typical Tabernacle, wherein the Jewish
priesthood sacrificed. 3. His manhood here is meant his whole and entire
manhood, not any one part thereof, but both his soul and body jointly, and the
same to be Heb. 9.11.
this Tabernacle of his Deity, Col. 2.9.
wherein the Godhead dwelt bodily. 4. That Christ offered up his sacrifice of
redemption in this Tabernacle, yt is, in his whole and entire ma^hood

So that hence our reason is good: If all these poincts be true, and if Christ
thus offered his sacrifice for sin both in his soul and body, then he suffered
properly both in his soul and body, and not in one part only. But al these
points are true, as our assumption imports, and are manifestly proved by
Co^paring Moses institution of that Jewish Tabernacle with this spiritual
application thereof, not to the flesh only but to the Heb. 8. and 9.
whole humanity of Christ.

Therefore the Conclusion is firm: Neither can any thing be stood at unless some
will say, Christ's flesh only and not his Soul also is the true Tabernacle
of the Godhead. Which amongst all wise Christians is to absurd.

Yet that of the Apostle is alleged and objected earnestly: Gal. 6, 1^
God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of Christ Jesus. Here eue^
all and the whole Sufferings of Christ are signified, for in nothing else would
Paul rejoice, but eue^ herein. Howbeit the Cross conteyneth not any
sufferings of Christ's Soul, his Soul was not crucified but his body only.
Therefore his Body only suffered, and not his Soul. I answer, personal
sufferinges of Christ, why might not the Cross conteyne his Souls
sufferinges, yea all the Sufferings of Christ's whole life? What lets but his
Soul might be said to be Crucified, and not the Flesh only? Any bitter anguish
and sharp affliction is commonly called, a Cross. And though Christ's Cross
properly and strictly taken was sensible and outward in deed, yet who sees not
but it is most familiarly and often used in a larger meaning, to conteyne all
Christ's grievous Sufferinges what so ever, when so ever, and how so ever: even
like as is observed before page 8. 9.
against the first objection against us in the beginning.2. Nevertheless I take
it to be clear, that this Text is further mistaken. The Apostle here speaks
not of the personal sufferinges of Christ, but of the godly, Christ's members
which they suffer for Christ's truth sake, which are also called Col. 1.24.
the afflictions of Christ. For having a little Gal. 6.12.
before noted the Falie teachers, which mingled and corrupted Gods truth,
because so they might better escape persecution, which they were loath to suffer
for the Cross of Christ, that is, for the sincere doctrine which commonly
Crux comos E^angely.
brings the Cross with it: Now Gal. 6.14.
here he presently Opposes his own upright and faithful affection, saying,
Nay, God forbid, that we who are the true Ministers of God, should joy in any
thing but in this that these men do abhor, that is, even ^n afflictions for
Christ and for his sincere truth, when God calls us thereunto: Which in
deed is a singular Act. 3.41.
note of the true Ministers of God. Also that which follows does show it
further: for here by nothing but the Gal. 6.15, 16. The world is crucified, etc
old man is Crucified in him, and dies more and more, and he grows and
increases forward in being a new creature, which verily is all in all. Here
then is no occasion to speak preciselie of the personal sufferings of Christ.
but he speaks of Christ's sufferings in his Members. Wherefore this is clean
mistaken.

Thus we see hitherto nothing lets, but our General Reason is evident by
the Scripture, That Christ suffered properly and immediately in his soul: and
consequently the Wrath of God for sin. Now it remayneh that we proceed to
the rest of our Arguments for this point.

More Special reasons, that Christ suffered the wrath of God.
The more Special Reasons proouing that Christ suffered for us the Wrath of
God, and even so the pains of Hell or Hellish sorrows, are now here to be
next considered.

But first it is good to mark these names Hell and Hellish sorrows. Because
all the advantage is picked against this most christian and comfortable
doctrine by them that love contention, only through the ambiguity and
doubtfulnes of this word Hell. We mean not that Christ suffered Hell properly,
What ^^^mea^^^ by Christ's suffering of Hell, or H^llish sorrows.
that is hell torments in the very place and condition of the damned. God
fordid. This gross cogitation never came into our minds, but only he suffered
for our-sinnes Gods severe Wrath and ^^^st vengeance, or rather the very
Effects of his just wrath and vengeance: which we affirm is equal to Hell it
self and all the torments thereof in sharpnes and vehemen^ic of pain. And
thus we say Christ suffered Hell or Hellish sorrows for us, and no otherwise.
Which we prove by many reasons.

should have suffered such paine^ are the effects of the intolerable wrath of
God (...) our sin. But Christ suffered the sorrows and pay^ for sin which
we should. Therefore Christ suffer^ for us such sorrows and pains, as are the
effecte^ the intolerable wrath of God for sin. The assumption only can be
doubted. But the prophet Esaias affirms it in plain words: He ba^e (...)
iniquities, and sustained our sorrows. He says not only, He sustained
sorrows, but he sustained Our sorrows: yea the text has it more
significantlie. Macobhenu sebhalam.
He sustained f^ur very sorrows, or our soroowes themselves, that i^, those
which else we should have borne. This conclusion can no ways be avoided.

The like to this is proved 2. Tim. 2.6.
He gave himself Antilytron hyper panton.
a price of redemption for us, which we else should have paid. For note that
antilytron is the price which when a Captive can not him self pay, then his
Prince o^ some other friend pays it for him, to redeem him withal. Now the
custom and use is, we know, that the enemy takes the same price for his
Captive of an other, which he would take else of the Captive him self, if he
were able to pay it. Even so the scripture here speaking after the common use
and custom of re seeming Captives taken in war, does mean that Christ's
price of redemption which he paid for us, was the same which else we should
have paid.

Gal. 3.13.
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was made a Curse for
us. What curse was he made for us? It is opened ver. 10. That curse which is
comprised in Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Moses: Cursed is every man that continues not in all things written in the
Law to do them. And more particularly in this very Gal. 3.13.
verse it is called the Curse of the Law. What is that? Surely the feeling of
Gods wrath for the tra^sgression of the Law. This curse therefore says Paul
Christ was made for us: yt is, he sustained for us even the feeling of Gods
wrath for our tra^sgressions imputed to him. curse here which Christ was made,
is not the same curse which is here called the curse of the law, and is
described in the words of Deuteronomy: Cursed is every one, etc: But this to be
another curse, a lesser and lighter, which Christ is here affirmed to be made
for us. curse. And if Christ sustained any curse for us, what curse could it
be? Not the curse of the law? or what was it? Not the curse of God? If it were,
then that is it which we speak of, and which else we should have borne.

curse, or paid the price yt we else should have paid, or sustained the very
sorrows that we should have sustained: for the^ he must have suffered
perpetually as the damned do, and as we should to, had we not bin redeemed by
Christ.

I answer. perpetually. if he suffered our punishment and had the just
sentence of our condemnation (I mean the full sha^p^e^ and vehemency of it)
translated and executed upon him. In sha^pnesse Christ suffered as the Damned
do, but not in continuance of sorrow.
That which he suffered might be for ye time incomparably sharp and terrible,
though enduring but a while and not perpetual. Wherefore this must be noted,
we co^^are not the sufferinges of Christ for us with the pains of the Damned
in regard of continuance: therein we never doubted n^r any Christian, but that
Christ suffered lesser, that is shorter time then we should, and the damned
do. Gods justice must stand? We answer. Yes: it may be, because his
perpetual sufferinges needed not. It was simply impossible that Christ should
suffer perpetually: for 2. reasons.
I say it must needs have been so: because simply it was impossible to be
otherwise. Which is most certain for have been saved, unless the Savior and
redeemer had ended his payment for us. But God had decreed to save some, whom
he gave his son to suffer for. Therefore it was impossible absolutely, but our
Saviors payment must end.2. He was very God himself that suffered: therefore
it was simply impossible, but he must overcome, and finish, and obtain his
purchase. Thus then in this one point of continuance in punishment our Savior
satisfied Gods justice, not by suffering strictly and exactlie that which we
should, but by suffering yt which in his person was fully worth (...)
answerable to ye perpetual continuance thereof, which in us else should have been
done. And al because of the simple necessity for which it must be so. If any
ask, the full smart of our sins, as there was, for him not to feel the full
continuance thereof. Seeing therefore it was possible for him to feel all our
smart, and seeing Gods strict justice requires it so, therefore it was so, and
it must be so. He suffered for us the full smart of our sins, which else we
should have suffered both in soul and body. Christ sols the Curse of God upon
for him us.


I urge then, Let it be here noted. Christ is said to be made a curse for us:
then he felt this curse. And before I showed this curse was Gods curse: and
what is that, but Gods wrath for sin. So then Christ is here proved to have
felt Gods wrath for sin.

If you reply: curse is not Gods curse, nor his wrath for sin: but only a
shame and ignominy amongst men for his bodily hanging on the tree: it was an
ignominious death, and that was all which is here meant, because every one else
is not cursed by God, that is openly executed: as here the Apostle expressly
has it. curse here which Christ bare for us, was only and merely but the
opinion of the people, holding it a sham to be executed to death openly. Will
any man of common reason say, that this is all the curse that Christ bare for
us, or that here is meant? Nothing but ye shame of the world? and no other
thing between God and him? To name this opinion is co^futatio^ enough. every
one is said to be cursed which hangs on the tree. Every one that so hangs
by the just sentence of the Law: wherefore it is here called the curse of the
law. Now then not every one that is hanged is cursed: for many innocents and
martyrs are hanged, who are most blessed. But every* one that is justly
hanged, is cursed. And so was Christ here. You will ask: What, was Christ
justly hanged on the tree? Yea verily, How Christ was in our person justly
cursed of God and executed for us.
by the just sentence of the Law was he put to death: neither let this be
strange to any Christian. Is not the Surety by the just sentence of the Law
condemned to pay his debt, for whom he has willingly and advisedly
undertaken? Is it wrong, is it violence for the Law to lay the penalty on
the Surety, when the debtor can not discharge it? But if it be mere and true
Justice, and no wrong, then was Christ by the just sentence of the Law hanged
on the tree, and so he bare in deed the true Curse of the Law. Not in respect
that he was an innocent man, nor as the Jews Magistrates had to do with him,
for so they did him most foul wrong that Crucified him: but as he took on him
our person as he was made sin for us, and as he stood forth in our name to
aunsvvere Gods justice, So was the just sentence of our condemnation according
to the justice of the Law inflicted on him, albeit the Jews savve it not.

Some will say, Curse here was only bodily: For so it is proved by He that
hangs on a tree.
those words of the Law, that speak only of a bodily execution. So it may
as well be concluded, Psalm. 40.6.
Psalm. proves not Christ's taking of a perfect body, but only of a Man's ears,
because there is mention of no more; Ears thou have prepared me. Yet the *
holy Ghost shows thereby that he had a perfect body, Heb. 10.5.
A body thou have or dayned me: yea in deed both a body and a soul. Therefore
both here and there and in many other such like places the Scripture notes a
part for the whole: and so here in out text a part of the just curse of the
Law, thereby meaning the whole: that is, hanging on the tree for the whole
execution of the Laws sentence against sin. For this bodily Hanging was a part
of the Laws Curse: and the Souls suff^ing is also by the Curse of the Law as
well as this of the body, and conteyneth the feeling of Gods wrath too, as well
as the simple Dying, the dissolution of the soul from the body: and is it
self Romans 5.12. and 6.23. Genesis 3.3.
the wages of sin no less, yea more in deed, then the bodily death, though
the bodily death be also. The which meaning is here easy and necessary to be
gathered, seeing such a term is given to this haging on the tree which
co^priseth the whole effect of all that I say, which also the holy Ghost says,
He was Cursed by it, yea made a curse. What does this else but signify the
wrath of God, the curse of God felt by him that was so hanged, as is above
showed: yea felt in his soul, seeinge this always lights more properly on
the Soul then on the Body. Therefore this hanging is here set as a part for
the whole execution of Gods just Curse. and argues the whole to be on him that
was executed, that is on Christ.

If it be objected, It is not possible that Christ the most holy and obedient
son, the most perfectly beloved of God, yea personally one with God him
self, that he in his Soul could feel Gods wrath. It is not possible, but God
must hate him on whom his wrath lighted* and in him must be found a conscience
of sin, but Christ knew no sin, neither in his mouth was found any guile.
And specially he, who^ God is wroth withal, can not be one person with God
himself. Seeing then a twofolde separation follows, 1 of the Deity from the
Humanity, 2 of Gods love and protection from Christ, and nothing remains but
hatred, horror of conscience, and utter darkness upon him, if he felt Gods
wrath and hellish torments: Therefore it is absurd, impious, haereticall and
blasphemous so to hold and maintain.

God defend: This curse causeles shall not come. they dig a pit for others
and fall into it them selves. But I answer, how could The wages of sin.
Death possess the body of Christ three days yea how could his body here be
accursed and made a Curse, which is a thing confessed? And yet I hope all this
while his body was not separated from his Godhead personally: even so neither
was his soul, neither need it to be disioyned from the Godhead, when it was
accursed for us, and sustained Gods wrath. And as the very body of Christ was
then not hated of God neither out of his protection for all that extreme
humiliation: Even so neithe^ was his soul. Therefore God always loue^ Christ,
he always embraced him, he always was knit to him in regard of his ow^
innocent person: and yet we may say (...) another regard, that is of our
person which he sustained being all sinful and rebellious, God cursed him, God
hated him God punished him justly, or rather ou^ sin upon him, til by his
sacrifice accomplished, he took it all away. So then (...) must well note, in
Christ were two person^ or conditions. 1. his own, wherein he w^^ most holy, In
Christ were a estates or conditions, or he sustained (...) persons: ours, and
his own.
most innocent, most beloved most blessed.2. He took our person on him, and
presented himself therein before his Father, and so he became by ou^ sins,
sinful, defiled, hateful, and accursed. The Surety though he be utterly
clear and obnoxious to none, yet by his suretyship he is a debtor and
obnoxious to the Creditour and the Law. If a tender ladye^ only child should by
some casualtie be all tombled in blood, or mire, and most stine-king filth: The
child so berayed and loth-some would breed great abhorring and lothing in the
delicate eyes of the dainty lady: yet the child's own person should be never the
less beloved of the mother, but rather the more if it may be. So such two
persons or conditions are found in Christ: according to one he was always
beloved, according to the other which he took upon him (whilst he had not
finished that office) he was justly accursed. And if we see not how this may
be in his soul, consider how it was in his body, (which neither is nor can be
denied) and then it will appear how his soul also might sustain for us the
curse of God, and yet no separation to follow.

But some will say: curse here is nothing else but simply to dye, the
dissolution of the body and soul: which the Genesis 3.3.
scripture says is a curse in deed: [In the day that thou shall cate of the
forbidden fruit thou shall dye the death.] Now this death be falls to the
decrest children of God still: that is, to dye. Therefore they also bear this
curse though they be clear from the vengance and wrath of God. Even so and no
otherwise is Christ here said to be accursed, only because he dyed.

Here we deny that the death of the righteous is properly a curse or a
punishment for sin. fault but not the punishment of sin. See also page 24.
Therefore death in the Godly is not properly a punishment of sin, nor
properly a curse of the Law. Indeed in it self and of it own nature it is
so, as it was first inflicted by the revenger of finne for sin: but in the
godly and faithful child of God it is not ^o: the na^u^^ and property of it
is clean changed (...) plainly a good thing and to be desired, 2. Paul
says, Death is to me a gaine^^ de^reto^ dissolved and to be with Christ.
Which he ought not to say if death were properly a cu^^ to him. And Christ
says such men sha^ not dye but pass from death to life. Where he^ denies
flat he the name of Death unto i^ even because the nature of it is change^ to
the godly. Neither ca^ it be strange the the self same thing may be clean
changed and of a diverse nature in diverse perso^^. To kill a man's self, in
Achitophel, was a foul: and monstrous sin: but in Sampson (...) was a most
glorious virtue, when he pulled the house upon his own and the Philistims
heads. Here the self same act To kill ones self is of a diverse nature in
diverse men, good in Sampson, but most wicked in Achitophell. And even as some
Physike in a^ sound man's stomach is poison, which in a sick man is
medicinable: and riches to the wicked are unjust possessions increasing their
judgment, but to the godly they are true blessings. So the self same thing in
diverse persons may be clean of diverse and contrary natures. And even so death
is to the wicked a curse for sin: yet to the godly it is not death, but a
passage to l^fe: no Curse properly, nor punishment of sin, but a benefit and
advantage. Therefore Christ's dying simply as the godly dye, may in no sort
here be called a curse, or cursed. But seeing the text says, He was made a
Curse for us, or accursed in his death: Therefore he dyed not simply as the
godly dye, He endured the Curse and wrath of God truly.

on the cross spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them. These principalities are the Devils and powers
of darkness: the instruments of Gods justice and wrath, the tempters which
assault and * wrestle with all good men. Ephesians. ^.1^.16.
Even so here they assault and conflict with Christ whom they did chiefly
desire to overthrow, being the head of all the rest: but here is showed his
glorious victory and conquest upon them. Therefore it is certain they on the
Cross most furiously attempted him, and he felt them. that is to say, the
very instruments that wrought the very effects of Gods severity and wrath
upon him: but he at the last most gloriously conquered them and trod them
under Heero some say, that Christ paid the pric^ and did satisfaction to the
Diuill properly, and not to God. But it ca^ not want both absurdity and
impiety so to say. Hoe paid it to Gods justice, to his holy severity, whereof
the Devil was but executioner.
feet in that place. If any doubt that these words are not to be referred to
the cross of Christ, it shall be made most manifest that they are, and
undeniable (God willing) in the next question.

The Godly sometime taste of Hellish sorrows in this life.
Further this reason will prove the same, taken from the less to the more. The
members of Christ do Ephesians. 6.12, 16
wrestle with the powers of darkness, and endure the fyrie darts of i^ Devil.
And Job cries out Job. 6.4.
The arrowes^ the Almighty are in me, the venom whereof d^^ drink up my
spirit, and the terrors of God sig^ against me. The like terrors does Ion.
2.2.
Ion. seem to feel in the fishes b^lly. Wh^ he cried to the Lord out of the
bottom of he^ And David wanted not the like in h^^ manifold and fearful
agonies man^ times. Thus do the member^ of Christ suffer. Therefore of
necessity Christ o^^ Head suffered the like: yea much rather, and fa^re
greater terrors of GOD and assaults of the Devil. For therer have we Romans
8.29.
conformity with him, even in a^ kinds of sufferinges. Therefore in
sufferinges Christ Jesus has matched us (...) least, yea surely has gonne
beyond us This is the Math. 20.23
Cup and the Baptism which: Christ affirmed should be common with his
Disciples and him self, though he drunk this Cup deeper then any cls. And it
is said, Heb. 4.15. and 2.17.
He was like us in all points, the^ he was like us in sufferings, and
specially in the mainest sufferings, which are the terrors and the wrath of
God, which as is proved, the godly are not exempted from in this life, and yet
never are, not can be touched deeper, then was Christ. Yea further, in these
places to the Hebrews he shows a reason which can never be refuted by the
wit of man. He succored us not, but wherein he has had experience of our
temptations and infirmities. But he succoureth us even in these our
temptations of feeling the terrors of God and the sorrows of Hell. Therefore
he him self had experience of the same. This here the very Scripture says.
Wherefore in all things it behooued him, Heb. 2.17, 18.
or he ought to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be merciful
and a faithful high priest in things concerning God. Lo, he was made like
us, that he might be merciful and faithful toward us.

Again hothen ophile. Wherefore he ought, it behooved him so to be. Therefore
he could not have been merciful and faithful to us, unless he had been
like us. Which also more fully appears in the words most significant
followinge, En ho gar pepon hen autos petrast he^s, dynatas te^^ peiraz omenois
boethesai: For in that which him self suffered and was tempted in, he is
able to succor them that are tempted: Or that are (so) tempted. Here he gives
the reason why he succoureth us being tempted, because him self also has
likewise suffered. Also he says, thereby Christ is able to succor us: as if
else he had not been able to be rightly merciful. And here me thinks ^n ho
has a singular force more then is commonly observed: Even to note the
particular matter wherein Christ is able to succor, namely in that which him
self has suffered before.

So that if Christ have not suffered it, o^ the like, then he is not able to
succour^^ in such suffering^s and temptations. For surely otherwise he can not
say here if he does, that Christ was made like his brethren in temptations and
sufferings. An^ all this he shows further Cha 4 14, 15, (...) Let us hold
fast our profession, for we have not (...) high priest that can not be
touched with our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort yet
without sin. He closely meets here with an objection. Some might think
Christ being so high and heavenly could not hau^ sufficient compassion toward
our mis^ries. Nay says he We have not an high prie^t which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, but he was in all things tempted in li^e
sort, Therefore let us hold fast our profession: and therefore let us go
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace in
due time, or in time of need. Which is as much as to say, If he were not like
us in all temptations and sufferings, he could not minister help to us in
time of need: but now he is one that has felt all our feelings, or the like in
every point. Therefore he can help us in all need, and we are not to doubt. And
thus by all these Scriptures it is proved that Christ suffered the wrath of God
and the sorrows of Hell, which the godly in this life sometimes do taste
also. Add hereunto, that of all Absurdities, Absurdity.
this is the greatest, yt mere Men should suffer more deeply and more
bitterly then Christ did. And yet they do so, if Christ suffered not at all any
sense of Gods wrath nor ye sor^owes of hell: which many mere men have and do
suffer many times, as is above declared, and shall further appear hereafter.

Heb. 5.7. where thus it is written of Christ: In the days of his flesh he
offered up prayer, and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that which he feared,
or, being delivered from his fear. Here first it may be asked, What prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears for fear of death, were these
which he poured forth to God in the days of his flesh? And where may we
learn them? We may learn what these were in the story of Christ's life and
death expressed in the Evangelists in three places. First, Ioh. 12.27.
where he lifts up his voice, saying: Now is my soul troubled: And what
shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But therefore came I into this
hour. The second place: where after he had mourned in the garden, saying, My
soul is Math. 26.32.
every way compassed with sorrows to death. He goes a little further and
falling on his face, he prays saying: O my Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. which he
prays three several times, ver. 44.
with such fear and terror of mind that his body, as yet without all harm
Luke 22.44
trickled down with clots of blood in steed o^ sweat: and ver. 43.
an Angel appeared to him comforting him. His sorrow also and troub^^ of
mind most terrible being expressed where he is said to ekthambei^sthat kas
aacmonein. Mar. 14.33, 34.
be affrighted, as it were, and miserably distressed because of this bitter
cup. The third place, where now ha^ging on the cross before he dyed the
cr^es with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have th^^ forsaken me. To these
places doubtless th^s text in Heb. 5.7. has relation, saying. That in the days
of his flesh he did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong crying
and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that
which he feared. Now these things being thus considered, I make this
argument: In all these places it is most certain Christ suffered in his soul
the wrath of God due^^ our sins. Therefore he suffered the wrath of God, and
not his bodily stripes only. The Antecedent I prove by 3. reasons, gathered
from these Scriptures. First because he now suffered in his soul properly
and immediately: My soul is every way compassed with sorrows. Therefore this
was the wrath of GOD for our sins which he now suffered: as I have plainly
showed in the Mat. 27.46.
beginning of this treatise. Page 4. 5. 6.
2. Because he so feared and shunned this conflict, which yet he knew he
deserved not, and was also according to the will of God for him to suffer. It
is not possible but he suffered more then the bodily death only, it must needs
be the unspeakable and intolerable wrath of God in that he so fears it and
desires to shun it. His Disciples he had Math. 10.28
taught carefully of that point before, saying: Fear not them that kill the
body, but are not able to kill the the soul: but fear him that can kill both
soul and body in Hell Which generally also he 1 Pet. 3.14, 15 and 4.13, 16.
commands all the Godly evermore. How can this be that him self should do
contrary to that, that he comma^deth others? Such folly in the Son of God, far
be it from us once to imagine, as that he should stagger, and shrink, and fail
in that wc he so earnestly warned others of, and so straightly commanded:
viz. not to fear the bodily, giltles, undeserved death, and allotted the^ of
God: but therefore rather to be glad and rejoice. And accordingly have infinite
many Martyrs, as their express stories do witness: The Thieves Cru^ified
with Christ suffered as great bodily violence as he did, Luk 23.40 They were
all together in one and the same condemnation Ex^ept they suffered more then he
did, because they continued longer. Ioh. 19.32, 3^.
yea wicked and ungodly men, endured with boldness and great joy far more
exquisite and barbarous torments and sharper tortures, as touching the body,
then Christ could endure? or then can with reason be affirmed and attributed to
that which Christ endured, if we view his passion? Have infinite many mere men
don this? And shall this I yo^ of the tribe of Judah, and La^be of God, that is
the prince of patience and of all fortitude be so heavy, so fearful, so
miserably afflicted and dismayed before hand, as the story declares, only for
fear of his bodily death? Which also he foreknewe a^^ could not be ignorant
of, that he was o^dained of God to suffer it, and that by (...) hands of most
malicious and furious en^mies? Ca^ it be thought that Christ wou^^ through
fear pray against this mere ^^dily death, and his soul be so troubled,
^^frighted, distracted therewith, that the ^^rie anguish and torment of mind
shou^^ wring out of his body sweat of cl^tted blou^ which never was heard of
in any oth^^ man beside, and that he should desire so earnestly and so often to
avoid it clean, and being in it, to cry out with much weping that he was
forsaken of God? It can not be, I sa^ it can not be, but Christ should sin in
so praying against the known will of God, and against his own most willing
purp^s^ except we say it was a greater horro^^ of punishment that lighted on
his ve^se soul, which partly by the feeling and partly by the fear thereof
did express such tokens, and did so stonish and amaze and ouervvhelme his
humane weakness ((...) in very nature such cases do and will bring to pass)
especially now the Divine assistaunce of purpose withdrawing it self. For a
man in such amazednes, does easily on a sudden become forgetful of
himself. And being forgetful and astonished (which an infinite pain present,
and fear of more cominge, will quickly drive us into) no marvel if Christ,
as a very man, let fall in this case words now and then, which in his good
remembrance he knevve well enough were as contrary to Gods will, as they
were suitable with natures instinst in him. Now then, it was surely the
horror of Gods wrath that oppressed him, seeing it is vain and senseless to
think his mere bodily torments, yea the stare of them did it, or that mere
bodily he suffered See the contrary page ^1.
more sharp and vehement things then any man ever did. All the devices and
amplifications of some men are but shifts and trifles to prove that. bodilye
pains though so violent, yet hastened they no whit his death at all, neither
was he the nearer it at the last, then at the first for all his pain. Which
is a paradox in nature, and contrary to Scripture, which says, He was like
us in all things, sin only excepted. But some will say, He desired this
thing three times in the Garden, Ioh. 12.97.
before. If this were to the end that he might escape the feeling of Gods
wrath assigned unto him as the special part of his passion, how could he be
so forgetful so often of that which he knew full well, and regarded diligently.
How could he? affrighted, astonished, forgetful, and all confounded in his
wholl humanity, both in all yt powers of his soul, and senses of his body,
not three times only, but three skore times three times, yea co^tinuallie and
without intercha^geable respiration, if Gods wrath for sin had bit still, and
continually revealed upon him For as it pleased God to open to his manhood the
touch and sense of his wrath sometimes more, sometimes less, and sometimes
staying it, So he was agayn^ and again sometimes more, sometimes less
confounded therewith, and sometimes a while refreshed. And if this had returned
300. times upon him, verelie he could not but have sunk under the same 300.
times also. Alas, we little think what the bitterness of Gods wrath is, and what
the weight of his indignation is to the feeling of man's soul and body. The
want of due knowledge and consideration whereof, I fear, is one chief cause
of broching this most shameful quaestion. Rather we may beeholde and see
here as in a glass, the unsupportable heaviness and intolerable smart of Gods
anger for our sins, which Christ put upon him self for our deliverance: And
again, that Christ became in deed a man for us, when as again and again he
could not but shrink and be confounded under that burden. If the weight of
Paul's Church were laid on the back of any Giant in the world many and
sundry times, were it any marvel if every time it crushed him still to
pieces? Much less is it, if the burden of Gods wrath, far heavier the^ the
whole earth oftentimes touching a man, he be confounded with it continually.
Thus then it can not be strange if often times Christ fell amazed, confounded,
and forgetful of him self for fear and grief, when the agony was on him,
it being even the sense of Gods wrath, and of the curse of the Law for us.

If any say, man being a finite creature could not feel infinite wrath.

I answer, wrath of God due to sin, as it comes from God, is infinite, as
his justice, and as he him self is infinite. And though Christ as a Creature,
could not comprehend the infiniteness of it, yet he could, being not capable
of it, nor able to sustain it, be overwhelmed and confounded, and astonished
withit.

If you say,

Touching the first, Notwithstanding all this amazednes and fear in Christ,
Christ though amazed and confounded with sorrows and fears, yet remained
still sinnelesse.
he sinned not. I grant we could not but have sinned in the like, but he did
not. Because, even as if you set two glasses filled, the one with muddy water,
and the other with clear Crystal water, and first let them stand till all
the muddines in the one be settled at the bottom, then shake both these
glasses, in the one the mudde arises straightway, and defiles all the water
there: in the other, although you shake it never so much, yet the clear water,
though troubled likewise, remains still all clear as crystal: Even so if
any of us be shaken and disquieted with any trouble, our Muddy affections
arisinge do presently defile us all over: but Christ (in whom was Man's true
Nature, but not any the least defilement of Nature) being likewise shaken, he
remained still clear from any the least spott of sin at all. For to shun
grief is natural in what we may: and being amazed and forgetful, Then to
shun that which else we should and would suffer, is no sin neither, but
Natures instinct. And on occasion to be forgetful, (even as some Marc. 13.32.
ignorance, is not sin) it is Natures infirmity, but no sin. If a man
indistresse fall a sleep, and then lift not up his heart to God, he sins
not, nor be that being amazed with some violent blow on the head, calls not
upon God: because nature is oppressed, and can not do that which he would
and should do. Also in this man so astonished, or in him a sleep, we can not
say, there is any less grace: There is no decay of faith, nor of obedience,
nor of patience, nor of love. Even so in Christ now in this case, there was no
defect of grace, but an infirmity of nature, which even by creation can not
endure the displeasure of God, but by it owns confusion withal.

Now touching the next poinct, That unless Christ were so, that is, so
a^tonished, and forgetful by reason of the intolerable sorrow and horror
which confounded his humane Nature, he had sinned by these requests: which
blasphemy God forbid. That is most true: and first I prove it: and then will
answer the exceptions against it. It is proved manifestly, because if Christ
had prayed advisedly, and with good memory against the known will of God,
he had sinned. As to pray against the tasting of his bitter passion, was
against Gods will known unto him. How appears that, even his knowing
thereof? First him self expressly Ioh. 12.17.
says it: Therefore I came into this hour. Secondly, he could not else have
corrected and reproved (as he did) his own words presently goinge before.

What shall I say? Father save me from this how but therefore I came into this
hour. And, Math. 26.39
O^^ Father if it be possible let this Cup pass from (...) nevertheless not
as I will, but as thou wilt. A^^ ver. 42.
O my Father if this Cup cannot pass away (...) me, but that I must drink it:
thy will be d^^ Mark has it thus: Cha. 14.36.
Father, all thinge^^ possible unto thee: take away this Cup from me
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will Therefore Christ prayed and
desired, a^ plainly corrected his will by Gods w^^ And in correcting it, it was
contrary, y^^ and he knew it so to be. This place ha^^ bin chiefly used of the
Ancients, and it is (...) singular, against the heresy of the Mo^^thelits,
Monothelites.
who held that Christ had in hi^ but one will. This now hurts not the^^
heretics, if it serve not us also in this question. This place therefore
shows he had a natural humane will at this time contrary to his divine will,
desiring to shunt: pain which he knew he was to suffer while through
astonishment he be though, not himself. Through astonishment I say for else
this contrarines of his humane w^^ to his divine, could not have wanted sin
because remembering himself suddain^^ he knew and acknowledged Gods will to be
that he should suffer, which immediately before he had spoken against. Thirdly,
this proves that he knew it was Gods determinate will, in that he terms it
Ioh. 12.27. Mat. 14.42
an hour, that is a time set of God for this his suffering, which he desired
to escape. Fourthly, because he so mightily feared it, therefore doubtless he
knew that he was appointed to suffer it. Thus it is manifest in plain words he
prayed contrary to Gods known will: which unless it were in astomishment, and
nature being opressed with the horror of his pain and fear, he could not
have wanted sin, which God forbid.

exceptiones against this 1. They say all these prayers and requests of his
may be that his bodily death might not have dominion over him. And so he might
pray and not against the known will of God. Mat. 10.34.
perfectly knew should never come to him: namely, that the dominion of death
should hold him. Therefore this could not trouble him. Ioh. 12.27.
John, concerns not his passion, but his appearance in Gods presence only to
receive sentence against Satan the Prince of this world: as it seems ver. 31.
I answer, which was done so absolutely at hi^ death that not only him self
cried out it is finished, but also the Apostle says, even then he triumphed
over Satan: Col. 2.15.
which (...) the next question we shall show f^^ the^ It is true then, Christ
now received (...) against Satan: but therefore had he now no feeling of his
passion? Would he (...) out, that his soul was so troubled, that he w^^ not
what to say? And yet said then, ^ath (...) save me from this hour? Would he
be th^^ grieved, afflicted, and distracted to recei^^^ sentence against his
enemy? What sense is then in this? Do men use to be terrified or to rejoice
and triumph when before a^^ judge they have sentence given with the^ against
their enemy. If you say, only the presence of Gods Majesty terrified and
astonished Christ's humane infirm^^ though he received a benefit. If it we^^ so
with him in receiving an honor and dignity from God, would it not be so with
him much rather in bearing hi^ curse for our sins? interpret this (...) how
you will. When he bare it as from GOD, would not Gods presence then much more
terrefie and affright him? But the truth is, the presence of Gods Majesty
never did so grieve, amaze, and astonish Christ's manhood in such cases: who
not only was his decrest Son but also personally knit and joined with God
himself, whereby it could not be that the Majesty so amazed him, which was so
united to him, and always sustained him. As also examples most frequent in the
Gospel do declare. How often did Christ pray unto his Father: he always then
presented himself before Gods Majesty. And do we read that ever he was vexed,
terrefied, and amazed in so doing? namely in Ioh: 17. appears there any such
passion in all that long, most earnest, and effectual prayer? Nothingh less
verily, nor any where else, where he appears before Gods majesty for this end
to receive Love and Honor from GOD. Only in case of his passion, when he
appeared to receive justice and severity at his hand, then in deed his Majesty
and the sense of his severe justice proceeding from him might well astonish and
confound any creature, specially a guilty creature, as Christ man was, namely
in the person and contenance wherein now he appeared. Therefore he spoke these
words, Ioh. 1^.^^.
in respect of his passion now drawing near: which also the ver. 33. plainly
declares: Now this he said, signifi^ng what death he should dye. For it
hangs with the ver. 32. next before, And I, if I were lift up from the earth
would draw all men unto me. And this most plainly has reference to this verse
27. whereof it is in part an opening or exposition. Thirdly, Math. 26.3^ 44.
threefolde prayer, If it be possible let this Cup pass from me: that this
was for fear indeed of feeling the wrath of God, but he felt it not. For a^
the Heb. 5.7.
Apostle shows, He prayed vehemently against it, and was heard and so deuered
from it. Christ both feared and felt Gods wrath for sin.
feared Gods wrath, and ye^ felt it never a whit. First it is well you grant
that Christ came so near it that he feared it, yea he so feared it that with
strong cries and tears he prayed against it, yea and with the agony thereof he
swea^ blood which must proceed of such grief of the mind, (seeing the body was
not touched) as was never heard of in any man else: and was thus affrighted and
distressed therewith out of measure. If he were thus near it, then I hope it is
neither impious, heretical, nor blasphemous, for a man to say he felt it. For
in good sooth, if to fear it be not to feel it any whit at all, specially
such a fear as this is described in the Scripture to be, I know not what
feeling is. Besides Luke says, Cha. 22.44.
He was now in the agony: then he felt, yea most bitterly, that which he so
strove withal. What is that but the Cup there mentioned, even of Gods wrath,
that he prayed might pass from him. Again how could he so deeply fear it,
but knowing it was ordained for him? Show me this how he could possibly so
fear it but that, he knew Gods will was that he should drink of it. And
indeed that it was so, I have proved before already. If then he was ordained
to it, most certainly he tasted it, he felt it, he endured it. fear it if he
felt it? For fear is an expectation of evil to come: and it is written, He
was heard in that which he feared and was delivered from it. I answer, felt and
feared it. He felt it intollerably: but yet feared it more: in the distresfull
agony and the very confusion of the powers of his nature he considered not how
long it might hold him, and how infinitely more it might yet increase upon him,
seeing he was not come to the greatest of his passion. This he might fear, and
yet presently feel sorrow unspeakable to. Hereupon after the instinct of
nature abhorring from pain, he desired to be released, yet suddenly reproves
his nature herein: Not as I will Father, but thy will be done. Howbeit his
Father heard him and delivered him out of that which he feared. Apo^t^^ (...)
be^^^.
Not from feeling it, but from being forsaken in it. For the very word seems
to say* He was in it: eisakoustheis, He was heard being in it. in Gods wrath:
he could not fear that. Therefore it was not (...) which in this place God
delivered him from. neither directly prayed against yt poinct yet Gods wrath
may be it which here he^ felt and feared, and was delivered from. For he may be
truly said to be heard in h^^ prayer when the Lord lets him tal^^ of
the Cup for all that, and susteyneth hi^ in tasting it, and in due season
deliuere^ him out of it. As Paul was heard in th^^ he prayed for, when 2.
Cor. 12.8.
he besought the Lord Christ to take away from him the messenger of Sa^ than
buffitting him. He was heard, I say herein, not that this prick in the flesh
was taken away clean from him. verse 9.
But in that h^ received grace sufficient to bear it, and in due season to be
eased of it. But further I affirm Christ's nature in yt most dreadful agony
and distemper of all the powers of his soul and body might fear a kind of
forsaking, ^l^we Christ (...) forsaken in his passion.
that is, least his humane nature should for a time be left alone and naked
from al comfortable feeling of assistance of the Godhead. This kind of
forsaking he might and did fear, yea he Math. 24.46.
felt it afterward to most certainly, when he cried, My God my God, why have
thou forsaken me. I say a kind of forsaking this is: for there is another
kind of forsaking, which in deed it were blasphemy to sav that Christ either
felt or feared it. Namely, to be cast away and forsaken utterly with hatred of
his Father. This were in deed desperation in Christ, if he had but feared it,
which God forbid we should once dream of. His express words even then
confute that, in calling him Father, and in crying earnestly to him my God, my
God. This he could not do but that he was far from desperation, or fear of
a final forsaking. Yet this lets nothing at all but he might fear the
other forsaking, that is touching the pain and sorrow to be left al comfortles
and alone some while, the Godhead as it were withdrawing and hyding it self
from him for the season of his passion, he being in the sense and feeling
thereof: which thing he perceived his mere manhood was not possibly able to
endure. And therefore a little before he felt the extremity of it, he prayed
that it might pass from him, yet presently submitted him self to it: and
after in this very extremity, when he did not fear it, but felt it, he cried
under the burden pitiouslie, and complained to his Father of it, why have thou
forsaken me. Thus he might fear it, and feel it, and crying to be comforted
he might be heard in it, and delivered out from it, according to the Heb. 5.7.
scripture. I know our Contraries do fancy other senses of this Math. 27.46.
text, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Did he singe? Wherefore? Nay these words are contrai^ to such
joy, and triumph: why have (...) forsaken me. It is a token of great deiection
of mind and of rare misery to complay^^ to be forsaken of God: Therefore he
sung n^ then to triumph over his enemies. Wherefore then? Did he singe a
mournful and dolorous lame^tation to be so abandone^ and left to the despite
and rage of the Jews all helpless? God forbid we shou^^ think he did so
pitiouslie complain (...) that, whereunto he knew well he was ordained of
God, and of his own most willing purpose he offered him self: yea that he
should be so dejected in mind only for his bodily stripes inflicted by the
Jews, God forbid we should think him so faint hearted, as before I have proved.
Neither did he amplify or paint out his sufferings poetically: Page 51.
this were vanity in him, and madness in us to think. Therefore it is certain, he
nether sung nor said these words to any such me^ning at all. then 3. whole
hours after tell them of such an answer in ye prophet. This is to fond to be
spoken. But it Mar. 15.33.34.
appears to be eue^ so; three whole hours, if not more, after their mocks it
was, that he cried my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Church,
complaining that now his Apostles and the rest should be forsaken, as it were,
being bereft of him. This is no less absurd then the former. [mee] here
should be taken figuratiuelie for his Church. Therefore it must Signifying the
person of himself.
be literal Again, he can not complain so dolefullie that his church should
be now forsaken, viz. for his bodily want, seeing he had armed them for that
before, and told them that it should be Ioh. 16.7.
better for them that he went, then to tarry. Whereby they should receive a
greater comfort then his bodily presence could yield them. And lastly, he
had thoroughlie Ioh. 17.1. etc.
commended them to the protection of his Father, that it may seem altogether
unseasonable now, in an other more weighty business to be thus disquieted
with this care. There is no reason or likelihood for it. compassion for his
Countrie-men the Jews: who did now to him, they knew not what, and were
shortly after to be all utterly rooted out and destroy for slaying the Lord of
glory. compassion even ^^wards his enemies, and specially towa^^ his whole
nation, yet that [me] here thou^ signify my whole nation there is no sense
reason in it. Neither had he forgotten that care perticularly in Math. 23 37
another place as it were wholly appointed for it, when he most tenderly wept
about it: but neither there, nor any where complayned^^ God why he would now
cast of his people, seeing he knew perfectly Gods w^^ in this poinct, that it
should be so.

Lastly they think those words are (...) express Christ's sorrow for our
sinning Let us see: h^^ was made sin for us. And so he could no^ conceive
due sorrow for our sins, but he must know, and feel it, proceeding from
the wrath of God for sin upon him. And such a sorrow indeed of a broken and
contrary heart is the only true and perfectly accepted sacrifice to God: and
in effect it is nothing but what we affirm. If they mean nothing else but a
religious and voluntary grief in Christ arising at the cogitation of our
secure and wanton sinning, without any feeling in himself of Gods just wrath
due to the same, which might be as it were a zeal in Christ and nothing else,
then certainly this pertains nothing to the sacrifice of Christ's passion,
which he has here in hand, but only to the other part his moral obedience
and fulfilling the righteousness of the law in affection of mind, as well as in
action of body. So that this ought not to have any place here: seeing
questionless these words my God my God, why have thou forsaken me, do
directly and immediately express some notable part of his passion and not of
his righteousness and holy mind. Again how could these words hang together,
when he means to tell his Father how zealous he is for his glory to say my
God my God, why have thou forsaken me. Surely there is no fashion in them, thus
signifying.

Therefore it rests they must needs signify simply and plainly (as they do)
that now Christ felt him self forsaken in the bearing of his intolerable
sorrows for sin: that is not succored at this instant by the comfortable
assistance of his Godhead, which of purpose withheld it self for a season in
his passion, that he might: thoroughly accomplish this perfect sacrifice
answerable to the severe justice of God, which thereby he turned away from us.

forsaking (...) not be without Gods hatred, and separa^^ from God. natural
desi^^ prayed that it might cease; and p^tious^: complained when it ceased not.
I say (...) a mere natural desire, not sinful: Because when his mind was
astonished at the fu^^ous violence of this unspeakable ho^rour, then in the
instant he leaned to natures instinst, desiring (without sin) rest, and being
to it self, and not destruction. The like also was his fear before in the
Garden, and in the Ioh. 12.27.
foretast of his passion. This was, I say, a natural fear, not a religious
fear, nor a mistrustfull fear, no^ damned fear, but properly a very natural
fear, which well may be without sin, as is aforesaid. Act. 2.25. out of
Psalm. 16 18.
fear in Christ, as some think. I beheld the Lord always before me, for
he is at my right hand that I should not stagger, or be shaken. Here it is
expressie said, Christ did not so much as shake or stagger, no not at any
time. Therefore he had no such doubtful fear, or fearful doubting when his
passion appo^hed: neither in deed could it be without some diminution of
faith, patience, and obedience in Christ, which God forbid. In deed God
forbid that: Far be it from us to think any the least diminution in Christ of
his faith, patience or obedience to God. shakinge and wavering: either in trust
and confidence of Gods love and protection toward him: Herein we affirm
Christ was not touched. Another shaking there is mere natural, a confounding
of the powers of the mind and the senses of the body: with a natural effect
following thereon, that is, abhorring of pain, specially being furious and
extreme. This was in Christ in as much as he had true nature, and was passible
like us. I say, thus the powers of nature in him might be confounded, when an
infinite burden of sorrow lay upon him, and his memory might be disturbed,
and then nature desiring and wishing suddenly ease and rest, he might
suddenly utter somewhat, which else reason in him would have controuled: which
quickly it did again, we see in saying: Yet not my will, but thine be done,
as it were, suddenly coming to him self again. If yet any stand upon
this, he behold the Lord always, not sometime only or for the most part, but
always before him, and therefore could never be so astonished. It is ridiculous
to stretch that always so far: Luke tells us, we may presume to tell it
again, Luke 9.31.
and affirm what it was. * They spoke of his departure which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem. Elegon ten exod^n autou hen emelle pleroun en
Jerusalem
Even so when all the Evangelists tell us by Christ's own words what he
feared, and what he felt, we may well presume to assirme it. Mathewe and Luke
tell us, that it was to drink of his Fathers Cup, which he feared, and in
fearing felt: yea further it is Math 27.46
expressed that God forsook him. Mark and John do call it an hour. What is
that hour, but this his And therefore known to himself.
appointed suffering for sin? This was it then, without all question, that
drove him into these his most wonderful and pitious agonies, fears, sorrows,
miseries, outcryes, tears, astonishment, forgetfulness, and confusion of the
powers of nature, as before is declared out of the very Scripture. Therefore
this Cup, and this hour, this forsaking of God, can not be only a bodily
death, but a more intolerable suffering that so afflicted him, even the very
sense of the wrath of GOD due to our sins which he sustained. And this we
need not fear to say. And so much for the Sea page 4^.
second argument, out of these words, des, touching his fearing and shunning
his passion in such sort, as we see he did.

An other Argument is taken hence also: Because he was heard in his suffering,
which feared, and was delivered from it. But he was not delivered from his
bodilye death, but he felt it indeed: Neither was it the dominion of death
which he feared: for he knew perfectly that he should rise again. Therefore it
was none of all these that here is meant which he fearing and feeling was
delivered from. But needs it was the sense of Gods curse for sin and his
wrath when he forsook him, wherein he was heard, and delivered out, as before
is declared.

I know the contrary is urged even from this place thus. heard and delivered
from by prayer, he seared, but felt not. But Christ was heard and delivered by
prayer from the wrath which he feared. proposition. For he was in some sen^^ of
it, when he prayed against it and wa^ heard: he had the^ some foretastes, but
the extremity came after, which he before feared. And finally he being in all
this, wa^ heard (as the Eisakoustheis Also Luke 22.44.
very word seems to import) and delivered from it, that is at least not
before he had felt it. Again the very fearing of Gods wrath is a true feeling,
To fear Gods ^^ath is indeed to feel it in part.
I say not a full feeling, but a true feeling. But it is granted that now in
this Agome he^ feared the wrath of God: Therefore he^ truly felt it.
Therefore the quaestion (...) granted.

Rhem. Test. Annot at. in Hebr. 5.7.
Papists do deny our translation, not yielding that we should read Apo tes
eulaheias.
from [his] feara. Act. 23.10.
Scripture, is used for a Sulahetheis.
perplexed fear. Also the Greek Praeposition apo signified naturally from o^
Out of, as we turn it. Finally the circumstaunces of this text are most
suitable to this meaning, viz. to set out Christ's sorrows and fears in his
passion. Therefore our translation is true and sound. But as I said, this is
not now called in question among our selves.

Other Objections are let fall, as this: Hell torments, is not meritorious:
Ezec. 33.11.
neither is GOD pleased with any man's death. bodily pains. Bodily pains
simply merit not, neither does God simply delight in his creatures bodily
death. But God is delighted with the execution of justice both on our bodies
and souls. And further, Christ's sufferings are not as the sufferings of other
creatures. All that he suffered was truly and properly meritorious, yea his
sufferinge of Hellish torments proceeding from the wrath of his just Father. No
other creatures such suffering can be, but his was infinitely meritorious,
because of the infinite excellency of his Godhead, being one person with his
manhood. Thus far hereof.

Heb. 2.14.
Thorough death he abolished him that had the power of death, that is the
Devil. I say, If this death here spoken of be specially the death of the
soul, then Christ suffered the death of his soul, whereby he destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. But death here is specially
taken for the death of the soul: Therefore Christ suffered the death of his
soul, that is the wrath of God. This reason will seem altogether
unreasonable, and harshe in the ears of some, to say the least of it. But let
then soberly consider it, and it is most true a^^ evident. First we mean not
that his so^^ was mortal and perished, or came to nothing, as the souls of
beasts do, such* death is not meant, when we spe^ke (...) the souls death:
But the death which so^les immortal can suffer. Note therefo^^ the bodily
death is taken two ways, (...) accordingly the The Souls death of a furles.
souls death is take (...) ways also. First, death strictly, and properly
taken, is the very separation of the soul from the body: and so the souls
death is the separation of Gods favor (...) grace from it. Thus Christ's soul
(...) not: it were impious in deed, and (...) phemous so to say, yea it was
imp^stice so to be. But besides this sense, death is often used otherwise, as
when we say, lie^ suffered a bitter death, a painful death, we mean not now
the very separation wh^che is death in deed. For death in deede^s sensselesse,
quiet, and without pain: the body being dead in deed has no more grief:
What then is this bitter death paynefull death? Surely it is the feelinge of
the pains and pangs of death, which do procure and bring on, and foreshewe
death ensuing. Yea men living being surprised with grievous sorrows and
pains, will faye Terent: Occidi: porij: inte^ij.
they dye, they perish, etc. And further, that is called death sometimes which
is such a suffering of hurt and pain, as makes a body seem Act. 20.9.10
quite dead, and yet is not. So likewise the death of the soul sometimes may
be understood, and that most fitly for the pains and sufferinges of Gods
wrath which always accompany them that are separated from the grace and love
of God. Always ordinarily.
Now this death of the soul we affirm Extraordinarily.
Christ suffered, that is, the wrath of God, and the horror of his severe
justice, like them who be separated in deed from the grace and love of God,
yet him self never separated, but always most entirely beloved, as is before
declared.

death here in this text may signify Christ's bodily death, whereby he
abolished the Devil and all his power over us. death being twice here named,
the latter with a refere^ce to the former, surely this word death has the
same meaning in both places: very fond it were to take it here otherwise.
Now it is questionless in this latter place death signifies the death of the
soul, the torments and sorrows of the damned, which are separated from the
life of God: of which death the Devil is said to have the power and
execution, and we (in the next verse) to be in the fear of this death before
our deliverance. Ver. 15.
Therefore in the former place death signifies so too, even the death of the
soul, that is, What death of the soul Christ suffered.
the torments and sorrows due to the damned proceeding from the justice are
wrath of God: by which death Christ (...) deed abolished him that had the power
of the same death, that is the Devil.

Thanat otheis ^en sark^ s^oopoietheis de to pneumati.
done to death vain flesh, but made alive by the Spirit. In this pla^^ the
Spirit signifies the almighty Spirit God whereby, he that was done to death
w^^ made alive again, according to these Scrpturs: 2. Cor. 13.4.
He was crucified concerning his infirmity but lives through the power of
God, Act. 2.24.
and When God raised up loosing the sorrows of death, Romans 1.3.4.
and According to the sleshe he was made of the seed^ David, but according to
the Spirit by the re^^rection from the dead he was mightily made ^^nifest to
be the Son of God. And thus the Spirit here in Peter also signifies the
Godhead, whereby Christ putt to death, was raised to life again. Yet for all
this some take Spirit here to be Christ's humane Soul, which certainly can
not be: seeing then Peter must say, He was made a live either (...) his soul,
or else by his soul. But both these are absurd, and most false, that Christ was
made alive either in his humane Soul, or by the same. Therefore the Spirit
here is his Deity, by the which after his death he was made a live indeed.
Again, when soever in Scripture the Flesh and the Spirit are opposed
together, the Spirit is never for a Humane Soul: and in Christ it is always
his Deity. And then the Flesh also is always Christ's whole Humanity: I say
not his Body only, but his Soul also, even his entire and whole humanity. As
also that word 2. Cor. 13.4.
Infirmity before noted, does likewise signify. From hence now it follows,
that Christ's Soul also dyed and was crucified according to the death and
crucifying. Which souls are subject unto and capable of, that is the feeling
of Gods wrath, as I showed a little before. I say the reason is, because not
one part of Christ's manhood but both parts even his whole and entire manhood
is here manifestly meant, where it is said, He was done to death, or made to
die in the Flesh. If yet there be any doubt against this sense, we shall have
fitter place afterward, in our next question to confirm it better. Hell is not
in this life, Therefore Christ suffered not Hell. Hell is the burning of
Material sire, Christ suffered no material fire. Therefore Christ suffered not
the pains of Hell. If Christ were in Hell, then holiness, faith, patience, and
all goodness may be in Hell: But only the contrary is there. Therefore Christ
suffered not the pains of Hell.

Page 33.
as in the entrance I noted. If we speak of Hell in the usual and proper
sense as it is the very set place for the tormenting of the damned, or the
very estate and condition of the damned: So none of us ever meant that Christ
was there, or felt any thing therein. But vn^derstanding thereby the severe
wrath of G^^due to sin, which may well be calle^ Hell by comparison, seeing
the sorrow^ and horrors of Gods fiery wrath are equ^^ to Hell: So we affirm,
Christ was in He^^ even in this life, he suffered Hell for us, (...) rather
Hellish sorrows. Otherwise then (...) we never thought. Therefore it is grea^^
iniquity, yea plain sophistry to amplify a^gainst us, and to make this most
holy tru^^ odious with the people, only by the an^ biguitie of the word Hell.
Know therefore Hell as we take it, (that is the sense of God^ wrath) is even in
this life, found sometime. As Heaven is likewise, that is, some unspeakable
foretaste of the insin^^ (...) prepared for the Godly hereafter: as 1 Cor.
2.9.10
ap^peareth: The things which eye has not seen, not ear has heard, neither
came into man's har^, which God has prepared for them that love him, the same
has God revealed unto us by his Spirit^, for the Spirit teaches all things,
yea the deept things of God. Thus you see, as there is Heaven even in this life
in some measure: even so there may be Hell. Yea we have showed it Page 4.5.
before in Job and Jonah and David, etc. And as for the wicked, they many times
find it far more intolerable, as only Cain for the rest, will serve to
testify. Oh says he, Genesis 4.
my sins, that is my horror for my sins, is heavier then I can bear.

Now, Christ I doubt not, as touching the vehemence of pain, was as sharply
touched even as the reprobates themselves, yea if it may be more
extraordinarily, seeing hereunto he was ordained of God, and the Godhead as it
were laid it upon him, even to the satisfaction of his severe justice. Further
as touching material sire in Hell what a toyish fable is that: then say as well
there is a material worm in the conscience that dies not, material
b^^mslone and much wood which the fire burns upon: All which the Scripture
affirms like as it does the sire. But who sees not that the scriptures, as
their use is, do here under material and known things, teach us invisible and
spiritual matters, which (...) their effects are like to them, even as
horrible and intolerable as they, and so most fitly resembled by them. And ^ls
I pray how may the Souls of the damned suffer by material sire seeing they are
Spirits, and therefore with them and sire material there can be no communion.
But let it b^ as it may be. The local Hell of the damned we speak not of,
neither I trust shall we ever know it. And therefore consequently here is no
preiuctice to the heavenly virtues of Christ.

And thus there is nothing worth naming against the sufferings of Christ to be
equal to the very Hellish torments in vehemency of pain and sharpenes. The
excellency of which most Christian doctrine may be further noted by these
consequences.

Christian reasons according to Godliness, which require also that Christ
should suffer the wrath of God.
See^ by the story of his passion in the Gosp^^^ there appears no such
barbarous a^ exquisite torments ins^icted on Christ body when he suffered
for me, as no^ my furious and beastly aduersaties, a^ like to invent and
inslict on me for h^^ Also if he, feeling nothing but body smart, yet was so
dismayed and so (...) full, yea so confounded as it were^ing how shall I, most
weak wretch, hope^ sustain and suffer victoriously the^^ dreadful torments
invented for me, yea^ know not whether Satan peraduentu^^ withal will conflict
with my cos^ien^^ the midst of mine intolerable paine^ which if Christ
tasted not of, how shall wretch, be so venturous, as to put my (...) into them,
and hope to out stand them And so by this means what courageous Christian,
entering into these thoughts, would not utterly shrink, and cease to suffer
for Christ. as severe on him, as on any reprobate. But if it were not so, then
it might come into our minds, the Lord can and will qualify his justice
where he loves: and then he may pity me, and so many insinite thousands
mo, who all of us even of nature commit sins, yet are his own creatures.



Now whereas some say, so much with so little. I answer, it is nothing so:
for then the might more have appeared, if only he^ had shed a drop or two of
his blood, a^^ not so much, and had felt a stripe or tw^ and not so many
wounds, and but so^^ one cross and that for a short while, bu^ not a lise of
miseries, and a death of inco^^ parable sorrows, as the wisdom of Go^
appointed that he should and he did su^^fer. Therefore this reason is but
vanity, and all such like against our assertion.

And hitherto it suffices to have taught from the Scriptures That Christ
suffered s^ us both in his soul and hody the wrath of God a Hellish torments,
to ransom us from the same.

Church, and our opinion never known this 1400. years, It shall not be amiss
to confute this notorious untruth by the testimony of Godly men in sundry ages
since. of late it has bin, because we never sinde it to have bin directly in
question, as lately we have seen it to be. And therefore in these later times
doubtless it has bin better sifted, and more persitlie taught, then ever
heretofore since the Apostles age.

Testimonies of the Anciens Writers.
How so ever it be, thus says Com. in Is^. cap. 53.
Ierom: Quod (maledictum) nos pro nostris debebamus sceleribus sustinere, ille
pro nobis passus est, pacificans, etc. The same (Curse) he suffered for us,
which we should have borne for our own sins.

Do Pastio^^
Cyprian: Dicendo. Quare derelictus sum indieat anxietates illius quarimonie
verba esse delictorum suorum, quorum personam and causam assumpsit. Per Mosen
and Apostolum sustinuit vocari Peccatum and Maledictum, pro similitudine
poenae, non culpae: quod pro eis voluit intelligi, qui deseri a Deo propter
peccata meruerant. In saying, Why have thou forsaken me, he shows the
sorrows of that his complaining to be the words of his sins, whose person
and cate he took upon him. He was content to be called by Moses and the
Apostle, Sin and a Curse, because of the likeness of the punishment, not of
the fault. And this he would have us to know that it was for them, or in their
steed, who by reason of their sins, deferued to be forsaken of God.

Com. in Lu^. ^^. D^ tristi^. dolor. etc.
Ambrose: Ego autem non solum excusandum non puto, sed etiam nusquam magis
p^etatem e^tis maiestatemque demiror. Minus enim cotulerat mihi, nisimeum
susceyisset assectum. Ergo pro me dolui^ qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret:
Et sequestrata^ delectatione Diusnitatis aternae, taedio meae infimitatis
afficitur. Moerorem animae nostrae, suae animae maeroie aboleuit. I do esteem
Christ (in this his suffering) not only not to be excused, but also in deed I
do no where more admire his gracious love and his Majesty. For he had done
less for me, if he had not Or, taken on him my affections.
b^ affected as I should have been. Therefore he sorrowed me, as having nothing
to be grieved at for him self. A the love of his eternal Godhead being set a
side, he ^o^^bled with the tediousnes of my infirmity. He (...) shed the
sorrow of our soul by the sorrow of his so^^

And In Cap 23. de co^mendatione Spiritus, etc.
again, Deus, Deus meus quare (...) liquisti me? Clamanuit hoxio Diuinitatis
sep^ ratione moriturus. O God, my God, why have (...) forsaken me? The Man
Christ did cry, his Go^thea (...) departed away, and he about to dye. He
meaneth^ Godhead was departed from him, not vuerly indeed, (...) touching any
comfort or strength that he selt of it the, when he was left in his most
gricuous sorroves.

Again De incarnationis Sacramento. Cap. 6.
he says, Hoc in se obtulit Chr^^stus, quodinduit: Et induit quod ante non
habu^ Christ offered that in sacrifice which he assumed and he (...) med all
that, which before he had not. That is to sa^ his Soul was offered as a
sacrifice, and not his body only.

Tertullian likewise says, Contra Praxcam.
Quid de esto quaris? Habes ipsum exclamantem in passione, De^^meus, Deus m^us,
vt quid me dereliquisti? Em Filius pat^ebatur a Patre derelistus: haec vox
ca^nis and animae, id est Hominis, non Sermonis n^ Spiritus est. What inquire
you of him? You hearch^^ crying out in his passion, My God, my God, why have
th^^ forsaken me? The Son therefore suffered, being forsaken of his Father:
but this is meant of the Flesh and of the Soul, that is, of the Manhood, not of
the Godhead. If any boiect, that which follows, Relinqui a Patre, morisail
Filio. This forsaking of the Father, is but that the Sonr^ dyed. He means
here that death which was awarded for sin: that is, both of the Soul and
Flesh.

Derectifid. ad Theodos.
Cyrill also, Carnem quidem suam in redemptionis precium pro carne omnium
impendens, and animam suam similiter pro omnium anima redemptionis precium
constituens. He bestowed his Flesh as a ransom for our flesh: likewise he made
his Soul a price of redemption for our Souls.

Thus much have we of the ancient Writers, and much more no doubt, as they know
who are better conversant in them ^hen my self. Howbeit this suffices to
^hewe that they held, Christ to have suffered properly in his Soul for our
sins, and that his Soul was made an Offering and price of redemption, and
not his flesh only. Yea that his Soul ^elt the separatio of the Godhead in his
person, and that he withdrew at that time all comfort from the same, and so
sustained the same Curse, the like punishment, which we should have done.
Wherefore surely the ancient times since the Apostles have also known and
taught and believed even that which we teach, and believe in this behalf.
There are also some of the modestest Cusanus in Ps. 30. Perus in Man. ^6.
Papists that here do join with us likewise. But to come to the Protestant
Writers, let this be chieflic noted: Protestants, teach as we do. Never was
there any voice heard any where openly to the contrary, before now in London
of Anno 1597.
late. Except only the whotest and cunningest Papists, Iesuists, Priests, and
Friars, who in deed always until this day, have had this controversy with all
Protestants, and all Protestants against them. As Tom. 1. Con. 2. L^b. 4. cap.
8
Bellarmine, and Rat. 8.
Campian, principal Jesuits, do testify, De Christo Patient. Dialog. 5.
Feuardentu^^ the Friar, and our Annotat. in Mat. 27.46. Heb. ^.7.
Rhemish Seminary Priests In whom, and specially in Bellarmine and Feu
ardentius we find the very argument and reasons, or rather the silly sophismes
which it has pleased some among us to gather together, and to paint the^ with
fair colors, and to scatter them in England as precious stuff. Now lastly if
we look: to our selves in England, al our worthy Preachers and Writers hitherto
have bin clear contrary always Mr Answer to the Rhem. Testam. in Mat. 27 46.
and Heb. 5.7.
Fulk in his answer to ye Rhemists: Lectur. in Hebr.
Mr Deering, whose name is still reverend in London: Mr Whitakers, a noble light
in our Churches of late, Contr. Durae. page 558.
says thus: Erat Deus nobis propter peccatu^ ^ratisumus, Christus se
interposuit, ciusqueirae vim omnem in se vnum effusam sustinuit. Qui ergo
Christam nihil huiusmodi) sensisse putat, and peccati magnitudinem and Dei
iustitiam, and Christi meritum ^^lli^. Quod non fuerit absorptus. Deitati
tribuendum est God was most wrathful with us for sin: Christ put him
^^^^^^-tweene, and sustained all alone the whole veheme^cie of his wrath poured
upon him. He therefore that thinks Christ felt not (any such thine) does
take away the grieuousnes of sin, the justice of God, and the merit of
Christ. It was because of his Godheads assistance, that he was not overwhelmed
and swallowed up quite.

And besides these, many other most excellent men, and namely Mr Nowell in his
On the article of the Creed He descended into Hell.
Catechism is so pregnant in this point, as no man living is more. This
Catechism is authorized in a whole Syn. Land. Anno 1578.
Synod, and commanded to be taught to all our youth in England. Also our great
Annotat. in Luke 22.44.
Bible appointed by Authority to be read in public Churches expreslie says
as much. Is not this now our English Churches express and constant doctrine,
it being never repealed since? Yes verily. Considering also that the now In
the Admonit. to the people of Engl. page 66.
Archishop of Canterbury with 3. other great Bb. have expressly given it this
allowance. Howsoever of late he has by his letters As it is cortainly reported
allowed Mr Bilsons contrary doctrine that it might be printed, albeit yet it
proceeded not. To conclude, I will add now finally the consent not of one or
two, nor of our Churches in England simply, but of our public Laws of the
Realm, that it may thoroughly appear our doctrine to be the public authorized
doctrine of England. The book of Homilies, established by Eliz. An. 13 cap. 12.
Act of Parliament has thus: Homil. 1. of the Passion.
In the beginning of the Homil, of the Passion, or presently after, setting
down certain parts and degrees of Christ's passion, first how he delivered him
self of his heavenly glory, and debased him self to the condition of a man,
yea of such a man as was subject to many infirmities and disgraces, by and by
he comes to his death on the Cross, as the last and greatest part of his
suffering The which he expresses thus, He put him self between Gods deserved
wrath and our sin. Where this Even as also M. Whitak: uses this phrase page
11.
putting him self between Gods deserved wrath and our sin being expressly made
a part and degree of Christ's suffering for us, it follows that the Homely
expressly teaches Christ suffered the wrath of God for us as a part of his
Passion and price of redemption. Again it says, Homil. 2. of the Passion.
He took upon him the just reward of sin. Then reward is that which Gods law
appo^^^ against sin: which is the Genesis 2.17.
death of^ Soul (as it is called) in deed the fee of the fierce wrath of God,
and not the^ dily death only. Thus seeing also by Hom, sentence, Christ took
upon him th^^ reward of sin: Surely the doctrine of (...) Churches publicly
allowed by Law^ England, does plainly avouch that Ch^^^ suffered the wrath of
God for us. And (...) soever says nay, he resists, yea h^^^ praueth In
saying it is heretical, impious, and blasphemous.
the doctrine of Christ authou^^ in England.

And here is it likely (Christian broth^^ that all the late holy men of God
sho^^ hitherto universally err, and only these pistes, their Jesuits, their.
Friars, and tra^terous Priests, have the truth herein: against us? In this so
great a light of the Gospel, as lately has shined out of da^^nes, and in this
so weighty, and religious^ cause? I say, is this likely by any mean. Neither
has this point ben covered in ^lence, but namely and particularly siste^ and
tried to the quick, and always noubly approved and determined every when
against the Papists. What injury then this to Gods Church, for one that
profeseth himself a friend, to agree with non: in such a case, but with the
enemies there of? But let it be possible that all Protestant^ hitherto have
herein erred, and now some one or two of them begin to spy the truth out of
Bellarmine: I will not simply deny, but this is possible to be, although
nothing more unlikely. Yet is this likely that only the author of this
conceit with us, a man of wealth, plenty, and worldly honor, should have this
singular truth revealed unto him, before all the rest of our most worthy
laborers in Gods church this many years, who were certainly, in all men's
reason, far likelier for diverse respects to discern of the feelings of
conscience, and of the wrath of God for sin: and so consequently might he or
they see better, how needful it was that the Son of God should taste thereof,
or not, to free us therfrom? Surely I must needs say, to think him the
likeliest of all other which have gone before, and yet are, most singular
lights, to find out this doctrine for us, that point verily I can never
admit, albeit I judge him not, nor any man. Only I hope, I have sufficiently
cleared this our first quaestion, and proved it by the Scriptures, that Christ
has suffered for us the wrath of God to redeem us from it. The which I wholly
submit to the judgment of the Godly, desiring them only to consider, what I
have before written: which also most gladly I do in all other things,
whatsoever hereafter I do, or shall write.

THAT CHRIST AFTER HIS DEATH ON the Cross, went not into Hell in his Soul.
THis we ought also in Christian fa^^ to believe, that Christ after his dea^
on the cross, went not into Hell in his sou^^ And here because that article
(...) our common Creed will be objected straigh^ against us, He descended into
Hell, we will be Gods help first make plain this article according to
Christian verity and the Sc^^pturs sense: Secondly we will prove our assertion
by the Word, that Christ we^^ not into Hell after his death on the cross. And
first to say somewhat in general of our common Creed usually called the
Apostles Creed: Tou^bing the common Creed called the Apostles Creed what we
are to acknowledge.
we acknowledge it to be an excellent short sum of Christian faith: wherein
are all the necessary and chief heads of salvation comprised, and nothing
but is consonant to the Apostles doctrine, being taken aright. Also we
acknowledge it so ancient, as if the Godly Christiaus gathered it not in the
Apostles times, yet certainly, it was very soon after them. For Ad Trall:
Ignatius runs upon the very articles of this Creed: Irenaus, Tertullian,
Origin, Eusebius, do show likewise that such a rule of faith was ancientlie
known before their times. So that we know it could not be mane very long
after the Apostles times: I mean if not this whole Creed as now it is, yet
surely a great part of it, and namely this article, He descended to Hades,
whereof Ignatius in the foresaid place does speak, and others most ^uncient
likewise. For we must know as the truth is, The common Creed not made all at
once.
This Creed was made not all at once, but sundry articles were made and added,
some after other as occasion required, til it came to this whole sum and
fulnsse, which now it is at. For when by occasion of Heretics arising and
calling in question any maine poincte of faith, open error began to assail
the Church, then the Godly and careful Christians resisted and armed the
people as they could against the danger, then they contrived some short article
of faith to be learned and held generally and of the simplest, whereby as it
were by one familiar word they might be prepared against the infection then
spreading, and so might be sufficiently grounded in the truth. This appears
to be so, not only by the practice of the In Nie: C^^^stant: Sph^s: (...).
ancient Councels, who added to their Creeds words and article: directly
against the Heretics who then troubled the^, but even in this also, called the
Apostles Creed it must needs be so: Seeing in the most ancient records
thereof, all the articles are not found full and whole, which after were added,
but those only whereof the Churches had need in thou former times. The Creed
was not made by the Apostles
And this is one sure proof^ that this common Creed was not made indeed by the
Apostles the^ selves, because it appears (as I said) to have been gathered and
made part by part as the after occasions in ye Church required. And though it
were called the Apostles Creed, yet tha^ verily was only because it agrees
with the Apostles doctrine. Neither could a^ the Apostles communicate together
in making it: Some being presently dead after Christ's ascension, and many
scattere^ far and wide in the world. And if some of them only made it, their
names would have been recorded. Finally if it had but made by the Apostles in
deed, then i^ had been Canonical Scripture, as well as the new Testament.
But the Creed was never so judged nor believed to be Canonical scripture.
Therefore it was neu^^^ believed of old, neither ought it now, to be the
Apostles very making. And yet as I said, we know it to be most ancient, and
very near to the Apostles times: yea this very article of Christ's descending
to Hades. Because Ignatius speaks of it, and others, as I have above
rehearsed.

Here then, let all men know, we deny not this Article of our Creed, but we
embrace it unfeignedly, and do hold it to have been profitably added, when it
was first put into the Creed, when and by whom soever it was, so that the
reason and meaning thereof be wisely and rightly regarded.

no dark no obsewe nor diffioulte word in the oulgare Creed.
And further we affirm, it has no dark nor figurative meaning nor far
removed from the usual phrase of the Greek language wherein it was written,
but it has a plain easy and vulgar sense familiar to the understanding of
all, that spoke Greek after the true language. Heretics, as if we denied an
Article of our faith, for teaching thus much: as some more hastily then wisely
have pronounced.

But you will say, What phrase, what meaning, For the right understanding of
this Article, it is necessary to know what Hades in Greek does properly
signify
and what use of speech is this that I speak of? Surely it is the proper and
usual meaning of Hades in Greek that I speak of: that I specially require
to be well known and regarded: that which in deed opens the whole present
controversy of Christ's descending. For this I affirm, it is only the Fathers
abusiue spea king, and altering the usual and ancient sense of Hades, that
has bred this error of Christ's descending into Hell: their unapt and
perilous translating it into Latin Insers, and our naughty and corrupt
translation in English Hell, has confirmed the same. with the Fathers, yea
with some of the ancientest of them to alter and chaung^ the authentike use of
words, whereby consequently it is easy for errors and gros^ mistakings to
creep in. As Chirotonia (...) signify Ordination of Ministers, when (...)
signifies authenticallie the Peoples g^uing of voices in Election: Kleros to
signify only the Clergy, when 1. Pet. 5.3.
it signifies (...) the Flock: Ecclesia to signify a Diocese o^ Province of
Christians, when it is always i^ Scripture a particular Church, or else in dee^
the Universal Church. So the Latins use Miritum to signify good works,
which authentically signifies merit or desert: Claues the Keys, to signify
only Church-gouernement, when in Scripture it signifies always the whole
Ministerial power and function, the word, sacraments, and prayer, as well a
discipline. Even so truly the Greek Fathers use Hades and the Latin Inferi,
to signify Hell properly and patticularly, that is, the place of the Damned:
or else an other particular place under the earth a part of Hell, and not far
from Hell it self, when Souls remained if not in pains yet in prison, and
far from the place of eternal blessedness and joy: which the The dream of
Limbus Patrum.
later Writers have since fondly named Limbus Patrum. Thus I say have the
Fathers written and spoken, applying Hades and Inferos so particularly to the
place for Souls under the earth, far from eternal blessedness. But this is a
mere and a plain abusio^ of these words, and specially of our word most in
quaestion, that is Hades. They have much altered and changed the authentike and
true use thereof. The Classical Writers the Masters of the Greek tongue do
use Hades in proper sense only in general for the state of the dead, The true
and authentike and familiar sense of Hades.
the world of the dead, the world of souls departed, indifferently and
indefinitelie meaning as well those in eternal joys as those in pains. So
that they signify herein a general opposition between the Living and the
Dead, not a particular opposition between the Damned and the Blessed. Examples
hereof in the authentike greek Authors are frequent. Plato the wise Master
Plato in Phadons.
says thus, speaking in the person of Socrates, a little before his death: He
psyche ara, to aides, to eis torou^ton topon heteron otchomeaon, gennaion, kai
katharon, kai aid, eis Hadou, hos alethos, para ton agatho^ kai phronimon
Theon: h^t, an Theos ethele, antika kai te heme psyche iteon. The soul being
an invisible thing goes (hence) to another place like (to it self, that is
to) a noble place, and pure, and invisible, even eis Hadon.
unto the Would of the dead, that is in truth, to the good and wise God:
whither if God will my soul must presently go. This most singular place
shows that Hades with them is not properly for Hell, but for the World of the
dead, and sometime, as namely here, even for Heaven: and that so it is named
Why Hades does naturally betoken the World of the Dead.
Hades because it is a^les invisible, or hidden from our eye and sense in this
world. We must note then, Socrates hops not here to go to Hell, but to
Heaven presently after his death: and that is it that he calls Hades. As
again he affirms (...) onti esontai en hadou hai psychas hemon Our (...)
after this life shall be in Hades truly or in very (...) Again he says of
Heaven, that it is aides (...) hades, hosper legetas: an unseen Estate, even
Hade Note, as it is commonly called.
as it is (commonly) called. Lastly he speaks (...) ta en Hadou agatha, of
the good things in Hade^ there is little good in Hell. Wherefore it (...)
plain by Plato, Hades sometime may be understood of Heaven: yea and with the
Grecians it was a common phrase. Likewise Plutarch shows of Leonidas the
Spartan King that most noble defendor of h^s Country, In Parall.
when with a handful of men he would resist the huge hosts of Persi^ though
he knew well that himself and his were all like to be slain, as they were in
deed, yet he cheered up his m^n not to fear such a blessed death, saying,
we shall so break our fast, that we shall suppe i^ Hades not in Hell, that
were a cold comfort, but amongst the blessed departed. So H^mer says, Iliad.
1.
many noble souls were sent aidi to Hades, not to Hell, but to the society of
the happy deceased. And Stephan Steph. Thesaur. in Hades.
cites Plutarch peri ton eusebeon en Hadou. Concerning the Godly departed,
and being in Hades, that is in Heaven he meant, I think, not in Hell.
Therefore the authentike Authors of the Greek tongue did use Hades for the
place of the blessed souls also, not properly for Hell, the place of the
damned, although no man denies but And that also even as well as it is taken
for Heaven. For both ways it is restrained by a fi^u^e: viz. Sy^e^doche, the
whole for the part.
sometime it serves even for Hell it self in deed.

This were enough to learned and reasonable men for the clearing of the true
and proper sense of Hades in Greek. But because I fear this question will not
so quickelie end, it shall serve very well for the better openinge of the
sense of this Greek word, if we compare the Latin word Inferi therewith,
which with them was used to signify the same thing as Hades in Greek did,
albeit indeed Inferi was not so fit to express generally both the blessed and
damned dead indifferently, as anon God willing we shall further see.

Now first therefore let us compare and consider likewise the authentike and
proper use of Inferi the Latin as we have done of Hades the Greek word. The
authentike sense of Inferi.
Inferi with the Latins is used authentically as we have seen Hades is in
Greek, not for the damned only, but also for the blessed departed this life:
indeed generally for the world of the dead, which by death are not clean
extinct but do live somwhere else in another life. So; did Cicero mean, Tuscul.
qu^st. 1.
where he shows in latin that incouragment of Leonidas before touched to his
associates, that they should not fear to dye for their Country, Forti animo
estu^, nam coenabimus forte apud inscros, Be of goo^ cheer (said he) for it
is likely we shall suppe, where? in Hell? Nay verily: Neither Leonidas nor
Tully thought so, but ^ther in a place of eternal blessedness, where they
believed the most worthy defendours of their Country were received, as
Socrates before said of him self about to dye, para ton agathon kai phronima
Theon, with the good and wise God. Yet this place he names here Inferos. Hence
also it is that Cicero says, In ^rut^.
It is an Orators part, sometime Locupletassimos tefles ab in Inferis
excitare, to raise up witnesses from the dead, not from H^. For he means that
which him self he did for In Orat. pro Milon.
Miloes defense, bringing the examples of the worthy and blessed old defendors
of the common wealth, Hala Seruilius, Nasica, Opimius, C. Marius, and Epist. ad
Octa^.
Old Africanus, Maximus, Paulus, Scipto, and the two Dec^ which would
grieve at the Common Wealths calamity, when any going unto them in illam
aeternam domum, should tell them of it. This eternal habitation of these most
noble dead men called thus to witness, was not Philip. 14.
Hell in his judgment, yet generailie he reckoned them to be apud Inferos.
For so thought and so spoke these Heathens: as also Virgill does, Aeneid. 6.
Deuenere locos laetos, etc. Where he describes Elysios campos their Heaven,
the goodly Elysian fields, the eternal habitation of the blessed to be apud
Inferos, but not in Hell, which in our English tongue is properly the place
of the damned only. Who surely though being a Poet, and feigned many things,
yet spoke he familiarlie and after the vulgar use, also for the substance of
his matter, he uttered touching Heaven and Hell the opinion of the world
then. Which also Hortentius commenting on the same place does show, saying:
Veteres Elysium putarunt in medio inferorum situm in quo piorum animae
quiescere^t. Philosophi in Insulis Fortunatis, etc. The ancient Heathen
believed their Heaven to be beneath in the world of the dead, where the
souls of the godly had rest. The Philosophers thought it to be in the
Fortunat Islands, etc. Hereunto let us add, that the latter learned Writers,
even Christians, have also espied and granted this property of the Latin
word Infernum or inferi, as also of the Greek Hades. In Ose. 13.1^.
Jerome says, Infernus is a place where the souls are included either in rest
or pains. The old Latin Tra^slator uses infernu^ not only for Hades but also
for Acts 2.24.
Thanatos death, also 1. Cor. 15.55.
Mors for Hades: So he esteems Hades and Infernum (both these words) for very
Death. In Mat. 2^ 50.
Bucer, No^ al^ter vspiam Scriptura de inferno loquitur qua^ vt sit communis
omnibus tam sanctis quam impijs. Gehenna autem solis impijs tribuitur. The
scripture no where speaks of Hades or Infernum but as being common as well
to the blessed as to the damned. But Gehenna is proper only for the damned. In
Ezec. 3^.1^.
Lauater says, Hades apud Greces generale vocabulu^ est. Hades in Greek is a
general word for the condition of the dead both i^ torments and in peace.
D^^ad. 1.7
Bullinger, To go ad inferos, is To go into Abraham's bosom: that is into
He^uen, not into Hell. In Esa. 33.
Zwinglius, Port a inferorum es^ periphrasis mortendi. The gates of Death is
nothing else but a phrase signifying Death. In Psalm. 16.10.
Moller touching Sheol, Hades, and Infernum, says, they do but signify that
Christ dyed. As if he should say, Ideo latatus sum quia futurums^n, vt
quanquam morte^dum mibi sit, tamen in vuan redeam. Therefore I rejoice because
I know, that although I dye, yet I shall rise to life agayue. In Symb.
Pe. Mart. Christum descendere ad inferos nibil aliud indicat, nisi quod cundem
subijt statum quem reliqua animae a corpore sejunctae experjuntur. That Christ
desc^ded to the dead signifies nothing else, but that de did udergoe the same
state as other souls do yt depart this life. Thus comparing the Latin
Inferos, and the Greek Hades together, we see that the ancient and late
Authors do signify by them both the general state of the dead, the world of
the dead, containing Heaven for the blessed, as well as Hell for the wicked
indifferently. Hades signifying a dark place, and Inferi a place beneath the
earth or in the earth, that these words I say should any way signify Heaven,
and the blessed souls there. Seeinge all wise men would rather think that this
is rather Hell, where is utter darkness: as for Heaven it is certainly a place
of glorious brightness, and that on high, not downwards. I answer: Hades al
men grant, it comes of a the Greek privative, and eido to see. But here is
the error: some men take it so as betokeninge impossibility for vt to see
being there, by reason of darkness and ougly blacknes in that place: and the^
this is likely to be nothing but Hell. Nay, they are deceived that give this
reason of the Etymology of Hades, if they give it for the full, perfect, and
general Etymology, and as being even with the natural use of the word. Plato
In Phaedon^.
in the place above cited, who knew it better the^ any of our Contraries, does
give another and a better meaning of this Deriuation: Where alluding to hades
he says it is topos aides a place invisible, a place which here in this world
none can see, an invisible world. And so the World of the dead generally and
not only Hell, is thereby properly and naturally noted. Which Tertullian Ap^l.
^.1^.
expresses thus, a notitia orbis communis segregatum, removed from the worlds
knowledge. This is certainly the true Deriuation of Hades: and so it may
rightly, truly, and by a natural emphasis signify Heaven sometime, if other
Circumstances there do so require, and not Hell, as in the former authentike
Greek Testimonies by the very circumstances of the places I have proved, and
even so also out of question it is taken in Acts 2.27.
the ground of our controversy, and in the A. postles Creed, where it is said
that Christ be^^^ dead went to Hades, he went to the World of the dead, that is
namely to the blessed souls in Heaven: I say in Heaven, not that Hades (...)
self does so importe, but because he that dyed was a Blessed man. But some
will say, Hades from a privative and eido, to see has been judged otherwise,
that is for a place where in we can not see, and then it will follow that it
should signify a dark place. Hades may admit that reason of the Etymology,
and so the Poet alludeth to it sine luce domus, a place without light. And the^
it signifies, first the Grave where is no light: and by a Metaphore from hence
it may be used for Hell, where in reason we judge also that there is ougly
darkness, and no light. Thus I say no man doubts but Hades sometime
signifies: but this is never unless, Synecdoche.
by a figure synecdoche the whole for the part, the full and just sense thereof
by some manifest circumstance be restrained. The full and just sense is the
general state of the dead, the world of the dead, as before I have showed: so
that it rightly and properly notes a difference between the dead and the
living, not between the damned and the blessed. And yet it is true this is
sometime restrained as I have said, by the circumstances in the place where we
find it: and then it is sometime for the place of the body being dead, sometime
of the soul departed being in Hell: and sometime also for the place of souls
in Heaven, as I have declared before also. Hades, where it need not to be
restrained: and most of all that we take it not for Hell, where it may, nay
where it must signify Heaven, as in the places of this our maine controversy
aforesaid.

It is easy to slip into error by the use of ye Latin Inferi or Infernum in
the Creed, unless we carefully consider the ancient use thereof.
Howbeit notwithstanding all this, compare the Latin Inferi with the Greek
Hades, and then I grant Inferi is proner to bring us into error then Hades.
For it is true Inferi comes of Infra which is beneath: and therefore it
seems there is no other way but to take it for a place beneath the earth, or
in the earth, and not on high, where it is to be thought that Heaven is and the
blessed souls do dwell. Inferi in Latin use does comprehend all that Hades
in Greek does: even the whole state or World of the dead generally, making
Bulling Dec. 1.7.
opposition properly between Superstites and Defunctos, the Living and the
Dead (as before was said of Hades) without difference of the bless^^ and
damned, unless also some other reason and circumstance do restrain the words
ancient and proper generality. The plain reason of this, we may learn from
Cicero him self, Says he Tuscul. g^ast. 1.
That Inferi sh^^^ signify the state of all the dead both good and bad
generally, it grew of an error of the Ancients, in terram cadentibus corpu^
bus hisque humo tectis, sub terra consebant reliqu^^ vitam agi mortuorum. The
old simple ignorant Latins thought when the bodies of m^^ were laid in the
earth, their souls also lived the rest of their life under the earth. This
they thought of all the dead, both the Blessed and the Damned. And this, says
he they thought because they knew not (...) deed of the souls of the dead
qua in sede manerent, in what place they were after death: Cu^^^ ignoratio
says he further, sinx^t Inseros, easque formidines, etc. The ignorance of
truth herein, begin this opinion that the state and World of the Dead was
v^der the earth; vid particularly the terrors of Hell also. And so in deed not
the opinion only, but the phrase also whereby they signified this general state
and World of the Dead, was justly and most fitly, as they thought, from Infra
beneath, viz. inferi and infernus And so they spoke also excitare ab inferis,
to raise up, not from Hell, but generally and indifferently from the Dead:
migrare ad inferos to go to the dead, common as well to those whom they
believed to be Blessed, as to the Damned. Also thus they believed Elysios
campos esse apud inferos, the Elysian fields (...) namely the Gentiles Heaven)
to be be^^eath amongst the dead: as already I have ^hewed out of Virgil,
Cicero, etc. Now Tully ^urther says of this opinion, Quam little ^pinionem
magni errores consecuts sunt: This opini^n gave occasion of many and great
errors. Touching Inferi in Cicero (...) things to be noted.
In all which words of Cicero I note 3. things. 1. That he utterly misliked
this opinion of ye ^old Latins or whom soever, that thought (...) World of the
dead was under the earth, and therefore gave this term Inferi to signify the
same. This he openly misliketh, yea that the damned Souls were beneath in the
earth, or at least such kind of torments for the^ as consequently the former
error did cause many to imagine. How much more did he condemn them that
thought al ye deceased souls were beneath, under, or in ye earth? The blessed
he thought rather, as Plato did, to asce^d up to the heavens. Here we must note
that the Heathen held diversely of their Heaven, the place for the blessed
souls. As Tertull. shows: in lib. de Anima.
Some thought it in the Heavens above, some in the air, some in the Sphere of
the moon, and others as before we heard in the fortunate Islands, and many,
specially the common sort, and most specially in the old times long before,
that it was an other Region under the earth, as Hell it self also was one, but
this clean distinct and removed from that which they called Their Heau^.
Elysium, as before I observed out of Virgill. This last opinion that the
souls deceased were under the earth Ci^^ here flatly rejects.2. I note in
hi^ that although he rejected this old fab^lous opinion of the Latins, yet he
^erayned the Latin phrase as being now common and familiar every where, ad
inferos, (...) inferos generally for the world of the de^^. Which phrase arose
of old from that opinion, as namely, thinking all the dead after this life to
be infra beneath. He had learned to think wiselyer, but yet he spoke so as
the vulgar phrase had prevailed. According to Topic.
Aristotle's rule, Loquend^^ vt vulgut, sapiendum vt sapientes, we must speak
as (...) custom is, but believe as the wise do. So then yet this phrase of
speech remained common, though the ground of it even then was held fabulous of
diverse.3. Tully says, of this opinion followed many errors. Now as he
says from this opinion amongst the Heathen, phrase of speech Inferi received
amongst Christians, but first grounded on the heathnish opinion, there has
followed many errors in the Church. The Fathers not duly considering the right
use of Inferi and Hades, gave occasion of the errors at this day about Hell
and Death.
For this word Inferi being used amonst the Christians vulgarly and
familiarly, but taken from the Heathen, and the reason thereof not duly
considered whence it first arose, namely that it was an error to think the
souls of the dead were under the earth: likewise also the Greek word Hades,
when men mistook the Etymology of it as meaning a ^ark^ place, when rather it
betokens a place ^nuisible to us here, as before I have showed: (...) say
both these mistakeings amongst the Fathers prevailing, have given occasion both
to them and us since of great and grievous errors, and of all this contention
^n the Church here bout at this day. To remedy the which, doubtless the best
way is well and thoroughly to consider the authentike use of these words Hades
and Inferi, in such sort as before I have declared. And then this will appear
that our English word Hell which we commonly use for the former Greek and
Latin, Hell in English no fit word to express the Greek Hades.
it fitteth not, it differs greatly, it is much amiss. And specially it
serves not for Hades, as before I have showed. For Hades signifies an
invisible place, and is used authentically for the World of the dead in
general, the invisible World unknown to us here, So that it makes difference
not between the damned and blessed, as some suppose, but between the dead and
the living: but Hell in English is properly and only the place of eternal
torments for the wicked.

Thus hitherto by comparing also the Latin Inferi and the Greek Hades
together, we see now clearly what the authentike use of Hades is. And seeing
we see it. I infer and affirm boldly, Even so doubtless do the Scripture,
speak, so write the Apostles, yea the Septuagint Translators, and all Good
Grammarians.
good Grecians: they varie^ not their language from the usual, know^, current
speech which was spoken in ar^ before their times. And if so they do, then it
remains concluded and firml^ proved that the Scripturs by Hades mea^^ not
Hell properly: but the World of the De^^ indifferently, or the general state of
dea^^, or the Power of death, unless sometime where special circumstances do
restraine^ proper and native generality of that word. Hades any other way then
only for Hell. Hades, according to the use of the authentike Authors, (by whom
even the Apostles words must be Grammaticallie construed, I suppose^ plainly
refuteth them. Wherefore I constantly affirm as before, the Scripture uses
Hades never properly for Hell. And this I affirm not only because of the
former authentike consent with me about the word, but also because all the
several places, eight in number, where Hades is used in Scripture, The
Scripture has Hades in 8. places.
being well considered, they show the same manifestly: also for that the
Seauentie Interpretours do use it so too, and finally because Sheol in
Hebrewe, which all men know to be the same that the Greek Hades is,
signifies likewise so too.

Mat. 16.18.
The gates of Hades shall not prevail against the Church. He speaks here
of persecution and suffering death for the faith of Christ. But says ^hee,
This shall not prevail against you: What? Death and Destrustion shall not. So
that the gates of Hades here are nothing ^els but the gates of Death, the
power of Death, shall never prevail, though they assail you. And this phrase
seems to be taken from the use of the Jews, who executed their severe
judgments of life and death in the gates of their Cities. Hence the phrase
seems to come, Ny a. Metonymie.
The gates of Death, for the power of those Rulers which should Except we
esteem it but as a simple Hebraisme, as Isa. 38.10. Where the gates of Sheol
is nothing else but Death, or the power and strength of Death.
condemn to death the godly for their faith and a good conscience, and yet
not prevail. That we should translate here, the gates of Hell, meaning
directly vices, and sins, and erroures, as some of the ancient Writers do,
the circumstances of the Text do seem not to bear it. For by occasion, as
seems of the ver. 21.
former incouragme^t to his faithful and godly ones, he falls to tell them
of his own suffering at Jerusalem soon after, where though he should be
betrayed and slain, yet should he rise again the third day, as it were
giving them an example and that first of all in himself of that combat and
victor^^ which verse 18.
before he promises them, and incourageth them unto. So then he does not here
directly and specially arm them, nor promises conquest against the
temptations of sin, though by proportion that also follows from this plac^^
but he encorageth his to stand to the^^ faith manfully against all
persecutours, seeing all their rage should not prevail, nor death it self
which should be ad^iged unto them in the gates, albeit it afflict them. Again
the gates of Hades shall not preuaill, these words do manifestly pretend force
and violence against them, which yet should not get the victory over them. But
errors and sins though by them Satan set upon us, yet they always pretend
contentment and quiet case toward us, not force and violence, as the rage of
persecutors does, and as here in this text is plainly signified. Wherefore
here surely Zwing. in Isa. 38. and others page 102.
the gates of Hades means the power of death and destruction and nothing else
properly. Neither also that the power of these Tyrants should be called the
gates of Hell do I see any reason: their Power is from God, and not from Hell.
Their malice moves not Gods children, but only as it threatens Death.
Therefore to call it here the gates of death it is good reason, and not the
gates of Hell, That is, regarding it as is in^eeds touches us.
as is above said. Howbeit if any will urge the common translation, and say
the gates of Hell, let him know this interpretation is received among the
learned not for the propriety of the word Hades, but for Namely, because this
malice and ^age of perse^^tors proceeds from Hell, and is stirred up by all
the power and might of Satan
a circumsta^ce of the text here requiring, it to be so translated, as they
conceive. And I confess that so here it may be, and do show that thus this
Hades is sometime used: and namely in the last example following out of Luke
Chap. 16.23. Yet properly Hades is nothing else but the Unseen World of the
Dead, not Hell. 2. Our present place cheiflie in quaestion is to be noted. Act.
2.27. taken out of Psa. 16.10.
Thou will not leave my soul (in Hades) with the dead, or in the unseen
world of the dead: nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Our common
translation has it, Thou will not leave my soul in the grave, etc which is
not much amiss, considering the scope of the Apostle and the manner of phrase
both in Hebrew and in Greek sometime, that is by a figure Synecdoche, the
whole for the part: as before I noted sometime it may be. But seeing a figure
here needs not, the most plain, and most natural, and familiar translation
should be thus, as I have no^ed: Thou will not leave my soul amongst the dead,
nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption. 1. That this is the natural and
proper sense of Hades, we have seen enough already by the authentike Greek
writers.2. That the Seauentie use it so to, after whose translation and phrase
Peeter here speaks: and; that the Hebrew word Sheol which is (...) original
of this phrase has the same sense likewise anon herafter we shall make
manifest, God willing. But to translate this Hell as some now will have it, that
is openly wrong and injurious to the text. And thus I prove it: First Psalm.
16.10.
David speaks it (...) some sort as true of Bulling. Decad. 1.7.
him self, being a type and figure of Christ, whom in deed in more special
wise it concerned. Again Peter in this point for the which he cites this verse
of the Psalm, Act. 2.39.
does plainly grant all this of David as well as of Chr^^, saving that David
was left therein even t^^l this day, which Christ was not. But this is only the
state of death, and the grave which David is yet left in, not Hell in any
wise, yea he was never in Hell. Therefore Hades and Sheol here can not be for
Hell. Secondly, if it be altogether here from the purpose of Peter to
speak to the Jews of Christ's soul being in Hell, then there is no reason to
take these words Hades and Sheol here for Hell. But by the Acts 2.
whole text it is evident, Peter had no reason nor purpose to speak to these
Jews of Christ's Soul being in Hell. His whole direct purpose was to show
them of his Soul being amongst the dead, and his body in the grave, like as
other men are when they die, and was from thence mightily raised up again, more
then other men were or could be. Therefore Hades and Sheol here do signify
the state of death, and not Hell. The first proposition stands on plain and
manifest reason, specially seeing these are the very words that he verse 31.
presses and stands on, to show them how Christ being truly dead, was yet
risen again. And as touching the assumption, that is most apparaunt, Peter had
no reason in the world, and therefore no purpose to speak to these Jews of
Christ's Soul being in Hell. 1. They being incredulous and unbelieving.2. The
thing being invisible and strange, and uncouth, not subject to the sense, and
without all example of the like.3. He intending nothing else in all this speech
to them, but to teach that this JESUS whom they had slain, was not now dead,
but risen again, why should he now speak of Hell: What reason had he? If
Christ had been in Hell, it made not necessarily neither for his death, nor
resurrection, which was the only scope of his speech (verse 31.) but being an
uncouth and invisible thing, it might rather hinder their faith, then further
it. Therefore verily the state of death is all that Hades and Sheol do here
signify: and it is the whole and only purpose of Peter here so to testify.

Rev. 6.8.
3. One sits on a pale horse whose name (...) death, and Hades followed after
him. That is, the world of the dead, Regnum mortucrum. If you refer it only
to our bodies, then it may be the grave. But rather I take it generally for the
state of the dead after this life. It can not be Hell certe^ly: because the
text adds Power was given them to slaye with its sword, and with famine, and
death, and with wild beasts. Hell slays none in that sort. Again it is
said, they had power, on the fourth part of the world. But to say preciselie
that the fourth part of the world at any time should go to Hell, I take it
to be a strange phrase in the Scripture. In a word this place is nothing else
but a prophecy of great mortality that at a certain time should come upon the
world for the contempt of the Gospel, and that they should dye by such means
as are there specified. Wherein Hell deals not, neither shows any power.
Therefore Hades here can not be Hell.

Rev. 20.14.
4. Death and Hades, (that is the place or world of the dead, or the kingdom
and power of death) were cast into Hell. It were absurd to say, Death and
Hell were cast into Hell: and therefore so we say also in the verse before,
Death and the World of the Dead, rendered up their dead to judgment. 1. Cor.
15.55
O Death, where is thy victory? O Hades, where is thy stinge? Neither can this
be meant of Helli because al his speech here is of the resurrection from ^he
dead, and this very speech is an Death (...) swallowed up in victory. ver. ^4.
insulting and triumph, as it were, over Death and the power of Death: seeing
they shall not be able to hold them, whom they shall get into their power. As
for Hell. that would not be adversary to the resurrection, but would desire
it rather, as being greedy of the bodies also of the damned which th^^ it
should have together with their souls, and not before. He speaks not then of
the damnation of the wicked, but of the Resurrection of the dead. Note also,
he does plainly allude to that of the Prophet Ose. 13.14.
Ose Sheol, O grave, or O world of the dead, I will be thy destruction. Not o
Hell: for the Prophet speaks to comfort Israel in their captivity, where
though they were for their rebellion against God destroyed grieuouslie a long
time, yet at length he promises to stay his judgments, and Death should not
devour them any more, it should not have her former power upon Gods people,
but they should live and florishe again, if they repented. And this the Apostle
might very fitly allude unto, when he spoke of the resurrestion, which might
be notably compared to Isreal's return out of the Lacus. Zech. 9.11.
pit of misery in Babilons Captivity. But of hell there could be no direct
nor proper moaning, neither in the one nor the other. Rev. 1.^.
I have the Keys of Hades and of Death: That is nothing else but Christ, who
was dead, has now overcome death, and has power to dye no more. He has
overcome death and holds the power thereof for him self and others. For him
self, in that he can and will dye no more. For others, in that he can give
to death whom he will, and whom he will he saves. This therefore is a plain
opposition to his former state when he was in death, but now shall be so no
men: and nothing else, as the beginning of the verse hanging together with this,
does express. I live, but was dead, and (now) behold I live for ever, and I
have the Keys of Hades and of Death. As if he should say: I am henceforth
no more subject, but superior thereunto. Here is nothing of Hell.

Mat. 11.23.
And thou Capernaum which art lift up to the Heaven, shall be brought down to
destruction, to Hades. He speaks here of the destruction of the City and
people thereof, which he calls Hades. And this is manifest: 1. By the notable
Oppositio^ of their lifting lifting up to the heaven, and their bringing down
to Hades. In the 1. he means not that they were lift up to eternal
blessedness, but only that they were lift up in renown, in pomp, and in
flourishing state, according as ye Latins speak also ad sydera tolls, To be
exalted to the sky. Wherefore in the later he means they shall be brought
down to destruction, to have no being ingloriouslie: that is Hades here in
this place, but not Hell.2. This is also manifest in yt he says presently of
Sodom, whereunto here he co^pareth Capernau^, if they had had the means of
repe^ta^ce in such manner as Capernau^ had, Sodom had remained to this day. This
shows he spoke but of Capernaums destruction, and of her not being on the
earth: and not of their damnation in hell by the word Hades.

Luke 16.23.
The rich man in Hades.
in the state of Death, or in the world of the Dead, lifted up his eyes being
in torments: Thus I say we may translate it, in the world of the dead, or being
amongst the dead, he lift up his eyes, etc. And the^ there is no text in all ye
Bible where Hades signifies Hell necessarily. But if we grant to say Hell in
this place for Hades, yet we affirm, this sense is given it for other
circumstances, not for ye nature of the word. Because he was such a man, and
because it is straight expressed he was in torments being dead. Therefore to
be in Hades, to be in the the World of the Dead, that was to him in deed to be
in Hell As for Hell in the Scripture it has another word Gehenna which
properly signifies it. As Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
Just. Martyr observes, he de Gehenna est i topos entha kolazesthai mellou si
hoi adikos biosantes, Gehenna Hell is a place where the wicked shall be
^ormented. Whereby is insinuated that Hades is not properly Hell, which Gehenna
is properly for. And thus Mr Bucer excellently observes not only in that Page
101.
before cited, but also on Luk, in Luke. 16.26. Hades and Gehe^na which in the
Scripture is only for Hell, are not all one.
Dives no^ simpliciter scribitur esse en hade, sed and in Gehe^na, quia in
tormentis and slamma. The rich man is not said to be simply in Hades, but
also in Hell: because he is said to be in syry torments. Therefore Hades and
Gehenna are not properly all one: and whersoeuer Hades is for Hell, there it is
taken by a figure synecdoche the whole for the part, the invisible state of
the dead for that where the damned are in torments. Thus then Hades in
scripture is no where properly for Hell.

The Septuagints do use Hades after the sense of the authentike Greeks.
Which also is further to be declared by the 70. Translatours. Whose words and
phrases the Apostles themselves used and chiefly followed in all their
allegationes from the old Testament. So that their using of Greek words and
phrases must needs be of great authority. These put Hades generally after the
authentike use for Death, the state of the dead: as Job. 33.22.
His soul draws near to the grave, and he zoe autou en hade. hs life is
among the dead, or in the world of the dead. And parokese to Hade he psyke
mou. Ps. 94. or after the Greek 93. ver. 17.
My soul had dwelt in the world of the dead. In Hebrew it is Dumah i^
scilence, that is in the estate of death. Again Psalm. 88.49.
ouk hoi nekros amesous^ se, oude hoi pantes katabainontes eis Hadou. The dead
praise thee not, o Lord, nor any that go down to the state of the dead. Here
also in Hebrew it is dumah to the place of silence. Further Psa. 111. or 113.
ver. 17.
what man lives, and shall not see death, rusetai ten psychen autou ek chiros
Hadou? shall he deliver his Soul from the power of the Unseen world, that is
from death? And psa 78.3.
My soul was filled with sorrows, kai he zoe mou to Hade engise, And my life
drew near unto the Dead, or to the world of the Dead. And Job says, Job.
17.13.
Hades mou ho oskes: The World of the Dead shall be my habitation. In all these
places and in many other such like of the 70. Hades can not be hell: but the
state or world of the dead. Finally consider the Hebrew word Sheol: The Hebrew
Sheol signifies the Estate of death, or the World of death likewise, as has
bone se^^^ in Hades.
Al men will grant that Sheol in Hebrew and Hades in Greek, as Ps. 1^.10.
here they are used for the same thing, so in deed every where else they are all
one. That is out of question. But it is manifest in the Scripture that Sheol is
generally used for the state of the death, the world of the dead, and
specially sometime for the soul, sometime for the body, sometime for the
good, sometime for the bad, according as the circumstances do imply: but
always for their state in death, and no further properly. And because it
comes of Shaal, Shaal.
to crave or ask, it signifies that this World or state of the dead, though
it takes infinite, yet it Abae. ^. ^. Kishol veea^^maueth, velo i^shbahh. Also
Pro. 30.16.27.20.
still takes, and is never satisfied. Neither ought any man to doubt that
Sheol has this familiar, ordinary, and natural signification, to note as I
said generally the state of death. There are innumerable places of Scripture
that do euince it, and chiefly that it is not properly Hell. First that
where Jacob says of Joseph whom he thought to be dead, Sheol not for Hell
properly, but for the general estate of Death.
Genesis 37.35.
Ered el beni abel Sheolah, I will go down mourning unto my son to the
place of the dead. Questionles he meant not into Hell, but into the place of
the dead that were dead in the Lord. Also Ezechia thought he should have gone
Isa. 38.1^
beshagnare Sheol, to the gates of death. He thought not that he should have
gone to Hell, but to the state of Death. And verse 18.
Lo sheol todhecha, The w^^^ of the Dead does not consesse thee, Death can not
pray^ thee, They that go down to the pit can not hope for up truth. All
this is meant not of the damned in Hell, but of them in the state of death. So
Ecclesiastes 9 10.
Bisheol is in the World of the dead, or in the state of Death: which the
cohere^ce does prove, which is between verse. 3.
bammet him the dead, and this here. Again, Job 14.13.
O that thou would h^^ me in the World of the dead, hisheol: Job would not
desire to be in Hell: and he says, the like shall come to him self Chap.
17.13.
Sheol beths My house shall be the place of the, dead: and all my hopes of
recovery in this world, shall go down with me verse 16.
badde sheol to the (...) else, on the Beer to the grave.
strong place of the world of the Dead. Howbeit Job was not so faithless as to
think he should go to Hell. Again Hose 13.14.
I will redeem them m^^d Sheol, from the power of Death: Sheol o Death, or o
kingdom of Death I will be thy destruction. This has bin showed Page 117.
before to be spoken directly and properly of the state of Death, or ye power
of Death, not of Hell. Which the old Latin tra^slator does also well Hose 13.14
observe, who turns ^^^ijad Sheol.
it a Morte from Death: again Hos. 13.14.
both inserne and 1. Cor. 15.55.
o Mors, that is, o Death. Further let it be noted yt in David, whose phrasewe
are now a ska^ning of, there is no word almost more common then Psalm. 89.49. and
88.4. and 18.6. and 16.10. etc.
Sheol in this sense: and specially there it is seen, where he expreslie
refers it to the Soul. The same also Job. 30.23.
Job means, where he speaks of He means Sheol.
Beth mogned lecol chai, the House appointed for all the living. Thus therefore
it is manifest that Sheol in Hebrew is not properly Hell, but it is the Worl of
the Dead, or the state of Death simply and indifferently. Which sense the
Sea^uentie do plainly confirm also: who sometime translate Sheol, Death:
Prove. 13.14
Mishcol ^k thanatou from Death, not from Hell, and sometime where they turn
Sheol Hades, yet it is most evident and undeniable that very Death, or the
estate of Death, or the power of Death is there meant: as in all those places
wherein we spoke of Sheol immediarly before. Therefore the 70. understand sheol
and hades also for the state of death simply and generally, not for Hell
properly. Even altogether after ye natural property of the word with the
authe^ take Grecians, as reason is that they should. hades and sheol being all
one, and namely with the 70. who do almost always use ye one for the other,
that therefore Hades and Sheol both do not fignifie Hell properly, but the state
of Death, the World or place of the dead, such as are g^n out of this visible
World into another. Also where hades and sheol are more specially taken for ye
Gen 42.3^. 1. King. 2.9. Isa. 14.10. compared with 11 E^e. 32.21.27 Ion. 2.2.
etc.
Grave or the state of dead Bodies, even here in effect it is all one as
before, they signify the state of Death: it is not possible yt they should be
for Hell properly and primarily in any of these and infinite more such like
places. Which besides all the former, Omnino sheol id quod Graci t^n Haden,
Latini infernis reddere solent. in Scripturis sepulchrum atque inde statum
mortuorum significat qualiscunque sit vel soelix vel insoelix. In Luke 16.26.
M. Bucer shows excellently: Sheol Hades and Insernum in Scripture do always
signify the Grave, and so the state of ye Dead whatsoever it be either happy
or cursed. And Sheol v^x Hebraea stationem quamlibet mortuorum in vniuersum
n^^at. In Psalm. 49.15.
Tremell. This Hebrew word Sheol does signify any station or state of the dead
in general: and Hell it may sometime signify but by a figure synecdoche.

Now then seeing the authentike Gracians do use Hades for the invisible World
after this life, that is for the World of the dead, yea Infer^ in Latin is
taken so to as we have seen, and seeing the new Testament has Hades sundry
times in like sense, and the 70. interpreters before them, and seeing the Hebrew
Sheol which they make to be and is indeed al one with Hades, Which is so
infinitely wide and large, that it is never full.
may and does signify also the unseen world, that it the World of the dead
generally. Therefore it follows that in our Creed also Hades is liable to
this sense, and for the force of the word there is no cause to translate it
Hell, and the Fathers by mere mistaking the proper and true use of this word
have fancyed such diverse and vain things, which foolish childien have since
amplified, of Christ's going down to Hell in his Scul^ after death, as neither
themselves knew, neither can they declare to others.

Sheol and Hades, to fit those words in our language. Psa. 1^.10. Act. 2.27.
and in other places.
Scripture. But this is evident, that which is commonly used and namely in our
vulgar Creedes, The English word Hell is not good in the Creed.
Hell, is a word to partial, to unfit, yea corrupt, and stark naught. It is
suitable to the largenes of the Hebrew and Greek meaning, though not so just
with the Nature of our word, to say in English, the Dead. As in the Creed, Or
if you will, say thus: He went into the unseen world etc.
He went unto the Dead: or, He descended among the Dead. Also Act. 2.17. Psa.
10.10.
Thou will not leave my soul with the Dead, nor thy holy one to see
corruption. Which as I have showed before, is the true, plain, easy,
familiar, and common sense of Hades among the authentike Greeks: as also of
Sheol in Hebrew.

Hades: they use it always or most commonly for Hell. Hell it self, or for a
place of darkness, a part of Hell, far from the place of Blessedness. And
yet they grant also, that it may be (yea and Insert to) used for Abraham's
bosom, where Lazarus had joy, and where was a great distance and contrariety
between Hell and it. What may this be, but the place of blessedness, I think,
even in their judgments? How soever it be, we stand not upon the Fathers
language to translate the Scriptures, or this Article of our Creed. The
Apostles and Apostolic men as also the Septuagint to, did write and speak as
the authentike Grecians did, as they learned to speak of the Masters of that
tongue, and as the people then might. best understand, not making phrases, nor
fitting their words to the latter writers that spoke and wrote long since
them. Therefore according to the authentike vseof Hades, so ought we indeed to
translate this both in English and Latin: Descendit ad mortuos, He descended
among the Dead.

to Dye: and that was expressed of Christ before, he was Dead, Buried, etc. But
in this short sum of Religion to repeat one point twice were needles, and
against the nature of a short sum. And to uses dark and hard phrase after a
plain and easy, is unreasonable and absurd. Hades is so: it is most easy (I
say) and Not if it be taken for Hell, for so it is taken but sometime. It is
very easy and samiliar if we take it generally for the world of the Dead.
plain to every Grecian, and most natural and proper in it self, as I have
sufficiently showed By many good authors. page 97. etc.
before. For we must remember our Creed was not written in English, and
therefore our abusiue word Hell ought not to trouble us. But look we to the
Greek Hades wherein it was written, and to the Hebrew, Sheol whereunto also
the Greek fitteth: and them it is as clear as the Son at noone day, The
Hebrew and Greek phrases ^eerein all one. Redeth Sheolah: Kataben^j ^in Haden.
that katabena^ c^s Haden and redeth Sheolah are the common and familiar
phrases to go to the World of the Dead, or among the Dead. As for the
repeating of the same thing, it is not idle nor vnsignificant, but most
Emphaticall. For even presently after the Apostles there arose Haeretikes
Ignat. a^^ Trall.
denyinge that Christ was a true Man but only in show, and therefore also
suffered and dyed but in show and appearance only. Such also continued a long
time, and such are at this day. Now to establish all Christians against such
devilish opinions, the Primitive Church added here diverse effectual words,
it seems. Whereas else it had been enough to have said, He suffered under
Pontius Pilate: But to express and the signify this point of Christian faith
even for the simple more fully, there is added further, first He was
Crucified: and yet further, He was Dead; yea more, He was Buried; and finally
to speak to the full, He went to the World of the Dead, or among the Dead.
notes
And this last verelie is meant of the Soul of Christ, to show what it did,
being now parted from the body: as the other words before are touching the
visible part his Body, Crucified, Dead, and Buried. Which Bucer saw very
well, Buc. in Ma^^ 27.50.
Ex eo quod consitemur Dominum discendisse ad inferna intelligendum est,
Dominum Spiritis suo ^ta se iunxisse spiritibus mortuorum sanctorum, vtt
corpore iunctus suit illorum corporibus per sepulturam. In that we believe that
the Lord were unto the Dead, we understand that in his Soul he joined to the
society of the Souls of the dead Saints, eue^ as in his body he was joined
to their bodies by Burial. So that all these words in the Creed have a very
profitable use and strong Emphasis for to show that Christ truly Dyed in
deed, and had every way the very same condition as other me^ had as touching
Humane nature, that so all Christians might be the better established against
those Haeresies denying the same, as is aforesaid. If any say, but in this
short sum there should be no repetitions at all. I have showed, that this his
going among the Dead, or unto the dead, or into the Unseen World, is most
fithe to be referred to the Soul of Christ parting from his body, showing
whither it went, even whither all other Good men's Souls went, to the place
appointed for the Saints: thither went Christ's soul too, like other men's,
being parted from his body: ^is Hadou. Whereof if any do ask particularly,
Whither is this? I answer, namely into Which is the true Grammatical sense
of this word, viz. with respect had to the quality of Christ's person.
heaven: For whither should the Saints go else? And thus it is no repetition
of any thing that particularly went before. Howbeit in the Creed there are in
deed repetitions, as short a sum as it is, and yet not unprofitable. As
thus, having said, He suffered, it is added, Crucified* and after that Dead,
yea Buried is but an addition also to signify that he was truly dead.
Therefore it is possible that there might be repetitions profitable in the
Creed, and namely when they be specially emphaticall. He descended to the
Dead, does show, it seems, that the place was downward, whither he went,
and not upward to Heaven. Genesis 37.35.
spoke Eredel beni abel Sheolah: I shall go down mourning to my Son among
the Dead. Yet Jacob thought not to go to Hell to his Son, but among the
souls of the godly dead, that is to say into Heaven, where he knew he should
be after death, and his Son he doubted not (being dead as he thought) was It
seems not that the Grave properly can be bee^e meant, seeing Jacob hoped not
to b^ together with his Son as touching (...) body.
there already. So then this word Descending or Going down, is nothing else
in this matter, but a Bulling. Dec. 1.7.
decaying, a falling down, or a coming to an end in this life: because they
(...) and flourish here, are said to a^^ (...) ^^ande up, and spring up. Only
this further emphasis seems to be in it: kateben may import that He came
under the power and dominion, as it were, of Death, although but for a while:
for he Act. 1.14.
could not be held thereof. Which is it, I think, that Oleuian i^ Symbol.
Oleuian understands in this place. Wherefore this phrase in the Creed,
agrees with ye Hebrew very fitly, whence it seems also to be taken. And thus
me^ may see, it is every way a most easy, a familiar, and usual phrase, not
with the Greek only, but in proporto^ with the Hebrews also, I say even that
in the Creed batch^^ cis Hadou to signify He went unto the Dead, which we in
English too corruptly use to say, He went into Hell: when as indeed here
concerning Christ, it was into Heaven.

Ascension. But this seems very untrue: specially seeing himself says after
his rising from death, Ioh. 20.17.
I have not yet ascended. Therefore immediately after death he went not into
Heaven: and if not to Heaven, then to Hell. Heaven. And what if in this wise he
Ascended twice? what reason is against it? That is, once in his Soul alone, in
the time of his death, as the souls of all the Godly besides do: and once
again afterward when both Soul and Body together ascended, even as we also
shall hereafter. Of this his later perfect intyre and apparent Ascension, he
says, Ioh. 20.17.
I have not yet Ascended. Whereby he denies not his other manner of ascending,
that is in his soul only. Even as Act. 2.34.
Peter denies that David is yet ascended. He means as touching his body and
all: for his soul was then, and long before that (no doubt) ascended into
Heaven. And thus in our Creed there may well be 2. articles, for 2. so diverse
and distinct kinds of Christ's going to Heaven.

Hitherto we have waded in our first point, about the opening of the word of
this Article of the Creed, he descended to Hades. Wherein it is as clear as
the light at noone, that the natural, simple, proper, and true meaning thereof
may be, He went unto the Dead. Now follows our See page 9^.
second general point, to prove that this is the very meaning thereof, and
nothing else indeed. Which thus I conclude.

If this Article mean not that Christ went to Limbus, nor went into the Grave,
nor his Hellish sufferinges on the Cross, nor afterward locally in Hell, nor
any going down locally into Hell at all: the^ here is certainly meant that his
soul separat from his body did go, as other men's do, into the World of the
Dead, or among the dead and nothing else.

But all those former opinions are untrue here, and not meant in the Creed.

Therefore this our last relearsed is true and is there in the Creed truly and
plainly intended, and meant.

1. No Limbus signified in our Creed.
Christ went not to any Limbus s^ing ye faithful before Christ's time, had the
same benifit of grace in effect which we since have had. Because Christ was
the same yesterday, and the same to day, and the same for ever: and Faith, we
they had as well as we, was the evidence of things not seen, and the ground of
things hoped for: and Abraham saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced: and the
Fathers before did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same
spiritual drink which we do: and Christ was the Sacrifice of redemption
slain before the beginning of the world. Therefore by the virtue and efficacy
of Christ's death, Heaven was opened to them before his Incarnation, as well as
unto us since. And therefore there was no Limbus, neither could Christ go to
any such place. 2. The Grave properly not meant by going to Hades in y^ Creed.
This Article can not be meant of the Grave, because that was most plainly and
familiarlie noted before in these words, He was buried: which to repeat
again in a darker and more doubtful word as Hades is, without difference
added, can not be likely. For Hades, as I said, is referred generally to the
state of the Dead: that is, to the Souls as well as to the Bodies of the dead.
3. Christ's Hellish sorrows which he suffered, not meant by his going to Hades.
Here are not meant Christ's Hellish sorrows and sufferings, which in deed he
on the Cross endured, as we have showed in the former quaestio^. Although
Master Calvin thus thought, yet surely this Article seems to mean another
thing: Saving the reverence of so worthy a man.
(quod pace tanti viri dixerim) because 1. the word Hades signifies not Hell
peculiarly, as I have showed, but when ye place does necessarily As this place
in the Creed ^^^th not.
require it. 2. If it were so, it must be here by a Figure not altogether so
familiar, namely a Metaphorical speech, which hardly may be admitted into this
vulgar and familiar Creed. And generally it was meant and comprised in those
former words, He suffered under Pontius Pilat. Last^ie, it ought not then to
follow after so many Articles put in between, as Crucified, Dead, Buried. 4.
Christ's going to Hades in the Creed, signifies not ^^y suffering locally in
Hell after his death.
This Article means not any sufferings of Christ locally in Hell after his
death on the Cross, as Illiricus thought: because ye Scripture says, by the
blood of his Cross he reconciled all things in heaven and in earth, and
through death he destroyed him that had the power of death, and on his Cross
he razed out all things that were against us, and spoiled Principalities and
powers, and triumphed openly over them, and on the Cross he cried, It is
finished. All this shows that on the Cross was the last act and final
accomplishment of all his sufferinges. Therefore he suffered nothing after his
death.

The last error that here I am to confute, is this, 5. Lastly, Christ went
not locallie into the very Hell of the damned at any time, nor many occasion.
(which now chiefly I bend against) that which chiefly troubles the
Churches in England at this day, by reason that some men, I know not whom,
have thought so. It is this, That Christ after his death went down into Hell,
not to suffer, but he went to triumph, or to insult over the damned reprobat,
or what to do, it is not well known, nor yet determined. Now we affirm,
this also is a mere fiction, and as false as the rest. And that by diverse
reasons.

A general argumit yt Christ went not into Hell.
First, If no Scripture prove it, then God forbid we should put this opinion
among the Articles of our faith. But no Scripture proves it: Therefore i^
ought in no wise to be believed of Us.

Allegations against us.
They allege for the Denial of the Assumption chiefly sour textes of
Scripture. But none to any purpose at all, as easily we may see. Acts 2.27.
and Psalm. 16.1^.
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, (say they) but falsely and injuriously
to the text, as Page 113.
before we have declared. Our common translation has, Thou will not leave my
Soul in the Grave: which is not much amiss, considering the scope of the
Apostle there, and the manner of Scripture Phrase sometime. But the most
plain, the most natural, and familiar translation should be this (as also
Page 126.
I have plainly noted before) Thou will not leave my Soul among the Dead, nor
thy Holy one to see corruption* This is certain, it can not be meant of Hell,
as also I have proved Page 114.
before sufficiently. Thus therefore their first and chiefest place does
say nothing at all for them.

1. Pet. 3.18, 19, 20.
Christ suffering for us was thanatotheis men sarks zoopotetheis do Pneumati,
en ho kas tois en phylake pneuman poreutheis ekeryxen Apeithesais pote, hot
hapax exedecheto he tou Theou makrothumta en hemerais Noe: Don to Death in the
Flesh, but made alive by the Spirit, wherein he went (or, had gone) and
preached to the spirits in prison Having been (or, which were disobedient in
time, past when once the long suffering of God did wait in the days of Noe.
The true sense of Peter in this place.
This place is as plain as may be clean to an other purpose: that is Christ
in his Passion dyed as touching his Manhood but was raised to life again by his
Divine Spirit, in which in the days of Noe he went and preached to th^se who
were now (in Peter's time) damned souls in Hell, and had been in time past (in
Noes time) disobedient, when as the long suffering of GOD waited for their
repentance but all in vain. Thus here is no one word of his Souls going
after death to the souls in Hell, and of his then preaching to them: as some
would from hence willingly gather. First I will prove our former translation
and sense to be true: then, I will confute such of their chiefest reasons as
they use to make from this place for them selves. Reasons for justifying our
interpretation of Peter in this place.
And first, If to Pneumati by ye Spirit be here the Divine Spirit the Godhead
of Christ and not his Humane Soul, the^ our translation and sense is true, and
theirs false. But here to Pneumati signifies by the Divine Spirit, that is by
the Godhead of Christ, and not by his Humane Soul. Therefore our translation
and sense is true, and theirs is false. The assumptio^ only is here doubted of.
But it has many most certain proofs. First, it is most familiar and common in
Scripture by Flesh to understand ye whole 1. Ioh. 4.^. Ioh. 1.14. Heb. 5.7. and
2.14. and 1. Pet. 4.1.
Humane nature, and by Spirit the Reu. 2.7. etc. Acts 16.7.
Divine nature. But where both are mentioned together oppositely, there they
always and evermore signify so in Romans 1.3, 4. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Christ, and in Gal. 5.17. Romans 8.5.
other men Flesh always signifies the corrupt nature wholly, the Spirit, all
the regenerate part in them. I say, these words Flesh and Spirit mentioned
thus together oppositely, do never in Scripture signify the Body and Soul of
a man. Therefore in this place also agreeably to the perpetual use of the
Scripture besides, these words Flesh and Spirit ought to signify the Humane
and the Divine natures of Christ, not the 2. parts of his Humanity, his Soul
and his Body: specially seeing no Circumstance here overthrows this sense,
as both before, and likewise presently after we shall further see. Again, the
very same thing is spoken by 2. Cor. 13.4
Paul, but more expreslie: He was crueified touching his infirmity, but
lives by the power of God. A place most excellent to be compared with this
here in Peter. That which Peter calls Flesh, Paul calls infirmity, and
that which Peter called Spirit, Paul calls the power of God. That is, the
one signifies his whole Humanity, both body and Soul, the other his very
Deity. And so by comparing these two most like textes, our sense is clearly
justified. Thirdly, if Spirit here signify his humane Soul, then of
necessity you must say, He was made alive in his Soul, or by his Soul:
zoopoietheis to pneumati. But both these are wicked and false to say: First,
not in his Soul, for then his soul was once dead or ^all at least, because
the word is zoopoietheis, He was made alive in his Soul, being don to death
in his body.2. Neither can it be by his Soul, for then he lived again by the
power of his Soul, and not of God, which is absurd and contrary to many
Scriptures before noted. Therefore Spirit here must needs be the Godhead and
Divine power of Christ, by the which he was in deed made alive after his death
in his Manhood.4. If these words Flesh and Spirit do signify here in Christ
his Body and Soul, then they can not bear any sense but such as agrees with
all other men when they dye: to be dead in their bodies, but to live in their
souls. But this text in these words shows surely some singular thing
happening to Christ, wherein he differed from other men: as who so veweth the
place, may easily see. Therefore these words here do not signify in Christ
his body and soul, but his Manhood and Godhead.5. All preaching is to amend
the hearers, or to take away from them all excuse. This is the very nature and
perpetual use of Preaching. But thus he could not preach to the Spirits in
Hell. On the earth he could by his eternal Spirit in the mouth of Noe to those
living then in those days, though careless and disobedient. Therefore this
preaching is here meant to have been on earth in those former times, and not
then in Hell. And so consequently in his Divine Spirit, That Christ should be
said being dead, to go and preach horror and confusion to the Damned of Noes
time now in Hell, not mentioning any other of them beside, is absurd and vain.
and not in his Humane Soul. 6. (...) it be absurd to say, He preached to the
damned in Hell who lived in Noes time, more then to the other damned: and i^
there be good reason to say this of his preaching on earth in Noah's time, th^^
this is meant of his Divine Spirit preaching then in the mouth of Noe, and no^
of his humane soul preaching after his death in Hell. But it is absurd to say,
He preached in Hell to those of Noes time, more the^ to the other damned
there. And if you ask what reason there is to mention his preaching on earth
to them of Noes time more then to all other disobedient before and since. I
answer, it means not but yt Christ preached by his divine spirit to all the
rest likewise, eue^ from Adam to John Baptist: but this special instance is
firly named, as being one of the most singular times of convicting the profane
rebellious world. Now this reason can not be yielded for his preaching to
the^ in Hell which were of Noes time, more the^ to the rest: as all men of any
reason do see. Therefore this place is meant of Christ's Divine Spirit, not of
his Humane Soul.

Now contrary wise for their reasons that this is meant of Christ's Soul
preaching in Hell, the most and the best that I find are in Mr Hill, noted and
confuted by Mr Humes very effectually. Phil. 2.7, 8, 9.
I will now touch but 2. of the^: because if I should deal further, I might
seem to do yt which he has don already.

Passive can agree to the Deity. But made to live is here a Passive. Therefore
it can not be that the Deity is here the Spirit, in which he is said to be
made alive. in ye spirit, but by the spirit, and so ought it to be translated.
Therefore this Passive is attributed to the Deity, but is the effect not of
Christ's Deity in his Manhood.

pote in time past does distinguishe apeithesasi to the disobedient with which
it goes, from poreutheis ekeryxen he had gone and preached. pote follow
apeithesasi, yet it is to evident and undeniable that this Aduerbe pote may
have reference (and by all reason it must) to this whole clause poreutheis
ekeryxen apeithesasi pote, and so distinguishes all this from all yt clause
next before tois en phylake pneunisi (where understand ousi) and that is, to
the Spirits that are in prison. And so pote plainly distinguishes apeithesasi
from tois en phylake (ousi) but not from ekeryxen. As Mr. Beza heereon does
well declare.

The other reasons, though 9. or 10. in number, are not worth the naming: yet
whatsoever force is in them, Mr. Humes has so defeated it, that I will
sursease to speak any more thereof. But thus it remains that this place of
Peter is nothing at all for them, who most erroneously think that Christ in
his Soul went down after death, and preached in Hell.

Now the third Scripture is, Ephe. 4.9.
Christ in that he ascended, what is it but that he^ descended first into the
lowest parts of the earth? Here first note the true meaning, and then the
mistaking of this place. I say then these words are a reason taken from Christ's
Ascending into Heaven to prove his Descending from Heaven first. As if he
should say, in as much as we see Christ our Lords Ascending up into Heaven, it
follows that he the very same Lord Descended thence first: that we may
learn by him how humiliation goes before glory, and submission before
exaltation. Now this being all, as indeed it is in this place, there is no
need to take this Descending of any local going down into Hell. But you will
say, whether do the words close following cista katotera mere tes ges, to the
lower parts of the earth, add any thing in the sense further, or no? And if
they do add more in the sense, how far do they signify? I answer, I see not
but they may be taken most fitly to add something in the sense of that
sentence before of his Descending, and yet nothing for his going to Hell. Even
this (as I take it) to show more particularly how base a Descending and
coming into the world Christ had, in humbling himself even to the Grave. And
so it may be very like that other place of this Apostle: Phil. 2.7, 8, 9.
He made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant and
was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled himself
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore God
has highly exalted him, etc. Thus I say in both these places this degree of
the baseness of Christ's humiliation is notably expressed: here in the
Philip* in that he humbled himself unto death, and before in the Ephesians. in
that be descended even to the Grave, that is to say also unto Death.

Grave is not in the lower parts of the Earth, but always a little under the
earth, that is in yt higher part of it. Rather Hell may be thought to be in the
As Mat. 12.40.
midst of yt earth. Takatoter a mere tes ges the lower parts of the earth,
seems to me a very plain Hebraisme, expressing Tachtijoth erets: which words
are no where found for Hell, for Psalm. 63.9.
the Grave they are found: also where in a similitude with the Grave (not with
Hell) a Psalm. 139.15
woman's womb is called tachtijoth ^rets. Like to this also is Ezech ^^.14 16,
18.
erets tachtith the Earth beneath. Now albeit Master Hill avouches eagerly
that these places are for Hell, yet the very several circumstances in them do
plainly teach that the Grave only is there meant, and the condition of Death:
as Sect. 9.
Mr. Humes does plainly declare against him. If a man ask, how the Grave may
be called the lower part of the earth I answer, it may very well, and is in
comparision of this Earth where we live, which is the Whence the living are
called Superslit^^ and sometime Superi; the Dead sometime Ius^ri.
higher parts of the earth: the oppositio^ thus standing between ye Living and
the Dead and between their proper habitations, not between the Living and
Hell. The same sense manifestly has another Hebru phrase very like to this:
Psalm. 86.13. Isa. 14.10.
She Will tachtijah or tachah, where though many think Hell is signified, yet surely
ye circumstances do convince that the Grave only is there meant, the Grave
beneath: as Mr. Fulke against Gr. Martin does cleerlie prove. Which also we
shall further declare and make manifest by yt phrase Mat. 12.40
in the heart of the earth, as we shall see presently in the answer to the
next Scripture objected afterward. But if any yet say touching Ephesians. 4.9, 10
this, yt here is opposed Christ's lowest debasing to his highe^l ascending.
Now Hell is the lowest debasing of Christ, not ye Grave. Therefore Hell is here
understood, and not the Grave. Surely thus by this reason it must follow yt
Christ not only was in Hell, but yt he suffered also in Hell. For indeed it was
a far greater humiliatio^ of Christ to suffer the pains of Hell (which we have
proved before that he might and Not after his death, but before his death.
did suffer indeed) the^ to be locally in Hell with triumph without suffering.
But it is most false and injurious to Christ's death to say, he suffered in the
lower parts of the Earth, taking the same for Hell. Therefore his debaseme^t
here we take in the estimation of the world, yt is so far as they might
sensibly conceive of his miserable and base condition. Now that could be no
lower the^ the Grave. As for Hell, both his going thither, and his suffering of
it, whether in y^ very place, or out of the place, all this was insensible to
the world, and not coming within their estimation: and so not here spoken of
nor intended, where only the apparent baseness of Christ is compared with the
apparent going up of Christ above the sensible Heavens. Thus do I judge that
the desce^ding of Christ to the lower parts of the earth may be taken truly,
plainly, and as is agreeable to the Hebrew phrase whence surely this Greek
phrase arises, namely for Christ's humiliation even unto the Grave, that is to
become under the power of Death Howbeit some do think, it may be taken as
directly alluding to that Psalm. 139.19
metaphorical Hebrew phrase tachtijotherets, the lower parts of the earth,
where David means his mothers womb, where he took flesh and so came into
this world of men. And then likewise Paul In Ephe. 4.
here means only Christ's taking our flesh, and his coming into this our
world, in that he says he descended to the lower parts of the earth. So also
yt sense of these scrip may be fitly compared withit. Ioh. 3.13.
No man ascends up to Heaven but he that descended from Heaven, the Son of
man which is in Heaven. And Ioh. 16.28.
I came out from the Father and came into the world: again I leave the world,
and go to the Father. Even so these words, He descended to the lower parts of
the Earth with opposition to his Ascending into Heaven, in this sense may
signify generally his abasement, in taking flesh in his mothers womb, and so
his coming into this our world, before he was exalted in his Ascension.
Lastly others do think, that this Greek phrase eis katotera mere tes ges, to
the lower part^^ of the earth, is no Hebraisme, but only a figure of speech in
the Greek, a kind of Hypallage: Hypallage.
the lower parts of the earth, for the Earth which is the lower parts of the
world. And so both these later senses do add nothing in signification touching
Christ's Descending or his coming from Heaven into this world: but they mean
only and generally, He first descended before he ascended. And this last sense
amplifyeth it (as it were) by a kind of description, showing what this world,
or this earth is where we live, and whither Christ descended; even the lower
parts of the world in comparison of the Heavens whence he descended, and
whither afterward from the earth he went up again.

Either of these two later senses might here very well serve: but I judge
rather the first to be likeliest. Howsoever it be, to dream here of Hell
there is no reason. And this we shall make further to appear by confuting the
next and last objection of Mat. 12.40.

In Mat. 12.40.
this place therefore Christ is said to have been three days and three nights
in the heart of the Earth. What is that, but in the midst of the earth? And
how was Christ there, unless he were there in Hell? I answer, this also is a
manifest Hebraisme, like to Erech. 27.25, 26.
that: Tyrus was very glorious in the heart of the Seas: beleb iammim. Tyrus
was not in the deep of the sea, nor in the midst of the sea, for it stood
close by the continent land, as Geography teaches us: but the Prophets meaning
by that phrase is, that Tyrus was or in a man^r compassed.
compassed about with the Sea, though standing near to the Sea shore. Even so
Christ in his Grave may well be said to be in the heart of the earth after
that phrase: that is compassed about with the earth though far from the midst
of the earth, even a little beneath the vpmost part of the same, as Graves are
wont to be made. Further this cannot possibly be meant of Christ's Soul going
into Hell, because the Jews here asked Christ for a visible sign, and he
said he would give them a sign: that is to say a visible miracle. Now this
miracle was, how Christ should be 3. days and 3. nights buried in the earth,
and then rise again to life: like Ionahs coming again into the world after
he had been 3. days and 3. nights in the Fishes belly. In this only he would
condescend unto them, and give them only this visible sign, like as they
craved, but not any more. Therefore this cannot be any going to Hell and
coming thence again: for that had been utterly no visible sign, neither had
he answered any whit to their desire at al, as the text says he did, namely to
give them this one sign only so as they desired, and as might be co^parable
in their sense to that of Jonah. Again if here the heart of the earth be
Hell, then was Christ all the time of his death in Hell even till the moment of
his resurrection, which thing the chief defendors of this dream dare not
avouch: and that of Luke 23.43.
Luke refuteth it, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: as anon God
willing, we shall further see. Therefore the heart of the earth Mat. 12.40.
here must not in any wise be taken for Hell. Which also that speech of Christ
now a dying, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, does evidently
prove. Where Christ shows (according to the usual phrase of men in such a
case) that he hoped presently to go to Heaven. No man thinks to go to Hell,
when he says, Lord into thy hands I commend my Soul: no more therefore now
did Christ, as is further showed Page 151.
afterward. Lastly, both against this and Ephe. 4.9.
that last before, thus I reason: If these Textes speak of Hell, then
certainly Hell is in the lowest parts of the earth, in the midst of the
earth. But it could never be affirmed directly and preciselie that Hell is in
the midst or deepest of the earth. Nay it is most false: For the Devils are
2. Pet. 2.4.
holden in Hell. But the Devils are locallie Math. 8.28 Ephe. 2.2.
on the earth, and in the air. Hell is not preciselie in the middost of the
Earth. Some will say, Hell is beneath, as the Prou. 15.24
Scripture teaches. Hell beneath us, but Hell beneath. That is in comparison
of Heaven, which is on High: so Hell may be downewarde from Heaven, but he
says not in respect of us here on earth. Secondly, They who take this for the
Grave, and the Bodily destruction (as the word in deed very often, and
familiarlie does also signify) do easily avoid this Objection. Thirdly,
it is not the unlikeliest to hold, that She^l here signifying the state of
death or destruction in this world, Mattah, declining or downward: Considering
also and comparing the former part of this verse with this later, and the next
following likewise: It seems the wise man says: The way of life to the wise
tends after things on high, whereby he escapes destruction, the way
whereof is groueling on the earth, and seeks not the things that are above,
which bring life, but the things that are beneath, which are snares of death.
And thus here may be some affinity with the Exhortation Col. 3.1, 2.
to seek the things above, and not the things that be earthly beneath. But
here is no local assignation for Hell. Hell, is there no certain local
place of torments to the reprobates now? Luke 16.23.
are now locally tormented in some certain place, and shall be after this world
ended: but where this is the Scripture teaches not, neither ought we to
inquire after it, but to learn how by all means to avoid it.

Nothing in all the Scripture for Christ's going to Hell: therefore it is a
fable.
Thus far the Scriptures have been examined, and nothing in them is found to
prove Christ's Souls going to Hell. Which above all things ought to be; I say
somewhat ought to be in Scripture for it, if we will have such an Article of
our faith. And I demand, are not they Haretikes that will needs hold an
Article of Faith merely without Scripture, as well as they that will not
receive something expressed in Scripture? Well: to believe therefore any
article of our faith, it is requisite that we have the Scriptures warrant. Yea
further, It ought not only to be in the Scripture, but it ought to be very
plain, express, and most easy to be proved out of Scripture: or else in no
wise to make it a maine Article of our common Faith. But all men know, and our
Adversaries herein confess yt it is a hard, a doubtful, and a very intricat
point, and with much difficulty to be proved in scripture, that Christ's Soul
went down into Hell. Therefore them selves grant in effect that this doctrine
ought not to be any part of our common Creed.

The Scriptures are clearly against Christ's going into Hell.
Nay further I urge, if we consider the Scriptures vnpartiallie, we do find
diverse singular places in them against this doctrine, proving yt his soul
after his death was not in Hell. I.
First, Luke. 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. This is spoken of the Humanity of
Christ. But not of his Body which lay in the Grave: Therefore of his Soul,
that it went the same day presently into Paradise and then not into Hell. If
you deny that this is meant of his Humanity, I prove it most plainly. 1.
This Participle Meta, is more pregnant then Sun, to signify a mutual
participation of somewhat. So that if we note the emphasis of this phrase well,
met' emou ese is as much as to say This day I shall have part with thee, and
thou with me of a blessed change, that is, from this miserable Cross which
now we both suffer, to Paradise, whither we shall both go hence presently.
But this is true of his Humane Soul, not of his Deity, to participate with
the Thief, and the Thief with him both in sorrow and joy. Therefore he
means here his Soul shall be presently to day in Paradise. Again, this
speech is directly and purposelie a Consolation to the Holy Thief, certifying
him that he should see quickly an alteration in the things that now he
sorrowed for. But he sorrowed grievously both for his own misery and for
Christ's most unworthy torments, as may be seen ver. 41.
presently before yt he received this consolation. Therefore this Consolation
shows him, that Christ should be translated also as well as him self very
quickly from the Cross into glory. Lastly, the good Thief says to Christ as
Man being yet in misery, but believing he should shortly be in glory, Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. As if he should say, Lord, I
se^ well thy woeful misery now, but I know thou shall hence go into thy
glorious kingdom: remember me therefore when thou come thither. This is now
alltogeather of Christ's Manhood. Must not Christ's answer be just to his
sense, Specially seeing he answers to Comfort him in his forenoted grief?
Yes verelie. He answers therefore to this effect. Be of good cheer, this
day I shall in deed come into my kingdom, and thy self with me. That is Me,
whom now thou grieuest to see thus afflicted, and who^ thou belieuest to go
hence to a kingdom, even me, though now in deed an afflicted man, yet to day
thou shall see in my kingdom in Paradise. And therefore this word semeron to
day seems also to have a contrary reference to this his state now, and this
now, contrary to that to day ensuing quickly afterward. As if he should
say, Now afflicted, but presently anon in glory. All this must needs be of
his Humane Soul verily without all quaestion: There is none can consider
herein his Deity. If any think his Soul might go to Hell first, and yet
presently go thence to Heaven yer night also. That is ridiculous and toyish:
it needs marvelous plain scripture to describe that, or else we ought to hold
it as a singular fable. It was now within 2. or 3. hours of the days end,
when Christ spoke this: so that he had need to go quick, and come quick,
and tarry but a little there. Well this place the^ I doubt not, is very plain
against Christ's Souls descending into Hell.

verse 4^
Father into thy hands I commend my Soul. What if Gods hand sometime does
signify his general protection only and government? But consider the
present circumstance here: Christ was now on the Cross so pitifully oppressed
with sorrows, as that he seemed a forlorn man, and forsaken not of men only,
but of God to: yet he even now being about to yield up his life to death,
lifting up his heart to God in peace and great assurance, says, Father into
thy hands I commend my soul. Tell me, do men use thus to say when they
think to go to Hell, or do they not hope presently to inioye Heaven? And
what else did Stephan, Act. 7.59.
saying, Lord, receive my Spirit. Men in such case when they speak thus,
declare a certain hope in the^ that they shall speedily be released from
their sorrows, and received into joys with God in Heaven. Thus is Gods hand
taken here agreeablie to this common phrase of men. As also the Scripture has
it Psalm. 16.12.
In thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Wherefore Christ now hanging here on the Cross, and ready to dye,
understands Gods hand surely in this manner.

There is no man of sense considering these circumstances that can judge
otherwise. Gods hands thetfore we say in this case signifies the means
whereby he takes his servants to him self, Gods Hands.
and holds them with him self as his own possessions, coming out of
tribulation, wherein while they were, they seemed far of from God, and as it
were out of his hand and possession, and subject to their enemies power: but
now commending their Souls into Gods hand, they declare their desire and
hope to be rid from these separations, and to be there where they desire, that
is received by Gods hand into his joyful presence and heavenly possession.

And so might David in this Psalm. 3^^
place whence Christ takes this sentence: and yet nevertheless he desired and
hoped for present release, and instead of his sorrow, present inioying of the
Lords comfort and joyful favor. Which in a measure and proportion is
answereable to the attayning of Heaven, which they have who depart hence. If
any say, the Greek word in the text parathesomas is I will commend: noting
that he looked not for present and immediate entering into Heaven, but in time
hereafter. That is a most vain and ignorant cauillation, proceeding from not
considering the Hebraisme there in. For David in like manner has aphkid, a
word Future in form, but of the prasent time in sense, as is most frequent
with the Hebrews, and as the very circumstances here do require it to be.

Luke 16.26.
Luke we see a general and eternal Law set estersktai between Hell and
Heaven, that none in Hell can come to Heaven, nor out of Heaven into Hell. This
Law I say is confirmed more surely then that of the Medes and Persians which
also might not be broken. Dan. 6.
Therefore Christ brake it not, neither went he down into Hell at all. was a
thing peculiar to him. general a Law, it behooves you to have most clear
evidence and plain proof in the word to affirm it, or else we have great
cause to abhor it and to hold it no prerogative, but a thing very injurious
and derogatory to the Man which was also the Son of God. Now what evidence
and proof you have for it which defend it, we have seen and tried to be
more then vain, if we note them with any indifferency. Seeing therefore he
which was like us in all things (sin only excepted) has left him self no
witness of this most strange and wondrous difference in him, why should we
dream of such an extraordinary case so presumptuously? Other reasons that
Christ went not into Hell.
If he triumphed not in Hell, he went not into Hell. But he triumphed not in
Hell. Therefore he went not into Hell at all. The Assumption is proved: first,
Seeing Triumph is a word taken from the custom of men of war, who having in
battle conquered their enemies do use to triumph over them. And this their
Triumph men use to make in the presense of such, as to whom the glory thereof
does in part appertain. But in Hell there were none with Christ in whose
presence he should triumph, and to whom some part of his glory might belong.
There were none besides, but the Devils and damned souls. absurd to say
Christ triumphed in Hell. A again, where Christ actually and meerlie
triumphed there began his glorification. But is it not absurd, vea of all
absurdities the greatest to say Hell was the beginning of Christ's
glorification. Therefore certainly Christ did not triumph in Hell. Hell, as on
the Cross. How could Christ triumph on the Cross, as we interpret that he
did: Col. 2.15.
He triumphed on the same Cross. He was there in sore torments, and in most
pitious plight. Call ye that a triumph? actually on the Cross, How Christ is
said to triumph on the Cross.
but virtually as I may say. That is the virtue and efficacy of that death did
not bring destruction to the sufferer but to the Doer and to the executioner,
that is to the Devil: with whom he spirituallie combated there even until
death, and by death was not vanquished, but did vanquish him that had the power
of death, that is the Devil: and him self triumphed. Which effect is
contrary in all other battaills and conflictes. For with us they who are
slain in fight, are conquered, and the suruiuer triumphs.

But the Holy Ghost gives us to know^ the contrary touching Christ and his
sufferings. For his suffering was his victory, and his dying his triumph. But
he means not actually: for while he suffered, and while he dyed, this was a
miserable triumph: and still he suffered, even till he gave up the Ghost.
Therefore the meaning here is not of any actual triumph: but only by virtue
of that which there he suffered, he triumphed indeed, and the Cross whereon
he was lifted up was like a triumphing Chariot. All this is thus named because
the effect of those sufferinges simply was the most perfect treading under
feet of Satan and of all infernal powers. But now his triumphing in Hell can
be nothing so. Dilemma.
Either in Hell it was actual, which is monstrous absurd: for then Hell was
the entrance of his Glor^fying, which all the world knows is the most
inglorious and vilest debasinge. Or at least his very presense was
meritorious, and virtually triumphant: and this is flatly blasphemous against
the all sufficient merit of the Cross of Christ.

Here some will ask, how does this derogate from the Cross of Christ, if
he triumphed in Hell? Because he triumphed on his Cross, yea perfitlie:
therefore he did not in Hell. ^o en hypenantion hemin what soever was any way
against us he took it out of the way, and fastened it to the Cross, having
spoiled Principalities and powers, made a show of them openly, and has
triumphed over them in the same Cross. They except here against this
translation, namely of the last words, as if the true reading were not en auto
in the same with reference to Cross, but en hauto in himself. We answer:
First, Howsoever the reading be, this doctrine cannot be impeached
notwithstanding, that Christ o^ the Cross did all those meritorious and
triumphant actions over sin and Satan which are here in the Colossians
specified. I say this doctrine is manifest still, even by the express words
which are there found: If you translate he triumphed in himself, the meaning
is by himself there on the Cross. For all those words and phrases they have
apparent and undeniable cohaerence and certain reference to that time and
place: He put out the hand writing of ordinances that was any way against us,
he even took it out of the way fastening it to the Cross Apekdus^menos.
having (then also) spoiled Principalityes and powers, he made a show of the^
openly Thriar^bousa^.
having triumphed over them by himself. By himself? where? even there on the
Cross most apparently. For where he took away all things that made any way
against us, there he spoiled the Devils and triumphed over the^: all the words
here being jointly of one and the same time, and that also not the future but
the time now past. But he took away all things any way against us on the
Cross, and fastened the hand writing of our indictment is the Cross, the
text says. Therefore all the rest was there don also. Whereunto other
Scriptures also beeinge compared do give further light. Heb. 2.24.
Through death he destroyed, not simply conquered, but destroyed and abolished
him that had the power of death, that is the Devil. And this is the true sense
also of that final speech of his, being about to strike the last blow at
his adversary, Ioh. 19.30.
It is finished. What is finished? surely all that he had to do with any
adversary, or any contrary thing to our freedom, even there and then he
finished it. And hereof is that vehemente Ioh. 12.31.
speech of Christ though spoken before he was apprehended: Now is the judgment
of this world: now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. He says cast
out, as if he never appeared any more in his sight after that most absolute
victory on the Cross: He spoke of the death that be should dye: ver. 33.
for thereof he speaks in this place, as Page 61.
before we have seen. Thus then appears plainly this doctrine, that Christ
on the Cross did all and every one of his victorious actions against Satan,
and wrought meritoriously our full deliverance from him, so that no ^ot of his
right nor power against us remained after that, but there he spoiled him,
there he confidently triumphed, and made a show openly of him, and trod him
under foot for ever: he so beat him and so destroyed his power that there was
no fear yt any thing should once stir against him or us afterward. This is
meant by Christ's triumphing on the Cross. For else indeed a pitions triumph it
was, where himself remained in such woeful torments, where appeared no show of
conquest, but rather of being conquered. Therefore this is spoken in regard of
the effect which came of this action, His triumph on the Cross was in regard
of the effect which it wrought.
not of the simple action (or rather passion) it self. What effect? An effect
rare and strange, nothing like, yea contrary to that which happens in like
case amongst men. When they in fight are beaten, and wounded, and slain, they
are conquered: but Christ even in being beaten, and wounded, and slain,
therein he conquered, and triumphed, and led openly his enemies in
captivity. Now he says openly, not that Christ did this openly and
evidently to our senses, but alluding to the manner of conquerours in their
triumphs, who lead in open show those enemies which henceforth cannot once
strirre against them any more: so he signifies that the effect of Christ's
very death was such and so forcible indeed, and fully to be compared with
these doings of perfect conquerours: and therefore most emphatically he sets
it out in these terms.

Thus far this doctrine is justified of Christ's triumphing on the Cross,
howsoever the reading be in those last words of that Col. 2.15.
text. Howbeit the truth is, this reading en auto in the same Cross, which we
in our common translations use after Beza, is no forgerie of Beza. But that
noble instrument of God does show, Beza.
as many other things most worthy and profitable to the Church of God, so this
to be no new, but a most ancient, and in all likelihood, the common reading in
old time, or at least to that very effect. Oecumenius the Greek Scholiast
does both read and interpret this place plainly thus: who commonly shows
what the Greek Churches use was Origin who was far elder, if he Homil. in
Exodus 4.
read not en auto in the same Cross, yet he read e^ xylo in ligno on the tree,
which in effect is all one. And thus not only Origin, but also Cypri. d^
Passione.
Cyprian, Ierom. Algas. quast. ^.
Jerome, with many others. So that if a Romish Priest had traduced Mr Beza for
leaving here their vulgar Latin translation, it had been shameful wrong to
that faithful servant of God: How much more when brethren, as they seem,
do so disgrace him, or rather the truth of God in him? Thus then it is
manifest that Christ triumphed over Satan on the Cross. And then to do it
again in Hell, were superfluous and vain: nay it were injurious to the Cross
of Christ, as if it were not sufficiently nor perfitely there done.

Luke 11.21.22.
When a strong man armed keeps his palace, the things that he possesses are
in peace. But when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him,
he takes from him, all his armor, and deuideth his spoils. This strong man's
Palace is Hell, where Christ, which is the stronger man coming upon Satan,
spoyleth him, etc. articles of Faith, viz. by allegories? A better sense
hereof may be given, and more to Christ's purpose. That is, Christ really
dispossessed Satan out of some in those times that were once reallie possessed,
but afterward by him, a stronger then Satan, clearly freed. Also
consequently it may be meant of the Spiritual casting out of Satan out of
Gods elect, who by Nature through sin has possession of Ephe. 2.^.
all men: but by Gods grace and the Ministry of his word, he is cast out
when Christ calls us and sanctifyeth us unto himself. Wherefore in a word
there is no hold for you in the Scriptures, but they are utterly against all
going down of Christ into Hell.

by the History of the Evangelists, who write the doeings of Christ exactlie,
all that Ioh. 20.3^.31.
we ought to believe: and of all other, his Death and Resurrection most
specially. But in all of them there is not a word of any going down to Hell.
Therefore there is no such thing to be believed.

recapitulatio^ in the Apostle of certain precise Articles of our faith, and
namely of these wherein Christ's full victory for our perfect deliverance is
orderly and sufficiently set down, The very Apostolic Creed found in
Scripture wants this art^le of Christ's going to Hell after Death.
as the Church it seems generally held in those times. 1. Cor. 15.2, 3, 4.
I have chiefly delivered unto you, that which I have received, that Christ
The very same in effect seems to have been delivered to this same purpose by
Christ himself Luke 24 46, 47.
dyed for our sins according to the Scripture, and that he was buried, and
that he arose the third day according to the Scriptures. This was the full
foundation of Faith in those days, by which if a man believed he might be
saved, and which if he believed not, he believed ver. ^.
in vain. Whence it arises that Paul had here great and just occasion to
have specified this several and weighty Article, that Christ went also into
Hell, if any such thing were then believed. He names the Articles both
before and after this. His Dying, Burial, and Resurrection: he ought not to
have skipped his Going into Hell, to save us from Hell, if those words in our
common Creed had any such meaning, if it had any diverse meaning from all
those mentioned articles, and so weighty a sense as some suppose. It will not
be excused to say. The Apostle meant here to prove our Resurrection only:
and therefore would speak of purpose, but only of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, from whence he might argue ours likewise. I grant that this is
his maine purpose in deed: but when he says, Except you have believed in
vain, he means that we bleeeue in vain, not only if we hold not the
Resurrection, but also if we hold not those special Articles of Faith
touching Christ's sufferinges and victory for us, which there presently he
names: and consequently if we hold them, then that we believe not in vain,
but even those to be sufficient. Whence it follows, and it is most certain,
that their fancy of Christ's going down into Hell, is superfluous, and
excluded out of this undoubted Apostles Creed, and out of the Holy Scriptures.

No end nor use us Christ's going locally into Hell after his death Therefore he
went not.
Thus far we have seen the Scriptures against this device: Now it were good
to see if there be any use at all or End, that his Descendinge into Hell may
have. end nor use at all, no benefit to the Godly thereby, then it is idle,
and vain, and a very dream, and nothing else. But there can be no certain
use at all, and especially no commodity nor benefit to the Godly by it.
Therefore it is a dream. For what good is there so much as pretended? The
general Redemption of all Gods elect and chosen people was wrought and fully
finished on the Cross, even to the Cancelling of the very writings, and
taking away of whatsoever was any way against us: as has been showed before.
What could his going down into Hell add more? Neither was it any peculiar
good to the godly then deceased before: for they were all in Heaven
immediately even then, as well as we that dye since: as we have proved already.
If then it be no way profitable to any of Gods children, what if it were so
that the Devils and reprobate in Hell might be more confounded by such his
local descending? yet see I not, neither can I believe how it may be among
the Articles of our Creed, all which in truth avail singularly to Gods own
childrens special good. It can not be I say in the Articles of our faith, if
it directly profit not the Godly. Yea and touching the further daunting and
confounding of the damned; that is a silly shift God knows, and ye vaynest
reason of all, that Christ should go to triumph and insule upon the thrice
miserable and woeful wretches in their present unspeakable Damnation
infinitlie confounded already. Sure a very sorry triumph this were for the
Son of GOD, which even among me^ were nothing but dishonorable. Yea a beast,
the Lion, they say, having but the instinct of Nature, yet he refuses to
insult and pray upon the pitiefull and helples creatures. And would the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah take pleasure to go thither only to insult farther upon
the miserable damned? I deny not but the wicked in torments might conceive
further horror, and the blessed in heaven further joys by the actual death of
Christ: but that might full easily be by the virtue and efficacy of the
power of the Godhead deriuing some fence thereof to all, how and when it
pleases him. There needed no local Descending into Hell, nor Ascending to
Heaven for that matter. Descend, because it is certain he did not Ascend for
any such purpose, for ought that we any where read. first, and the Blessed
last, yea so long after, that is 40. days after his death was past. But
contrariwise the Godly in all reason should first have had his presence to
certify them, and then the wicked afterward, if any such local coming and
going for giving notice had been required. Wherefore this remains that there
was no use, no good at all by Christ's Souls descending into Hell. And Mr Hill
in saying Hill Sect. 14
He thereby personally redeemed us from Hell, and Sect. 5.
If Christ's Soul had not, A bad assertion.
David's Soul must, and his, and ours have gone to Hell, does no less then
derogate from the Cross of Christ, and blaspheme his all sufficient death.
must go thither of necessity to save our souls thence, why went not his Body
too, for to save our bodies thence? But of these presumptuous and gross
vanities we have said enough, and to much already, but that necessity has
enforced us.

Howbeit yet let us go a little further. The Creed it self being viewed and
marked, will plainly yield another meaning of these words, through a right
distributing of the Articles thereof: viz. those that concern Christ's Office
in being our Savior and Redeemer. Humiliation, and some his Glorificatio^. The
Articles of Christ's Humiliation I suppose every sensible man will confess to
be these, He suffered, was Crucified, Dead, Buried, Descended to the Dead, or
to Hell: and those of his Glorification to be only these: The third day he rose
again, he Ascended into Heaven, he sits at the right hand of God, and
thence he shall come to judgment. Which if it be the very natural and
necessary Division of these Articles of the Creed, as it is in deed, the^
this overthrows wholly their opinion, and stablisheth ours, that Christ went
not down into Hell: By the very order of our Creed Christ went not into Hell.
namely not to triumph, for then this was not the lowest point of his
Humiliatio^, but the first of his Glorification. Which can stand with no sense
in this place: and therefore he descended not by our very Creeds into Hell at
all.

By other sufficient Creedes Christ went not into Hell.
Moreover we find almost all the Creeds and Rules of Christian faith,
certainly the most and the ancientest and the best (beside this called the
Apostoli^e Creed) to want these words of Christ's descending altogether. These
Creedes or sums of our faith we find i^ Ad Magnet.
Ignatius, Lib 1 cap 1.
Irenaeus, Apol 2
Just. Mart. De preser. aduers. ha^. and cou^^ Prax.
Tertull. De princip.
Origin, Ad Epictet.
Athanas A^ Pet. Diac.
Augustine Symbol: Nic. Constantinop: 1. Toletan. 1. and Cap. 13.
Ephesin: 1. etc. Which whosoever did hold, they were ever acknowledged true
and sound Christians. And God forbid that such precise and exact Summaries of
Christianity should be thought defectine in any needful point. Therefore all
these never thought that Christ's going down into Hell as some now urge it)
was any distinct and certain Article of Christian faith. But how then is it
possible that these perfect and famous Creed should want that which our common
Creed has? Surely In Symbol.
Ruffinus shows, Vis verbi eadem videtur esse, in co quod sepultus dicitur.
Note Ruffinus.
The effect of this Article He descended to Infernum seems (says he) to be
the same with this, He was baryed Whereby even the Ancients do appear to
consent with us here in effect, that these words of Christ's going to Hades or
Insernum in our Creed do signify no more in deed, then the former words
there signified, and that this was added but for Emphasis sake to show more
plainly that he was truly dead in deed, as we Page 127.128.
before observed. And certainly unless this were so, all those most excellent
Creedes before mentioned, ought not in any wise so utterly to want it, as they
do. Also how generally this was wantinge, Ruffinus shows heerewithall,
Scie^dum sane est quod in Ecclesiae Romana Symbolo non habetur additum,
Descendit ad inserna, sed nec in Orientis Lcelesus habetur hic Sermo: We must
know verily, that the Church of Romes Creed has not this added, He went
unto the Dead, neither is this clause in the East Churches. But so generally,
and so far and wide in the Cristian world, a necessary Article, distinct
from the rest, neither was, nor could be wanting: specially seeing they al
found it in the Apostolic Creed expressly put in. Therefore it must needs be,
I think, they all took it but to signify in effect the same as Dead and
Buried: yea even in the common Creed called Apostolic. And therefore they
Athanas. Symb. etc.
sometime used those express words, and sometime they used them not: and yet
they never differed, they neither abou^ded nor wanted in their maine sense. And
so it could not mean with them, that Christ went to Hell.

vt res ad Triarios redeat, that this matter may be helped with the last, the
best, and the only succor: that is some of the particular Fathers. What say
they? Do they teach that Christ after death, went down into Hell. Fathers
teach not so. Taking Hell as in English properly we always mean, for the very
place of the damned. I grant many of them thought that he went to Limbus
patrum: though this name be not found in them, but was framed by the Schoolmen
since. Howbeit such a place they dreamed of, as was out of Hoauen, they thought
in yt deep of the earth, whence he fetched the souls of yt Patriarks out, and
carried the^ up with him to Heaven. Which opinion the Papists have laid fast
hold on since eue^ till this day, having also increased it with other fables.
And thus in deed some of yt Ancients imagined and ghessed by reason of their
mistaking of the Greek Hades in the common Creed, and in the Scriptures, and
somewhat also by mistaking the old use of the Latin Insert, wherewith they
commonly used to translate Hades, as before I have largely declared. When they
once mistook these words, and specially Hades, to signify Hell properly, then
they could not but devise some likely matter of it, and some purpose for it,
which else had been ridiculous. And yet even herein they spoke waueringlie and
ambiguouslie: a token indeed that they spoke they knew not what, as in August.
Ephesians. 99.
Augustine we may see. But I hope with us every where esthaec tampridem explosa
sententia est, This old rotten error is abhorred: which I also have refuted
briefly before. How be it in a word, The Fathers are not for Christ's
descending into the Hell of the Damned.
the Fathers knew not this our present opinion in Controversy now, that he
went locallie into the Hell of the damned, and not to any Limbus. Herein they
that hold against us have no help at the Fathers hands, whatsoever they
pretend. It began not I suppose till about Man Luhers time, when they saw
somewhat of the Popish errors herein, but could not presently be purged
from all their filth. Now since that time diverse of our Protestants, though
they l^s in deed the old Popish Lambo, yet not discerning but that surely
Christ went into Hell after death (because I think sundry of the Fathers in
words make show of some such uncouth thing) therefore they devised a fresh
how this might be, The contrariety about Christ's descending unto Hell.
and wherefore. Some thought to suffer torments there, some not to suffer in
any wise, but to triumph forsooth in Hell, and some knew not why he went to
Hell, but thither he went they thought. And some, that he went and came again
from thence presently, not staying two hours in Hell: others that he stayed
there all the while till his Resurrection. In the end of Master Humes
against. D. Hill, we may see how diversely they thought herein who were the
defendours, yea the beginners of this opinion. Scarce any of them agree with an
other, it seems: and with those of us in England that lean this way, not one
of the^ all that are strangers, do seem fully to consent. But whether they
do or no, whether any of the old or new Writers say of or on, it makes no
great matter. We have learned Christ Jesus otherwise, the^ to stay our holy
faith on the credit of any man, or men. Our treatise I hope before grounded
wholly on Gods word, has sufficiently cleared this point to be but a devise of
me^, a mere forgery, and no truth in Religion at al: yea and so much the more
hateful, as that it is urged to be taken as one of the Articles of faith. In
which our denial neither want we the consent of me^. The Ancients we have
noted before: the late Godly Christians are many and most famous that give
their joint consent with us heerin. The best reformed Churches, the French,
Dutch, Heluetian, and Scottish, with all their most worthy and learned Pastors
in them are with us. And to speak of our selves in England: first all our most
famous and learned Teachers in her May* time have so taught, Mr Fulk, Mr.
Whitakers, Mr Rainolds, Mr Deering, The consent of many Godly learned in this
that Christ went not properly into Hell.
etc. Mr Nowel some think holds contrary. The good old Father lives, and
therefore himself can show his own mind therein best. As for his In Catech.
words that be extant, they prove it not: Christ's soul being separate from
his body descendit ad inferos: which we may well interpret thus, it went unto
the Dead. or among the Dead, as we have showed before that Inferi or Infernum
may signify. And specially we may think his meaning in those words was not
against the manifest meaning of our whole Anno. 1562.
Synod: whose doctrine was well known to him, and is our public doctrine, and
established by Law in England.

This Synod appara^tly renounceth this doctrine of Christ's going down to the
Hell of the damned. The Doctrine received and established in England is against
Christ's going into Hell properly.
But how appears it? Even thus: The Synod before holden in K. Edwardes time
affirmed this doctrine directly and expressly. This Synod coming after does
correct and amend this very article of the former. It repeateth and ratifieth
part thereof in express words: but part of it, even all and every whit that
contains this doctrine expressly of Christ's going down to the Hell of the
damned, all this I say, Anno 1562.
our Synod cutteth of, it puts out, it casts away. Therefore our Synod
renounceth apparently this sense of the Creed, that Christ defended to the
Hell of the damned. The words are these of the former Synod: Quemadmodum
Christus pro nobis mortuus est and sepultus, ita est etiam credendus ad inferos
descendisse. Nam Corpus vsque ad resuriectionem in sepulchro iacuit, spiritus
ab illo emissus cum spiritibus qui in carcere sieve in inferno detine hantur
suit, illisque praedicauit, quemadmodum testatur Petri locus. In which last
words they in deed expreslie determine that Christ went in his soul after
death into the Hell of the damned: and no marvel in them, who did but newly
peep out of Popery. But our Synod since corrects it herein, and says
but thus only, Quemadmodum Christus pro nobis mortuus est and sepultus, ita est
etiam credendus ad inferos desce^disse: As Christ dyed for us and was buried,
so we are to believe also that he went unto the Dead. That he went into the
Hell of the damned, which followed expreslie in all the next words, this they
wholly corrected, suppressed, and refused. This therefore in them is seen
manifestly (as I said) to renounce and abrogate this particular sense of
Christ's descending, that he went after death into Hell. If any say, Synod
leaves it free to any convenient sense, it denies none. Christ went into
Hell. Secondly, I say this is true also and manifest by the praemisses, that
they leave in deed this Article of our Creed to any convenient sense, they
deny none, saving only this which before in K. Edwardes time was expreslie
commanded, and is here with us specially put out. By putting it out, they deny
this apparantlie. Therefore I conclude, The Law in England is against Christ's
going into Hell properly.
if we note this well, it can not be denied but the public sentence of our
Churches, yea the Act of Part. anno Eliz. 1^. Cap. 12.
Law of our Land confirming the same, as well as the Holy Scripture which is
the Law of God, is against this opinion of Christ's descending into Hell.

All which being duly considered, I marvel that a man of learning and
wisdom as he is thought, who has openly impugned this doctrine of late,
would so rashly run into these errors, and so vainly defend them
afterward, that he would rather Gods Church should be pitiously disturbed
about them, as now it is, then that his ill conceits should be kept to
himself. And for my part, my trust is, that in resisting these sansies and
notable errors of Christ's suffering for us only in Flesh, and of his Soul
descending into Hell, sauouring so strongly of Popery, and vanity, I have done
according to my power without respect of persons, but what in conscience I owe
both to God, and to his Church, and to our whole state. And thus the Lord in
mercy will yet (I doubt not) beat down error, and advance his truth still,
yea even by making things that are not to bring to naught things that are,
that his own Name may have all the glory. Amen.

2. Cor. 2.17. We are not as many, which make merchandise of the Word of God:
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ.

H. I.

Pagin. Lin. Faults: Corections. 9 19. the seed of Angels the Angels, 9. 16
against his ou^ body against his own body, 37. in margin.
ye last for him us. him for us. 63. 31. put out two things 68. 30. contrary
ha^te contrite heart 73. in margin.
See page 49. See page 50. 74. 25. signified signifies 86. 29. object object
97. 23. heme eme 111. 15. executed exercised 111. 28. "former former 111. 29.
falls "falls 121. 9. the death, the dead, 127. 20. the signify to signify
139. 9. attributed not attributed 139. 10. not of of 31. 32. after outward
indeed, read yea only his very Death, yet etc. 50. 33. after not possible read
therefore 52. 18. after willing purpose: read yea against his most holy
patience, and heavenly fortitude:


