THE GOOD MAN'S REFVGE IN AFFLICTION. OR A MOST PROFITABLE AND COMFORTABLE
SERMON, preached by JOHN BARLOVV.

AND NOW PVBLISHED ESPECIally for the good of them that be, or have been
afflicted inwardly in mind, or outwardly in body.

Judge. 6.12. The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold
at his shop, under St. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR EDMUND TRYFOORD, OF TRYFOORD, KNIGHT: I. B.
Wishes truth of grace here, glory eternal hereafter.
IN gratefulness (Right Worshipful) has been condemned amongst the very
Heathen, Plin. in prolog^ de natur^l^ hist.
Senec 1 de beneficijs. ep 48.
and reputed a vice to be abandoned, and as a fruit proceeding from a wicked
and an unhappy mind. Bernar sup. Cant. Ch is super Matthew.
The Fathers too in former times have avouched, that it is the enemy of the
soul, the extenuation of desert, the dispersion of virtue, perdition of
benefits; a burning wind, drying up the fountain of piety, the spring of
pity, the influence of grace; and a sin that never goes unpunished: Luke
17.17.
yea our Lord condemns the nine Leapers, that they returned not to give
thanks for their cure; 2. Tim. 3 2.
and the Apostle makes it a damnable sin, that shall sprout up in the last
days. Wherefore if I should suffer the favors to slip out of my mind, that I
have received from you, I could not clear my self from the foul censure of
an ungrateful person: But what have I to render, except words, for all your
kindnesses? yet were they good, then might I be glad, and you receive some
acceptable gratuitie; but howsoever they be, know, that had the Lord put better
into my mouth, I had delivered them willingly with my hand, and freely from my
heart unto you. I confess that when I little expected any favor from you, you
furthered me, not by word, but deed, in my studies at the University; and
that not once, but often. And now I, (as unexpectedly, I judge) have sent to
your hands, one of the first fruits of my labors: in the manner there is some
similitude, but in the matter no equal proportion.

Your Worship must not expect from me curious division, rare invention,
Rhetorical composition, or ambition of quotation: for I am one of the other
day, a Babe plucked from my mothers breast, by a kind of force; and sent to
feed others, before I my self was well able to digest stronger meat, and
bread of a harder concoction. But not to grow tedious, I presume of your
patronage, and willing acceptance, though not for the dignity of the work,
or desert of the Author (which is very little); yet because I know, you know,
that Gifts are not to be accepted or rejected, for their greatness, and
goodness; but principally in respect of the intention and affection of the
giver. And thus referring the work to your Censure, and my self in all
willingness to do you service, I commend you to the Almighty, who stablish
you in every good word, and work, to do his will. Amen.

Yours in all Services, wherein he can stead you, JOHN BARLOVV.

TO THE CHRISTIAN AND WELL AFFECTED READER.
GOod Reader, I freely confess, that man's heart naturally is like to leaven; a
little one will swell, grow big, and in a short time puff up the whole lump
of a man's person: and rare it is, not to be well conceited of our selves; not
to judge above the worth of our own works; and with Simon Magus, not to
think, that we be not some great bodies: But every man knows best the
beginning, and scope of all his proceedings. Wherefore though the setting out
of Books may smell of vainglory, if not of folly, in these learned times;
yet I am best acquainted with my own heart, and full well understand mine own
endeauours: and were not I persuaded, that (through the blessing of God) it
would return to thy further edification, these lin^s had never com^ to light.

Moreover, I must give thee to understand, that when I first treated of this
subi^ct, it was (though a fault peradventure) within the City of London, and
before one of the most indicious auditori^s there. But since that time, I have
had occasion else where to prosecvte the text more at large; and diverse have
been d^sir us to have what I then delivered, to be published judging it to be
not unworthy the Press^. Now if I have done amiss^ not mine own, but many
other men's errors are with me; the which If I be blam^-worthi^ (as it is like
enough) may serve in part, though not altogether, to excuse me in this action.
But and if I have done well, Id sire not, neither deserve any praise, because
it was as much of necessity as willingly. I will not altog^ther ex^use, or
accuse my self unto thee: only this (without prejudice to any) may be
spoken, that every man has his proper gift of God; whence it follows, that
the meanest scholar, sometimes, in some thing, from this ground, may excel
him, that in many things excels others: the which either being not
understood, or (as it ought) practiced; makes men of good desert contemned, and
the graces of Gods spirit, rejected despised. Were he not worthy the title of
a fool, that would never walk out of doors, because all the Planets are not
equal to the Sun in bigness, brightness? or deserves not he to die for
want of food, that will not eat, neither drink, until he find all the
creatures to be like in kind, color, and taste? Who would not deem him an
unskillful Musition, that will not strike a stroke, except all the strings be
one and the same in quantity and sound? And he is no wiser, that will read no
Authors, hear no Preachers, approve no man's labors, until there be an
equality in words, method and phrase.

Wherefore, in reading, and hearing, try the spirit, see wherein the Gift of
the person most consists, and then draw the water of life from that Pipe and
Conduit: so shall thou neither abuse thy own wit, nor another man's
worthiness. The which that thou may do, the Lord rectify thy judgment,
and then incline the wheel of thy will (which is froward) to run according
to its direction. Amen.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, JOHN BARLOVV.
From my study at Plymouth. June 26. 1618.
THE GOOD MAN'S REFVGE IN AFFLICTION.
PSALM 40.18. And I poor and needy, the Lord thinks on me.


IT has been my private opinion, that he who makes a long Logical Analysis
to a short Sermon, may not unfitly be resembled to an indiscreet Traueler,
that descends from his horse, enters into the house, spends a couple of
pence; yet when he is to pay, draws forth his purse, and declares thereby
all the coin in his pocket: for will not that be a grief to the Host, seeing
so much, and receiving no more? and a note of folly in the Guest, he spending
so little, notwithstanding manifests all his treasure? The application hereof
I leave to your selves; resolving to imitate the skillful husband, or
well-experienced and expert Tailor: breaking up no more ground, then I intend
to scatter with good grain; neither shaping that piece of cloth, I purpose not
at this present to make up into a garment.

In these words therefore, of many, two things of me shall but be observed; the
one is, the person; the other, his condition. For the person, it may be either
meant of David literally, or of Christ his Son (according to the flesh)
typically, I^^. 30 9.
for Christ is often called David by the Prophets; Hos. 3.5.
and of him this Psalm also entreats, as the Author to the Hebrews
testifies. Heb. 105.6. etc.


Concerning his condition, it is twofold: first, he lays down his misery,
and in grief of heart confesses, that he is poor and needy: the second
(which is the ground of raising up his fainting spirit) he annexeth, that yet,
notwithstanding, all the evil that has befallen him, the Lord thinks on him.

I might spend much time, to show you the several readings of these words, and
diverse expositions by sundry interpreters: but I have respect to my promise;
brevity is my purpose, and my bounds I will not pass.

By the Person: especially I understand David; neither do I exclude Christ, or
any of his members: for the servant is not (in this respect) better then his
Master; and betwixt the Head and all the other parts of the whole body, there
is a sympathy and fellow-feeling; let the condition be good, or bad; in earth
or Heaven.

By poor and needy: I hold to be meant the chastisements, and fiery trialls
that come from God the Father; the tentations, and bitter assaults of that
foul and fell fiend, Satan; the persecutions and vexations inflicted by the
hands of unreasonable and wicked men; and (but in this following Christ must
be exempted) the inward corruptions, disordered motions, unsettled affections,
and the original pollutions brought from the mothers womb; with the soul and
bodies unaptness, and unableness with chearefulnes and constancy, to run
the direct and just paths of Gods commands. Many of these made the Head, all of
these (and more too) the members, poor and needy.

By the Lord: we may (I take it) without danger understand God the Father.

And by Thinking on me; how that he would free his Son, and all that he had
given him, from all trouble, bondage and afflictions that ever should befall
them: for the father thought on his Son in the Garden, and upon the Cr^sse,
when all had forsaken him: so he did think on David and Paul, when no man
assisted them: and, as we shall hear more at large anon; so has he, does
he, and will he think upon all his chosen, head and members.

The sum of all in one word is this, as if Christ, David, or any true
believer had thus confessed.

What if I be poor, afflicted, despised and persecuted? What if the Lord seem
to leave me for a time, as one forsaken? and fallen into the hands of his
cruel enemies? hat^ he therefore forgotten me? forsaken me? No, no: he know^th
me by name, his eye of pr^uidence is still over me; and I am con^^^^nt in this
same thing, that he will ^ree me from all evil, and preserve me to his heaven
^^king kingdom.

And thus, according to my purpose and promise, I come to handle the several
doctrines, that hence, without wrong to my Text, or offense to any judicious
Auditor, may be deduced: where first let it be observed, that

Af i^^^ions befall Gods dearest children.

Understand this Text to be prophesied of Christ: can thou deny the truth
of the doctrine? was it no sorrow to his humane Nature, ^^^e 2^.3^.
to be circumcised, whipped and crucified? what a burden bare he? what a
wounded spirit had he? and what woe endured he? when he sweat great drops of
blood; called to his Disciples to watch with him; and cried out, (...) 2^.14.
My s^ule is heavy to death; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Were
not these piercing sorrows? But we leave the Head, and come to touch some of
his members; and but touch, lest we grow tedious. Shall I relate Abel suddenly
slain by cruel Caine, (...) 48. (...) 12 4. (...) 2^ 10.
his bloody and unnatural brother? Abraham's flight, he knew not thither? or
Iaco^s heavy journey to Padan Aram? Were it to the purpose, to tell you of
Moses, Joseph, ^^b, or any of the Prophets? Is it a sorrow to be ^old? Io. 2.
to have al ones children slain in a moment? ^r to be persecuted for
well-doing? May it be ^iled, a prick, or wound, to fast often? to be whipped
often? to be imprisoned wrongfully often? ^. ^r. 11.24. etc.
to die often in appearance once in truth, and that unjustly? Why then the
point is confirmed, sufficiently proved, L^ke 235.
that a sword ^oth pierce through the hearts of Gods dearest children. And
though this at the first seem strange; yet you shall see (at the last) it will
stand with right reason.

Christ, had not he suffered, who had been saved? and if he had not been pierced
through with many sorrows, Is^^^ 3.5. and^.
not one of the sons of Adam had possessed any true comfort, or sound solace.
And for this end, it was needful to consecrate the Prince of their salvation
through afflictions. (...). 2.11.
He was that brazen Altar, which must undergo the great heat of the day,
(...), 8 30.
upon the which fire was continually burning: Christ was typified or figured
hereby, to suffer the infinite justice of his father.

Exodus 32.
will he not plant and sow them with the sweetest seeds, and most fragrant
flowers? shall he not then dig them up, Ier. 4 4.
pick out the least grass, and break every little clod to pieces? Every
skillful Gardener does this to that plot of ground, where he intends to
gather grapes, and not thorns; figs, and not thistles. And so it is with the
Lord; where he will scatter the good grain of his grace, that person
undoubtedly shall have piercing sorrows.

(...). 1.3.
If they that were planted in Eden, must be kept, (...). 17.^.
and dressed by Adam our father? shall we think to escape the knife to cut us
and prune us? for trees, if the roots run to deep into the earth, they must
be cut shorter; if the branches spread too far, they must be lopped; and if
the Canker or Caterpiller once infect, and cleave to them, then they must be
burned, smoaked: so (assuredly) if we be too much rooted, by our affections,
in the things of the world; and with the great and large boughs of our
ability, wrong and impouerish our poor neighbor; or let our coin, like the
canker, eat into our souls; God will give us many a cutting, lopping and
smoking: and as we cannot naturally but do the one; so, when God will heal
us spiritually, he will do the other.

Math. 13.24.
not cockle; we must expect then to be shaken with the windy and blustering
storms of the wicked. Ier. 10.25.
The Rookes of our times will be pecking out the ripest grain; and every
ravening foul fly over us, and defile us; go through us, and bruise us; or
fall upon us, and rob us: yea, our God himself will cut us down, thresh us,
and grind us; for its corn that must be put on the mill, not chafe: wheat
that must be winnowed, when cockle is to be abandoned, burned.

1. Cor. 3.16.
and may not every particular person resemble a stone in diverse things? We
must be cut out of the rock of our natural estate; 2 Cor. 6.16.
and it is no easy matter to be endured, afterward squared and hewn, that we
may be fitted to lie close and comely in the building: and this will be felt a
paineful polishing; yet this must be done, or we are undone. Rough stones are
cast into the foundation, but they that be appointed for the Pinnacles, and
principal places, must have the more pickes, the greater polishing: else they
should not be of (or at the best but deface) this holy Temple, this stately
building. And because that this is not the chief point in my text, though the
words (in part) will bear it; we will make brief application, and so
proceed to another.

And do piercing sorrows befall Gods dearest children? what use then is to be
made of this doctrine?

Peter draws it from this ground) but a terrible one to all such persons. If
judgment begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.17.18.
What shall the end be of those that obey not the Gospel of Christ? and, If
the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?
Another Apostle tells you, 2. These. 1.8.
and gives you a full resolution: God (says he) shall come in flaming fire, to
render vengeance upon them that know him not, and obey not the Gospel of
Christ. This is not all, for, Verse. 19.
They shall be punished with everlasting perdition (that is their end) from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power (that is the place of
their appearance).

But wicked men imagine, that God is like them, Psalm. 50.21.
because for a time he holds his peace; and in regard judgment, a little
season is deferred, the hearts of the sons of earthly men are set upon Eccles
8.11.
mischief. Za^h. 1.12.
Tush (say such) God will neither do good or evil: But, O thou vain man, when
will thou learn wisdom! shall he scourge his first borne, his only son,
and but by imputation a sinner? and do thou think that he will spare thee?
Shall the natural O^iue be thus lopped, and pruned? and shall the wild One
escape the hand of the husbandman? Will the Creditor cause the surety to pay
all to the uttermost farthing? and do thou, that art so deep in debt,
expecta discharge without full payment? Is the path to Canaan thus strawed?
what then will the way be that leads to Egypt? (...) 10 33.
if he that trembles at Gods word, shall thus be corrected; how shall they,
that make a mock of the blood of the new Covenant, H^^. 1^.29.
escape damnation? Tell, if thou can, but its a thing impossible.

He that goes toward the Sun, shall have his shadow follow him; but he
that runs from it, to flee before him: So he that marches with his face
toward the Son of righteousness, shall have afflictions still to pursue
him; as for him that has his back toward Christ; his sorrows, like the
shadow, are before him; but he shall meet with them in another world.
Wherefore be thou not deceived; for if God afflict his dearest children, Luke
19.2^.
he will one day take vengeance of all disobedient bastards.

dotrine? Why, they must not think it strange, that they are in the fiery
trial; 1. Pet. 4 12.
neither faint because they are chastened: for its for thy good, and the Lords
glory, that these things befall thee. Christ is a shepherd, and they that
serve him are sheep, by the rule of relation: shall he not then send this
Dog of affliction, to fetch us in, when we break our bounds, and are
straggling? he is our Master, and we his scholars; must we not then have a
lash, when our eye is off our book; and we have no mind, either to say, or
learn our lesson? we be his patients, he our Physician; then if we feed too
full, grow too rank, shall he not strike a vain, and let us blood, in due
season?

I have often in my meditations, compared a Christian in prosperity, to a
people at peace in a kingdom: do we not see, that since wars have ceased in
our land, and neighbor Countries, that many a valiant soldier is grown fat,
purfie, and not able to weild his weapons? And all (or the most) of our Armor
to, rustie, cankred? The Spiders have wouen webs in our Helmets, and
head-pieces: the worms eat into the very heart and pith of our shafts and
spears; and scarce is to be found any Bandileeres, that will hold to hang
about a soldiers sholders. Are not our ships vnrigged? our Cannons at the
Forts, vnskoured? houses, towns, and Cities, but too weakly provided? And
has not peace (by accident) had a finger in this business? And even so is it
with a Christian soldier; let him have health of body, quiet of mind, and his
cups to flow over; all his spiritual armor will either rust, or be
unexercised. For what use shall we have of prayer, in calling; faith, in
believing; hope, in expecting; or patience, in suffering? truly little, if any
at all: therefore God will send wars, and rumors of wars, that we may not
abuse those excellent graces, and he want his glory, we our gain by them.

Our God is wise, yea Wisdom it self, he knows our estates, and can
physic us for the purpose; and there is nothing so bad, but he can use for
the recovery of our former condition, and cause it to work for good. I
remember, that when Ioab would not come to Absalom, 2. Sam. 14.30.31.
he set his cornefield on fire, and thereby fetched him: so when the just Ones
will not see their fathers face, Hos. 2.7. and 5.15.
the fire of affliction will make them seek him early, and diligently. It is
the custom of our Gallants, when their horses be slow and dull, to spur
them; if iron grow rusty, cast it into the fire to purify it: and so does our
good God, in our backwardness to good duties, prick us; or being in our
filthiness, purify us, by casting us into the hot coals of tribulation.

Wherefore do not so much mourn, that thou art afflicted; but be careful and
fearful, lest thereby thou should not be reformed; for this is a true sign
that we are Gods sons, and not bastards, when we are more doubtful that we
shall not make the right use of them, then fearful that the Lord will not
remove them. He that finds this in himself, finds a good thing, and but
that which always attends and accompanies a sanctified heart in its
greatest troubles.

do to attain to this?

Matthew. 7.13.
and is it not better to be in our right way, though stony, crooked; then in
the pleasant Meadows going astray, wandering? The speediest way to compass the
world, is to go by water; and the surest path to heaven, is to sail through a
sea of affliction.

Christ thy Captain has trod the same steps before thee; and shall not the
Head be followed by the members? It is said, 2. Sam. 15.30.
that David the King went up to the Mount of Olives, and the people with him,
and as they went, they wept: so our David is ascended into heaven, but he went
weeping, and so must we follow him weeping; for these two are inseparable.

Lam. 3.22.39.
long ago might thou have been cut off by death, and condemned: if this
were thought on, it would stop this vain of discontent and impatience. Thou
may admire thou wast not long ago consumed, rather then pine, in that thou
art corrected, afflicted.

Finally, immoderate mourning, is a means to draw down a heavier judgment.
When boys will pule, and cry out for a little lash, the Master many times sets
it on with a tang: And he that will struggle under the Lords hand,
peradventure shall undergo a double ierking. Say therefore with David, I held
my peace, Psalm. 39 9.
because thou Lord did it. Thus much for this point; the second succeeds,
which is, that

The Lord does not separate his affection from his children in affliction.

Psalm. 73.1.
Howeuer it be, yet God is good to Israel; and the pure in heart shall never be
forgotten. Did not he remember Noah, Gen 8 1. Genesis 15.
in his Arc? Abraham, in all his troubles? Jacob, in his heavy journey?
Joseph, in the pit and prison? Genesis ^8 16. Gen 39.21. Genesis 29.16.
and just Lot, in the midst of Sodom? The Lord thought on David, when he
kept his fathers sheep: Saul would have slain him; 2. Sam. 12.1.
Ziklag was burnt, in his flight to Gath; and when he had forgotten his God,
committed adultery and murder, and was in his greatest extremity, how often
does this man confess, that in the midst of all his sorrows the Lord
comforted his soul? Psalm 94.19.
and, Though his father and his mother should forsake him, Psalm. 27.10.
yet Jehovah would gather him? I might here make mention of Moses, Daniel, the
three Children, and our forerunner, Christ; and tell me, which of the
faithful was ever forgotten by the Lord? He has said, Hebr. 13.5.
that He will not leave us, or forsake us; but at all times, and in all places,
he will be with us. Paul, without doubting, casts down the gantlet, and
bids a defiance against all things, (which notably does prove the point in
hand). Who, Romans 8.35. etc.
or what shall separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation, or anguish,
or famine, or persecution, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? No: for he
is persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate the faithful from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus. Shall I now show it you in the Reason?

knows who are his; and his eye is always over the^. 2. Tim. 2 19.
Could the Lord forget them, were he subject to ignorance? then his affections
might be separate from them; but he is not, he cannot. Tamar may disguise her
self, walk in an unaccustomed path; so Judah may not know her. Isaac, through
the dimnesse of his sight, may bless Jacob, and pass Esau. Tract of time may
make Joseph to forget, or be forgotten of his brethren. Solomon may doubt to
whom the child (of certain) belongs; and Christ come to his own, and not
be received. But the Lord sees all his; time, place, Heb. 4.13.
speech or apparel cannot obscure or darken his eye or ear. He can discern
Daniel in the den; Job, though never so changed, on the dunghill: Let Jonah
have his lodging in the whales belly; Peter be put into close prison; or
Lazarus be wrapped in rags; or Abel tumbling in blood; yet can he call them
by name, and send his Angels to comfort them. Ignorance, or forgetfulness may
cause love to be estranged in the creature; but the Lord is not incident to
either: for his eye, as his essence, Psalm. 139 1.2. etc.
is every where. In this respect therefore he needs not to separate his
affection from his children in affliction.

whom he loves once, Mal 3 6. Ier. 31.3.
he loves ever. Man is subject to mutation of affection; but so is not the
Lord: for he is one most pure act, his love makes us good; so that his
affection is perpetual. Man's judgment may deceive him, and his love cannot
make the object beloved better; therefore he is subject to alteration; God not.





Sun has but one simple act of shining; yet, do we not see that it does
unite clay and straw, dissolve ice into water? makes the flowers smell sweetly,
and a dead corpse to stink lothsomly? the hot fire to be colder, and the cold
water hotter? and will it not help to cure one man by his heat, yet therewith
kill another? Where is the cause? in the several objects, and their diverse
dispositions, and constitutions; and not in the Suns act of shining, which is
but one and the same.

Take a more familiar similitude. Let a looking-glass be set in the window,
will it not represent to thy eye diverse objects? If thou go to it in decent
and comely apparel, shall not thou see the like figure? if dejected, and in
course raiment, will it not offer to thy view the same equal proportion? do
but thou stretch thy self, bend thy brow, and run against it, and will it
not resemble the like person, and action? where is the change? shall we
conclude in the glass? No: for it is neither altered from the place, nor in
nature.

Wherefore if God one day seem to love us, another day to hate us; there is an
alteration within us first, not any in the Lord. Be thou then such in thy
self, as thou would have the Lord be unto thee; but if thou change, thou
shall find a change, though God never change; and if thou run stubburnly
against him; Psalm. 18.24.25. etc.
he will walk stubburnly against thee. For with the froward, he will show
himself froward; but with the meek, he will show himself meek. Yea, such
as thou art to him, he will be to thee, and no other. O that we could believe,
and so practice this lesson!

God, we see no cause can be found: surely, nor in the thing beloved. For what
is affliction to Gods children? does it destroy the essence of the soul, or
deface the image of holiness and righteousness in them? Luk 22.44. Psalm.
119.71.
Does it (in a word) make them worse, or better? It is plain, that no trouble
destroys the image of God; or makes his the more prone to sin; but rather
it has been a means to move them to leave it and amend. For in trouble they
will pray more fervently; Hos. 2.7. 2. Cor. 1.4.
pity others more compassionately; make vows, and resolve to serve God the
more strictly, Psalm. 66.13.14.
then ever in the days of prosperity. Why then should the Lord withdraw his
affection from them? for love leaves hold, but when the object grows worse and
worse.

Mat. 7.9.10 11.
(who take the most pity of their own being in the greatest distress) if he
should forsake his children in their affliction. 1. Tim. 5.8.
Nature it self, in these straits, will not be wanting; and shall the Author
of all graces be found failing? 2. Sam. 18.33.
Shall David keep such a houling for a rebellious son? and will the Father
of mercy not respect his obedient children? Away with it: for it is a kind of
blasphemy to conceive it. For betwixt the love of the Creator, and the
creature, there is neither in respect of height, depth, breadth, or length,
any equal proportion.

Exodus 15.
Moses would make a song, David and others in way of thankfulness, because in
their greatest affliction, they felt the Lord to be present in affection. Did
not Mary break out, Luke 1.46.47.
My soul shall magnify the name of the Lord, and my spirit shall rejoice in
God my Savior? Why did she this? for he has looked on the poor estate of
his handmaid. How did Paul, from the like ground double his petition; The Lord
show mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; 2 Timothy 1.16.18.
The Lord grant that he may find mercy with the Lord in that day: Where was
the reason of this? for he found me out at Rome, visited me often at Ephesus,
and was not ashamed of my chain. Shall the Apostle thus bless his friend, for
being refreshed in his bands? and shall not we, from the heart roots, break
forth into thankfulness? For God, not once, but often has visited us, and
has not been ashamed of our chains of sin and corruption: nay, he has
broke our bands, and set us, that were Satan's slaves, at free liberty.

Christ in the last day; When saw we thee in nakedness, etc? so, When were
we poor and needy, and God thought on us?



Adam our father; Genesis 3.
did not we eat with him, sin with him, Romans 5.14.17.
and lay in the bush with him? was not he, and all we at that time poor and
needy? who was ever in so great a straight? in so miserable a condition?
conceive, if thou can, of a portion of matter without a form; and such was
thy tickle condition, almost turned to nothing: were we not all dead men, and
deprived of our greatest glory? Romans 3.23.
what man's case was ever more miserable then all ours, before the Lord called,
Adam, Where art thou? Conceive of it a little, lay it to heart, ponder it
deeply in thy mind, and suffer it to take some settled impression. What misery
was that? What a word of comfort was this, The seed of the woman shall shuffle
or break the Serpents head? I speak to you that have understanding, and
consider what I say; for the more thou do meditate on this thing, it will
seem to thee the more wonderful.

Canaan) have brought a bad report upon our country; let us search into, and
examine the matter. And that we may speak as the thing is, let us first of al
compare the land with it self, and next with her neighboring sisters.

Was it not in times past, as at the beginning, a Chaos, without form and
void? Did not darkness cover all our deep? and the people perish for want
of knowledge? Ignorance was our wedding garment, and Implicit faith, a sword
fast in the sheath to quench all the fiery darts of Satan: our Bible was as a
sealed book; the teachers of it blind guides, and Gods house nothing else but
a Den of Thieves. Were not all our Progenitors under this cloud? Did not
sin enlarge it self, as Hell? and like the Leprosy in the time of the Law,
spread far, and infect the whole body? What were all the most eminent and
pleasant seats in our Kingdom, but hiues full of droanes; Temples, swarming
with Caterpillars, who nipt every green thing in the bud, as in the land of
Egypt? What shall I more say? Were not all our Priests Papists, or Atheists?
These places, wherein now in Spirit and truth the Lord is served, a very sink
of all sin, and Collunies of all uncleanness? Is not this truth? And has
not the Lord in these latter days brought light out of darkness? made the
English man in his own image? blown part of this viperous brood into the red
sea of destruction? and given him his elder brothers blessing? I lie not: there
is not one thing, at the which I have more wondered, then to see how the Lord
has rooted out the Canaanite, who was so mighty, in number many, and equal in
pride and malice; I do not doubt to speak, but if some of us had seen the
days of old, and compared them to these, they would be astonished at Gods
goodness, and the times reformation. For did not our Ancestors want the bread
of the soul, the eye of the mind, and the pure water of life and salvation? Is
it not to be feared, that millions of souls were poisoned, that I say not
eternally damned? Look back the^ to thy mother, take a strict view what she
was, and then consider what she is; we account comparisons odious; but I am
sure, such as these, be commodious: and he that does not compare time with
time, shall never see the depth of man's misery, or the greatness of the Lords
mercy.

very good, before the last days Creation; no more will I my Mother, until
the last day of sanctification and recreation: poor and needy in many things
then we be? and did not the Lord then herein think upon us? Have not we a
great Light to rule the day, and many less for the night-season? What if some
wandering Planets be in the firmament? why, is not their irregular course and
motion evident to all men?

If the Canaauites had been destroyed at once, the beasts of the field had
devoured the Israelites: and what know thou, but the same reason may be of
force in these days? Let us not murmr, seeing we have took possession of
their land, and have dominion over the Canaanite: We have the prize, and the
remnant one day shall be ours, if our sins and ingratefulnesse do not
prevent it.

poor and needy, and the Lord thought on us, at the change of the two Princes:
Did not the Edomites conclude, that then was the day of mourning, when they
intended to be revenged of Israel? But God prevented them. And in 88 was not
lots cast upon our land, and we esteemed as dead men? And in (that never to be
forgotten delivery) the Gun-powder-plot, were not all our heads near the
block? who was ever needy, if then we were not in need? When I have thought
of that cruel plot and invention, me seems I could never match it, except
that in the fall of Adam, and betwixt them there is some equal parallel.

In that, there was the Devil and the Serpent; the Garden and the persons
against whom the treason was intended: and in this the Pope, Faux his
instrument, the place, and the people they aimed at. And in this comparison or
allegory, we liken the Pope to the Devil; Faux to the Serpent; the
Parliament House to the Garden; and the King to Adam. The Devil was in the
Serpent, but would not be seen; the Pope in Faux, yet loath to be discovered:
the Serpent must swim (probably) in the water, and creep close into the
Garden; Faux must cross the seas, and crawle under the Parliament House: the
Serpent must speak nothing, but as the Devil would; nor Faux do any thing,
but by the Popes direction: the Devil pretends kindness to Adam, Ye shall be
as Gods; the Pope under the cloak of holiness aims at destruction: the
Serpent respected not the excellency of the place, to effect his purpose; nor
Faux, if he might accomplish his resolved treason: the Serpent said, Ye shall
not die at all; Faux, if he had been posed, would have rendered the same lesson:
the Devil in tempting Adam, aimed at the destruction of all his posterity; so
did the Pope, in our dread Sovereign, at all his royal issue, and loyal
subjects: and in many more particulars they might be paralleld. And undoubtedly
these two plots (not to be equald by any) had one first efficient, Satan;
twins they be, conceived in the same womb; whether in Hell, or some Friars
Cloister, there is the Question. But how good was God to us, that though they
traueld of iniquity, and conceived mischief, P^^^. ^.14.
yet they have brought forth a lie; their heads have been bruised, and their
counsel confounded? Suppose that it had took effect, what fact (except that
in the Garden) to this had been comparable! For the walls of our Jerusalem had
been ruinated, and the Sepulchers of our fathers burnt with fire: our Anointed
had died the death, and Bethel his house become a Babylon: our Harpes had been
hanged on the willowes, and we (at the best) but sung our Hebrew songs in a
strange tune, voice and land: This was the work of God, and ought to be
marvelous in our eyes. For had not the Lord thought on us, we had been
swallowed up quick, and laid as low as the nethermost hell.

poor and needy; as pinching Frosts, scorching heat, inundations of waters,
droughts, famine, and the devouring plague in this City, and other places of
our kingdom? Was it not to be poor and needy, when thousands in a week
departed? men, women and children drawn with hooks by heaps into holes? they
that were living either running away with great fear, or staying still at
home, with greater? And who has removed these evils, and sent down the
contrary blessings? Is it not the Lord? We have but yet spoke of generals; but
let us descend to particulars, and there is not one can deny, but in these two
respects he has been poor and needy; and the Lord thought on him.

flow over, and anointed thee above thy fellows, except David's Shepherd?

the whole world lies in wickedness? Will not these former favors provoke
thee to gratefulness? yet let the benefit by it for the present, and future
time, be forcible to urge thee to the practice of this duty: for others of
Gods servants have done the same upon no other ground. Paul, when he
considered, that The Lord had assisted him, when all men for spoke him, and was
persuaded, that the Lord would deliver him from every evil work, and preserve
him to his heavenly Kingdom; breaks forth into these words, To whom be praise
for ever and ever, Amen. And is not this pattern worthy of our best imitation?
and this constant affection on the Lords part, a continual gratuitie on ours?
Why then let it be daily put in practice: for either this love, or nothing
deserves it, and is thanksworthie.

it may comfort us for the present and future troubles. Have thou vexations
without, and terrors within? seems it to thee, that the Lord has forsaken
thee? Why, it is not so: thou art deceived. Think on the days of old, and if
ever thou can prove, that he did love thee; this point will prove he does so
still. What should more comfort a Christians heart then this? and encourage him
to go on through good report, and evil report with resolution?

Acts 20.38.
What made the people weep so bitterly, and fall on Paul's neck? was it not,
in that they must see his face no more? And what did Christ promise to his
disciples for their comfort and resolution in their greatest troubles and
vexations? Any thing but this, Mat. 28.20.
I will be with you to the end of the world: You then that have chosen the
better part, given up your names to serve God, and be in the vast wilderness of
this world, be not faint, or weary in the way: for though hunger pinch you,
Pharaoh pursue you, and the fiery Serpents sting you, yet the Lord shall never
leave you, or forsake you.

Gedeon did to the Angel; Judges 6.13.
Ah my Lord, if the Lord love us, and be with us; why then is all this evil
come upon us?

Sol.
Art thou sick in body? the Lord does it for to make it a fitter habitation for
thy soul. What if thou seem to be broken in pieces? yet he can easily
restore thee to thy former condition. Shall you not see a Carpenter set up a
house in a comely order, yet anon he will strike one joint from another, and lay
it flat on the ground? has he a purpose to destroy it?

No: rather to amend what he saw amiss in it: And so be we, in our own
judgments, builded in a decent manner; but God is wise in heart, and sees
that our bodies are not fit Temples for his Spirit; therefore we must down
again for a time (at the least) in our own feeling, and present apprehensio^.



Thou art to know this, Sol.
that in a Christian soul there be many mansions; as of love, joy, faith,
zeal, repentance, and humility: If therefore the spirit be not present in one
place, seek to find him in another: for be thou assured he is not (in truth)
departed. Do thou want joy, or faith? can thou pray for either? why thou
have the spirit: Can thou not pray? (for sometimes this is a good man's
condition), yet can thou sigh and groan? why, that comes from the Spirit:
Can thou not repent as in times past? art thou notwithstanding sensible of
this? and strikest thy hand upon thy breast? this is a motion of the Spirit.
And be thou of good comfort; for when thy case spiritual is most miserable,
yet thou may discern some pulse (though weak) of the Spirit, beating. He
that comes to see his friend, will be glad to find him in any room of his
house; and if he be not in the dining chamber, or parlour, he (peradventure)
shall have him in some other private corner: so, if the Spirit be absent from
the mansions of faith, love, and the like: then thou must find him out in the
close and dark room, called, The dislike of thy present condition; or in the
secret corner of Humiliation. These two be the furthest places of his absence.



Solution.
To speak with reverence; Every grace in our hearts may be compared to so many
candles in a house: Now the Master will not light above one or two at the most,
except he have great use of them: so the Holy Ghost is the keeper of our
souls; he works with these graces in us; and he will but employ them, as
there is just occasion: If there be need, all shall be enlightened, made
strong. And what man being an old Disciple, that has not experience in these
things?

for they that work wickedness are set up; Man. 3.15.
and such as tempt God, they are delivered: And are not all things within us,
and without us, out of order?

Solution.
We must not judge things by the appearance or present condition; for then we
may condemn the generation of the just and the Lords own building: He that
would have comfort in the remembrance of his house, must not conceive of it in
parts: as of the wood in the Forests, vnsquared; the stone in the rocks,
unpolished; the brick in the clay, unburned; and lime in the sand, untempered;
but in the pattern or frame, as it will be when it is perfected: So we are
to look at the end of the righteous, and the restoration of all things, not
as they be for the present; and then shall we see the full beauty of the Lords
works, and our own blessedness. He that does these things shall never fall,
finally, and for ever.

Therefore Watch ye, stand ye fast, quit you like men, and be strong: for the
Lords affection to all the faithful, never fails in affliction.

Paul's bands. For to him that has not (need of comfort) shall be given; but
from him that has, shall be taken away that he has. Job renders the reason:
Because Men have forsaken the fear of the Lord. How many have the faith in
respect of persons? forsake just Job, if tumbling on the dunghill? and be
ashamed of Paul's chain? Is this to show forth the virtues of him that has
called thee? to imitate the example of thy Savior? and to be a fellow-feeler
of thy brothers affliction? If this go before, what will follow? shall not the
Lord mete to us, as we have measured to others? leave us, when we have most
need of comfort, seeing we cry, Stand afar, come not near me, to our
children and friends in the time of affliction.

Was it not Ionathans praise, that he was lovely in life and death, and would
not leave his brother David in all his troubles? and shall it not be thy duty
and comfort to do the like to all thy brethren? The Butler is branded, that he
remembered not Joseph in his bands; and hence (probably) came that Proverb: No
man remembers the afflictions of Joseph. Yet we have some more unnatural, who
forsake men in their prosperity, and days of Gods promotion: they envy David,
because he is anointed King from the sheepe-fold: Cry, away with Amos, he
must not prophecy at Bethel, for he was a figge-gatherer: and if Christ come
out of Nazaret, be reputed the Carpenters son; and advanced by his heavenly
Father; some will reject him; others doubt of him; and too few receive him.

And (without mis-apprehension be it spoken) I have seen these two evils in
the learned and religious of our times; Friends forsaken in adversity, envied
in prosperity: we will not visit the poor, if we be rich; neither regard
them the Lord extraordinarily aduanceth. But these things should not be so: why
then say with Ruth, Naught but death shall part thee, and thy friend: follow
him with thine affection whithersoeuer he goes; and if he fall amongst
thieves, go not by him, but look on him; and to thy ability and his necessity
relieve him: For this is thy Fathers proceeding; the custom of his children;
and the only way to be of others respected, when thou thy self art most
afflicted.

If poverty would have parted friends; nakedness made a separation, meannesse
of birth, or baseness of condition; then the Lord had never took pity on
thee; or, in affection been united to thee. Wherefore set the Lords pattern
before thine eyes; and whatsoever he bears with, in his, do thou the like
also: and let not that withdraw thy love from any of thy brethren, against
which the God of love never objected, disliked; or, for the which his affection
was never separated, weakened. I know this is thy duty; but a thing, not easy
to be done; for, it is no weak, but a maine pitch of sanctification, not to
draw arguments from the meannesse of a man's birth, friends, education, former
poverty, or present necessity to withdraw, extenuate and separate affection:
but to love, where, and in the same manner the Lord loves: he that does this,
flesh and blood never revealed it to him. Then strive for it; it is worth the
obtaining; that it may be said of thee, as Paul said of one, who performed this
duty: The Lord show mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; The Lord grant he may
find mercy with the Lord at that day.

Prodigal, run from him; or with Demas, embrace the world: for all creatures
of that kind will fail and forsake thee in thy affliction; or if not, they
will prove, but like Jobs friends, or the Pharisees, Miserable Comforters. Or,
have thou not yet given up thy name, and with a purpose of heart cleaued to the
Lord? why then change thy master, and make choice of him we have in hand.

Who would not serve such a man as will be always present with his people;
have an eye over them; call them by name, and relieve them according to their
necessities? Shall not we then make election of the Lord? For his eye shall
watch for thy good; his right hand shall be over thy face, and his left hand
under thy head; and, thou shall want no manner of thing. Art thou in bonds? he
shall visit thee. In danger? his Angels shall defend thee. In want? the
creatures refresh thee. Tempted by Satan? he shall fight for thee. Or in the
pangs and shadow of death? yet he will be with thee, that thou may sleep
soundly and securely.

Beloved, this I know, that if God be with us, it is no matter who be against
us: but if he be not on our side, what will it profit us to be respected of
the world? And say not in thy heart, Lush, my mountain is strong, and I shall
not be moved; for we are but in the wilderness, we shall meet with fiery
serpents, the stings of a guilty and wounded spirit. Jordan, that type of
death has not looked us in the face; at the most, we have not passed over it:
and does not the day draw near? is it not at hand? and if the Lord do not
then help thee, and be with thee, what shall become of thee? woeful will be
that Haven, where thou shall be landed.

O that we did but know the worth of Gods favor in affliction! or how joyful
a thing it is for his children to be assured of his affection! Well; the day of
death and of judgment shall declare it: and till then, the true worth will not
be fully known of the faithful; or the want feelingly discerned by the
ungodly. Let me then entreat thee to strive for his favor; think no pains
too great to obtain it; neither be at peace till thou possess it; for then
thou may have comfort in troub^es; joy, amidst sorrow; and life, in death.
No tidings so terrible, that shall make thee tremble; no former sin cause
thee to fear; nor Satan's deadliest darts touch or pierce thee, if the Lord be
with thee. Now then is the time to agree with him; take the opportunity,
fore-slow it not; and build thou on this rock once, and stand for ever.

A third point from the words may now be collected, viZ. that,

The favor of God in affliction, only gives the faithful satisfaction.

We see that this good man did comfort himself from no other ground, but from
this, that The Lord thought on him. Neither is there any thing that could work
this effect, he being in so great affliction, except the Lords love and
affection. Many cry, who will show us any good? Psalm. 4 6.
But Lord lift thou the light of thy countenance upon me. And whom have I in
heaven but thee, Psalm 73.25.
or in earth that I respect in comparison of thee? No person, no thing. I^ is
good (yea best) to draw near to God, ^^nd 28. 2. Sam. 1^.12.
for content in these dangers. Saul was a King, and yet when God was gone,
could his kingdom yield him any comfort? BalshaZZar in his bowls will quake,
Dan. 5.6.
and his heart roll within him, if the Lords hand in writing be stretched out
against him. Why does the devil tremble and fear? Oh, Iam. 2.19.
he has no confidence in the great Creator. Cain will curse and cry to, Genesis
4.5.
when he cannot expect and rest in a cheerful acceptance from the Lord: but
let all the creatures in the earth, and the whole host of Heaven band
themselves against us, If God be with us, Romans 8.31.
who can be against us to hurt us, trouble us? And what may be the reason of
this?

Genesis 45.28.
Let Jacob hear that Joseph his son is yet alive, he has enough. If the
King come home safe, Ziba may keep the land, 2 Samuel 19.30.
for Mephibosheth is satisfied. Could but the son of Hamor match with Dinah,
Genesis 34.19.
his Circumcision will be endured; and though the daughters in the country
be denied him, yet shall he be well contented. Give but Rahel children, Genesis
30.1. Luk 1.29.
and she will not die. And let Simeon see his Savior and he will die. And how
are these contrary effects produced? Why love is the cause thereof: so let Gods
children enjoy the subject of their affection, they will rest in it with full
contentation in all affliction.

all shall work together for good at their latter end. Romans 8.18.
For being assured of the one, they never need to doubt of the other: and grant
but the first, and the second will ensue of necessity. Will it not rejoice the
poor patient, that his Physician does affect him? for then he is assured, that
if he can, he will (and God can) cure him. If we have the Judge for our friend
and father, what need we to fear the many inditements preferred against us?
Let Moses have the Lord to look upon him, Pharaohs frowns cannot fear him:
and let God but think on us, and we think on him (he by affection, we by
faith), we need not to shake or shadder: but walk on cheerfully and resolutely
in the valleys of tears, Psalm. 23.4.
and the very shadow of death. David in his greatest troubles speaks thus to
the Lord; Thou have given joy in my heart, more then of the time, when their
corn and their new wine were multiplied. Psalm. 4.7.8.
In peace together will I lie down and sleep; for thou Jehovah alone wilt
seat me in confidence; preserve my soul in safety. Now from this point thus
proved, we learn these things.

Mat. 27.5. 1. Sam. 3^.4 2. Sam. 17.23.
Shall we think that Judas would have hanged himself; Saul fallen on his
own spear; or so wise a wight as Achitophel, proved his own executioner; if
God had been the object of their affection, and they put confidence in him in
their affliction? No: it had been a thing impossible. And therefore we may
hence safely conclude, that the want of the assurance of Gods savor is the
true cause, why men in discontent and crosses become their own executioners.
For that which they affect most, wanting power to content and preserve them, or
being removed from them; they having no other God in their present
apprehension, often become their own bloody Butchers, to drown, hang, or
murder themselves. And do but observe it, and what I have spoken, you shall
find verified by experience.

Heb. 11.8.
Abraham will go he knows not whither; Daniel into the Den, Daniel 6. Genesis
28. Ruth 1.6.
and Paul to prison, having this confidence of the Lords favor. Jacob will
leave his fathers house, Ruth run into a strange Country, Hebr. 12.23.
and Christ embrace the Cross, endure the shame, when God thinks on them. How
should Job have endured the stealth of his cattle, Job, 1. and 2.
burning of his corn, and the sudden death of all his children, when their
bones were bruised and broken; their blood and brains sprinkled and spread on
the posts and timber; his VViues bitter words, Curse God and dye (for so the
place is to be understood; for it is probable Satan spared her life to that
purpose to tempt him; and it was the end he aimed at, He will curse thee to thy
face: why should we then imagine, that he put not that tart and cruel phrase
into her mouth? for he is wise in his proceedings) if the certainty of the
Lords love had not supported him? Had it once been possible for frail men,
Heb. 11.
and weak women to have endured burning, hewing asunder, and to be rent on the
Rack, but upon this ground? Why then, see the true cause of joy in sorrow,
and give the Lord his deserved praise, whose power is the most made manifest in
our weakness, woefulness, wretchedness, 2. Cor. 12.9.

David's darling; get Gods affection once shed abroad in thy heart; be sure of
this, and thou shall endure the greatest storm; cut the strongest streams of
the raging tide, and land safe at the haven of Heaven. We, in policy, prepare
cloakes for wet, provision for winter, and a staff against the time of
decrepit old age; and shall we not provide for death and judgment? What can
support thee in the times of trouble, and the hour of thy departure, but some
persuasion of Gods favor? Could Pharaohs Horses, the Rich Man's purple, the
Fools great barnes, or Iesabel her painting, if thou had them? No, no: these
are but a vain thing, a sandy foundation, and a staff of Reed, that will
either stock thee fast, or break in shiuers, piercing thy hands through with
many sorrows.

Therefore in the fear of God think on this one thing: for death will come,
and will not tarry; and if thou have not this fixed fast in the furrows of thy
heart, little pleasure can thou have in death at death. And because we dream
(but deceive our selves, and that too too often), in thinking we are in the
Lords favor highly, principally in prosperity; be thou the more careful to
attain to this thing. We have a common Proverb, that A good thing cannot be
made too sure: and what better then this in all the world? And for the better
trial of thy self in the matter, take these rules in the mean while, till
thou have learned better.

sheds his love first abroad in thy heart, Romans 5.5.
and then thou art enflamed with the love of him. P^al. 73 27.
For as I first give heat to my bed, and then it gives me warmth the night
after: so the Lords love heateth my heart, and then I thence forward affect
him: certainly he that loves the Lord, is loved of him.

Psalm. 6.8.9. etc.
especially in prayer, and that familiarly. When thou have called on his Name,
has he given thee a gracious and comfortable answer? Have thou felt a secret
voice of the spirit, speaking to the ear of thy soul, Thy prayer is heard,
Acts 10.4.
and thy request come before the Lord? (for God, like man, gives the greatest
gifts, and manifests himself to his children the most in secret). Josh. 21.45.
that he has kept covenant with thee, and performed his promise (for his
promises are Yea and Amen to all he loves)? 2. Cor. 1.20.
then may thou have hope. Isaiah 27 3.
What peace have thou found wrought in thy soul? Psalm. 30.9.
How has he watered thee every morning? humbled thee in prosperity, and
comforted thee in adversity? Have thou an experimental knowledge of his
proceedings? fear not then, he will do thee good, and no evil; 2. Cor. 1.4.
and he is never weary (for that were to cross his own command) in weldoing.

Arm of flesh and blood; deny thy own power, and only rely upon the Lord? I
then dare give thee my word, Psalm. 60.11.12.
that he shall never fail thee, or in the greatest danger forsake thee.

Be thou assured once, that these things are in thee; and the like done for
thee; and thou shall be as secure and safe from all dangers in life and death,
as the least drop of water in the bottom of the deep Ocean sea is from the
exhalation of the Summers Sun; or that grain of sand, which possesses the
very center of the Globe, is from motion, or the footes trampling, scattering.

One thing more may yet be observed out of the words, thinks on me, which
is, that

The Lord will deliver the faithful from all dangers; free them in a
convenient season from all afflictions. Psalm 91. Psalm. 27.14.


For this is the true exposition of the phrase, as the words following do
declare evidently, plainly. Noah shall not be drowned in the old world, Genesis
8.1. etc.
but be freed from all dangers. Genesis 19.
Let shall come safe to little Zoar. Moses flee to, and return in health, Acts
7.
from the land of Madian. Joseph may be sold, Genesis 45.
yet God can preserve him safe, Genesis 33.
and Esau expect the time of mourning to be revenged on his brother Jacob, yet
shall he come again, and find favor in his eyes. Psalm. 11.1. etc.
Let David be hunted like a Partridge, the ravening Kite shall never catch him;
Ier. 45.5.
and Baruch shall have his life, though many perish for a prey. Peter may be in
prison, Acts 5.19.20. and 12 7.8.
yet shall the gates be cast off their hinges, his bolts be loosed, and he set
at liberty. 2. Tim 4.17.18.
And though Paul be forsaken of all men, yet God shall assist him, free him out
of the mouth of the Lion, and preserve him to his heavenly kingdom. Yea, Phil
1.21.
this is most certain, that either in life he shall let them loose, Revel.
14.13. 2. King. 22 20.
to run at liberty; or by death free them from the evil to come. And reason
may be rendered why it shall be so:

his counsel stand? Prove. 19.21.
and his word abide for ever? Did he ever fail in keeping covenant? or have
his promises at any time been prevented? No, Mat^ 5.18.
no: Let Heaven and Earth pass away, one jot of his word shall not move, but
be verified, certainly accomplished. Tit. 1.2.
For shall God prove a liar? break promise? Away with this; he cannot, he will
not. God is not like man, promising what he never intends to perform: 2. Cor.
1.20.
for all the promises made by him, are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus.

Philistims to rejoice in the overthrow of little David his Anointed; Deuteronomy.
32.26.27.
or the cursed Canaanites to tread underfoot the sanctified seed of old
Israel. Psalm. 89.10.11. etc. Exodus 1.12.
Pharaoh may lay great burdens on the Jews, yet the more he does vex them,
they shall multiply, grow and vex him. This has been a reason of force in
former time, and may continue still to confirm this doctrine.

1. These. 4.13.
or mourn as men without hope, for it is but a very little while, and then He
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Heb. 10.37.
The Husbandman must patiently expect the time of harvest; James 5 7.
the Mariner wait with content for wind and tide; and the Watchman for the
dawning of the day: we must also tarry the Lords leisure; be strong, and he,
in the fittest season, will comfort our souls. David being assured, that he
should see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, did not faint,
Psalm. 27.13.
but expect with patience the time appointed; and his pattern must be our
practice; seeing it was grounded and sprang from the point we have in hand.



But we think not seriously of this thing, and that is the cause, we hang down
the loins of our minds; and that which is halting is ready, Heb. 12.12.13.
upon the least rub, to be turned out of the way. Wherefore let us consider how
he has in former time delivered his; and it will be a notable prop to support
our staggering minds; and a sure base, and foundation for faith to rest it
self upon. Now the kinds and means be many.



Bush was, Exodus 3.2. and the three children in the furnace, Dan. 3.

Pharaoh, Exodus 14; of Haman, Ester 7; and Herod, Acts 12.

Paul a bloody persecutor, to become a resolute Christian soldier, Acts 9.

Paul, by setting the enemies at ods one with another, as he did the Sadduces
and the Pharisees, Acts 21.31. and 23.10.

Saul, that the Philistines are about to invade the land: so David may escape
the danger, 1. Sam. 23.27. etc.

Paul and others, in so much as they shall be kindly entreated, and sent away,
Acts 4.8. etc. Acts 16.37, etc.

Balaam to bless; Caiphas to prophecy; and the Whale to preserve Jonah, when
the ship would not save him. And is his power yet weakened, his wisdom
decreased, or his will altered, changed? No, in no wise: for there is no shadow
of turning with the Lord; therefore fear not, fail not, faint not.

Abel was slain; James beheaded, and many of Christ's members murdered.

I answer, that if we keep, Sol.
and live in some close sin, the Lord will not deliver us; for the committing
of some iniquity, may procure danger, yea death too.





Babylon, as in the land and limits of Canaan?









This then being thus; be of good comfort for the present; fear not any future
dangers; but pluck up your hearts, and gird up the loins of your minds: Go
on through good report, and evil report; be resolute soldiers of Jesus
Christ; march on valiantly, and fear not their fear. For mauger their malice,
David shall serve his days; Paul finish his work, and John's life be
prolonged, until his task be ended. Let Balaam, the Pope, curse; Pharaoh, the
Turk pursue; Gallio, the Jesuit, judge; Pontius Pilate, the Priest, condemn;
nay, let Satan rage, his instruments band themselves together, and all the
crawling Locusts ascend out of the nethermost hell; yet I have hoped, and ever
will, that the Lords Anointed shall reign, his people increase more and more,
the word daily run, Babylon be razed down to the ground, the house of Bethel
builded and supported, till the Son of God return again in his greatest
glory. When all wicked and ungodly men shall taste of the second death; be
bound hand and foot, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire: And every
upright and honest heart shall have al tears wiped from his eyes, fetters from
his feet, manacles from his fingers; run to and fro in the new Jerusalem
that is above; and with Jesus showt for joy, as David and the people did, when
the Ark came home safe into the City: and then shall it be known, whether
God had, or not, power to tread down Satan, and his shauelings under foot;
and preserve his people unto his heavenly Kingdom. To which God, for this
hope, be praise throughout all generations, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

