A REMONSTRANCE OF THE MOST GRACIOUS KING JAMES I. KING OF GREAT BRITAIN,
FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc. FOR THE RIGHT OF KINGS, AND
THE independance of their Crowns. AGAINST AN ORATION OF the most Illustrious
Card. of PERRON, pronounced in the Chamber of the third Estate. Ian. 15. 1615.

Translated out of his Majesty's French Copy.

PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1616.

THE PREFACE.
I Have no humor to play the Curious in a foreign Commonwealth, or,
unrequested, to carry any hand in my neighbors affairs. It has more
congruitie with Royal dignity, whereof God has given me the honor, to
prescribe Laws at home for my Subjects, rather then to furnish foreign
Kingdoms and people with counsels. Howbeit, my late entire affection to K.
Henry IV. of happy memory, my most honored brother, and my exceeding sorrow
for the most detestable parricide acted upon the sacred person of a King, so
complete in all heroical and Princely virtues; as also the remembrance of my
own dangers, incurred by the practice of conspiracies flowing from the same
source, has wrought me to sympathize with my friends in their grievous
occurrents: no doubt so much more dangerous, as they are less apprehended and
felt of Kings themselves, even when the danger hangs over their own heads.
Upon whom, in case the power and virtue of my aduertisments be not able
effectually to work, at least many millions of children and people yet
unborn, shall bear me witness, that in these dangers of the highest nature
and strain, I have not bin defective: and that neither the subuersions of
States, nor the murders of Kings, which may unhappily betide hereafter, shall
have so free passage in the world for want of timely aduertisment before. For
touching my particular, my rest is up, that one of the maynes for which God
has advanced me upon the lofty stage of the supreme Throne, is, that my words
uttered from so eminent a place for Gods honor most shamefully traduced and
vilified in his own Deputies and Lieutenants, might with greater facility be
conceived.

Now touching France; fair was the hope which I conceived of the States
assembled in Parliament at Paris. That calling to mind the murders of their
Noble Kings, and the wars of the League which followed the Popes
fulminations, as when a great storm of hail powers down after a
thunder-cracke, and a world of writings addressed to justify the parricides
and the dethronings of Kings, would have joined heads, hearts, and hands
together, to hammer out some apt and wholesome remedy against so many fearful
attempts and practices. To my hope was added no little joy, when I was given to
understand the third Estate had preferred an Article or Bill, the tenor and
substance whereof was concerning the means whereby the people might be
vnwitched of this pernicious opinion; That Popes may toss the French King his
Throne like a tennis ball, and that killing of Kings is an act meritorious to
the purchase of the crown of Martyrdom. But in fine, the project was
encountered with success clean contrary to expectation. For this Article of
the third Estate, like a sigh of liberty breathing her last, served only so
much the more to inthrall the Crown, and to make the bondage more grievous and
sensible then before. Even as those medicines which work no ease to the
patient, do leave the disease in much worse terms: so this remedy invented
and tendered by the third Estate, did only exasperate the present malady of
the State: for so much as the operation and virtue of the wholesome remedy was
ouermatched with peccant humors, then stirred by the force of thwarting and
crossing opposition. Yea much better had it been, the matter had not been
stirred at all, then after it was once on foot and in motion, to give the
Truth leave to lie gasping and sprawling under the violence of a foreign
faction. For the opinion by which the Crowns of Kings are made subject unto
the Popes will and power, was then avowed in a most Honorable Assembly by the
averment of a Prelate in great authority, and of no less learning. He did not
plead the cause as a private person, but as one by representation that stood
for the whole body of the Clergy. Was there applauded, and seconded with
approbation of the Nobility. No resolution taken to the contrary, or in bar
to his plea. After praises and thanks from the Pope, followed the printing of
his eloquent harangue or Oration, made in full Parliament: a set discourse,
maintaining Kings to be deposeable by the Pope, if he speak the word. The
said Oration was not only printed with the Kings privilege, but was likewise
addressed to me by the author and Orator himself; who presupposed the reading
thereof would forsooth drive me to say, Lord Cardinal, in this high subject
your Honor has satisfied me to the full. All this poysed in the balance of
equal judgment, why may not I truly and freely affirm, the said Estates
assembled in Parliament have set Royal Majesty upon a doubtful chance, or
left it resting upon uncertain terms: and that now, if the doctrine there
maintained by the Clergy should bear any pawme, it may lawfully be doubted,
who is King in France? For I make no question, he is but a titular King that
reigns only at an others discretion, and whose Princely head the Pope has
power to bare of his Regal Crown. In temporal matters, how can one be
Sovereign, that may be fleeced of all his temporalties by any superior power?
But let men at a near sight mark the pith and marrowe of the Article proposed
by the third Estate, and they shall soon perceive the skillful Architects
thereof aimed only to make their King a true and real King, to be recognized
for Sovereign within his own Realm, and that killing their King might no
longer pass the muster of works acceptable to God.

But by the vehement instance and strong current of the Clergy and Nobles,
this was borne down as a pernicious Article, as a cause of schism, as a gate
which opens to all sorts of heresies: yea there it was maintained tooth and
nail, that in case the doctrine of this Article might go for current doctrine,
it must follow, that for many ages past in sequence, the Church has bin the
kingdom of Antechrist, and the synagogue of Satan. The Pope upon so good issue
of the cause, had reason, I trow, to address his letters of triumph unto the
Nobility and Clergy, who had so far approved themselves faithful to his
Holiness; and to vaunt withal, that he had nipped Christian Kings in the
Crown, that he had given them check with mate, through the magnanimous
resolution of this courageous Nobility, by whose brave making head the third
Estate had bin so valiantly forced to give ground. In a scornful reproach he
qualified the Deputies of the third Estate, nebulones ex foece plebis, a sort
or a number of knaves, I have received advertisement from diverse parts, that in
the Popes letters to the Nobility these words were extant, howsoever they have
been left out in the impression, and rased out of the copies of the said
letters.
the very dregs of the base vulgar, a pack of people presuming to personate
well affected Subjects and men of deep understanding, and to read their
masters a learned lecture. Now it is no wonder, that, in so good an office and
loyal carriage toward their King, the third Estate has outgone the Clergy.
For the Clergy deny themselves to have any rank among the Subjects of the
King: they stand for a Sovereign out of the kingdom, to whom as to the Lord
Paramount they owe suit and service: they are bound to advance that Monarchy,
to the body whereof they properly appertain as parts or members, as elsewhere
I have written more at large. But for the Nobility, the Kings right arm, to
prostitute and set as it were to sale the dignity of their King, as if the
arm should give a thrust unto the head; I say for the Nobility to hold and
maintain even in Parliament, their King is liable to deposition by any
foreign power or Potentate, may it not pass among the strangest miracles and
rarest wonders of the world? For that once granted, this consequence is good
and necessary; That in case the King, once lawfully deposed, shall stand upon
the defensive and hold out for his right, he may then lawfully be murdered.
Let me then here freely profess my opinion, and this it is: That now the
French Nobility may seem to have some reason to disrobe themselves of their
titles, and to transfer them by resignation unto the third Estate. For that
body of the third Estate alone has carried a right noble heart: in as much as
they could neither be tickled with promises, nor terrified by threatenings, from
resolute standing to those fundamental points and reasons of State, which most
concern the honor of their King, and the security of his person.

Of all the Clergy, the man that has most abandoned, or set his own honor
to sale, the man to whom France is least obliged, is the Lord Cardinal of
Perron: a man otherwise inferior to few in matter of learning, and in the
grace of a sweet style. This man in two several Orations, whereof the one was
pronounced before the Nobility, the other had audience before the third
Estate, has set his best wits on work, to draw that doctrine into all hatred
and infamy, which teaches Kings to be indeposeable by the Pope. To this
purpose he terms the same doctrine, a breeder of schisms, a gate that
opens to make way, and to give entrance unto all heresies; in brief, a
doctrine to be held in so high a degree of detestation, that rather then he and
his fellow-Bishops will yield to the signing thereof, they will be contented
like Martyrs to burn at a stake. At which resolution, or obstinacy rather in
his opinion, I am in a manner amassed, more then I can be moved for the like
brauado in many other: for as much as he was many years together, a follower
of the late King, even when the King followed a contrary Religion, and was
deposed by the Pope: as also because not long before, in a certain Assembly
holden at the Iacobins in Paris, he withstood the Popes Nuntio to his face,
when the said Nuntio labored to make this doctrine, touching the Popes
temporal Sovereignty, pass for an Article of faith. But in both Orations, he
sings a contrary song, and from his own mouth passes sentence of
condemnation against his former course and profession. I suppose, not without
solid judgment: as one that herein has well accommodated himself to the
times. For as in the reign of the late King, he durst not offer to broach this
doctrine (such was his fore-wit:) so now he is bold to proclaim and publish it
in Parliament under the reign of the said Kings son: whose tender years and
late succession to the Crown, do make him lie the more open to injuries, and
the more facill to be circumuented. Such is now his after wisdom.

Of these two Orations, that made in presence of the Nobility he has, for
fear of incurring the Popes displeasure, cautelously suppressed. For therein
he has been somewhat prodigal in affirming this doctrine, maintained by the
Clergy, to be but problematicall; and in taking upon him to avouch, that
Catholics of my Kingdom are bound to yield me the honor of obedience. Whereas
on the other side he is not ignorant, how this doctrine of deposing Princes and
Kings the Pope holds for merely necessary, and approoueth not by any means
allegiance to be performed unto me by the Catholics of my Kingdom. Yea if
credit may be given unto the abridgement of his other Oration published,
wherein he parallels the Popes power in receiving honors in the name of the
Church, with the power of the Venetian Duke in receiving honors in the name of
that most renowned Republike; no marvel that when this Oration was dispatched
to the press, he commanded the same to be gelded of this clause and other
like, for fear of giving his Holiness any offensive distaste.

His pleasure therefore was and content withal, that his Oration imparted to
the third Estate, should be put in print, and of his courtesy he vouchsafed
to address unto me a copy of the same. Which after I had perused, I forthwith
well perceived, what and how great discrepance there is between one man that
perorateth from the ingenuous and sincere disposition of a sound heart, and an
other that flaunteth in flourishing speech with inward checkes of his own
conscience. For every where he contradicts himself, and seems to be afraid
least men should pick out his right meaning.

First, In 12. several passages the L. Card. seems to speak against his
own conscience.
he graunts this Question is not hitherto decided by the holy Scriptures, or by
the Decrees of the ancient Church, or by the analogy of other Ecclesiastical
proceedings: and nevertheless he confidently does affirm, that whosoever
maintain this doctrine to be wicked and abominable, Page 85.
that Popes have no power to put Kings by their supreme Thrones, they teach
men to believe, there has not been any Church for many ages past, and that
indeed the Church is the very Synagogue of Antechrist.

Secondly, he exhorts his hearers to hold this doctrine at least for
problematicall, and not necessary: and yet herein he calls them to all humble
submission unto the judgment of the Pope and Clergy, by whom the cause has
been already put out of all question, as out of all hunger and cold.

Thirdly, he does auerre, in case this Article be authorized, it makes the Pope
in good consequence to be the Antechrist: Page 99.
and yet he graunts that many of the French are tolerated by the Pope to
dissent in this point from his Holiness; provided, their doctrine be not
proposed as necessary, and material to faith. As if the Pope in any sort gave
toleration to hold any doctrine contrary to his own, and most of all that
doctrine which by consequence inferres himself to be the Antechrist.

Fourthly, he protests forwardness to undergo the flames of Martyrdom,
rather then to sign this doctrine, which teaches Kings Crowns to sit faster
on their heads, then to be stirred by any Papal power whatsoever: and yet says
withal, the Pope winketh at the French, by his toleration to hold this
dogmatical point for problematicall. And by this means, the Martyrdom that he
affects in this cause, will prove but a problematicall Martyrdom, whereof
question might grow very well, whether it were to be mustered with grievous
crimes, or with phreneticall passions of the brain, or with deserved
punishments.

Fifthly, he denounces Anathema, discharges maledictions like haile-shot,
against parricides of Kings: and yet elsewhere he lays himself open to speak
of Kings only so long as they stand Kings. But who does not know that a King
deposed is no longer King? And so that limme of Satan, which murdered Henry
III. then vn-king'd by the Pope, did not stabbe a King to death.

Sixthly, he does not allow a King to be made away by murder: and yet he
thinks it not much out of the way, to take away all means whereby he might
be able to stand in defense of his life.

Seventhly, Page 95. 97.
he abhors killing of Kings by apposted throat-cutting, for fear least
body and soul should perish in the same instant: and yet he does not mislike
their killing in a pitched field, and to have them slaughtered in a set
battle. For he presupposes, no doubt out of his charitable mind, that by
this means the soul of a poor King so dispatched out of the way shall
instantly fly up to heaven.

Eighthly, he says a King deposed retains still a certain internal
habitude and politic impression, by virtue and efficacy whereof he may,
being once reformed and become a new man, be restored to the lawful use and
practice of Regality. Whereby he would bear us in hand, that when a foreign
Prince has invaded and rauenously seized the Kingdom into his hands, he will
not only take pity of his predecessor to save his life, but will also prove
so kind-hearted, upon sight of his repentance, to restore his kingdom without
fraud or guile.

Ninthly, he says every where in his Discourse, that he deals not in the
cause, otherwise then as a problematicall discourser, and without any
resolution one way or other: and yet with might and maine he contends for the
opinion, that leaves the States and Crowns of Kings controulable by the Pope:
refutes objections, propounds the authority of Popes and Councils, by name the
Lateran Council under Innocent III. as also the consent of the Church. And to
cross the Churches judgment, is, in his opinion to bring in schism, and to
leave the world without a Church for many hundred years together: which (to my
understanding) is to speak with resolution, and without all hesitation.

Tenthly, he acknowledges none other cause of sufficient validity for the
deposing of a King, besides heresy, apostasy, and infidelity: nevertheless
that Popes have power to displace Kings for heresy and apostasy, he proves
by examples of Kings whom the Pope has curbed with deposition, not for
heresy, but for matrimonial causes, for civil pretenses, and for lack of
capacity.

Eleuenthly, he alleges every where passages, as well of holy Scripture as
of the Fathers and modern histories; but so impertinent, and with so little
truth, as hereafter we shall cause to appear, that for a man of his deep
learning and knowledge, it seems not possible so to speak out of his
judgment.

Lastly, whereas all this has been hudled and heaped together into one mass,
to currie with the Pope: yet he suffers diverse points to fall from his lips,
which may well distaste his Holiness in the highest degree. As by name, where
he prefers the authority of the Council before that of the Pope, and makes
his judgment inferior to the judgment of the French; as in fit place
hereafter shall be showed. Again, where he represents to his hearers the
decrees of Popes and Councils already passed concerning this noble subject:
and yet affirms that he does not debate the question, but as a Questionist,
and without resolution. As if a Cardinal should be afraid to be positive, and
to speak in peremptory strains, after Popes and Councils have once decided
the Question. Or as if a man should perorate upon hazard, in a cause for the
honor whereof he would make no difficulty to suffer Martyrdom. Add hereunto,
that his Lordshippe has always taken the contrary part heretofore, and this
total must needs arise, that before the third Estate, his lips looked one
way, and his conscience another.

All these points, by the discourse which is to follow, and by the ripping up
of his Oration (which by Gods assistance J will undertake) tending to the
reproach of Kings, and the subversion of Kingdoms, I confidently speak it,
shall be made manifest. Yet do I not conceive it can any way make for my
honor, to enter the lists against a Cardinal. For J am not ignorant how far a
Cardinals Hat, comes under the Crown and Scepter of a King. For well I wot
unto what sublimity the Scripture has exalted Kings, when it styles them Gods:
Whereas the dignity of a Cardinal is but a late vpstart invention of man; In
the Preface to my Apology.
as I have elsewhere proved. But I have imbarqued my self in this action,
moved thereunto; first by the common interest of Kings in the cause it self:
Then by the L. Cardinal, who speaks not in this Oration as a private person,
but as one representing the body of the Clergy and Nobility, by whom the
cause has been won, and the garland borne away from the third Estate.
Again, by mine own particular: because he is pleased to take me up for a
sower of dissension, and a persecutor, under whom the Church is hardly able to
fetch her breath; yea, for one by whom the Catholics of my Kingdom are
compelled to endure all sorts of punishment: and withal he terms this
Article of the third Estate, a monster with a fishes tail that came swimming
out of England. Last of all, by the present state of France; because France
being now reduced to so miserable terms, that it is now become a crime for
a Frenchman to stand for his King; it is a necessary duty of her neighbors to
speak in her cause, and to make trial whether they can put life into the
truth now dying, and ready to be buried by the power of violence, that it may
resound and ring again from remote regions.

I have no purpose once to touch many pretty toys which the ridges of his
whole book are sowed withal. Such are his allegations of Pericles, Agesilaus,
Aristotle, Minos, the Druides, the French Ladies, Hannibal, Pindarus, and
Poetical fables. All resembling the red and blew flowers that pester the corn
when it stands in the fields, where they are more noisome to the growing
croppe, then beautiful to the beholding eye. Such petty matters, nothing at
all beseemed the dignity of the Assembly, and of the maine subject, or of the
Orator himself. For it was no Decorum to enter the Stage with a Pericles in
his mouth, but with the sacred Name of God: nor should he have marshalled the
passage of a Royal Poet, after the example of an heathen Orator.

Neither will I give any touch to his conceit of the Roman conquests, Page 4.
which the L. Cardinal bestows in the list of Gods graces and temporal
blessings, as a recompense of their zeal to the service and worship of Idols.
As if God were a recompencer of wickedness, or as if the forcible eiecting of
tenants out of their frames and other possessions, might be reckoned among the
blessings of God.

Nor to that of the Milesian Virgins, Page 7. and 8
dragged starre-naked after they were dead; which the L. Cardinal draws into
his discourse for an example of the eternal torments denounced by the Laws
Ecclesiastical, to be inflicted after this life.

Nor to his exposition of the word Problematicall: Page 13.
where he gives to understand that by Problematicall, he means such things
as are of no necessity to matter of faith; and in case men shall believe the
contradictorie of the said points, they are not bound for such belief, to
undergo the solemn curse of the Church, and the loss of communion. Arist. 1.
top. cap 4. (...), sound both one thing. (...), provided the word (...) or
vtrum, do stand before, as, Vtrum homo sit animal.
Whereas Aristotle, of whom all Schools have borrowed their terms, has
taught us that every proposition is called a Problem, when it is propounded in
a formal doubt, though in it proper nature it contains a necessary truth,
concerning the matter thereof. As for example, to say in form of question,
Whether is there but one God? or, Whether is man a creature endued with reason?
By which examples it is plain, that propositions in problematically form, do
not forgo the necessity of their nature; and that many times the
contradictorie binds the believers thereof to Anathema and loss of communion.
There is a confused heap or bundle of otherlike toys, which my purpose is to
pass over in silence, that I may now come to cast anchor, as it were in the
very bottom and substance of the cause.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


A REMONSTRANCE OF THE MOST GRACIOUS King of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE, and
IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc. FOR THE RIGHT OF KINGS, AND the
independencie of their Crowns: AGAINST AN ORATION OF the most Illustrious
Cardinal of PERRON, pronounced in the Chamber of the third Estate. The 15. of
Ianuar. 1615.
THE L. Cardinal even in the first passage of his Oration, has laid a firm
foundation, That Ecclesiastics in France are more deeply obliged to the King,
then the Nobility, and third Estate. His reason: Because the Clergy do
sweetly enjoy their dignities and promotions, with all their infinite wealth,
of the Kings mere grace, without all danger, and with fair immunities;
whereas the other two Orders hold their offices by a chargeable and burdensome
title or tenure, even to the great expense of their blood, and of their
substance. But see now, how loose and weak a frame he has erected and pinned
together, upon his firm and solid foundation: Ergo, the third Estate is to
lay all care to provide remedies against apposted cutthroats, upon the Clergy:
and the said remedies (as he boldly affirms) must be derived from the laws of
conscience, which may carry an effectual acting or operative efficacy upon
the soul, and nor from civil or temporal punishments. Now this consequence
limpeth like a lame creple after the premises. For it is no usual and common
matter, to see men that are deepest in obligation, perform their duties and
covenants with most fidelity. Again, were it granted the Clergy had well
hitherto demonstrated their careful watching over the life and honor of their
Prince; yet is it not for spiritual punishments thundered by Ecclesiastics, to
bind the hands of the civil Magistrate, nor to stop the current of temporal
punishments: which ordinarily do carry a greater force and virtue to the
bridling of the wicked, then the apprehension of Gods judgment.

The third Estate therefore, by whom all the Officers of France are properly
represented, as to whom the administration of justice and protection of the
Kings rights and Honor does appertain, can deserve no blame in carrying so
watchful an eye, by their wholesome remedy to provide for the safety of the
King, and for the dignity of his Crown. For if the Clergy shall not stand to
their tackle, but shrink when it comes to the push of their duty; who shall
charge themselves with careful foresight and prevention of mischiefs? Shall
not the people? Now, have not all the calamities, which the third Estate have
sought prouidently to prevent; have they not all sprung from the Clergy, as
from their proper and natural fountain? From whence did the last civil
wars, wherein a world of blood was not more profusely then prodigiously and
unnaturally spilt, and wherein the parricide of King Henry III. was impiously
and abominably committed: from whence did those bloody wars proceed, but
from the deposing of the said King by the Head of the Church? Were they not
Prelates, Curats, and Confessors; were they not Ecclesiastics, who partly by
seditious preachments, and partly by secret confessions, powered many a jarre of
oil upon this flame? Was not he that killed the forenamed King, was not he one
of the Clergy? Was not Guignard a Jesuit? Was not John Chastel brought up in
the same school? Did not Ravaillac that monster of men, upon interrogatories
made at his examination; among the rest, by whom he had been so diabolically
tempted and stirred up to his most execrable attempt and act of extreme horror:
did not the refer his examiners to the Sermons made the Lent next before,
where they might be satisfied concerning the causes of his abominable
undertaking and execution? Are not Bellarmine, Eudaemonoiohannes, Suarez,
Becanus, Mariana, with such other monsters, who teach the doctrine of
parricides, uphold the craft of Ianus-like equivocations in Courts of Justice,
and in secret confessions: are they not all Clerics? are not all their books
approved and allowed, as it were by a corporation or gross company of
Doctors, with their signs manuel to the said books? What were the heads, the
chief promoters, the accomplices of the powder-conspiracie in my Kingdom? were
they not Ecclesiastics? Has not Faux by name, a confederate of the same demned
crew; has not he stoutly stood to the gunners part, which then he was to act
in that most doleful Tragedy, with asseueration of a conscience well assured
and settled, touching the lawfulnes of his enterprise? Did he not yield this
reason? to wit, because he had been armed with instruction of musket proof in
the case, before he made passage over from the Low Countries? Is it not also
the general belief of that Order, that Clerics are exempted from the
condition of Subjects to the King? Nay, is it not confessed by the L. Cardinal
himself, Page 7.
that King-killers have engaged themselves to undertake the detestable act of
parricide under a false credence of Religion, as being instructed by their
schoolemasters in Religion? And who were they but Ecclesiastical persons? All
this presupposed as matter of truth, I draw this conclusion: Howsoever no small
number of the French Clergy may perhaps bear the affection of loving Subjects
to their King, and may not suffer the Clericall character to deface the
impression of natural allegiance; yet, for so much as the Order of Clerics is
dipped in a deeper die, and bears a worse tincture of dangerous practices
then the other Orders; the third Estate had been greatly wanting to their
excellent providence and wisdom, if they should have relinquished and
transferred the care of designements and proiects for the life of their King,
and the safety of his Crown, to the Clergy alone. Moreover, the Clergy
stands bound to refer the judgment of all matters in controversy, to the
sentence of the Pope, in this cause being a party, and one that pretends
Crowns to depend upon his Mitre. What hope then might the third Estate
conceive, that his Holiness would pass against his own cause, when his
judgment of the controversy had been sundry times before published and
testified to the world? And whereas the plot or model of remedies proiected by
the third Estate, and the Kings Officers, has not proved sortable in the
event: was it because the said remedies were not good and lawful? No verily:
but because the Clergy refused to become contributors of their duty and means
to the grand service. Likewise, for that after the burning of books, addressed
to justify rebellious people, traitors, and parricides of Kings; nevertheless
the authors of the said books are winked at, and backed with favor. Lastly,
for that some wretched parricides drink off the cup of public justice;
whereas to the firebrands of sedition, the sowers of this abominable doctrine,
no man says so much as black is their eye.

It sufficiently appears, as I suppose, by the former passage, that his
Lordship exhorting the third Estate to refer the whole care of this Regal
cause unto the Clergy, has tacked his frame of weak joints and tenons to a
very worthy but wrong foundation. Page 9.
Howbeit, he labors to fortify his exhortation with a more weak and feeble
reason. For to make good his project he affirms, that matters and maxims out
of all doubt and question, may not be shuffled together with points in
controversy. Now his rules indubitable are two: The first, It is not lawful to
murder Kings for any cause whatsoever. This he confirms by the example of
Saul (as he says) deposed from his Throne, whose life or limbs David
nevertheless durst not once hurt or wrong for his life. Likewise he confirms
the same by a Decree of the Council held at Constance. Conc. Constan. Sess. 15.
His other point indubitable. The Kings of France are Sovereigns in all
Temporal Sovereignty, within the French Kingdom, and hold not by fealty
either of the Pope, as having received or obliged their Crowns upon such
tenure and condition, or of any other Prince in the whole world. Which point,
nevertheless he takes not for certain and indubitable, but only according to
humane and historical certentie. Now a third point he makes to be so full of
controversy, and so far within the circle of disputable questions, as it may
not be drawn into the rank of classical and authentical points, for fear
of making a certain point doubtful, by shuffling and jumbling therewith some
point in controversy. Now the question so disputable, as he pretends, is
this. A Christian Prince breaks his oath solemnly taken to God, both to live
and to die in the Catholic Religion. Say this Prince turns Arrian, or
Mohammedan, falls to proclaim open war, and to wage battle with Jesus Christ.
Whether may such a Prince be declared to have lost his Kingdom, and who shall
declare the Subjects of such a Prince to be quit of their oath of allegiance?
The L. Cardinal holds the affirmative, and makes no bones to maintain, that
all other parts of the Catholic Church, yea the French Church even from the
first birth of her Theological Schools, to Calvin's time and teaching, have
professed that such a Prince may be lawfully removed from his Throne by the
Pope, and by the Council: and suppose the contrary doctrine were the very
Quintessence or spirit of truth, yet might it not in case of faith be urged and
pressed otherwise then by way of problematicall disceptation. That is the sum
of his Lordsh* ample discourse. The refuting whereof, I am constrained to put
off, and refer unto an other place; because he has served us with the same
dishes over and over again. There we shall see the L. Cardinal makes way to
the dispatching of Kings after deposition: that Saul was not deposed, as he
has presumed: that in the Council of Constance there is nothing to the purpose
of murdering Sovereign Princes: that his Lordship, supposing the French King
may be deprived of his Crown by a superior power, does not hold his liege
Lord to be Sovereign in France: that by the position of the French Church from
age to age, the Kings of France are not subject unto any censure of deposition
by the Pope: that his Holiness has no just and lawful pretense to produce,
that any Christian King holds of him by fealty, or is obliged to do the Pope
homage for his Crown.

Well then, for the purpose: he dwells only upon the third point pretended
questionable, and this he affirms: If any shall condemn, or wrappe under the
solemn curse, the abettors of the Popes power to unking lawful and Sovereign
Kings; the same shall run upon four dangerous rocks of apparent
incongruities and absurdities.



hands into the Arc; what is it but laying of unholy fingers upon the holy
Censor for perfumes?



by the train or sequence of wars, and other calamities which usually wait
and attend on schisms.

The L. Cardinal spends his whole discourse in confirmation of these four
heads, which we now intend to sift in order, and demonstratiuely to prove that
all the said inconveniences are mere nullities, matters of imagination, and
built upon false presuppositions. But before we come to the maine, the reader
is to be informed and advertised, that his Lordship sets a false gloss upon
the question; and propounds the case not only contrary to the truth of the
subject in controversy, but also to the Popes own mind and meaning. For he
restrains the Popes power to depose Kings only to cases of heresy, Apostasy,
and persecuting of the Church; whereas Popes extend their power to a further
distance. They depose Princes for infringing, or in any sort diminishing the
privileges of Monasteries: witness Gregory the first in the pretended
charter granted to the Abbay of S. Medard at Soissons, the said charter being
annexed to his Epistles in the rere. The same he testifies in his Epistle to
Senator, by name the 10. of the eleventh book. They depose for natural
dullness and lack of capacity, whether inbred and true indeed, or only
pretended and imagined: witness the glorious vaunt of Gregory VII. that
Childeric King of France was hoysted out of his Throne by Pope Zachary, Not so
much for his wicked life, Cause. 15. Can. Alius. Qu. 6.
as for his unableness to bear the weighty burden of so great a Kingdom. They
depose for collating of Benefices and Prebends: witness the great quarrels
and sore contentions between Pope Innocent III. and John King of England: as
also between Philip the Fair and Boniface VIII. They depose for adulteries
and matrimonial suites: witness Philip. 1. for the repudiating or casting off
his lawful wife Bertha, and marrying in her place with Bertrade wife to the
Earl of Aniou. Finally, feign would I learn into what heresy or degree of
Apostasy, Paul. Aemil. in Phil. 3.
either Henry IV. or Freder. Barbarossa, or Frederic 2. Emperors were fallen,
when they were smitten with Papal fulminations even to the deprivation of
their Imperial Thrones. What? was it for heresy or Apostasy that Pope Martin
IV. bare so hard a hand against Peter King of Arragon, that he acquitted and
released the Arragonnois from their oath of allegiance to Peter their lawful
King? Was it for heresy or Apostasy, for Arrianisme or Mahumetisme, that
Lewis XII. so good a King and Father of his Country, was put down by Julius
the II? Was it for heresy or Apostasy, that Sixtus 5. usurped a power against
Henry III. even so far as to denounce him vn-kingd; the issue whereof was
the parricide of that good King, and the most woeful desolation of a most
flourishing Kingdom? But his Lordship best liked to work upon that ground,
which to the outward show and appearance, is the most beautiful cause that can
be alleged for the dishonouring of Kings by the weapon of deposition: making
himself to believe that he acted the part of an Orator before personages not
much acquainted with ancient and modern histories, and such as little
understood the state of the question then in hand. It had therefore been a
good warrant for his Lordship, to have brought some authentical instrument from
the Pope, whereby the French might have been secured, that his Holiness
renounceth all other causes auouchable for the degrading of Kings; and that he
will henceforth rest in the case of heresy, for the turning of Kings out of
their freehold: as also that his Holiness by the same or like instrument,
might have certified his pleasure, that he will not hereafter make himself
judge, whether Kings be tainted with damnable heresy, or free from heretical
infection. For that were to make himself both judge and plaintiff, that it
might be in his power to call that doctrine heretical, which is pure orthodoxe:
and all for this end, to make himself master of the Kingdom, and there to
settle a Successor, who receiving the Crown of the Popes free gift and grant,
might be tied thereby to depend altogether upon his Holiness. Has not Pope
Boniface VIII. declared in his proud letters all those to be heretics, that
dare undertake to affirm, the collating of Prebends appertains to the King?
It was that Popes gross error, not in the fact, but in the right. The like
crime forsooth was by Popes imputed to the unhappy Emperor Henry IV. And
what was the issue of the said imputation? The son is instigated thereby to
rebel against his father, and to impeach the interment of his dead corpse, who
never in his life had beat his brains to trouble the sweet waters of
Theological fountains. Annal. Boio.
It is recorded by Auentine, Lib. 3.
that Bishop Virgilius was declared heretic, Iuuanen.
for teaching the position of Antipodes. Episcop.
The Bull Exurge, marching in the rere of the last Lateran Council, sets down
this position for one of Luthers heresies, Optima poenitentia nova vita.
A new life is the best repentance. Among the crimes which the Council of
Constance charged Pope John XXIII. withal, one was this: Conc. Constan. Sess.
2.
that he denied the immortality of the soul, and that so much was
publicly, manifestly, and notoriously known. Now if the Pope shall be
carried by the stream of these or the like errors, and in his heretical
prauitie shall depose a King of the contrary opinion, I shall hardly be
persuaded, the said King is lawfully deposed.

The first Inconvenience examined.
THE first inconvenience growing (in the Cardinal his conceit) by entertaining
the Article of the third Estate (whereby the Kings of France are declared to be
indeposeable by any superior power spiritual or temporal) is this: It
offers force to the conscience, under the penalty of Anathema, to condemn a
doctrine believed and practiced in the Church, in the continual current of the
last eleven hundred years. In these words he makes a secret confession, that
in the first five hundred years, the same doctrine was neither apprehended by
faith, nor approved by practice. Wherein, to my understanding, the L.
Cardinal voluntarily gives over the suite. For the Church in the time of the
Apostles, their disciples, and successors, for 500. years together, was no
more ignorant what authority the Church is to challenge over Emperors and
Kings, then at any time since in any succeeding age: in which as pride has
still flowed to the height of a full Sea, so purity of religion and manners
has kept for the most part at a low water-marke. Which point is the rather to
be considered, for that during the first 500. years, the Church groned under
the heavy burden, both of heathen Emperors, and of heretical Kings; the
Visigot Kings in Spain, and the Vandals in Africa. Of whose displeasure the
Pope had small reason or cause to stand in any fear, being so remote from
their dominions, and no way under the lee of their Sovereignty.

But let us come to see, what aid the L. Cardinal has amassed and piled
together out of later histories: provided we still bear in mind, that our
question is not of popular tumults, nor of the rebellion of subjects making
insurrections out of their own discontented spirits and brain-sicke humors,
nor of lawful Excommunications, nor of Canonical censures and reprehensions;
but only of a iuridicall sentence of deposition, pronounced by the Pope, as
armed with ordinary and lawful power to depose, against a Sovereign Prince.

Now then; Exampl. 1. page 18. Evag. hist.
The L. Cardinal sets on, and gives the first charge with Anastasius the
Emperor, Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 32.
whom Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople would never acknowledge for
Emperor: (that is to say, would never consent he should be created Emperor by
the help of his voice or suffrage) except he would first subscribe to the
Chalcedon Creed: notwithstanding the great Empress and Senate sought by
violent courses and practices to make him yield. And when afterward the said
Emperor, contrary to his oath taken, played the relaps by falling into his
former heresy, and became a persecutor; he was first admonished, and then
excommunicated by Symmachus Bishop of Rome. To this the L. Cardinal adds,
that when the said Emperor was minded to choppe the poison of his heretical
assertions into the public forms of divine service, then the people of
Constantinople made an vproare against Anastasius their Emperor; and one of
his Commanders by force of arms, constrained him to call back certain
Bishops whom he had sent into banishments before.

In this first example the L. Cardinal by his good leave, neither comes close
to the question, nor salutes it a far off. Euphemius was not Bishop of Rome:
Anastasius was not deposed by Euphemius; the Patriarch only made no way to the
creating of Anastasius. The sudden commotion of the base multitude makes
nothing, the rebellion of a Greek Commander makes less, for the authorizing
of the Pope to depose a Sovereign Prince. The Greek Emperor was
excommunicated by Pope Symmachus: who knows whether that be true or forged?
For the Pope himself is the only witness here produced by the Lord Cardinal
upon the point: and who knows not how false, how suppositious, the writings
and Epistles of the ancient Popes are justly esteemed? But grant it a truth;
yet Anastasius excommunicated by Pope Symmachus, is not Anastasius deposed by
Pope Symmachus. And to make a full answer, I say further, that excommunication
denounced by a foreign Bishop, against a party not being within the limits of
his jurisdiction, or one of his own flock, was not any bar to the party from
the communion of the Church, but only a kind of publication, that he the said
Bishop in his particular, would hold no further communion with any such party.

For proof whereof, I produce the Canons of the Councils held at Carthage. In
one of the said Canons it is thus provided and ordained; (...).
Nomocan. Affric. Can. 77. (...)
If any Bishop shall wilfully absent himself from the usual and accustomed
Synodes, let him not be admitted to the communion of other Churches, but let
him only use the benefit and liberty of his own Church. In an other of the
same Canons thus; Can. 81. eiusd. Nomo. (...).
If a Bishop shall insinuate himself to make a conueiance of his Monastery,
and the ordering thereof unto a Monk of any other Cloister; let him be cut
off, let him be separated from the communion with other Churches, and content
himself to live in the communion of his own flock. In the same sense
Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers excommunicated Liberius Bishop of Rome, Anathema
tibi a me Liberi. Faber. in frag. Hilarij.
for subscribing to the Arrian Confession. In the same sense, John Bishop of
Antioch excommunicated Caelestine of Rome, and Cyrill of Alexandria, Bishops;
for proceeding to sentence against Nestorius, without staying his coming to
answer in his own cause. In the same sense likewise, Victor Bishop of Rome did
cut off all the Bishops of the East, not from the communion of their own
flocks, but from communion with Victor and the Roman Church. What resemblance,
what agreement, what proportion, between this course of excommunication, and
that way of unjust fulmination which the Popes of Rome have usurped against
Kings, but yet certain long courses of time after that ancient course?

And this may stand for a full answer likewise to the example of Clotharius.
Exampl. 2.
This ancient King of the French, fearing the censures of Pope Agapetus,
erected the territory of Yuetot unto the title of a Kingdom, by way of
satisfaction for murdering of Gualter, Lord of Yuetot. For this example the L.
Cardinal has ransackt records of 900. years antiquity and upward; in which
times it were no hard piece of work to show, that Popes would not have any
hand, nor so much as a finger in the affairs and acts of the French Kings.
Gregory of Tours that lived in the same age, has recorded many acts of
excess, and violent injuries done against Bishops by their Kings, and namely
against Praetextatus Bishop of Roan; for any of which injurious prankes then
played, the Bishop of Rome durst not reprove the said Kings with due
remonstrance. But see here the words of Gregory himself to King Chilperic: If
any of us, O King, shall swerve from the path of justice, him thou have power
to punish: But in case thou shall at any time transgress the lines of equity,
who shall once touch thee with reproof? To thee we speak, but are never
heeded and regarded, except it be thy pleasure: and be thou not pleased, who
shall challenge thy greatness, but he that justly challenges to be justice it
self? The good Bishop, notwithstanding these humble remonstrances, was but
roughly entreated, and packt into exile, being banished into the Isle of
Gernseye. But I am not minded to make any deep search or inquisition, into the
titles of the Lords of Yuetot: whose honorable privileges and titles are the
most honorable badges and cognizances of their ancestors, and of some
remarquable service done to the Crown of France: so far I take them to
differ from a satisfaction for sin. And for the purpose I only affirm, that
were the credit of this history beyond all exception, yet makes it nothing to
the present question, wherein the power of deposing, and not of
excommunicating, supreme Kings is debated. And suppose the King by charter
granted the said privileges for fear of excommunication; how is it proved
thereby, that Pope Agapetus had lawful and ordinary power to deprive him of
his Crown? Nay, doubtless it was rather a means to eleuate and advance the
dignity of the Crown of France, and to style the French King, a King of
Kings, as one that was able to give the quality of King, to all the rest of
the Nobles and Gentry of his Kingdom. Does not some part of the Spanish Kings
greatness, consist in creating of his Great?

In the next place follows Gregory I. who in the 10. Epistle of the 11.
book, Exam. 3. page 22.
confirming the privileges of the Hospital at Augustodunum in Bourgongne,
prohibiteth all Kings and Prelates whatsoever, to infringe or diminish the said
privileges, in whole or in part. His formal and express words be these: If
any King, Prelate, Judge, or any other secular person, informed of this our
constitution, shall presume to go or do contrary thereunto, let him be cast
down from his power and dignity. I answer; the Lord Cardinal here wrongs
himself very much, in taking imprecations for Decrees. Might not even the
meanest of the people use the same tenor of words, and say? If any shall touch
the life, or the most sacred Majesty of our Kings, be he Emperor, or be he
Pope, let him be accursed; let him fall from his eminent place of authority,
let him lose his dignity; let him tumble into beggarie, diseases, and all kinds
of calamities? I forbear to show how easy a matter it is for Monks, to
forge titles after their own humor, and to their own liking, for the
upholding and maintaining of their privileges. As for the purpose, the same
Gregory cites in the end of his Epistles an other privilege, of the like
stuff and stamp to the former, granted to the Abbey of S. Medard at Soissons.
It is fenced with a like clause to the other. But of how great untruth, and of
how little weight it is, the very date that it bears makes manifest proof:
For it runs, Dated the year of our Lords Incarnation 593. the 11. Indiction;
whereas the 10. Indiction agrees to the year 593. Besides, it was not
Gregory's manner to date his Epistles according to the year of the Lord.
Again, the said privilege was signed by the Bishops of Alexandria and
Carthage, who never knew (as may well be thought) whether any such Abbey of S.
Medard, or city of Soissons, was ever built in the world. Moreover, they
signed in the thickest of a crowde as it were of Italian Bishops. Lastly, he
that shall read in this Gregory's Epistles, with what spirit of reverence and
humility he speaks of Emperors, will hardly believe that ever he armed
himself with authority to give or to take away Kingdoms. He styles himself
Epist. 6. l. 3 Ego autem indignus pietatis ^uae seruus.

Ego vero haec Dominis meis loquens, quid sum nisi pull vis and vermis? Ibid.

Ego quidem ^^ssioni subiectus, etc. Ep. 61. l. 2.


the Emperors unworthy servant: presuming to speak unto his Lord, when he
knows himself to be but dust and a very worm. He professes subjection
unto the Emperors commands, even to the publishing of a certain Law of the
Emperors, which in his judgment somewhat iarred and iustled with Gods Law:
as elsewhere I have spoken more at large.

The L. Cardinal next brings upon the stage Justinian 2. He, Examp. 4.
being in some choler with Sergius Bishop of Rome, because he would not
favor the erroneous Synod of Canstantinople, would have caused the Bishop to
be apprehended by his Constable Zacharias. But by the Roman Militia, (that
is, the troops which the Emperor then had in Italy) Zacharias was repulsed
and hindered from his design, even with opprobrious and reproachful terms.
His Lordship must have my shallownes excused, if I reach not his intent by this
allegation; wherein I see not one word of deposing from the Empire, or of any
sentence pronounced by the Pope.

Here are now 712. years expired after the birth of Jesus Christ: in all which
long tract of time, the L. Cardinal has not light upon any instance, which
might make for his purpose with never so little show. For the example of the
Emperor Philippicus, Examp. 5.
by the Cardinal alleged next in sequence, belongs to the year 713. And
thus lies the history: This Emperor Philippicus Bardanes, was a professed
enemy to the worshipping of Images, and commanded them to be broken in pieces.
In that very time the Roman Empire was ouerthrown in the West, and sore
shaken by the Saracens in the East. Beside those miseries, the Emperor was
also encumbered with a civil and intestine war. The greatest part of Italy
was then seized by the Lombards, and the Emperor in Italy had nothing left
save only the Exarchat of Rauenna, and the Duchy of Rome, then half
abandoned by reason of the Emperors want of forces. Pope Constantine gripes
this occasion whereon to ground his greatness, and to shake off the yoke of
the Emperor his Lord: Undertakes against Philippicus the cause of Images: By a
Council declares the Emperor heretic* Prohibites his rescripts or coin to
be received, and to go current in Rome: Forbids his Imperial statue to be
set up in the Temple, according to ancient custom: The tumult grows to a
height: The Pope is principal promoter of the tumult: In the heat of the
tumult the Exarche of Rauenna loses his life. Here see now the mutiny of a
subject against his Prince, to pull from him by force and violence a city of
his Empire. But who sees in all this any sentence of deposition from the
Imperial dignity? Nay, the Pope then missed the cushion, and was disappointed
utterly of his purpose. The city of Rome stood firm, and continued still in
their obedience to the Emperor.

About some 12. years after, Examp. 6.
the Emperor Leo Isauricus (whom the Lord of Perron calls Iconoclast)
falls to fight it out at sharp, and to prosecute worshippers of Images with
all extremity. Upon this occasion, Pope Gregory 2. then treading in the steps
of his predecessor, when he perceived the city of Rome to be but weakly
provided of men or munition, and the Emperor to have his hands full in other
places, found such means to make the city rise in rebellious arms against
the Emperor, that he made himself in short time master thereof. Thus far the
L. Card. whereunto my answer for satisfaction is; that degrading an Emperor
from his Imperial dignity, and reducing a city to revolt against her Master,
that a man at last may carry the piece himself, and make himself Lord
thereof, are two several actions of special difference. If the freehold of
the city had been conveyed to some other by the Pope depriving the Emperor,
as proprietarie thereof, this example might have challenged some credit at
least in show: but so to invade the city to his own use, and so to seize on
the right and authority of another, what is it but open rebellion, and
notorious ambition? For it is far from Ecclesiastical censure, when the
spiritual Pastor of souls forsooth, pulles the cloak of a poor sinner from
his back by violence, or cuts his purse, and thereby appropriates an other
man's goods to his private use. It is to be observed withal, that when the
Emperors were not of sufficient strength, and Popes had power to beard and to
brave Emperors, then these Papal practices were first set on foot. This
Emperor notwithstanding, turned head and peckt again: his Lieutenant entered
Rome, and Gregory 3. successor to this Gregory 2. was glad to honor the same
Emperor with style and title of his Lord: witness two several Epistles of the
said Gregory 3. written to Boniface, and subscribed in this form: Data 10.
Dated the tenth Calends of December: Call. December Imperante Dom. pijssimo
Augusto Leone, a Deo coronato, magno Imp. anno decimo Imperij eius.
In the reign of our most pious and religious Lord, Angustus Leo, crowned of
God, the great Emperor, in the tenth year of his reign.

The L. Cardinal with no less abuse alleges Pope Zachary, by whom the
French, as he affirms, were absolved of the oath of allegiance, Examp. 7.
wherein they stood bound to Childeric their King. And for this instance, he
stands upon the testimony of Paulus Aemilius, and du Tillet, a pair of late
writers. But by authors more near that age wherein Childeric reigned, it is
more truly testified, that it was a free and voluntary act of the French,
only asking the advice of Pope Zachary, but requiring neither leave nor
absolution. Ado Bishop of Vienna, in his Chronicles has it after this manner:
The French, following the Counsel of Ambassadors, and of Pope Zachary, elected
Pepin their King, and established him in the Kingdom. Trithemius in his
abridgement of Annals, thus: Childeric, as one unfit for government, was
turned out of his Kingdom, with common consent of the Estates and Peers of
the Realm, so advised by Zachary Pope of Rome. Godfridus of Viterbe in the
17. part of his Chronicle; and Guaguin in the life of Pepin, affirm the same.
And was it not an easy matter to work Pepin by counsel to lay hold on the
Kingdom, when he could not be hindered from fastening on the Crown, and had
already seizd it in effect, howsoever he had not yet attained to the name of
King? Moreover, the rudeness of that Nation, then wanting knowledge and
Schools either of divinity, or of Academicall sciences, was a kind of spur
to make them run for counsel over the mountains: which nevertheless in a
cause of such nature, they required not as necessary, but only as decent and
for fashion sake. The Pope also for his part was well appaied, by this means
to draw Pepin unto his part; as one that stood in some need of his aid
against the Lombards; and the more, because his Lord the Emperor of
Constantinople was then brought so low, that he was not able to send him
sufficient aid, for the defense of his territories against his enemies. But
had Zachary (to deal plainly) not stood upon the respect of his own
commodity, more then upon the regard of Gods fear; he would never have given
counsel unto the servant, under the pretended color of his Masters dull
spirit, so to turn rebel against his Master. The Laws provide Gardians, or
overseers, for such as are not well in their wits; they never deprive and
spoil them of their estate: they punish crimes, but not diseases and
infirmities by nature. Yea, in France it is a very ancient custom, when the
King is troubled in his wits to establish a Regent, who for the time of the
Kings disability, may bear the burden of the Kingdoms affairs. So was the
practice of that State in the case of Charles 6. when he fell into a frenzy;
whom the Pope notwithstanding his most grievous and sharp fits, never offered
to degrade. And to be short, what reason, what equity will bear the children
to be punished for the fathers debilitie? Yet such punishment was laid upon
Childerics whole race and house; who by this practice were all disinherited of
the Kingdom. But shall we now take some view, of the L. Cardinals excuse for
this exemplarie fact? Page 25.
The cause of Childerics deposing, (as the L. Cardinal says) did nearly
concern and touch Religion. For Childerics imbecillitie brought all France
into danger, to suffer a most woeful shipwreck of Christian religion, upon the
barbarous and hostile invasion of the Saracens. Admit now this reason had been
of just weight and value, yet consideration should have been taken, whether
some one or other of that Royallstemme, and of the Kings own successors
nearest of blood, was not of better capacity to rule and manage that mighty
State. The fear of uncertain and accidental mischief, should not have
driven them to sly unto the certain mischief of actual and effectual
deposition. They should rather have set before their eyes the example of
Charles Martel, this Pepins father; who in a far more eminent danger, when
the Saracens had already mastered, and subdued a great part of France,
valiantly encountered, and withal defeated the Saracens; ruled the Kingdom
under the title of Steward of the Kings house, the principal Officer of the
Crown; without affecting or aspiring to the Throne for all that great step
of advantage, especially when the Saracens were quite broken, and no longer
dreadful to the French Nation.

In our own Scotland, the sway of the Kingdom was in the hand of Walls,
during the time of Bruise his imprisonment in England, who then was lawful
heir to the Crown. This Walls or Vallas had the whole power of the Kingdom
at his beck and command. His edicts and ordinances to this day stand in full
force. By the deadly hatred of Bruise his mortal enemy, it may be coniectured,
that he might have been provoked and inflamed with desire to trusse the
Kingdom in his talants. And notwithstanding all these incitements, he never
assumed or usurped other title to himself, then of Governor or Administrator
of the Kingdom. The reason. He had not been brought up in this new doctrine
and late discipline, whereby the Church is endowed with power to give and to
take away Crowns. But now (as the L. Cardinal would bear the world in hand)
the state of Kings is brought to a very dead lift. The Pope forsooth must send
his Physicians, to know by way of inspection or some other course of Art,
whether the Kings brain be cracked or found: and in case there be found any
debility of wit and reason in the King, then the Pope must remove and
translate the Crown, from the weaker brain to a stronger: and for the acting
of the stratageme, the name of Religion must be pretended. Ho, these heretics
begin to crawle in the Kingdom: order must be taken they be not suffered by
their multitudes and swarms, like locusts or caterpillars to pester and poison
the whole Realm. Or in a case of matrimony, thus: Ho, marriage is a
Sacrament: touch the Order of Matrimony, and Religion is wounded. By this
devise not only the Kings vices, but likewise his natural diseases and
infirmities are fetched into the circle of Religion; and the L. Cardinal has
not done himself right, in restraining the Popes power to depose Kings, unto
the cafes of heresy, Apostasy, and persecution of the Church.

In the next place follows Leo III. who by setting the Imperial Crown upon
the head of Charles, absolved all the subjects in the West, of their obedience
to the Greek Emperors, if the L. of Perron might be credited in this example.
But indeed it is crowded among the rest by a sly trick, and clean contrary
to the naked truth of all histories. For it shall never be justified by good
history, that so much as one single person or man (I say not one Country, or
one people) was then wrought or won by the Pope, to change his copy and Lord,
or from a subject of the Greek Emperors, to turn subject unto Charlemayne.
Let me see but one Town that Charlemayne recovered from the Greek Emperors,
by his right and title to his Empire in the West: No, the Greek Emperors had
taken their farewell of the West Empire long before. And therefore to nick this
upon the tallie of Pope Leo his Acts, that he took away the West from the
Greek Emperor, it is even as if one should say, that in this age the Pope
takes the Dukedom of Milan from the French Kings, or the city of Rome from
the Emperors of Germany, because their predecessors in former ages had been
right Lords and governors of them both. It is one of the Popes ordinary and
solemn practices to take away, much after the manner of his giving. For as he
gives what he has not in his right and power to give, or bestows upon
others what is already their own: even so he takes away from Kings and
Emperors the possessions which they have not in present hold and possession.
After this manner he takes the West from the Greek Emperors, when they hold
nothing in the West, and lay no claim to any city or town of the West
Empire. And what shall we call this way of deprivation, but spoiling a naked
man of his garments, and killing a man already dead? True it is, the Imperial
Crown was then set on Charlemaynes head by Leo the Pope: did Leo therefore
give him the Empire? No more then a Bishop that crowns a King, at his Royal
and solemn consecration does give him the Kingdom. For shall the Pope himself
take the Popedom from the Bishop of Ostia as of his gift, because the crowning
of the Pope is an office of long time peculiar to the Ostian Bishop? It was the
custom of Emperors, to be crowned Kings of Italy by the hands of the
Archbishop of Milan: did he therefore give the kingdom of Italy to the said
Emperors? And to return unto Charlemayne; If the Pope had conveyed the Empire
to him by free and gracious donation, the Pope doubtless in the solemnity of
his coronation, would never have performed unto his own creature, an Emperor
of his own making, the duties of adoration, as Ado that lived in the same age
has left it on record: Perfectis laudibus, a pontific^ more Principum
antiquorum adoratus est.
After the solemn praises ended (says Ado) the chief Bishop honored him
with adoration, according to the custom of ancient Princes. The same is
likewise put down by Auentine, in the 4. book of his Annals of Bauaria.
Auentinus Annalium Boiorum lib. 4. post haec ab eodem Pontifice vt caeteri
veterum Principum, more maiorum adoratus est Magnus.
The like by the President Fauchet in his antiquities: and by Mons. Petau
Councellor in the Court of Parliament at Paris, in his preface before the
Chronicles of Eusebius, Hierome, and Sigebert. It was therefore the people of
Rome that called this Charles the Great unto the Imperial dignity, and cast
on him the title of Empeerour. So testifies Sigebert upon the year 801.
Sigeb. ad an. 801.
All the Romans with one general voice and consent, ring out acclamations of
Imperial praises to the Emperor, they crown him by the hands of Leo the
Pope, they give him the style of Caesar and Augustus. Maria. Scotus lib. 3.
Marianus Scotus has as much in effect: Annalium.
Charles was then called Augustus by the Romans. Plat. in vita Leon. 3.
And so Platina. After the solemn service, Leo declares and proclameth
Charles Emperor, according to the public decree and general request of the
people of Rome. Auent. Annal. Boio. lib. 4. Imperium transfer iure suo in
Germanos, Carolumque tacito Senatus consulto plebiscitoque d^cernunt.
Aventine, and Sigonius in his 4. book of the Kingdom of Italy witness the
same. Nevertheless to gratify the L. Cardinal: Suppose Pope Leo dispossessed
the Greek Emperors of the West Empire. What was the cause? what infamous act
had they done? what profane and irreligious crime had they committed?
Nicephorus and Irene, who reigned in the Greek Empire in Charlemaynes time,
were not reputed by the Pope, or taken for heretics. How then? The L.
Cardinal helps at a pinch, and puts us in mind, that Constantine and
Leo, predecessors to the said Emperors, had been poisoned with heresy, and
stained with persecution. Here then behold an Orthodoxe Prince deposed. For
what cause? for heresy forsooth, not in himself but in some of his
predecessors long before. An admirable case. For I am of a contrary mind, that
he was worthy of double honor, in restoring and setting up the truth again,
which under his predecessors had endured oppression, and suffered persecution.
Doubtless Pope Siluester was greatly ouerseene, and played not well the Pope,
when he winked at Constantine the Great, and cast him not down from his
Imperial Throne, for the strange infidelity and paganism of Diocletian, of
Maximian, and Maxentius, whom Constantine succeeded in the Empire.

From this example the L. of Perron passes to Fulke Archbishop of Reims:
Examp. 9. page 27.
by whom Charles the Simple was threatened with Excommunication, and refusing
to continue any longer in the fidelity and allegiance of a subject. To what
purpose is this example? For who can be ignorant, that all ages have brought
forth turbulent and stirring spirits, men altogether forgetful of respect and
observance toward their Kings, especially when the world finds them shallow
and simple-witted, like unto this Prince? But in this example, where is there
so much as one word of the Pope, or the deposing of Kings? Examp. 10. page 28.


Here the L. Cardinal chops in the example of Philip 1. King of France, but
mangled, and strangely disguised, as hereafter shall be showed.

At last he leads us to Gregory VII. surnamed Hildebrand, Exam. 11. An. 1076.
the scourge of Emperors, the firebrand of war, the scorn of his age. This
Pope, after he had (in the spirit of pride, and in the very height of all
audaciousnesse) thundered the sentence of excommunication and deposition,
against the Emperor Henry 4. after he had enterprised this act without all
precedent example: after he had filled all Europe with blood: this Pope, I
say, sunk down under the weight of his affairs, and died as a fugitive at
Salerne, overwhelmed with discontent and sorrow of heart. Here lying at the
point of giving up the ghoast, calling unto him (as it is in Sigebert) a
certain Cardinal whom he much favored, Sigeb. ad an. 1085.
He confesses to God, and Saint Peter, and the whole Church, that he had been
greatly defective in the Pastor all charge committed to his care; and that by
the Devils instigation, he had kindled the fire of Gods wrath and hatred
against mankind. Then he sent his Confessor to the Emperor, and to the whole
Church to pray for his pardon, because he perceived that his life was at an
end. Likewise Cardinal Benno that lived in the said Gregory's time, does
testify, That so soon as he was risen out of his Chair to excommunicate the
Emperor from his Cathedral seat: by the will of God the said Cathedral
seat, new made of strong board or plancke, did crack and cleave into many
pieces or parts: to manifest how great and terrible schisms had been sowed
against the Church of Christ, by an excommunication of so dangerous
consequence, pronounced by the man that had sit Judge therein. Now to bring and
allege the example of such a man, who by attempting an act which never any
man had the heart or face to attempt before, has condemned all his
predecessors of cowardice, or at least of ignorance; what is it else, but even
to send us to the school of mighty robbers, and to seek to correct and
reform ancient virtues by late vices. Otho Frisingens. in vita Hen. 4. lib. 4.
cap. 31.
Which Otho Frisingensis calling into his own private consideration, he durst
freely profess, that he had not read of any Emperor before this Henry the
4. excommunicated or driven out of his Imperial Throne and Kingdom by the
chief Bishop of Rome. But if this quarrel may be tried and fought out with
weapons of examples, I leave any indifferent reader to judge what examples
ought in the cause to be of chiefest authority and weight: whether late
examples of Kings deposed by Popes, for the most part never taking the intended
effect; or ancient examples of Popes actually and effectually thrust out of
their thrones by Emperous and Kings.

The Emperor Constantius expelled Liberius Bishop of Rome out of the city,
Theo. lib. 2.
banished him as far as Beroe, Hist. cap. 16*
and placed Foelix in his room. Indeed Constantius was an Arrian, and therein
used no less impious then unjust proceeding. Nevertheless the ancient Fathers
of the Church, do not blame Constantius for his hard and sharp dealing with a
chief Bishop, over whom he had no lawful power, but only as an enemy to the
Orthodoxe faith, and one that raged with extreme rigor of persecution against
innocent believers.

In the reign of Valentinian the 1. and year of the Lord 367. the contention
between Damasus and Vrsicinus competitors for the Bishoppricke, Ammia. lib. 27.
filled the city of Rome with a bloody sedition, in which were wickedly and
cruelly murdered 137. persons. Decret. did. 79.
To meet with such turbulent actions, Honorius made a law extant in the
Decretalls, the words whereof be these; If it shall happen henceforth by the
temeritie of competitors, that any two Bishops be elected to the Sea, we
straightly charge and command, that neither of both shall sit in the said, See.
By virtue of this Law, Platina.
the same Honorius in the year 420. expelled Bonifacius and Eulalius,
competitors and Antipopes out of Rome, Sigebertus.
though not long after he revoked Bonifacius, and settled him in the Papal See.

Theodoric the Goth King of Italy, Anastatius.
sent John Bishop of Rome Ambassador to the Emperor Justinian, Platina.
called him home again, Lib. Pontisi.
and clapped him up in the close prison, Diaconus.
where he starued to death. By the same King, Peter Bishop of Altine was
dispatched to Rome, to hear the cause and examine the process of Pope
Symmachus, then indicted and accused of sundry crimes.

King Theodatus about the year 537. had the service of Pope Agapetus, as his
Ambassador to the Emperor Justinian, upon a treaty of peace. Agapetus dying
in the time of that seruicc, Syluerius is made Bishop by Theodatus. Not long
after, Syluerius is driven out by Belisarius the Emperor his Lieutenant, and
sent into banishment. After Syluerius next succeeds Vigilius, who with
current coin purchased the Popedom of Belisarius. The Emperor Justinian
sends for Vigilius to Constantinople, and receives him there with great honor.
Soon after, the Emperor takes offense at his freeness in speaking his mind,
commands him to be beaten with stripes in manner to death, and with a roape
about his neck to be drawn through the city like a theife, as Platina relates
the history. Nicephorus in his 26. book, and 17. chapter, comes very near
the same relation.

The Emperor Constantius, in the year 654. caused Pope Martin to be bound with
chains, (...) Sigeberius.
and banished him into Chersonesus, where he ended his life. The Popes in that
age writing to the Emperors, used none but submissiue terms, by way of most
humble supplications; made profession of bowing the knee before their sacred
Majesty's, and of executing their commands with entire obedience; paid to the
Emperors twenty pound weight of gold for their Inuestiture; which tribute was
afterward released and remitted, Justin. Authent. 123. cap. 3.
by Constantine the Bearded, to Pope Agatho, in the year 679. as I have
observed in an other place.

Nay further, even when the power and riches of the Popes was grown to great
height, by the most profuse and immense munificence of Charlemayne and Lewis
his son; the Emperors of the West did not relinquish and give over the
making and vnmaking of Popes, as they saw cause. Pope 'Adrian 1. willingly
submitted his neck to this yoke: and made this Law to be passed in a Council,
that in Charlemain should rest all right and power for the Popes election, and
for the government of the Papal See. This Constitution is inserted in the
Decretals, Did. 63. Can. Note that in the same Did. the Ca^. of Greg. 4.
beginning with Cum Hadrianus secundus, is false and supposititious because
Greg. 4. wa^ Pope long before Hadri. 2.
Hadrianus, and was confirmed by the practice of many years.

In the year of the L. 963. the Emperor Otho took away the Popedom from John
13. and placed Leo 8. in his room. In like manner, John 14. Gregory 5. and
Siluester 2. were seated in the Papal Throne by the Othos.

The Emperor Henry 2. in the year 1007. deposed three Popes, namely,
Benedict 9. Siluester 3. and Gregory 6. whom Platina does not stick to call,
Tria tcterrima monstra.
three most detestable and vile monsters. This custom continued, this practice
stood in force for diverse ages, even until the times of Gregory 7. by whom
the whole West was tossed and turmoiled with lamentable wars, which plagued
the world, and the Empire by name with intolerable troubles and mischiefs. For
after the said Gregorian wars, the Empire fell from bad to worse, and so went
on to decay, till Emperors at last were driven to beg, and receive the
Imperial Crown of the Pope.

The Kingdom of France met not with so rude entreatie, but was dealt withal
by courses of a milder temper. Gregory 4. about the year of the Lord 832. was
the first Pope that persuaded himself to use the censure of Excommunication
against a King of France. This Pope having a hand in the troublesome factions
of the Realm, was nothing backward to side with the sons of Lewis, surnamed
the Courteous, by wicked conspiracy entering into a desperate course and complot
against Lewis their own Father: as witnesses Sigebert in these words, Pope
Gregory coming into France, joined himself to the sons against the
Emperor their Father. Bo^he^. Decret. Eccles. Gallican. lib. 2. tit. 16.
But Annals of the very same times; and he that furbushed Aimonius, a
religious of S. Benedicts order, do testify, that all the Bishops of France
fell upon this resolution; by no means to rest in the Popes pleasure, or to
give any place unto his design: and contrariwise, In case the Pope should
proceed to excommunication of their King, he should return out of France to
Rome an excommunicate person himself. The Chronicle of S. Denis has words in
this form: The Lord Apostolical returned answer, that he was not come into
France for any other purpose, but only to excommunicate the King and his
Bishops, if they would be in any sort opposite unto the sons of Lewis, or
disobedient unto the will and pleasure of his Holiness. The Prelates informed
hereof made answer, that in this case they would never yield obedience to the
Excommunication of the said Bishops: because it was contrary to the authority
and advise of the ancient Canons.

After these times, Pope Nicholas, 1. deprived King Lotharius of communion (for
in those times not a word of deposing) to make him repudiate or quit Valdrada,
and to resume or take again Thetberga his former wife. The articles framed by
the French upon this point, are to be found in the writings of Hincmarus
Archbishop of Reims, and are of this purport; that in the judgment of men both
learned and wise, it is an ouerruled case, that as the King whatsoever he shall
do, ought not by his own Bishops to be excommunicated, even so no foreign
Bishop has power to sit for his Judge: because the King is to be subject only
unto God, and his Imperial authority, who alone had the all-sufficient power
to settle him in his Kingdom. Moreover, the Clergy addressed letters of
answer unto the same Pope, full of stinging and bitter terms, with speeches of
great scorn and contempt, as they are set down by Auentine in his Annals of
Bauaria, Annal. Boio. lib. 4.
not forbearing to call him theife, wolf, and tyrant.

When Pope Hadrian took upon him like a Lord, to command Charles the Bald
upon pain of interdiction, that he should suffer the Kingdom of Lotharius to
be fully and entirely conveyed and conferred upon Lewis his son; the same
Hinemarus, a man of great authority and estimation in that age, sent his
letters containing sundry remonstrances touching that subject. Among other
matters thus he writes, The Ecclesiastics and Seculars of the Kingdom
assembled at Reims, have affirmed and now do affirm by way of reproach,
vpbrading, and exprobation, that never was the like mandate sent before from
the Sea of Rome to any of our predecessors. And a little after: The chief
Bishops of the Apostolic See, or any other Bishops of the greatest authority
and holiness, never withdrew themselves from the presence, from the reverend
salutation, or from the conference of Emperors and Kings, whether heretics,
or schismiticks and Tyrants: As Constantius the Arrian, Julianus the Apostata,
and Maxmius the tyrant. And yet a little after; Wherefore if the Apostolic
Lord be minded to seek peace, let him seek it so, that he stir no brawles,
and breed no quarrels. For we are no such babes to believe, that we can or
ever shall attain to Gods Kingdom, unless we receive him for our King in
earth, whom God himself recommendeth to us from heaven. It is added by
Hincmarus in the same place, that by the said Bishops and Lords Temporal, such
threatening words were blown forth, as he is afraid once to speak and utter.
As for the King himself, what reckoning he made of the Popes mandates, it
appears by the Kings own letters addressed to Pope Hadrianus, as we may
read every where in the Epistles of Hincmarus. For there, after King Charles
has taxed and challenged the Pope of pride, and hit him in the teeth with a
spirit of usurpation, he breaks out into these words: What hell has cast up
this law so cross and preposterous? what infernal gulf has disgorged this
law out of the darkest and obscurest dens? a law quite contrary and
altogether repugnant unto the beaten way showed us in the holy Scriptures, etc.
Yea, he flatly and peremptorily forbids the Pope, except he mean or desire to
be recompensed with dishonor and contempt, to send any more the like mandates,
either to himself, or to his Bishops.

Under the reign of Hugo Capetus and Robert his son, a Council now extant in
all men's hands, was held and celebrated at Reims by the Kings authority. There
Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, then Prolocutor and Speaker of the Council, calls
the Pope Antichrist, and lets not also to paint him forth like a monster: as
well for the deformed and ugly vices of that unholy See, which then were in
their exaltation, as also because the Pope then won with presents, and namely
with certain goodly horses, then presented to his Holiness, took part
against the King, with Arnulphus Bishop of Reims, then dispossed of his
Pastoral charge.

When Philip 1. had repudiated his wife Bertha, daughter to the Earl of
Holland, and in her place had also taken to wife Bertrade the wife of Fulco
Earl of Aniou yet being alive; he was excommunicated, and his Kingdom
interdicted by Vrbanus then Pope, (though he was then bearded with an Antipope)
as the L. Cardinal here gives us to understand. But his Lordship has skipt
over two principal points recorded in the history. The first is, that Philip
was not deposed by the Pope: whereupon it is to be inferred, that in this
passage there is nothing material to make for the Popes power against a Kings
Throne and Scepter. The other point is, that by the censures of the Pope, the
course of obedience due to the King before was not interrupted, nor the King
disauowed, refused, or disclaimed: but on the contrary, that Iuo of Chartres
taking Pope Vrbanus part, was punished for his presumption, dispoyled of his
estate, and kept in prison: whereof he makes complaint himself in his 19. and
20. Epistles. The L. Cardinal besides, in my understanding, for his Masters
honor, should have made no words of interdicting the whole Kingdom. For when
the Pope, to give a King chastisement, does interdict his Kingdom, he makes
the people to bear the punishment of the Kings offense. For during the time of
interdiction, the Church doors through the whole Kingdom are kept continually
shut and locked up: public service is intermitted in all places: bells every
where silent: Sacraments not administered to the people: bodies of the dead so
prostituted and abandoned, that none dares bury the said bodies in holy
ground. More, it is believed, that a man dying under the curse of the
interdict, (without some special indulgence or privilege) is for ever damned
and adjudged to eternal punishments, as one that dies out of the communion of
the Church. Put case then the interdict holds and continues for many years
together; alas, how many millions of poor souls are damned, and go to hell
for an others offense? For what can, or what may the faltlesse and innocent
people do withal, if the King will repudiate his wife, and she yet living,
join himself in matrimony to an other?

The Lord Cardinal after Philip the 1. produces Philippus Augustus, Examp. 12.
who having renounced his wife Ingeberga daughter to the King of Denmark, and
marrying with Agnes daughter to the Duke of Morauia, was by Pope Innocent the
third interdicted himself and his whole Kingdom. But his Lordshippe was not
pleased to insert withal, what is auerred in the Chronicle of Saint Denis:
that Pope Celestinus 3. sent forth two Legates at once upon this errand: Bochei.
page 320.
Who being come into to the assembly and general Council of all the French
Prelates, became like dumb dogs that can not bark, so as they could not bring
the service which they had undertaken to any good pass, because they stood in
a bodily fear of their own hydes. Not long after, the Cardinal of Capua was
in the like taking: For he durst not bring the Realm within the limits of the
interdict, before he was got out of the limits of the Kingdom. The King
herewith incensed, thrust all the Prelates that had given consent unto these
proceedings out of their Sees, confiscated their goods, etc. To the same effect
is that which we read in Math. Paris. After the Pope had given his Majesty to
understand by the Cardinal of Anagnia, that his Kingdom should be interdicted,
unless he would be reconciled to the King of England* the King returned the
Pope this answer, that he was not in any sort afraid of the Popes sentence, for
as much as it could not be grounded upon any equity of the cause: and added
withal, that it did no way appertain unto the Church of Rome to sentence
Kings, especially the King of France. And this was done, says Johannes Tilius
Register in Court of Parliament at Paris, by the counsel of the French Barons.

Most notable is the example of Philip the Fair, and hits the bird in the
right eye. In the year 1032. the Pope dispatched the Archbishop of Narbona
with mandates into France, commanding the King to release the Bishop of Apamia
then detained in prison, for contumelious words tending to the Kings
defamation, and spoken to the Kings own head. In very deed this Pope had
conceived a secret grudge, and no light displeasure against King Philip before:
namely, because the King had taken upon him the collation of benefices, and
other Ecclesiastical dignities. Upon which occasion the Pope sent letters to
the King of this tenor and style: Fear God, and keep his commandments: We
would have thee know, that in spiritual and temporal causes thou art subject
unto our self: that collating of benefices and prebends does not in any sort
appertain to thy office and place: that, in case as keeper of the
spiritualties, thou have the custody of benefices and prebends in thy hand
when they become void, thou shall by sequestration reserve the fruits of the
same, to the use and benefit of the next incumbents and successors: and in case
thou have heretofore collated any, we ordain the said collations to be
merely void: and so far as herein thou have proceeded to the fact, we revoke
the said collations. We hold them for heretics whosoever are not of this
belief. A Legate comes to Paris, and brings these brauing letters: By some of
the Kings faithful servants they are violently snatched and pulled out of the
Legates hands: by the Earl of Artois they are cast into the fire. The good
King answers the Pope, and pays him in as good coin as he had sent. Philip by
the grace of God King of the French, to Boniface calling and bearing himself
the Sovereign Bishop, little greeting or none at all. May thy exceeding
sottishness understand, that in temporal causes we are not subject unto any
mortal and earthly creature: that collating of benefices and prebends, by
Regal right appertains to our office and place: that appropriating their
fruits when they become void, belongs to our self alone during their
vacancie: that all collations by us heretofore made, or to be made hereafter,
shall stand in force: that in the validity and virtue of the said collations,
we will ever courageously defend and maintain, all Incumbents and possessors
of benefices and prebends so by us collated. We hold them all for sots and
senseless, whosoever are not of this belief. The Pope incensed herewith
excommunicates the King: but no man dares publish that censure, or become
bearer thereof. The King notwithstanding the said proceedings of the Pope,
assembles his Prelates, Barons, and Knights at Paris: asks the whole assembly,
of whom they hold their Fees, with all other the Temporalties of the Church.
They make answer with one voice, that in the said matters they disclaim the
Pope, and know none other Lord beside his Majesty. Mean while the Pope
works with Germany and the Low Countries, to stir them up against France.
But Philip sends William of Nogaret into Italy. William by the direction and
aid of Sciarra Columnensis, takes the Pope at Anagnia, mounts him upon a lean
ill-fauoured jade, carries him prisoner to Rome; where overcome with choler,
anguish, and great indignation, he takes his last leave of the Popedom and
his life. All this notwithstanding, the King presently after, from the
successors of Boniface receives very ample and gracious Bulls, in which the
memory of all the former passages and actions is utterly abolished. Extrauag.
Witness the Epistle of Clement 5. wherein this King is honored with praises,
Meruit.
for a pious and religious Prince, and his Kingdom is restored to the former
estate. In that age the French Nobility carried other manner of spirits, then
the modern and present Nobility do: I mean those by whom the L. Cardinal
was applauded and assisted in his Oration. Yea, in those former times the
Prelates of the Realm stood better affected toward their King, then the L.
Cardinal himself now stands: who could find none other way to dally with,
and to shift off this pregnant example, but by plain glosing, that heresy and
Apostasy was no ground of that question, or subject of that controversy.
Wherein he not only condemns the Pope, as one that proceeded against Philip
without a just cause and good ground; but likewise gives the Pope the lie, who,
in his goodly letters but a little above recited, has enrowled Philip in the
list of heretics. He says moreover, that indeed the knot of the question was
touching the Popes pretense, in challenging to himself the temporal
Soueraingntie of France, that is to say, in qualifying himself King of France.
But indeed and indeed no such matter to be found. His whole pretense was the
collating of benefices, and to perch above the King to crow over his Crown
in Temporal causes. At which pretense his Holiness yet aims, still
attributing and and challenging to himself plenary power to depose the King.
Now if the L. Cardinal shall yet proceed to cavil, that Boniface 8. was taken
by the French for an usurper, and no lawful Pope, but for one that crept into
the Papacy by fraud and symonie; he must be pleased to set down positiuely
who was Pope, seeing that Boniface then sat not in the Papal chair. To
conclude, If he that creeps and steals into the Papacy by symonie, by
canuases or laboring of suffrages under hand, or by bribery, be not lawful
Pope; I dare be bold to profess, there will hardly be found two lawful
Popes in the three last ages.

Pope Benedict in the year 1408. being in choler with Charles 6. because
Charles had bridled and curbed the gainefull exactions and extorsions of the
Popes Court, See the treatise of Charles du Moulin co^tra paruas Datas, wherein
he reports a notable Decree of the Court under Charles 6.
by which the Realm of France had been exhausted of their treasure, sent an
excommunicatorie Bull into France, against Charles the King, and all his
Princes. The University of Paris made request or motion that his Bull might be
mangled, and Pope Benedict himself, by some called Petrus de Luna, might be
declared heretic, schismatike, Theodoric.
and perturber of the peace. N^emens. in nemore union. Tract. 6. and somnium
viridarij.
The said Bull was mangled and rent in pieces, according to the petition of the
University, by Decree of Court upon the 10. of June, 1408. Ten days after,
the Court rising at eleven in the morning, two Bul-bearers of the said
exco^muncaitorie censure underwent ignominious punishment upon the Palace or
great Hall stayres. From thence were lead to the Lovure in such manner as they
had been brought from thence before: drawn in two tumbrells, cladde in coats
of painted linen, wore paper-mytres on their heads, were proclaimed with sound
of trumpet, and every where disgraced with public derision. So little
reckoning was made of the Popes thundering canons in those days. And what
would they have done, if the said Bulls had imported sentence of deposition
against King Charles?

The French Church assembled at Tours in the year 1510. decreed that Lewis
XII. might with safe conscience contemn the abusiue Bulls, and unjust censures
of Pope Julius the II. and by arms might withstand the Popes usurpations, in
case he should proceed to excommunicate or depose the King. More, by a Council
holden at Pisa, this Lewis declared the Pope to be fallen from the Popedom,
and coined crowns with a stamp of this inscription, I will destroy the name of
Babylon. To this the L. of Perron makes answer, that all this was done by the
French, as acknowledging these iars to have sprung not from the fountain of
Religion, but from passion of state. Wherein he condemns Pope Julius, for
giving so great scope unto his public censures, as to serve his ambition, and
not rather to advance Religion. He secretly teaches us besides, that when the
Pope undertakes to depose the King of France, then the French are to sit as
Judges concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the cause; and in case
they shall find the cause to be unlawful, then to disannull his judgments,
and to scoff at his thunderbolts.

John d' Albret King of Navarre, whose Realm was given by the foresaid Pope to
Ferdinand King of Arragon, was also wrapped and entangled with strict bands of
deposition. Now if the French had been touched with no better feeling of
affection to their King, then the subjects of Navarre were to the Nauarrois;
doubtless France had sought a new Lord, by virtue of the Popes (as the L.
Cardinal himself does acknowledge and confess) unjust sentence. But behold,
to make the said sentence against John d' Albret seem the less contrary to
equity, the L. Cardinal pretends, the Popes donation was not indeed the
principal cause, Page 5^.
howsoever Ferdinand himself made it his pretense. But his Lor. gives this for
the principal cause: that John d' Albret had quitted his alliance made with
condition; that in case the Kings of Navarre should infringe the said alliance,
and break the league, then the Kingdom of Navarre should return to the
Crown of Arragon. This condition, between Kings never made, and without all
show of probability, serves to none other purpose from the Cardinals mouth,
but only to insinuate and work a perrswasion in his King, that he has no
right nor lawful pretension to the Crown of Navarre: and whatsoever he now
holds in the said Kingdom of Navarre, is none of his own, but by usurpation
and unlawful possession. Thus his Lordshippe French-borne, makes himself an
Advocate for the Spanish King, against his own King, and King of the French:
who shall be feign, as he ought (if this Aduocats plea may take place) to draw
his title and style of King of Navarre out of his Royal titles, and to
acknowledge that all the great endeauours of his predecessors to recover the
said Kingdom, were dishonorable and unjust. Is it possible, that in the very
heart and head City of France, a spirit and tongue so licentious can be
brooked? What, shall so great blasphemy (as it were) of the Kings freehold, be
powered forth in so honorable an assembly, without punishment or fine? what,
without any contradiction for the Kings right, and on the Kings behalf? I may
perhaps confess the indignity might be the better borne, and the pretense
aledged might pass for a poor excuse, if it served his purpose never so
little. For how does all this touch or come near the question? in which the
Popes usurpation in the deposing of Kings, and the resolution of the French in
resisting this tyrannical practice, is the proper issue of the cause: both
which points are never a whit more of the less consequence and importance,
howsoever Ferdinand in his own justification stood upon the foresaid pretense.
Thus much is confessed, and we ask no more: Pope Julius took the Kingdom
from the one, and gave it unto the other: the French thereupon resisted the
Pope, and declared him to be fallen from the Papacy.

This noble spirit and courage of the French, in maintaining the dignity and
honor of their Kings Crowns, bredde those ancient customs, which in the
sequence of many ages have been observed and kept in use. This for one: That
no Legate of the Pope, nor any of his rescripts nor mandates, Page 26.
are admitted and received in France, Nisi de consensu Regis Christianissimi.
without license from the King: and unless the Legate impart his faculties to
the Kings Attorney General, to be perused and verified in Court of Parliament:
where they are to be tied by certain modifications and restrictions, unto such
points as are not derogatorie from the Kings right, from the liberties of the
Church, and from the ordinances of the Kingdom. Bochellus.
When Cardinal Balva, contrary to this ancient form, entered France in the
year 1484. and there without leave of the King did execute the Office, and
speed certain Acts of the Popes Legate; the Court upon motion made by the Kings
Attorney General, decreed a Commission, to be informed against him by two
Counselors of the said Court, and inhibited his further proceeding to use any
faculty or power of the Popes Legate, upon pain of being proclaimed rebel.

In the year 1561. Johannes Tanquerellus Bachelor in Divinity, by order of
the Court was condemned to make open confession, Indiscrete ac inconsiderate.
that he had indiscreetly and rashly without consideration defended this
proposition, The Pope is the Vicar of Christ, a Monarke that has power both
spiritual and secular, and he may deprive Princes, which rebel against his
commandments, of their dignities. Which proposition, howsoever he protested
that he had propounded the same only to be argued, Doctrinaliter tantum and
non iuridice.
and not iudicially to be determined in the affirmative, Tanquerellus
nevertheless was compelled openly to recant. Here the L. Cardinal answers; The
history of Tanquerellus is from the matter, because his proposition treats
neither of heresy nor of infidelity: but I answer, the said proposition
treats of both, for as much as it makes mention of disobedience to the Pope.
For I suppose he will not deny, that whosoever shall stand out in heresy,
contrary to the Popes monitorie proceedings, he shall show but poor and
simple obedience to the Pope. Moreover, the case is clear by the former
examples, that no Pope will suffer his power to cast down Kings, to be
restrained unto the cause of heresy and infidelity.

In the heat of the last wars, raised by that holy-prophane League,
admonitory Bulls were sent by Pope Gregory 14. from Rome, Anno 1591. By these
Bulls King Henry 4. as an heretic and relaps, was declared incapable of the
Crown of France, and his Kingdom was exposed to hauock and spoil. The Court
of Parliament being assembled at Tours the 5. of August, decreed the said
admonitorie Bulls to be cancelled, torn in pieces, and cast into a great fire
by the hand of the public executioner. The Arrest it self or Decree is of
this tenor: The Court duly pondering and approouing the concluding and
vnanswearable reasons of the Kings Attorney General, has declared, and by
these present does declare, the admonitorie Bulls given at Rome the 1. of March
1591. to be of no validity, abusiue, seditious, damnable, full of impiety and
impostures, contrary to the holy decrees, rights, franchises, and liberties
of the French Church: does ordain the Copies of the said Bulls, sealed with
the seal of Marsilius Landrianus, and signed Septilius Lamprius, to be rent in
pieces by the public executioner, and by him to be burnt in a great fire to be
made for such purpose, before the great gates of the common Hall or Palace,
etc. Then even then the L. of Perron was firm for the better part, and stood
for his King against Gregory the Pope, notwithstanding the crime of heresy
pretended against Henry his Lord.

All the former examples by us alleged, are drawn out of the times after
Schools of Divinity were established in France. For I thought good to bound
my self within those dooles and limits of time, which the L. Card. himself
has set. Who goes not sincerely to work and in good earnest, where he
tells us there be three instances (as if we had no more) objected against
Papal power, to remove Kings out of their chaires of State: by name, the
example of Philip the Fair, Page 47.
of Lewis XII. and of Tanquerellus. For in very truth all the former examples
by us produced, are no less pregnant and evident, howsoever the L. Cardinal
has been pleased to conceal them all for fear of hurting his cause.

Nay, France even in the days of her sorest servitude, was never unfurnished
of great Divines, by whom this usurped powof the Pope, over the Temporalties
and Crowns of Kings, has been utterly misliked and condemned.

Robert Earl of Flanders was commanded by Pope Paschall 2. to persecute with
fire and sword the Clergy of Liege, who then adhered and stood to the cause of
the Emperor Henry 4. whom the Pope had ignominiously deposed. Robert by the
Popes order and command, was to handle the Clergy of Liege in like sort as
before he had served the Clergy of Cambray, who by the said Earl had been
cruelly stripped both of goods and life. The Pope promised the said Earl and his
army pardon of their sins for the said execution. The Clergy of Liege
addressed answer to the Pope at large. They cried out upon the Church of Rome,
and called her Babylon. Told the Pope home, that God has commanded to give
unto Caesar that which is Cesars: that every soul must be subject unto the
superior powers: that no man is exempted out of this precept: and that every
oath of allegiance is to be kept inviolable: yea, that hereof they themselves
are not ignorant, in as much as they by a new schism, and new traditions,
making a separation and rent of the priesthood from the Kingdom, do promise
to absolve of perjury, such as have perfidiously forsworn themselves against
their King. And whereas by way of despite and in opprobrious manner, they were
excommunicated by the Pope, they gave his Holiness to understand, that David's
heart had uttered a good matter, but Paschals heart had spewed up sordid and
railing words, like old baudes and spinsters or websters of linen, when they
scold and brawle one with an other. Finally, they rejected his Papal
excommunication, as a sentence given without discretion. This was the voice and
free speech of that Clergy, in the life time of their noble Emperor. But
after he was thrust out of the Empire by the rebellion of his own son,
instigated and stirred up thereunto by the Popes persuasion and practice, and
was brought unto a miserable death; it is no matter of wonder, that for the
safeguard of their life, the said Clergy were driven to sue unto the Pope for
their pardon.

Hildebert Bishop of Caenomanum upon the river of Sartre, Bibliotheca Patrum.
living under the reign of King Philip the first, affirms in his Epistles
40. and 75. that Kings are to be admonished and instructed, Tom. 3.
rather then punished: to be dealt with by counsel, rather then by command,
by doctrine and instruction, rather then by correction. For no such sword
belongs to the Church, because the sword of the Church is Ecclesiastical
discipline, D^ co^sid^r ib. 1. cap. 6.
and nothing else. Bernard writes to Pope Eugenius after this manner:
Whosoever they be that are of this mind and opinion, shall never be able to make
proof, that any one of the Apostles did ever sit in quality of Judge or
Diuider of lands. I read where they have stood to be judged, but never where
they sat down to give judgment. Again, Your authority stretches unto
crimes, not unto possessions: because you have received the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, not in regard of possessions, but of crimes, to keep all
that plead by couin or collusion, and not lawful possessors, out of the
heavenly kingdom. A little after: These base things of the earth are judged by
the Kings and Princes of this world: wherefore do you thrust your sickle into
an others harvest? wherefore do you incraach and intrude upon an others
limits? Elsewhere. The Apostles are directly forbid to make themselves Lords
and rulers. Lib. 2. cap. 6.
Go thou then, and being a Lord usurp Apostleship, or being an Apostle
usurp Lordship. If thou needs wilt have both, doubtless thou shall have
neither.

Johannes Mayor Doctor of Paris: Did. 24. quaest. 3.
The Sovereign Bishop has no temporal authority over Kings. The reason.
Because it follows (the contrary being once granted) that Kings are the Popes
vassals. Now let other men judge, whether he that has power to dipossesse
Kings of all their Temporalties, has not likewise authority over their
Temporalties.

The same Author: Comment. in l. 4. Sent.
The Pope has no manner of title over the French or Spanish Kings in temporal
matters. Did. 24. fol. 214.
Where it is further added, That Pope Innocent 3. has been pleased to
testify, that Kings of France in Temporal causes do acknowledge no
superior. For so the Pope excused himself to a certain Lord of Montpellier,
who in stead of suing to the King, had petitioned to the Pope for a
dispensation for his bastard. But perhaps (as be speaks) it will be alleged
out of the gloss, that he acknowledges no superior by fact, and yet ought by
right. But I tell you the gloss is an Aurelian gloss, which marres the text.
Amongst other arguments, Mayor brings this for one: This opinion ministers
matter unto Popes, to take away an others Empire by force and violence: which
the Pope shall never bring to pass, as we read of Boniface 8. against Philip
the Fair. Says besides, That from hence proceed wars, in time of which
many outrageous mischeifes are done, and that Gerson calls them egregious
flatterers by whom such opinion is maintained. In the same place Mayor denies
that Childeric was deposed by Pope Zachary: The word, He deposed, says Mayor,
is not so to be understood, as it is taken at the first blush or sight; but he
deposed, is thus expounded in the gloss, He gave his consent unto those by
whom he was deposed.

John of Paris: De potest. Regia and Papali. cap. 10.
Were it granted that Christ was armed with Temporal power, yet he committed
no such power to Peter. A little after: The power of Kings is the highest power
upon earth: in Temporal causes it has no superior power above it self, no
more then the Pope has in spiritual matters. This author says indeed, the
Pope has power to excommunicate the King; but he speaks not of any power in
the Pope to put down the King from his regal dignity and authority. He only
says, When a Prince is once excommunicated, he may accidentally or by occasion
be deposed: because his precedent excommunication, incites the people to
disarme him of all secular dignity and power. The same John on the other side
holds opinion; that in the Emperor there is invested a power to depose the
Pope, in case the Pope shall abuse his power.

Almainus Doctor of the Sorbonic school: Almain. de potest. Eccl. and Laica.
It is essential in the Laye-power to inflict civil punishment, Quest. 2.
cap. 8.
as death, banishment, and privation or loss of goods. But according to divine
institution, the power Ecclesiastical can lay no such punishment upon
delinquents: De dominio naturali civilly and Eccl. 5. vlt. pars.
nay more, not lay in prison, as to some Doctors it seems probable: but
stretches and reaches only to spiritual punishment, as namely to
excommunication: all other punishments inflicted by the spiritual power, are
merely by the Law positive. If then Ecclesiastical power by Gods Law has
no authority to deprive any private man of his goods; how dares the Pope and
his flatterers build their power to deprive Kings of their scepters upon the
word of God?

The same author in an other place: Be it granted that Constantine had power
to give the Empire unto the Pope; Quaest. 1. de potest. Eccles. and laic. c.
12. and 14.
yet is it not hereupon to be inferred, that Popes have authority over the
Kingdom of France; because that Kingdom was never subject unto Constantine.
For the King of France never had any superior in Temporal matters. A little
after: It is not in any place to be found, that God has given the Pope power
to make and unmake Temporal Kings.

He maintains elsewhere, Quaest. 2. c. 8. and sic non deposuit autoritatiue.
that Zachary did not depose Childeric, but only consented to his deposing;
and so deposed him not as by authority. In the same book, taking up the words
of Occam, whom he styles the Doctor: Quae. 3. c. 2.
The Emperor is the Popes Lord in things Temporal, Quaest. 1 1. c^^. Sacerd
and the Pope calls him Lord, as it is witnessed in the body of the Text. The
Lord Cardinal has dissembled and concealed these words of Doctor Almainus,
with many like places: and has been pleased to allege Almainus reciting
Occams authority, in stead of quoting Almainus himself in those passages,
where he speaks as out of his own opinion, and in his own words. A notable
piece of sly and cunning conueiance. For what heresy may not be fathered and
fastened upon S. Augustine, or S. Hierome, if they should be deemed to
approve all the passages which they allege out of other authors. And that is
the reason wherefore the L. Cardinal does not allege his testimonies whole and
perfect, as they are couched in their proper texts, but clipped and curtaild.
Thus he deals even in the first passage or testimony of Almainus; he brings
it in mangled and pared: he hides and conceales the words added by Almainus,
to contradict and cross the words going before. For Almainus makes this
addition and supply; Howsoever some other Doctors do stand for the negative,
and teach the Pope has power only to declare that Kings and Princes are to
be deposed. And so much appears by this reason; because this ample and
Sovereign power of the Pope, might give him occasion to be puffed up with great
pride, and the same fullness of power might prove extremely hurtful to the
subjects, etc.

The same Almainus brings in Occams opinion in express terms deciding the
question, Quaest. 2. de potest. Eccl. and Laic. cap. 12.
and there ioynes his own opinion with Occams. The Doctors opinion, says
Almainus, does simply carry the most probability; that a Pope has no power,
neither by excommunication, nor by any other means, to dedepose a Prince from
his Imperial and Royal dignity. In cap. 9. 10 and 11.
And a little before, having maintained the Greek Empire was never transported
by the Pope to the Germans, and that when the Pope crowns the Emperor, he
does not give him the Empire, no more then the Archbishop of Reims when he
crowns the King of France, does give him the Kingdom; he draws this
conclusion according to Occams opinion: I deny that an Emperor is bound by
oath to promise the Pope allegiance. On the other side, if the Pope hold any
Temporal possessions, he is bound to swear allegiance unto the Emperor, and
to pay him tribute. The said Occam alleged by Almainus does further auerre,
that Justinian was acknowledged by the Pope for his superior in Temporal
causes: for as much as diverse laws which the Pope is bound to keep and
observe, were enacted by Justinian; as by name the law of prescription for an
hundred years: which law stands yet in force against the Bishop of Rome. And
to the end that all men may clearly see, how great distance there is between
Occams opinion and the L. Cardinals, who toward the end of his Oration,
exhorts his hearers at no hand to dissent from the Pope; take you here a view
of Occams own words, as they are alleged by Almainus: Quest* ^. cap. 14.
The Doctor assoyles the arguments of Pope Jnnocent, by which the Pope would
prove out of these words of Christ, Whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. that
fulness of power in Temporal matters, belongs to the Sovereign Bishop. For
Innocent says, Whatsoever, excepteth nothing. But Occam assoyles Innocents
authority, as not only false, but also heretical; and says withal, that
many things are spoken by Jnnocent, which by his leave savor and smell of
heresy, etc.

The L. Cardinal with less fidelity alleges two places out of Thomas his
Sum. Page 40.
The first, in the Second of his Second, Quest. 10. Art. 10. in the body of
the Article. In which place (let it be narrowly examined) Thomas will easily be
found to speak, not of the subjection of believing subjects under Infidel
Kings, as the Lord Cardinal pretends, but of believing servants that live
under Masters, whether Jews or Infidels. As when a Jew keeps servants which
profess Jesus Christ; or as when some of the faithful kept in Caesar's house:
who are not considered by Thomas as they were subjects of the Empire, but as
they were servants of the family. The other place is taken out of Quest. 11.
and 2. art. in the body of the article: where no such matter as the L. Cardinal
alleges can be found.

With like fidelity he takes Gerson in hand: Page 44.
who indeed in his book of Ecclesiastical power, and 12. Consider. does
affirm, When the abuse of secular power redoundeth to manifest impugning of
the faith, and blaspheming of the Creator; then shall it not be amiss to have
recourse unto the last branch of this 12. Consider. where, in such case as
aforesaid, a certain regitiue, directive, regulatiue, and ordinatiue authority
is committed to the Ecclesiastical power. His very words: which make no
mention at all of deposing, or of any compulsiue power over Sovereign Princes.
For that form of rule and government whereof Gerson speaks, is exercised by
Ecclesiastical censures and excommunications; not by loss of goods, of
Kingdoms, or of Empires. This place then is wrested by the L. Cardinal to a
contrary sense. Neither should his Lordship have omitted, that Gerson, in the
question of Kings subjection in Temporal matters, or of the dependence of
their Crowns upon the Popes power, excepteth always the King of France:
witness that which Gerson a little before the place alleged by the Cardinal
has plainly affirmed: Now since Peter's time, says Gerson, all Imperial,
Regal, and Secular power is not immediately to draw virtue and strength from
the Sovereign Bishop: as in this manner the most Christian King of France has
no Superior, nor acknowledges any such upon the face of the earth. Now here
need no great sharpenes of wit for the searching out of this deep mystery;
that if the Pope has power to give or take away Crowns for any cause or any
pretended occasion whatsoever, the Crown of France must needs depend upon the
Pope.

But for as much as we are now hitte in with Gerson, Page 108. 109. 119. where
the Card. takes Char. 7. for Charl. 6.
we will examine the L. Cardinals allegations toward the end of his Oration,
taken out of Gersons famous Oration made before Charles 6. for the University
of Paris: where he brings in Gerson to affirm, That killing a Tyrant is a
sacrifice acceptable to God. But Gerson (let it be diligently noted) there
speaks not in his own person: he there brings in sedition speaking the
words. Of which words uttered by sedition, and other like speeches, you shall
now hear what judgment Gerson himself has given. When sedition had spoken
with such a furious voice, I turned away my face as if I had been smitten with
death, to show that I was not able to endure her madness any longer. And
indeed when dissimulation on the one side, and sedition on the other, had
suggested the devises of two contrary extremes, he brings forth Discretion as a
Judge, keeping the mean between both extremes, and uttering those words
which the L. Cardinal alleges against himself. If the head, (says Gerson)
or some other member of the civil body, should grow to so desperate a pass,
that it would gulpe and swallowe down the deadly poison of tyranny; every
member in his place, with all power possible for him to raise by expedient
means, and such as might prevent a greater inconvenience, should set himself
against so mad a purpose, and so deadly practice: For if the head be grieved
with some light pain, it is not fit for the hand to smite the head: no, that
were but a foolish and a mad part. Nor is the hand forthwith to chop off or
separate the head from the body, but rather to cure the head with good speech
and other means, like a skillful and wise Physician. Yea nothing would be more
cruel or more void of reason, then to seek to stop the strong and violent
stream of tyranny by sedition. These words, me think, do make very strongly
and expressly against butchering even of Tyrannical Kings. And whereas a
little after the said passage, he teaches to expel Tyranny, he has not a
word of expelling the Tyrant, but only of breaking and shaking off the yoke of
Tyranny. Yet for all that, he would not have the remedies for the repressing
of Tyranny, to be fetched from the Pope, who presumes to degrade Kings, but
from Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines, and personages of good conversation. It
appears now by all that has been said before, that whereas Gerson in the 7
Considerat. against Flatterers, does affirm: Whenever the Prince does
manifestly pursue and prosecute his natural subjects, and show himself
obstinately bent with notorious injustice, to vex them of set purpose, and
with full consent, so far as to the fact; then this rule and law of Nature
does take place, It is lawful to resist and repel force by force; and that
sentence of Seneca, There is no sacrifice more acceptable to God, then a Tyrant
offered in sacrifice; the words, Does take place, are so to be understood, as
he speaks in an other passage, to wit, with or amongst seditious persons. Or
else the words, does take place, do only signify, is put in practice. And so
Gerson there speaks not as out of his own judgment.

His Lordshippe also should not have balked and left out Sigebertus, who with
more reason might have passed for French, then Thomas and Occam, whom he
puts upon us for French. Sigebertus in his Chronicle upon the year 1088.
speaking of the Emperors deposing by the Pope, has words of this tenor: This
heresy was not crept out of the shell in those days, that his Priests, who
has said to the King, Apostata, and makes an hypocrite to rule for the sins
of the people, should teach the people they owe no subjection unto wicked
Kings, nor any allegiance, notwithstanding they have taken the oath of
allegiance.

Now after the L. Card. has coursed in this manner through the histories of
the last ages (which in case they all made for his purpose, do lack the
weight of authority) in stead of searching the will of God in the sacred
Oracles of his word, and standing upon examples of the ancient Church; at last
leaving the troop of his own allegations, he betakes himself to the
sharpening and rebating of the points of his adversaries weapons.

For the purpose, he brings in his adversaries, Page 52. and sequentib.
the champions of Kings Crowns, and makes them to speak out of his own mouth
(for his L. says it will be objected) after this manner: It may come to pass,
that Popes either carried with passion, or misledde by sinister information,
may without just cause fasten upon Kings the imputation of heresy or
apostasy. Then for King-deposers he frames this answer: That by heresy they
understand notorious heresy, and formerly condemned by sentence of the Church.
Moreover, in case the Pope has erred in the fact, it is the Clergies part
adhering to their King, to make remonstrances unto the Pope, and to require the
cause may be referred to the judgment of a full Council, the French Church
then and there being present. Now in this answer, Aduer. Barclaium.
the L. Cardinal is of an other mind then Bellarmine his brother Cardinal.
For he goes thus far: That a Prince condemned by unjust sentence of the Pope,
ought nevertheless to quit his Kingdom, and that his Pastors unjust sentence
shall not redound to his detriment; provided that he give way to the said
sentence, and show himself not refractarie, but stay the time in patience,
until the holy Father shall renounce his error, and revoke his foresaid unjust
sentence. In which case these two material points are to be presupposed. The
one, That he who now has seized the Kingdom of the Prince displaced, will
forthwith (if the Pope shall solicit and intercede) return the Kingdom to the
hand of the late possessor. The other, That in the interim the Prince unjustly
deposed, shall not need to fear the bloody murderers merciless blade and
weapon. But on the other side, the Popes power of so large a size, as
Bellarmine has shaped, is no whit pleasing to the L. Cardinals eye. For in
case the King should be unjustly deposed by the Pope not well informed, he is
not of the mind the Kingdom should stoop to the Popes behests, but will
rather have the Kingdom to deal by remonstrance, and to refer the cause unto
the Council. Wherein he makes the Council to be of more absolute and supreme
authority then the Pope: a strain to which the holy Father will never lend
his ear. And yet doubtless, the Council required in this case must be
universal; wherein the French, for so much as they stand firm for their King
and his cause, can be no Judges: and in that regard the L. Cardinal requires
only the presence of the French Church. Who sees not here into what pickle
the French cause is brought by this means? The Bishops of Italy forsooth, of
Spain, of Sicilie, of Germany, the subjects of Sovereigns many times at
professed or privy enmity with France, shall have the cause compromitted and
referred to their judgment, whether the Kingdom of France shall drive out her
Kings, and shall kindle the flames of seditious troubles, in the very heart and
bowels of the Realm. But is it not possible, that a King may lack the love of
his own subjects, and they taking the vantage of that occasion, may put him to
his trumps in his own Kingdom? Is it not possible, that calumniations whereby
a credulous Pope has been seduced, may in like manner deceive some great part
of a credulous people? Is it not possible, that one part of the people may
cleave to the Popes faction, an other may hold and stand out for the Kings
rightful cause, and civil wars may be kindled by the spleen of these two
sides? Is it not possible, that his Holiness will not rest in the
remonstrances of the French, and will yet further pursue his cause? And whereas
now a days a General Council cannot be held, except it be called and
assembled by the Popes authority; is it credible, the Pope will take order for
the convocation of a Council, by whom he shall be judged? And how can the Pope
be President in a Council, where himself is the party impleaded? and to whom
the sifting of his own sentence is referred, as it were to committies, to
examine whether it was denounced according to Law, or against Justice? But in
the mean time, whilst all these remonstrances and addresses of the Council
are on foot; behold, the Royal Majesty of the King hangs as it were by
loose gimmals, and must stay the judgment of the Council to whom it is
referred. Well: what if the Council should hap to be two or three years in
assembling, and to continue or hold eighteen years, like the Council of
Trent; should not poor France, I beseech you, be reduced to a very bad plight?
should she not be in a very wise and warm taking? To be short; His Lordships
whole speech for the untying of this knot, not only surmounteth possibility,
but is stuffed with ridiculous toys. This I make manifest by his addition in the
same passage: If the Pope deceived in fact, shall rashly and unjustly declare
the King to be an heretic; then the Popes declaration shall not be seconded
with actual deposition, unless the Realm shall consent unto the Kings
deposing. What needs any man to be instructed in this doctrine? Who does not
know, that a King, so long as he is vpheld and maintained in his Kingdom by
his people, cannot actually and effectually be deposed from his Throne? He
that speaks such language and phrase, in effect says, and says no more then
this: A King is never deprived of his Crown, so long as he can keep his Crown
on his head: a King is never turned and stripped naked, so long as he can keep
his clothes on his back: a King is never deposed, so long as he can make the
stronger party and side against his enemies: in breife, a King is King, and
shall still remain King, so long as he can hold the possession of his Kingdom,
and sit fast in his Chair of Estate. Howbeit, let us here by the way, take
notice of these words uttered by his Lordship: That for the deposing of a King,
the consent of the people must be obtained: For by these words the people are
exalted above the King, and are made the Judges of the Kings deposing.

But here is yet a greater matter: Can. Si Papa, Did. 40.
For that Popes may err in faith, Nisi sit a fide deuius.
it is acknowledged by Popes themselves: For some of them have condemned Pope
Honorius for a Monothelite: S. Hierome, and S. Hilarious, and S. Athanasius do
testify, that Pope Liberius started aside, and subscribed to Arrianisme: Pope
John 23. was condemned in the Council of Constance, for maintaining there is
neither hell nor heaven. Diverse other Popes have been tainted with error in
faith. If therefore any Pope heretical in himself, shall depose an Orthodoxe
King for heresy; can it be imagined, that he which boasts himself to bear
all divine and humane laws in the privy coffer or casket of his breast, Omnia
iura in scrinio pectoris.
will stoop to the remonstrances of the French, and veil to the reasons which
they shall propound, though never so justifiable, and of never so great
validity? And how can he, that may be infected with damnable heresy (when
himself is not always free from heresy) be a judge of heresy in a King? In
this question some are of opinion, that as a man, the Pope may fall into error,
but not as Pope. Very good: I demand then upon the matter, wherefore the Pope
does not instruct and reform the man? or wherefore the man does not require
the Popes instructions? But whether a King be deposed by that man the Pope, or
by that Pope the man, is it not all one? is he not deposed? Others affirm, the
Pope may err in a question of the fact, but not in a question of the right. An
egregious gullery and imposture. For if he may be ignorant whether Jesus
Christ died for our sins, doubtless he may also be to seek, whether we should
repose all our trust and assured confidence in the death of Christ. Consider
with me the Prophets of old: They were all inspired and taught of God, to
admonish and reprove the Kings of Judah and Israel: they neither erred in
matter of fact, nor in point of right: they were as far from being blinded
and fetched over by deceitful calumniations, as from being seduced by the
painted show of corrupt and false doctrine. As they never trod awry in matter
of faith; so they never whetted the edge of their tongue or style against the
faultles. Had it not been a trim device in their times, to say, that as Esaias
and as Daniel they might have sunk into heresy, but not as Prophets? For
doubtless in this case, that Esaias would have taken counsel of the Prophet
which was himself. To be short; If Kings are only so long to be taken for
Kings, until they shall be declared heretics, and shall be deposed by the
Pope; they continually stand in extreme danger, to undergo a very heavy and
unjust sentence. Their safest way were to know nothing, and to believe by
proxy; least, if they should happen to talk of God, or to think of religion,
they should be drawn for heretics into the Popes Inquisition.

All the examples hitherto produced by the L. Cardinal on a row, are of a
latter date, they lack weight, are drawn from the time of bondage, and make
the Popes themselves witnesses in their own cause. They descant not upon the
point of deposition, but only strike out and sound the notes of
excommunication and interdiction, which make nothing at all to the music of
the question. And therefore he tells us (in kindness as I take it) more
oftentimes then once or twice, that he speaks only of the fact; as one that
does acknowledge himself to be out of the right. He relates things done, but
never what should be done: which, as the Judicious know, is to teach nothing.

The second Jnconuenience examined.
THE second Inconvenience like to grow, Page 86.
(as the Lord Cardinal seems to be half afraid) if the Article of the third
Estate might have passed with approbation, is couched in these words: Laymen
shall by authority be strengthened with power, to judge in matters of
Religion; as also to determine the doctrine comprised in the said Article to
have requisite conformity with Gods word: yea they shall have it in their
hands to compel Ecclesiastics by necessity, to swear, preach, and teach the
opinion of the one side, as also by Sermons and public writings to impugn the
other. This inconvenience he aggrauateth with swelling words, and breaks out
into these vehement exclamations: O reproach, O scandal, O gate set open to a
world of heresies. He therefore labors both by reasons, and by autorities of
holy Scripture, to make such usurped power of Laics, a foul, shameful, and
odious practice. In the whole, his Lordship toils himself in vain, and
makes suppositions of castles in the air. For in preferring this Article, the
third Estate have born themselves not as judges or vmpires, but altogether as
petitioners: requesting the said Article might be received into the number of
the Parliament books, to be presented unto the King and his Counsel, unto
whom in all humility they referred the judgment of the said Article;
conceiving all good hope the Clergy and Nobility would be pleased to join
for the furtherance of their humble petition. They were not so ignorant of
State-matters, or so unmindful of their own places and charges, to bear
themselves in hand, that a petition put up and preferred by the third Estate,
can carry the force of a Law or Statute, so long as the other two Orders
withstand the same, and so long as the King himself holds back his Royal
consent. Besides, the said Article was not propounded as a point of religious
doctrine; but for ever after to remain and continue a fundamental Law of the
Commonwealth and State it self, the due care whereof was put into their hands,
and committed to their trust. If the King had ratified the said Article with
Royal consent, and had commanded the Clergy to put in execution the contents
thereof; it had been their duty to see the Kings will and pleasure fulfilled,
as they are subjects bound to give him aid in all things, which may any way
serve to procure the safety of his life, and the tranquillity of his Kingdom.
Which if the Clergy had performed to the uttermost of their power, they had
not showed obedience as underlings, unto the third Estate, but unto the King
alone: by whom such command had been imposed, upon suggestion of his
faithful subjects, made the more watchful by the negligence of the Clergy;
whom they perceive to be linked with stricter bands unto the Pope, then they
are unto their King. Here then the Cardinal fights with mere shadows, and
mooues a doubt whereof his adversaries have not so much as once thought in a
dream. But yet, according to his great dexterity and nimblenesse of spirit,
by this device he cunningly takes upon him to give the King a lesson with more
liberty: making semblance to direct his masked Oration to the Deputies of the
people, when he shoots in effect, and pricketh at his King, the Princes also
and Lords of his Counsel, whom the Cardinal compriseth under the name of
Laics; whose judgment (it is not unlikely) was apprehended much better by the
Clergy, then the judgment of the third Estate. Now these are the men whom he
terms intruders into other men's charges, and such as open a gate for I wot
not how many legions of heresies, to rush into the Church. For if it be proper
to the Clergy and their Head, to judge in this cause of the Right of Kings;
then the King himself, his Princes, and Nobility, are debarred and wiped of
all judgment in the same cause, no less then the representative body of the
people.

Well then, Page 61.
the L* Cardinal showers down like hail sundry places and testimonies of
Scripture, where the people are commanded to have their Pastors in singular
love, and to bear them all respects of due observance. Be it so; yet are the
said passages of Scripture no bar to the people, for their vigilant
circumspection, to preserve the life and Crown of their Prince, against all the
wicked enterprises of men stirred up by the Clergy, who have their Head out of
the Kingdom, and hold themselves to be none of the Kings subjects: a thing
never spoken by the sacrificing Priests and Prelates, mentioned in the passages
alleged by the Lord Cardinal. He likewise produces two Christian Emperors,
Page 62.
Constantine and Valentinian by name; the first refusing to meddle with
judgment in Episcopal causes: the other forbearing to judge of subtle
Questions in Divinity, with protestation, that He would never be so curious,
to diue into the streams, or sound the bottom of so deep matters. But who
does not know, that working and providing for the Kings indemnity and safety,
is neither Episcopal cause, nor matter of curious and subtle inquisition? The
same answer meets with all the rest of the places produced by the L. Cardinal
out of the Fathers. And that one for example, out of Gregory Nazianzenus, Orat.
ad ciues timore perculsos.
is not cited by the Cardinal with fair dealing. For Gregory does not board
the Emperor himself, but his Deputy or L. President, on this manner: (...).
For we also are in authority and place of a Ruler, we have command as well as
your self: whereas the L. Cardinal with foul play, turns the place in these
terms, We also are Emperors. Which words can bear no such interpretation, as
well because he to whom the Bishop then spoke, was not of Imperial dignity;
as also because if the Bishop himself, a Bishop of so small a city as
Nazianzum, had qualified himself Emperor, he should have passed all the
bounds of modesty, and had showed himself arrogant above measure. For as
touching subjection due to Christian Emperors, he freely acknowledges a
little before, (...).
that himself and his people are subject unto the superior powers, yea bound
to pay them tribute. The history of the same Gregory's life does testify, that
he was drawn by the Arrians before the Consuls judgment seat, and from
thence returned acquitted, without either stripes or any other kind of
contumelious entreatie and use: yet now at last up starts a Prelate, who dares
make this good Father vaunt himself to be an Emperor. It is willingly
granted, that Emperors never challenged, never arrogated, to be Sovereign
Judges in controversies of doctrine and faith; nevertheless it is clearer then
the Suns light at high noone, that for moderation at Synods, for
determinations and orders established in Councils, and for the discipline of
the Church, they have made a good and a full use of their Imperial authority.
The 1. Council held at Constantinople, bears this title or inscription; Vide
Canones Graecos a Tilio editos.
The dedication of the holy Synod to the most religious Emperor Theodosius
the Great, to whose will and pleasure they have submitted these Canons by them
addressed and established in Council. And there they also beseech the Emperor,
to confirm and approve the said Canons. The like has bin done by the
Council of Trullo, by whom the Canons of the fifth and sixth Councils were put
forth and published. This was not done, because Emperors took upon them to
be infallible Judges of doctrine; but only that Emperors might see and
judge, whether Bishops (who feel the prick of ambition as other men do) did
propound nothing in their Conuocations and Consultations, but most of all in
their Determinations, to undermine the Emperors authority, to disturb the
tranquillity of the Commonwealth, and to cross the determinations of precedent
Councils. Now to take the cognizance of such matters out of the Kings hand or
power; what is it but even to transform the King into a standing image, to
wring and wrest him out of all care of himself and his Kingly charge, yea to
bring him down to this basest condition, to become only an executioner, and
(which I scorn to speak) the unhappy hangman of the Clergies will, without
any further cognizance, not so much as of matters which most nearly touch
himself, and his Royal estate?

I grant it is for Divinity Schools, to judge how far the power of the
Keys does stretch: I grant again, that Clerics both may, and ought also to
display the colors and ensigns of their censures against Princes, who
violating their public and solemn oath, do raise and make open war against
Jesus Christ: I grant yet again, that in this case they need not admit Laics
to be of their counsel, nor allow them any scope or liberty of judgment.
Yet all this makes no bar to Clerics, for extending the power of their keys,
many times a whole degree further then they ought; and when they are pleased,
to make use of their said power, to deprive the people of their goods, or the
Prince of his Crown: all this does not hinder Prince or people from taking
care for the preservation of their own rights and estates, nor from requiring
Clerics to show their cards, and produce their Charts, and to make
demonstration by Scripture, that such power as they assume and challenge, is
given them from God. For to leave the Pope absolute Judge in the same cause
wherein he is a party, and (which is the strongest rampire and bulwark, yea
the most glorious and eminent point of his domination) to arm him with power
to unhorse Kings out of their feats; what is it else but even to draw them
into a state of despair, for every winning the day, or prevailing in their
honorable and rightful cause?

It is moreover granted, if a King shall command any thing directly contrary
to Gods word, and tending to the subuerting of the Church; that Clerics in this
case ought not only to dispense with subjects for their obedience, but also
expressly to forbid their obedience: For it is always better to obey God then
man. Howbeit in all other matters, whereby the glory and majesty of God is not
impeached or impaired, it is the duty of Clerics to plie the people with
wholesome exhortation to constant obedience, and to auert by earnest
disswasions the said people from tumultuous revolt and seditious insurrection.
This practice under the Pagan Emperors, was held and followed by the ancient
Christians; by whose godly zeal and patience in bearing the yoke, the Church
in times past grew and flourished in her happy and plentiful increase, far
greater then Popery shall ever purchase and attain unto by all her cunning
devises and sleights: as namely by degrading of Kings, by interdicting of
Kingdoms, by apposted murders, and by Diabolical trains of
Gunne-powder-mines.

The places of Scripture alleged in order by the Cardinal, Page 66.
in favor of those that stand for the Popes claim of power and authority to
depose Kings, are cited with no more sincerity then the former: They allege
(these are his words) that Samuel deposed King Saul, or declared him to be
deposed, because he had violated the laws of the Jews religion. His Lordship
avouches elsewhere, that Saul was deposed, because he had sought profanely
to usurp the holy Priesthood. Both false, and contrary to the tenor of truth
in the sacred history. For Saul was never deposed, according to the sense of
the word (I mean, depose) in the present question: to wit, as deposing is
taken for despoyling the King of his Royal dignity, and reducing the King to
the condition of a private person: But Saul held the title of King, and
continued in possession of his Kingdom, even to his dying day. Yea, 1. Sam.
23. 20. and 24. 15. and 2.
the Scripture styles him King, even to the periodical and last day of his
life, by the testimony of David himself, Sam. 2. 5.
who both by Gods promise, and by precedent unction, was then heir apparent as
it were to the Crown, in a manner then ready to gird and adorn the temples of
his head. For if Samuel, by Gods commandment, had then actually removed Saul
from his Throne, doubtless the whole Church of Israel had committed a gross
error, in taking and honoring Saul for their King after such deposition:
doubtless the Prophet Samuel himself, making known the Lords ordinance unto
the people, would have enjoined them by strict prohibition, to call him no
longer the King of Israel: doubtless David would never have held his hand from
the throat of Saul, for this respect and consideration, 1. Sam. 26. 11.
because he was the Lords anointed. For if Saul had lost his Kingly
authority, from that instant when Samuel gave him knowledge of his reiection;
then David, least otherwise the body of the Kingdom should want a Royal Head,
was to begin his Reign, and to bear the Royal Scepter in the very same
instant: which were to charge the holy Scriptures with untruth, in as much as
the sacred history begins the computation of the years of David's reign,
from the day of Saul's death. True it is, that in the 2. Sam. cap. 15. Saul was
denounced by Gods own sentence, a man rejected, and as it were excommunicated
out of the Kingdom, that he should not rule and reign any longer as King over
Israel; nevertheless the said sentence was not put in execution, before the
day when God, executing upon Saul an exemplarie judgment, did strike him with
death. From whence it is manifest and clear, that when David was anointed
King by Samuel, 1. Sam. 16. 13.
that action was only a promise, and a testimony of the choice, which God had
made of David for succession immediately after Saul; and not a present
establishment, inuestment, or instalment of David in the Kingdom. We read
the like in 1. King. cap. 19. where God commands Elias the Prophet, to
anoint Hasael King of Syria. For can any man be so blind and ignorant in the
sacred History, to believe the Prophets of Israel established, or sacred the
Kings of Syria? For this cause, 2. Sam. 2. 4*
when David was actually established in the Kingdom, he was anointed the second
time.

In the next place he brings in the Popes champions using these words; 1. K^^.
12.
Rehoboam was deposed by Ahiah the Prophet, from his Royal right over the
ten Tribes of Israel, because his father Solomon had played the Apostata, in
falling from the Law of God. This I say also, is more then the truth of the
sacred history does affoard. For Ahiah never spoke to Rehoboam (for ought we
read,) nor brought unto him any message from the Lord. As for the passage
quoted by the L. Cardinal out of Reg. 3. chap. 11. it has not reference to
the time of Rehoboams reign, but rather indeed to Salomons time: nor does it
carry the face of a iudicatory sentence for the Kings deposing, but rather of
a Prophetical prediction. For how could Rehoboam, before he was made King, be
deprived of the Kingdom? Last of all, but worst of all; to allege this
passage for an example of a just sentence in matter of deposing a King, is to
approve the disloyal treachery of a servant against his master, and the
rebellion of Jeroboam branded in Scripture with a mark of perpetual infamy
for his wickedness and impiety.

He goes on with an other example of no more truth: 1. Kin. 19.
King Achab was deposed by Elias the Prophet, because he embraced false
religion, and worshipped false gods. False too like the former; King Achab lost
his Crown and his life both together. The Scripture, that speaks not
according to man's fancy, but according to the truth, does extend and number the
years of Achabs reign, to the time of his death. Predictions of a Kings
ruin, are no sentences of deposition. Elias never gave the subjects of Achab
absolution from their oath of obedience; never gave them the least inckling of
any such absolution; never set up, or placed any other King in Achabs Throne.

That of the L. Cardinal a little after, Page 68.
is no less untrue: That King Vzziah was driven from the conversation of the
people by Azarias the Priest, and thereby the administration of his Kingdom
was left no longer in his power. Not so: 2. Chro. 26.
For when God had smitten Vzziah with leprosy in his forehead, he withdrew
himself, or went out into an house apart, for fear of infecting such as were
whole by his contagious disease. The high Priest smote him not with any
sentence of deposition, or denounced him suspended from the administration of
his Kingdom. No: the days of his reign are numbered in Scripture, to the day
of his death. And whereas the Priest, according to the Law in the 13. of
Leuit. judged the King to be unclean; he gave sentence against him, not as
against a criminal person, and thereby within the compass of deposition; but
as against a diseased body. For the Law inflicteth punishments, not upon
diseases, but upon crimes. Hereupon, whereas it is recorded by Josephus in his
Antiquities, Antiq. l. 9. cap. 11.
that Vzziah lead a private, and in a manner, a solitary life; the said author
does not mean, that Vzziah was deposed, but only that he disburdened himself
of care to manage the public affairs.

The example of Mattathias, Page 69.
by whom the Jews were stirred up to rebel against Antiochus, is no better
worth. For in that example we find no sentence of deposition, but only an
heartning and commotion of a people then grievously afflicted and oppressed. He
that makes himself the ringleader of conspiracy against a King, does not
forthwith assume the person, or take up the office and charge of a Judge, in
form of law, and iuridically to deprive a King of his Regal rights, and
Royal prerogatives. Mattathias was chief of that conspiracy, not in quality
of Priest, but of cheiftaine, or leader in war, and a man the best qualified
of all the people. Things acted by the sudden violence of the base vulgar,
must not stand for laws, nor yet for proofs and arguments of ordinary power,
such as the Pope challenges to himself, and appropriateth to his
triple-Crowne.

These be our solid answers: Page 67.
we disclaim the light armor which the L. Cardinal is pleased to furnish us
withal, forsooth to recreate himself, in rebating the points of such weapons,
as he has vouchsafed to put into our hands. Now it will be worth our labor to
beat by his thrusts, fetched from the ordinary mission of the new Testament,
from leprosy, stones, and locks of wool. A leach no doubt of admirable skill,
one that for subiecting the Crowns of Kings unto the Pope, is able to extract
arguments out of stones; yea, out of the leprosy, and the dry scab, only
forsooth because heresy is a kind of leprosy, and an heretic has some
affinity with a leper. But may not his Quoniam, be as fitly applied to any
contagious and inueterate vice of the mind beside heresy? Page 66.
His warning-peice therefore is discharged to purpose, whereby he notifies that
he pretends to handle nothing with resolution. For indeed upon so weak
arguments, a resolution is but ill-fauouredly and weakly grounded.

His bulwarks thus beaten down, Page 69.
let us now view the strength of our own. First, he makes us to fortify on
this manner: They that are for the negative, do allege the authority of S.
Paul; Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: For whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. And likewise that of S.
Peter, Submit your selves, whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior,
or unto governors, etc. Upon these passages, and the like, they infer, that
obedience is due to Kings by the Law of God, and not dispensable by any
spiritual or temporal authority. Thus he brings us in with our first weapon.
But here the very chief sinew and strength of our argument, he does wittingly
balke, and of purpose conceal. To wit, That all the Emperors of whom the said
holy Apostles have made any mention in their divine Epistles, were professed
enemies to Christ, Pagans, Infidels, fearful and bloody Tyrants: to whom
notwithstanding every soul, and therefore the Bishop of Rome for one, is
commanded to submit himself, and to profess subjection. Thus much
Chrysostom has expressly taught in his Hom. 23. upon the Epistle to the
Romans; The Apostle gives this commandment unto all: even to Priests also,
and cloistered Monks, not only to secular: be thou an Apostle, an Evangelist,
a Prophet, etc. Besides, it is here worthy to be noted, that howsoever the
Apostles rule is general, and therefore binds all the faithful in equal
bands; yet is it particularly, directly, and of purpose addressed to the Church
of Rome by S. Paul, as by one who in the spirit of an Apostle did foresee, that
rebellion against Princes was to rise and spring from the city of Rome. Now in
case the Head of that Church by warrant of any privilege, contained in the
most holy Register of Gods holy word, is exempted from the binding power of
this general precept or rule; did it not become his Lordship to show by the
book, that it is a book case, and to lay it forth before that honorable
assembly, who no doubt expected and waited to hear when it might fall from his
learned lips? But in stead of any such authentical and canonical
confirmation, he flies to a slight shift, and with a cavil is bold to
affirm the foundation, laid by those of our side, does no way touch the knot
of the controversy. Let us hear him speak: It is not in controversy,
whether obedience be due to Kings by Gods Law, so long as they are Kings, or
acknowledged for Kings: but our point controuerted, is whether by Gods Law it
be required, that he who has been once recognized and received for King by
the body of Estates, can at any time be taken and reputed as no King, that is
to say, can do no manner of act whereby he may loose his right, and so cease
to be saluted King. This answer of the L. Cardinal is the rare devise, evasion,
and starting hole of the Jesuits. In whose ears of delicate and tender touch,
King-killing sounds very harsh: but forsooth to vn-king a King first, and
then to give him the stabbe, that is a point of just and true descant. For to
kill a King, once vn-king'd by deposition, is not killing of a King. For the
present I have one of that Jesuitical Order in prison, who has face enough to
speak this language of Ashdod, and to maintain this doctrine of the Jesuits
Colleges. The L. Cardinal harps upon the same string. He can like subjection
and obedience to the King, whilst he sits King: but his Holiness must
have all power, and give order withal, to hoyst him out of his Royal seat. I
therefore now answer, that in very deed the former passages of S. Paul and S.
Peter should come nothing near the question, if the state of the question were
such as he brings it, made and forged in his own shop. But certes the state of
the question is not, whether a King may do some act, by reason whereof he may
fall from his right, or may not any longer be acknowledged for King. For all
our contention is, concerning the Popes power to vn-authorize Princes: whereas
in the question framed and fitted by the L. Card. not a word of the Pope. For
were it granted and agreed on both sides, that a King by election might fall
from his Kingdom, yet still the knot of the question would hold, whether he
can be dispossessed of his Regal authority, by any power in the Pope; and
whether the Pope has such fullness of power, to strip a King of those Royal
robes, rights, and revenues of the Crown, which were never given him by the
Pope; as also by what authority of holy Scripture, the Pope is able to bear
out himself in this power, and to make it good.

But here the L. Cardinal stoutly says in his own defense by way of
reioynder; Page 71.
As one text has, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; in like
manner an other text has, Obey your Prelates, and be subject unto your
Pastors: for they watch over your souls, as men that shall give an account for
your souls. This reason is void of reason, and makes against himself. For may
not Prelates be obeyed and honored, without Kings be deposed? If Prelates
preach the doctrine of the Gospel, will they in the pulpit stir up subjects
to rebel against Kings? Moreover, whereas the universal Church in these days
is divided into so many discrepant parts, that now Prelates neither do nor can
draw all one way; is it not exceeding hard, keeping our obedience toward God,
to honor them all at once with due obedience? Nay; is not here offered unto me
a dart out of the L. Cardinals armorie, to cast at himself? For as God
charge all men with obedience to Kings, and yet from that commandment of
God, the Lord Cardinal would not have it inferred, that Kings have power to
degrade Ecclesiastical Prelates: even so God gives charge to obey Prelates,
yet does it not follow from hence, that Prelates have power to depose Kings.
These two degrees of obedience agree well together, and are each of them
bounded with peculiar and proper limits.

But for so much as in this point, we have on our side the whole ancient
Church, which, albeit she lived and groned for many ages together under heathen
Emperors, heretics, and persecuters, did never so much as whisper a word
about rebelling and falling from their Sovereign Lords, and was never by any
mortal creature freed from the oath of allegiance to the Emperor; the
Cardinal is not unwilling to grant, that ancient Christians in those times
were bound to perform such fidelity and allegiance, for as much as the Church
(the Cardinal for shame durst not say the Pope) then had not absolved them of
their oath. No doubt a pleasant dream, or a merry conceit rather, to imagine
the Bishop of Rome was armed with power to take away the Empire of the world
from Nero, or Claudius, or Domitianus; to whom it was not known, whether the
city of Rome had any Bishop at all. Is it not a master-iest, of a strain most
ridiculous, to presuppose the Grand-masters and absolute Lords of the whole
world, had a sent so dull, that they were not able to smell out, and to nose
things under their own noses? that they saw so little with other men's eyes and
their own, that within their capital city, they could not spy that
Sovereign armed with ordinary and lawful authority to degrade, and to turn
them out of their renowned Empire? Doubtless the said Emperors, vassals
belike of the Popes Empire, are to be held excused for not acknowledging and
honoring the Pope in quality of their Lord, as became his vassals; because
they did not know there was any such power in the world, as aftertimes have
magnified and adored under the quality of Pope. For the Bishops of Rome in
those times, were of no greater authority, power, and means, then some of the
Bishops are in these days within my Kingdoms.

But certes those Popes of that primitive age, thought it not expedient in the
said times to draw their swords: they exercised their power in a more mild and
soft kind of carriage toward those miserable Emperors, for three several
reasons alleged by the L. Cardinal.

The first: because the Bishops then durst not by their censures whet and
provoke those Emperous, for fear of plunging the Church in a Sea of
persecutions. But if I be not clean void of common sense, this reason serves
to charge not only the Bishops of Rome, but all the ancient professors of
Christ besides, with deep dissimulation and hypocrisy. For it is all one as
if he had professed, that all their obedience to their Sovereigns, was but
counterfeit, and extorted, or wrung out of them by force: that all the
submissiue supplications of the ancient Fathers, the assured testimonies and
pledges of their allegiance, humility, and patience, were but certain forms
of disguised speech, proceeding not freely from the suggestions of fidelity,
but faintly and fainedly, or at least from the strong twitches and violent
convulsions of fear. Whereupon it follows, that all their torments and
punishments, even to the death, are wrongfully honored with the title, and
crowned with the crown of Martyrdom; because their patience proceeded not
from their own free choice and election, but was taught by the force of
necessity, as by compulsion: and whereas they had not mutinously and
rebelliously risen in arms, to assuage the scorching heat and burning flames of
tyrannical persecuters, it was not for want of will, but for lack of power.
Which false and forged imputation, the Fathers have cleared themselves of in
their writings. Tert. Apol. cap. 37.
Tertullian in his Apologet: All places are full of Christians, Hesterni sumus,
and omnia vestra impleuimus.
the cities, isles, castles, buroughs, armies, etc. If we that are so infinite
a power, and multitude of men, had broken from you into some remote nooke or
corner of the world, the cities no doubt had become naked and solitary: there
had been a dreadful and horrible silence over the face of the whole Empire:
the great Emperors had been driven to seek out new cities, and to discover
new nations, over whom to bear Sovereign sway and rule: there had remained
more enemies to the State, then subjects and friends. Cypr. cont. Demetr.
Cyprian also against Demetrianus: None of us all, howsoever we are a people
mighty and without number, have made resistance against any of your unjust and
wrongful actions, executed with all violence; neither have sought by
rebellious arms, or by any other sinister practices, to cry quittance with
you at any time for the righting of our selves. Certain it is, that under
Iulianus, the whole Empire in a manner professed the Christian Religion; yea,
that his Leiftenants and great Commanders, as Iovinianus, and Valentinianus by
name, professed Christ. Which two Princes not long after attained to the
Imperial dignity, but might have solicited the Pope sooner to degrade
Iulianus from the Imperial Throne. For say that Iulians whole army had
renounced the Christian Religion: (as the L. Cardinal against all show and
appearance of truth would bear us in hand, and contrary to the general voice
of the said whole army, making this profession with one consent when Julian was
dead, Socr. lib. 3. cap. 19.
We are all Christians:) yet Italy then persisting in the faith of Christ,
Theod. lib. 4* cap. 1.
and the army of Julian then lying quartered in Persia, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1.
the utmost limit of the Empire to the East, the Bishop of Rome had fit
opportunity to draw the sword of his authority (if he had then any such sword
hanging at his Pontifical side) to make Julian feel the sharp edge of his
weapon, and thereby to pull him down from the stately perch of the Roman
Empire. I say moreover, that by this general and sudden profession of the
whole Caesarian army, We are all Christians, it is clearly testified, that if
his army or soldiers were then addicted to Paganism, it was wrought by
compulsion, and clean contrary to their settled persuasion before: and then it
follows, that with greater patience they would have borne the deposing of
Julian, then if he had suffered them to use the liberty of their conscience.
To be short in the matter; S. Augustine makes all whole, and by his testimony
does euince, that Iulians army perseuered in the faith of Christ. The soldiers
of Christ served a heathen Emperor: August^n Psalm. 124.
But when the cause of Christ was called in question, they acknowledged none
but Christ in heaven: When the Emperor would have them to serve, and to
perfume his idols with frankincense, they gave obedience to God, rather then to
the Emperor. After which words, the very same words alleged by the L.
Cardinal against himself do follow: Page 81.
They did then distinguish between the Lord eternal, and the Lord temporal:
nevertheless they were subject unto the Lord temporal, for the Lord eternal.
It was therefore to pay God his duty of obedience, and not for fear to incense
the Emperor, or to draw persecution upon the Church (as the L. Cardinal
would make us believe) that Christians of the Primitive Church and Bishops by
their censures, durst not anger and provoke their Emperors. But his Lordship
by his colored pretenses does manifestly provoke and stir up the people to
rebellion, so soon as they know their own strength to bear out a rebellious
practice. Whereupon it follows, that in case their conspiracy shall take no
good effect, all the blame and fault must lie, not in their disloyalty and
treason, but in the badde choice of their times for the best advantage, and in
the want of taking a true sight of their own weakness. Let stirring spirits
be trained up in such practical precepts, let desperate wits be seasoned with
such rules of discipline; and what need we, or how can we wonder they contriue
powder -- conspiracies, and practice the damnable art of parricides?

After Julian, his Lordship falls upon Valentinian the younger, who
maintaining Arrianisme with great and open violence, might have been deposed
by the Christians from his Empire, and yet (say we) they never dreamed of any
such practice. Page 82.
Here the L. Cardinal makes answer: The Christians moved with respect unto
the fresh memory both of the brother and father, as also unto the weak estate
of the sons young years, abstained from all counsels and courses of sharper
effect and operation. To which answer I reply: these are but frivolous
conjectures, devised and framed to tickle his own fancy. For had
Valentinianus the younger been the son of an Arrian, and had then also
attained to threescore years of age, they would never have borne themselves in
other fashion then they did, toward their Emperor. Then the Cardinal goes
on: The people would not abandon the factious and seditious party, but were so
firm or obstinate rather for the faction, that Valentinian for fear of the
tumultuous vproares was constrained to give way, and was threatened by the
soldiers, that except he would adhere unto the Catholics, they would yield
him no assistance, nor stand for his party. Now this answer of the L.
Cardinal makes nothing to the purpose, concerning the Popes power to pull
down Kings from their stately nest. Let us take notice of his proper
consequence. Valentinian was afraid of the popular tumult at Milan: the Pope
therefore has power to curb heretical Kings by deposition. Now mark what
distance is between Rome and Milan, what difference between the people of
Milan, and the Bishop of Rome; between a popular tumult, and a iudicatory
sentence; between fact and right, things done by the people or soldiers of
Milan, and things to be done according to right and law by the Bishop of Rome;
the same distance, the same difference (if not far greater) is between the
L. Cardinals antecedent and his consequent, between his reason, and the maine
cause or argument which we have in hand. The mad commotion of the people was
not here so much to be regarded, as the sad instruction of the Pastor, of their
good and godly Pastor S. Ambrose, so far from heartning the people of Milan to
rebel, that being Bishop of Milan, he offered himself to suffer Martyrdom:
If the Emperor abuse his Imperial authority, (for so Theodoret has recited
his words) to tyrannize thereby, here am I ready to suffer death. And what
resistance he made against his L. Emperor, was only by way of supplication in
these terms: We beseech thee, O Augustus, as humble suppliants; we offer no
resistance: we are not in fear, but we fly to supplication. Epist. lib. 5.
Again, If my patrimony be your mark, Epist. 33.
enter upon my patrimony: if my body, I will go and meet my torments. Shall
I be dragged to prison or to death? I will take delight in both. Item, in his
Oration to Auxentius: J can afflict my soul with sorrow, Epist. lib. 5.
I can lament, J can send forth grievous groans: My weapons against either of
both, soldiers or Goths, are tears: A Priest has none other weapons of
defense: I neither can resist, nor ought in any other manner to make resistance.

Justinian Emperor in his old age fell into the heresy of the
Aphthartodocites. Against Justinian, though few they were that favored him in
that heresy, the Bishop of Rome never darted with violence any sentence of
Excommunication, interdiction, or deposition.

The Ostrogot Kings in Italy, the Visigot in Spain, the Vandal in Africa were
all addicted to the Arrian impiety, and some of them cruelly persecuted the
true professors. The Visigot and Vandall were no neighbors to Italy. The Pope
thereby had the less cause to fear the stings of those waspes, if they had
been angered. The Pope for all that never had the humor to wrestle or iustle
with any of the said Kings in the cause of deposing them from their Thrones.
But especially the times when the Vandals in Affricke, and the Goths in Italy
by Belisarius and Narses, professors of the Orthodoxe faith, were tired with
long wars, and at last were utterly defeated in bloody battles, are to be
considered. Then were the times or never, for the Pope to vnsheath his weapons,
and to vn-case his arrows of deposition; then were the times to draw them out
of his quiver, and to shoot at all such Arrian Heads: then were the times by
dispensations to release their subjects of their oaths, by that peremptory
means to aid and strengthen the Catholic cause. But in that age the said
weapons were not known to have been hammered in the Pontifical forge.

Gregory I. made his boasts, that he was able to ruin the Lombards, (for many
years together sworn enemies to the Bishops of Rome) their state present, and
the hope of all their future prosperity. But he tells us, that by the fear
of God before his eyes and in his heart, he was bridled and restrained from any
such intent, as elsewhere we have observed: In Apol. pro iuram. fidel.
If J would have meddled with practicing and procuring the death of the
Lombards, His own words. lib. 7. Epist. 1.
the whole nation of the Lombards at this day had been robbed of their Kings,
Dukes, Earls, they had been reduced to the terms of extreme confusion. He
might at least have deposed their King, (if the credit of the L. Cardinals
judgment be current) without polluting or stayning his own conscience.

What can we term this assertion of the L. Cardinal, but open charging the
most ancient Bishops of Rome with cruelty, when they would not succor the
Church of Christ oppressed by tyrants, whose oppression they had power to
repress by deposing the oppressors. Is it credible, that Jesus Christ has
given a Commission to S. Peter and his successors for so many ages, without any
power to execute their Commission, or to make any use thereof by practice? Is
it credible, that he has given them a sword to be kept in the scabbard,
without drawing once in a thousand years? Is it credible, that in the times
when Popes were most deboshed, abandoning themselves to all sorts of corrupt
and vicious courses, as it testified by their own flaterers and best affected
servants; is it credible that in those times they began to understand the
virtue and strength of their Commission? For if either fear or lack of power,
was the cause of holding their hands, and voluntary binding of themselves to
the peace or good behavior: wherefore is not some one Pope at least produced,
who has complained that he was hindered from executing the power that Christ
had conferred upon his Pontifical See? Wherefore is not some one of the
ancient and holy Fathers alleged, by whom the Pope has bin advised and
exhorted to take courage, to stand upon the vigor and sinews of his Papal
Office, to vnsheath and unease his bolts of thunder against ungodly Princes,
and grievous enemies to the Church? wherefore living under Christian and
gracious Emperors, have they not made known the reasons, why they were
hindered from drawing the pretended sword; least long custom of not using the
sword so many ages, might make it so to rust in the scabbard, that when there
should be occasion to use the said sword, it could not be drawn at all; and
least so long custom of not using the same, should confirm prescription to
their greater prejudice? If weakness be a just let, how is it come to pass,
that Popes have enterprised to depose Philip the Fair, Lewis the XII. and
Elizabeth my predecessor of happy memory; (to let pass others) in whom
experience has well proved, how great inequality was between their
strengths? Yea, for the most part from thence grow most grievous troubles and
wars, which justly recoyle and light upon his own head; as happened to
Gregory the VII. and Boniface the VIII. This no doubt is the reason, wherefore
the Pope never sets in (for fear of such inconveniences) to blast a King with
lightning and thunder of deposition, but when he perceiues the troubled waters
of the Kingdom by some strong faction settled in his Estate; or when the King
is confined, and bordered by some Prince more potent, who thirsts after the
prey, and is ever gaping for some occasion to pick a quarrel. The King
standing in such estate, is it not as easy for the Pope to pull him down, as
it is for a man with one hand to thrust down a tottering wall, when the
groundsil is rotten, the studdes vnpind and nodding or bending toward the
ground? But if the King shall bear down and break the faction within the
Realm; if he shall get withal the upper hand of his enemies out of the
Kingdom; then the holy Father presents him with pardons never sued for, never
asked; and in a fathers indulgence forsooth, gives him leave still to hold the
Kingdom, that he was not able by all his force to wrest and wring out of his
hand, no more then the clubbe of Hercules out of his fist. How many worthy
Princes, incensed by the Pope, to conspire against Sovereign Lords their
Masters, and by open rebellion to work some change in their Estates, have
miscarried in the action, with loss of life, or honor, or both? For example;
Rodulphus Duke of Sueuia was eg'd on by the Pope, against Henry IIII. of that
name, Emperor. How many massacres, how many desolations of cities and towns,
how many bloody battles ensued thereupon? Let histories be searched, let just
accounts be taken, and beside sieges laid to cities, it will appear by true
computation, that Henry IIII. and Frederic the I. fought above threescore
battles, in defense of their own right against enemies of the Empire, stirred
up to arms by the Popes of Rome. How much Christian blood was then split in
these bloody battles, it passes man's wit, pen, or tongue to express. And
to give a little touch unto matters at home; does not his Holiness understand
right well the weakness of Papists in my Kingdom? Does not his Holiness
nevertheless animate my Papists to rebellion, and forbid my Papists to take
the oath of allegiance? Does not his Holiness by this means draw (so much as
in him lies) persecution upon the backs of my Papists as upon rebels, and
expose their life as it were upon the open stall, to be sold at a very easy
price? All these examples, either joint or several, are manifest and evident
proofs, that fear to draw mischief and persecution upon the Church, has
not barred the Popes from thundering against Emperors and Kings, whenever
they conceived any hope, by their fulminations to advance their greatness.

Last of all; I refer the matter to the most possessed with prejudice, even
the very adversaries, whether this doctrine, by which people are trained up in
subjection unto Infidel or heretical Kings, until the subjects be of
sufficient strength to mate their Kings, to expel their Kings, and to depose
them from their Kingdoms, does not incense the Turkish Emperors and other
Infidel Princes, to root out all the Christians that draw in their yoke, as
people that wait only for a fit occasion to rebel, and to take themselves
engaged for obedience to their Lords, only by constraint and servile fear.
Let us therefore now conclude with Ozius, in that famous Epistle speaking to
Constantius an Arrian heretic: Apud A. than. in Epist. ad solitar. vitam
agentes.
As he that by secret practice or open violence would bereave thee of thy
Empire, should violate Gods ordinance: so be thou touched with fear, least, by
usurping authority over Church matters, thou tumble not headlong into some
heinous crime. Where this holy Bishop has not vouchsafed to insert and mention
the L. Cardinals exception; to wit, the right of the Church always excepted
and saved, when she shall be of sufficient strength to shake off the yoke of
Emperors. Neither speaks the same holy Bishop of private persons alone, or men
of some particular condition and calling; but he sets down a general rule
for all degrees, never to impeach Imperial Majesty upon any pretext whatsoever.

As his Lordships first reason drawn from weakness is exceeding weak: The 2.
reas.
so is that which the L. Cardinal takes up in the next place: Page 77.
He tells us there is very great difference between Pagan Emperors, and
Christian Princes: Pagan Emperors who never did homage to Christ, who never
were by their subjects received, with condition to acknowledge perpetual
subjection unto the Empire of Christ; who never were bound by oath and mutual
contract between Prince and subject. Christian Princes who slide back by
Apostasy, degenerate by Arrianisme, or fall away by Mahometisme. Touching the
latter of these two, (as his Lordshippe says) If they shall as it were take an
oath, and make a vow contrary to their first oath and vow made and taken when
they were installed, and contrary to the condition under which they received
the Scepter of their Fathers; if they withal shall turn persecutors of the
Catholic religion; touching these I say, the L. Cardinal holds, that without
question they may be removed from their Kingdoms. He tells us not by whom,
but every where he means by the Pope. Touching Kings deposed by the Pope
under pretense of stupidity, as Childeric; or of matrimonial causes, as Philip
I. or for collating of benefices, as Philip the Fair; not one word. By that
point he easily glideth, and shuffles it up in silence, for fear of distasting
the Pope on the one side, or his auditors on the other.

Now in alleging this reason, his Lordship makes all the world a witness,
that in deposing of Kings, the Pope has no eye of regard to the benefit and
security of the Church. For such Princes as never sucked other milk then that
of Infidelity, and persecution of Religion, are no less noisome and
pernicious vermin to the Church, then if they had sucked of the Churches
breasts. And as for the greatness of the sin or offense, it seems to me
there is very little difference in the matter. For a Prince that never did
swear any religious obedience to Jesus Christ, is bound no less to such
obedience, then if he had taken a solemn oath. As the son that rebelliously
stands up against his father, is in equal degree of sin, whether he has
sworn or not sworn obedience to his father: because he is bound to such
obedience, not by any voluntary contract or covenant, but by the law of
Nature. The commandment of God to kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.
whom the Father has confirmed and ratified King of Kings, does equally bind
all Kings, as well Pagans as Christians. On the other side, who denies, who
doubts, that Constantius Emperor at his first step or entrance into the
Empire, did not swear and bind himself by solemn vow, to keep the rules
and to maintain the precepts of the Orthodox faith, or that he did not receive
his fathers Empire upon such condition? This notwithstanding, the Bishop of
Rome pulled not Constantius from his Imperial throne, but Constantius removed
the Bishop of Rome from his Papal See. And were it so, that an oath taken by a
King at his consecration, and after violated, is a sufficient cause for the
Pope to depose an Apostate or heretical Prince; then by good consequence the
Pope may in like sort depose a King, who being neither dead in Apostasy, nor
sick of heresy, does neglect only the due administration of justice to his
loyal subjects. For his oath taken at consecration imports likewise, that he
shall minister justice to his people. A point wherein the holy Father is held
short by the L. Cardinal, who dares prescribe new laws to the Pope, and
presumes to limit his fullness of power, within certain meeres and head-lands,
extending the Popes power only to the deposing of Christian Kings, when they
turn Apostats forsaking the Catholic faith; and not such Princes as never
breathed any thing but pure Paganism, and never served under the colors of
Jesus Christ. Mean while his Lordship forgets, that King Attabaliba was
deposed by the Pope from his Kingdom of Peru, and the said Kingdom was
conferred upon the King of Spain, though the said poor King of Peru, never
forsook his heathen superstition; and though the turning of him out of his
terrestrial Kingdom was no way to convert him unto the faith of Christ. Yea
his Lordship a little after tells us himself, Page 77.
that Be the Turks possession in the conquests that he makes over Christians
never so ancient, yet by no long tract of time whatsoever, can he gain so
much as a thumbes breadth of prescription: that is to say, the Turk for all
that is but a disseisor, one that violently and wilfully keeps an other man
from his own, and by good right may be dispossessed of the same: whereas
notwithstanding the Turkish Emperors never favored nor sauoured
Christianity. Let us run over the examples of Kings whom the Pope has
dared and presumed to depose; and hardly will any one be found, of whom it may
be truly avouched, that he has taken an oath contrary to his oath of
subjection to Jesus Christ, or that he has wilfully cast himself into
Apostaticall defection.

And certes to any man that weighs the matter with due consideration, it will
be found apparently false, that Kings of France have been received of their
subjects at any time, with condition to serve Jesus Christ. They were actually
Kings before they came forth to the solemnity of their sacring, before they
used any stipulation or promise to their subjects. For in hereditary Kingdoms,
(nothing more certain, nothing more uncontrollable) the Kings death instantly
makes livery and seisin of the Royalty, to his next successor. Nor is it
material to reply, that a King succeeding by right of inheritance, takes an
oath in the person of his predecessor. For every oath is personal, proper to
the person by whom it is taken: and to God no living creature can swear, that
his own son or his heir shall prove an honest man. Well may the father,
and with great solemnity, promise that he will exhort his heir apparent with
all his power and the best of his endeauours, to fear God and to practice
piety. If the fathers oath be agreeable to the duties of godliness, the son
is bound thereby, whether he take an oath, or take none. On the other side, if
the fathers oath come from the puddles of impiety, the son is bound thereby
to go the contrary way. If the fathers oath concern things of indifferent
nature, and such as by the variety or change of times, become either
pernicious or impossible; then it is free for the Kings next successor and
heir, prudently to fit and proportion his laws unto the times present, and to
the best benefit of the Commonwealth.

When I call these things to mind with some attention, I am out of all doubt
his Lordship is very much to seek, in the right sense and nature of his Kings
oath taken at his Coronation, to defend the Church and to persevere in the
Catholic faith. For what is more unlike and less credible then this conceit,
that after Clouis had reigned 15. years in the state of Paganism, and then
received holy Baptism, he should become Christian upon this condition, That in
case he should afterward revolt from the faith, it should then be in the
power of the Church, to turn him out of his Kingdom? But had any such
conditional stipulation been made by Clouis, in very good earnest and truth;
yet would he never have intended, that his deposing should be the act of the
Roman Bishop, but rather of those (whether Peers, or people, or whole body of
the State) by whom he had been advanced to the Kingdom. Let us hear the
truth, and this is the truth: It is far from the customarie use in France,
for their Kings to take any such oath, or to use any such stipulation with
their subjects. If any King or Prince wheresoever, does use an oath or solemn
promise in these express terms, Let me loose my Kingdom, or my life, be
that day my last both for life and reign, when I shall first revolt from the
Christian religion: by these words he calls upon God for vengeance, he uses
imprecation against his own head: but he makes not his Crown to stoop by
this means, to any power in the Pope, or in the Church, or in the people.

And touching inscriptions upon coins, of which point his Lordship speaks by
the way; verily the nature of the money or coin (the stamping and minting
whereof is one of the marks of the Prince his dignity and Sovereignty) is not
changed by bearing the letters of Christ's name, on the reuerse or on the front.
Such characters of Christ's name, are aduertisements and instructions to the
people, that in showing and yielding obedience unto the King, they are obedient
unto Christ; and those Princes likewise, who are so well advised to have the
most sacred names inscribed and printed in their coins, do take and
acknowledge Jesus Christ for supreme King of Kings. The said holy characters
are no representation or profession, that any Kings Crown depends upon the
Church, or can be taken away by the Pope. The L. Cardinal indeed so bears us
in hand. But he inuerts the words of Jesus Christ, and wrings them out of the
right joint. For Christ without all ambiguity and circumlocution, by the image
and inscription of the money, does directly and expressly prove Caesar to be
free from subjection, and entirely Sovereign. Now if such a supreme and
Sovereign Prince, at any time shall bandie and combine against God, and thereby
shall become a rebellious and perfidious Prince; doubtless for such disloyalty
he shall deserve, that God would take from him all hope of life eternal: and
yet hereby neither Pope nor people has reason to be puffed up, in their power to
deprive him of his temporal Kingdom.

The L. Cardinal says besides: Page 76.
The champions of the Popes power to depose Kings, do expound that
commandment of S. Paul, whereby every soul is made subject unto the superior
powers, to be a prouisionall precept or caution accommodated to the times; and
to stand in force, only until the Church was grown in strength unto such a
scantling, that it might be in the power of the faithful, without shaking the
pillars of Christian state, to stand in the breach, and cautelously to provide
that none but Christian Princes might be received: according to the Law in
Deuteronomy. Thou shall make thee a King from among thy brethren.The reason whereupon
they ground is this: Because Paul says, It is a shame for Christians to be
judged under unjust Infidels, in matters or business, which they had one against
an other. For which inconvenience, Justinian after provided by Law; when he
ordained that no Infidel nor heretic might be admitted to the administration
of justice in the Commonwealth.

In which words of the Cardinal, the word Received, is to be observed
especially and above the rest. For by chopping in that word, he does nimbly and
with a trick of legier-de-main, transform or change the very state of the
question. For the question or issue of the cause, is not about receiving,
establishing, or choosing a Prince; (as in those Nations where the Kingdom
goes by election) but about doing homage to the Prince, when God has settled
him in the Kingdom, and has cast it upon a Prince by hereditary succession.
For that which is written, Thou shall make thee a King, does no way concern
and touch the people of France in these days: because the making of their King
has not of long time been tied to their election. The passage therefore in
Deuteron* makes nothing to the purpose; no more then does Justinians law. For
it is our free and voluntary confession, that a Christian Prince is to have
special care of the Laws, and to provide that no unbeliever be made Lord
Cheife-Iustice of the Land, that no Infidel be put in trust with
administration of justice to the people. But here the issue does not direct us
to speak of Delegates, of subordinate Magistrates, and such as are in
Commission from the Prince, but of the supreme Prince himself, the Sovereign
Magistrate ordained by nature, and confirmed by succession. Our question is,
whether such a Prince can be vnthroned by the Pope, by whom he was not placed
in the Throne; and whether the Pope can despoile such a Prince, of that
Royalty which was never given him by the Pope, under any pretended color and
imputation of heresy, of stupiditie, or infringing the privileges of
Monasteries, or transgressing the laws and lines of holy matrimony.

Now that Saint Paul's commandment which binds every soul in the bands of
subjection unto the higher powers, is no precept given by way of prouiso, and
only to serve the times, but a standing and a perpetual rule, it is hereby
more then manifest. S. Paul has grounded this commandment upon certain
reasons, not only constant and permanent by their proper nature, but likewise
necessary for every state, condition, and revolution of the times. His reasons;
Because all powers are ordained of God: because resisting of powers is
resisting the ordinance of God: because the Magistrate bears the sword to
execute justice: because obedience and subjection to the Magistrate is
necessary, not only for fear of his wrath, or fear of punishment, but also
for conscience sake. It is therefore a case grounded upon conscience, it is not
a law devised by humane wisdom; it is not fashionable to the qualities of the
times. Apostolical instructions for the right informing of manners, are not
changeable according to times and seasons. To use the L. Cardinals language,
and to follow his fancy in the matter, is to make way for two pestiferous
mischeifes: First, let it be free and lawful for Christians, to hold the
commanding rules of God for prouisionall cautions, and what follows? Men are
lead into the broad way of impiety, and the whole Scripture is wiped of all
authority. Then again, for the other mischeife: The glorious triumphs of most
blessed Martyrs in their unspeakable torments and sufferings, by the L.
Cardinals position shall be judged unworthy to wear the title and Crown of
Martyrdom. How so? Because (according to his new fiction) they have given place
to the violence and fury of heathen Magistrates, not in obedience to the
necessary and certain commandment of God, but rather to a prouisionall
direction, accommodated to the humors of the times. And therefore the L.
Cardinal has used none other clay wherewith to dawbe over his devise, but
plain falsification of holy Scripture. For he makes the Apostle say to the
Corinthians, It is a shame for Christians to be judged under unbelieving
Magistrates: whereas in that whole context of Paul, there is no such matter.
For when the Apostle says, I speak it even to your shame; (...).
he does not say it is a shame for a believer to be judged under an Infidel,
but he makes the^ ashamed of their ungodly course, and unchristian practice,
that in suing and impleading one an other, they laid their actions of
contention in the Courts of unbelieving Judges. The shame was not in bearing
that yoke which God had charged their necks withal, but in devouring and
eating up one an other with writs of habeas corpus, and with other processes;
as also in uncovering the shame, in laying open the shameful parts and prankes
played by Christians, before Infidels, to the great scandal of the Church.
Here I say the L. Cardinal is taken in a trick of manifest falsification. If
therefore a King when he falls to play the heretic, deserves to be deposed;
why shall not a Cardinal when he falls to play the iuggler with holy
Scripture, deserve to be disrobed?

Mean while the indifferent Reader is to consider, how greatly this doctrine
is prejudicial, and how full of danger, to Christians living under heretical
or Pagan Princes. For make it once known to the Emperor of Turks, let him
once get never so little a smacke of this doctrine; that Christians living
under his Empire do take Gods commandment, for obedience to Princes whom they
count Infidels, to be only a prouisionall precept for a time, and wait every
hour for all occasions to shake off the yoke of his bondage; doubtless he
will never spare with all speed to root the whole stock, with all the arms
and branches of Christians, out of his dominions. Add hereunto the L.
Cardinals former determination; that possession kept never so long by the Turk
in his Conquests over Christians, gains him not by so long tract of time one
inch of prescription; and it will appear, that his Lordship puts the Turkish
Emperor in mind, and by his instruction leads the said Emperor as it were by
the hand, to have no manner of affiance in his Christian subjects; and withal
to afflict his poor Christians with all sorts of most grievous and cruel
torments. In this regard the poor Christians of Graecia and Syria, must needs
be very little beholden to his Lordship. As for my self, and my Popish
subjects, to whom I am no less then an heretic forsooth; am not I by this
doctrine of the Cardinal, pricked and whetted against my natural inclination,
to turn clemency into rigor; seeing that by his doctrine my subjects are
made to believe, they owe me subjection only by way of prouiso, and with
waiting the occasion to work my utter destruction and final ruin? the rather,
because Turks, miscreants, and heretics are mashalled by the Cardinal in the
same rank; and heretics are counted worse, yea more justly deposeable, then
Turks and Infidels, as irreligious breakers and violaters of their oath? Who
sees not here how great indignity is offered to me a Christian King?
paralleld with Infidels, reputed worse then a Turk, taken for an usurper of my
Kingdoms, reckoned a Prince, to whom subjects owe a forced obedience by way of
provision, until they shall have means to shake off the yoke, and to bare my
temples of the Crown, which never can be pulled from the sacred Head, but with
loss of the head it self?

Touching the wars undertaken by the French, English, and Germans, in their
expedition for Jerusalem, it appears by the issue and event of the said
wars, that God approved them not for honorable. That expedition was a
devise and invention of the Pope, whereby he might come to be infeoffed in the
Kingdoms of Christian Princes. For then al such of the French, English, or
Germans, as undertook the Croisade, became the Popes mere vassals. Then all
robbers by the high way side, adulterers, cutthroats, and base bankerupts,
were exempted from the Secular and Civil power, their causes were sped in
Consistorian Courts, so soon as they had gotten the Cross on their cassocks
or coat-armours, and had vowed to serve in the expedition for the Leuant. Then
for the Popes pleasure and at his commandment, whole countries were emptied
of their Nobles and common soldiers. Then they made long marches into the
Leuant. For what purpose? Only to die upon the points of the Saracens pikes,
or by the edge of their barbarous courtelasses, battle-axes, fauchions, and
other weapons, without any benefit and advantage to themselves or others. Then
the Nobles were driven to sell their goodly Manors, and ancient demaines to
the Churchmen, at under prises and low rates; the very root from which a
great part of the Church and Churchmens revenues has sprung and grown to so
great height. See the Bull of Innoc. 3. at the end of the Later. Conc.
Then, to be short, his most bountiful Holiness gave to any of the
riffe-raffe-ranke, that would undertake this expedition into the Holy land, a
free and full pardon for all his sins, besides a degree of glory above the
vulgar in the Celestial Paradise. Military virtue, I confess, is commendable
and honorable; provided it be employed for justice, and that generous
nobleness of valiant spirits be not under a color and shadow of piety, fetched
over with some casts or devises of Italian cunning.

Now let us observe the wisdom of the L. Cardinal through this whole
discourse. His Lordship is pleased in his Oration, to cite certain few
passages of Scripture, culls and picks them out for the most graceful in
show: leaves out of his list whole troops of honorable witnesses, upon whose
testimony, the Popes themselves and their principal adherents do build his
power to depose Kings, and to give order for all Temporal causes. Take a sight
of their best and most honorable witnesses. Peter said to Christ, See here two
swords; and Christ answered, It is sufficient. Christ said to Peter, Ier. 1.
Put up thy sword into thy sheath. God said to Jeremy, I have established thee
over Nations and Kingdoms. 1. Cor. 2.
Paul said to the Corinthians, The spiritual man discerns all things. Christ
said to his Apostles, Whatsoever ye shall loose upon earth: by which words the
Pope has power forsooth to loose the oath of allegiance. Moses said, In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Extauag. Vnam Sanctam.
Upon these passages, Pope Boniface 8. grapling and tugging with Philip the
Fair, does build his Temporal power. Other Popes and Papists avouch the like
authorities. Christ said of himself, All things are given to me of my Father,
and all power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. The Devils said, If thou
cast us out, send us into this herd of swine. Christ said to his Disciples, Ye
shall find the colt of an ass bound, loose it and bring it unto me. By these
places the adversaries prove, that Christ disposed of Temporal matters; and
infer thereupon, why not Christ's Vicar as well as Christ himself. The places
and testimonies now following are very express: In stead of thy fathers shall
be thy children: Psalm. 45.
thou shall make them Princes through all the earth. Item, Jesus Christ not
only commanded Peter to feed his lambs; but said also to Peter, Arise, kill,
and eat: the pleasant gloss, the rare invention of the L. Cardinal Baronius.
Ioh. 12.
Christ said to the people, If I were lift up from the earth, I will draw all
things unto me. Who lets, what hinders this place from fitting the Pope? Paul
said to the Corinthians, Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? how much
more then the things that pertain unto this life? A little after, Have not we
power to eat? These are the chief passages, on which as upon maine arches,
the roof of Papal Monarchy, concerning Temporal causes, has rested for
three or four ages past. And yet his Lordship durst not repose any confidence
in their firm standing to bear up the said roof of Temporal Monarchy, for
fear of making his auditors to burst with laughter. A wise part without
question, if his Lordship had not defiled his lips before, with a more
ridiculous argument drawn from the leprosy and dry scab.

Let us now by way of comparison behold Jesus Christ paying tribute unto
Caesar, and the Pope making Caesar to pay him tribute: Jesus Christ persuading
the Jews to pay tribute unto an heathen Emperor, and the Pope dispensing with
subjects for their obedience to Christian Emperors: Jesus Christ refusing to
arbitrate a controversy of inheritance partable between two private parties,
and the Pope thrusting in himself without warrant or Commission to be absolute
Judge in the deposing of Kings: Jesus Christ professing that his Kingdom is
not of this world, and the Pope establishing himself in a terrene Empire. In
like manner the Apostles forsaking all their goods to follow Christ, and the
Pope robbing Christians of their goods; the Apostles persecuted by Pagan
Emperors, and the Pope now setting his foot on the very throat of Christian
Emperors, then proudly treading Imperial Crowns under his feet. By this
comparison, the L. Cardinals allegation of Scripture in favor of his Master
the Pope, is but a kind of puppet-play, to make Jesus Christ a mocking stock,
rather then to satisfy his auditors with any sound precepts and wholesome
instructions. Hereof he seems to give some inckling himself. For after he
has been plentiful in citing authorities of Scripture, and of new Doctors,
which make for the Popes power to depose Kings; at last he comes in with a
fair and open confession, Page 85.
that neither by divine Oracles, nor by honorable antiquity, this
controversy has been yet determined: and so pulls down in a word with one
hand, the frame of work that he had built and set up before with an other:
discovering withal the reluctation and privy checkes of his own conscience.

There yet remains one objection, the knot whereof the L. Cardinal in a
manner sweateth to untie. Page 84.
His words be these: The champions for the negative fly to the analogy of
other proceedings and practices in the Chruch. They affirm that private
persons, masters or owners of goods and possessions among the common people,
are not deprived of their goods for heresy; and consequently that Princes much
more should not for the same crime be deprived of their estates. For answer to
this reason, he brings in the defendants of deposition, speaking after this
manner: In the Kingdom of France the strict execution of laws decreed in Court
against heretics, is favorably suspended and stopped, for the preservation
of peace and public tranquillity. He says elsewhere, Conniuence is used
toward these heretics in regard of their multitude, because a notable part of
the French Nation and State is made all of heretics. I suppose that out of
special charity, he would have those heretics of his own making, forewarned
what courteous use and entreaty they are to expect; when he affirms that
execution of the laws is but suspended. For indeed suspensions hold but for a
time. But in a cause of that nature and importance, I dare promise my self,
that my most honored Brother the King of France, will make use of other
counsel: will rather seek the amity of his neighbor Princes, and the peace
of his Kingdom: will bear in mind the great and faithful service of those,
who in matter of religion dissent from his Majesty, as of the only men that
have preserved and saved the Crown for the King his Father, of most glorious
memory. I am persuaded my Brother of France will believe, that his liege
people pretended by the L. Cardinal to be heretics, are not half so bad as
my Roman Catholic subjects, who by secret practices vnder-mine my life, serve
a foreign Sovereign, are discharged by his Bulls of their obedience due to me
their natural Sovereign, are bound (by the maxims and rules published and
maintained in favor of the Pope, before this full and famous assembly of the
Estate at Paris; if the said maxims be of any weight and authority) to hold
me for no lawful King, are there taught and instructed that Paul's commandment
concerning subjection unto the higher powers, adverse to their professed
religion, is only a prouisionall precept, framed to the times, and watching
for the opportunity to shake off the yoke. All which notwithstanding, I deal
with such Romane-Catholiks by the rules and ways of Princely clemency; their
heinous and pernicious error, in effect no less then the capital crime of
high treason, I use to call some disease or distemper of the mind. Last of all,
I believe my said Brother of France will set down in his tables, as in record,
how little he stands engaged to the Lord Cardinal in this behalf. For those
of the reformed Religion profess and proclaim, that next under God, they owe
their preservation and safety to the wisdom and benignity of their Kings.
But now comes the Cardinal, and he seeks to steal this persuasion out of
their hearts: He tells them in open Parliament, and without any going about
bushes, that all their welfare and security stands in their multitude, and
in the fear which others conceive to trouble the State, by the strict
execution of laws against heretics.

He adds moreover, Note by the way that here the Church of Rome is called a
sect.
that Jn case a third sect should peep out and grow up in France, the
professors thereof should suffer confiscation of their goods, with loss of
life it self: as has been practiced at Geneua against Seruetus, and in
England against Arrians. My answer is this, That punishments for heretics,
duly and according to law convicted, are set down by decrees of the civil
Magistrate, bearing rule in the country where the said heretics inhabit, and
not by any ordinances of the Pope. I say withal, the L. Cardinal has no
reason to match and parallel the Reformed Churches with Seruetus and the
Arrians. For those heretics were powerfully convicted by Gods word, and
lawfully condemned by the ancient General Councils, where they were permitted
and admitted to plead their own cause in person. But as for the truth
professed by me, and those of the reformed religion, it was never yet hissed
out of the Schools, nor cast out of any Council, (like some Parliament bills)
where both sides have been heard with like indifferency. Yea, what Council
soever has been offered unto us in these latter times, it has been proposed
with certain presuppositions: as, That his Holiness (being a party in the
cause, and consequently to come under judgment as it were to the bar upon
his trial) shall be the Judge of Assize with Commission of oyer and
determiner: it shall be celebrated in a city of no safe access, without safe
conduct or conuoy to come or go at pleasure, and without danger: it shall be
assembled of such persons with free suffrage and voice, as uphold this rule,
(which they have already put in practice against John Hus and Hierom of Prage)
that faith given, and oath taken to an heretic, must not be observed.

Now then to resume our former matter; If the Pope hitherto has never
presumed, for pretended heresy to confiscate by sentence, either the lands or
the goods of private persons, or common people of the French Nation, wherefore
should he dare to dispossess Kings of their Royal Thrones? wherefore takes he
more upon him over Kings, then over private persons? wherefore shall the sacred
heads of Kings be more churlishly, uncivilly, and rigorously handled, then the
hoods of the meanest people? Here the L. Cardinal in stead of a direct answer,
breaks out of the lists, alleging clean from the purpose examples of
heretics punished, not by the Pope, but by the civil Magistrate of the
Country. But Bellarmine speaks to the point with a more free and open heart:
he is absolute and resolute in this opinion, that his Holiness has plenarie
power to dispose all Temporal estates and matters in the whole world: I am
confident (says Bellarmine) and I speak it with assurance, Contr. Barclaium.
cap. 27.
that our Lord Jesus Christ in the days of his mortality, had power to
dispose of all Temporal things; yea, to strippe Soueraign Kings and absolute
Lords of their Kingdoms and Seignories: and without all doubt has granted and
left even the same power unto his Vicar, to make use thereof whenever he
shall think it necessary for the salvation of souls. And so his Lordship
speaks without exception of any thing at all. For who does not know, that
Jesus Christ had power to dispose no less of private men's possessions, then of
whole Realms and Kingdoms at his pleasure, if it had been his pleasure to
display the ensigns of his power? The same fullness of power is likewise in
the Pope. In good time: belike his Holiness is the sole heir of Christ, in
whole and in part. The last Lateran Council fineth a Laic that speaks
blasphemy, Sess. 9.
for the first offense (if he be a gentleman) at 25. ducats, and at 50. for the
second. It presupposes and takes it for granted, that the Church may rifle
and ransacke the purses of private men, and cast lots for their goods. The
Council of Trent diggeth as deep for the same vein of gold and silver. It
ordaines; That Emperors, Sess. 25 cap. 19.
Kings, Dukes, Princes, and Lords of cities, castles, and territories holding
of the Church, in case they shall assign any place within their limits or
liberties for the duel between two Christians, shall be deprived of the said
city, castle, or place, where such duel shall be performed, they holding the
said place of the Church by any kind of tenure: that all other Estates held in
fee where the like offense shall be committed, shall forthwith fall and become
forfeited to their immediate and next Lords: that all goods, possessions, and
estates, as well of the combatants themselves, as of their seconds shall be
confiscate. This Council does necessarily presuppose, it lies in the hand and
power of the Church, to dispose of all the lands and estates, held in fee
throughout all Christendom; (because the Church forsooth can take from one,
and give unto an other all estates held in fee whatsoever, as well such as hold
of the Church, as of secular Lords) and to make ordinances for the confiscation
of all private persons goods. By this Canon the Kingdom of Naples has need to
look well unto it self. For one duel it may fall into the Exchecker of the
Roman Church: because that Kingdom pays a Relief to the Church, as a
Royalty or Seignorie that holds in fee of the said Church. And in France
there is not one Lordship, not one Manor, not one farm which the Pope by this
means cannot shift over to a new Lord. His Lordship therefore had carried
himself and the cause much better, if in stead of seeking such idle shifts, he
had by a more large assertion maintained the Popes power to dispose of private
men's possessions, with no less right and authority then of Kingdoms. For
what color of reason can be given, for making the Pope Lord of the whole, and
not of the parts? for making him Lord of the forest in gross, and not of the
trees in parcel? for making him Lord of the whole house, and not of the
parlour or the dining chamber?

His Lordship alleges yet an other reason, but of no better weight: Between
the power of private owners over their goods, and the power of Kings over their
estates, there is no little difference. For the goods of private persons are
ordained for their owners, and Princes for the benefit of their Commonwealths.
Hear me now answer. If this Cardinal-reason has any force to infer, that a
King may lawfully be deprived of his Kingdom for heresy, but a private person
cannot for the same crime be turned out of his mansion house; then it shall
follow by the same reason, that a Father for the same cause may be deprived of
all power over his children, but a private owner cannot be deprived of his
goods in the like case: because goods are ordained for the benefit and comfort
of their owners, but fathers are ordained for the good and benefit of their
children. But most certain it is, that Kings representing the image of God in
earth and Gods place, have a better and closer seat in their chaires of Estate,
then any private persons have in the saddle of their inheritances and
patrimonies, which are daily seen for slight causes, to flit and to fall into
the hands of new Lords. Whereas a Prince being the Head, cannot be loosed in
the proper joint, nor dismounted; like a cannon when the carriage thereof is
unlocked, without a sore shaking and a most grievous dislocation of all the
members, yea without subuerting the whole body of the State, whereby private
persons without number are inwrapped together in the same ruin: even as the
lower shrubs and other brush-wood are crushed in pieces altogether by the fall
of a great oak. But suppose his Lordships reason were somewhat ponderous and
solid withal, yet a King (which would not be forgotten) is endowed not only
with the Kingdom, but also with ancient desmenes and Crownelands, for which
none can be so simple to say, the King was ordained and created King; which
nevertheless he loses when he loses his Crown. Admit again this reason
were of some pith, to make mighty Kings more easily deposeable then private
persons from their patrimonies; yet all this makes nothing for the deriuing and
fetching of deposition from the Popes Consistory. What he never conferred, by
what right or power can he claim to take away?

But see here no doubt a sharp and subtle difference put by the L. Cardinal
between a Kingdom, and the goods of private persons. Goods, as his Lordship
says, are without life: they can be constrained by no force, by no example, by
no inducement of their owners to loose eternal life: Subjects by their Princes
may. Now I am of this contrary belief, That an heretical owner, or master of
a family, has greater power and means withal, to seduce his own servants and
children, then a Prince has to pervert his own subjects; and yet for the
contagion of heresy, and for corrupt religion, children are not removed from
their parents, nor servants are taken away from their masters. Histories abound
with examples of most flourishing Churches, under a Prince of contrary
religion. And if things without life or soul are with less danger left in an
heretics hands; why then shall not an heretical King with more facility and
less danger keep his Crown, his Royal charge, his lands, his customs, his
imposts? etc. For will any man, except he be out of his wits, affirm these
things to have any life or soul? Or why shall it be counted folly, to leave a
sword in the hand of a mad Bedlam? Is not a sword also without life and soul?
For my part, I should rather be of this mind; that possession of things
without reason, is more dangerous and pernicious in the hands of an evil
Master, then the possession of things endued with life and reason. For things
without life lack both reason and judgment, how to exempt and free themselves
from being instruments in evil and wicked actions, from being employed to
ungodly and abominable uses. I will not deny, that an heretical Prince is a
plague, a pernicious and mortal sickness to the souls of his subjects. But a
breach made by one mischief, must not be filled up with a greater
inconvenience. An error must not be shocked and shouldered with disloialtie,
nor heresy with perjury, nor impiety with sedition and armed rebellion
against God and the King. God, who uses to try and to school his Church, will
never forsake his Church: nor has need to protect his Church by any
proditorious and prodigious practices of perfidious Christians. For he makes
his Church to be like the burning bush. In the midst of the fire and flames
of persecutions, he will provide that she shall not be consumed, because he
stands in the midst of his Church. And suppose there may be some just cause
for the French, to play the rebels against their King; yet will it not follow,
that such rebellious motions are to be raised by the bellows of the Roman
Bishop, to whose Pastoral charge and office it is nothing proper, to
intermeddle in the civil affairs of foreign Kingdoms.

Here is the sum and substance of the L. Cardinals whole discourse, touching
his pretense of the second inconvenience. Which discourse he has closed with a
remarkable confession: to wit, that neither by the authority of holy
Scripture, nor by the testimony and verdict of the Primitive Church, there has
been any full decision of this question. In regard whereof he falls into
admiration, that Lay People have gone so far in audaciousnesse, as to labor
that a doubtful doctrine might for ever pass current, and be taken for a new
article of faith. What a shame, what a reproach is this? how full of scandal?
for so his Lordship is pleased to cry out. This breaks into the seueralls and
enclosures of the Church: this lets in whole herds of heresies to grase in her
green and sweet pastures. On the other side, without any such Rhetorical
outcries, I simply affirm: It is a reproach, a scandal, a crime of rebellion,
for a subject having his full charge and load of benefits, in the new spring
of his Kings tender age, his King-fathers blood yet reeking, and upon the point
of an address for a double match with Spain; in so honorable an assembly, to
seek the thraldom of his Kings Crown, to play the captious in cauilling about
causes of his Kings deposing, to give his former life the lie with shame enough
in his old age, and to make himself a common byword, under the name of a
Problematicall Martyr; one that offers himself to faggot and fire for a point
of doctrine but problematically handled, that is, distrustfully and only by
way of doubtful and questionable discourse: yea for a point of doctrine, in
which the French (as he pretends) are permitted to thwart and cross his
Holiness in judgment, provided they speak in it as in a point not certain and
necessary, but only doubtful and probable.

The third Jnconvenience examined.
THE third Inconvenience pretended by the L. Cardinal to grow by admitting
this Article of the third Estate, Page 87.
is flourished in these colors: It would breed and bring forth an open and
vnauoideable schism against his Holiness, and the rest of the whole
Ecclesiastical body. For thereby the doctrine long approved and ratified by
the Pope and the rest of the Church, should now be taxed and condemned of
impious and most detestable consequence; yea the Pope and the Church, even in
faith and in points of salvation, should be reputed and believed to be
erroniously persuaded. Hereupon his Lordship gives himself a large scope of
the raines, to frame his elegant amplifications against schisms and
schismatikes.

Now to mount so high, and to fly in such place upon the wings of
amplification for this Inconvenience, what is it else but magnifically to
report and imagine a mischeife by many degrees greater then the mischeife is?
The L. Cardinal is in a great error, if he make himself believe, that other
nations will make a rent or separation from the communion of the French, because
the French stand to it tooth and nail, that French Crowns are not liable or
obnoxious to Papal deposition; howsoever there is no schism that imports
not separation of communion. The most illustrious Republike of Venice, has
embarked herself in this quarrel against his Holiness* has played her
prize, and carried away the weapons with great honor. Does she,
notwithstanding her triumph in the cause, forbear to participate with all her
neighbors in the same Sacraments? does she live in schism with all the rest of
the Roman Church? No such matter. When the L. Cardinal himself not many
years past, maintained the Kings cause, and stood honorably for the Kings
right against the Popes Temporal usurpations, did he then take other Churches
to be schismatic, or the rotten members of Antechrist? Believe it who list,
I believe my Creed. Nay, his Lordship tells us himself a little after, that
his Holiness gives the French free scope, to maintain either the affirmative
or negative of this question. And will his Holiness hold them schismatikes,
that dissent from his opinion and judgment in a subject or cause esteemed
problematicall? Far be it from his Holiness. The King of Spain, reputed the
Popes right arm, never gave the Pope cause by any act or other declaration, to
conceive that he acknowledged himself deposeable by the Pope for heresy, or
Tyranny, or stupidity. But being well assured the Pope stands in greater
fear of his arm, then he does of the Popes head and shoulders, he never
troubles his own head about our question. More, when the book of Cardinal
Baronius was come forth, in which book the Kingdom of Naples is decryed and
publicly discredited (like false money) touching the quality of a Kingdom,
and attributed to the King of Spain, not as true proprietary thereof, but only
as an Estate held in fee of the Roman Church; the King made no bones to
condemn and to banish the said book out of his dominions. The holy Father was
contented to put up his Catholic Sons proceeding to the Cardinals disgrace,
never opened his mouth against the King, never declared or noted the King to
be schismatic. He waits perhaps for some fitter opportunity; when the
Kingdom of Spain groaning under the burdens of intestine dissentions and
troubles, he may without any danger to himself give the Catholic King a
Bishops mate. Yea, the L. Cardinal himself is better seen in the humors and
inclinations of the Christian world, then to be grossly persuaded, that in the
Kingdom of Spain, and in the very heart of Rome it self there be not many,
which either make it but a jest, or else take it in foul scorn, to hear the
Popes power over the Crowns of Kings once named: especially since the Venetian
Republike has put his Holiness to the worse in the same cause, and cast him
in Law.

What needed the L. Cardinal then, by casting up such mounts and trenches, by
heaping one amplification upon an other, to make schism look with such a
terrible and hideous aspect? Who knows not how great an offense, how heinous a
crime it is to quarter, not Jesus Christ's coat, but his body, which is the
Church? And what needed such terrifying of the Church with ugliness of
schism, whereof there is neither colorable show, nor possibility?

The next ugly monster, after schism, shaped by the L. Cardinal in the third
supposed and pretended inconvenience, is heresy. His Lordship says for the
purpose: Page 89.
By this Article we are cast headlong into a manifest heresy, as binding us to
confess, that for many ages past the Catholic Church has been banished out
of the whole world. For if the champions of the doctrine contrary to this
Article, do hold an impious and a detestable opinion, repugnant unto Gods
word; then doubtless the Pope for so many hundred years expired, has not been
the head of the Church, but an heretic and the Antechrist. He adds moreover;
That the Church long ago has lost her name of Catholic, and that in France
there has no Church flourished, nor so much as appeared these many and more
then many years: for as much as all the French Doctors for many years
together have stood for the contrary opinion. We can erect and set up no
trophey more honorable for heretics in token of their victory, then to avowe
that Christ's visible Kingdom is perished from the face of the earth, and that
for so many hundred years there has not been any Temple of God, nor any
spouse of Christ, but every where, and all the world over, the Kingdom of
Antechrist, the Synagogue of Satan, the spouse of the Devil, has mightily
prevailed and borne all the sway. Lastly, what stronger engines can these
heretics wish or desire, for the battering and the demolishing of
transubstantiation, of auricular confession, and other like towers of our
Catholic religion, then if it should be granted the Church has decided the
said points without any authority? etc.

Me thinks the Lord Cardinal in the whole draught and course of these words,
does seek not a little to blemish the honor of his Church, and to mark his
religion with a black coal. For the whole frame of his Mother Church is very
easy to be shaken, if by the establishing of this Article she shall come to
final ruin and shall become the Synagoue of Satan. Likewise, Kings are
brought into a very miserable state and condition, if their Sovereignty shall
not stand, if they shall not be without danger of deposition, but by the total
ruin of the Church, and by holding the Pope, whom they serve, to be
Antechrist. The L. Cardinal himself (let him be well sifted) herein does not
credit his own words. For does not his Lordship tell us plain, that neither
by divine testimony, nor by any sentence of the ancient Church, the knot of
this controversy has been untied? again, that some of the French, by the
Popes favorable indulgence, are licensed or tolerated to say their mind, to
deliver their opinion of this question, though contrary to the judgment of
his Holiness; provided they hold it only as problematicall, and not as
necessary? What? Can there be any assurance for the Pope, that he is not
Antechrist; for the Church of Rome, that she is not a Synagogue of Satan, when
a man's assurance is grounded upon wavering and wild vncertanties, without Canon
of Scrpture, without consent or countenance of antiquity, and in a cause which
the Pope with good leave suffers some to toss with winds of problematicall
opinion? It has been showed before, that by Gods word, whereof small
reckoning perhaps is made, by venerable antiquity, and by the French Church in
those times when the Popes power was mounted aloft, the doctrine which teaches
deposing of Kings by the Pope, has been checked and countermaunded. What, did
the French in those days believe, the Church was then swallowed up, and no
where visible or extant in the world? No verily. Those that make the Pope of
Sovereign authority for matters of faith, are not persuaded that in this
cause they are bound absolutely to believe and credit his doctrine. Why so?
Because they take it not for any decree or determination of faith; but for a
point pertaining to the mysteries of State, and a pillar of the Popes Temporal
Monarchy; who has not received any promise from God, that in causes of this
nature he shall not err. For they hold, that error by no means can crawle
or scramble up to the Papal See, so highly mounted; but grant ambition can
scale the highest walls, and climb the loftiest pinnacles of the same See.
They hold withal, that in a case of so special advantage to the Pope, whereby
he is made King of Kings, and as it were the play master or distributer of
Crowns, it is against all reason that he should sit as Judge, to carue out
Kingdoms for his own share. To be short, let his Lordship be assured that he
meets with notorious blocke-heads, more blunt witted then a whetstone, when
they are drawn to believe by his persuasion, that whosoever believes the Pope
has no right nor power to put Kings beside their Thrones, to give and take
away Crowns, are all excluded and barred out of the heavenly Kingdom.

But now follows a worse matter: For they whom the Cardinal reproachfully
calls heretics, have wrought and won his Lordship (as to me seems) to
plead their cause at the bar, and to betray his own cause to these
heretics. For what is it in his Lordship, but plain playing the
Praeuaricator, when he cries so loud, that by admitting and establishing of
this Article, the doctrine of cake-incarnation and privy Confession to a
Priest, is utterly subverted? Let us hear his reason, and willingly accept of
the truth from his lips. The Articles (as his Lordshippe grants) of
Transubstantiation, auricular Confession, and the Popes power to depose Kings,
are all grounded alike upon the same authority. Now he has acknowledged the
Article of the Popes power to depose Kings, is not decided by the Scripture,
nor by the ancient Church, but within the compass of certain ages past, by
the authority of Popes and Councils. Then he goes on well, and inferres with
good reason, that in case the point of the Popes power be weakened, then the
other two points must needs be shaken, and easily overthrown. So that he does
confess the monstrous birth of the breaden-God, and the blind Sacrament or
vain fantasy of auricular confession, are no more conveyed into the Church
by pipes from the springs of sacred Scripture, or from the rivers of the
ancient Church, then that other point of the Popes power over Kings and their
Crowns. Very good: For were they indeed derived from either of those two
heads, that is to say, were they grounded upon the foundation of the first or
second authority; then they could never be shaken by the downfall of the
Popes power to depose Kings. I am well assured, that for using so good a
reason, the world will hold his Lordshippe in suspicion, that he still has
some smacke of his fathers discipline and instruction, who in times past had
the honor to be a Minister of the holy Gospel.

Howbeit he plays not fair, nor uses sincere dealing in his proceeding
against such as he calls heretics; when he casts in their dish, and bears
them in hand they frowardly wrangle for the inuisibilitie of the Church in
earth. For indeed the matter is nothing so. They freely acknowledge a visible
Church. For howsoever the assembly of Gods elect, does make a body not
discernable by man's eye: yet we assuredly believe, and gladly profess, there
never wanted a visible Church in the world; yet only visible to such as make a
part of the same. All that are without see no more but men, they do not see
the said men to be the true Church. We believe moreover of the universal
Church visible, that it is composed of many particular Churches, whereof some
are better fined and more clean from lees and dregs then other: and withal,
we deny the purest Churches to be always the greatest and most visible.

The fourth and last Inconvenience examined.
THE Lord Cardinal before he looks into the last Inconvenience, uses a
certain preamble of his own life past, and services done to the Kings, Henry
the III. and IIII. Touching the latter of which two Kings, his Lordship says
in a strain of boasting, after this manner: I, by the grace of God, or the
grace of God by me rather, reduced him to the Catholic religion. I obtained at
Rome his absolution of Pope Clement 8. I reconciled him to the holy See.
Touching the first of these points; I say the time, the occasions, and the
foresaid Kings necessary affairs do sufficiently testify, that he was
induced to change his mind, and to alter his religion, upon the strength of
other manner of arguments then Theological schools, or the persuasions of the
L. Cardinals fluent Rhetoric, do usually afford, or could possibly suggest.
Moreover, who does not know, that in affairs of so high nature and
consequence, resolutions once taken, Princes are to proceed with instructions
by a formal course? As for the Kings absolution, pretended to be purchased of
Clement 8. by the L. Cardinals good service; it had been the part of so great
a Cardinal, for the honor of his King, of the Realm, and of his own place,
to have buried that piece of his notable service in perpetual silence, and in
the dark night of eternal oblivion. For in this matter of reconcilement, it
is not unknown to the world, how shamefully and basely he prostituted the
inviolable dignity of his King, when his Lordship representing the person of
his King, and couching on the ground, by way of sufficient penance, was glad
(as I have noted in the Preface to my Apology) to have his venerable shoulders
gracefully saluted with stripes, and reverently worshipped with bastonados of a
Pontificiall cudgel. Which graceful, or disgraceful blemish rather, it
pleased Pope Clement of his rare clemency, to grace yet with a higher degree of
spiritual graces: in giving the L. Cardinal then Bishop of Eureux, a certain
quantity of holy grains, crosses, and medals, or little plates of silver, or
some other metal, to hang about the neck, or to be born about against some
evil. Which treasures of the Popes grace, whosoever should graciously and
reverently kiss, they should without fail purchase unto themselves a pardon
for one hundred years. These feate and pretty gugawes for children, were no
doubt a special comfort unto the good Kings heart, after his Majesty had been
handsomely basted upon the L. Bishops back. But with what face can his
Lordship brag, that he prevailed with Pope Clement for the Kings absolution?
The late Duke of Neuers, not long before had solicited his Holiness, with all
earnest and humble instance to the same purpose; howsoever, the Kings affairs
then seeming desperate in the Popes eye, he was licensed to depart for France,
without any due and gracious respect unto his errand. But so soon as the Pope
received intelligence, of the Kings fortunes growing to the full, and the
affairs of the League to be in the wane, and the principal cities, the
strongest places of garrison through all France to strike tops and tops
gallant, and to hale the King; then the holy Ghost in good time inspired the
holy Father with a holy desire and tender affection, to receive this poor
wandering sheep again into the flock of Christ, and bosom of holy Church. His
Holiness had reason. For he feared by his obstinate severity to provoke the
patience of the French, and to drive that Nation (as they had many times
threatened before) then to put in execution their ancient design; which was,
to shake off the Pope, and to set up some of their own tribes or kinreds for
Patriarch over the French Church. But let his Lordshippe vouchsafe to search
the secret of his own bosom, and no doubt he will not stick to acknowledge,
that before he stirred one foot out of France, he had good assurance of the
good success and issue of his honorable embassage.

Now the hearers thus prepared by his Preface, the L. Cardinal proceeds in
his purpose; namely to make proof, how this Article of the third Estate,
wherein doubtful and questionable matters are mingled and confounded with
certain and indubitable principles, does so debilitate and weaken the sinews
and virtue of any remedy intended for the danger of Kings, as it makes all
remedies and receipts prescribed for that purpose, to become altogether
unprofitable, and without effect. He yields this reason, (take it forsooth upon
my warrant) a reason full of pith and substance: The only remedy against
parricides, is to thunder the solemn curses of the Church, and the punishments
to be inflicted after death: which points, if they be not grounded upon
infallible authority, will never be settled in men's persuasions with any
certain assurance. Now in the solemn curses of the Church, no man can attain
to the said assurance, if things not denied be mingled with points not
granted, and not consented unto by the Universal Church. By a thing not
denied and not contested, the L. Cardinal means prohibiting and condemning of
King-killing: and by points contested, he means denying of the Popes power to
depose Kings.

In this whole discourse, I find neither pith of argument, nor course of
proof; but only a cast of the L. Cardinals office by way of counsel:
whereunto I make this answer. If there be in this Article of the third Estate
any point, wherein all are not of one mind and the same judgment; in whom
lies all the blame, from whence rises the doubt, but from the Popes and Popish
parasites, by whom the certainty of the said point has been cunningly
removed and conveyed away, and must be restored again by public authority?
Now the way to restore certainty unto a point, which against reason is called
into doubt and question, is to make it up in one mass, or to tie it up in the
same bundle, with other certain points of the same nature.

Here I am forced to summon the consciences of men, to make some stand or stay
upon this point, and with me to enter into deep consideration, how great and
vnvanquishable force is ever found in the truth. For these two questions,
Whether Kings may lawfully be made away by assassins waged and hired for the
act; and Whether the Pope has lawful power to chase Kings out of their
Thrones, are by the L. Cardinals own confession, in so full aspect of
conjunction, that if either be brought under any degree of doubt, the other
also is fetched within the same compass. In which words he directly points as
with a finger to the very true source of the maine mischief, and to the
basilique and liver vein, infected with pestilentiall blood, inflamed to the
destruction of Basilicall Princes by detestable parricide. For whosoever shall
confidently believe that Popes are not armed with power to depose Kings; will
believe with no less confidence and assurance, it is not lawful by sudden
assaults to fly at their throats. For are not all desperate villains
persuaded, when they are hired to murder Kings, that in doing so damnable a
feate, they do it for a piece of notable and extraordinary service to the
Pope? This maxim therefore is to be held for a principle immovable and
indubitable; that, If subjects desire the life of their Kings to be secured;
they must not yield the Pope one inch of power, to deprive their Kings of their
Thrones and Crowns, by deposing their Kings.

The Lord Cardinal testifies no less himself in these words: If those
monsters of men, and furies of hell, by whom the lifeblood of our two last
Kings was let out, had ever been acquainted with Laws Ecclesiastical, they
might have read themselves adjudged by the Council of Constance to express
damnation. For in these words, the L. Cardinal prefers a bill of indictment
to cast his Holiness; who, upon the commencing of the Leaguers wars, in
stead of giving order for the publishing of the said Ecclesiastical Laws for
the restraining of all parricidicall practices and attempts, fell to the
terror of his fulminations, which not long after were seconded and ratified by
the most audacious and bloody murder of King Henry III. In like manner, the
whole Clergy of France are wrapped up by the L. Cardinals words, and inuolued
in the peril of the said indictment. For in stead of preaching the said
Ecclesiastical Laws, by which all King-killing is inhibited; the Priests
taught, vented, and published nothing but rebellion; and when the people in
great devotion came to power their confessions into the Priests ears; then the
Priests, with a kind of counterbuffe in the second place when their turn was
come, and with greater devotion, powered blood into the ears of the people: out
of which root grew the terror of those cruel wars, and the horrible
parricide of that good King.

But let us here take some near sight of these Ecclesiastical Laws, whereby
subjects are inhibited to kill, or desperately to dispatch their Kings out of
the way. The L. Cardinal, for full payment of all scores upon this reckoning,
lays down the credit of the Council at Constance, which nevertheless
affoardeth not one myte of true and current payment. The truth of the history
may be taken from this brief relation. John Duke of Burgundy, procured Lewis
Duke of Orleans to be murdered in Paris. To justify and make good this bloody
act, he produced a certain petimaster, one called by the name of John Petit.
This little John caused nine propositions to be given forth or set up, to be
discussed in the famous University of Paris. The sum of all to this purpose:
It is lawful, just, and honorable, for every subject or private person,
either by open force and violence, or by deceit and secret lying in wait, or by
some witty stratagem, or by any other way of fact, to kill a Tyrant practicing
against his King and other higher powers: yea the King ought in reason, to give
him a pension or stipend, that has killed any person disloyal to his Prince.
The words of Petits first proposition be these: It is lawful for every
subject, Gerson.
without any command or commission from the higher powers, by all the Laws of
nature, of man, and of God himself, to kill or cause to be killed any Tyrant,
who either by a covetous and greedy desire, or by fraud, by divination upon
casting of lots, by double and treacherous dealing, does plot or practice
against his Kings corporal health, or the health of his higher powers. In the
third proposition: It is lawful for every subject, honorable and meritorious,
to kill the said Tyrant, or cause him to be killed as a Traitor, disloyal and
treacherous to his King. In the sixth proposition: The King is to appoint a
salarie and recompense for him that has killed such a Tyrant, or has caused
him to be killed. These propositions of Johannes Parvus, were condemned by the
Council of Constance, as impious, and tending to the scandal of the Church.
Now then, whereas the said Council no doubt understood the name or word Tyrant
in the same sense, wherein it was taken by Johannes Parvus; certain it is, the
Council was not of any such judgment or mind, to condemn one that should kill
a King or Sovereign Prince; but one that by treason, and without commandment
should kill a subject, rebelling and practicing against his King. For John
Petit had undertaken to justify the making away of the Duke of Orleans to be
a lawful act, and calls that Duke a Tyrant, albeit he was no Sovereign
Prince; as all the above recited words of John Petit do testify, that he
speaks of such a Tyrant, as being in state of subjection rebelleth against
his free and absolute Prince. So that whosoever shall narrowly search and look
into the mind and meaning of the said Council, shall easily perceive, that by
their decrees the safety of Kings was not confirmed but weakened, not augmented
but diminished: for as much as they inhibited private persons to kill a
subject, attempting by wicked counsels and practices to make away his King.

But be it granted, the Council of Constance is flat and altogether direct
against King-killers. For I am not unwilling to be persuaded, that had the
question then touched the murdering of Soueraign Princes, the said Council
would have passed a sound and holy decree. But, I say, this granted, what
shield of defense is hereby reached to Kings, to ward or beat off the thrusts
of a murderers weapon, and to save or secure their life? seeing the L.
Cardinal, building upon the subtle devise and shift of the Jesuits, has
taught us out of their Schools, that by Kings are understood Kings in esse,
not yet fallen from the supreme degree of Sovereign Royalty. For being once
deposed by the Pope, (say the Jesuits) they are no longer Kings, but are
fallen from the rights of Sovereign dignity; and consequently to make strip
and wast of their blood, is not forsooth to make strip and wast of Royal
blood. These Jesuitical masters, in the file of their words are so supple and
so limber, that by leaving still in their speech some starting hole or other,
they are able by the same, as by a posterne or back-doore, to make an escape.

Mean while the Readers are here to note (for well they may) a trick of
monstrous and most wicked cunning. The L. Cardinal contends for the bridling
and hampering of King-killers by the Laws Ecclesiastical. Now it might be
presumed, that so reverend and learned a Cardinal intending to make use of
Ecclesiastical laws, by virtue whereof the life of Kings may be secured, would
fill his mouth and garnish the point with divine Oracles, that we might the
more gladly and willingly give him the hearing, when he speaks as one
furnished with sufficient weight and authority of sacred Scripture. But
behold, in stead of the authentical and most ancient word, he propounds the
decree of a late-borne Council at Constance, neither for the Popes tooth, nor
any way coming near the point in controversy. And suppose it were pertinent
unto the purpose, the L. Cardinal bears in his hand a forke of distinction,
with two tines or teeth to bear off, nay to shift off and to avoid the matter
with mere dalliance. The shortest and nearest way (in some sort of respects)
to establish a false opinion, is to charge or set upon it with false and with
ridiculous reasons. The like way to work the overthrow of true doctrine, is to
rest or ground it upon frivolous reasons or authorities of stubble-weight. For
example; if we should thus argue for the immortality of the soul with Plato:
In Phaedone.
The swan sings before her death; ergo, the soul is immortal. Or thus with
certain seduced Christians: The Pope has ordained the word of God to be
authentical: ergo, all credit must be given to divine Scripture. Upon the
spurkies or hooks of such ridiculous arguments and frivolous reasons, the L.
Cardinal hangs the life and safety of Kings.

With like artificial devises he pretends to have the infamous murders, and
apposted cutting of Kings throats in extreme detestation; and yet by deposing
them from their Princely dignities, by degrading them from their supreme and
Sovereign authorities, he brings their sacred heads to the butchers block.
For a King deposed by the Pope, (let no man doubt) will not leave any stone
vnremooued, nor any means and ways unattempted, nor any forces or powers of
men vnleuied or vnhired, to defend himself and his Regal dignity, to
repress and bring under his rebellious people, by the Pope discharged of their
allegiance. In this perplexity of the public affairs, in these tempestuous
perturbations of the State, with what perils is the King not besieged and
assaulted? His head is exposed to the chances of war; his life a fair mark
to the insidious practices of a thousand traitors; his Royal person obuious to
the dreadful storm of angry fortune, to the deadly malice, to the fatal and
mortal weapons of his enemies. The reason: He is presupposed to be lawfully
and orderly stripped of his Kingdom. Will he yet hold the stern of his Royal
estate? Then is he necessarily taken for a Tyrant, reputed an usurper, and his
life is exposed to the spoil. For the public laws make it lawful and free,
for any private person to enterprise against an usurper of the Kingdom: In
reos Maiestatis, and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est. Ter. apol. cap. 2.
Every man, says Tertullian, is a soldier, to bear arms against all
Traitors and public enemies. Take from a King the title of lawful King, you
take from him the warrant of his life, and the weapons whereby he is maintained
in greater security, then by his Royal Guard armed with swords and halbards,
through whose wards and ranks, a desperate villain will make himself an
easy passage, being master of an other man's life, because he is prodigal and
careless of his own. Such therefore as pretend so much pity toward Kings,
to abhor the bloody opening of their liuerveine, and yet withal to approve
their hoysting out of the Royal dignity; are just in the vain and humor of
those that say, Let us not kill the King, but let us disarme the King that he
may die a violent death: let us not deprive him of life, but of the means to
defend his life: let us not strangle the King and stop his vital breath, so
long as he remains King; O that were impious, O that were horrible and
abominable; but let him be deposed, and then whosoever shall run him
through the body with a weapon up to the very hilts, shall not bear the guilt
of a King-killer. All this must be understood to be spoken of Kings, who after
they are despoyled of Regalitie, by sentence of deposition given by the Pope,
are able to arm themselves, and by valiant arms do defend their Sovereign
rights. But in case the King, blasted with Roman lightning, and stricken with
Papal thunder, shall actually and speedily be smitten down from his high
Throne of Regality, with present loss of his Kingdom; I believe it is almost
impossible for him to warrant his own life, who was not able to warrant his
own Kingdom. Let a cat be thrown from a high roof to the bottom of a
cellour or vault, she lights on her feet, and runs away without taking
any harm. A King is not like a cat, howsoever a cat may look upon a King: he
cannot fall from the lofty pinnacle of Royalty, to light on his feet upon the
hard pauement of a private state, without crushing all his bones in pieces. It
has been the lot of very few Emperors and Kings, to outliue their Empire. For
men ascend to the lofty Throne of Kings, with a soft and easy pace, by
certain steps and degrees; there be no stately stairs to come down, they
tumble head and heels together when they fall. He that has once griped
another Kingdom, thinks himself in little safety, so long as he shall of his
courtesy suffer his disseised predecessor to draw his breath. And say that some
Princes, after their fall from their Thrones, have escaped both point and edge
of the Tyrants weapon; yet have they wandered like miserable fugitives in
foreign countries, or else have been condemned like captives to perpetual
imprisonment at home, a thousandfold worse and more lamentable then death it
self. Dyonisius the Tyrant of Syracusa, from a great King in Sicilie turned
Schoolmaster in Corinth. It was the only calling and kind of life, that as he
thought bearing some resemblance of rule and government, might recreate his
mind, as an image or picture of his former Sovereignty over men. This
Dyonisius was the only man (to my knowledge) that had a humor to laugh after
the loss of a Kingdom, and in the state of a Pedant or governor of children,
merrily to jest and to scorn his former state and condition of a King. In this
my Kingdom of England, sundry Kings have seen the walls as it were of their
Princely fortress dismantled, razed, and beaten down. By name, Edward and
Richard, both II. and Henry VI. all which Kings were most cruelly murdered in
prison. In the reign of Edward III. by act of Parliament, whosoever shall
imagine, (that is the very word of the Statute) or machinate the Kings death,
are declared guilty of rebellion and high treason. The learned Judges of the
Land, grounding upon this law of Edward the third, have ever since reputed and
judged them traitors according to Law, that have dared only to whisper or
talk softly between the teeth, of deposing the King. For they count it a
clear case, that no Crown can be taken from a Kings head, without loss of
Head and Crown together, sooner or later.

The L. Cardinal therefore in this most weighty and serious point does merely
dally, and flowt after a sort, when he tells us, The Church does not intermeddle
with releasing of subjects, Page 95.
and knocking off their yrons of obedience, but only before the
Ecclesiastical tribunal seat; and that besides this double censure, of
absolution to subjects, and excommunication to the Prince, the Church imposes
none other penalty. Under pretense of which two censures, so far is the Church
(as the L. Cardinal pretends) from consenting that any man so censured should
be touched for his life, that she utterly abhors all murder whatsoever; but
especially all sudden and vnprepenced murders, for fear of casting away both
body and soul; which often in sudden murders go both one way. It has been
made manifest before, that all such proscription and setting forth of Kings to
port-sale, has always for the train thereof, either some violent and bloody
death, or some other mischief more intolerable then death it self. What are
we the better, that parricides of Kings are neither set on, nor approved by
the Church in their abominable actions; when she lays such plots, and takes
such courses, as necessarily do infer the cutting of their throats? In the
next place be it noted, that his Lordship against all reason, reckons the
absoluing of subjects from the oath of allegiance, in the rank of penalties
awarded and enjoined before the Ecclesiastical tribunal seat. For this
penalty is not Ecclesiastical, but Civil, and consequently not triable in
Ecclesiastical Courts, without usurping upon the civil Magistrate. But I
wonder with what face the Lord Cardinal can say, the Church never consents
to any practice against his life, whom she has once chastised with severe
censures. For can his Lordship be ignorant, what is written by Pope Vrbanus,
Can. excom. Cause. 23. Quaest. 6.
Can. Excommunicatorum. We take them not in any wise to be man-slayers, who in
a certain heat of zeal toward the Catholic Church their Mother, shall
happen to kill an excomunicate person. More, if the Pope does not approve and
like the practice of King-killing, wherefore has not his Holiness imposed
some severe censure upon the book of Mariana the Jesuit (by whom parricides
are commended, nay highly extolled) when his Holiness has been pleased to take
the pains, to censure and call in some other of Mariana's books? Again,
wherefore did his Holiness advise himself, to censure the decree of the Court
of Parliament in Paris against John Chastell? Wherefore did he suffer Garnet
and Oldcorne my powder-miners, both by books and pictures vendible under his
nose in Rome, to be inrowled in the Canon of holy Martyrs? And when he saw two
great Kings murdered one after an other, wherefore by some public declaration
did not his Holiness testify to all Christendom, his inward sense and true
apprehension of so great misfortune, as all Europe had just cause to lament on
the behalf of France? Wherefore did not his Holiness publish some Law or
Pontificiall decree, to provide for the security of Kings in time to come?
True it is that he censured Becanus his book. But wherefore? That by a
captious and slight censure, he might prevent a more exact and rigorous decree
of the Sorbon School. For the Popes check to Becanus, was only a general
censure and touch, without any particular specification of matter touching the
life of Kings. About some two months after, the said book was printed again,
with a dedication to the Popes Nuntio in Germany; yet without any alteration,
save only of two articles containing the absolute power of the people over
Kings. In recompense and for a counterchecke whereof, three or four articles
were inserted into the said book, touching the Popes power over Kings; articlcs
no less wicked and injurious to Regal rights; nay more injurious then any of
the other clauses, whereof just cause of exception and complaint had been given
before. If I would collect and heap up examples of ancient Emperors, (as of
Henry IV. whose dead corpse felt the rage and fury of the Pope; or of Frederic
2. against whom the Pope was not ashamed to whet and kindle the Sultane; or of
Queen Elizabeth our Predecessor, of glorious memory, whose life was diverse
times assaulted by privy murderers, expressly dispatched from Rome for that
holy service) if I would gather up other examples of the same stamp, which I
have laid forth in my Apology for the oath of allegiance; I could make it more
clear then daylight, how far the L. Cardinals words are discrepant from the
truth, where his Lordship out of most rare confidence is bold to avowe, Page 97.
That never any Pope went so far, as to give consent or counsel for the
desperate murdering of Princes. That which already has been alleged may
suffice to convince his Lordship: I mean, that his Holiness by deposing of
Kings, does lead them directly to their graves and tombs.

The Cardinal himself seems to take some notice hereof. The Church (as he
speaks) abhors sudden and vnprepensed murders above the rest. Page 95.
Does not his Lordship in this phrase of speech acknowledge, that murders
committed by open force, are not so much disavowed or disclaimed by the Church?
A little after he speaks not in the teeth, as before, but with full and open
mouth: that he does not dislike a King once deposed by the Pope, should be
pursued with open war. Whereupon it follows, that in war the King may be
lawfully slain. No doubt a remarkable degree of his Lordships clemency. A
King shall be better entreated and more mildly dealt withal, if he be slain
by the shot of an harquebuse or caleeuer in the field, then if he be stabd by
the stroke or thrust of a knife in his chamber: or if at a siege of some city
he be blown up with a mine, then by a mine made, and a train of gunpowder laid
under his Palace or Parliament house in time of peace. His reason: Forsooth,
because in sudden murders, oftentimes the soul and the body perish both
together. O singular bounty, and rare clemency! prouokers, instigators, strong
puffers and blowers of parricides, in merciful compassion of the soul, become
unmerciful and shameful murderers of the body. This device may well claim
and challenge kindred of Mariana the Jesuits invention. For he likes not at
any hand the poisoning of a Tyrant by his meat or drink; for fear least he
taking the poison with his own hand, and swallowing or gulping it down in his
meat or drink so taken, should be found felo de se, (as the common Lawyer
speaks) or culpable of his own death. But Mariana likes better, to have a
Tyrant poisoned by his chair, or by his apparel and robes, after the example
of the Mauritanian Kings; that being so poisoned only by sent, or by contact,
he may not be found guilty of selfe-fellonie, and the soul of the poor Tyrant
in her flight out of the body may be innocent. O hell hounds, O diabolical
wretches, O infernal monsters! Did they only suspect and imagine, that either
in Kings there is any remainder of Kingly courage, or in their subjects any
spark left of ancient liberty; they durst as soon eat their nails, or
tear their own flesh from the bones, as once broach the vessel of this
Diabolical device. How long then, how long shall Kings whom the Lord has
called his Anointed, Kings the breathing images of God upon earth; Kings that
with a wry or frowning look, are able to crush these earth-wormes in pieces;
how long shall they suffer this viperous brood, scot-free and without
punishment, to spit in their faces? how long, the Majesty of God in their
person and Royal Majesty to be so notoriously vilified, so dishonourably
trampled under foot?

The L. Cardinal bourds us with a like manifest jest, and notably trifles;
first, distinguishing between Tyrants by administration, and Tyrants by
usurpation; then showing that he by no means does approve those profane and
heathenish Laws, whereby secret practices and conspiracies against a Tyrant by
administration are permitted. His reason. Because after deposition there is a
certain habitude to Royal dignity, and as it were a kind of politic
character inherent in Kings, by which they are discerned from persons merely
private, or the common sort of people; and the obstacle, crosse-barre, or
sparre once removed and taken out of the way, the said Kings deposed are at
length reinuested and endowed again with lawful use of Royal dignity, and
with lawful administration of the Kingdom. Is it possible that his Lordship
can speak and utter these words according to the inward persuasion of his
heart? I believe it not. For admit a King cast out of his Kingdom were sure to
escape with life; yet being once reduced to a private state of life, after he
has wound or wrought himself out of deadly danger, so far he is from
holding or retayning any remainder of dignity or politic impression, that on
the contrary he falls into greater contempt and misery, then if he had been
a very peasant by birth, and had never held or governed the stern of Royal
estate. What foul is more beautiful then the peacocke? Let her be plumed and
bereft of her feathers; what owl, what iacke-daw more ridiculous, more without
all pleasant fashion? The homely sowter, the infamous catchpol, the base
tincker, the rude artificer, the pack-horse-porter, then living in Rome with
liberty, when Valentinian was detaind captive by Saporas the Persian King, was
more happy then that Roman Emperor. And in case the Lord Cardinal himself
should be so happy (I should say so unfortunate) to be stripped of all his
dignities and Ecclesiastical promotions; would it not redound to his Lordships
wonderful consolation, that in his greatest extremity, in the lowest of his
bareness and nakedness, he still retains a certain habitual right and
character of a Cardinal, whereby to recover the loss of his former dignities
and honors? when he beholds these prints and impressions of his foresaid
honors; would it not make him the more willing and glad, to forsake the back
of his venerable mule, to use his Cardinals foot-cloath no longer, but ever
after like a Cardinal in print and character, to walk on foot?

But let us examine his Lordships consolation of Kings, thrust out of their
kingdoms by the Pope for heresy. The obstacle (as the L. Cardinal speaks)
being taken away; that is to say, when the King shall be reformed; this
habitual right and character yet inherent in the person of a King, restores
him to the lawful administration of his Kingdom. I take this to be but a cold
comfort. For here his Lordship does only presuppose, and not prove, that
after a King is thrust out of his Throne, when he shall repent and turn true
Roman Catholic, the other by whom he has been cast out, and by force
disseised, will recall him to the Royal seat, and faithfully settle him again
in his ancient right, as one that rejoices for the recovery of such a lost
sheep. But I should rather fear, the new King would press and stand upon
other terms; as a term of years for a trial, whether the repentance of the
King displaced be true and sound to the coare, or counterfeit, dissembled, and
painted holiness; for the words, the sorrowful and heavy looks, the sad and
formal gestures, of men pretending repentance, are not always to be taken, to
be respected, to be credited. Again, I should fear the afflicted King might be
charged and borne down too, that albeit he has renounced his former heresy,
he has stumbled since at an other stone, and run the ship of his faith
against some other rock of new heretical prauitie. Or I should yet fear, he
might be made to believe, that heresy makes a deeper impression, and a
character more indeleble in the person, then is the other politic character of
Regal Majesty. Alas, good Kings! in how hard, in how miserable a state do
they stand? Once deposed, and ever barred of repentance. As if the scapes and
errors of Kings, were all sins against the Holy Ghost, or sins unto death,
for which it is not lawful to pray. Falls a private person? he may be set up,
and new established. Falls a King? is a King deposed? his repentance is ever
fruitles, ever unprofitable. Has a private person a train of servants? He can
not be deprived of any one without his priuity and consent. Has a King
millions of subjects? He may be deprived by the Pope of a third part, when his
Holiness will have them turn Clerics or enter cloisters, without asking the
King leave: and so of subjects they may be made nonsubiects.

But I question yet further. A King falling into heresy, is deposed by the
Pope; his son stands pure Catholic. The Regal seat is empty. Who shall
succeed in the deposed Kings place? Shall a stranger be preferred by the Pope?
That were to do the innocent son egregious and notorious wrong. Shall the
son himself? That were a more injurious part in the son against his
father. For if the son be touched with any fear of God, or moved with any
reverence toward his Father, he will diligently and seriously take heed, that
he put not his Father by the Kingdom, by whose means he himself is borne to
a Kingdom. Nor will he tread in the steps of Henry V. Emperor, who by the
Popes instigation, expelled and chased his aged father out of the Imperial
dignity. Much less will he hearken to the voice and advise of Doctor Suares
the Jesuit; Lib. 6. cap. 4. Si papa Regem deponat, ab illis tantum p^terit,
expelli vel interfici, quibus ipse id commiserit.
who, in his book written against my self, a book applauded and approved of
many Doctors, after he has like a Doctor of the chair, pronounced, That a
King deposed by the Pope, cannot be lawfully expelled or killed, but only by
such as the Pope has charged with such execution: falls to add a little
after: If the Pope shall declare a King to be an heretic, and fallen from the
Kingdom, without making further declaration touching execution; that is to
say, without giving express charge unto any to make away the King: then the
lawful successor being a Catholic, has power to do the feate; and if he
shall refuse, or if there shall be none such, then it appertains to the
comminaltie or body of the Kingdom. A most detestable sentence. For in
hereditarie Kingdoms, who is the Kings lawful successor, but his son? The
son then by this doctrine, shall imbrew his hands in his own fathers blood,
so soon as he shall be deposed by the Pope. A matter so much the nearer and
more deeply to be apprehended, because the said most outrageous book flies
like a furious mastiffe directly at my throat, and withal instilleth such
precepts into the tender disposition of my son, as if hereafter he shall
become a Roman Catholic, so soon as the Pope shall give me the lift out of
my Throne, shall bind him forthwith to make effusion of his own fathers blood.
Such is the religion of these Reverend Fathers, the pillars of the Pontificiall
Monarchy. In comparison of whose religion and holiness, all the impiety that
ever was among the Infidels, and all the barbarous cruelty that ever was among
the Canibals, may pass henceforth in the Christian world for pure clemency
and humanity. These things ought his Lordship to have pondered, rather then to
babble of habitudes and politic characters, which to the common people are
like the Bergamasque or the wild-Irish form of speech, and pass their
understanding.

All these things are nothng in a manner, if we compare them with the last
clause, which is the closer, and as it were the vpshot of his Lordships
discourse. For therein he labors to persuade concerning this Article, framed
to bridle the Popes tyrannical power over Kings, if it should receive gracious
entertainment, and general approbation; That it would breed great danger, and
work effects of pernicious consequence unto Kings. The reason: because it
would prove an introduction to schism; and schism would stir up civil
wars, contempt of Kings, distempered inclinations and motions to intrappe
their life; and which is worst of all, the fierce wrath of God, inflicting all
sorts of calamities. An admirable paradoxe, and able to strike men stone-blind:
that his Holiness must have power to depose Kings, for the better security and
safeguard of their life; that when their Crowns are made subject unto an others
will and pleasure, then they are come to the highest altitude and elevation of
honor; that for the only warrant of their life, their supreme and absolute
greatness must be depressed; that for the longer keeping of their Crowns, an
other must pluck the Crown from their heads. As if it should be said, Would
they not be stripped naked by an other? the best way is, for themselves to
untruss, for themselves to put off all, and to go naked of their own accord.
Will they keep their Sovereignty in safety for ever? The best way is to let
an other have their Sovereign authority and supreme Estate in his power. But
I have been ever of this mind, that when my goods are at no man's command or
disposing but mine own, then they are truly and certainly mine own. It may
be this error is grown upon me and other Princes, for lack of brains:
whereupon it may be feared, or at least coniectured, the Pope means to shave
our crowns, and thrust us into some cloister, there to hold rank in the
brotherhood of good King Childeric. For as much then as my dull capacity does
not serve me to reach or comprehend the pith of this admirable reason, I have
thought good to seek and to use the instruction of old and learned experience,
which teaches no such matter: by name, that civil wars and fearful
perturbations of State in any nation of the world, have at any time grown from
this faithful credulity of subjects, that Popes in right have no power, to
wrest and lift Kings out of their dignities and possessions. On the other side,
by establishing the contrary maxims, to yoke and hamper the people with
Pontificiall tyranny, what rebellious troubles and stirs, what extreme
desolations has England been forced to fear and feel, in the reign of my
Predecessors Henry II. John, and Henry III? These be the maxims and
principles, which under the Emperor Henry IV. and Frederic the I. made all
Europe flow with channels and streams of blood, like a river with water,
while the Saracens by their incursions and victories ouerflowed, and in a
manner drowned the honor of the Christian name in the East. These be the
maxims and principles, which made way for the wars of the last League into
France; by which the very bowels of that most famous and flourishing Kingdom
were set on such a combustion, that France herself was brought within two
fingers breadth of bondage to an other Nation, and the death of her two last
Kings most villanously and traitorously accomplished. The Lord Cardinal then
giving these diabolical maxims for means to secure the life and estate of
Kings, speaks as if he would give men counsel to dry themselves in the
river, when they come as wet as a water spaniel out of a pond; or to warm
themselves by the light of the Moon, when they are starnaked, and well near
frozen to death.

The Conclusion of the Lord of Perron examined.
AFTER the L. Cardinal has stoutly showed the strength of his arm, and the
deep skill of his head in fortification; at last he leaves his lofty
scaffolds, and falls to work nearer the ground, with more easy tools of
humble prayers and gentle exhortations. The sum of the whole is this: He
adiures his auditors never to forge remedies, never so to provide for the
temporal safety of Kings, as thereby to work their final falling from
eternal salvation: never to make any rent or rupture in the unity of the
Church, in this corrupt age infected with pestilent heresies, which already
having made so great a breach in the walls of France, will no doubt double
their strength by the dissentions, divisions, and schisms of Catholics. If
this infectious plague shall still increase and grow to a carbuncle, it can by
no means poison religion; without bringing Kings to their winding sheets and
woeful hearses. The first rowlers of that stone of offense, aimed at no other
mark, then to make an ignominious and lamentable rent in the Church. He thinks
the Deputies of the third Estate, had neither head nor first hand in contriuing
this Article; but holds it rather a new device and subtle invention,
suggested by persons, which being already cut off by their own practices
from the body of the Roman Church, have likewise inueigled and ensnared some
that bear the name of Catholics, with some other Ecclesiastics; and under a
fair pretense and goodly cloak, by name, the service of the King, have
surprised and played upon their simplicity. These men (as the Cardinal says)
do imitate Julian the Apostata, who to bring the Christians to idolatrous
worship of false gods, commanded the idols of Jupiter and Venus to be
intermingled with Imperial statues, and other Images of Christian Emperors,
etc. Then after certain Rhetorical flourishes, his Lord ship falls to
prosecute his former course, and cries out of this Article; A monster having
the tail of a fish, as if it came cutting the narrow Seas out of England. For
in full effect it is downright the English oath; saving that indeed the oath
of England runs in a more mild form, and a more moderate strain. And here
he suddenly takes occasion to make some digression. For out of the way, and
clean from the matter, he enters into some purpose of my praise and
commendation. He courteously forsooth is pleased to grace me with knowledge of
learning, and with civil virtues. He seems chiefly to rejoice in his own
behalf, and to give me thanks, that I have done him the honor to enter the
lists of Theological dispute against his Lordship. Howbeit he twitches and
carpes at me withal, as at one that sows seeds of dissension and schism
amongst Roman Catholics. And yet he would seem to qualify the matter, and to
make all whole again, by saying, That in so doing I am persuaded I do no more
then my duty requires. But now (as his Lordship follows the point) it
stands neither with godliness, nor with equity, nor with reason, that Acts
made, that Statutes, Decrees, and Ordinances ratified for the State and
Government of England, should be thrust for binding Laws upon the Kingdom of
France: nor that Catholics, and much less that Ecclesiastics, to the end
they may live in safety, and freely enjoy their privileges or immunities in
France, should be forced to believe, and by oath to seal the same points,
which English Catholics to the end they may purchase liberty only to
breath, nay sorrowfully to sigh rather, are constrained to allow and to aduowe
besides. And whereas in England there is no small number of Catholics, that
lack not constant and resolute minds to endure all sorts of punishment, rather
then to take that oath of allegiance; will there not be found an other manner
of number in France, armed with no less constancy and Christian resolution?
There will, most honorable Auditors, there will without all doubt: and we all
that are of Episcopal dignity will sooner suffer Martyrdom in the cause. Then
out of the super-abundance and ouer-weight of his Lordships goodness, he
closely coucheth and conuayeth a certain distasteful opposition between me and
his King; with praises and thanks to God, that his King is not delighted, and
takes no pleasure to make Martyrs.

All this Artificial and swelling discourse like unto puffe-past, if it be
viewed at a near distance, will be found like a bladder full of wind, without
any soliditie of substantial matter. For the Deputies of the third Estate were
never so void of understanding, to believe that by providing for the life and
safety of their King they should thrust him headlong into eternal damnation.
Their brains were never so much blasted, so far benumbed, to dream the
soul of their King cannot mount up to heaven, except he be dismounted from his
Princely Throne upon earth, whenever the Pope shall hold up his finger.

And whereas he is bold to pronounce, that heretics of France do make their
benefit and advantage of this division; that speech is grounded upon this
proposition; That professors of the Christian Religion reformed (which is to
say, purged and cleansed of all Popish dregs) are heretics in fact, and ought
so to be reputed in right. Which proposition his Lordship will never soundly and
sufficiently make good, before his Holiness has compiled an other Gospel, or
has forged an other Bible at his Pontificiall anvile. The L. Cardinal
undertook to read me a lecture upon that argument; but ever since has played
Mum-budget, and has put himself to silence, like one at a Nonplus in his
enterprise. There be three years already gone and past, since his Lordship
began to shape some answer to a certain writing dispatched by me in few
days. With forming and reforming, with filing and polishing, with laboring
and licking his answer over and over again, with reiterated extractions and
calcinations, it may be coniectured that all his Lordships labor and cost is
long since evaporated and vanished in the air. Howbeit, as well the friendly
conference of a King, (for I will not call it a contention) as also the
dignity, excellency, and importance of the matter, long since deserved, and
as long since required the publishing of some or other answer. His Lordships
long silence will never be imputed to lack of capacity, wherewith who knows
not how abundantly he is furnished; but rather to well advised agnition of his
own working and building upon a weak foundation.

But let us return unto these heretics, that make so great gain by the
disagreement of Catholics. It is no part of their duty to aim at sowing of
dissentions; but rather to intend and attend their faithful performance of
service to their King. If some be pleased, and others offended, when so good
and loyal duties are sincerely discharged; it is for all good subjects to
grieve and to be sorry, that when they speak for the safety of their King and
honor of the truth, it is their hard hap to leave any at all unsatisfied. But
suppose the said heretics were the Authors of this Article preferred by the
third Estate. What need they to conceal their names in that regard? What need
they to disclaim the credit of such a worthy act? Would it not redound to
their perpetual honor, to be the only subjects that kept watch over the
Kings life and Crown, that stood centinell, and walked the rounds for the
preservation of his Princely diadem, when all other had no more touch, no more
feeling thereof then so many stones? And what need the Deputies for the third
Estate, to receive instructions from foreign Kingdoms, concerning a cause of
that nature; when there was no want of domestical examples, and the French
histories were plentiful in that argument? What need they to gape for this
reformed doctrine, to come swimming with a fishes tail out of an Island to the
main continent, when they had before their eyes the murders of two Kings, with
diverse civil wars, and many Arrests of Court, all tending to insinuate and
suggest the introduction of the same remedy? Suggestions are needless from
abroad, when the mischief is felt at home. It seems to me that his Lordship
in smoothing and tickling the Deputies for the third Estate, does no less then
wring and wrong their great sufficiency with contumely and outrageous abuse:
as if they were not furnished with sufficient foresight, and with loyal
affection toward their King, for the preservation of his life and honor, if
the remedy were not beaten into their heads by those of the Religion, reputed
heretics.

Touching my self, ranged by his Lordship in the same rank with sowers of
dissension; I take my God to witness, and my own conscience, that I never
dreamed of any such unchristian project. It has been hitherto my ordinary
course to follow honest counsels, and to walk in open ways. I never wonted
my self to holes and corners, to crafty shifts, but evermore to plain and open
designs. I need not hide mine intentions for fear of any mortal man, that
puffs breath of life out of his nostrils. Nor in any sort do I purpose, to
set Julian the Apostata before mine eyes, as a pattern for me to follow.
Julian of a Christian became a Pagan: I profess the same faith of Christ
still, which I have ever professed: Julian went about his designs with crafty
conueiances; I never with any of his captious and cunning sleights: Julian
forced his subjects to infidelity against Jesus Christ; I labor to induce my
subjects unto such terms of loyalty toward my self, as Jesus Christ has
prescribed and taught in his word. But how far I differ from Julian, it is to
be seen more at large in my answer to Bellarmines Epistles written to
Blackwell; from whence the Lord Cardinal borrowing this example, it might well
have beseemed his Lordship to borrow likewise my answer from the same place.

Now as it mooues me nothing at all, to be drawn by his Lordship into
suspicions of this nature and quality: so by the praises, that he rocks me
withal, I will never be lulled asleep. To commend a man for his knowledge,
and withal to take from him the fear of God, is to admire a soldier for his
goodly head of hair or his curled locks, and withal to call him base coward,
faint-hearted and fresh water soldier. Knowledge, wit, and learning in an
heretic, are of none other use and service, but only to make him the more
culpable, and consequently obnoxious to the more grievous punishments. All
virtues turn to vices, when they become the servants of impiety. The
handmaids which the Sovereign Lady Wisdom calls to be of her train in the
9. Proverb. are moral virtues, and humane sciences; which then become
pernicious, when they run away from their Sovereign Lady-Mistris, and put
over themselves in service to the Devil. What difference is between two men,
both alike wanting the knowledge of God; the one fnrnished with arts and civil
virtues, the other brutishly barbarous and of a deformed life, or of profane
manners? What is the difference between these two? I make this the only
difference: the first goes to hell with a better grace, and falls into
perdition with more facility, then the second. But he becomes exceedingly
wicked, even threefold and fourefold abominable, if he wast his treasure and
stock of civil virtues in persecuting the Church of Christ: and if that may
be laid in his dish which was cast in Caesar's teeth, that in plain sobernes
and well-setled temper, he attempts the ruin of the Commonwealth, which from
a drunken sot might receive perhaps a more easy fall. In brief, I scorn all
garlands of praises, which are not ever green; but being dry and withered
for want of sap and radical moisture, do flagge about barbarous Princes
brows. I defy and renounce those praises, which fit me no more then they fit
a Mahumetane King of Marocco. I contest against all praises which grace me with
pety accessories, but rob me of the principal, that one thing necessary;
namely, the fear and knowledge of my God: unto whose Majesty alone, I have
devoted my scepter, my sword, my pen, my whole industry, my whole self, with
all that is mine in whole and in part. I do it, I do it in all humble
acknowledgement of his unspeakable mercy and favor, who has vouchsafed to
deliver me from the erroneous way of this age, to deliver my Kingdom from the
Popes tyrannical yoke, under which it has lain in times past most grievously
oppressed. My Kingdom where God is now purely served, and called upon in a
tongue which all the vulgar understand. My Kingdom, where the people may now
read the Scriptures without any special privilege from the Apostolic See,
and with no less liberty then the people of Ephesus, of Rome, and of Corinth
did read the holy Epistles, written to their Churches by S. Paul. My Kingdom,
where the people now pay no longer any tribute by the poll for Papal
indulgences, as they did about an hundred years past, Aliquot annis post,
Apostolicae sedis nuncius in Angliam ad colligendum S. Petri vectigal missus.
Onu^phri in vit Paul. 4. Vide and Math. Paris.
and are no longer compelled to the mart, for pardons beyond the Seas and
Mountains, but have them now freely offered from God, by the doctrine of the
Gospel preached at home, within their own several parishes and jurisdictions.
If the Churches of my Kingdom, in the L. Cardinals account, be miserable for
these causes and the like; let him dream on, and talk his pleasure: for my
part I will ever advowe, that more worth is our misery then all his felicity.
For the rest, it shall by Gods grace be my daily endeavor and serious care, to
pass my days in shaping to my self such a course of life, that without
shameful calumniating of my person, it shall not rest in the tippe of any
tongue, to touch my life with just reprehension or blame. Nor am I so privy to
mine own guiltiness, as to think my state so desperate, so deplorable, as
Popes have made their own. For some of them have been so open-hearted and so
tongue-free, to pronounce that Popes themselves, the key-bearers of Heaven and
hell, Onup. de vitis Pontif. in vit. Mar. 2. does testify, that Marcel also
after Adrian 4. used these words: Non video quo modo qui locum hunc altiss.
tenent, saluari possint.
cannot be saved. Two Popes, reckoned among the best of the whole bunch or
pack, namely, Adrian IV. and Marcelline II. have both sung one and the same
note; that in their understanding they could not conceive any reason why, or
any means how those that sway the Popedom can be partakers of salvation. But
for my particular, grounding my faith upon the promises of God contained in the
Gospel, I do confidently and assuredly believe, that repenting me of my
sins, and reposing my whole trust in the merits of Jesus Christ, I shall
obtain forgiveness of my sins thorough his Name. Nor do I fear, that I am
now, or shall be hereafter cast out of the Churches lap and bosom; that I now
have or hereafter shall have no right to the Church as a putrified member
thereof, so long as I do or shall cleave to Christ Jesus, the Head of the
Church: the appellation and name whereof, serves in this corrupt age, as a
cloak to cover a thousand new inventions; and now no longer signifies the
assembly of the faithful, or such as believe in Jesus Christ according to his
word, but a certain glorious ostentation and Temporal Monarchy, whereof the
Pope forsooth is the supreme head.

But if the L. Cardinal by assured and certain knowledge (as perhaps he may
by common fame) did understand the horrible conspiracies that have been plotted
and contrived, not against my person and life alone, but also against my whole
stock: if he rightly knew and were inly persuaded, of how many foul periuries
and wicked treasons, diverse Ecclesiastical persons have been lawfully
convicted: in stead of charging me with false imputations, that I suffer not my
Catholics to fetch a sigh, or to draw their breath; and that I thrust my
Catholics upon the sharp edge of punishment in every kind; he would, and
might well, rather wonder, how I my self, after so many dangers run, after so
many proditorious snares escaped, do yet fetch my own breath, and yet
practice Princely clemency toward the said Catholics, notorious transgressors
of divine and humane laws. If the French King in the heart of his Kingdom,
should nourish and foster such a nest of stinging hornets and busy waspes, I
mean such a pack of subjects, denying his absolute Sovereignty, as many Roman
Catholics of my Kingdom do mine: it may well be doubted, whether the L.
Cardinal would advise his King still to feather the nest of the said
Catholics, still to keep them warm, still to bear them with an easy and a
gentle hand. It may well be doubted, whether his Lordship would extol their
constancy, that would have the courage to sheath up their swords in his Kings
bowels, or blow up his King with gunpowder, into the nether station of the
lowest region. It may well be doubted, whether he would endure that Orator,
who (like as himself has done) should stir up others to suffer Martyrdom
after such examples, and to imitate parricides and traitors in their constancy.
The scope then of the L. Cardinal, in striking the sweet strings, and sounding
the pleasant notes of praises, which feign he would fill mine ears withal; is
only by his excellent skill in the music of Oratorie, to bewitch the hearts
of my subjects, to infatuate their minds, to settle them in a resolution to
deprive me of my life. The reason: Because the plotters and practisers against
my life, are honored and rewarded with a glorious name of Martyrs: their
constancy (what else?) is admired, when they suffer death for treason. Whereas
hitherto during the time of my whole reign to this day, (I speak it in the
word of a King, and truth it self shall make good the Kings word) no man has
lost his life, no man has endured the Rack, no man has suffered corporal
punishment in other kinds, merely or simply, or in any degree of respect, for
his conscience in matter of religion; but for wicked conspiring against my
life, or Estate, or Royal dignity; or else for some notorious crime, or some
obstinate and wilful disobedience. Of which traitorous and viperous brood, I
commanded one to be hanged by the neck of late in Scotland: a Jesuit of
intolerable impudency, who at his arraignment and public trial, stiffely
maintained, that I have robbed the Pope of his right, and have no manner of
right in the possession of my Kingdom. His Lordship therefore in offering
himself to Martyrdom, after the rare example of Catholics, as he says
suffering all sort of punishment in my Kingdom, does plainly profess
himself a follower of traitors and parricides. These be the Worthies, these
the heroical spirits, these the honorable Captains and Coronels, whose
virtuous parts never sufficiently magnified and praised, his Lordship
propounds for imitation to the French Bishops. O the name of Martyrs, in old
times a sacred name! how is it now derided and scoffed? how is it in these
days filthily profaned? O you the whole quire and holy company of Apostles,
who have sealed the truth with your dearest blood! how much are you disparaged?
how unfitly are you paragoned and matched, when traitors, bloody butchers, and
King-killers are made your assistants, and of the same Quorum; or to speak in
milder terms, when you are coupled with Martyrs that suffer for maintaining
the Temporal rites of the Popes Empire? with Bishops that offer themselves to
a Problematicall Martyrdom, for a point decided neither by the authorities of
your Spirit-inspired pens, nor by the ancient and venerable testimony of the
Primitive Church? for a point which they dare not undertake to teach, otherwise
then by a doubtful, cold, fearful way of discourse, and altogether without
resolution. In good sooth, I take the Cardinal for a personage of a quicker
spirit and clearer sight, (let his Lordship hold me excused) then to persuade
my self, that in these matters his tongue and his heart, his pen and his
inward judgment, have any concord or correspondence one with another. For
being very much against his mind (as he does confess) thrust into the office
of an Advocate to plead this cause; he suffered himself to be carried (after
his engagement) with some heat, to utter some things against his conscience
murmuring and grumbling the contrary within; and to affirm some other things
with confidence, whereof he had not been otherwise informed, then only by
vain and lying report. Of which rank is that bold assertion of his Lordship;
That many Catholics in England, rather then they would subscribe to the oath of
allegiance in the form thereof, have undergone all sorts of punishment. For in
England (as we have truly given the whole Christian world to understand in our
Preface to the Apology) there is but one form or kind of punishment ordained
for all sorts of traitors.

Has not his Lordship now graced me with goodly testimonialls of praise and
commendation? Am I not by his praises proclaimed a Tyrant, as it were
inebriated with blood of the Saints, and a famous Enginer of torments for my
Catholics? To this exhortation for the suffering of Martyrdom, in imitation
of my English traitors and parricides, if we shall add; how craftily and
subtly he makes the Kings of England to hold of the Pope by fealty, and their
Kingdom in bondage to the Pope by Temporal recognizance; it shall easily
appear, that his holy water of praises wherewith I am so reverently
besprinkled, is a composition extracted out of a dram of honey and a pound of
gall, first steeped in a strong decoction of bitter wormwood, or of the wild
gourd called Coloquintida. For after he has in the beginning of his Oration,
Page 10.
spoken of Kings that owe fealty to the Pope, and are not Sovereigns in the
highest degree of Temporal supremacy within their Kingdoms; to explain his
mind and meaning the better, he marshals the Kings of England a little after in
the same rank. His words be these; When King John of England, not yet bound in
any temporal recognizance to the Pope, had expelled his Bishops, etc. His
Lordship means, that King John became so bound to the Pope not long after. And
what may this meaning be, but in plain terms and broad speech, to call me
usurper and unlawful King? For the feudatarie, or he that holds a Manor by
fealty, when he does not his homage, with all suit and service that he owes to
the Lord Paramount, does fall from the property of his fee. This reproach of
the L. Cardinals, is seconded with an other of Bellarmines his brother
Cardinal; That Ireland was given to the Kings of England by the Pope. The best
is that his most reverend Lordship has not showed, who it was that gave
Ireland to the Pope.

And touching John King of England, thus in brief stands the whole matter.
Between Henry 2. and the Pope had passed sundry bickerments, about collating of
Ecclesiastical dignities. John the son, after his fathers death, renews,
undertakes, and pursues the same quarrel. Drives certain English Bishops
out of the Kingdom, for defending the Popes insolent usurpation upon his
Royal prerogative, and Regal rights. Shows such Princely courage and
resolution in those times, when all that stood and suffered for the Popes
Temporal pretensions against Kings, were enrowled Martyrs or Confessors. The
Pope takes the matter in foul scorn, and great indignation; shuts the King by
his excommunicatory Bulls out of the Church; stirs up his Barons, for other
causes the Kings heavy friends, to rise in arms; gives the Kingdom of England
(like a masterlesse man turned over to a new master) to Philippus Augustus King
of France; binds Philip to make a conquest of England by the sword, or else no
bargain, or else no gift; promises Philip, in recompense of his travel and
Royal expenses in that conquest, full absolution and a general pardon at large
for all his sins: to be short, cuts King John out so much work and makes him
keep so many yrons in the fire for his work, that he had none other way, none
other means to pacify the Popes high displeasure, to correct or qualify the
malignitie of the Popes choleric humor, by whom he was then so entangled in
the Popes toils, but by yielding himself to become the Popes vassal, and his
Kingdom feudatary or to hold by fealty of the Papal See. By this means his
Crown is made tributarie, all his people liable to payment of taxes by the
poll for a certain yearly tribute, and he is blessed with a pardon for all his
sins. Whether King John was moved to do this dishonorable act upon any
devotion, or inflamed with any zeal of Religion; or enforced by the
irresistable weapons of necessity, who can be so blind, that he does not well
see and clearly perceive? For to purchase his own freedom from this bondage
to the Pope; what could he be unwilling to do, that was willing to bring his
Kingdom under the yoke of Amirales Murmelinus a Mahumetan Prince, then King of
Granado and Barbaria? The Pope after that, sent a Legate into England. The King
now the Popes vassal, and holding his Crown of the Pope, like a man that
holds his land of an other by Knights service, or by homage and fealty, does
fair homage for his Crown to the Popes Legate, and lays down at his feet a
great masle of the purest gold in coin. The reverend Legate, in token of his
Masters Sovereignty, with more then usual pride falls to kicking and spurning
the treasure, no doubt with a pair of most holy feet. Not only so; but
likewise at solemn feasts is easily entreated to take the Kings chair of
Estate. Here I would feign know the Lord Cardinals opinion; whether these
actions of the Pope were just or unjust, lawful or unlawful, according to
right or against all right and reason. If he will say against right; it is then
clear, that against right his Lordship has made way to this example: if
according to right; let him then make it known, from whence or from whom this
power was derived and conuaied to the Pope, whereby he makes himself
Sovereign Lord of Temporalties in that Kingdom, where neither he nor any of
his predecessors ever pretended any right, or laid any claim to Temporal
matters before. Are such prankes to be played by the Pontificiall Bishop? Is
this an act of Holiness, to set a Kingdom on fire by the flaming brands of
sedition? to dismember and quarter a Kingdom with intestine wars; only to
this end, that a King once reduced to the lowest degree of misery, might be
lifted by his Holiness out of his Royal prerogative, the very soul and life
of his Royal Estate? When began this Papal power? In what age began the
Pope to practice this power? What! have the ancient Canons, (for the Scripture
in this question bears no pawme) have the Canons of the ancient Church,
imposed any such satisfaction upon a sinner, that of ueraigne and free King, he
should become vassal to his ghostly Father; that he should make himself
together with all his people and subjects tributaries to a Bishop, that shall
rifle a whole Nation of their coin, that shall receive homage of a King, and
make a King his vassal? What! Shall not a sinner be quitted of his faults,
except his Pastor turn robber, and one that goes about to get a booty? except
he make his Pastor a feoffee in his whole Estate, and suffer himself under a
shadow of penance to freeze naked, to be turned out of all his goods and
possessions of inheritance? But be it granted, admit his Holiness robs one
Prince of his rights and revenues, to confer the same upon an other: were it
not an high degree of Tyranny to finger an other man's estate, and to give that
away to a third, which the second has no right, no lawful authority to give?
Well, if the Pope then shall become his own caruer in the rights of an other;
if he shall make his own coffers to swell with an others revenues, if he shall
deck and array his own back in the spoils of a sinner, with whom in
absolution he makes peace, and takes truce; what can this be else, but
running into further degrees of wickedness and mischief? what can this be
else, but heaping of robbery upon fraud, and impiety upon robbery? For by such
deceitful, crafty, and cunning practices, the nature of the Pontificiall Sea,
merely spiritual, is changed into the Kings-bench-Court, merely temporal:
the Bishops chair is changed into a Monarchs Throne. And not only so; but
besides, the sinners repentance is changed into a snare or pit-fall of
cousening deceit; and Saint Peter's net is changed into a casting-net or a flew,
to fish for all the wealth of most flourishing Kingdoms. Moreover, the King (a
hard case) is driven by such wyles and subtilties, to work impossibilities, to
act more then is lawful or within the compass of his power to practice. For
the King neither may in right, nor can by power trans-nature his Crown,
impair the Majesty of his Kingdom, or leave his Royal dignity less free
to his heir apparent, or next successor, then he received the same of his
predecessor. Much less, by any dishonorable capitulations, by any unworthy
contracts, degrade his posterity, bring his people under the grievous burden
of tributes and taxes to a foreign Prince. Least of all, make them tributary
to a Priest: unto whom it no way appertains to have any hand in the civil
affairs of Kings, or to distaine and unhallow their Crowns. And therefore
when the Pope dispatched his Nuntio to Philippus Augustus, requesting the King
to avert Lewis his son from laying any claim to the Kingdom of England;
Philip answered the Legate (as we have it in Math. Paris;) No King, no Prince
can abienate or give away his Kingdom, but by consent of his Barons, bound by
Knights service to defend the said Kingdom: and in case the Pope shall stand
for the contrary error, his Holiness shall give to Kingdoms a most pernicious
example. By the same Authorit is testified, that King John became odious to his
subjects, for such dishonorable and unworthy inthralling of his Crown and
Kingdom. Therefore the Popes right pretended to the Crown of England, which
is nothing else but a ridiculous usurpation, has long ago vanished into
smoke, and required not so much as the drawing of one sword to snatch and pull
it by violence out of his hands. For the Popes power lying altogether in a
certain wild and wandering conceit or opinion of men, and being only an
imaginary castle in the air, built by pride, and underpropped by superstition,
is very speedily dispersed upon the first rising and appearing of the truth in
her glorious brightness. There is none so very a dolt or block-head to deny,
that in case this right of the Pope over England, is grounded upon Gods word,
then his Holiness may challenge the like right over all other Kingdoms:
because all other Kingdoms, Crowns, and Scepters are subject alike to Gods
word. For what privilege, what charter, what evidence can France fetch out of
the Rolls, or any other treasury of her monuments or records, to show that
she owes less subjection to God then England? Or was this yoke of bondage
then brought upon the English Nation; was it a prerogative, whereby they might
more easily come to the liberty of the sons of God? Or were the people of
England persuaded, that for all their substance, wealth, and life bestowed on
the Pope, his Holiness by way of exchange returned them better weight and
measure of spiritual graces? It is ridiculous, only to conceive these to yes
in thought; and yet with such ridiculous, with such toys in conceit, his
Lordship feeds and entertains his auditors.

From this point he falls to an other bowt and fling at his heretics, Page
105.
with whom he played no fair play before: There is not one Synod of ministers
(as he says) which would willingly subscribe to this Article, whereunto we
should be bound to swear. But herein his Lordship shoots far from the
mark. This Article is approved and preached by the Ministers of my Kingdom. It
is likewise preached by those of France, and if need be (I assure my self)
will be signed by all the Ministers of the French Church.

The L. Cardinal proceeds, (for he means not so soon to give over these
heretics: All their Consistories believe it as their Creed; that if Catholic
Princes at any time shall offer force unto their conscience, then they are
dispensed withal for their oath of allegiance. Hence are these modifications
and restrictions, tossed so much in their mouths; Provided the King force us
not in our conscience. Hence are these exceptions in the profession of their
faith; Provided the Sovereign power and authority of God, be not in any sort
violated or infringed. I am not able to conceive what engine can be framed of
these materials, for the bearing of Kings out of their eminent seats, by any
lawful authority or power in the Pope. For say, those of the Religion should
be tainted with some like error; how can that be any shelter of excuse for
those of the Romish Church, to undermine or to dig up the Thrones of their
Kings? But in this allegation of the Lord Cardinal, there is nothing at all,
which does not iumpe just and accord to a hair with the Article of the third
Estate, and with obedience due to the King. For they do not profess, that in
case the King shall command them to do any act contrary to their conscience,
they would fly at his throat, would make any attempt against his life, would
refuse to pay their taxations, or to defend him in the wars. They make no
profession of deposing the King, or discharging the people from the oath of
allegiance tendered to the King: which is the very point or issue of the matter
in controversy, and the maine mischeife, against which the third Estate has
bin most worthily careful to provide a wholesome remedy by this Article.
There is a world of difference between the terms of disobedience, and of
deposition. It is one thing to disobey the Kings command in matters prohibited
by divine laws, and yet in all other matters to perform full subjection unto
the King. It is another thing of a far higher degree or strain of
disloyalty, to bare the King of his Royal robes, throne, and scepter, and
when he is thus far disgraced, to degrade him and to put him from his degree
and place of a King. If the holy Father should charge the L. Cardinal to do
some act repugnant in his own knowledge to the Law of God, I will religiously,
and according to the rule of charity presume, that his Lordship in this case
would stand out against his Holiness, and notwithstanding would still
acknowledge him to be Pope.

His Lordship yet prosecutes and follows his former purpose: Hence are those
arms which they have oftentimes borne against Kings, when Kings practiced to
take away the liberty of their conscience and Religion. Hence are those
turbulent Commotions and seditions by them raised, as well in the Law-countryes
against the King of Spain, as in Swethland against the Catholic King of
Polonia. Besides, he casts Iunius Brutus, Buchananus, Barclaius, and Gerson
in our teeth. To what end all this? I see not how it can be available to
authorize the deposing of Kings, especially the Popes power to depose. And yet
his Lordship here does outface (by his leave) and bear down the truth. For I
could never yet learn by any good and true intelligence, that in France those
of the Religion took arms at any time against their King. In the first civil
wars they stood only upon their guard: they stood only to their lawful
wards and locks of defense: they armed not, nor took the field before they
were pursued with fire and sword, burnt up and slaughtred. Besides, Religion
was neither the root nor the rynde of those intestine troubles. The true ground
of the quarrel was this: During the minority of King Francis 2. the
Protestants of France were a refuge and succor to the Princes of the blood,
when they were kept from the Kings presence, and by the over pouring power of
their enemies, were no better then plain driven and chased from the Court. I
mean, the Grandfather of the King now reigning, and the Grandfather of the
Prince of Conde, when they had no place of safe retreat. In regard of which
worthy and honorable service, it may seem the French King has reason to have
the Protestants in his gracious remembrance. With other commotion or
insurrection, the Protestants are not justly to be charged. But on the
contrary, certain it is that King Henry III. raised and sent forth several
armies against the Protestants, to ruin and root them out of the Kingdom:
howbeit, so soon as they perceived the said King was brought into dangerous
terms, they ran with great speed and special fidelity to the Kings rescue
and succor, in the present danger. Certain it is, that by their good service
the said King was delivered, from a most extreme and imminent peril of his
life in the city of Tours. Certain it is, they never abandoned that Henry 3.
nor his next successor Henry 4. in all the heat of reuolts and rebellions,
raised in the greatest part of the Kingdom by the Pope, and the more part of
the Clergy: but stood to the said Kings in all their battles, to bear up the
Crown then tottering and ready to fall. Certain it is, that even the heads
and principalls of those by whom the late King deceased was pursued with all
extremities, at this day do enjoy the fruit of all the good services done to
the King by the said Protestants. And they are now disgraced, kept under,
exposed to public hatred. What, for kindling coals of questions and
controversies about Religion? Forsooth, not so: but because if they might have
equal and indifferent dealing, if credit might be given to their faithful
aduertisements, the Crown of their Kings should be no longer pinned to the
Popes flie-flap; in France there should be no French exempted from subjection
to the French King; causes of benefices or of matrimony, should be no longer
citable and summonable to the Romish Court; and the Kingdom should be no
longer tributarie under the color of annats, the first fruits of Benefices
after the remove or death of the Incumbent, and other like impositions.

But why do I speak so much in the behalf of the French Protestants? The Lord
Cardinal himself quittes them of this blame, when he tells us this doctrine
for the deposing of Kings by the Popes mace or verge, had credit and authority
through all France, until Caluins time. Does not his Lordship underhand
confess by these words, that Kings had been always before Caluins time, the
more dishonored, and the worse served? Item, that Protestants, whom his
Lordship calls heretics, by the light of holy Scripture made the world then
and ever since to see the right of Kings, oppressed so long before? As for
those of the Low Countries, and the subjects of Swethland, I have little to say
of their case, because it is not within ordinary compass, and indeed serves
nothing to the purpose. These Nations, besides the cause of Religion, do stand
upon certain reasons of State, which I will not here take upon me like a Judge
to determine or to sift.

Iunius Brutus, whom the L. Cardinal obiecteth, is an author unknown; and
perhaps of purpose patcht up by some Romanist, with a wyly deceit to draw the
reformed Religion into hatred with Christian Princes.

Buchanan I reckon and rank among Poets, not among Divines, classical or
common. If the man has burst out here and there into some terms of excess,
or speech of bad temper; that must be imputed to the violence of his humor,
and heat of his spirit, not in any wise to the rules and conclusions of true
Religion, rightly by him conceived before.

Barclaius alleged by the Cardinal, meddles not with deposing of Kings; but
deals with disavowing them for Kings, when they shall renounce the right of
Royalty, and of their own accord give over the Kingdom. Now he that leaves
it in the Kings choice, either to hold or to give over his Crown, leaves it
not in the Popes power to take away the Kingdom.

Of Gerson obtruded by the Cardinal, we have spoken sufficiently before. Where
it has been showed how Gerson is disguised, masked, and perverted by his
Lordsh. In brief, I take not upon me to justify and make good all the sayings
of particular authors. We glory (and well we may) that our religion affords
no rules of rebellion: nor any dispensation to subjects for the oath of their
allegiance: and that none of our Churches give entertainment unto such
monstrous and abominable principles of disloyalty.

If any of the French, otherwise persuaded in former times, Richerius.
now having altered and changed his judgment, does contend for the Sovereignty
of Kings against Papal usurpation; he doubtless, for winding himself out of the
Laborinth of an error so intricate and pernicious, deserves great honor and
special praise. He is worthy to hold a place of dignity above the L.
Cardinal: who has quitted and betrayed his former judgment, which was holy
and just. Their motions are contrary, their marks are opposite. The one
reclineth from evil to good, the other declineth from good to evil.

At last his Lordship comes to the close of his Oration, and binds up his
whole harangue with a feate wreath of praises, proper to his King. He styles
the King the eldest Son of the Church, a young shoot of the lilly, which King
Solomon in all his Royalty was not able to match. He leads us by the hand
into the pleasant meadows of Histories, there to learn upon the very first
sight and view, That so long, so often as the Kings of France embraced union,
and kept good terms of concord with Popes and the Apostolic See; so long as
the spouse of the Church was pastured and fed among the lillies, all sorts of
spiritual and temporal graces abundantly showred upon their Crowns, and upon
their people: On the contrary, when they made any rent or separation from the
most holy See; then the lillies were pricked and almost choked with sharp
thorns; they began to droope, to stoop, and to bear their beautiful heads
down to the very ground, under the strong flawes and gusts of boisterous winds
and tempests.

My answer to this flourishing close and vpshot, shall beno less apert then
apt. It savors not of good and faithful service, to smooth and stroke the
Kings head with a soft hand of oyled speech, and in the mean time to take away
the Crown from his head, and to defile it with dirt. But let us try the cause
by evidence of History, yea by the voice and verdict of experience; to see
whether the glorious beauty of the French lillies, has been at any time
blasted, and thereupon has faded, by starting aside, and making separation
from the holy See. Under the reign of King Philip the Fair, France was
blessed with peace and prosperity, notwithstanding some outrageous acts done
against the Papal See, and contumelious crying quittance by King Philip with
the Pope. Lewis 12. in ranged battle defeated the armies of Pope Julius 2. and
his Confederates: proclaimed the said Pope to be fallen from the Popedom:
stamped certain coins and pieces of gold with a dishonorable mot, even to
Rome it self, Rome is Babylon: yet so much was Lewis loved and honored of his
people, that by a peculiar title he was called, the Father of the Country.
Greater blessings of God, greater outward peace and plenty, greater inward
peace with spiritual and celestial treasures, were never heaped upon my Great
Britain, then have been since my Great Britain became Great in the greatest
and chiefest respect of all; to wit, since my Great Britain has shaken off
the Popes yoke; since she has refused to receive and to entertain the Popes
Legates, employed to collect S. Peter's tribute or Peter Pence; since the Kings
of England, my Great Britain, have not been the Popes vassals to do him
homage for their Crown, and have no more felt the lashings, the scourgings of
base and beggarly Monks. Of Holland, Zeland, and Friseland, what need I
speak? yet a word and no more. Were they not a kind of naked and bare people,
of small value, before God lighted the torch of the Gospel, and advanced it in
those Nations? were they not an ill fed and scragged people, in comparison of
the inestimable wealth and prosperity (both in all military actions and
mechanical trades, in traffic as merchants, in marting as men of war, in
long navigations for discovery) to which they are now raised and mounted by the
merciful blessing of God, since the darkness of Popery has been scattered,
and the bright Sun of the Gospel has shined in those Countries? Behold the
Venetian Republique. Has she now less beauty, less glory, less peace and
prosperity, since she lately fell to bicker and contend with the Pope? since
she has wrung out of the Popes hand, the one of his two swords? since she
has plumed and shaked his Temporal dominion? On the contrary; after the
French Kings had honored the Popes, with munificent graunts and gifts of all
the cities and territories, lands and possessions, which they now hold in
Italy, and the ancient Earldom of Avignon in France for an ouer-plus; were
they not rudely recompensed, and homely handled by their most ungrateful
fee-farmers and copyholders? Have not Popes forged a donation of Constantine,
of purpose to blot out all memory of Pepins and Charlemaignes donation? Have
they not vexed and troubled the State? have they not whetted the sons of
Lewis the Courteous against their own Father, whose life was a pattern and
example of innocence? Have they not by their infinite exactions, robbed and
scoured the Kingdom of all their treasure? Were not the Kings of France,
driven to stop their violent courses by the pragmaticall sanction? Did they
not sundry times interdict the Kingdom, degrade the Kings, solicit the
neighbour-Princes to invade and lay hold on the Kingdom, and stir up the
people against the King, whereby a gate was opened to a world of troubles and
parricides? Did not Rauaillac render this reason for his monstrous and horrible
attempt, That King Henry had a design to war with God, because he had a
design to take arms against his Holiness, who is God? This makes me to
wonder, what moved the L. Cardinal to marshall the last civil wars and
motions in France, in the rank of examples of unhappy separation from the
Pope; when the Pope himself was the trumpetor of the same troublesome motions.
If the Pope had been wronged and offended by the French King, or his people,
and the Kingdom of France had been scourged with pestilence, or famine, or
some other calamity by foreign enemies; it might have been taken in
probability, as a vengeance of God for some injury done unto his Vicar. But
his Holiness being the root, the ground, the master-workman and artificer of
all these mischiefs; how can it be said, that God punishes any injury done to
the Pope? but rather that his Holiness does revenge his own quarrel; and
which is worst of all, when his Holiness has no just cause of quarrel or
offense. Now then; to exhort a Nation (as the L. Cardinal has done) by the
remembrance of former calamities, to currie favor with the Pope, and to hold a
strict union with his Holiness, is no exhortation to bear the Pope any
respect of love, or of reverence, but rather a rubbing of memory, and a
calling to mind of those grievous calamities, whereof the Pope has been the
only occasion. It is also a threatening and obtruding of the Popes terrible
thunderbolts, which never scorched nor parched any skin, (except crauens and
meticulous bodies) and have brought many great showers of blessings upon my
Kingdom.

As for France, if she has enjoyed prosperity in the times of her good
agreement with Popes, it is because the Pope seeks the amity of Princes that
are in prosperity, have the means to curb his pretensions, and to put him to
some plunge. Kings are not in prosperity, because the Pope holds amity with
Kings; but his Holiness uses all devises, and seeks all means to have
amity with Kings, because he sees them flourish and sail with prosperous
winds. The swallow is no cause, but a companion of the spring: the Pope is no
worker of a Kingdoms felicity, but a wooer of Kings when they sit in
felicities lap: he is no founder, but a follower of their good fortunes. On the
other side: let a Kingdom fall into some grievous disaster or calamity, let
civil wars boil in the bowels of the Kingdom; civil wars no less
dangerous to the State, then fearful and grievous to the people; who rises
sooner then the Pope, who rusheth sooner into the troubled streams then the
Pope, who thrusts himself sooner into the heat of the quarrel then the
Pope, who runs sooner to raise his gain by the public wrack then the Pope,
and all under color of a heart wounded and bleeding for the salvation of
souls? If the lawful King happen to be foiled, to be oppressed, and thereupon
the State by his fall to get a new master by the Popes practice; then the said
new-master must hold the Kingdom as of the Popes free gift, and rule or guide
the stern of the State at his beck, and by his instruction. If the first and
right Lord, in despite of all the Popes fulminations and fireworkes, shall get
the honorable day, and upper hand of his enemies; then the holy Father with a
cheerful and pleasant grace, yea with fatherly gratulation, opens the rich
cabinet of his jewels, I mean the treasury of his indulgences, and falls now
to dandle and cocker the King in his fatherly lap, whose throat if he could, he
would have cut not long before.

This pestilent mischief has now a long time taken root, and is grown to a
great head in the Christian world, through the secret but just judgment of
God; by whom Christian Kings have been smitten with a spirit of dizzinesse.
Christian Kings, who for many ages past have lived in ignorance, without any
sound instruction, without any true sense and right feeling of their own right
and power: whilst under a shadow of Religion and false cloak of piety, their
Kingdoms have been ouer-burdened, yea ouer-born with tributes, and their
Crowns made to stoop even to miserable bondage. That God in whose hand the
hearts of Kings are poised, and at his pleasure turned as the watercourse;
that mighty God alone, in his good time, is able to rouse them out of so deep
a slumber, and to take order (their drowzy fits once over and shaken off with
heroical spirits) that Popes hereafter shall play no more upon their patience,
nor presume to put bits and snaffles in their noble mouths, to the binding up
of their power with weak scruples, like mighty bulls lead about by little
children with a small twisted thread. To that God, that King of Kings I deuote
my scepter; at his feet in all humblenes I lay down my Crown; to his holy
decrees and commands I will ever be a faithful servant, and in his battles a
faithful champion. To conclude; in this just cause and quarrel, I dare send
the challenge, and will require no second, to maintain as a defendant of
honor, that my brother-Princes and my self, whom God has advanced upon the
Throne of Sovereign Majesty and supreme dignity, do hold the Royal dignity
of his Majesty alone; to whose service, as a most humble homager and vassal, I
consecrate all the glory, honor, splendour, and luster of my earthly Kingdoms.

FINIS.

