A COVNTERBLASTE TO Tobacco.

Imprinted at London by R. B. Anno 1604.

TO THE READER.
AS every humane body (dear Country men) how wholesome soever, is
notwithstanding subject, or at least naturally inclined to some sorts of
diseases, or infirmities: so is there no Commonwealth, or Body-politicke, how
well governed, or peaceable soever it be, that lackes the own popular errors,
and naturally inclined corruptions: and therefore is it no wonder, although
this our Country and Commonwealth, though peaceable, though wealthy, though
long flourishing in both, be amongst the rest, subject to the own natural
infirmities. We are of all Nations the people most loving and most reverently
obedient to our Prince, yet are we (as time has often borne witness) too
easy to be seduced to make Rebellion, upon very slight grounds. Our fortunate
and often proved valor in wars abroad, our hearty and reverent obedience to
our Princes at home, has bred us a long, and a thrice happy peace: Our Peace
has bred wealth: And Peace and wealth has brought forth a general
sluggishnesse, which makes us wallow in all sorts of idle delights, and soft
delicacies, the first seeds of the subversion of all great Monarchies. Our
Clergy are become negligent and lazy, our Nobility and Gentry prodigal,
and sold to their private delights, Our Lawyers covetous, our Common People
prodigal and curious; and generally all sorts of people more careful for
their private ends, then for their mother the Commonwealth.

For remedy whereof, it is the Kings part (as the proper Phisician of his
Politicke-body) to purge it of all those diseases, by Medicines meet for the
same: as by a certain mild, and yet just form of government, to maintain
the Public quietness, and prevent all occasions of Commotion: by the example
of his own Person and Court, to make us all ashamed of our sluggish delicacie,
and to stir us up to the practice again of all honest exercises, and
Martial shadows of War; As likewise by his, and his Courts moderatenesse
in Apparel, to make us ashamed of our prodigality: By his quick admonitions
and careful ouerseeing of the Clergy, to waken them up again, to be more
diligent in their Offices: By the sharp trial, and severe punishment of the
partial, covetous and bribing Lawyers, to reform their corruptions: And
generally by the example of his own Person, and by the due execution of good
Laws, to reform and abolish, piece and piece, these old and evil grounded
abuses. For this will not be Opus vnius diei, but as every one of these
diseases, must from the King receive the own cure proper for it, so are there
some sorts of abuses in Commonwealths, that though they be of so base and
contemptible a condition, as they are too low for the Law to look on, and too
mean for a King to interpone his authority, or bend his eye upon: yet are
they corruptions, as well as the greatest of them. So is an Ant an Animal,
as well as an Elephant: so is a VVrenne Auis, as well as a Swanne, and so is a
small dint of the Toothake, a disease as well as the fearful Plague is. But
for these base sorts of corruption in Common wealths, not only the King, or
any inferior Magistrate, but Quilibet e populo may serve to be a Phisician, by
discovering and impugning the error, and by persuading reformation thereof.

And surely in my opinion, there cannot be a more base, and yet hurtful,
corruption in a Country, then is the vile use (or rather abuse) of taking
Tobacco in this Kingdom, which has moved me, shortly to discover the abuses
thereof in this following little Pamphlet.

If any think it a light Argument, so is it but a toy that is bestowed upon
it. And since the Subject is but of Smoke, I think the fume of an idle brain,
may serve for a sufficient battery against so fumous and feeble an enemy. If my
grounds be found true, it is all I look for; but if they carry the force of
persuasion with them, it is all I can wish, and more then I can expect. My
only care is, that you, my dear Contrymen, may rightly conceive even by
this smallest trifle, of the sincerity of my meaning in greater matters, never
to spare any pain, that may tend to the procuring of your weal and
prosperity.

A Counterblaste to Tobacco.
THat the manifold abuses of this vile custom of Tobacco taking, may the
better be espied, it is fit, that first you enter into consideration both of
the first original thereof, and likewise of the reasons of the first entry
thereof into this Country. For certainly as such customs, that have their
first institution either from a godly, necessary, or honorable ground, and are
first brought in, by the means of some worthy, virtuous, and great Personage,
are ever, and most justly, holden in great and reverent estimation and account,
by all wise, virtuous, and temperate spirits: So should it by the contrary,
justly bring a great disgrace into that sort of customs, which having their
original from base corruption and barbarity, do in like sort, make their
first entry into a Country, by an inconsiderate and childish affectation of
Novelty, as is the true case of the first invention of Tobacco taking, and of
the first entry thereof among us. For Tobacco being a common herb, which
(though under diverse names) grows almost every where, was first found out by
some of the barbarous Indians, to be a Preservative, or Antidot against the
Pockes, a filthy disease, whereunto these barbarous people are (as all men
know) very much subject, what through the uncleanly and adust constitution of
their bodies, and what through the intemperate heat of their Climat: so that
as from them was first brought into Christendom, that most detestable disease,
so from them likewise was brought this use of Tobacco, as a stinking and
unsavory Antidot, for so corrupted and execrable a Malady, the stinking
Suffumigation whereof they yet use against that disease, making so one canker
or venime to eat out another.

And now good Country men, let us (I pray you) consider, what honor or
policy can move us to imitate the barbarous and beastly manners of the wild,
godless, and slavish Indians, especially in so vile and stinking a custom?
Shall we that disdain to imitate the manners of our neighbor France (having
the style of the first Christian Kingdom) and that cannot endure the spirit of
the Spaniards (their King being now comparable in largenes of Dominions, to the
great Emperor of Turkey) Shall we, I say, that have been so long civil and
wealthy in Peace, famous and invincible in War, fortunate in both, we that
have been ever able to aid any of our neighbors (but never deafed any of
their ears with any of our supplications for assistance) shall we, I say,
without blushing, abase our selves so far, as to imitate these beastly
Indians, slaves to the Spaniards, refuse to the world, and as yet aliens from
the holy Covenant of God? Why do we not as well imitate them in walking naked
as they do? in preferring glasses, feathers, and such toys, to gold and
precious stones, as they do? yea why do we not deny God and adore the Devil,
as they do?

Now to the corrupted baseness of the first use of this Tobacco, does very
well agree the foolish and groundless first entry thereof into this Kingdom.
It is not so long since the first entry of this abuse amongst us here, as this
present age cannot yet very well remember, both the first Author, and the form
of the first introduction of it amongst us. It was neither brought in by King,
great Conqueror, nor learned Doctor of Physic.

With the report of a great discovery for a Conquest, some two or three Savage
me^, were brought in, together with this Savage custom. But the pity is, the
poor wild barbarous men died, but that vile barbarous custom is yet alive,
yea in fresh vigor: so as it seems a miracle to me, how a custom springing
from so vile a ground, and brought in by a father so generally hated, should be
welcomed upon so slender a warrant. For if they that first put it in practice
here, had remembered for what respect it was used by them from whence it came,
I am sure they would have been loath, to have taken so far the imputation of
that disease upon them as they did, by using the cure thereof. For Sanis non
est opus medico, and counterpoisons are never used, but where poison is thought
to precede.

But since it is true, that diverse customs slightly grounded, and with no
better warrant entered in a Commonwealth, may yet in the use of them thereafter,
prove both necessary and profitable; it is therefore next to be examined, if
there be not a full Sympathy and true Proportion, between the base ground and
foolish entry, and the loathsome and hurtful use of this stinking Antidote.

I am now therefore heartily to pray you to consider, first upon what false and
erroneous grounds you have first built the general good liking thereof; and
next, what sins toward God, and foolish vanities before the world you
commit, in the detestable use of it.

As for these deceitful grounds, that have specially moved you to take a good
and great conceit thereof, I shall content my self to examine here only four
of the principals of them; two founded upon the Theoricke of a deceivable
appearance of Reason, and two of them upon the mistaken Practicke of general
Experience.

First, it is thought by you a sure Aphorism in the Physickes, That the
brains of all men, being naturally cold and wet, all dry and hot things
should be good for them; of which nature this stinking suffumigation is, and
therefore of good use to them. Of this Argument, both the Proposition and
Assumption are false, and so the Conclusion cannot but be void of it self. For
as to the Proposition, That because the brains are cold and moist, therefore
things that are hot and dry are best for them, it is an inept consequence:
For man being compounded of the four Complexions, (whose fathers are the
four Elements) although there be a mixture of them all in all the parts of his
body, yet must the diverse parts of our Microcosme or little world within our
selves, be diversely more inclined, some to one, some to another complexion,
according to the diversity of their uses, that of these discords a perfect
harmony may be made up for the maintenance of the whole body.

The application then of a thing of a contrary nature, to any of these parts,
is to interrupt them of their due function, and by consequence hurtful to the
health of the whole body. As if a man, because the Liver is hot (as the
fountain of blood) and as it were and oven to the stomach, would therefore
apply and wear close upon his Liver and stomach a cake of lead; he might
within a very short time (I hope) be sustained very good cheap at an
Ordinary, beside the clearing of his conscience from that deadly sin of
gluttony. And as if, because the Heart is full of vital spirits, and in
perpetual motion, a man would therefore lay a heavy pound stone on his breast,
for staying and holding down that wanton palpitation, I doubt not but his
breast would be more bruised with the weight thereof, then the heart would be
comforted with such a disagreeable and contrarious cure. And even so is it with
the Brains. For if a man, because the Brains are cold and humide, would
therefore use inwardly by smells, or outwardly by application, things of hot
and dry qualite, all the gain that he could make thereof would only be to
put himself in a great forwardness for running mad, by ouerwatching himself,
the coldness and moistness of our brain being the only ordinary means
that procure our sleep and rest. Indeed I do not deny, but when it falls out
that any of these, or any part of our body grows to be distempered, and to
tend to an extremity beyond the compass of Natures temperate mixture, that in
that case cures of contrary qualities, to the intemperate inclination of that
part, being wisely prepared and discreetely ministered, may be both necessary
and helpefull for strengthening and assisting Nature in the expulsion of her
enemies: for this is the true definition of all profitable Physic.

But first these Cures ought not to be used, but where there is need of them,
the contrary whereof, is daily practiced in this general use of Tobacco by
all sorts and complexions of people.

And next, I deny the Minor of this argument, as I have already said, in regard
that this Tobacco, is not simply of a dry and hot quality; but rather has a
certain venomous faculty joined with the heat thereof, which makes it have
an Antipathie against nature, as by the hateful smell thereof does well
appear. For the Nose being the proper Organ and conuoy of the sense of
smelling to the brains, which are the only fountain of that sense, does
ever serve us for an infallible witness, whether that Odor which we smell, be
healthful or hurtful to the brain, (except when it falls out that the sense
it self is corrupted and abused through some infirmity, and distemper in the
brain.) And that the suffumigation thereof cannot have a drying quality, it
needs to further probation, then that it is a smoke, all smoke and vapor,
being of it self humide, as drawing near to the nature of the air, and easy
to be resolved again into water, whereof there needs no other proof but the
Meteors, which being bred of nothing else but of the vapors and exhalations
sucked up by the Sun out of the earth, the Sea, and waters, yet are the same
smoakie vapors turned, and transformed into Raynes, Snowes, Deawes, hoare
Frostes, and such like waterie Meteors, as by the contrary the raynie clouds
are often transformed and euaporated in blustering winds.

The second Argument grounded on a show of reason is, That this filthy smoke,
as well through the heat and strength thereof, as by a natural force and
quality, is able and fit to purge both the head and stomach of Rhewmes and
distillations, as experience teaches, by the spitting and avoiding fleame,
immediately after the taking of it. But the fallacy of this Argument may easily
appear, by my late preceding description of the Meteors. For even as the
smoakie vapors sucked up by the Sun, and stayed in the lowest and cold
Region of the air, are there contracted into clouds, and turned into rain
and such other watery Meteors: So this stinking smoke being sucked up by the
Nose, and imprisoned in the cold and moist brains, is by their cold and wett
faculty, turned and cast forth again in waterie distillations, and so are
you made free and purged of nothing, but that wherewith you wilfully burdened
your selves: and therefore are you no wiser in taking Tobacco for purging you
of distillations, then if for preventing the Cholike you would take all kind
of windy meats and drinks, and for preventing of the Stone, you would take
all kind of meats and drinks that would breed gravel in the Kidneyes, and
then when you were forced to avoid much wind out of your stomach, and much
gravel in your Urine, that you should attribute the thank thereof to such
nourishments as bred those within you, that behooved either to be expelled by
the force of Nature, or you to have burst at the broad side, as the Proverb is.

As for the other two reasons founded upon experience, the first of which is,
That the whole people would not have taken so general a good liking thereof,
if they had not by experience found it very sovereign and good for them: For
answer thereunto, how easily the minds of any people, wherewith God has
replenished this world, may be drawn to the foolish affectation of any
novelty, I leave it to the discreet judgment of any man that is reasonable.

Do we not daily see, that a man can no sooner bring over from beyond the Seas
any new form of apparel, but that he can not be thought a man of spirit,
that would not presently imitate the same? And so from hand to hand it
spreades, till it be practiced by all, not for any commodity that is in it,
but only because it is come to be the fashion. For such is the force of that
natural Self-love in every one of us, and such is the corruption of envy
bred in the breast of every one, as we cannot be content unless we imitate
every thing that our fellows do, and so prove our selves capable of every
thing whereof they are capable, like Apes, counterfeiting the manners of others,
to our own destruction. For let one or two of the greatest Masters of
Mathematickes in any of the two famous Universities, but constantly affirm any
clear day, that they see some strange apparition in the skies: they will I
warrant you be seconded by the greatest part of the Students in that
profession: So loath will they be, to be thought inferior to their fellows,
either in depth of knowledge or sharpness of sight: And therefore the general
good liking and embracing of this foolish custom, does but only proceed
from that affectation of novelty, and popular error, whereof I have already
spoken.

The other argument drawn from a mistaken experience, is but the more
particular probation of this general, because it is alleged to be found true
by proof, that by the taking of Tobacco diverse and very many do find
themselves cured of diverse diseases, as on the other part, no man ever received
harm thereby. In this argument there is first a great mistaking, and next a
monstrous absurdity. For is it not a very great mistaking, to take Non causam
pro causa, as they say in the Logicks? because peradventure when a sick man
has had his disease at the height, he has at that instant taken Tobacco, and
afterward his disease taking the natural course of declining, and consequently
the patient of recovering his health, O then the Tobacco forsooth, was the
worker of that miracle. Beside that, it is a thing well known to all
Phisicians, that the apprehension and conceit of the patient, has by wakening
and uniting the vital spirits, and so strengthening nature, a great power and
virtue, to cure diverse diseases For an evident proof of mistaking in the like
case, I pray you what foolish boy, what silly wench, what old doting wife, or
ignorant country clown, is not a Phisician for the toothach, for the
cholicke, and diverse such common diseases? Yea, will not every man you meet
withal, teach you a sundry cure for the same, and swear by that mean either
himself, or some of his nearest kinsmen and friends was cured? And yet I hope
no man is so foolish as to believe them. And al these toys do only proceed
from the mistaking Non causam pro causa, as I have already said, and so if a
man chance to recover one of any disease, after he has taken Tobacco, that
must have the thanks of all But by the contrary, if a man smoke himself to
death with it (and many have done) O then some other disease must bear the
blame for that fault. So do old harlots thank their harlotrie for their many
years, that custom being healthful (say they) ad purgandos Renes, but never
have mind how many die of the Pockes in the flower of their youth. And so do
old drunkards think they prolong their days, by their swinelike diet, but
never remember how many die drowned in drink before they be half old.

And what greater absurdity can there be, then to say that one cure shall
serve for diverse, nay, contrarious sorts of diseases? It is an undoubted
ground among all Phisicians, that there is almost no sort either of nourishment
or medicine, that has not something in it disagreeable to some part of man's
body, because, as I have already said, the nature of the temperature of every
part, is so different from another, that according to the old proverb, That
which is good for the head, is evil for the neck and the shoulders. For even
as a strong enemy, that inuades a town or fortress, although in his siege
thereof, he do belaie and compass it round about, yet he makes his breach and
entry, at some one or few special parts thereof, which he has tried and
found to be weakest and least able to resist; so sickness does make her
particular assault, upon such part or parts of our body, as are weakest and
easiest to be overcome by that sort of disease, which then does assail us,
although all the rest of the body by Sympathy feel it self, to be as it were
belaied, and besieged by the affliction of that special part, the grief and
smart thereof being by the sense of feeling dispersed through all the rest of
our members. And therefore the skillful Phisician presses by such cures to
purge and strengthen that part which is afflicted, as are only fit for that
sort of disease, and do best agree with the nature of that infirm part; which
being abused to a disease of another nature, would prove as hurtful for the
one, as helpful for the other. Yea, not only will a skillful and wary
Phisician be careful to use no cure but that which is fit for that sort of
disease, but he will also consider all other circumstances, and make the
remedies suitable thereunto: as the temperature of the clime where the Patient
is, the constitution of the Planets, the time of the Moon, the season of the
year, the age and complexion of the Patient, and the present state of his body,
in strength or weakness. For one cure must not ever be used for the
selfsame disease, but according to the varying of any of the foresaid
circumstances, that sort of remedy must be used which is fittest for the same.
Whear by the contrary in this case, such is the miraculous omnipotency of our
strong tasted Tobacco, as it cures all sorts of diseases (which never any
drugge could do before) in all persons, and at all times. It cures all manner of
distillations, either in the head or stomach (if you believe their Axioms)
although in very deed it do both corrupt the brain, and by causing over
quick disgestion, fill the stomach full of crudities. It cures the Gowt in
the feet, and (which is miraculous) in that very instant when the smoke
thereof, as light, flies up into the head, the virtue thereof, as heavy, runs
down to the little toe. It helps all sorts of Agues. It makes a man sober
that was drunk. It refreshes a weary man, and yet makes a man hungry. Being
taken when they go to bed, it makes one sleep soundly, and yet being taken
when a man is sleepie and drowsy, it will, as they say, awake his brain, and
quicken his understanding. As for curing of the Pockes, it serves for that use
but among the pockie Indian slaves. Here in England it is refined, and will not
deigne to cure here any other then cleanly and gentlemanly diseases. O
omnipotent power of Tobacco! And if it could by the smoke thereof chase out
devils, as the smoke of Tobias fish did (which I am sure could smell no
stronglier) it would serve for a precious Relicke, both for the superstitious
Priests, and the insolent Puritanes, to cast out devils withal.

Admitting then, and not confessing that the use thereof were healthful for
some sorts of diseases; should it be used for all sicknesses? should it be
used by all men? should it be used at al times? yea should it be used by able,
young, strong, healthful men? Medicine has that virtue, that it never leaves a
man in that state wherein it finds him: it makes a sick man whole, but a
whole man sick. And as Medicine helps nature being taken at times of
necessity, so being ever and continually used, it does but weaken, weary, and
wear nature. What speak I of Medicine? Nay let a man every hour of the day,
or as often as many in this country use to take Tobacco, let a man I say, but
take as often the best sorts of nourishments in meat and drink that can be
devised, he shall with the continual use thereof weaken both his head and his
stomach: all his members shall become feeble, his spirits dull, and in the
end, as a drousie lazy belly-god, he shall euanish in a Lethargy.

And from this weakness it proceeds, that many in this kingdom have had such
a continual use of taking this unsavory smoke, as now they are not able to
forbear the same, no more then an old drunkard can abide to be long sober,
without falling into an incurable weakness and evil constitution: for their
continual custom has made to them, habitum, altera^ naturam: so to those
that from their birth have been continually nourished upon poison and things
venomous, wholesome meats are only poisonable.

Thus having, as I trust, sufficiently answered the most principal arguments
that are used in defense of this vile custom, it rests only to inform you
what sins and vanities you commit in the filthy abuse thereof. First, are
you not guilty of sinful and shameful lust? (for lust may be as well in
any of the senses as in feeling) that although you be troubled with no
disease, but in perfect health, yet can you neither be merry at an Ordinary,
nor lascivious in the Stews, if you lack Tobacco to provoke your appetite to
any of those sorts of recreation, lusting after it as the children of Israel
did in the wilderness after Quails? Secondly it is, as you use or rather
abuse it, a branche of the sin of drunkenness, which is the root of all
sins: for as the only delight that drunkards take in Wine is in the strength
of the taste, and the force of the fume thereof that mounts up to the brain:
fot no drunkards love any weak, or sweet drink: so are not those (I mean
the strong heat and the fume) the only qualities that make Tobacco so
delectable to all the lovers of it? And as no man likes strong headie drink
the first day (because nemo repent fit turpissimus) but by custom is piece
and piece allured, while in the end, a drunkard will have as great a thirst to
be drunk, as a sober man to quench his thirst with a draught when he has
need of it: So is not this the very case of all the great takers of Tobacco?
which therefore they themselves do attribute to a bewitching quality in it.
Thirdly, is it not the greatest sin of all, that you the people of all sorts
of this Kingdom, who are created and ordained by God to bestow both your
persons and goods for the maintenance both of the honor and safety of your
King and Commonwealth, should disable your selves in both? In your persons
having by this continual vile custom brought your selves to this shameful
imbecilitie, that you are not able to ride or walk the journey of a Jews
Sabbath, but you must have a reekie cole brought you from the next poor house
to kindle your Tobacco with? whereas he cannot be thought able for any service
in the wars, that cannot endure oftentimes the want of meat, drink, and
sleep, much more then must he endure the want of Tobacco. In the times of the
many glorious and victorious battles fought by this Nation, there was no word
of Tobacco: but now if it were time of wars, and that you were to make some
sudden Caualcado upon your enemies, if any of you should seek leisure to stay
behind his fellow for taking of Tobacco, for my part I should never be sorry
for any evil chance that might befall him. To take a custom in any thing that
cannot be left again, is most harmefull to the people of any land. Mollicies
and delicacie were the wrack and overthrow, first of the Persian, and next of
the Roman Empire. And this very custom of taking Tobacco (whereof our present
purpose is) is even at this day accounted so effeminate among the Indians
themselves, as in the market they will offer no price for a slave to be sold,
whom they find to be a great Tobacco taker.

Now how you are by this custom disabled in your goods, let the Gentry of this
land bear witness, some of them bestowing three, some four hundred pounds a
year upon this precious stink, which I am sure might be bestowed upon many
far better uses. I read indeed of a knauish Courtier, who for abusing the
favor of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus his Master by taking bribes to
intercede, for sundry persons in his Masters ear, (for whom he never once
opened his mouth) was justly choked with smoke, with this doom, Fumo pereat,
qui fumum vendidit: but of so many smoke-buyers, as are at this present in this
kingdom, I never read nor heard.

And for the vanities committed in this filthy custom, is it not both great
vanity and uncleanness, that at the table, a place of respect, of
cleanliness, of modesty, men should not be ashamed, to sit tossing of Tobacco
pipes, and puffing of the smoke of Tobacco one to another, making the filthy
smoke and stink thereof, to exhale athwart the dishes, and infect the air,
when very often, men that abhor it are at their repast? Surely Smoke becomes
a kitchen far better then a Dining chamber, and yet it makes a kitchen also
oftentimes in the inward parts of men, soiling and infecting them, with an
unctuous and oily kind of Soote, as has been found in some great Tobacco
takers, that after their death were opened. And not only meat time, but no
other time nor action is exempted from the public use of this uncivil trick:
so as if the wives of Diepe list to contest with this Nation for good manners,
their worst manners would in all reason be found at least not so dishonest (as
ours are) in this point. The public use whereof, at all times, and in all
places, has now so far prevailed, as diverse men very sound both in
judgment, and complexion, have been at last forced to take it also without
desire, partly because they were ashamed to seem singular, (like the two
Philosophers that were forced to duck themselves in that rain water, and to
become fools as well as the rest of the people) and partly to be as one that
was content to eat Garlic (which he did not love) that he might not be
troubled with the smell of it, in the breath of his fellows. And is it not a
great vanity, that a man cannot heartily welcome his friend now, but straight
they must be in hand with Tobacco? No it is become in place of a cure, a point
of good fellowship, and he that will refuse to take a pipe of Tobacco among his
fellows, (though by his own election he would rather feel the favor of a
Sink) is accounted peevish and no good company, even as they do with
tippeling in the cold Eastern Countries. Yea the Mistress cannot in a more
manerly kind, entertain her servant, then by giving him out of her fair hand
a pipe of Tobacco. But herein is not only a great vanity, but a great
contempt of Gods good gifts, that the sweetness of man's breath, being a good
gift of God, should be wilfully corrupted by this stinking smoke, wherein I
must confess, it has too strong a virtue: and so that which is an ornament of
nature, and can neither by any artifice be at the first acquired, nor once
lost, be recovered again, shall be filthily corrupted with an incurable
stink, which vile quality is as directly contrary to that wrong opinion which
is holden of the wholesomnesse thereof, as the venime of putrefaction is
contrary to the virtue Preservative.

Moreover, which is a great iniquity, and against all humanity, the husband
shall not be ashamed, to reduce thereby his delicate, wholesome, and clean
complexioned wife, to that extremity, that either she must also corrupt her
sweet breath therewith, or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking
torment.

Have you not reason then to be ashamed, and to forbear this filthy
novelty, so basely grounded, so foolishly received, and so grossly mistaken
in the right use thereof? In your abuse thereof sinning against God, harming
your selves both in persons and goods, and raking also thereby the marks and
notes of vanity upon you: by the custom thereof making your selves to be
wondered at by all foreign civil Nations, and by all strangers that come among
you, to be scorned and contemned. A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to
the Nose, harmefull to the brain, dangerous to the Lungs and in the black
stinking fume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stigian smoke of the pit
that is bottomless.


