A DEFENSE OF A TREATISE TOUCHING THE SVFFERINGS AND VICTORY OF CHRIST IN THE
WORK OF OUR REDEMPTION.

Wherein is confirmed, 1 That Christ suffered for us, not only Bodily grief,
but also in his Soul an impression of the proper wrath of God, which may be
called the pains of Hell. 2 That after his death on the Cross he went not
down into Hell.


For Answer to the late writings of Mr Bilson, L. Bishop of Winchester, which
he intitleth, The effect of certain sermons, etc. Wherein he strives mightily
against the doctrine aforesaid.

By HENRY JACOB Minister of the word of God.

John 7. ver. 24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
judgment.

1600.

To all the godly and religious Magistrates, faithful Pastors, and other
Christian brethren in England, Grace and peace be multiplied in the true
sufferinges and victory of JESUS CHRIST, our only and most glorious Redeemer.
GIVE me leave I beseech you (Fathers and Brethren right honorable and beloved
in Christ) in so great and necessary a case to reply and Defend my self in
such wise as becomes me against the unseemly writings of a man, who indeed,
I aknowledg, in the world is far greater then I am. Yet forasmuch as the Cause
which here I maintain is right and just, as to any man I hope it shall soon
appear that will simply and soberly try it by the Scriptures: Again in
regard of mine own person and poor credit, although mean in the world, yet
by Gods mercy such as in conscience I am bound by all honest and Christian
means to preserve, seeing he so strangely traduceth and accuses me in his
book as is almost incredible, I am therefore of necessity (as I take it) to
open my mouth at this time, and specially in the behalf of that doctrine,
which I am undoubtedly persuaded, for the substance of it, that hither unto I
with infinite mo in England have truly and faithfully taught. And albeit I find
my self very unequal to try any question with him, who is so high in
authority, so prompt of wit, so exquisit in learning, my self in all things
so despised and rejected as I am by him and some others: insomuch that I might
justly be altogether terrified and wholly turned away (were my cause never so
good) from maintayning the same against him: yet surely, God is my witness, it
seems to me so easy and so plain to defend, together with the necessity
of duty binding me (as likewise indeed all me^ else I think) to stand
thereunto, that I could not choose but speak again in this matter, and clear
it again so well as I can from his further weak exceptions, and insufficient
objections against it. Neither let any man think that in thus doing I greatly
please my self, or seem unwilling to let others to utter their judgments
heerevpon. Nay surely it is the thing that herein chiefly I desire, even that
others, yea many others (if so it may seem good unto the^) would declare their
minds touching this new doctrine sprung up from Winchester, and likely to
bring a common calamity with other errors mo upon our Churches in England,
because I fear that not a few among us, are, and will be troubled therewith. And
so I doubt not but it will most amply appear how Holy and true a doctrine this
is, which he so disdainfully skoffeth at and reprocheth, being well assured
that even the most learned and godly Teachers in this land, Defendours of the
truth against Popery, as well before time as now at this day under our
gracious Queen, do concur and agree with my opinion herein. This if it
shall please God that I may see, it will far more exceedingly please me to
behold, then whatsoever mine own unskillfulness has or can utter. In the mean
while, I beseech thee, Christian Reader, consider duly with thy self, not who
speaks, but what is spoken by either of us. As for me, I am not ashamed to
testify with all duty, though after my simplicity, in the behalf of the
Gospel of Christ against men's improbable conjectures: which my trust is that
the godly and sober minded will take in good worth uprightly, even as my heart
means it (the Lord knows) sincerely. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

H. I.

A Praeface to the Christian Readers touching our 2. Questions and their
Defense following.
IT is a just thing with God (dear brethren) to punish in his dissolute people
sin with sin: and where one iniquity is not repented, to bind others
thereunto. Which thing surely we may to well see is com to pass and befallen
us in England deservedly at this day. Who after so long, plentiful, and
comfortable enjoying of the Gospel (the most precious blessing of God in this
life) are now almost generally com to this, that we have lost the love
thereof. What remains then for us, when we set so light by this Heavenly
grace forgetting our first love which once we seemed to bear toward it, and
wherein now we ought to have abounded, but that God should punish this our
heinous and general sin with others, and among others send us delusions even
strong delusions to broch and believe lies, seeing we show so small affection
and so little pleasure in his truth. The Lord in justice then (no doubt) does
punish us with such delusions of error as are now so rife in our land at this
time, more then in times past when as the Gospel has been soundlyer preached
and better beloved among us, then now it seems to be. Now so much the more
dangerous this mischief is, as also it must needs prove yet still, because it
is offered unto us forsooth by the friends of the Gospel, and fathers of the
Church as they desire to be called, yet being indeed sole Commanders in
Religion, very Lords over men's consciences, compulsiuely ouerruling their
brethren and Gods dear flock; contrary to the Mat and 2 2 Cor. 1. Cor. 1. Pet.
express Scripture, and all well ordered Ancient and present times. How
needful then is it that the Lords faithful Remembrancers forget not
themselves in these deceiptfull days, nor that great charge which the great
Pastor of the Flock has laid upon them, but to be watchful and diligent and
for no respect of persons to suffer any part of the gracious truth of God to
be disgraced by men: chiefly that part and point (if we can discern what it
is) which by the corruption thereof raises and maintayneth most of our other
vain corrupt and contentious quaestions which now swarm among us, yet which
easily would be cut clean down if the word of God alone might bear sway, as
we see it to be brought to pass this day by the blessing of God in other
Reformed Churches of foreign Countries. For my part, being occasioned at this
time more specially to speak of 2. of these foresaid corrupt doctrines, J am
not unwilling (though unequally yoked) to defend the truth in them. It has
pleases Mr Bilson the now L. Bishop of Winchester to begin among us a new
matter of faith never heard of before in England (but only in the days of
Popery) touching the All sufficiency of the mere Bodily Sufferings of Christ,
and to maintain an other which was near worn out, of his going down to Hell
in Soul. In both which because my conscience assured me that he was much
mistaken, and labored that others should mistake also, I thought it not
besides my duty (the Lord offering me opportunity) to maintain the truth, and
that in all plainenes and evidence of the Scripture as God enabled me with.
This now a while since being published (wherein my trust is I carried my self
no otherwise then J ought) the Author and maintayner of the contrary has so of
late intertayned it, as seems to me and to many others wonderful.
Wonderful, not for strength of reasons nor for exquisit matter such as never
before was delivered, though his learning J acknowledge and will not but
reverence his gifts: but wonderful his answer is and altogether
extraordinary, considering that such incomparable bitterness, disdain,
skoffing, reproach, and furious rage does so abundantly com from him therein
against my poor self, being yet by the mercy of God a true Christian, a
Minister of the Gospel, and one (I praise the Lord) which ever have bin
careful to be free from the scandalls of the World. Though herein J boast
not, but rather (with the Apostle) will boast of mine infirmities. Verily this
now J have learned by his writing better then ever I conceived before; namely
what great odds he makes and desires to be made between himself a Lord
Bishop, and an other being but a Preacher of Gods most holy word. Well: this is
the Rhetorike and the ornaments of his Conclusion against my treatise. But all
this is besides his Matter, which nevertheles may have peradventure some weight
in it. It may peradventure. Wherefore J see a double necessity urging me to
reply thereunto. First to the end that his exceptions and reasons, (that is to
say, his wholl matter) may appear yet better to be so weak and insufficient
as indeed they are. See: that those uncivil reproaches (I will not say
unchristian revilings) being the bewty and form of his book, may appear to
be but the froth of a distempered stomach, the color of reason and just cause
which he casts on it, being taken away. As touching the matter therefore thus
I purpose to deal. I will begin with his later writing, which he calls a
Conclusion, because he mainly directs it against me, taking in by the way
also all such places and points in the former Treatise as do rightly concern
our matter in hand. Finally, as touching his reproaches and cruel words I
intend wholly to pass over them, seeing for them neither is he any whit the
better, nor my self the worse.

The Defense of the Treatise of Christ's sufferings against Master Bilsons
Conclusion.
HIs Conclusion (for so he thinks good to call it) begins against me in
his page 225. Wherein first he does change me in general terms that I flee
from the state of the Chief question, and overskip his Authorities, The like
says in E^ page 9.
in his reasons I forget and dissemble what pleases my self, in the defense of
my holy cause (as it pleases him to mock) I roue as I list neither keeping
any order, nor bringing any matter of moment, co^fusedly pouring out the hasty
resolutions of mine own brains spiced every where with ignorant and absurd
positions, proudly despising all authority and antiquity, etc. Al which words
are but wind, as I shall make it evident (God willing) when we com to view his
particulars hereafter ensuing. Among which he Page ^
beginneh to justify that he mistook not his Text when he preached this
doctrine. But I will speak thereof anon, so that first I satisfy him in the
most principal point of his challe^ge against me. Which is this, Epis^.
that I have changed the first question, that I set not down the state thereof
fully nor truly: and so, I offer to prove that which he never denied, I confute
that which he never affirmed. Let us there fore consider advisedly this
question: which I will set down again as exactly and as plainly as I can, that
we may see how far I erred from it before. We affirm That Christ in his Soul
suffered all Gods proper Wrath and vengeance being pains and punishment for
sin and no sin, also as touching the essence or nature thereof, The su^
whole out 1.^.
and so far as was due Generally for all mankind to suffer. His contrary
opinion we conceive thus, That Christ suffered for our sins nothing else but
simply and or (...) his Ho^ fectio^s ^^tio and
merely a Bodily death: altogether like as the godly and holy men do often
suffer at the hands of persecutors, saving only that God accepted this death
of his Son as a ransom for sin, but the death of his servants be does not.

The Opening of the whole sta^e of this Question.

For the better understanding whereof, we must note these principal things.
taine spe. I things to ^oted.
First that All suffering of Pains in man is from God: either properly from
his Justice, or from his Holy Love: either from Proper and immediate justly so
called: ^ee kinds (...) So^^es ^^^ing of (...).
Proper, because it is proper only to reasonable and immortal Spirits:
although in Souls Proper and Immediate Suffering. The Souls second faculty of
Suffering pains is not Proper, but Common to us with Beasts: namely that which
is by Sympathy and Communion with and from the Body. For which cause also it is
not Immediate: since it comes not to the Soul but by external bodily means.
A Affections are Painful, whether they be good or evil. As Zeal, Love,
Compassion, Pity, Care, etc. Neither are these immediately for Sin, whether
Punishments or Corrections: but they com for and by other immediate causes,
^^tions no ^^at ^or (...) Punish (...) 5.
neither are they Punishments or Corrections at all Properly in them selves:
Accidentally they may be, when they grow so strong that they pain and grieve
the Soul. These 2. later kinds of the Souls Suffering you acknowledge to have been in Christ: the 1. kind " you utterly deny. ^^g. 5. 6. 16 (...). 253. ^
255. 335
Now I affirm that Christ tasted also the 1st kind. For how could the Proper
and principal Humane Suffering be not in him, ^^^br. 2.10.
a Man made of God to * Suffer for all our Sins? So this (in a manner) is ye
point of our Controversy. And verily how you can deny the same by the
Scripture, yet acknowledging withal a true and perfect Human Soul in Christ,
I cannot see. Namely seeing just occasion hereof was given him from God, as
afterward shall further appear. You pa. 248.
seem to stick at those terms which I use The Souls proper and immediate
suffering, and you call them pa. 257. 336.
unsalted and unsettled. But any may see how easy they are to be understood,
and also that we must in this quaestion necessarily thus distinguish the same
from that which is by sympathy, and is common to us with other creatures.
Thirdly we must also note that God proper and immediate faculty of suffering.
And that is always immediately for sin also, not for any other cause at all.
Gods own almighty power armed with justice in burning wrath thus punishes
sin sometime more sometime less, when and how it pleases him. Fourthly, God
himself therefore was thus the principal Isa 53.^
The Lord laid upon him the punishment of us all. Whatsoever you have against
this afterward, we shall consider it in due place. Fifthly we mean not that in
God was, is, or can be any As you^ serve w^ page 24^
perturbatio^ Wrath nor Hatred as is in us. But because We painfully afflict
others with whom commonly we are Angry, and we discern sometime and see pains
inflicted on men by God, therefore we say he shows his anger and wrath upon
them whom he punishes. Nevertheles we must note especially that to suffer
(as the Godly do) Chastisements and corrections, is not to suffer or feel
Gods Wrath nor indeed the pumishment of sin: except it be in a very improper
speech. To suffer the true punishment, satisfaction, proper payment, and wages
of sin, only that is to suffer properly and truly the Wrath and Curse of God.
Now then seeing the pains which Christ for us did feel, were indeed properly
the Punishment and Payment and vengeance for sin, such as the Godly do in no
wise suffer, Christ only having wholly suffered that for us all: Therefore
indeed his sufferings proceeded from Gods proper wrath, and were the true
effects of Gods mere Justice bent to take recompense on him for out offenses:
the Godly never suffering any thing at all in such respect. ^^^fering of ^aines
for sin (...) fold. ^or sin in^^e^ent and ^^puted.
that there are 3. diverse and several sorts of suffering pains directly for
sin. 1. As the wicked and damned do: that is by suffering the proper wrath of
God truly punishing in them (that is properly in their Souls as well as in
their Bodies) their sins, in whom together with their pains there is also
inherent sin abiding and imputed, (the cause of all their punishments) with
the the adjuncts and consequents thereof, desperation, induration, blaspheming,
reiection, malediction, hatred, and final dereliction, with such like. These
are certain proper and right conditions of the reprobat here, and of the
damned in Hell, ^^r sin in^^^ent but (...) imputed.
which Christ never tasted. 2. The godly in this world do suffer pains for
their sins. But these whatsoever they be (yea though death it self) are
improperly called Punishments, as was before noted, ^^ch. 12.5, ^ 7, 8, 9, 10, ^
they are * Chastisements of sin. Yea they are partly remembrances to cause
repentance of sin past and presently inherent, partly Chastisements to humble
us, and to mortify sin in us more and more hereafter. And thus they are in
no sort inflicted on us as very Curses by Gods Wrath and Justice (properly so
called) but properly by Gods Holiness and Love: as after we shall further see.
These are the ordinary ways of suffering for sin, but nothing appertayning
to Christ neither. 3. 3 Suffering sin not haerent, yet impu^^^
There is another peculiar and extraordinary way belonging only to Christ,
according to which Christ suffered for sin: distinct and greatly differing
from both the former, and yet in some special points agreeing with both. 1.
Christ suffered for sin being sinles indeed, How Ch^st sufferings those of
the Godly d^gree. Ho^ they diffe^^
as the Godly also are sinles Romans 4.
by imputation. Again their sufferings are temporary, and in this life only:
such also were his. But Christ's sufferings were exceeding much differing from
ours, 1 in that his sufferings were for our sins now made his by Gods
accoumpt, and ours are for our own. Also, his were the true and proper
Punishment or just vengeance of God for sin, ours only Chastisements and
remembrances, which belonged nothing at all to him. His, the true effects of
Gods severe and just Wrath properly taken, ours are from his justice and wrath
improperly so called.
Touching the Reprobats and damned, How the suf^^rings of Ch^^^^ and of th^^
Damned (...) differ.
1. their sufferings are for sins inhaerent, Christ's were for sins only
imputed: So that Gods Anger was not against Christ's own person, but against
the sins which by his office in his own person he sustained, the sorrow and
pains whereof touched his very person. 2. Their punishments are partly in this
life, and partly eternal in the life to come: but Christ's were temporary and
only in this life. 3. Their sin being inherent not forgiven and justly
punished, they have all the properties and Concomitants of sin inherent,
never forgiven, but in wrapped in eternal punishments: as these, Desperation,
the stinge of Conscience, Induration, Reiection, Malediction, Dereliction, etc.
But in Christ, where no sin was inhaerent nor eternally punished, there could
utterly be none of these. 4. They are pumished here, and chiefly in Hell the
proper place of the damned hereafter:: but Christ suffered only here in this
life.
Lastly their torments though everlasting deserve nothing at Gods hands. but
Christ though suffering but for a while, deserved infinitely favor and grace
for them for whom he suffered. Howbeit as I said the sufferings of the damned
are all one with Christ's, How the su^^^rings of Ch^^^^ and of th^^^ Damned
(...) the same
as touching the Nature of the punishments and as touching the chiefest causes
thereof. First God himself was the proper and principal Ordayner, Author and
Executor of his punishment, Gods own hand did it to Christ: no less then to
the damned. Sec: Christ having most horrible sins imputed to him as the
damned have also, therefore he suffered for them from Gods hand even as the
damned do: namely in these points, which are both possible and reasonable, that
is, pains inflicted immediately and properly in the Soul, and not only by
outward means in the Body. For it is most reasonable and possible that the
Soul of Christ should have our sin imputed to it, yea principally to it, and
not to the Body only, even as we commit sin in our wholl manhood, but yet
principally in and by our Soul. Which being true that Christ's reasonable
Soul had sin imputed principally to it according to that of the Prophet " He
made his Soul sin, Isa. 53.10.
therefore his Soul principally and peculiarly did suffer for it. Also his
Soul by nature being capable of suffering from Gods very hand, and an occasion
now serving thereunto, because of all our sins wholly imputed to him, lastly
God himself standing now disposed to punish and revenge sin in him so far as
he was capable thereof, therefore his punishment for that sin was a true,
proper, and full punishment as theirs is, namely as touching mere pains, and
was the effect of Gods proper Wrath, justice, and vengeance as well on his
Soul, as on his Body: and thus for the time, it was even like as the
sufferings of the damned are. ^a. 53.134.
For * continuance of time in pains is not of the nature of Hell pains or of
Gods Wrath, Page 341.
nor yet to be in Hell " locally, as you wrongly imagine, but mere
circumstances there of only. Thus the very nature of punishment for sin being
but the feeling of extremest pains from Gods hand, whether for a time or for
ever, whether locally in Hell or else where, that neither alters nor
lesseneth the present pains, which Gods own infinite wrathful power and
justice can inflict for satisfaction where and how it pleases him. These
pains then to this end, and in this very manner inflicted Christ felt: Indeed
not being in the local Hell, yet those being as we see the self same pains
for their nature which are in Hell, ^ag. 247.
yea which are * sharpest in Hell. And he discerned and received them properly,
yea only in his very Soul; as then was manefest when his body was so bruised
with sorrows and sufferings (yet none at all then touching him without) that
there strayned out from him much sweat of clotted blood, etc.

These things being thus, now let us see wherein you agree with us, (...). 248.
and wherein you disagree. We all agree (in terms) That Christ suffered in
soul Gods Wrath: howbeit touching the sense we disagree in 2. maine points.
The i^^^ the q^^^
I affirm that Christ suffered Gods Proper Wrath and vengeance: you mean he
suffered only such Pa. 1^
you think all Afflictions whatsoever, small or great, and toward whomsoever
are the effects of Gods Wrath. But that is not so: except in a most improper
speech. To the godly their Afflictions both small and great are Gods Fatherly
and gracious Chastisements and no effects of his proper Wrath, as shall appear
further hereafter.

Howbeit you must observe here my 3. limitations which I set down in the Before
Quaestion. 1. I mean he suffered only that proper Wrath of God which was
merely Punishment for sin, and no sin. 2. This also he suffered as
touching the Substance and Nature of the Pains, not as touching the
Circumstances, either of of Place, or Continuance, etc. 3. I mean he suffered
not every particular Punishment of sin, nor that which every particular
sinner meets with all: but the General Curse and Punishment of God for
sin, namely that which belongs in Gods Justice to All men in Common and
Generally, who abide in sin.


Now after these necessary limitations, the maine point wherein

And Gods impartial Justice dispenses not without necessity: Yea where he
comes to Punish, he lays it on finding sin unsatisfied, as he does
inhaerent in the wicked, and as he did imputed in Christ our surety, till he
had by Heb ^^
Sufferings accomplished and finished perfitly his Redemption for us. Your A^^
on w^^^ ^gain sa^^ Christ ^^red i^^^ only (...) from hi^
But this is far greater then as you hold, that He suffered no more but mere
Bodily pains, that is, in his Soul by and from his Body. This is your drift
every where, but I note these express places: ^^g. 16.
* Sin which should have wrought in us an eternal destruction both of Body and
Soul could not farther prevail in him but to the wounding of his flesh and
sheding of his blood for the just and full satisfaction of all our sins, even
in the righteous and sincere judgment of God. Likewise your general Title is,
The Full redemtion of mankind by the death and blood of Christ. So you commend
" the force and fruit of his bodily death as most sufficient. ^ag. 84. ^^g. 88.
And * the bodily death of Christ pays the price of our Redemption, ^ag 335.
it removes all the impediments of our salvation " The joint sufferings of
Christ (the Soul feeling what the Body suffered) were most avaylable for our
salvation. ^^g. 336.
The violence was offered to the Body, the sense whereof reached unto the
Soul, and these are the sufferings of the Cross and of death which the
Scriptures attribute to the Son of God for our salvation. ^^g. 60. 58.
" There is no other sacrifice of Christ's Soul, which can be neither bodily
nor bloody. * The justice of God both temporally and eternally punishes the
Soul only by the Body. (...) 254. 255


Nevertheles contrariwise you seem some where to yield wholly so much as we
affirm. ^^g. 17.
As where you say " The same part might indeed suffer in Christ which sinned in
man, J mean the Soul. If you mean as you seem and as you ought, that as
every part and faculty of the Soul is in us sinful, so in Christ it suffered
for our sin, then in his Soul he suffered for sin properly and immediately,
that is, in his very Mind from the immediate hand of God, and not only from and
by his Body. (...) 87. 4.
Again you allow in Christ * All those afflictions and passions of the Soul
which naturally and necessarily follow pain. This All reaches unto mo, and
more grievous pains then the mere bodily are: it includes the Souls porper
and immediate pains also. (...) 138.
And yet playner: " Smart, pain and grief of body or mind (be it never so
great) will commend his obedience and patience. (...) 286.
And * the punishment of sin which proceeds from the justice of God, and is
no sin, that Christ might and did bear: Yea he suffered death " with all
painful, (...) 87.
but no sinful concomitants and consequents. (...) 76.
And * nothing might befall the humane nature of Christ which was unfitting for
his Divine. Whence we gather (understanding you in the best sense) that
whatsoever was fitting for his Divine nature to admit of in his Humanity, that
his humane nature did feel. Consequently then he felt all the pains of the
damned which were no sins, neither indeed perpetual: seeing his Divine
nature could admit this in his Manhood as well as any suffering at all for
sin. You will say, If he felt not also desperation as the damned do, then
he felt not all the pains which the damned do feel: For desperation
augmenteth their very pains. I answer, we say not that Christ suffered simply
All the pains of the damned; that is, He felt not such as are by their very
nature sins as well as pains: as indeed desperation is. But I say Christ
suffered none of those pains. All other which are by their nature mere pains
and only painful Christ did suffer them as sharply for the time, we doubt
not, as the very damned do. So that if your L. will stand to that which before
we observed in you, and not clip it, not renounce it, we profess this is all
that ever we did or do crave, we need no longer to strive, it is the wholl
question which you grant us: viz: That Christ did bear punishment of sin as
great as any is proceeding from the Justice of God, yet being no sin. Whence
it must needs follow that the pains of Christ's suffering were the same in
nature and altogether as sharp and as painful as they are in Hell it self.
And this is the whole sum of the matter about Christ's Hellish sorrows and
pains, and thus stands our quaestion with these differences, according to
which we hold and profess that Christ suffered the Wrath of God, or Hell
pains.

If you set the question otherwise, you go back from that which you found fault
withal in your Sermons, and you fully join with the Preachers and Catechismes
of England, yea withal other Protestants in the world; and namely with all
them, whom at first you reproved and traduced openly for this cause. There is
none of them I assure you that ever spoke or meant any more then this issue
delivers. If you agree to this, I beseech you what wisdom showed you in your
whot confutations and exclamations, so vehemently to condemn you knew not
what and to reprove you knew not whom. Further, if any do teach that Christ
suffered the pains of Hell in a gross and local manner, though you most
injuriously do invey at us for such a matter, yet verily it is nearer your own
assertion then ours, if you be well observed. For seeing you determine simply,
that Christ might and did suffer such punishment of sin which proceeds from
the justice of God and is no sin, it seems by your speech that Christ did
suffer Torments even locally in Hell it self: for that had been a punishment,
and that is no sin, ^^^^^icus: ^^^^^st. Lati^^^er. Act. ^^^^on.
and that in deed some learned and godly men did hold, but erroneouslie. As for
us somway we avouch your sentence also, that Christ suffered whatsoever
punishment of sin which proceeded from the justice of God, and is no sin,
but yet with express limitation from Scripture namely in Circumstances, as I
showed, viz. in this world only and not after his cross at all, nor locally
among the damned. So that thus we say, it is not true that Christ suffered the
pains of Hell, (...) hold not (...) at Christ ^^^fered sim^^y the par^^s of
Hell.
which yet those your fore-noted indefinit words do import. Nay, speaking
exactly, we use not this term of Hell, neither delight we to use it often in
any regard about our maine Quaestion: because we find not this word literally
and expreslie applied to Christ's sufferinges in the Scripture. Howbeit
sometimes we speak so, I grant, and I think that we may well do so, As
also (...) any other ^^^nts of Re^^^on are ^^^yme af^^^ned and vt^^^ed.
when we understand it (by " plain Consequence from Scripture) for the
extreme pains of Gods proper wrath and vengeance for sin, from which even
Hell it self is not separated; yea Gods very wrath is a part, and the
greatest part of Hell pains. Or else Metaphorically, when we have to set out
with an emphasis, the most doleful and incomparable pains of Christ's
sufferinges, as they appeared only to the sense of men, and not otherwise:
Which it seems " your self also likes well enough. (...) 8.^34.^^9.
But how badly then do you urge upon us and persuade men that we do and must
say in maintenance of this our Question, ^^imious ^^^tation. (...)
1.8.244.^^7.264.^^0.34^.
* that Christ suffered All the sorrows of Hell, the whole Curse of God, his
whole wrath, and All the very Torments of the damned, and that in such sense as
you make of those words, that is including in them, the Local Hell, eternal
punishment, Diminution of faith, Holiness, etc. with Desperation, ^reat. 1.^^.40.
Reiection, utter darkness, etc? As for " my words which you wrest that way,
they are cleared by my Opening this Question both before and after. Wherefore
we plainly tell you, that we defy and detest in our hearts (as well as you)
all these blasphemous and wicked thoughts of the Son of God, our most
glorious and gracious Redeemer. And yet if you had understood those Phrases,
the whole C^rse of God, His whole Wrath, All the sorrows of Hell only
to^ching the sense of Mere pains, that Christ feeling the proper wrath and
Justice of God punishing him for our sins, felt as extreme sharpnes of
pains which had no mixture of sin, as may in any possibility be endured yea
though in Hell it self; and so a kind also of As in (...) place I (...) show.
forsaking in them, a kind of Such as (...) self explai^^^ page 245 And as
(...) Curse is n^ words, b^ deeds. pa.
Cursing, and hatred, and condemnation, and a sense of burning wrath, which he
being our high Priest and Sacrifice was appointed unto, and which payment of
ours was by God laid upon him being our Redeemer, and Ransompayer, and Surety;
and that all this he sustained and suffered for a time in this life so deeply
and woefully as was possible for a man any where to suffer which was also weary
God. I say if this had been your meaning, we would not then hold it blasphemous
nor erroneous, as Epi^p:
you object it unto us, but the very truth indeed, to say He suffered the true
pains of Hell, and the wholl wrath of God. Which verily your own words also in
some places do imply, yea at least so much, and that manifestly enough, it
seems, as before I have observed. But to wade further then this, and to
particularize, or to specify the parts of Gods wrath which Christ felt, as Pa.
^47.
you will us to do; or to show the manner how, or the certain measure how
deeply he suffered it, what madness were it in men to attempt, and what folly
is it in any to requier. This suffices, that we know God is able (as well out
of the local Hell as in it) to reveal and inflict spiritually this wrath
where he finds sin unsatisfied, and in Christ the union of his Godhead
might admit it in his Manhood, and his Soul was capeable and apt to discern
and feel immediately the impression thereof in it self. Now because also God
was here bent to punish all our most horrible sins in Christ, and he was
ordained to receave the same upon himself, and God was never to punish them
truly any more, nor any where else, and because of the proportion of Gods exact
Justice which dispenses not where there is no necessity for dispensation,
because also of Christ's taking our wholl nature for no needful purpose at all
without this, and lastly by reason of many pregnant texts of Scripture proving
by infallible arguments that thus surely it was in this mystery of Christ's
purchasing our redemption (which you in all your writing have no whit defeated)
therefore we are undoubtedly persuaded that this is the very truth of God:
Namely as Treat. 80.81.7
before I taught, as touching the sense of pain and vehemence of sorrow that
Christ suffered for us All and wholly the wrath of God and his bitter Curse:
That is, as I said so far as Pa. 37.
possibillity would admit, so far as he being also very God and a man not
possible to sin, could suffer. Neither is there any piece of reason on your
part for the contrary. And this is much more I trust then to suffer in Soul
by Sympathy only from and by and with the Body, Page 13.14
which as " before I showed, you plainly do make the only and wholl suffering
of Christ for our Redemption: which kind^ of suffering all Godly men do suffer
also when the wicked in the world do afflict and persecute them. But touching
suffering of Marti^s and godly men, Page 8.11
it is not intruth, (as before is showed) of that kind as Christ's suffering
was, and therefore this suffering of the Soul only by Sympathy comes
nothing near to the sorrows of the suffering of Christ: which he suffered
from the hand of Gods offended Justice, and pure Holiness, and Wrathful power,
infinitely satisfying it self on him for our sins which by his office he
received upon himself, to acquit us from the same. This no Martyr nor godly
man does, who suffer only as from the malice and rage of men, ^^^d therefore
^^^ey are so ^^^eerefull at ^^^eir Death, ^^^hen Christ is extreme^^^
sorrowful.
from God there proceeds nothing but fatherly chastenings to them, his very
wrath indeed for their sins appears not at all against them, which they
know Christ has once borne and for ever dissolved. You have words in some
places, as if you h^ld this difference with us of Christ's sufferinges compared
with the suffering of Martirs: Namely where you say, Page 248
" Christ suffered the wrath of God punishing sin, ^ag. 257
not * in his Body only, but in his Soul also by some proper punishments of
the Soul, as by sorrow, and fear in his Agony, etc. Howbeit, though these
words seem plain, yet I perceave ambiguity and fallacy in them, yea also I
think a great error. First your fallacy is in that you mean sorrow and fear
indeed properly in his Soul, but not any proper Punishment of sin nor
coming for any pain or smart that he felt inflicted for sin, but it was
mere " Devotion to God, 2.1^4.23.9 144 290
and Love, pity, and compassion toward men: Which say you, could not be
without some fear, and zeal, and grief. That is true: but this is a notable
fallacy. For many think that you mean, Christ suffered such sorrow and pain
as was both proper to the Soul, and was the proper punishment of sin also.
But then had you herein fully agreed with us. Now that Religious Devotion,
godly and ^^^t^ous A^^tions.
and Pity are properly parts of Christ's Holiness and righteousness, not of his
Sufferings for sin. For these 2. parts of Christ's Mediation I trust, you
will distinguish. And surely Christ's Agony, was properly a part of his most
bitter Passion, not of his Obedience and Righteousness: albeit even in suffering
also he was perfitly obedient. Thus then you are never the nearer to the truth
in this point for all your seeming. Again considering what you write of the
wrath Pa. 130 132.246.
of God which the Godly generally do suffer, you seem to me to think that
every Marti^s death and all the crosses and griefs both of body and mind in
the godly are very For yo^ make G^^ Wrath ^^^ferent to men who afflicted.
punishments of sin, and right effects of Gods Justice and wrath taking
properly vengeance on them for sin in such manner as he does on the Reprobat,
though not in such measure: and that such likewise were Christ's sufferings. But
then I deny that therein you have the truth, or have rightly expressed the
sufferinges of Christ, or of his Saints. Because the sufferings of the Saints
are properly not punishments for sins, nor effects of Gods wrath properly,
but are indeed fatherly and profitable chastisements purposely inflicted by God
for their good, as before is said. But Christ's were altogether of another
nature and condition, they were the only true and proper punishment, price,
Satisfaction, and Ransom for sins, as has been also noted before, and after
shall be further showed. If you understand Christ's suffering Gods Wrath to be
such as the godly feel, viz: improperly and largely (as the Scriptures In your
13^.
there do mean) and not as the very price and punishment for sin, but only
as Chastisements, then that is likewise manefestly untrue. Also then again for
your words you are ambiguous and deceiptfull in this issue: which kind of
vanity you commonly use in all other your handling of controversies since you
left writing against the Papists, as who so looks shall see. For we
affirming that Christ felt the wrath of God do mean it properly, as it
inflicteth properly the punishment and Wages of sin; Your Equ^cation in term
G^^ Wrath.
and you tell us that he suffered Gods wrath as the Saints and Godly men do
suffer it: That is, altogether improperly, being sometime so called for a
certain seeming that it has to be so (as you acknowledge) in the sense of
flesh and blood. Then what is this to our purpose? What else do you work
herein but deceit and mistaking to the Reader through the ambiguity of this
word the Wrath of God. Which palpable fallacy of yours is so plain, that I
need not stand to open it any further: and yet I assure my self that this is
the very ground and refuge of the error in this Question. Which if a man mark
well and distinguish as he ought and may easily do, he shall quickly drive you
either to shift into this " corner, Your Equiocation.
or else to deny much of that which you affirm in your book elsewhere,
Therefore let the wise consider it. Nevertheless if happily you mean
otherwise, that is, Pas you seem (...) me^^^ pa^^ ^01.105
that Christ's very * outward sufferings and bodily death were in a peculiar
sort the effects of Gods proper wrath thus truly punishing our sins on him,
then in effect you come to us again, of you will stick but to this. For there
is no reason in the world to make Christ's flesh subject to Gods Curse for
sin, and not his Mind and soul likewise. Also we must note that such
outward bodily sufferings being indeed punishments and not chastisements for
sin, that is proper effects of Gods very wrath and justice coming to take
vengeance for sin, they cannot be mere bodily sufferings, nor merely felt by
sympathy in the Soul, which is the proper effect of the outward sensitive
faculty only, but they must of necessity be conceaved, discerned, and applied
in the inward feeling of the Mind of Christ, ^^d (...) deny at ^^^nce. yt Men's
^^^ules have ^^^ny sense in ye ^^he ^inde, be^^^des ye Com^^^^ sense de^^nding
on ^^^e Body.
and will make a singular and secret impression of sorrow in the Soul far
above all mere bodily griefs, beyond all measure and proportion of things in
ordinary experience, and so exceedingly differing from all other sufferings in
this life. Which therefore may justly be termed the proper and immediate
sufferings of his Soul. And this sense the Lord doubtless reveals upon men
sometime more sometime less in this life, even as it pleases him. Which also
befell unto Christ. Again, Page 257.
if the Agony and sorrow which " you grant Christ suffered simply in his
mind, be meant by you to have been as it were a " foretast of such sufferings
and a fear or dread of them (as very justly it may be) considering the weak
disability of a Creature to stand up against the Creator, Propathia.
namely now shooting or preparing to shoot presently the sharp arrows of his
wrath upon him for our sins, in which case and condition Christ now stood for
that while: then I say also I see in effect no difference between us, then
again this Question is (as it were) at an end. For doubtless he suffered at one
time or other the same thing which he so feared. Yea such a kind of fearing
cannot be but a mighty suffering thereof. Neither do we contend to express
what just measure of Gods wrath, nor precisely in what manner it was revealed
and executed on Christ. Only we know that whatsoever it were, Gods very wrath
and proper vengeance for sins though outwardly executed on the Body, yet it
could not but sink in deeper, even into the deapth of the Soul, and be
discerned by Christ and conceaved to be such, and so sustained as proceeding
from God, and so wound the Soul properly, yea chiefly, though the anguish
thereof bruized his body jointly also. Again whatsoever you will call it; All
or Such (...) as wa^ nothin^ whole. (...) sinful (...) rents o^^
part of Gods proper Wrath and vengeance (as it proceeded from him) was
incomprehensible, unspeakable, infinite, and intolerable to any creature, and
therefore so it was unto the very Manhood of Christ, namely when the Godhead
for a season concealed it self of purpose and with held his wonted supportation
and comfort from him, to the end that his bitter Passion ordained of God and
most voluntarily undertaken by himself, might be in suffering the The (...)
Pains rows (...) sin wer^^^ Christ fo^^ time no qualifye^ (...) lessened
sorrows and pains which were due to us, nothing qualified, but in all
severity accomplished. As indeed when his Hour was come and gone it was. As
touching that term The death of his Soul, which you stumble at, we shall
speak thereof hereafter in due place.

Thus far I have proceeded in opening the true state of this Quaestion: which
whether you (who have begone to avouch the contrary) will now acknowledge and
approve, or not, I know not. Overthrow it, I trust you shall never with all the
cunning and strength you have. For undoubtedly it is, and so will appear by
the word to be a manefest truth, and therefore Act. 5^
will prevail: besides that it is expressly the doctrine taught and established
by authority in England as hereafter God willing I shall plainly show,
notwithstanding all your strange co^tradicting and traducing thereof. Lastly
whether I did set down this very state of the quaestion in full effect in my
former Treatise, or whether I changed it (though indeed I grant I was there
much shorter then I am here) I pray you look and consider again in that my
Page 5 33. and
first book. This being well considered and marked, will yield us an easier
passage thorough the rest behind.

To com then to that which he first Page 2^
begins with: where he labors very much to show that he mistook not his
Text whereupon first he grounded his doctrine. This I say, that Gal. ^ page 1.
this Text, whereon he Page 3
groundeth and sets down the doctrine of the wholl meritorious contents of
Christ's Cross, as likewise of Page 42
those effects thereof which he in his Treatise handles, I am persuaded is
mistaken, and that this place of Scripture intends not these things. Gal.
6.12.
It is manefest that the Apostle * here reproves the false teachers for
mingling the pure doctrine of the Gospel because they were loath to ta^t
persecution, which then followed the true and sincere professors thereof: And
so incourageth the godly to bear all Afflictions for this persecuted truth and
for Christ's sake. Thus the Cross of Christ here signifies I grant Christ
crucified, Christ afflicted, Christ persecuted: not in his own person only,
but also in his members. He does here jointly together understand by Christ's
Cross, the afflictions of the whole mystical Body of Christ both Head and
members, which they commonly have in the world. Which many shunned even with
Shipwreck of sincere Religion, but Paul rejoiced therein so much, as in no
worldly joy like to it. For so he means when he says, God forbid that I
should rejoice but in the Cross of Christ: not that he makes it a thing
detestable to rejoice in any thing else, Page 227
as " you imagine him to do. It is lawful to rejoice in other things besides
the Cross of Christ: but it is not lawful to rejoice in any worldly joy so
much, or we are not to rejoice in comparison of our joy which we ought to have
in this our shame and afflictions sustained for Christ, for his Servants, and
for the purity of the Gospel. Paul had very great cause thus exceedingly to
rejoice herein. For 1. this was a token to men that he walked in the perfect
way, and a means also to himself so to do. 2. Because this his doing rebuked
the corrupters and minglers of the Religion who would sustain in the world no
disgrace which followed the sincere course: and he thus encouraged also the
weak professors to suffer willingly for the same. 3. This indeed Crucified the
world unto him and him unto the world, as still it does us also.
These causes are both evident in the text and sufficient for Paul so
exceedingly to rejoice in suffering for the pure Gospel. Now he cannot here
respect the meritorious and propitiatory Contents of Christ's Cross, and so
make it detestable to rejoice in any thing else as propitiatory besides this
suffering here expressed (which is the sense that you give unto it) I say,
this Paul cannot respect in this Word, if he include his own and the Godlies
afflictions. But it appears by that before, that indeed he does include them:
and all the circumstances imediatly following do also declare it. 1. That which
I touched before, By suffering in the world for Christ, for his simple truth,
and Church sake, the Which your p^^ Text v: ^
world was C^ucified to him, and he indeed unto the world. Also an other reason
shows it: v: 15.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avayle any thing
but a new Creature. That is a sincere and upright conversation being the fruit
of a sincere and pure faith and profession: which matter he names a little
before Gal. 5.
Faith working by love. So by this Fruit he incourageth men (as I said) though
there com shame and trouble therewith. Also in the next place thus, v: 16.
And as many as walk according to this rule (both of pure profession and
conversation) peace shall be upon them etc. howsoever in the world they have
shame and trouble. Lastly v: 17.
he wills that no good Christian hereafter should put him to business by
seeking resolution of him, whether (for the pretended peace of the Church)
unprofitable Caeremonies should be retained with the Gospel: for lo says he my
example shows you all my mind, J bear about me the marks of the L. Jesus,
that is Afflictions for the sincere truths sake, which I could by policy and
wisdom avoid as well as those corrupters of Religion, if I had no more care of
the sincerity of the Gospel then they have. This being thus, it cannot be
possibly that the Apostle should here mind to name the particular kinds and
all the meritorious parts or Contents of Christ's suffering in this place: but
only he incourageth men (as I said) to endure all afflictions for Christ and
his truth sake. Thus you are answered also in that Page 22
you deny the Cross of Christ in Scriptures to be taken for the Afflictions of
the godly. You see the Apostle ver. 17
here calls the Afflictions of the godly the marks of the Lord Jesus: also
the afflictions of Christ in Coll. 1. ^
another place. And in another 2 Cor. ^.
the dying of the Lord Jesus. What are these in truth but the Cross of Christ,
unless you imagine some mystery in the diverse words, when apparently the
matter is all one. Also the very word Cross Gal. 5.1
a little before signifies the Shame and hatred of Christ slain on the Cross
tog^ather with the shame of his Servants. And thus also Page 22
your maine objection is answered, where you argue that Paul cannot be
understood ver. 12.
to say that those false teachers would not suffer persecution for the
Afflictions of the godly. He may be understood to say, that he would not suffer
persecution for commending the Afflictions and shame of good Christians for
Christ's sake, which they ought to have done. Then what sense or reason wants
this exposition? I know the root and original of their Hatred and disdain
was against Christ himself, and namely for his ignominious death on the
Cross. But this excludes not, indeed it includes in the Cross of Christ
Christ's members the faithful which are his own Body, and so consequently all
their Afflictions for Christ's sake. Which the wicked and corrupt professors, I
say, will not commend (as Paul did) by suffering persecution in their own
persons, they will not by Suffering win credit and reverence to that way in the
world. Pa. 229
The Fathers which " you bring hereabout overthrow not this sense but justify
it rather. Wherefore you cannot avoid it yet, but that it is still an oversight
in you to understand here, by the Cross of Christ, the Contents of his
sufferings and to note his wholl and entire Passion in every part thereof as he
merited thereby for us, which evidently the Apostle intends not, neither is
he about that in this place. You say, Pa. 226
you drew no reason from these words of your Text, but proposing them for your
theme took occasion from them to lay down, first the Contents, then the
Effects of Christ's Cross. Indeed such handling of Texts is to usual in these
days, but no good nor commendable use: that is, to take occasion from any text
to speak of any thing. Which practice in you so great a man as you are, and
seem among us to be, is so much the worse, as there are many younger Divines
who are led by example more then reason, that will think it a point of
learning and wisdom even to do like you. But I for my part do suppose that
they are the faithfullest and wisest handlers of Scripture, which make their
Text the ground of all they speak, and do conclude even from their text
firmly and first of all, whatsoever they teach afterward further thereupon.
Else whereunto serves the taking of Texts in Sermons? If choice Texts may be
used only to take occasion by them to speak of things evidently of an other
suit, and to another purpose then in the Text is meant, sure it may then be
justly charged against us that we do much wrong to the Scriptures, and do make
of them such an instrument as they ought not to be. Lastly it is a strong
presumption that you have never a good place in all the Scripture for your
opinion, seeing even your choice Text affords not any the least reason to
help it with all; which your self here confesses, or else why drew you not
this reason (such as it is) from your text to your purpose. But to gratify you
a little, suppose if you will that your Text is not mistaken by you, but that
the Apostle intended here to note the Co^tents of Christ's Cross. We are to
remember then how you Page 4.
expressly grant, that also the proper Sufferings of the mind may rightly be in
the Contents of his Cross. But thus can Pa. 5. 16 60. 253. ^bove pa^
your maine opinion be good, that Christ's Bodily Sufferings alone were the
full price of our Redemtion* Which also Page 33
you would ground generally on all the Fathers: though very untruly as
afterward God willing we shall see. And to show the absolut fulness of this
only, you say Page 6^
More we can not ask or expect; and what more can be required, I verily
cannot conjecture. Howbeit your self admits more, even the sufferings of
the mind simply as I noted: and thus your own self by your very Text
overthrows your self in the first entrance, as all men may see. And here
me thinks also you should not so reprove with contempt as Pa. 335.
you do, that which In my Treat. pa^
I noted, that Christ's Soul in a large sense might be said to be Crucified,
and not his Body only; namely if we suppose this your text to signify the
Contents of Christ's Cross. For you know that the Pa. 4 ^ 257. 248
wholl Contents must be then signified, not any part of them excluded. Finally
where you say, Page 22
the Apostle here makes it a detestable thing to rejoice in any things else
but in the Contents of Christ's Cross, in saying God forbid that I should
rejoice but in the Cross of Christ, either this your speech is to lavish, or
else you quite overthrow your 2. Question, That Christ after this went down into
Hell. For either in Hell Christ has got us no purchase, nor wrought us any
further riddance from Satan then he had don before, which thing you with
great and mighty words Pa. 35^
do proclaim that he did, but altogether without show of reason or
likelihood. For if he did, were it a detestable thing for us (think you) to
rejoice therein? Or else of necessity you must extend the Contents of Christ's
Cross that is his bitter sufferings beyond his death, even unto his being in
Hell also among the Devils and Damned spirits, whither he went as you say.
But this sequel I think you will not defend. These iarres in your self
therefore you must reconcile: in the mean time men will think that you have
not handled your Text indeed very rightly.

Then proceeding foreward you still show a bad mind in you toward me, seeking
forthwith even in the entrance to draw me without cause into hatred for "
disdayning the Fathers, Page 229.
as you suppose. The direct and express occasion to speak of this matter
comes not in place till * long after: Pa. 349.
but you cannot forbear to procure me ill will so long, as it seems. What
then is my contempt and disdain of the Fathers, which you often report in
sundry places, and as odiously as is possible? What is my insolent dealing
against them? Surely I believe you can not tell. Happily it is, because I
follow not their Authorities in some opinions of Religion, nor in diverse
expositions of Scripture. Page 225.48 ^pist. 12.6 9.
Indeed so " you call the Fathers judgments many times namely Authorities;
that the world might conceave their words to be warrants unto us, and good
Authorities to rest on in matters of Religion. If you had not this drift in
your mind, why give you them such a title, which to me seems somewhat
insolent indeed? And why do you so har^fully blame me for leaving their
opinions sometimes: which so far as I know is never, but when strong reason out
of the very Scipture does lead me from them. And that which I say of the old, I
understand also of the new Writers. Whom indeed I do equally esteem, and do
judge them (I mean * many of them) except only in Antiquity, Calvin, ^cer,
Mar^^ Beza, ^emellius, ^^chius, etc
otherwise no way inferior to the best of the Ancients, yea happily in true
learning, soundnes of Religion, clear interpretations on the text, many times
before them. Which I hope is no singularity in me so to think; but I know it
to be that, wherein very many learned and godly Christians do concur. Of all
therefore that are learned men whether new or old thus I esteem, thus I
profess, only true of reading ^^ed men ^ases of re^^on.
that they are to be read and reverenced as very good helps to show us some
light, and to sharpen our judgments in the understanding of Scripture, but no
further. Their opinions either in opening of Texts or in conclusions of
Religion we ought not to receave without examining. And wherewith must we
examine them, but only with the written word. Gods most holy word is
Allsufficient in it self for all true Religion, or for any part thereof for
ever. Thus it was before the writings of men were published, and thus it is now
since they are published, and so shall be for ever. Even for matter, Abundant,
and for giving light to the right conceaving and understanding thereof,
Allsufficient. So that men's writings do nothing else but help to give a greater
measure of easines to their understanding, which yet nevertheles being used as
God has appointed them to be, are sufficiently easy and lightsom in them
selves. I think the H. Ghost much commends those Act. 17 12.
men of Beraea, who hearing the Apostle Paul teach, though they were not ill
affected toward him, yet they would not believe that he spoke touching
Religion, till they had examined by the Scriptures and seen, whether the truth
were so as he uttered. I trust then no advised Christian will challenge more
authority to the Fathers then was here given to the Apostle, nor deny indeed
to any private men, much less to a minister, to Phil. 1. psalm. 119 1 Cor 2 1
Cor. 1^
judge and discern in themselves not only of the words of men, but even of the
sense and meaning of the Scripture by the Scripture it self, which thing here
the Beraeans did, and are commended by the H. Ghosh for it. How unjustly then
do you charge me that Page 34
I refuse the Fathers to testify in any cause against my liking. I hope you
will not deny me to judge of the^ by the Scripture according to that measure of
knowledge and diligence which the Lord inableth me with. It is every Christians
duty as we have seen, and you take it unto your self, as we shall see
afterward. Wherefore let others partake with you, I pray, in this common right
and Christian liberty. Unless you think so well of your self, as to imagine
that other men will not be so modest and humble minded in using this their
freedom, or not so wise, and circumspect as your self are. Which conceit if
you have you ought to correct it. Neither yet are the Fathers refused, as you
complain, to testify in any cause of Religion whatsoever. By uttering their
opinions they may witness what was held and esteemed as true or probable by
some godly and wise men in those times, but not by all. Mr Bilson himself In
his book a^ the Jesus part 2.
elsewhere says well hereof; If all the ancient Bishops (such were the
Fathers, or most of them which we have extant) should hold an opinion, yet it
follows not that all Preachers then were of that mind, nor if the Preachers
generally thought so, that all the Christians were so persuaded. Thus it is
true, they can witness what was held by some good men then, as I said, yea
perhaps what was commonly thought in the Churches of those places where they
lived. But in no wise what was the judgment of all no not among themselves,
much less every where and in all ages. Now if you should mean yet further,
that they may testify in causes of Religion, as witnesses do with us in Civil
matters, that what they affirm and testify must obtain a verdict, and so
have sentence and judgment with it, which in effect you seem to insinuat by
calling their Opinions Authorities, so usually as you do; then indeed for my
part I can not agree that they or any men should be such Witnesses, nor their
words (nor show of reasons) in any matters of Religion to be taken as
Authorities. If you or any think otherwise, we may lawfully deny it. Gods
word only with us has indeed Authority. The Fathers, all, or some have none
any further, then that their Conclusions, expositions, and reasons, if after
examination made by the lively word they be found current with the Text, then
they are the more joyfully to be embraced. If otherwise in our conscience they
seem to vary from the text, or from some certain evident Circumstance
thereof, then is it not indifferent for us, but our Christian duty in the
presence of God, to leave them and not to follow them therein: yet still with
reverence and loving regard toward their names for the manifold graces of God
otherwise in them. More then this whosoever ascribes unto them, they verily
abuse the Fathers, and not we. For as the Papists do abuse the Saints deceased
by Worshipping and praying unto them, not we who love them and think
reverently of them as the blessed Servants of God: So in this case, we who use
the writings of godly Men as good helps to our knowledge do not despise them,
but you who make them Authorities in Religion, by your to much embracing them
do indeed notably abuse them.

Nevertheles I well perceave that all this great show of cleaving to the
Fathers judgments is but colored in you; you urge them in some cases so whotly
but for advantage. For in other points again we see when they speak not to
your liking, the case is altered. It is worth the pains to look a little
further in to this your practice, because you pursue me with such cruelty for
leaving the Fathers in some things. First your general speeches somwhere of the
Scripture and of the expositions of men, are very good. Touching the
Scriptures, Ep. pa. 9. ^ag 41. Book 1.2 a^^inst the Ie^^s part. 4. ^^g. 360.
^ag. 301.
" Jn Gods causes let Gods book teach us what to believe and what to profess.
* What J read in the word of God that I believe, what I read not that I do not
believe. Touching men, " If you want the foundation of true faith and religion
(the Scripture) in vain do you seek to make a show of Catholicisme etc. * One
man with truth is a warrant against all the world. Again, In this 3 book Full
^ed^tion etc 122.
By their patience their expositions must not look to be Canonical in the
church of God. If they say any thing well, we take it with their praise, if
otherwise as men they miss their mark, we refuse it with their leaves. Gal. 5.
God has called us unto liberty, 1. Cor.
not to be servants of men: and to serve erroneous constructions is worse then
to bear tyrannous exactions. These are very worthy speeches; but have a care
and conscience (Sir) I pray you in this, that you leave this freedom unto us,
which you take to your self. Bind no heavyer burdens on the Church of God,
then your self professes to like of. And because I would have this sound
profession of yours to be well noted of all men, in as much as I know how
wavering and slippery you are for the most part herein, therefore it is good
also that we observe how your own practice concurreth heerewith, and ratifieth
your profession when and where you list, though when you will, you check and
taunt us for the like Christian liberty. I see in this book where you forsake
the ancient and learned Fathers, that is as you speak in my case, where you
contemn and despise them.

First Page 21
you reject Austens opinion, that those who rose to life at Christ's Sec: You
reject his exposition of those This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
Austen understands Christ as speaking of the Thieves soul, and his own Also
E^^ He is re^^ in it, N^^nim ips^^ in celo ^^rus crat ^^mo Chr^^ Jesus.
Divine presense in Paradise. But you refuse that, because Page 21
we have no warrant in the word of God to fasten Christ's Soul unto Hell for
the time of his Death, that it might not be in Paradise before he descended to
Hell. Third: You Pa. 196
renounce Austen and (as he says) almost all the Church thinking that Christ
loosed Adam and some others whom he thought good out of the pains of Hell,
wherein till his going thither they were held.

Fourth: Against all the Fathers Pa. 188 200.
you affirm it to be more then manefest that Christ did not fetch the
Patriarchs out of Limbo Patrum, a certain region of rest under the earth, as
they generally thought. Fifth: Pa. 18^
You renounce diverse Fathers opinion that None e^^ Martyrs. tull.
none do go into Heaven till after the last Judgment.

Thus we observe your liberty in leaving the Fathers when you see cause. Why
deny you unto us the like? If we bring not as good reason to dissent as you do,
whenever we vary from them, let us hear of it, and bear the blame justly.
This only we desire that in any case of Religion the bare custom of times, the
opinion of men, and authority merely Humane should never bar us from
receaving the simplicity and evidence of the truth concerning us which
appears in the Scripture. But now, that we may proceed, let us see your
special examples, page 229.
wherein you will make it manefest that " J have despised the Fathers

First, page 229.
* where you say out of certain Fathers, That Christ in his dying gave up his
Spirit " miraculously, page 7.
* no violence of Death wresting it from him as it does ours, page 229.
but when he saw his time he even at an instant laid it down of himself, no
pains hastening his death. Heb. 4.15.
Contrary to this I alleged the Scripture, " He was like us in all things
sin only excepted. To answer this * you reply, Was he like us in his birth?
Page 230.
Can we lie in the Grave without corruption, as " he lay? Neither yet his flesh
ly he Grave hot possi^^y to cot^^t, otherwise ^n as his ^^es possibly ^^d not
be ^^en.
Or raise our selves from death as he did? Which poor answer I wonder to see
coming from you. As Well you might show further, He was not like us in that he
walked upon the water, nor in that he fasted 40. days, nor in that he knew the
secrets of men's hearts, nor in that he turned water into wine, and with a word
healed all diseases etc. These things don by his Manhood yet were they the
proper effects of his Godhead: they were no natural but supernatural things.
But this text to the Hebrews says only of natural Humane properties and
infirmities, that Christ in them was altogether like us, sin excepted. Also
this manner of Dying whereof we speak, that is, by sore wounds and blows, by
sharp outrages, and deadly pains to draw nearer and nearer to Death, is a
mere natural infirmity, and incident to all men. Therefore surely in this very
manner did Christ die also, like as all men use to do in such case. Again those
Divine effects which you mention are justly believed to have been in Christ.
Why? Because of the express Scripture that * witnesses the same. (...) 1.23,
25.1.2.27. ^^^n. 1.3, 4.^.1.10.18.
Let me see express words in the text that he Dyed as you say, not naturally,
but Miraculously, and then will I believe it also. You cite certain places, by
which you would prove it, ^^h. 10.18.
As " No man takes my soul from me, but J lay it down of my self, etc. He
means here that his Death was mere voluntary, freely undertaken, and
willingly of his own accord performed with such natural and ordinary
infirmities as belong to a man. As you confess somwhere, * So that to die even
in Christ, ^^g. 161.
was infirmity, though voluntary. Here then Christ denies that he suffered
any thing as forced on him by constraint and violence, but he shows that
himself was altogether willing even to Die for his people: which also page 11^
you plainly see. How will you hence conclude, Ergo He dyed miraculously, and
not by any failing of the strength of nature in him notwithstanding all his
most intolerable sorrows and pains? This is truly a miraculous argument. As
for Chrisostom whom page ^3^
you cite heerevpon, he has nothing for this point. Though it were new and not
ordinary that Christ a man should have power to lay down his life and power to
take it again, yet why may not his manhood die naturally notwithstanding. But
you will conclude this better. If I deny (you say) this that Chrisostom says,
I must remember what God himself says, Luc. 12.
O fool this night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee. I remember it
well. What then? Ergo Christ saying, None takes my life from me, etc. meant
that he would die miraculously, and not by the failing of nature in him. If this
be the reason, as I take it to be, verily I grant it is marveylous subtle and
past my reach. Further page 7.
you cite, that Ion. 19.
When Jesus had tasted the vinegar, he said, All is finished, and bowed the
head, and gave up the Ghost. What proves this? Surely that at last after long
and sore anguish of mind and bodily torments his natural strength failed him,
and therefore he bowed his head and gave up the Ghost. What miracle is there in
this? But Barnard says, this proves plainly an infinite power. Which does? His
tasting the vinegar, or his saying, it is finished, or his bowing the head, or
his giving up the Ghost. For my part I can not yet see any infinite power in any
of these. Wherefore I can not rest on Barnard here, except you for him do
find out some other point in the text to prove plainly an infinite power showed
openly in the manner of the Death of Christ, which yet I see not. Give me leave
to refuse the Fathers in such a case, which your self does, as we saw before.
Then you allege that Luke 23.
Jesus cried with a loud voice, a little while before he dyed: to show himself
page 7.
say you, to be free from any touch of death. How are you sure of that? What
Scripture says so? Or is there absolut necessity in reason that it must be
so? Questionles none at all. Is it a thing not possible that Christ should cry
alowd, saying Father into thy hands J commend my Spirit, and even anon after
die; and yet nature to have been weaker in him, and so himself nearer to death
now at last, then he was before in the beginning of his Passion. Let all wise
men judge. If this be not possible I will acknowledge mine error. Add
hereunto that experience shows (as Physicians say) how some diseases in the
Body bring Death presently after most strong and violent crying: namely in some
excessive torments, as of the Stone, etc. Where in through extreme pains and
torments the vital Spirits being dissipated will be utterly extinct sometimes,
before they can recover and gather again together. Thus a man having good
strength and force in his Body, when such a disease rests not near the
principal parts of nature originally, it seems he may notwithstanding by
violence of pain only give up the Ghost at a sudden, yet not miraculously,
but by the course of nature only. Page 7. Ad Hedib. quaest. 8.
But * Ierom says, " this was a great wonder, and that thereupon the Centurion
confessed, truly this man was the Son of God. I deny not but Christ might
show some strange and unusual thing apparantlie to the beholders in uttering his
last voice, when he cried Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Which
might also very much move the beholders and hearers. And yet it shall not
follow that Death seized upon him not naturally, or not by the failing of
natures strength in him. I say, this may be acknowledged: and yet verily there
is no necessity at all to yield even this, for any thing that the text notes.
Yet Ierom says the Centurion was moved with this great wonder. It is strange
that you should persist to urge Jerome herein against the plain text in
another place: Mat. 27.54.
which says " When the Centurion saw the Earth quake and the things that were
don, he said, Truly this was the Son of God. ^er. 51.
Here it is expressly noted, that the * Earthquake chiefly with other apparent
miracles there mentioned, or else the Earthquake with the the injuries of the
Persecutours and the innocence and partience of Christ persecuted, compared
together, did move the Centurion to confess and say, Truly this was the Son
of God. Here it is plain then that not Christ's crying in those torments was
such a wonder, or that the Centurion was by reason thereof moved to acknowledge
Christ to be the Son of God, as Ierom collecteth I know not from what ground,
but those other sights before said. Last of all Austin is " brought to prove
this matter, Page 8.
but with no more strength of reason by the Scripture then the former. Neither
can his words indeed being granted, necessarily conclude any thing for your
purpose; which as s^emeth do show nothing but Christ's voluntary dying, and
that at his death he ^hew^d great power and not infirmity only. Who denies
th^se things.

Th^n he proceeds to show my disdain to the Fathers further: nam^ly for such
page 2^
insolent rejecting all their opinions touching the causes of Christ's Agony in
the Garden, and of his complaint on the Cross. These supposed causes are
alleged and amplifi^d in the page 1^
former part. For answer, first I d^si^e to know whether you allow of all
these causes, or not, you s^^me to ^^fuse them page 13^
here: for herein you showed not your own opinion, but ^he judgments of the
Fathers. Elsewhere, page 29
yourselfe are resolute for some of these causes, and against other some. And yet
before, page 37
All these interpretations (you say) are sound, and stand well with the rules
of Christian piety. Thus variable you are, in that wherein you seem most
resolut. Howb^it in my mind, where you deny these to be your opinions, there
you are in the best opinion. Neither indeed to tell you plain can I be of
opinion that those their judgments are true. " page ^^
The reasons of my dissenting were touched in my former Treatise, and are
maintained further hereafter, as very sufficient and just. How then I pray you
do I insolently reject the Fathers if herein I dissent from them justly, which
even your self also does in sundry of them? But my manner of speech is insolent
perhaps, because I say such collections are absurd and unlikely. I answer,
these my words are purposely meant of those in these days that delight to
vaunt of the Fathers, and chiefly in their errors. For seeing these opinions
themselves are untrue, though some of the Fathers inclined after them, yet such
in our time as urge them cannot but be absurd and strange teachers. Who having
so many helps and means to discern where the Fathers mistook^, which they
utterly wanted and we abound with all, yet do so little profit by them, that
even great Doctors as they desire to be thought, see not so much in the truth
of the Gospel as many younger men now pe^c^ave: and in the Fathers they make
themselves so cunning that commonly their sound doctrine they little regard,
their faults only they admire. Such I meant and took for absurd gatherers from
this Scripture. Whom here I noted by the nam^ of our Contraryes: The Fathers I
call not so. Now that this ind^ed may be also seen even in your expounding
here. Consider first, how you wavered and spoke co^trarily in these " supposed
Causes, Christ's sub^^ssion ^^e jews re^ction. ^^e Churches ^^spersion (...) pa
17 and ^. ^2. 37. Treat 1. ^ag 68.
as I noted a little before. Again, these agree not with any Ci^cumstances of
the Passion, and so are merely of Humane conjecture without all Scripture:
also they agree not together among themselves. One of them crosses another;
one overthrows another. Will you then avouch them, as you do, to be * all
sound and to stand well with the rules of Christian piety? Howbeit absolutely "
I d^ny not, but that th^se or some of these reasons were in Christ at his
Passion, as namely his Care for his Church; his love of his enemies, etc. For
these holy affections he never wanted all his life long. But this rather
confuteth then proves these to be the very cause or causes that in the hour
of his dreadful Passion wrought in him such Agonies and consternation of
mind. ^ag. 6.
But these things here I omit, being hereafter more fully discussed. Lastly
you cast a needles rebuke upon me for " confounding the Causes of the Agony
and of the Complaint together. (...) 230.231.
Forsooth that was done not without reason, I think: Every reasonable man, I
believe, will say, that the same cause was of them both in Christ. His Agony
and his Complaint are not so contrary nor so diverse, but that they might, yea
verily did proceed from the same cause and ground. Yea Ambrose, (...) 20.
one of your Authors does * plainly join the^ both together. (...) 231.
Yea your self does also, as by comparing your cause of the Agony, (...) 34.
with your 1. or 2. of the Complaint, will appear. You have much cause then,
have you not, to make such out^^yes upon me, that I am strangely amazed,
confounded, and forgetful in my writing? Good words I pray you. I did but
join them together whom your self and others do make all one. But I have
stood too long on these tryfles.

Now you will show some examples of my mistaking or perverting your own
reasons. (...) 31.
For these hitherto were not his, but the Fathers opinions, as before I noted.
I marveyle then why he troubles him self and us with them, if they be not
his; specially if he propound them not to be received? Why labors he so to
distract us with such varieties? And then to tell us they are not his, but
other men's. Yet such men's he tells us they are, as that it must not be for
our Credit to refuse them. Thus the poor people are strangely taught: thus the
world shall be filled full of ambiguities, doubtfulnes, variety of opinion in
matters of Religion: and withal forbidden to rest upon any certain and
particular reason, as also he deals in other cases. But I omit to prosecute
this any further. For we shall now see some of his own matters, which I have
ignorantly or purposely perverted.

First page 2^
he tells us, that In the Effects of Christ's Cross he noted out of the
Apostle to the Hebrews, three properties of the true propitiatory Sacrifice
which took away the sin of the world. It was a Bodily, a Bloody, and a
Deadly Sacrifice, for so you speak. This is one of your reasons, yea almost
the greatest, to prove the Quaestion against us: because Christ's Bodily
Sufferings and bloodshed were the true propitiatio^ of our sins. But what a
reason is this? How diffreth it from our Assertion? That the true Sacrifice for
sin, must be indeed bodily, bloody, and dead we doubt not: we unfeignedly and
heartily do embrace it The Patriarchs believed it, the Jews sacrifices of
beasts figured it, the new Testament confirms it. But how will it follow
then, Ergo Christ's Bodily death only and meerlie was the wholl ransom and
price of sin. For we must note that this is the very Question in deed; this
is the point of our Controversy, as Page 8.
I have showed, if you will deal plainly. If you speak not to this point,
your words are Ambiguous and deceitful: and that notable fault is in your
self most true, which Page 2.301.
you wrongully charge me with: you dally with general and doubtful terms,
which according as they are expounded, may either make with you or against you.
And most rightly of your wholl book being indeed a huge volume for so little
matter, I may say that which you object most unaptly against my small pamphlet
Pa. 24^
Three lines directly to the purpose had been more worth the^ so many leves thus
wastfully spent. Wherefore, if you mean these words directly to the purpose
in deed, and do intend to conclude that which we plainly deny, and as now at
this time we will understand your meaning to be, that the mere Bodily
Sufferings of Christ, without any proper sufferings of his Soul, are the
intier and whole ransom for sin: then I affirm expressly there is no piece of
reason, nor likeness of any argument in th^se words. This will not follow by
any means from your Here (...) the Heb^^ Your me^^ is and m^^^ in this Q^^^
That Ch^^^^ mere bo^^ and blood ^^^ferings a^^ whole (...)
text. Again, if the Sacrifice, as it is only Bodily, Bloody, and Deadly,
does wholly purge sin, then although Christ's Bodily death and bloodshed
wanted not the sympathy of the Soul, yet it follows that no action or
passion of his Soul, neither this by sympathy nor any other, I say none at all
as being in the Soul, was regarded as propiciatory and meritorious. Which if
you once affirm plainly, then we will seek no further for your drift, we may
know your meaning well enough. Christ's Soul shall have no place, no merit, no
respect at all in the matter of Propitiation. Howbeit elsewhere I see in you
manifest Contrariety hereunto. For sundry times you teach that Christ did
suffer peculiarly and severally some * proper punishments (which I hope were
propitiatory and meritorious) in his Soul, ^^g 4. 257. ^^8 2^3. ^^8. 245.
besides his Bodily suffering: Yea that this was a part of his Cross and the
effect of Gods wrath on his Soul as well as the suffering in his Body. Now how
can this be true, if our wholl Ransom and propitiation be only Bodily, bloody,
and deadly: which is the point that here * you stand on. so pa. 253
But you have reasons " you say to co^firm your maine matter, ^ag. 232. 3.
among many these 2: The Jewish Sacrifices, and the Sacraments of Christians.
The 1st. shaddowing and foreshewing, the 2. testifying and confirming that the
true sacrifice for sin was Bodily and bloody. Still what trifling is this?
Does any in the World deny it, that the true Sacrifice for sin was the Body,
blood, and death of the Redeemer? Wherefore the * Proposition must be as I "
did set it in your behalf: ^ereof (...) speak (...): 233. ^^at. 1.10. ^31.
^^. 8. etc. 44. etc.
The Jewish Sacrifices were shadows or Figures, and our * Sacraments were
signs of our wholl and absolute redemption by Christ. I say of the wholl and
entire propitiatory Sacrifice, or else you shrink and leave the Question. As
for your pains of Hell in such sense as " you understand them, that is
including the local punishment among the Damned, Desperation, final
retection, and such like, so there was never any that thought Christ Suffered
Hell pains, as before is declared. (...) 6
Where you say, that I expound these Figures of our wholl and absolut
redemption to be of all the fruits and causes of our redemption, why do you
untruly charge me with that which I have not. I have no such word nor meaning
as fruits. Indeed I named the^ Figures of * Effects in Christ, (...) 14.
I mean Acts don by Christ: but I never thought them any where fruits of our
redemption, but either causes or means or other necessary adioints. This
therefore which indeed is the true Proposition, and being set as it ought to be
I grant not, as you also untruly charge me; I do still deny it in such manner,
as I did before: Page 1
Generally All the Jews Sacrifices did not I mean the propo^^ of their ^^ward
app^^rance, the^ not expre^^ the whole
Figure and shadow our wholl redemption in Christ. The inward and invisible
things they all did not signify. And yet I grant indeed, that they signified
what they were apt to teach and signify: namely the outward and Bodily
sufferings only. This I say, many of the Jews Sacrifices did represent and
signify, yea most of them, but not All. Therefore the Page 23
Assumption also I may well deny, as Treat. 1 page 12.
I did before: affirming that certain Jewish Sacrifices set forth the
sufferings even of the Soul of Christ, and not of his Body only. As 1. that
Lev. 1^
Sacrifice consisting of 2. Goats, a slain and a Scapegoat. Page 23.
You object here against: 1. that I abuse the Text. That were a great fault:
but let us view the text. Thus are the very express words which you also
recite: ver. 5:
Aaron shall take of the people 2. Goats for a Sinne-offering. Surely you must
bring very good reason to frustrat so plain a speech: That is, you say, to
make a Sinne-offering of one of them. Nay, the very words are, take 2. Goats
for a Sinne-offering: it says not, take 2. Goats that one of them may be a
Sinne-offering. But this shows so much, you think, where the text says,
Lottes were cast over the 2: Goats one lot for the Lord, the other for the
Scapegoat. And Aaron shall offer the Goat on which the Lords lot shall fall,
and make him a Sinne-offering. These words prove not that the Scapegoat was no
Sinne-offering at all: Unless this were true, that no Sin offering can
possibly be but by killing and slaying and sheadding of blood. Although the
Heb. 9.
Scripture say, Without sheadding of blood is no remission, yet it means that
Almost all things are in the Law purged with blood. That is, many Offerings
and sacrifices are bloody, but not all. I take now sacrifice and offering in
the largest sense, as signifying any consecrated thing given to God to appease
him for sin. And such unbloody Sinne-offerings very many we shall find in
Lev. 2.11, 13, 8 13. Nomb. 1^ and 18, 11 and 28, 12 14.
Moses Law. Wherefore the Scapegoat may we yet a Sinne-offering, though it were
not slain nor bloody. And his utter sending away into the unknown Deserts, may
answer to the consuming of some other Sacrifices by fire. Thus then these words
of the text which you bring do not prove the Scapegoate to be no
Sinne-offering at all: they prove it to be no bloody Offering, and therefore
not such, but of another kind then the slain Goat was. It might be consecrated
and offered to the Lord, and utterly sequestered from men, and bear and take
away sin no less then the slain Goat: wherein verily consists the nature
and being of a Sacrifice or true Sinne-offering. And in very deed all this the
text following expressly avoucheth of the Escape goat. ver. 10.
" The Scapegoat shall be presented alive before the Lord to make reconciliation
by him, and to let him go for a Scapegoat. Here is his Consecrating unto the
Lord, yea reconciliation also is made by him, though he dyed not as the other
did. Again more plainly, ver. 21, 22.
* And Aaron shall put both his hands upon the head of the live Goat and
confess upon him all the iniquities of the Children of Israel and all their
trespasses and all their sins putting them upon the head of the Goat, and
shall send him away (alive) into the Wilderness. So the Goat shall bear upon
him all their iniquities into the Wilderness, being let go thither. Can there be
any thing in the world more full and strong to prove that the Scapegoat also
was a true Sinne-offering, or rather a true part of this wholl and entire
Sinne-offering consisting and being complete in both these Goats the slain and
the Scapegoat together. For as the slain Goat so this Scapegoat, we see,
was as well " Consecrated to the Lord, and * here Offered (though not by
killing) and separated from men, ver. 10. ver. 21, 22.
and have upon him all the sins of the people and carried them clean away. So
we may read of other Sacrifices consisting and being complete wholly " of
Sacrifices of sundry diverse kinds. Nomb. 28.3, etc.
The bloody Sacrifice had conjoined together with it, the unbloody Sacrifice
of the Meat offering, and another of the Drink offering etc. Which may very
likely represent unto us the sundry and diverse kinds of Christ's meritorious
Sufferings in his life time and at his Death, some bloody, some unbloody: but
all concurring together and making the full and persit propitiation for all our
sins. And even such a Sacrifice or Sinne-offering it seems surely these 2.
Goats were. Here then your advisednes may be noted by all men, which do
reprove me for this assertion, and that with such violent and uncomely terms.
Now if it be a Figurative Sinne-offering, what signified this Figure? Certainly
it signified Christ, and his taking away of our sins by his death. Have you
any color of reason to maintain those wide conjectures of the * Ancients,
^yrill, Am^^ose, Beda.
that the Scapegoat signified the Reprobat and castaway people: or else cursed
Barrabas that escaped death when Jesus was slain. Who but you would defend
these palpable mistakinges of those men? And why? Because they are Ancient. Yet
see you not the express text against the^? Do damned men, or did Barrabas
reconcile us to God, and take away our sins, as the Scapegoat did typically?
Nay surely: It must needs be then, that it signified Christ, yea doubtless
Christ man. For the Godhead could be no Sinne-offering neither did it make
reconciliation for sin, neither did the Deity bear our sins upon himself
properly: all which the Scapegoat Tipically.
did. Further, if it were Christ man, it could not be his Body: for his body
was slain bloudily, the Scapegoat was not slain. For the other Goat (a
Sacrifice to) being slain, this survived and went away into the land of
separation. It must then be of necessity (I think) the Humane mortal Soul of
Christ which the Scapegoate signified: which was a true Sinne-offering and made
propitiation for us, as well as the slain Goat, and bare upon him our sins:
though his Soul dyed not bloudily nor by loosing life and sense, as his body
and the typical slain Goat did. You say, Pap. 235.
If this Scapegoat do signify Christ's Soul, then it cannot be that Christ's
Soul Suffered, much less dyed any death. This objection truly you might have
spared: seeing my self Treat. 1.1^
before brought it and fully answered it: where against you have said never a
word. The effect whereof is this: The escaping of the Goat may lively show unto
us that Christ's Soul dyed not as the Body dyed by loosing life and sense, but
surviving went hence into Hades, the land of separation, the invisible world of
the Dead. But in that the Scapegoat did bear and sustain our sins, and was
indeed a Sinne-offering to as well as the slain Goat, so it may well signify
that Christ's Soul properly suffered and sustained the burden of our sins in
satisfying for them, no less then his body which was bloudily slain
therefore. As for the Dying of Christ's Soul we shall answer you for that in
due place hereafter. So that, Now where you say, Page 234.
I am more bold then wise in affirming the Scapegoat to signify the Soul of
Christ. Surely then I were like you, who affirm as boldly, that among the
Jews no Sacrifice at all foreshewed any Suffering of the Soul of Christ:
which you can never prove. Howbeit this I acknowledge indeed that the Jewish
Figures, though they be applyable unto Christ the substance of those shadows,
yet we ought to apply them in the particulars soberly and warily, and not
without some plain proportion of the Figure with the thing Figured. Wherefore
my meaning is none other in these Jewish figures, which the Scripture does not
any where expressly interpret, but to show what I think to be indeed most
probable and likely, knowing that yet some such matter, as we aim at, they do
signify without question. And this is sufficient to deny your Assertion, which
against our saying that the sufferings of Christ's Soul may be signified by
the Scapegoat, is but merely coniecturall and presumed.

The very like are * your 3. reasons brought to show that the " Holocaust
cannot signify the suffering^s of whole Christ, Page 236.
and therefore not of his Soul any way. Lev. 1. and 6.
Your former reason is, because the Holocaust was 1. slain and after burnt:
for then if the burning signifies Christ's pains and sufferings, Christ must
seem to suffer after his death. But this is a weak inference. Is there any
Figure or similitude concurring in all points and circumstances with the thing
signified? Sure there is no man of knowledge so inexpert or so unreasonable as
to require it. Many times where they agree only but in one principal respect,
that suffices to make the similitude. Again many similitudes and Figures
there are in the old Law having as great disparageme^t to the things signified
by them as this in the Holocaust which you talk of. The Bodies of beasts first
" slain, Lev. 4.11, 2. and 16, 27 Heb 13.11.12. ver. 13. Lev. 1.9.
were after carried out of the Host. Now these signified Christ's going out of
Jerusalem * to be slain, but being yet alive. Again the beasts carrying out by
others after they were slain "is likened to our voluntary and free leaving of
the world in this life. Lastly the * burning of the beasts after they were
dead, was a sacrifice of a sweet favor unto God. Which in truth is Christ's
very " death, Fphe. 5.2.
and nothing don by him afterward, whereby Gods anger is fully pacified toward
us. Wherefore your first exception is very vain. The 2. is like to it. The
Holocaust was consumed in one and the same sire. But Christ was tormented
wholly not with one kind of suffering (as we maintain) but with 2. kinds,
that is with bodyly and spiritual sorrows. First I say, this also, if it were
true, is as weak an exception as the former, and altogether like it. See:
Though Christ indeed suffered diverse and sundry kinds of sorrows yea even of
those which were merely outward and bodily, Even that merely in the Soul
viz. when it grew vehement.
as also of those that were merely Spiritual and inward, yet we plainly
affirm that one and " the same torment afflicted his whole manhood by
sympathy. For his Soul also was sore grieved I doubt not even with his proper
Bodily torments: likewise his Body, when his trickling sweat was clots of
blood, was crushed and broken vnspekeably with his inward and spiritual
sorrows, though his flesh then felt outwardly no pain. So your 2. exception
is also nothing. The 3. is no better: where you argue from Trea^ page 1^
my words, that the Bodies of beasts could not prefigure the immortal and
reasonable Soul of Christ. And it is like to that which page ^
afterward you cite from my words about the Sacraments, Earthly Elements cannot
set out spiritual and invisible effects in Christ. Hence you think that I
cannot defend that the fiery consuming of the Holocaust may signify the sorrows
both of the Soul and Body of Christ. You shall see that I can full easily, and
without any trisling. It is evident that I mean in those former places, that
bodily things generally and for the most part doe-represent the mere bodily
and external parts of Christ's sufferings: but not always and altogether.
Which you might have easily seen by my answer to the Trea^ page ^
Assumption and by the instances which there I give to this purpose. Again the
very instances which I give, viz: the Scapegoat, the Holocaust, and afterward
the bread broken in the communion, these I say do not in that respect as they
are Bodily things represent the Soul of Christ or any matter pertaining to it.
But the peculiar usage and manner of action about them does lively represent the
suffering of his soul and not of his body only. As, not the Goat represents
Christ's soul, unless only in respect of the escaping of it when the other Goat
dyed, and also in respect of the sustayning and bearing upon himself of our
sins. And not the body of the Holocaust, but the utter consuming by fire of
the whole, signifies the sufferings of whole Christ. Lastly the bread may
signify the whole Christ who is the entire and perfect bread of life: but the
Breaking thereof into pieces represents more lively the breaking and crushing
in pieces (as it were) of the soul rather the^ of the body. Which was pierced
through, but was not in case of being broken in pieces, so likely as the Soul
was. Yet you will say) the Hol: may signify that whole Christ suffered but
some bodily afflictions, the Soul feeling the griefs and pains of the Body.
For how will it follow that the proper and immediate sufferings of Christ's Soul
might be signified by the Holocaust? Surely according to the proportion of the
Holocaust so whole Christ, and then his very Soul chiefly, was as it were
chopped or broken into pieces, and as it were quite consumed and swallowed up in
his fiery sorrows: only the assistance of his Godhead sustained his Soul and
withal his body, or else he could not have borne it, ^reat 1. ^ag. ^8.
as a I noted M. Whitakers to have truly taught. This can not be but the
Souls peculiar suffering of Gods very wrath, far beyond all bodily sufferings:
and yet not those pains of Hell, ^ag 8. etc.
as b you grossly utter it. Your other senses that you give hereof, the 1.
hinders not mine, ^ag. 237.
that is c the Acceptance of Christ's death. The 2. that is Christ's fleshes
incorruption after death is very hard and far fetched. And Sacrifices had their
respect to Christ's death, not to any thing further or afterward. As for
another sense out of Austin that it should signify our perfection and burning
charity, it cannot be true: for the Holocaust-sacrifice out of question
primarily signified the person of Christ, not ours. See: it is untrue that any
man besides Christ alone is or can be perfect in this life, that he should be
wholly consumed with Heavenly love, according to the proportion of the
consuming of the Holocaust. Also you both here do seem double, understanding
by the Holocaust both incorruption after death, and a perfect burning Love in
us now in this life. Which things are far distant asonder and cannot stand
together. But all th^se are so unlikely, that I will leave them to the
consideration of the godly wise.

Then d you come to your next reason about the Sacraments, ^^g. 238.
wherein you think to touch me. First you reprove me for saying, ^^at. 1.
(...). 14.
e Sacraments are Earthly elements, they cannot set out the spiritual and
invisible effects in Christ. This say you is against the definition of a
Sacrament, which is, Avisible sign of invisible grace. I answer, first you
rather overthrow your self in urging this against me: for your own main
assertion is that neither the Jewish Sacrifices nor Christian Sacraments do
signify any more then the bodily and bloody death of Christ. Then it is your
self Sir indeed that denies the very definition of Sacraments, that they are
visible signs of invisible graces. For I hope the Bodily and bloody death of
Christ, and the renting of his flesh with whips, nails, and spears were
visible and not invisible things. As for me I can easily defend my self
although you fail in this. For I hold that Sacraments are indeed visible
signs of invisible graces wrought in us by Christ: and yet usually they
represent not spiritual and invisible Effects or Acts in Christ himself, but
Albei^^ conseq^^ and imp^^ I deny^ but al^ Passion be vn^^stood it
only the external and visible parts of his Passion. Can you not reconcile
these two? Any b^ginner in Christianity will easily do it. Next Page 2^
you make me to cross the Justitution of the Lords Table, because Treat. ^
page 14
I said the Ceremony of breaking the bread cannot properly belong to Christ's
body. But even here do not I say expressly, that it shows forth how
Christ's body was broken for us? Which you say is the Institution and this I
plainly acknowledge: where then is mine error, and what is it? Indeed I mean
that the breaking of the bread into many pieces does not set out primarily the
breaking of his body, but of his soul first and immediately, and then of his
Body jointly and consequently. Again, that it does not set out properly the
pearcing or boring through of Christ's body with the spear or nails nor his
lashing with the whip: because 1 Cor. 1^
Klomenon is broken to pieces properly, and Isa. 53^
Meducca in the Prophet is also Broken to pieces properly, or crushed and
broken to powder. As these Nom. ^ Isa 19. Deuteronomy. 2^ Likewise there wor^ very same
^^ture. 2 C^^ 34.7 2 (...) 23.6, 15.16.12. Isa 21, and 2 and 41.1 Mic 4.^
Scripture do use this word likewise, and also all Lexicons do confirm. Your
Psalm. 14 Ior. 44.^ Except Io^^ 2. where ye portion man kept of yt per sense
(...) break m^^ pieces with words A^^ Psalm. 34 51.17.
allegatio^s therefore about the use of Dacha otherwise, show not the proper,
but the use thereof altered. Thus then still I say our former places are not to
be meant principally of Christ's Body, for it was not properly broken: which
also my other place shows suffficientlie where it is said, Ioh 1^
Not a bone of him was broken. Seeing it is manefest that none of his flesh was
separated from his bones. But of necessity it must have been so, if his flesh
had been properly broken into pieces, and yet his bones not broken. Page 23
You say, From a part the whole may and does properly take denomination. First
you must show that some part of him was properly broken into pieces: which
hitherto is proved to the contrary. That fable which Page 6^
you bring of the Nails being so great that Constantine of them made him a
Bridle and a Helmet, will not help to prove that his Body was properly broken.
Neither is cutting or tearing, or pearching through which only indeed the
Scripture warranteth, that Breaking properly which Dach^.
that word in the Prophet before noted does properly signify. And I pray is
that true, that from a part the whole may and does properly take denomination.
Does it properly? From a part to the whole is a Figure of speech. Is a
Figurative speech a proper speech with you? Vainly you charge me I know not how
often against my express words, that I call Hell Heaven, and Descending
Ascending. But here it is no wrong to charge you with such an absurdity
indeed, who expressly do make that which you say is Figurative to be a proper
denomination. I am sure your Grammar was better, before you were as you are.
But to proceed if you ask me, Cor. 11.24 (...) 53 10.
whether do I think that a those places, of the Apostle and the Prophet do
signify at all the pearcing of his body. I answer they may by a general and
improper speech, as piercing may be an improper kind of breaking. For seeing
the H. Ghost by those words intends to show the whole outward violence and
destruction of his flesh also, and not only the breaking and bruizing of his
Soul, therefore I deny not but herein so much may be signified, yet in no
wise not that alone, nor by a proper signification, as I have said. Now where
you catch at an advantage in me as you think, Treat 1. ^^g. 14.
in that I said, b The Caeremony of breaking the bread (or that breaking to
pieces in I say) cannot belong properly to Christ's body, but to his soul. I
grant taking my words at the worst, and thinking me to be a senseles fool (as
indeed you do in your whole writing) so you may construe them as if I had said,
The Soul might be properly broken to pieces. But other men (not inferior to
your L. in learning, none dispraysed) who have read this Treatise, have
co^ceaved me thus. This breaking to pieces cannot be properly said of Christ's
body, nor in any sense proportionable to the property of the c words. But his
Soul may rather and more truly be said to have been broken and bruized to
pieces in such wise as souls may be broken with sorrows and extraordinary
anguish, ^omenon ^educca.
and so was his Body likewise by sympathy with his Soul. Where I deny not but
Broken applied to the Soul is Figurative: yet keeping a just and full
proportion with the proper sense of Breaking to pieces, which we cannot keep
referring it to his Body. So that thus it is nearer and better applied to the
Soul then to the Body of Christ, which was only pierced or bored through.

Then you rehearse another of your reasons tending to the very same effect as
that last before. ^^g. 240.
You will prove (d you say) that the blood of our Savior is the true price of
our redemption, and that as well of our Souls as of our Bodies. Still you deal
fraudulently: for who denies this as your words run. But we know you
mean, ^^s here ^^g. 16.
e that no more but the shedding of his blood only and merely is the just and
full satisfaction of all our sins even in the righteous and sincere judgment
of God. Then we absolutely deny your Assertion, as before we have don the like.
As for your 1 Pet. 1 Rev. 5.^
alleged Scriptures we answer them as we did generally Treat. page 8.9
before: that they mean not the mere blood of Christ nor only the body singly
and simply considered but, that together with the proper sufferings of his
Soul also they were the just and full satisfaction, and redemption. Against
which you have nothing any where. And likewise our advised and resolut answer
is to page 58, 60, 61, 7^. etc.
all the rest of your scriptures which most tediously and vainly you heap up
and scatter every wherein your former treatise to this effect, as if they
contained somewhat for your purpose, when as indeed there is not one text any
where that has any meaning of your strange conceit. So that we shall have no
need to trouble our selves any more hereafter about any of them. Yet page 24^
here you urge a reason against us: Jf our Souls be not redeemed by the blood
of Christ our bodies have no benefit of redemption (you mean) from death. But
we 1. Pet. 1 Rev. 5.9.
are redeemed, not we shall be. Ergo it is our Souls which are redeemed, our
bodies are not redeemed as yet in this life. Wherein we have to note 3. things.
1. Your Proposition is vain and illogicall having no consequence in it at all.
Which makes me to think that I hit your meaning right and mistook you not
in my former book. Howbeit to try this your sentence here, what if our Souls
were not at all redeemed by Christ's blood but some other way, or not by his
blood merely and only (which indeed is our quaestion) will it follow that
therefore our bodies are still mortal, and therefore not redeemed from death?
Or what if our Souls be redeemed by his blood, as indeed they are, though not
wholly nor only thereby. What follows then from this? Nay what if our Souls
and Bodies were redeemed wholly and only by Christ's blood? Is these any
consequence that therefore our bodies should now be redeemed from death, and
never die. Truly I cannot discern, but that your proposition means some such
consequence as this, which is to me a vey strange reason. Yet that which you ad
Page 2^
afterward is more strange: Jf our Souls be not redeemed (wholly) by the
(mere) blood of Christ, (For thus still I say you must make your words, or
else you ask the very Quaestion) then our bodies have utterly no good, even no
good at all by the death of Christ. In which sequel verily I can see neither
head nor tail. Chose you now, whether you will that you speak this
sophistically, or absurdly. For I cannot discern it: I leave it therefore to
your self to determine. But perhaps you will yet again go back to that you
excused your self withal before. You will mean that our bodies in this life
have no benefit of redemption from death, even no more then the bodies of
Infidels. And this plainly you avouch for truth. Is this true, Are not our
bodies now already freed from the curse and the sting of death, from all the
hurt and harm that properly and naturally is in death? Is it not made unto us
a quiet sleep and a peaceable rest, an entrance for our Souls into Heaven, a
putting off of sin to our bodies, in such wise that Christ takes from it the a
name of Death and calls it but b a passage? ^oh. 8.51.
Or have the Jnfidels also thus much benefit in death, ^oh. 5.2^.
as we have in it by our redemption in Christ? I know not therefore how to
term this your assertion, I forbear to name it as it deserves: it is more
then strange that Infidels bodies should have as much benefit of nedemption
from death, as our bodies have by Christ. Die I grant, or cease to breath we
must and do still even as they do. And this death by the natural property of
it is a part of Gods Curse: but to the faithful there are great benefits joined
even in death by the gracious dealing of God peculiarly toward his children,
which also their bodies are partakers of thorough the death of Christ. The
natural sting is taken out of it for the godly, yet it remains to the
Infidells and hurts them by retayning even their bodies (though dead) in and
under Gods dreadful Curse. Wherefore it makes many to think that indeed you
uttered this matter somewhat otherwise in your Sermons, then here you do now
publish it: and it persuades me still that c I mistook you not, ^^eat. 1.
^^g. 11.
seeing this your turning and setting of it is so vnhansom. For every one may
see by this your handling of it, that then you said more then here you
express: and here you would feign fashion it to somewhat, but you cannot. Yea
your own words bewray some alteration from that which so confidently you
preached, where you say, Whatsoever the words were that you might use, which
you do not acknowledge to be these that I bring. ^ag. 240.
Lastly, d you grant that you used this reason in handling the power of
Christ's death: that is, when you preached it. For now in this Treatise you
have clean left it out, for ought that e I can see. which bewrays that it
was such, (...). 88.113
as your self saw was not to be maintained, howsoever here you strive to set
some color upon it, though yet still in vain.

Before we depart from this point, That not the blood of Christ nor his flesh
merely and only without respect to the merit of his whole Soul was the full
price of Redemption, here is fit place to show how sundry of the Ancient
Fathers do agree with us sufficiently in this matter: although afterward in
your book you seem to bring them against us. But indeed so they seem only:
for in truth they are with us as by these following we may see. First Ire^. 5.
Irenaeus, The Lord bought us with his own blood, and gave his soul for our
souls, and his flesh for our flesh. Cyr. de (...) fid. ad T^^
Cyrill, He bestowed his flesh as a ransom for our flesh, and made his Soul
likewise a price of redemption for our Souls, although he lived again, being
by nature life it self. Naz. in tr^^ 49. ad Cl^^
Nazianzen makes every part of man to be sanctified by the like in Christ, our
condemned flesh by his flesh, our soul by his soul, our understanding by his
understanding. Ambr. (...) Luc. 22. (...) trist. dolo^^ etc.
Ambrose says Maerorem animae nostrae suae animae maerore abolevit: He
abolished the sorrow of our Soul by the sorrow of his Soul. And De inca^^
Sacr. cap. (...)
Hoc in se obtulit Christus quod induit etc. Christ offered in sacrifice all
that which he assumed: that is all and every whit that was in him besides his
Godhead. Fulgent. (...) Thrasym (...) lib. 3.
Fulgentius, He showed in himself the sufferinges of a whole man in verity and
truth, quicquid fuit infirmitatis animae sine peccato suscepit and pertulit:
He took upon him and suffered whatsoever infirmity may be in the soul
without sin. It is not possible that we our selves should speak a more
effectual sentence for our purpose then this is. Say as Fulgentius here
says, and we ask no more. All that Page 86.
you except, that by these Fathers Christ dyed only the death of the flesh, is
less then here they affirm. And we shall answer to that in due place. Now
mark well, how these Fathers do not say that Christ gave his life for a ransom
only, (as Page 70. ^^
you would construe it) but even his very Soul to for our Souls. They strive
to express an exact proportion so far as was possible between Christ and us.
First in the parts of Christ who suffered, and of us who were saved. So that as
we are saved not in our bodies only, nor only in the external sensitive part
of our souls (wherein stands that suffering with and by our bodies) but we
are saved redeemed and sanctified in our whole Spirit and Understanding also:
even so (by their verdict) Christ suffered for us not the bodily and outward
sufferinges by Sympathy only, but he suffered for us even in his Mind also.
Now this is directly against your present a Assertion which we have in hand.
(...) 132.240 ^eere p. 14
Also here they observe an exact proportion in the Objects so far as was
possible, viz: in that which he suffered for us, and that which we are saved
from thereby. Thus that sorrow of the immortal part of the Soul and not of
body only, which we are saved from, the same he suffered. Yea I say all and
every whit of those passions and sorrows whereunto man's nature is b subject
and capable of, (...) nature we ^^e subject to ^^fer in the ^^nde pro^erly for
sin: and not only ^y Sympathy from ye Body Cyrill. Thes^^ur. 10 3 Barnard. de
^ass. Dom. ^ap. 41. Page 7. Ter^ul. cout. Prax. Amb in Luc. 2. De trist. ^olor.
etc.
and from which we are saved, all the same he tasted and suffered for us. Thus
it is also that Cyrill elsewhere says, c Omnia perpessus est vt nos ab omnibus
liberaret: He suffered all things thoroughly, that he might acquit us from all,
which else we should have suffered. And thus I take Barnards meaning to be, d He
spared not him self who knows how to spare his. Whereupon you collect well,
if you mean so e He suffered and endured All to the uttermost with exact
obedience and patience. To which end Tertullian also, f Sic reliquit, dum non
parcit. This was Gods forsaking of him in his passion, that in nothing he
spared him. And thus Ambrose g Minus contulerat mihi nisi meum suscepisset
affectum. He had don less for me* if he had not ben (altogether) affected as
I should have been. And thus Ierom, ^erom. in ^sa. 53.
h Quod nos pro nostris debebamus sceleribus sustinere, ille pro nobis passus
est, pacificans etc, That which we should have borne for our sins, the same
he suffered for us. Wherefore by the Fathers Christ suffered exactly i All and
whatsoever sorrows and pains which we should have suffered, All kinds:
(...): both in ^^irit and Body. ^ot all parti^^lars in the^.
as well Spiritual as Corporal as well in all the powers of the Soul subject
to suffering, as in that which suffered always with and from the body. Only
they except 2. points which of simple necessity indeed must be excepted in the
Son of God, Page 10. 12. ^3.
which before k I have also acknowledged: 1. Sin, Page 87.
and all sinful concomitantes and consequentes as l you speak. And that is it
which Cyprian exactly notes, That in him there was m Similitudo paenae non
Culpae, Cypr. de pass.
the very like punishment as should have been in us: only there was no sin nor
fault in him as is in us. The 2. point excepted is, that he suffered not
eternally, but for a while: for he that was life it self could not but live
again, says n Cyrill. In the place above cited.
Where he seems to acknowledge a kind of death even of the soul, from which
Christ revived again. But of that in due place hereafter. Now here it is
manifest that even the Fathers, of whom you do so exceedingly boast, are
clean against you and for us in the 1. and chiefest point of this question:
showing that Christ suffered not only bodly, or in the soul by Symphaty only,
but in the Mind also distinctly, even as we may suffer in mind distinctly
from our bodily suffering, that is when we suffer somewhat As I (...) Treat.
(...) page 4.
imediatly from God. Yea he suffered (say these Fathers) all the pains which
else we should have suffered: no material thing excepted but only sin,
otherwise he was spared by dispensation in nothing. Against this clear and
plain sense of the Fathers Pa. 35^.
you take no exception, neither can you.

Thus having hitherto manefestly defended my self, that I have not abused any
way the Fathers nor yet your self, as you unjustly charge me in Pa. 22^
your entrance: Now I am to do the like against Page 2^^
your insufficient refusing of my Reasons. Where by, I hope, it shall appear
that you have not weakened any one of them. And First you begin with rehearsing
my words, wherein I briefly noted the very Question between us, Treat. (...)
page 4.
That Christ suffered for us the Wrath of God. Which you Page 24
exclame at without measure, as being not the point which you preached against.
Howbeit I suppose these words do rightly and fitly set out the matter, both
which then you preached, and which now you write. I have Page 8
here before truly and fully declared the whole state of this controversy, I
trust. Yet because we can never open this point to much for many good uses that
it has, I will not think it tedious nor labor lost ne to rip up this
question a little again in this place, that so we may proceed with more ease.

Your general carriage in your book declares, that you abuse the Reader
exceedingly by the ambiguous and equivocall taking of this term Gods Wrath, as
before in the entrance I have showed. It is not I that abuse them, as you Nam^
243.24^
every where very bitterly and unreasonably do charge me. For according to the
most usual and common sense of Gods wrath, so in my wholl Treatise I take it
for Gods perfect Holiness, Justice, and Power Ioh. 3^ Psalm. 2^ 2. Cor* 9.
properly executing vengeance and punishment (whether little or great) due to
them on whom sin lies. But you generally do so carry this phrase, as
signifying any punishment of sin whatsoever: and namely the Afflictions which
the very Godly do suffer, which is altogether an improper speech. This I
observe most specially in one place of your book above others. Where you say,
Page 1^
All kinds of troubles, pains, and griefs in our states, bodies, and minds,
which shorten or sower this present life are degrees of Gods wrath, and
chasticements of out transgression and corruption. Which presently you prove by
many needeles Scriptures. And from this sense of his Fathers wrath you do not
exempt the Lord Christ. You mean that this he suffered indeed, and that this
is all in your opinion. It is true All troubles pains and griefs in their
first Ordinance a were the effects of Gods proper wrath. ^^ou do (...)
right^^^ 275. and
But in their state and condition now, they are b not: namely, as the Godly do
suffer them. Which we must here note and consider well. ^^at. 1.14.^.132.
You say right also: This, because it seems grievous for the present and not
joyous is called (somtymes) in the Scriptures the rod and wrath of God. True;
it seems. But indeed it is not so, or it ought not so to be. For c it seems
otherwise to the judgment of faith and knowledge. (...) 1.2.^.2.28, (...) and 2
Cor. ^0. before pa. ^^. 19.
Then Gods wrath in this sense is very improperly taken: as I have often said.
Wherefore speaking properly and exactly as in this Co^troversy we ought
according to the revealed mind of the Holy Ghost, it is Chasticement and
correction: it is not in any wise Wrath, or punishment properly meant. Neither
may it be said properly that his Justice leads him to inflict it on us (as e
you affirm) but it is his Holiness and Love toward his children which
chasteneth them. (...). 132.
According to the Scripture which says, (...) 12.10.
f God chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness.
And g whom the Lord loves he chasteneth: (...) 6.7. (...) 11.32
he scourges every Soune that he receaveth. If we endure chastening, God
offers himself unto us as unto sons: for what son is it whom the Father
chasteneth not. Therefore to speak properly not Gods Justice, but his Holiness
and Fatherly Love does move him to lay whatsoever Crosses and troubles upon his
children. He is not unto them a Judge or Revenger, but a Father: Neither is it
Wrath that comes from him or Vengeance for sin properly, ^^r. 11.
but h amendment in Love toward the godly. Now the case with Christ was clean
otherwise. He needed no Amendment, but that which he suffered was right
Punishment. He was neither in case as the wicked, nor yet simply as the godly.
He differed from them both, and yet in some points did partake of both their
conditions. He was like the godly, in that he was highly beloved of God, and
had no manner of sin of his own laid to his charge. He was like the wicked and
differed from the case of the godly greatly, because he was laden and charged
with sins, yea with all manner of sins, and sustained their due punishment,
there being also none other at all to endure the vengeance of God for them but
himself. As we have largely showed before in opening the state of our
Question. Thus then whatsoever Christ suffered (and specially at his death) was
very wrath and vengeance from God properly taken, true punishment and justice
executed against sin and for sin, to the which he was in some sort condemned
and appointed, also this was the true Curse of the Law which thus he sustained
for us. Nevertheles in all this his Case was extraordinary, his condition in
the like punishments utterly unlike to the wicked. For his own nature was
still for all this most holy, faithful, steadfast, loving the Lord, and beloved
of him, albeit in his office of Redeeming us and suretyship for us he did
sustain truly, and not improperly, (as the Godly do) the Lords very wrath
against sin which he took upon him. Here is now the Power of God to be
deeply considered, together with his unspeakable Justice, and Love and
Holiness. Even one of the greatest mysteries of Christian Religion: which to
unfold what tongue is able, yea what heart can conceave it? And yet most
necessary and most comfortable to be understood of all men. Namely how the Lord
has assigned to his son in the work of Redemption 2. persons as it were,
or countenances, or conditions. His own naturally, which God ever dearly
loved: and our countenance, or person, or condition which he sustained by his
office, which condition the Lord truly As yo^^ Gods C^^ page 26^ in deeds in
word^
accursed and punished. Only the sense of the pain of Gods Vengeance came
indeed unto his most holy nature: the Curse the Hatred, the wrath, and
judgment of God being quenched therewith. His own nature felt the sorrow and
pain of the Curse and Hatred. But the Hatred and Curse was bent against the
load of our sin wherein he stood forth as guilty before God, and appeared as
it were clothed therewith. This was Love and mercy to us, this was Justice upon
Christ having undertaken for us, this was infinite power and wisdom both ways
in God to bring it to pass, which no creature can comprehend: his Holiness and
Love still chastening his Redeemed ones, but laying no part of true Punishment
or proper Vengeance for sin upon them, which Christ only did for them wholly
sustain. Thus also seeing Christ indeed had no sin in him (as the godly
have) to be corrected: neither could be correctted and chasticed for nothing:
therefore properly he was not chastised nor corrected at all, but his
Afflictions every one both small and great were true and proper punishments,
and the effects of Gods very wrath for our sin lying upon him. (...). 245.
Some where a you say, Christ might suffer the wrath of God in his body, yea in
his soul he might suffer it, and yet not the pains of the Damned, or of Hell.
We grant you say true, Christ suffered not the pains of the damned nor of Hell
understanding this for the very same condition and state alltogeather b as the
Damned are in. (...) you de^^^e it page ^0.49.50.
We abhor such blasphemy as much as you that Christ so suffered Hell pains.
Yea albeit I know you are far from thinking so, yet I say your words do com
nearer unto it then ours do, ^^g. 15.16.
as is c before noted. But I ask, do you grant that Christ suffered Gods
wrath in Spirit, as the Apostle d somwhere distinguishes the Spirit and Soul?
If you mean not thus, (...). The. 5.23
then you again use sophistry deceaving us with the word Soul. For we mean
thereby in this Question only the Spirit or Mind, as it is also called in
exact and distinct speech. Howbeit speaking vulgarly and ordinarily we call it
the Soul: Which yet sometime is understood only for the Sensitive parts
quickening the body and depending thereon. But this indeed is not it which we
have here in quaestion. If you mean in Soul, to be properly and immediately
in his immortal Spirit, as the ordinary phrase intends: and that so he
suffered directly punishment for sin in his Soul, and not Devotion and Piety
and zealous Care only (as I doubt e you mean) then you differ not from us,
(...) observe (...). 18.
but we al agree. And thus my words shall be true, Christ suffered a sense of
Gods wrath f equal to Hell it self, and all the torments thereof. For as
touching Gods wrath punishing his Spirit, Which you (...) s;o blame: (...).
244.247.
who can say but that this was as hot and skorching as Hell fire it self? Who
can limit or measure the fury of Gods severe Justice when he comes in judgment
against sin, as now he did unto Christ? This therefore being well pondered,
we may preceave that Christ's sorrow and anguish which he endured for sin,
might very well be and was no doubt infinite: yea even in those bodily stripes,
wounds, and bloodshed, whose pains otherwise were finite. His soul not only
discerning sensitively the bodily pain and smart, but chiefly in the
understanding he conceaved, and in his faculty of immediate suffering he felt
the fury of that hand which principally struck those blows upon his Humane
nature: not Pilats, nor the Jews, who were but instruments, but the original
and chief employing them, which was Gods Justice armed with vengeance for his
sin (His I may call it, for he paid for it.) Now this could not but make an
unspeakable impression of pain and sorrows, which stacke in the depth of his
soul. Who then can say how little or how small this was? Nay, who can declare
or comprehend the infinite greatness of it? Finally your self does grant expressly
that Page 2.
the Wrath of God is Hell: indeed only it Isa. 30
causes Hell to be cruel. Yea you grant it to be sharper then Hell. So that
we see hereby how vainly you say, Page 2^.
Out of this proposition, Christ suffered for us the wrath of God for sin, I
shall never conclude: Ergo he suffered the true pains of Hell. I have here
showed you I trust that this follows well, seeing the wrath of God which
Christ felt in his Spirit was his right and proper wrath, albeit he suffered
not all nor the wholl wrath of God, nor Hell locally, nor every part thereof
just as the Damned do. Which you without all color of reason or likelihood,
would make men imagine to be the question between us.

You Page 24
would make a Contradition in my words for saying Treat. 1.
Christ suffered in his wholl manhood, and afterward Treat. 1.
Christ suffered Gods wrath properly and immediately in his Soul. Where I say
not as you untruly charge me, that, He suffered all that he suffered in his
whole manhood. Wherefore this is a niew contrariety. Again, granting him to
suffer all that he suffered in his wholl manhood, yet he must suffer Gods wrath
(as God wrath) properly and immediately in his Soul, in his Body mediatly and
by conjunction only with his Soul. And thus my reason Treat. 1.
there framed is yet still wholly good and sound.

Then I am charged with absurdityes, I know not how many, nor how great. 1.
Page 34^
Because I say, Treat. ^. page 17.
Christ assumed not our nature, nor any part of it but only to suffer in it
properly and immediately. As if I had meant here, that he became man not to
reveal to us by his own mouth his Fathers will, not to work righteousness for
us, not to quicken and sanctify us, but only to suffer for us, and nothing else.
Wherein who would have showed himself so unjust an Adversary, and so
unreasonable? Were it not reason and just dealing to consider whereof we
dispute, and so weighing the whole matter of our talk not to stretch and rack
my words further then that. All men may see it to be manefest, that Treat. ^
page 16.
here I speak only of Christ's suffering for our redemption, having not one
word about his other benefits which he wrought for us. Page 17.
a And after speaking of Christ's Souls suffering, I show that although there
were 2 sorts thereof, one immediate and proper, an other by Sympathy from and
with the flesh, yet Christ took our Humane Soul only to suffer in it properly
and immediately: that is, his maine end was not that he should suffer in it by
Sympathy from and with the body, and only so, which you very strangely
affirm. So that my meaning is no more but to exclude that which you affirm,
That Christ took his Humane Soul to suffer in it only from and by his Body.
This here I denied, and nothing else. For I grant that Christ intended that his
Humane Soul should suffer by Sympathy: but yet also this he intended not
directly nor primarily in taking the 2 distinct parts of our Humane nature our
Soul and our Body. He intended it by consequence, because Natures right state
was such in us: therefore determining to be in nature like us, he would also
that his Soul should feel the Bodies outward harms, as it does with us.
Howbeit in comparison of the Souls most principal disposition, and of that
which is proper to Reasonable Creatures, he did not respect the inferior part,
that which is common to us with Beasts, even this sensitive suffering by
Sympathy with and from the Body. I say in comparison of the other Christ
respected not this, yet he did respect this also, as I said, secondarily and
consequently: that is because he intended to have our nature in whole and full
perfection, as we have it, only except sin. Now I beseech you would any
upright adversary object against me, that in this speech I exclude Christ's
doing righteousness in his Soul for us etc. I appeal to all indifferent
Readers. Rather hence we are to gather and to conclude, that each part in
Christ ought to have the proper and immediate use as is incident to the nature
thereof, as well in suffering, as it is clear that it has in working
righteousness. In Christ's working of righteousness and obedience to God, his
Soul had a proper and immediate part to do which it executed without the Body:
as to conceave and meditate on the will of God revealed to him, to love and
wholly to embrace it, and to purpose the full performing of it, etc. His Body
also had a proper and external use, not only to follow the holy thoughts and
purposes of his mind, but also to minister many outward occasions, and to
derive them to the mind, whereby Christ wrought righteousness completely, and
in his whole man. That which was by cooperation and mutual cohaerence only of
one part with the other, as it was a distinct kind of working in the Soul and
in the body also, so it was respected secondarily, and only because the true
constitution of our nature requires so: which Christ meant wholly and perfitly
to take upon him. Whence now we may well argue, As it was with him touching his
faculty of doing righteousness and Obedience, so it was and ought to be
touching his suffering Gods punishments for us. There is no reason in the
world, nor likelihood, that the natural faculty in Christ's Soul of proper and
immediate suffering for our sins should have no use, and a Suffering of pains
only by and from the body should be sufficient, when in his doing of
righteousness for us his Souls joint Obedience and mutually knit together in
and with his Body was not alone sufficient. But there was further obedience
found in the Soul of Christ, even that which was proper and immediate in it, as
before I said. Seeing then such a kind of Obedience was necessary for us in
Christ's Soul, therefore such a Suffering also even in the same kind was
necessary likewise. This must needs be a perfect reason for us against you,
except you could by express Scripture disprove this proportion of like
necessity between the operation of the proper faculties of Christ's Humane
Soul, that is between his Doing and Suffering for us: which you shall never
be able to do. And thus it appears I hope, that you had no cause so cruelly
to rage at me for this as you do.

Nor yet for the next: where your charge me that Page 250.
I conclude Christ's flesh to be needles for our redemption. A horrible
Haeresie. But how do I say so much? Because I say, His Souls suffering by
Sympathy did not make properly to our redemption. Ergo his Flesh was needles. I
deny this sequel: how can that follow? Touching the sense of my speech, you
may remember how I have largly declared Page 8.
before that the Souls proper suffering is greatly and justly distinguished
from the Common suffering that is by sympathy: And that the Souls suffering by
Sympathy in Christ was intended by God, by reason that our natural
constitution does require it so to be in every true and perfect man, which
Christ also was. And thus it did make to our redemption, even as likewise his
Infirmities, and Affections: as his Wearines, Hunger, Sleep, Fear, Love, Joy,
etc. These do make to our redemption, not as intended in Christ's incarnation
principally and primarily, but secondarily and by consequent; because that
Humane nature which God ordained unto him, and intended to be perfect in him,
could not otherwise be thoroughly perfect as it is in us; but with these common
Affections and infirmities which other mortal Creatures have to, and not Man
only. Also in Christ these Infirmities and Affections wrought not immediately
for sin: but usually for other particular causes and occasions immediately.
Nevertheles they were all even for sin in him consequently, that is because the
perfection of Humane nature, which he assumed for sin, and was in every point
in him, as before I noted, required so. Even thus likewise in Christ: I say his
Souls suffering by sympathy wrought in him immediately and properly for some
other particular cause stirring that faculty, that is by reason of the Bodily
pain and smart, which this sensitive power of the Soul apprehended and felt
and caused the flesh also to feel. This suffering then of his Soul only by
sympathy was immediately and properly not for our redemption from sin, but for
the sensitive apprehending of the smart, wounds, and blows, which the Jews
gave his body: and yet as before I said consequently even this was for our
sin also, namely because these wounds were given him for our sin. And
thus, though it made for our redemption in such manner as it wrought in Christ
because of our sin, and as it was intended by Christ in taking both parts of
our Nature, the Soul and the Body, yet this was not in a direct or immediate
respect, and so not properly but by consequent as I have showed.

After a you charge me sorely, Page 252.
that I falsify your Argument about receaving pollution from Adam. For where b
I frame your reason as grounded on that opinion that only our flesh is derived
from Adam and not our soul, Treat. 1. page 19.
Page 252.
c you renounce it utterly and say, you grounded no reason upon that
difficulty: and so you made no such argument as here I pretend. Which whether
it be true or no, I report me to them that heard you. But then, what is your
reason now? is it any otherwise grounded? No certainly, if you make any reason
at all. Who trifleth then? and why do you vpbraid me so much with trifling?
Let us see what is your reason now: Christ's flesh is as able to redeem us, as
Adams to condemn us. But we inherit pollution from Adams flesh. Ergo. Do we
inherit pollution from Adams flesh, and is it not by Generation? How else do we
inherit pollution and co^demnatio^ from him. If there be no otherway, why do
you then seem to refuse the difficult question of our Generation, and yet urge
the sequel thoreof? For if our souls arise in Generation from Adam as well as
our flesh, how can your reason be good by any possiblity? It is best therefore
utterly to omit this reason, which you grant has no ground but a great
difficulty and doubtful question. I Treatis^ page 21.
have showed herefore at large that your argument (which here is your Minor)
is nothing true: For pollution, that is, sin and real iniquity is not in our
flesh without a Soul. But Ambrose says, We are defiled before we have life, I
pray, omit men's Authorities in this case, and prove by sound reason that which
you would. Neither is it clear, as you say it is, that we ^^heri^^ pollution
from Adams flesh only. (This word only you must add, or else you say nothing
against us.) Our parents Souls are in cause as well as their flesh, that sin is
derived unto us. But you draw me to talk of these intricat things, which I
would in no wise meddle with. I pray, keep page 10.
your promise better, not to meddle with this difficulty, neither to make it
any ground of your reason: which yet you do here notwithstanding. Again you
with one breath overthrow your self. For you say, we have pollution before the
Soul comes whence soever it comes. Yea, whence soever? What if the Soul
do come in and by generation? You see how you cross your self, who do so
taunt me for this fault, I hope, altogether unjustly. Then Page 25
you will disprove Treat. ^^ page 19.
my Proposition: which is, whereby Adam first sinned by the same Christ
satisfied for sin. You deny this, because the Scripture acknowledges no
satisfaction but by death: where still we must note that you mean only by the
Bodily death. Now how prove you that? Because the judge in prohibiting Adam to
transgress, threatened death: Ocn. 2.
Jn the day that thou catest thereof, thou shall dye the death. Which it
seems Pa. 100. 64.
you avouch again and again. And are you sure that Death here is but the
bodily death only, and no more? Then surely the wicked should satisfy easily
for their sins. Far be it from me to utter such a sentence. Nevertheless,
you must give me leave to show you also your contradiction in this point. First
in that where you acknowledge, Page 42.
the Judges revenge for sin is Death both of body and soul. Again where you
Page 18.
agree with Athanasius showing expressly that this text intends even both
these: Anima dixit, Morte morieris, He said to the Soul, Thou shall die the
death. But you would prove your matter again by this; Hebr. 9.15.
a Through death, which was for our redemption, we receive the promise: Yet he
says not, Through his bodily death merely and alone, and by nothing else
together therewith, which is your intent. He excludes not the Souls proper
sufferings, as b I have often said: Treat. 1.
the contrary hereof you never come near to prove. And it must not be
forgotten, Page 8, 9.
that c here ^ou renounce all satisfaction for sin in respect of merit as
from Christ's soul utterly. Page 253.
Therefore that absurd speech and worse which you d unjustly cast on me, Pa.
250. etc.
proves in very deed to be your own: that Christ's suffering in Soul by
Sympathy makes not to our redemption. Your own place in Barnard makes Christ's
whole Soul that is the Mind, and the part depending on the Body also, to have
place and part in the meritorious sacrifice, Page 84.
as well as the Body. e Vt totum hominem salvum fecit, sic de Toto se hostiam
fecit salutarem. Which suteth not with your words, The Soul of Christ which
could not dye, could not pay the satisfaction: and nothing might satisfy for
sin, but death. Page 85, 86, 8. etc.
Yea all your f other places of Contradiction hereunto must be taken in good
part. As for your reason, That nothing may satisfy for sin but death, it is
not sound. The Scriptures do show in deed that Christ should not satisfy
without Death: but they deny not that there are other parts of Christ's
Satisfaction, which differ from Death: As his bloodshed, and besides that
Christ's Poverty, his hunger, his wearines, his shame, his reproaches, his
apprehension, his buffeting, etc. These doubtless, yea all other suffringes of
Christ whatsoever, small or great, are satisfactorie and meritorious. You will
say, you understand all these and such like in the Death of Christ. You may
understand what you list: but who will grant in proper speech that these are
his Death, or that his death is any or all these. And if you take Christ's
death by the Figure Synecdoche, a part of Christ's sufferings for the whole,
Page 41. etc.
then why do g you so much abhor that Figure here, and why may not the
Souls proper sufferings be admitted also into the work of Christ's
Satisfaction, although it can not properly dye? Where you nippe me also for
saying that the Soul of Christ in some kind of sense dyed: I hope in due
place you shall have a reasonable answer to that matter. Till then have
patience, I pray. And thus h you come to skan my Assumption also, Page 253.
that Adam committed sin most properly in his Soul. Which you grant in one
sense is true, but directly repugnant to my Conclusion. How I pray? Page 25
If I mean that Adams Soul transgressed the Commandment with her body and by
her body, that is, the Soul as agent, the Body as the Instrument, the^ the
conclusion will follow in spite of my heart, Ergo in satisfiing for sin
Christ's Soul must be punished with her body and by her body: which is the
thing I labor to overthrow with all the wits I have. Nay, then the Conclusion
will follow that the immortal part the Mind was punished peculiarly, and not
by and from the Body only: seeing in all even outward sins the Soul
sins, both principally, and also in a proper and peculiar manner by it self,
yea before the body sins. Albeit the Body sins also seco^darily, and in a
manner proper to it self: even as the Instrument, as you say. Yea further I
mean that some sins the Soul acts in and by it self merely: and
therefore it suffers likewise some punishments merely in it self, which
touch not the Body at all, unless by Sympathy only, and that only when they
grow vehement. But all this you here deny: Very stran^ doctrine.
teaching that the Soul properly commits no sin but by and with the body:
that is, the Soul in it self and by it self alone sins not. And so
consequently that God temporally and eternally punnisheth the Soul only by the
Body. This is the true effect of your discourse here. For proof of the first
you say, Page 25
God did not say to Adam, thou shall not like The so^^den frui^^
it, or desire it which the Soul of Adam did, but thou shall not eat thereof,
which could not be performed but by the hand and mouth of Adam. And therefore
Adam transgressed the Commandment not by his Soul, but by his Body, even as in
murder, theft, and adultery: these factes men commit by their Bodies and not by
their Souls. And after, All provocations and pleasures of sins the Soul
takes from her 'Body: all acts of sin she commits by her body. Both
which speeches are exceeding untrue and hurtful. For even in these sins the
Soul as I said sins principally and peculiarly before that the Body sins
at all. Yea the Desiring and Liking of evell is sin, before the outward Act
is co^summat and finished. This Paul Romans (...)
understood at length when he became a Christian, though a long while being a
Pharisee, he knew it not. And it seems, this was in Christ's time the Haeresie
of the Pharisees: against whom he shows, that not only the outward fact of
Bodily sin was sin, but also ^at. 5.22.28
even the very thoughts and liking toward sin. Wherefore Adam was as well
forbidden to desire or like that fruit, as to eat it, which you deny. The
Commandment was naturally engraven in Adams heart in his Creation. Which
since, Moses makes distinct and diverse from all the rest, which concern the
outward act. Therefore distinctly he says, Thou shall not desire or covet. So
that to desire the forbidden fruit was sin, even without and before the act
of eating. Moreover other foul sins, Haeresies, Turcisme, and Atheism are
committed and determined simply in the mind, without any necessary employment
of any parts of the Body. As touching Haeresies, to hold Two first causes of
things a Good and a Bad, God and the Devil with Manichee: also that Christ
the Redeemer was not God with Arrius: that the Holy Ghost is not God with
Eunomius etc: that Christ had no Soul with Apollinaris: that Christ's Manhood
was confounded and changed into his Godhead with Eutyches, or divided from his
Godhead with Nestorius: or the opinion of Vbiquity or of Transubstantiation.
Finally that there never was nor shall be any Christ a Redeemer as the Turks
hold, that there is no God as the Atheists. Now are there not many
provocations to hatch and to conclude these opinions merely in the mind and
soul of man? Are there not many pleasures even in these impieties merely in
the mind? Yea it is evident to all that the mere Thoughts, the Understanding
and determination of the only Soul of man does act them and resolves on them
in it self, without any concurrence or cooperation of the body therein. Happily
you will say, The Soul takes occasion so to think by some outward bodily
things before seen or heard. I deny not but the Soul takes occasion to
think many things by the bodily senses. How be it not all things simply. And
so are the Fathers ^prian and (...) 10. in your ^^g. 255.
here to be understood. If any will stumble on that of Aristotle, Nihil est in
intellectu quod non fuit prius in sensu, it is not absolutely nor universally
true. My reason is, because Philosophers thought the mind to be as it were
Tabula abrasa when we come into the world first. They knew not the natural
Pride, the impiety, and perversity of man's soul, which may yield many and
sundry Thoughts and Determinations to sin, yea provocations and pleasures in
sin which the Body ministers not, neither could the Heathen understand them.
And to say that this pride, impiety, and perversitie was taken by contagion
from the mere flesh originally in Generation, is not to be proved. Bud yet
were that so, notwithstanding the Soul afterward can act many sins merely
in it self and without the cooperation of the body. Further, as the Angels
sinned in the beginning by their mere spiritual conceit against God, so
nothing lets but that man in his Angell-like nature (the reasonable Soul)
may sin likewise without any Bodily means thereunto. Also, as we can think
well without using our body, God so inspiring us: so may we think ill (which
is sin) our own inborne corrupt understanding and reason and will moving us
only. Moreover if I grant you this point of Heathen Philosophy, that the Soul
takes occasion to think all things which she thinks universally from the
body and bodily obiectes: yet it follows not that she takes occasion to
misthinke from thence always. The proper provocations and pleasures of sin
are oftentimes not outward at all: but the mere perversitie and malignity of
our evil mind is usually the very cause of ill thoughts and ill
determinations. I grant also that the occasion is often taken from the outward
senses. But it is merely taken, not given: taken by the corrupt and perverse
mind, not given by the senses. Which though they be also otherwise corrupt,
yet simply in seeing natural things they sin not, nor yet in hearing, nor in
tasting, save as the mind which is properly, and principally, and first
sinful, abuses their operation. And as touching those wretched Haeret^ Turks
theists.
men and opinions before rehearsed, doubtless their presumptuous and perverse
wit only so reasoning and concluding falsely without any other proper
inducementes from without, was the very cause of those spiritual impieties in
many impes of Satan. Wherefore for you to affirm that the Soul commits
all acts of sin by the body, and that God did not forbid Adam to like or
desire that fruit, is more then strange doctrine. Somewhere most injuriously
Page 3^
you reproach purity: I dare say here you have no color of purity in this
point. Notwithstanding Page 2^
you resolutly set your self to prove your opinion, not by Scripture, but by
Fathers: who are answered before, saving Tertullian, who Page 2^
you say points to a place of Scripture for it: Mat. (...)
out of the heart come evil thoughts. But this place being considered will
rather prove the contrary. For Christ here means not by Heart any part of
the Body, but merely the Mind or Soul of man, and that with opposition to
the body in this case of sinning. For thus in effect he says, Not the Body
sins by taking in, but the Soul by sending out. That is to say, The Soul
only sins properly, and not the body at all no not in gross facts, except
as the body is the Instrument, the Soul being the Agent, as your self do
speak. Otherwise the body sins not at all, much less in such thoughts as
are mere spiritual, unless we mean by society, and for conjunctions sake in
one person with the Soul, which indeed is it that sins. And thus some have
thought, those places of Tertullian which ^ag. 255.
you cite may be understood. But indeed Tertullian you use not well, and bring
these his words against his own meaning, as anon we shall further see. That
which you ad of Bodily infirmities letting the operation of the Soul (for so I
think you mean) as in Lethargies, (...) 256.
Apoplexies, Sleep, Phrensy, etc. Peradventure, then it thinks and
co^sidereth more freely in it self and by it self, then when the body sets
it on work otherwise at other times. Howsoever, it can never be proved that
the Soul then utterly cease operation, and can do nothing: for it seems
that only our memory and sensitive faculties are stopped, whereby it comes to
pass that we know nothing afterward what the mind contemplateth and thinks
in such cases. It is very rare when we remember something, and by some
extraordinary loosing of those obstructions it is, which commonly do possess
our senses wholly in such occasions. Yet even those small remnants of such
operations of our Soul being in such state, do evidently convince that the
Souls operations hang not necessarily on the body, neither is it idle when the
body is hindered, though commonly and for the most part we remember little
thereof. Lastly, if the Souls operations were so necessarily tied to the
faculties and instruments of the body as you do avouch, I greatly doubt how
the Souls immortality will be defended against the effect of your assertion.
^^^oul has ^^^^ion nor meere^^ ^^mply in (...) without ^^^dy. 54.255
Surely it brings in with it the Haeresie of Pope John the 22. and of
certain Anabaptists, that the Soul has no being till when it shall resume
her body at the last day. And hence also it is that you say, Gods justice
punishes the soul (only) by the body, that is, not till the Resurrection.
This (only) the effect of you speech contains plainly and fully. Yea in truth
thus you must needs affirm and hold: you can not avoid it, if you will hold
vour maine Question. Only except you deny that Christ had a Humane Soul
perfect in all the powers and facultyes thereof, like ours: or else that God did
not properly punish Christ for our sins. Of necessity you must fall into one
of these dangerous evils, for ought that I yet see. Wherefore this point is
not Page ^
so easy nor so evident to the simple as you pretend: and I think you had
need of better reasons then hitherto I see any you have, before the Godly and
Learned will believe you. The rather for that in deed here you committ further
2. grievous faults. 1. Tertullian your own author, and the principal ground
which you have for your opinion here, is wonderfully ill used. 2. You are
strangely contrary to your self in your very winding up of the matter. As for
Tertullian, he resolves directly contrary to the words which De R^^^ carn.
c^^^ Animas (...) torquers (...) rique pe^^^ ^^ros etc
you cite from him. Says he, The example of Lazarus in the Gospel proves
that Men's Souls though alone and without their bodies, are punished, and
comforted, in the world of the dead. The Soul shall lack the reuniting of the
flesh with it, not for that it can not feel any thing without the flesh, but
for that it must needs hereafter feel also with the flesh. For as much as it
suffices by it self to do somewhat, so much, or so far also it suffices
to suffer. It suffices indeed to do less by it self. For it is able of it
self only, to Think, to Will, to Desire, to Dispose: but to accomplish, it
looks for the use of the body. So therefore it also looks for the society
of the body, that by it the Soul may as well suffer absolutely, as without it
she could not do things completely. And therefore for what actions it sufficed
by it self, the judgment of the same it receaveth (now) that is, Of the
Desire, of the Thoughts, of the Will, that it had. Thus Tertullian directly
answers to that Page ^
Conclusion and Page 2^^
reasons which you gather out of him, proving contrary to the same that the
Soul now without the flesh receaveth judgment for such actions as of it self
it was sufficient to do: and it is sufficient to do certain actions of it
self, as To think, to Will, to Desire, to Order, and dispose things; but to
accomplish, it is not able (namely outward actions) the judgment of which
actions indeed the Soul shall tarry for till the reuniting again of the flesh
therewith. It seems that Tertullian cited before the reasons of the Such a
fore not (...) Pope L^^
Heret^kes, holding that the Souls slept till the last judgment, and received
no reward at all in the mean time, for want of the society of their flesh,
which till then lies rotten in the Grave: but here Tertullian answers and
renounceth all this same. ^^s after^ard. and the ^nhapilies, (...) now (...).
And so those were the Heretics words against Tertullian, which you allege
out of him in steed of Catholic. Which dealing what it is, I leave to be
considered. Next your own contradictorie dealing in this place, is also not to
be forgotten. For your self shuts up with an excellent reason against your
self, almost the same that I observed presently before in Tertullian against
your collection. Thus you say, Page 257.
Do I deny then that the Soul has any sufferings in this life and the next,
which come not by the body? By no means. The Soul has some proper
punishments in this life, as sorrow and fear when the body has no hurt, from
which Christ was not free, as appears by his Agony: and so in the next the
Souls of the wicked have grief and remorse, besides the pain of fire, etc.
Yes surely: I suppose you denied before the Souls punishment without the Body.
But now you seem to grant it. And seeing you grant also, that Page 25^.
nothing is more proportionable to Gods justice, the^ to retain the same order
in punishing which they kept in offending. Therefore it follows by your own
words, that the wicked sometimes sinned merely in and by their Souls, and not
only together with and by their Bodies: seeing they are punished simply in
and by their souls, and not only with and by their bodies. Also, how sound
this is, I wot not Page 257.
where you yield some punishment now to the Damned: how beit none other real
and positive punishment but remorse and remembrance of sin only, as it
seems, Again in saying that Christ was not free from some proper punishments
to the soul, as Sorrow and Fear in his agony: if you mean as you speak,
that these were proper punishments inflicted on him by Gods very Wrath, (and
not to be only his holy affections Devotion to God, and compassion to men,
which yet ^es^o^e ^^g. 18.
I fear is your meaning) then it follows evidently from your own words, that
Christ suffered proper punishment in his Soul from the very wrath of God,
more then the Bodily sufferings only on by Sympathy in the Soul which in a
word is the grau^ting of our whole question. All the rest that you add out of
the Fathers, touching Hell and Hell pains, is to no purpose. If (...). 258.259
you cite them to prove that Christ had no natural fear of Death and Hell,
you ^^g. 22^
gainsay that your self further then we do, or then the truth is.

Then Page
you come to my other Reasons which I called Special, not for more excellency
in them then in the other, except only that I take these to be not so
General as the former, but more nearly to touch our Quaestion. Which you
might perceave well enough to have been my meaning, by the express Opposition
that Treat page 3.
I make of General and Special. But it appears you had rather take my
words so as that you may make them to serve your unseemly jesting and better
inveying humor: which yet in the end will help your cause but little.

Against b my 1. Reason out of I say, that Christ suffered those pains and
sorrows for sin which else we should have borne: you except that I express
not whether I mean All or Some. I answer, All and every whit I mean so far as
possibllity will admit: and namely as touching the very sorrows and pain.
Nothing was abated in the nature and vehemence of the pain which he suffered,
any more then is abated in the pain and sorrows of the Damned. This the very
text here expresses with great Which faint int^tations (...) 261. do^^ fully
(...) unto.
emphasis, Isa. 53
He sustained our very sorrows, or our sorrows themselves. And this we
conclude the rather, because the sense of pains and sorrows Heb. 2^
only was the Ransom ordained and consecrated by God in Christ, that by them
his sufferings should be accomplished, and our sins satisfied. Whatsoever
therefore in this life might be painful and was due to mankind generally for
sin, and in it own nature was no sin, that Christ suffered wholly and
alltogeather for us, even the same which else we should. Which is your own pa.
28^
plain confession also. I grant indeed it utterly impossible that he who was
incapable of sin, yea God himself, should be really separated from God, or
Hated, or weakened in faith, or punished externally. Yet it was possible that
even he on whom our sin was laid should feel both properly in Soul, and
also in Body all the whole vehemence of our due pain, and the sharpenes of our
smart. Pain, affliction, and sorrow is not sin be it small or great: it is
indeed properly and originally the Punishment of sin either in us or in
others. Christ suffered Punishment for sin not in himself, as others do,
but by Gods ordinance he suffered punishment extraordinarily for sin in us.
When God smot him, it was possible for him to feel it, yea impossible it was
that he should not feel it, and of necessity his Soul peculiarly, properly,
and infinitely did feel the stroke of Gods wrathful justice. The vehemence
whereof may wound and pierce no less even in this life where God will, then in
the local Hell it self. All these our due sorrows therefore, and all this
our sharpest deserved pain, even Gods own immediate hand smiting the Soul for
sin, (which far exceeds and comprehends as it were all other pain)
Christ without any dispensation or qualification whatsoever, endured for us.
This is that which we say: and thus Ierom also expounds this very text:
^trom. in (...) 53.
Says he a Quod nos pro nostris debebamus sceleribus sustinere ille pro
nobis' passus est. Turn now your vain and frivolous insultation against
Ierom for his indefinit speech, to whom it pertayneth in this case as well as to
me, Page 26^.
if you be not a respecter of persons. Say to him, b You may do well (St Ierom)
to go to the University again, whence you came before you were wise, and there
learn to put quantity to your propositions, that we may know when you speak of
any thing whether you mean All or Some. But Jerome would be wise enough to
answer you (if he were alive) that (whersoever he studied) he knew so much,
that in learning and reason an indefinit proposition is to be taken as
Universal in a necessary matter, (...) special^^ Satisfying Gods vn^^all
Justice (...).
* as the undertaking of a Surety is in his stead whom he is surety for: and
yet namely but so far as known possibility admits, and indeed no further.
Now this is apparent in this case of Christ's suretyship and suffering in our
steed: He suffered all the whole punishent of sin due to mankind,
whatsoever was possible for him being a sinles man, and also very God, to
suffer. And further then this none will imagine or think that any (unless mad
men) do affirm. You charge me^ c hereafter that I falsify this place of
Ierom, (...). 350. ^^reat. 1. (...). 85. Curse. (...) I put it ^^^hus
(Ma^^ctum) (...) a pa^^^nthesis. ^^nod enim. ^^al. 3.13.
because d I did put in e maledictum with his words. Which is a silly devise
to turn of Jerome without answer. For by it I express Ieroms meaning: f his
words have plain reference to Maledictum in the g Apostle, who^ he cited
immediately before. This is the^ none other but an honest falsifying of mine
Author. Now that this place of Isay, and the whole doctrine which I avovch
touching these sufferinges of Christ for us, may the better be received, let us
note that the public doctrine appointed by h Authority to be taught through
our England expresses the very same. Which Au^^^tie I have ^^^ged and ex^^sed
Treat. (...) 88.89. ^he answers to i^ a word.
Namely Nowells Catechism, where it is thus taught. He paid and suffered the
pain due to us, and by this means delivered us from the same. Neither is it
unused among me^, ^ne to promise, and to be surety, yea sometime to suffer for
an other. But with Christ as our Surety so suffering for us, God dealt as it
were with extremity of law: but to us whose sins, deserved punishments, and
due pains he laid on Christ, he used singular lenity, gentleness, clemency, and
mercy. Christ therefore suffered, and in suffering overcame death, the pain
appointed by the everliving God for men's offense. Again, His will was to
suffer All extremity for us, who had deserved all extremity. All these things
being taken upon himself he destroyed them all. Where mark also what doctrine
the Law of this Realm consonantly publishes and commands in the Homilies of
Christ's Passion. See whether it misliketh yours, or no. The Hom. ^.
Hom: makes Christ's putting himself between Gods deserved Wrath and our
sin the extremest part of his Passion. If this were the extremest part of
his Passion, then it was a further feeling then the sense of Bodily pain only,
it cannot be any other then his feeling of Gods proper Wrath spiritually, which
our sin deserved. Therefore by the Homily he felt Gods proper Wrath
spiritually which our sin deserved. Again, he bare All our sins, sores and
infirmities upon his own back. No pain did he refuse to suffer in his own
body. But as he felt All this in his Body, so he must feel the greatest part
primarily and much more deeply in his Soul. Ergo he refused not to suffer All
the pains of the Wrath of God both in Body and Soul. Hom. ^^
He took upon him the reward of our sins, the just reward of sin. But
this same Homily says, The reward of our sin was the just wrath and
indignation of God, the death both of Body and Soul. Therefore by the Homily,
Christ took on him for us the just wrath and indignation of God, the death
both of body and soul. And thus also 1. Treat. page 34.
my text of Scripture is justified, That 2. Tim. ^^
Christ gave himself the price of redemption for us, which we else should have
paid. Where Pa. 261.
you except against this text in Timoth: that I say, The Scripture speaks
here after the common use and custom of redeeming captives taken in war:
when a captive being not able, some other friend pays Antilytron the same
price for the captive which else he should. You ask, who told me that the
Scripture speaks after the common use of enemies? I answer, The nature of the
word Antilytron a Ransom imports so much, which is properly used in such
cases. Where also you Pa. 261.^^
seem to infer, that I forsooth do hold with your opinion that a Christ
paid the price of our Redemption (properly) to the Devil, Page 261, ^62.
and not to God. For this is it that here you mean: and this, though now in
print you deliver it nothing so largly and emphatically as you preached it, yet
this still in effect you maintain in certain b words out of Ambrose, which is
passing strange to hear: But how do I join to your opinion herein? Page 68.
69.
because I urge that the enemy must have a price for his Captive. I pray, who
is that ennemy which must be satisfied? The Devil? GOD forbid. Though I see
that c you over earnestly do thus profess: Page 68. Treat. 1. ^ag. 45. ^^^at.
5.25.
yet God knows it is far from d my heart so to think. Gods Justice only is
that e offended enemy, to who^ our Ransom was paid: it was not paid to the
Devil who was but Gods slave and executioner. Against which what reason have
you? Surely not the shadow of any. As for the names of Ambrose or Austin they
are of no weight to warrant such a doctrine as those words pretend. And I am
out of doubt that the Fathers in following an Allegory, do but play with the
Figure, as there use is oftentimes: they speak not exactly here as meaning
indeed to teach such a doctrine. Or if they did, then we are to learn by their
good leaves how to speak and think more wholesomly (then they do) out of the
Scripture. If they or an Angel from Heaven should teach so in earnest as they
pretend, we ought to forsake them. As for the point whether it draw any thing
near to Manichisme or no, let other judge. Then f you would show that this
similitude of a Captives paying his Ransom by his friend, ^ag. 262.
is not like to Christ's Redeeming us: because Captives themselves are
appointed to perpetual imprisonment or servitude unless a sufficient Ransom be
paid for them, and then the Ransomer is not bound to be prisoner himself for
them, but satisfies the enemy in money or otherwise. Wherein verily you fit
this similitude to my desire further then my self at first did express. For
thus we may now plainly see how it is possible that Christ our Ransomer might
pay that whole price for us which we else should have paid but could never
discharge: and yet that he need not in such Redeeming of us enter into our
whole condition absolutely and to become a perpetual prisonner in our steed,
seeing we see that this is not exacted by enemies for their Captives at the
Ransomers hand. Wherein on^y this simili^ude may, and ^oth stand.
Only that *price of money which the Captive should but cannot pay, the very same
is paid by the Ra^somer: and it obtayneth.

Then you let drive at my a Reason out of the Apostle: Gal. 3.
Christ redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.
Because I say, What Curse can this be meant but the Curse of the Law, that is
even Gods Curse against sin, whereof the Apostle has altogether spoken
here before. Yea therefore indeed I demand again, what reason or likelyhoood
is there by the text to take this Curse to be in nature an other from the
former, both being so closely and jointly mentioned together? Page 26^. 263.
You make a very maine difference between them, by comparing this Curse laid
on Christ with those Curses wherewith God sometimes is said to Curse his senseles
Creatures for wicked men's sake. But this is verily far fetched, it is
altogether another thing, very incomparable to the Curse which Christ suffered.
This is a most improper curse, not felt at all by the things accursed: yet
called a Curse by similitude only, as the image of a man is called a man. There
is no color to make the Curse which Christ suffered for our sins like to
the Curse which senseles creatures do sometimes bear for man's cause. But you
make a reason Page 27.
to prove Moses particular Curse in Deuteronomy. 2.
Deuteron: Cursed is he that is hanged, (which Paul also applies to his
purpose saying, Christ was made a Curse for us to redeem us from the Curse of
the Law,) to be not all one with this Curse of the Law in Paul. Neither yet did
I, neither do I say, that it was all one. This I said and say still, that they
are both of one and the same nature: that is true and proper Curses of God, not
any improper Curse, nor only esteemed a Curse by men. One was the whole, the
other a part: but both of them the true and proper Curses of God. To understand
this more plainly, Paul says not as you affirm, that Christ was made that
Curse, only, that Judicial Curse whereof only Moses speaks: Paul does not
understand it in the same measure that Moses mentions and no further. But
this he does; handling before generally Gods Curse and the punishment of the
Law against sin, and showing that we are redeemed from it by Christ's being
made the same for us, he confirms it by applying Moses Judicial punishment
against certain transgressors ( As o^^ who v^^ execu^^^ other ^^ments (...)
Law, (...) not.
being it seems a Figure of Christ herein,) That all they were accursed,
which were hanged: that is they which were hanged by the just sentence of the
law, they were herein Accursed, that is they herein sustained the Laws true
and deserved punishment. Now by applying this text of Moses in this sense, and
in this respect, to Christ's being made the Curse of God for us, it is well
confirmed to be in nature and verity the true and proper Curse of the Law
which Christ was made for us: for such also indeed was the nature of that
Judicial Curse of Moses, though but a part of the whole. And so as before I
said the Apostle applying that which was but a part, he may soundly and well
show what was the nature of that Curse in Christ, though in him it were the
whole. For a part and the whole of any thing differ not in nature, but in
quantity. Now understand a Chrysostom thus, ^a. 94. 274. ^ag. 11. etc.
as b before we have distinguished the punishment of Christ and of the Damned,
and then we differ not. Where he says they were diverse Curses in Christ and
in the Damned, take him to signify diverse manners of one and the same Curse in
Nature, or Christ's Death and Moses Judicial hanging on the tree, to be only
diverse degrees, or measures of one and the same Curse in nature, and so he
says the same altogether that we do. For these in their proper nature be all
one, that is proper Punishments from God for sin, yet either in the measure and
degree, or in the manner and condition of their suffering, they are very diverse
and exceeding far a sunder. ^^g. 268.
Austin on whom d you triumph, is stretched beyond his meaning. He deals
against a Manichee who denied that Christ had true Humane flesh: (...) likewise
^^l the rest ^^ur Fathers ^^ken for ^ost part. (...) sayings ^^ther a^^ the
Ma^^es, or the ^^s, etc. (...) strove about our ^^^ion.
which yet notwithstanding is manefest, because Christ truly dyed. Now he proves
that Christ truly dyed, because the Apostle says, He was made a Curse for us
in that he hanged on the tree. And where it is said Cursed is every one that
hangs on the tree, this was says he to show that Christ was not exempted,
but was like other men truly accursed and truly dead. So that his meaning is
not to show that Christ's whole Curse and his bodily death were just all one
without any difference, which you urge him for: nay he has no such meaning.
Only he proves by this that he being made truly a Curse, did also truly Die,
which the Manichee denied. For in saying, Christ was dead, and accursed for us,
is the same, he means it is the same for his purpose, the one very well
proves the other: but not that they were simply all one. The rest of e your
Fathers are alltogeather idly cited: (...). 95.
no man denies that which they say.

Where f you mislike me for saying, (...). 26^. ^^^at. 1. (...). 38.
g The Curse laid upon Christ was not only the ignominy of his death, and the
shame of the world: you have nothing against it, but much for it. Austin whom
you boast of is against you in this, saying: Page ^^
Christ here took on him our punishment without sin. But our punishment,
which is without sin, doubtless was a great deal more then only the dishonor
and shame of the world. Austin therefore is manifestly against you in this: yea
also Page 2
your own self is in saying likewise. Austin and Chrysostom, and Page 9
other do say that Christ suffered this ignominy: but that this was all or
the whole Curse which he suffered, I see none that affirms. Your many
Scriptures in Page 2
this place, what do they? Forsooth they prove that it is light at Midday. For
who ever made quaestion, but that shame and reproach in their simple Nature,
were a part of the true Curse of God? Yet all this shows not that Shame was
the whole Curse which Christ endured. Page 2^
You mislike that Treat. page 45.
I said Christ's dying simply, That is Christ ha^ed simply which in (...) he
did no^
as the godly die, may in no sort be called a Curse or Accursed: Because as I
affirm also, Page 44.
Death to the godly is no Curse properly nor punishment of sin, but a benefit
and advantage. Nay, therefore Christ's Death was properly a Curse, because his
Death was As before Page 11. 49, 59, 5
not like theirs. You say, I am too young a Doctor to control St Austin
herein. And I say, you are a Doctor not old enough to prove Austin Your self
teth him (...) me herein 49. Corp mors b^^ bona, m^^ mala.
contrary to me in this point. Death in it own nature and in the original
property of it, is a part of the Curse, and so Christ suffered it: but in the
Godly it is not properly a Curse, nor the proper punishment or revenge of
sin, which Christ once and alone has wholely sustained and clean freed us
of for ever. This Page 90.
your self (as well as Page 43
I) can tell, saying: The vengeance of the Law once executed on our Surety,
can no more in Gods justice be executed on us. And this our Nowell techis. H^^
suffered ^^der, etc.
public doctrine in England set forth by Masster Nowell confirms: By
Christ's death it is come to pass that to the faith full Death is now not a
Destruction, but as it were a removing and changing of life, and a very short
and sure passage to heaven. Who also in His she Catechis^^ An. 157
another place expresses it thus, Death of the body, which without Christ was
the gate to Hell, is now by Christ made to all that believe in him the gate
and passage to Heaven: So that death which before was a Punishment, is now by
Christ become a vantage. Wherein you are notably contradicted, who do call
Page 15^ 216.
Death in the godly, the gate of Hell: a strange and most untrue translation.
Again, you are Page 268 269.
gainsaide in this place, where you reprove me for affirming, that Death to the
godly and faithful is a benefitt and advantage. Then you say, If I will reason
what death is in it self, I must resolve it to be a part of Gods Curse. Which
is no answer. For our quaestion is not, what death is in it self. Who ever
denied it to be in it self, as you say, a part of Gods Curse for sin: but my
express words are, Death to the godly is no Curse properly, but a vantage.
Page 270.
Where a you add, If Death were a gain to the godly, as I would have it, by
what means, I pray you, came it so to be? If you know not, why did you not
mark better the public Catechism before rehearsed, where all England is
taught that it came by means of the death and resurrection of Christ. You say,
Jf by the resurrection of Christ conquering Death and changing the nature of
it, then till Christ was rison, Death was a punishment to the faithful
themselves. I wonder what meaning there is in this argument. As well you may
say, There were none saved til Christ was risen. For salvation also and
forgivenes of sins to all men, came only by the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ. So that thus, till Christ came in the flesh, none of the holy
Patriarchs, Abraham, David, and the rest, obtained eternal life. And what
became of them then? But I am persuaded, that Abraham, David, and all the
Prophets dying before Christ was exhibited in the flesh, yet by their faith in
Gods sure ordinance and promise, they had and enjoyed Christ truly incarnat,
slain, and risen again: and this to them was as effectual then, as it is now
to us since the actual performance of these things. Whereby even as we by
faith, so they by the same faith (differing only in the circumstance of time)
were truly and thoroughly saved. Likewise to the faithful then, by the
efficacy of their holy faith, Death was properly no punishment but a gain,
even as to us now it is. Further, b you except against me touching innocents
and Martyrs executions, Page 175.
who c I say, are most blessed. Treat. 1. Page 38.
You reply, Their Martyrdomes are shameful deaths, and that is a kind of
Corporal Curse. A kind of Curse? Who denies that? We know all shame and
affliction to all men is a kind of Curse. But neither shame nor Death to the
holy Martyrs are d accounted by God nor by his servauntes as proper and true
Curses, Before page 9. 50.
but the holy men are in truth most glorious and blessed in them. Again, the
Saints and Martyrs can not be properly Cursed and properly Blessed too, in any
measure. Neither their Souls blessed, unless their bodies be blessed also, and
free from the true Curse: although you seem to deny this point. Which strange
and uncouth assertion, both here and in many places mo, you do at least
insinuat: that is, that the godly in their Souls are blessed, but in their
bodies they still retain Gods true and proper Curse, till the resurrection.
Which I leave to the consideration of the godly. You say, We must call things
by those Names which God first allotted them. That I deny, If God since
evidently have altered them, and disposed of them otherwise. But he has so don
in this case. The afflictions and death which originally and naturally were
punishments for sin, and are so still to the wicked, the same to the godly
(as I have often said) are since changed, and now are properly Chastisements of
sin, and not Punishments nor Curses. Only Christ has suffered the whole
proper punishment, and true Curse or Vengeance of our sins: and therefore on
us it is not, it can not be laid again in any part thereof. You Page 96.
avouch some that deny Christ to have been made a Curse or sin. But you must
remember Page 92.
your own place of Austin Maledictum est omne peccatum, sive ipsum quod fit,
sive ipsum supplicium: The Curse is all sin, which is twofold, either that
which we commit against Gods law, or else the very Punishment of that sin.
Now Page 96.
your testimonies do mean, Christ was not made a Curse, or sin the first way,
that is, he was not in him self sinful nor hated: they deny not the second,
that he was made the proper punishment or Sacrifice for our sin.

And thus though you lust not to see it, yet my Tre^^. page 45.
speech was sound and true, If Christ dyed simply but as the Godly dye, it
might in no sort Gal. 3.
here be called a Curse. The reason is evident; because the text here does
speak and treat of the Curse of the Law against sin: such therefore was
Christ's Curse which he su^layned. To conclude then, his afflictions and death
was neither Wages nor Chastisement, nor Curse nor Consequent of any sin in
him. Yet as God made him sin for us, so he truly, properly, and in very
deed, laid the pain of his Curse upon his body and Soul. Which Curse of God
upon Christ (as you Page 26
say truly) was not in words but in deeds. Wherefore my words Page 2^
you openly pervert, affirming that I say, Death here (that is Christ's death,
noted Galat. 3.13.) ^ay in no sort be called a Curse, when I expressly even
there, and every where do say the contrary. Page 263.
But a your greatest exception is, that this Curse laid on Christ cannot be
understood of the whole Curse of God or of the Law: Page 264.
and therefore b you spare me not for c saying that Paul here in his
application out of Moses names a part of the just Curse of the Law for sin,
Treat. 1. page 40.
thereby meaning (and inferring to his purpose) the whole. Where you must be so
good as to understand me by mine own words in other places. Page 290.
For thus d you know e I limited my speech else where, As touching the vehemence
of pain Christ was as sharply touched as the very reprobats. Treat. 1. page 81.
And, Christ's sufferings were equal to the very Hellish torments in vehemence
of pain and sharpnes. Again, f This price equally in Justice must be kept so
far as it is possible. Page 26.
And, Page 37.
Because there was no impossibility, no necessity, no reason, but he might
feel the full smart of our sins, (as there was that he should not feel the
full continuance thereof) and seeing Gods strict justice requires it to be so,
therefore it was so, he suffered all the smart, but not all the continuance of
our punishment. ^ Also Pa. 23. Hee^e Pa. 13
Thus then plainly h I signified i those 3 Limitations which now are expressed,
that Christ suffered our whole Curse only so far as the possibility of things
could admit, wherein nothing was dispensed nor pardoned to him (for there was
no cause) as I have often said. Which doctrine how unworthy it is of your
strange contempt and outcryes against me, I leave it to the godly Wise to
consider. Nowell. Catechis.
Only mark if our k public doctrine be not the same. Vltima omnia pati voluir
pro nobis, qui vltima omnia commeriti sumus. Diram execratione^ suscepit:
co^tumelias etia^ omnes, omnia probra, atque supplicia: etc. But you will say,
thus we make it not the whole Curse of the Law. Yes: we call it rightly the
whole Curse, for as much as Christ suffered it in his whole manhood, See before
page 8. 1. The. 5.28. ^ pa. 48. 52
even in l All the powers of his m Spirit, and Soul, and Body. where that
Curse in Deutero. being a part, was suffered only in the Body quickened by the
Soul. Also in other respects this suffering of Christ may be well called the
whole Curse or Punishment of sin, Page 11, 12. ^n^ 16.17. Pa. 27^. 280
as n before is declared. After this o you think it strange that I say, Christ
suffered and dyed justly, and was hanged on the tree by the just sentence of
the Law: and that so he was by imputation of our state and condition unto him,
sinful, (...) before (...). 51.11.
defiled, hateful, and accursed. All the which I avouch, because he undertook
by Gods ordinance as our Surety to receave our whole condemnation upon himself
so far as his own nature and condition could possibly admit, Christ suffe^
justly.
to the end that he might wholly acquit us. In regard whereof I ask, Is it
wrong for the Law to lay the penalty on the surety, when the debtour can not
discharge it? Against this my assertion you say, Page 27^
By no sentence of the Law he hanged on a tree. And a reason you give, Page 273
because to be hanged on a tree was no necessary part of the general Curse of
God upon all sinners. I answer, to Die for sin was a necessary part of the
general Curse upon all sinners. What say you then to his Death? Did he die
justly? Sure if Christ dyed by the rule of Gods justice, then he dyed justly.
If he dyed not by Gods justice, then Woe, and thrice Woe to us. For it cannot be
but Gods Justice Luc. 16.1 Deuteronomy. 10.1 Romans 8.32 See before page 66.
must be executed: it cannot be made void. So that if Christ in Gods proper
justice dyed not for us, then in his Justice without mercy we must, and shall
die. Which God forbid. But Christ therefore indeed suffered and dyed most
justly, according to the rule of Gods strict Justice in all points possible.
Yet you say, His hanging on a tree was no necessary part of the general Curse
of God upon all sinners. What if that were no necessary part of the general
Curse? It was nevertheles just from God upon him, as well as his Death. No
particular Punishments are necessary, but accidental in their own nature. The
general Curse Genesis 2.1^
Thou shall die the Death, comprehending them all not as necessary, but as
accidental parts. Yet wheresoever by Gods providence they happen, they are
just Punishments, no less then the General Curse. And thus Christ answering
for sin not only Dyed generally, but also was hanged on the tree particularly
by the just sentence of the Law. Still I mean justly in respect of God alone:
for men used mere violence, wrong, and no Law toward him. For they persecuted
him as a malefactor (as they said) yet indeed he being in himself
altogether faultles and without blame. You seem to mislike that Christ should
suffer justly, because he suffered willingly for us. Which hinders not at
all: for the voluntary surety bears his penalty justly, when he sustayneth
that which the debtour by Law should sustain. You say Page 27^.
No Law, you are sure not Gods Law, allows that when a murderer or such like
offendour transgresses he should be spared, and an other that is willing
hanged in his steed. And therefore you mislike the similitude of a Surety in
the work of Christ's Redemption. I answer in Gods Law that is not true, which
you say. Understanding here by Gods revealed Will and his most holy and
gracious Ordinance for us. Though indeed this is not his Law properly, but his
Gospel, and the most blessed glad tidings of peace and health to our Souls.
Now by this Law of God I am sure, that Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves (and
worse then these) are spared in Gods presense, and an other that is their most
willing surety executed by the justice of God in their steed. Page 280.
But a no similitude can prove Christ in taking ou^ person on him to be
sinful, defiled, hateful, and accursed. I deny this saying utterly. b How
could he be by God properly and truly punished and Cursed for sin, F^ee 18.20
Genesis 18.25.
but that he was sinful and hateful. And it is written, c God sent his Son
in the likeness and form of sinful flesh for sin, Rom 8.3. Synac. beb^sich.
and condemned sin in d (his) flesh. In which likeness he stood before God
indeed: before the world he was reputed so, 2. Cor. 5.21.
but falsely. And e God made him sin for us that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. As also he was made f a Curse for us. Gal 3.13.
Though you ^y nay: p 280 Calv in Gal. ^.13. Heb. 9. vlt. Page 11, 12. ^^d 50.51.
Whereupon Mr Calvin g warily enough says, h Vt personam nostram suscepit,
peccator erat and maledictionis reus. And ye i Apostle says, Ek deuterou The
second time he shall appear without sin: meaning that the first time he
appeared with sin. Yet this is k not inhaerently, but by imputation: the Lord
translating by his ordinance the sin of men upon him, and reckoning them unto
him. Even as by Gods true and real imputation, not by any inhaesion we now in
this life are just holy and blameles before God: so was he sinful and
defiled by imputation, not inhraenetly. Thus by this reckoning he suffered at
Gods hands justly: yet in his own nature, and in respect merely thereof, he
suffered both at the Jews hands and before God the just for the unjust. Page
280.
l You say, where the Apostle says m he was made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.21
the Fathers have 2 good and approved senses differing from ours. 1 That God
made him a sacrifice for sin: 2 that he used him as he does sinners.
What is there in both these that we acknowledge not? Yea what is this later
but the very same point which we urge? It is nothing else in all this quaestion
that we hold, but that God used Christ our Redeemer and Surety as he does
sinners, so far as possibility admits that he could and might be so used.
And for this the Fathers are not silent, if I were so ambitious as you in
producing multitudes of men. Cypr. de Pas^.
Only Cyprian, and Athanasius, and Austin shall content me in this. The first,
n He sustained and suffered himself to be called Sin and a Curse by Moses and
the Apostle, because he had the like punishment as we should have had, but not
the like fault. Page
Your slight answer that it was like in part, not in all, salveth not the
matter. For Cyprian means Christ's punishment for us was so like ours, as was
possible: and that suffices us. Also by this your weak answer you are
contrary to your self here, in that you acknowledge that God in punishing
Christ making him sin for us, he used him as he does sinners. Athanasius
says, Page ^^ De ^nea
Ipse per se sententiam solvit sub specie condemnati: He himself satis fied
and abrogated the sentence of the Law under the appearance of a Damned man. Did
not God then use him as he does sinners in all extremity of punishment so far
as was possible? And that it was altogether possible to inflict the sense of
his wrath immediately and properly in his Soul, as well as in his Body, no
reasonable man ca^deny. Aust. we saw a little Before 71.73.
before. Thus also your former good sense of this that Christ was made sin,
that is a sacrifice or punishment for sin: how differs it from your second,
as you seem to make them to differ? Or how differ they both from our maine
Assertion, that Christ in himself sinlesse, was by God reputed sinful in our
steed. Nay this directly and necessarily proves the same. For as I said, how
could he be truly punished for sin by God, but that he must be indeed
sinful by imputation? The Jews Sacrifices the express figures of Christ do
also most lively set out this thing. When they were Lev. ^^
brought unto God, the people must lay on their hands upon the heads of the
Beasts: showing thereby that their Lev. ^^
sins were put upon the sacrifice, and that God so accounted them indeed to
be. Wherefore what cause have you so to exclame as you do, against this
comparison of Christ our Redeemer with a Surety: Christ truly Surety
who among men by the ordinance of Law and justice must and does pay the debt
when the debtour cannot. It is neither a simple similitude as Page 2^
you simply call it: neither is it Page 2^
unclean, nor irreverent, nor irreligious, but a holy and most fit
representation of Christ's paying our debt for us, and of our acquitting from
the justice of God by him. The very word is used in Scripture it self, Heb. ^^
He was made a Surety of a better covenant. Which also expressly you grant:
Page ^^
That Christ is made a Surety we find it once mentioned in the Scripture. Is
not that sufficient then to warrant the goodness and aptnes of the similitude
against your vndutyfull reproves of it? But you say he was not as a Surety
bound to the Law, but of a better Covenant, even of grace. Verily a Surety to
us, of both. Yea this latter implies necessarily the former, unless you imagine
Gods Justice needed not exact satisfaction so far as was possible: or that
there might be 2 Sureties to bring us into grace and favor with God. For he
could not assure us of remission of sins, but by assuring us that he had
exactly paid all our debts. Yea none could pay them for us thoroughly and acquit
himself also, but only he. Therefore by being a Surety to us of grace, it must
needs be also that he, and none other, was our Surety to the Law and to the
justice of God. (...). 4.4.
Thus also it is written that a He was made hyponomon subject to the Law,
(...). 277.
or under the Law. Which b you mightily deny against express Scripture. But by
what reason? Because he was a Mediator to God for us. ^^ns hone^vtia ^st.
con^^. 14.6.
Now Sureties that stand bound and must pay the debt, may not look to be
Mediators. Yes forsooth, such a Surety as he was might worthily be a gracious
Mediator also. Though he were a Surety, and stood bound, yet he was no
ordinary Surety. Though the debt were infinite, yet he was more infinite in
grace and power both to pay it, and to overcome it: and by his obedience and
righteousness to merit for us, yea even in his suffering. What lets then that
such a person as he, might be a Mediator to purchase also grace and favor,
even in and besides his satisfaction for us. c You say, he could not be bound
to the Law, because he was above the Law. (...) 276.
He was above the Law in his Godhead, but in his Manhood he became for us d
under the Law. Again, (...) 4 4.
he was not of him self in his Manhood bound to the Law for us, but freely and
voluntarily undertaking, and by Gods gracious eternal Decree appointing him,
so he became bound to the Law. Wherefore, though e he, who ordinarily redeemeth
a prisoner from the enemy, (...) ^77.
be not bound, but content so to do: yet a Surety being content, (...) became
ye Law, ^unde to ^^w for us ^^ds De^^d Ordi^^ and by ^ne free will.
becomes bound. And so Christ our Redeemer became bound as a Surety to pay
our debt for us by the most steadfast and immutable Decree of God, and yet also
by his own most free good will. Yea Gods Decree, and his own good will was,
that he should satisfy and pay none otherwise for us, then so as he did:
Therefore those Sentences of f your Authors Gregory, Augustine and Ambrose, if
they be spoken simply, (...) 277.
seem very harsh, where they say, That Christ could have saved us otherwise,
then by suffering and dying for us. For herein they oppose Gods absolut
Omnipotency against his express and revealed will. Which how it may be liked
in Divinity, I know not. Wherefore still all these similitudes of Mediator,
Redeemer, and Surety, may stand very well together in the Office of Christ,
though Page
you would persuade us the contrary, yea rather they confirm each other.
Certainly, these Similitudes of a Suertie and a Mediator, are very approved
and excellent to set out most heavenly his great Grace and Justice, by earthly
things. Our public Churches doctrine also avoncheth that he was Now^ techis.
fore pa^
our Surety. With Christ, as our Surety, so suffering, God dealt as it were
in extremity of Law, etc. Also Cyprian, Cypri^ passion
In saying, why have thou for saken me, he shows the sorrows of that his
complaining to be the words, Delictorum suorum, or Dilectorum suorum, of his
sins: or if you so think rather, of his beloved ones, whose person and case
he took upon him. And this he would have us to know that it was for them, or
in their steed, who by reason of their sins deserved to be for saken of God.
You Page 3^
answer that these words of Cyprian I neither understand nor like. I pray why
so? Because Augustine says, Illa vox membrorumerat non capitis, That Cry was
of his Members, not of the Head. Whatsoever Austins meaning is herein, yet
Cyprians words are plain and can not bear any other sense then as I make of
them, that Christ was a very Surety for his people, and suffered such a
forsaking of God touching sense of pain and want of present feeling of comfort
in the pains, as the damned do. And touching Austin also, I suppose you
mis-vnderstand him: but of his mind touching this speech of Christ on the
Cross, we shall see further hereafter. I add unto all this last of all your
own grant, where you fully yield and acknowledge that Christ was our very
Suertie to the Law, and that he did suffer justly, or in Gods justice. The
vengeance of the Law (say Page 9^^
you) once executed on our Surety, can no more in Gods justice be exacted on
us. Page 13^
Elsewhere also you allow of this Similitude: which yet Page 27^ 276. 279.
many times you reject most disdainfully. Yea in that your sentence you
overthrow Page 27^
your own chief exception which you make against it, that he was not our
Surety to the Law to pay our debtes. If the vengeance of the Law lighted on
him as on a Surety, then he was our Surety to the Law: and if this vengeance
of the Law ca^ not now in Gods justice be exacted on us, then he as our Surety
to the Law by suffering it has cleared us from it. And to conclude, that which
he suffered as being our Suertie, the same before God he suffered in justice,
as is before proved. And in vain you exclaim, that this is a against the
Scriptures, Page 272.
against the faith, against the Fathers, against the Consciences of Gods
people: seeing it appears not to be against, Page 182.
but with all these. b Your Similitude of a Kings son entreating for his
Fathers Rebels, is very weak, and overthrows (if it were good) a confessed
point of Christ's Redemption. For by this similitude Christ should not have
suffered bodily death for us: seeing no King has lawful power by any means
to lay bodily death on any such Surety, much l^sse to make his Son, or his
Son to make him self any such Surety or Redeemer of Rebels: as Christ was
made and might be made of God for us. So that also where you would have it to
serve, that we might perceave by this how Christ was not defiled, nor hateful,
nor guilty by imputation of our treason, it is evidently to weak. For you have
not showed, neither can show, that this Kings Son was or ought to have been
such a Surety and Redeemer as Christ was, that is unto bodily death. Therefore
this Similitude cannot be good. We have other manner of warrant that Christ was
by imputation made Sin for us, and the Curse for us: and that this ordinance
was holy and right, and above all reproof. Which you can not bring for your
Kings Sons Suretiship, nor for the Kings fact: who kept not the order of
justice when he spared abominable Rebels without their bloodshed; or when he
slew his guiltles Son for them, that they might be spared.

After this c he impugneth another reason of mine with marveylous skorne and
detestation. Pa. 183.284.
That seeing Christ d on the Cross spoiled principalities and powers, Col.
2.15.
and made a show of them openly triumphing over them. Therefore I collected,
that Christ there discerned and felt the Powers of darkness (Satan and his
Accomplices) as very instruments working the effects of Gods wrath upon him
self. Which as I conceave, is no such foolish nor impious reason as he vainly
pretends. For does not the very phrase and manner of speech import some such
mighty contention and violent opposition, where yet at length an absolut and
glorious triumphant victory was obtained? Surely it does. This then must be
conceaved and felt by Christ: neither could these be other effects but only
of Gods proper wrath, severitie, and indignation against the sin of the
world, which was matter of Of some pain a tormen^
opposition against Christ at that season; it could not be the revealing of
any glory or comfort, which such instruments procured unto him and wrought
upon him. Against this you bring not a word. Nevertheles your high disdain
toward me, breaks out touching the manner how this might be. But what is that
to the purpose? What if no tongue can express the manner, as neither have I once
endeavored to express it: shall not therefore the testimony of the H. Ghost
be true, that on the Cross Christ obtained such a victory against the
Devils, which implies also such a Conflict first, as I have observed?

Yet because you will needs examine the manner how possibly this might be, let
us see what you make of it. The Devils (say you) have nothing to do with the
Souls of men, but either to tempt them or torment them. First, before I answer
you directly, this we may consider: Christ might and no doubt he did in his
Soul discern, conceave, and apply to him self all the rage, malice, How
Ch^^^ might be faulted by than on Cross.
and violence of the Jews tormenting him to death, as set on fire by Satan
him self, and by all the powers of Hell: and these also as set on work by the
Justice and severe Wrath of God now purposely laying punishment on his Son,
thereby to take satisfaction and recompense for all our sins. Now this
feeling and suffering in the Soul of Christ, made an other kind of impression
in him, and was infinitely more greevous and doleful as touching the present
sense then otherwise the mere outward stripes and wounds of men were or could
be. These conflictes of Christ on the cross with Satan's rage and malice,
laboring if he could possibly by these means to have quenched the light of our
Salvatio, may well be understood by the Apostle in this place: and yet none of
your exceptions do touch this argument. Elsewhere in your book you speak
directly against ye maine ground of it: affirming that God himself did nothing
to Christ, that is, he did not pperly punish him. Thus you say, Page 3^
God did not any thing unto him. And, Page 32.
who did Crucify him, I pray you, God, or the Jews? And, Page 7^
He was indeed condemned by man that gave wrongful sentence of death against
him: but he was acquit^ed of God. And Page
Christ was no more a Curse then he was Sin: who indeed and with God was
neither: ^roper^^ ^hed ^^st. ^^or 5 21
but with men he was reputed both wicked and accursed. Notwithstanding the very
truth and Gods word it self is flat contrary to you. For it is written: a Hes
made him Sin for us which knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. Yea, b he made his Soul sin. Which is nothing
else but that c the Lord laid upon him or inflicted upon him the iniquity of us
all. (...) 53 10. (...). 6.5.10. ^rem. in (...). 8. (...). 4 28. ^^m. 8.3.
Yea, d the Lord delighted to bruise him, and afflicted him or slew him. And
the Apostles do acknowledge that e both the counsel and the Hand of God was
in Christ's punishment. Finally, f God sending his Son in the similitude of
sinful flesh and for sin, ^^iac.
condemned sin in (* his) flesh. His Co^demning of sin in Christ was in
deeds, and not in words. Gods own hand then did smite Christ, and inflicted on
him whatsoever he suffered as the condemnation of sin. Where yet we imagine
not that God was moved with any affection or perturbation, ^^g. 245.
but (as f you acknowledge) the punishment or dayned for sin by the Justice of
God, and inflicted by the hand of God (whatsoever mean it pleased him to use)
is called the wrath of God. And then how may we think Gods infinite Justice
and power punished Christ? Surely in all such respects as he was capable of
pains and punishments as from God. Wherefore in his spirit certainly he
suffered spiritual and incomprehensible punishments being no sins, such as
Men's souls are subject unto as from God. In his Body also he felt bodily
afflictions, which our bodies can apprehend. Some God himself immediately
inflicted, some he inflicted by means and instruments: but still it was his
Hand principally which did what soever was done unto him. Neither can you say
that Christ's punishment was Gods mere and bare permission only. Nay his
punishment was his revealed and written will, his express and public
ordinance, and most holy appointment from the beginning of the world: and now
at last effected by his own hand, and by other means, when the fulness of time
was come. Wherefore the whole suffering of Christ was Gods own and most proper
action: The wicked Jews and Devils were only his instruments to do that
which he set them on work to do, though they thought not so. Now we come to
answer you more directly touching the text in hand. Where you would intimate
that Christ on the Cross was not tempted by the powers of Hell, because Christ
could not b^^ tempted by Satan's inward suggestion, but only by the care
receaving an outward voice: This I suppose also is a singular conceit of your
own without any title of Scripture to prove it by. Yea what reason can you
give that where the mind conceaveth any temptation, there of necessity must
be Concupiscence, Original sin, Page 1
Corruption of the flesh, etc. In us men it is so, you say. I grant in us it is
so. But that of necessity in nature it must be so, or that Adam was tempted by
voice of necessity, and not accidentally; I see no reason in the world: or
that Christ might not be sometime inwardly assaulted and tempted also without
heaving any voice. Nay I suppose you have no reason to affirm (as Page* 1
you do) that Christ in the Wilderness was tempted by Satan by outward voice
only. It seems rather to be manifest that his temptation was merely in
cogitation and in the thoughts of his heart so moved by the Or else b^ such
out^ objects t^ther, with (...) work tha^rituall c^^tion in C^^ As Satan (...)
well kno^ how.
spiritual suggestion of the Devil. First, because the text says, that Satan
Mat. ^.
set him upon a pinnacle of the temple in Jerusalem, and moved him to cast him
self down. Which was within the time of his fasting, and he fasted but
forty days and forty nights: and so long continually he was Marc.
in the wilderness. Seeing then Christ was in the Wilderness all the while that
he was thus tempted, How could that be really and actuallie done? This was
therefore in a spiritual Cogitation. But chiefly, when the Mat. 4.
Devil showed him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, and
Luc. 4.
that in the twinkling of an eye, how could that Yea, sibly it (...) be don
^^^ally etc ficell^ a^ you. But onles it (...) be. Ergo^
possibly be done really, actually, and externally? Wherefore I must needs
think that as Satan was a subtle Spirit, so he could and did sometime
spiritually suggest temptations into Christ's heart, and Christ could in Soul
conceave them, and yet utterly without all sin: which we at no hand now can
do, because we are all naturally apt and inclining to evil, as Christ was
not. Yea the text to the Hebr. seems to prove it also, Christ was tempted in
all things like us, without sin. Then he was tempted both outwardly and also
merely within: (for so are we) and this was merely by conceaving and
considering of Satan's wicked spiritual motion in his Spirit, which it was
possible that he might do without any yielding to it, though we by reason of
our inborne corruption can not possibly do it. Thus then it was possible, and
most likely it is also that Christ was assaulted, and wrastled withal by the
Devils spiritual suggestions now when in most bitter Agonic he hanged on the
Cross. Howbeit to go further, such grievous and bitter assaults of the Devil
he might receave outwardly also by his senses other ways: though not by Satan's
own voice, yet by Satan's members means. And so ^ag. 283.
you say he was tempted of Satan all the time of his abode on earth. Then so
you deny not, but now even on the Cross Christ might be and was tempted and
assaulted by Satan, that is by Satan's instruments, moved and enraged by him.
And this is none other indeed, but that which in the entrance of Page 77.
this question here I observed: which as I have before showed suffices to
prove Christ's Combating, as it were, and wrestling with the powers of Hell on
the Cross. But Page 284.
you object against this, that Outward temptation by the mouths and hands of
the wicked, is no effect of Gods wrath. No is? Here you are clean contrary to
your self and the truth. Elsewhere Page 243.^63.275.
you truly acknowdge that all outward crosses and afflictions small or great
are in their nature punishments of sin and effects of Gods wrath. Now those
doubtless are temptations. Then sure these outward temptations by the mouths and
hands of the wicked such as Christ endured, are effects of Gods wrath, viz. his
revilings, his shame, his poverty, his stripes, his wounds, and death it
self, etc. You say outward temptation is rather a try all of Gods gifts and
graces bestowed upon us. And is not inward temptation in the Godly so to? I
pray what odds is this, that you make between the inward and outward
temptations? It is true, this is one good use of both these fortes in the
godly, in whom Christ has sanctified all afflictions, and death it self. Yet
in their very nature they all are none other but parts of Gods Curse for sin,
very punishments of sin, and true effects of Gods wrath: as in Christ they
were all. Further Satan might spiritually and extraordinarily work together
with these his instruments outwardly afflicting his body, I say, by these
bodily occasions thus the rather working an impression of his malice and
spiritual fury mixed with subtilty against Christ: and Christ likewise
extraordinarily might apprehend the same, that is the rather by the concurrence
and cooperation of those outward occasions with these spiritual incursions.
And thus might Christ suffer most strange temptations, and incomprehensible
sorrows, as very punishments of sin from the furious rage of Satan and
malice of wicked men, whatsoever other uses they might have besides in him.
Here now we may seed row unjustly you conclude that Satan could no other way
assault Christ as an instrument of Gods wrath, but The ve^^ wrastlings assaults
of ^^tan may b^ ritual ^orn^^ though (...) such as ar^^ ecuted in local He
only by executing torments on his Soul even in such wise as he tormenth
damned souls in Hell: and that ca^ be, say you, no other way then by Satan's
very possessing of those souls. Which gross and infernal speculations of
yours (for truths you can not make them) I utterly leave to your own
discussing. For my part I have spoken no word of them in all my treatise.
Notwithstanding this here I avouch, that howsoever the means or manner was of
Satan's and his furious bands assaulting of Christ on the Cross, it made
certainly an impression of most doleful sorrow and torment in his Soul, as
feeling and discerning by that means the very stroke of Gods own hand upon
him, and receaving the sting of his wrath and indignation therein, which then
wrought, and was revealed chiefty then upon him for all our sins. Neither say
you any thing whereby you do or can overthrow this assertion. Our authorized
doctrine in England agrees with me, saying, Nowe^ Catech.
He fought and wrastled as it were hand to hand with the whole army of Hell.
Finally here where you skornfully reject and detest this my sense of the
Apostle in this place, yet you give no inkling of any other sense at all which
these words might seem rather to admit. Wherefore this is more then half a
conclusion against you, that my interpretation and application of it is
unjustly by you reproved.

Then Page 2^
you come to confute my fourth Reason: but the mainest points thereof you have
not so much as touched. 1 I Treat^ pa. 45.
showed that the Godly sometimes in this life do feel a taste of Gods infinite
Wrath, and even of Hellish sorrows. 2. That Christ our Redeemer suffered for
us as deeply, yea deeper then ever any of us here do suffer or can suffer. But
all this you can here cleanly pass over without any word to it. Whereupon it
follows soundly, that Christ indeed suffered in Spirit the true effects of
Gods wrath, and even the sense of Hellish sorrows. Howbeit in an other reason
of mine not unlike to that, you think you can pick more advantage against
some words. I showed out of the Hebrews that Christ succoureth us not but
wherein he had experience of our temptations and infirmities. Now he succoureth
us even in the feeling of the terrors of God and sorrows of Hell in our
Souls. Therefore he himself had experience of the same: pa 66. and
I meaue c always so far as was possible: that is in the extremity of the
sorrow and pain thereof, no further: Where note that the words of this
Proposition are not any whit more general, neither include they any thing
less tolerable then the text it self does, ^eb. 2.17.
thus: d Wherefore in all things it behooved him (or he ought) to be made like
unto his brethren, ^ebr. 4.15. ^om. 8.19. ^^ch. 20.2^
e like in temptations, infirmities, and f afflictions, only except sin: that
he might be a merciful and faithful Highpriest in things concerning God. For
in that which himself suffered and was tempted (in) he is able to succor
First, en ho in that which himself suffered, signifies either the matter
wherein Christ is able to succor us, or ^o their ^^e it see^^h ^^well. ^^ch.
Christ therefore felt the same indeed to succor us thereby. Whereunto serves
our public doctrine, g Diram execrationem qua scelera nos nostra de vinxerat
in se suscepit, vt ea nos hoc pacto exolveret. Albeit here the first way
seems to me not the vnlikelyest, that the Apostle should signify All the
matter namely that kind of pain wherein he succoureth us, even that which
himself also had experience of. And this also those words kata panta in all
things do fully import. But indeed all; are but one and the same in effect as
I said. Sec: we must note that in these words Christ was like us in All
temptations and afflictions, we are to understand h All that are incident to
Mankind generally: (...) before (...). 48. etc
not which happen to any man particularly. All the particular Crosses in the
world, neither could nor can possibly come to any man. Also, that he suffered
not only in one or in some parts of our nature, but in All and every part,
even in Spirit, and Soul and Body, like as we are apt and able to suffer.
Again, all the particulars which by Gods providence he suffered not, were
far less in pain and terror then the general pains were, which he did
suffer. And thus right well is Christ said to be like us in all our temptations
and sufferinges: that is, at least like us, indeed beyond us in all the
extremity and violence of them, and exceeding much more deeply plunged
therein. As well therefore you might have given a good sense of my words (if
you had had any mind thereto) as of these general and large words of the
Scripture whereupon I ground my self. But very chariritably you can infer
upon my reason, Then Christ had his eyes put out for so had Sampson he was
swallowed up by a Whall, for so was Jonas: he was cast into a burning furnace,
for so were Sidrac, Mishac, and Abednego he was stoned to death, for so were
Naboth and Steven. In deed I had been as foolish and as doltish as you do make
me, if I had treamed so. Care us therefore I pray that indifferency which all
reason and use of speech permits: namely that general terms be understood
according to the possibility and propabilitie of the matter. That is, that the
Apostle and I both do speak of All the sufferinges of Mankind in general,
and of each part of Humane Nature apt to suffer but not of every particular in
each of them, or which each man meets with all. Then where Page 287
you examine me, what I m^ane whether Christ be not able or not willing to
succor us in other things then he him self did suffer. Mine answer is; Ask
the Apostle what he means in saying kata panta, in all things it behooved him
to be like his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faith full
Highpriest: and dyna^ as he is (thus) able to succor us, as if he should say;
He was not any otherway able, then in that him self has also suffered being
tempted in all things kata, homototet a like unto us. How be it I understand
him not to speak here of Christ's absolu: Omnipotency; what he could have done
(as God) if he would: But of his ability by dispensation received in his
Manhood by the Ordinance and appointment of God. As if he should say, Thus
has God appointed him and enabled him to succor us, and not otherwise. Where
we will not stick to grant you your sense, that he might be the better able
to have compassion on us. In effect these expositions differ not much. And thus
this Scriptured trust is cleared, and my Reason justified, Christ succoureth us
not in any extreamer kind of pain them him self had experience of. Which
also ^ough All ge^^rally feel ^t, yet gene^^lly it is due (...) All in re^^ect
of sin.
But he succoureth us in the ^ feeling of the terrors of God, he releaseth us
of the pains and sorrows unmeasurable that rise thereof. Therefore him self
had experience of them. This same also sundry of the Fathers avouch with us
most fully: and even those which your self brings for a your self. Page 25.
Cyrills words before touched are most large, Cyrill. The^^ur. 10.3.
Omnia Christus perpessus est, vt nos ab omnibus liberaret: Christ thoroughly
suffered all such passions (which men do suffer) that he might deliver us from
all. Humane nature.
All the passions of flesh were stirred in Christ yet without sin, and so
that unless he had dyed we had not been delivered from death, unless he had
feared and sorrowed we had not ben quitt from fear and sorrow. Here he
says, all our passions were stirred in Christ's humane nature, even so far
as we are cured, and so far as might be without sin in him. Then I hope by
Cyrills judgment the sense of the true curse and proper wrath of God for sin
was in Christ's Soul; so fair as it might be painful and not sinful: seeing
Men are subject to this suffering as the most sharpest among others. Lastly by
Cyrill here we see that unless Christ had felt the same sufferings which we feel
and are cured of, we had not been delivered of them. This also I am sure
fitteth not your opinion, That one drop of Christ's blood was sufficient for
our whole redemption. Which was one of your principles in your preaching, but
in your book you skip it clean, I know not how. ^ag. 25. 26.
Next we may see that c your place of d Ambros^ is also fully to the same
effect. Luc. de ^^tic. dol. ^^.
A little after his e former words he says The joy of the eternal Godhead
being parted away from him, Christ was affected with the redio^snes of my
infirmity. ^^fore pa. 48
He took upon him my sorrow, that he might give me his joy, and he abased
himself to the sorrow of death in our manner, that by the same means in him
he might bring us to life. He ought therefore to take sorrow that he might
overcome sorrow, and not exempt himself from it, and that we might learn in
Christ to ouercom the sorrow of death approaching. Wherefore Christ exempted
himself from nothing in his Passion that we have experience of as touching
Pains and sorrows. And by the same sufferings in him self for us, he heals
us, whereunto we are subject by reason of sin. So that thus (in his agony)
he wrought with a deep effect, that because in his flesh he killed our
sins, he might also with the sorrow of his Soul extinguish the sorrow of our
Souls. To this very purpose also Page 47.4^ Na^^anz. Fulgent. Barnard.
Tertull. Ierom.
many others before rehearsed do affirm most fully. Neither is this taking of
their sentences any whit to abuse the Fathers, which you Page 86.
are afraid of. You greatly abuse them which take them otherwise: namely as if
they meant that by the flesh and bloodshed of Christ merely and alone without
the merit of his Souls and Minds proper suffering, our whole Ransom were
paid. As for our comparing the pains of Christ's suffering with the pains even
of the Reprobats in this life, I see not that you nor any man living can find
fault therewith: only set aside their sinful suffering, which always I
testify that Christ was most free from. Yea I doubt not but we may compare
Christ's sufferings in his Agonies touching vehemence of pains even with those
of the Damned in hell. What the o^ is between^ Christ's Su^fering and (...)
Damned.
Only I conceave between Christ's, and theirs this odds: 1 They suffer
sinfully, 2 Perpetually, 3 Locally in Hell. All which being excepted* otherwise
Christ suffered altogether as bitterly and as sharply (yea I may say in nature
the very same) as the Damned do: which therefore may well be called the pains
of Hell, although yet Hell indeed does differ in some great and weighty
circumstances, as is aforesaid. If you say, the extremest pains of punishment
cannot be where sin is not. That is true: neither in deed can the least
pains be where there is no sin: and that no more in the Body then in the
Soul, though this please not you. Mark what I say, The extremest pains of
al may as possibly be inflicted where no sin is, as the very least, and that
as well in the Spirit as in the Body. But in truth neither the one nor the
other is possible. Neither the greatest nor the least pains of Gods proper
vengeance for sin can be inflicted or suffered at all in Soul or in Body,
but only where sin is. That is to say, either imputed or inhaerent.
Ordinarily the Reprobat are thus punished, where sin is inhaerent.
Extraordinarily and singularly by Gods own special ordinance Christ was even
thus punished, yet where sin was but imputed. And thus therefore Christ's Soul
for mere pain might suffer the extremest spiritual punishments (altogether
as well as his body might suffer any at all) without inhaerent sin. But you
grant his body suffered truly punishments for sin. Therefore his soul
might suffer also, even those of the extremest degree. Your See be^^^ page 14.
self also grants that Christ both might and did suffer the extremest
pains that might be, without his own sin. But it was possible for him to
conceave and feel in his a mind far greater sorrows and pains for our
sin from Gods wrath, ^at. ^. (...) 26.
then he could feel merely in his body outwardly. And the greatest was no
more sin then the least, though both were properly for sin. Therefore by your
own grant, Christ might and did feel and endure the greatest sorrows of the
mind and soul as well as the lesser in the body, being all the very effects
of the wrath of God against sin. ^ag. 102.
b You bring a reason against this, that God spiritually punishes no man but
for his own uncleanness: which is a thing merely untrue. For though no other
man was ever punished without his own uncleanness, neither spiritually nor
corporally, yet Christ our Savior was: who in this case was not in the
ordinary state of men. But I pray show me this mystery how it is that God
cannot punish Spiritually where there is no inhaerent sin, but can and may
Corporally where there is none: All the rest of your assertions c here are
altogether of this suit. ^a 101, 102 ^03, 105. ^66. 94.
By this one reason I weakened all yours, but you could pass that by, To this
ef^^ct. Treat. 1 ^ag. 41, 43.
answering unto it not a word. Viz: d If Christ's body hanging on the Cross,
and held by Death in the grave, was punished by God where yet he found no
sin, and which he still intierly loved and was never separated from, then so
he might and did punish properly his Soul also, and yet never divide his
Godhead nor his love from it. But thus he did to his body: therefore even so
he might do, and did to his soul properly also. For the one stands with
Gods justice, and with the Nature of man in Christ, as well as the other. So
far for this.

Then e you address your self against another, ^ag. 289.
even one of the chiefest reasons of mine: which I make from the strange and
incomparable Ago^ies of Christ in the time of his Passion. These invaded him,
as we read, principally at 3. times: 1. in the foretast of his Passion, showed
us in the 12. of John. 2. In the Garden a little before his apprehension. 3. In
his very extreme Passion it self on the Cross.
The Scriptures f heretofore I rehearsed at full, Treat. ^. ^ag. 49. 50. ^oh.
12.27. Mat. 26.39. and 44. Mark. 14.33 ^uk. 22.44. and 43. Mat. 27.46. ^eb^^
5.7.
and whence these piteous and unspeakable Agonies of his are notified unto us.
Whereby to all (that duly consider) it appears so clear as the Sun at
noone day, that The pains of his Passion^ which plainly now he felt, and
feared, (because he knew he was to feel them further unto death) were the
proper and direct cause of those Agonies. But we assume, that such strange and
lamentable things and behavior in Christ were not the effects only and
meerelie of his bodily pains and death, or of the fear of them. Therefore
Christ felt and endured more then his mere bodily pain and death, by the
testimony of the Scriptures, which thing Before 14.25.5
you deny. In your whole discourse you gainsay Page 17 22. 23. 2^ 34. etc.
the Proposition, that the pains of Christ's Passion, or the natural fear of
them, was the proper and direct cause of those Agonies: or that these
Scriptures do imply so much. The Assumption you grant and acknowledge, that
the mere bodily pains and death of Christ or the fear thereof, were not the
only, nor the proper and direct Cause of these Agonies in him. For Page 29^
you are resolved that the cause of Christ's Agony could not proceed but from
his Submission to God or Compassion to men, or from both. These you name
elsewhere a Page 23. ^
religious Fear, Page 124. 20, 21.
Devotion and Piety to God, pity to men, etc. And thus you resolutely deny
my Proposition. For you mean it seems that Christ suffered pains in his
Soul by reason of the strength and zeal of these his Holy Affections: and
that these were the proper and maine Causes of that his most woeful and
miraculous Agony and Complaint. Therefore not any extraordinary Pains
inflicted upon him by way of proper punishment, as my Proposition intends.
But this your Assertion I simply deny, that Christ's Holy Affections, his
Piety and his Pity were the proper and maine Causes of that his most woeful and
miraculous Agony and Complaint. And then my Proposition stands firm, that
his Pains inflicted on him by way of proper Punishment and Vengeance for sin
were the proper and maine Cause thereof. Wherefore let us try your proofs for
it, and then mine against it. But before we com to them, you must know that
this your Resolution, as you call it, is first most vain, also directly
contrary to your self, and then altogether untrue and presumed by wide
conjecture; as God willing presently I shall show. For the first; I heartily
entreat the Christian Reader to mark well and to consider, how your L. does
contrive 3. notable Equivocations in these few words, Christ suffered in his
Soul the wrath of God: Notable S^^ phistrie.
which you Pa 243, 24^ 245. 248.
seem to grant, but in truth you do not: and if we ad also the pains of Hell,
then he opposes a fourth fallacy against us. And these 3. or 4. are the only
Pillars of his Doctrine. For the 3. former, your first Equivocation is in this
word Christ Suffered: and about it we deal in this place now. The common and
ordinary phrase of men understands herein, His feeling of pains inflicted
on him by way of proper punishment and satisfaction for sin, ^t Christ's
^fering or ^^lion is pro^^ly.
which he undertook for us. Only this in the ordinary and usual manner of
speech is signified by Christ's suffering or his Passion: and so do we always
understand by it. But you cunningly take another rare sense of this word, as
it signifies the Affections of the Mind in Christ wholly bent to Holiness,
Righteousness, and Obedience of God, that so he might exactly and perfitly keep
his just Law. Which 2. parts of Christ's Mediation, are greatly differing, ^^e
before pa. 18. 52. 64.
and ought not both in truth to be called His Passion or Satisfaction for
sin. Therefore speak plainly I beseech you, and deceave us not? call not
this His Souls suffering, but his Souls Holiness and Righteousness. And seeing
you mean, This was the proper and maine cause of Christ's Passion and Suffering
when he wrought his satisfaction for sin now at the last end of his life
chiefly, I simply deny it: (...) Treat. 1. page 68. 69.
all Reason reclaimeth against it: and to that which " I alleged for further
reproof thereof, you answer nothing. Your next Equivocation is in this, See
before page 52.
He suffered in Soul: your next in " Gods wrath. Both which I have plainly
showed before. As also your 4. Before pa. 49. 19.
* Fallacy, which may be called Fallacia Accidentis. But Sit I hope you will
not think to bear down all before you with nothing but with cunning, Before
page 16. 53.
yet vain deceit, countenanced out with cruel and hateful words. Further,
you are in this your Resolution directly contrary to your own self: Before
pa. 36. 64.
as " before I have briefly, yet sufficiently showed. Again, where you censure
your self very sharply for your resolutnes in this cause, Page 17.
* It is curiosity to examine, presumption to determine, impossibility to
conclude certainly what was the true cause thereof. Thirdly, Page 290.
where you make but 2. causes submission to God, Compassion to men: elsewhere
but one Page 23.
Religious fear. But Pa. 17. etc.
before you very precisely made 6. If you agree no better with your self, I have
small hope that you will agree with us. Last of al, this your resolution,
making Christ's Piety and Pity to be the only proper and maine Cause of all his
woeful Passion, is utterly false and untrue, having no ground but mere
conjectures. But before I vn^^ my reasons against your Assertion, Your. 6.
Causes of Chr. Agony untrue.
let us view all your particul^^ Causes, and see if any one of the can be good,
Page 18.
Your 1. Cause is S^^mission to the Majesty of God sitting in judgment.
Against whom (...) in what cause sat he now in judgment, when Christ was thus
astonished and Agonized therewith? Of necessity it must be one of these three
ways. 1. Gods Majesty and great justice now at this time might sit in
judgment against us, and so consequently yea chiefly against Christ him self
as our Ransom-payer and Surety in our steed. If you mean, that thus Christ
with Submissio^ beholding his Father in judgment at this time was cast into
this Agony, it is the very truth, and the same that we maintain. For this
denies not, but that he had real pains inflicted from the Father as from a
just judge against us in him, who were thus acquitted by him. And thus if Aust.
and others Page 3^
sentences be understood, that the Compaint on the Cross was not Christ's in
respect of him self but in respect of his Church for whom then and there he
answered before God coming now to execute judgment for their sin, so they
are well and rightly understood: otherwise there is no truth in them, namely as
you seem to use them. Second: God might be considered now as judging Satan the
prince of this world, and overcomming him for us by the victory of Christ's
sufferings which he was now about to undergo: that thus the Devil (as Page
you note out of Aug.
Austin) might be vanquished in our Cause not by Gods absolut and mere power,
but also by doing justice, and so we delivered. Thus where Page
you apply, Ioh. 32.
Now (even at hand) is the judgment of this world: Now (eve^ shortly) shall
the prince of this world be cast out. and I, if I were lift up from the earth,
will draw all men unto me. If you mean it in this sense (as you seem to do)
it serves well. But that in this respect, as God proceeded against Satan, and
for this cause Christ should be cast into these dreadful scates, sorrows,
and bloody Agonies, what man of judgment would imagine? What color of
likelihood is there in it? Rather this were properly cause of great joy and
triumph indeed: as sufficiently I have showed in my Ph. 5.
former treatise, whereunto you answer not. Your testimonies touching Joel
Heb. Psalm.
men sinful, whereunto may be adjoined Luc^
an other of the like, somewhat opening those places, make nothing to the
purpose at al. For these could not by reason of their Sins induce the very
presence of Gods Majesty, being in any measure revealed unto them: but Christ
in him self being free from all sin, could be in no such case. No better
also is Isa. ^
that of the Angels (mere Creatures) vayling their faces at the glorious
presence of God the Creator of all: but Christ the Mediator was not a mere
Creature, but always personally united with a greater power then the Angels
were, and always sustained by it: unless only in case of his Judgment and
Passion proceeding upon him from God, as is before noted, when purposely the
Godhead hid him self as it were, and withdrew his wonted Comfort, that the
manhood might be subject ^o full Punishment for us, as was appointed by God.
Although even now also the Godhead did sustain his manhood thus being
overloaden with pains: otherwise it could not before ^.42.
but have been quite overwhelmed. Third: Gods Majesty and justice may be
considered sitting in judgment merely against sinful men. If you mean here
against the sins of the Elect, Christ knew the eternal and sure decree of
God which had turned the Cup of vengeance already from them upon himself, as
being their Surety: so that this comes to our Assertion, as is aforesaid. Or
touching the Reprobates do you think that Christ here so vehemently wished
them better, whom he knew God hated: or that for pity of them he fell into this
Agony and sorrowful prayers? First Christ says a little (...) 17. ^.
before, He would not so much as pray for them. Yea it is certain Christ
rather would have greatly rejoiced to see the due execution of Gods most holy
and deserved justice, which is a special part of his high glory. According to
that which is written: (...) 58.10,
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet
in the blood of the wicked: And men shall say, verily there is fruit for the
righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. Again if Christ's
mournful prayers were to wish better to the Reprobat, how can that stand where
he says, Let this Cup pass from me: he should have said from them. Neither
this also might he say, from them: as knowing perfectly his Fathers and his
own will directly to the contrary.

Your next supposed Cause 290.
Compassion toward men co^tayneth 3. several causes 18.19
here: 1. for the Reiection of the Jews: 2. for the Dispersion of his Church:
3. His zealous grief generally for the sins of the world.
All these I grant were always in Christ, and caused no doubt always heavines
in him: yet no more then a godly and heavenly mind could and would cheerfully
digest and bear. Wherefore you strangely deceave your self if you think that
these, any, or all of them, did so far exceed in him as to procure his most
dreadful and bloody Agony. For the Reiection of the Jews what reasons bring
you. Luke (...)
Christ wept over their City: Ergo Now at his Passion he was driven into his
dreadful Agony for this cause: and that rather now, then when he so wept
expressly for them. I deny this argument: how will you do to prove it? I Treat.
(...) pa. 6.^7.
have showed from hence the contrary: whereunto nothing is answered: that
seeing when a little before he thoroughly intended and expressed his affection
about that matter, yet thereby he fell into no such Agony, but only wept and
mourned for them, therefore now in his Passion where he speaks not a word of
them, it is strange to say, that his Pity of his Country men the Jews should
drive him to sweat blood, and thrice to pray with tears and strong cries, that
this Cup of grief might pass from him, and thrice to yield him self again to
Gods will, saying: Not my will, but thy will be done. This verily cannot stand
with any reason. Again, that his express Compassion toward the Jews a
little Luke 19. Mat. 24.
before he prepared him to his Passion, plainly shows, that now in the Garden
and so still forward, he gave him self wholly to other thoughts and matters,
Namely such as co^cerned his great work in hand: that is, to be are the Pains
which now chiefly he was to suffer for man's redemption at Gods hands. Wherefore
this work of Christ at this time performed and wrought by him, Note.
is by a proper and peculiar Name justly called his Passion, not not his
Compassion. Again you say, For their sakes Moses desired to be wiped out of
Gods book, and Paul could have wished him self to be separated from Christ
for his brethren the Israelites. Ergo Christ at his Passion was cast into that
strange Agony for the grief of their reiection. This also has no shape of
any reason in it. It proves that Christ surely had very great pity and
commiseration of them, but nothing else in the world. Besides Christ might have
far greater pity of them, then Moses or Paul had, and yet he was able to carry
his affection far more patiently and quietly then they were able: which would
rather keep him from such an outward distemper as was even in them. Also
Christ knew exactly Gods Counsel and purpose for their reiectio^, which those
holy men were not so particularly sure of. Wherefore Christ might better stay
the vehemence and breaking out of this affection, which in such a case must
needs tend against the known will of God. In those holy men it might better
break forth very strongly, as it did, seeing they knew not particularly Gods
decree herein, so as Christ knew. Lastly those holy men (it seems) having
their thoughts wholly defixed on their vehement pity toward the Jews
earnestly and " constantly wished, that the Cup of Gods eternal wrath might
come upon them selves that the Jews who deserved it, ^pecially ^ul; who
^^v^edly ^proveth ye ^^th. Romans 1.
might escape. But Christ in his Passion contrariwise desired that the Cup which
he tasted to be too bitter and too violent for him, might pass away from him
self. Thus here is no semblance of reason in this for your purpose. But
against you here are 4. worthy things to be noted. If we consider this first,
that these most servent desires of these rare men, were holy and not sinful.
Because their thoughts being wholly and altogether for the time defixed on
their love to their Brethren in the flesh that they might be saved, and that
Gods glory might be infinitely more ample, if he saved so many hundred thousands
(which now almost seemed to them as lost) then it would be in their own
particular salvation only: and thus for the time not thinking (it seems)
upon their own immutable Election and Salvation not any thing else, saving only
that they could desire their brethrens salvation yea though it were with their
own damnation for their sakes, if so it might stand with Gods will, which no
doubt always they employed, though expressed nor: thus I take it plain enough
that these sinned not in this their desire, and I suppose you take it so too,
in that you allege them and ground your reason of Comparison upon them. Now
from hence I observe these 4. notable points. ^^^e.
1. That, if God Omuipotent and only Sovereign Lord will, he may inflict
Damnation and the pains of Hell upon mere men, not for them selves but for
others, not for their own sins but for the imputed Sins of other men: much
rather then may he do thus to Christ, whom God sent indeed and ordained for
that purpose. ^^g. ^76.
Flatly contrary to " your Assertion. That which there you mention is the
ordinary and common rule, The Soul that sins it shall Die. But in Christ
this was eatraordinary and singular that The just dyed for the unjust. 2. We
see here that there may be possibly a Death of the Soul, a Curse and
Separation from God which is in it self neither Sin, nor conjoined with
sin necessarily: but merely a Suffering of Punishment from God for the
sins of others imputed. (...) 73.310.
Contrary to you also: yea generally every where. Third: That extraordinarily
there is greater love even to die bodily one for another, though usually and
ordinarily a greater can not be found among men: which is it, that Ioh. 13.1^
Christ means. But how much more the may the love of Christ toward his Elect
be far greater. Contrary to Pa. 107.1^
your assertion. Fourth: We see here that these holy men without feeling any
pains inflicted by Gods wrath, but only Page 293.
have their minds drawn so wholly to think on this special thing above
their reach, that during the time they turn not themselves to any other
cogitation. Even as the eye, being bent inte^tively to behold any thing, for
that present discerns nothing else. Whereby it comes to pass that these
wishes of these holy men ravished with Pity and Zeal, are not reckoned sinful
in the^, though they were directly against their own Salvation, which
otherwise they knew was immutable with God and certainly reserved for them in
Heaven. This you Page 293.
acknowledge may be in men, and yet you will not skoffe at them as Page 144.
cast into a trance by it, nor reproach them with Page 299.
infernal confusion. How much less ought you so to deal with Christ: but
specially to acknowledge that his marveylous perplexity may well be a means
that his suddainwishes against his own constant purpose and Gods will, were yet
no sins. And that much rather even for this, because Christ had infinitely
more cause by his Pains (the^ felt and feared to be in his mind both more
amuzed and also amazed, then those men had by their affections. Thus far of
this. As for the Ambro^^^ le^om A^ and B^de.
Fathers which Page 19.
you cite, if they mean as they seem to do that now at his Passion among
other causes of sorrow there wa^ted not this, even his great Pity toward his
forlorn Cou^tryme^, the^ we join with them. If they mean (as you would have
them) that this was the maine and chief cause of his extreme sorrows and
amazednes, therein I utterly leave them. Howbeit this here note in them, that
these Fathers avouch Christ feared not his (bodily) Death and Passion: for
thereof only they speak here questionles. You contrariwise say that Christ
feared (bodily) death, for thereof also Page 26, (...)
you discourse, and had more cause (as you think) so to do, then any of his
members have.

Third: touching Page 19, (...)
his regard of his Church, generally the same answer serves, as is given to
the last point before. If you urge that these Fathers are so resolute for these
Causes as their words here pretend, then your self abuses them more the^
ever I did or mean to do, ^ag. 17.
where you say, a it is curiosity to examine, presumption to determine,
impossibility to conclude (as these do) what was the true cause of Christ's
Agony.

Fourth: Page 20.
b you allege his inward sorrow and zealous grief for the sins of the world,
to be the maine and chief cause of his Agony. Surely even to rehearse these
your arguments is refutation of them enough. All these are proper parts of his
Holiness and Righteousness, as I have said, but no proper parts or causes of his
bloody and most dreadful Agony, that is of his Sacrifice satisfying for
sin. Only his Heb. 2.10.
Pains were, which then he felt and feared. Neither in respect of these your
supposed causes could he say, Save me from this hour, nor Let this Cup pass
from me: as in respect of his infinite pains he might. Mar. 14.35.
c This hour can not be referred to his Holy and Righteous affections, which
were at all hours and seasons in him without measure Holy, yet now at his
death did not so expressly break out and show themselves, Nor as his ^aines did
^^peare.
"as they did at diverse times before. Therefore this Hour can not be these his
Holy affections: his Pains and afflictions they d may be and must be. ^oh.
12.27. ^^mpar. with (...) 33.
Neither thus stands it with his piety to wish that his strong and vehement
affections of Holiness should pass from him, or be weakened in him. For my
part I can see no sense nor sap in these assertions. Even so likewise in that,
^ag. 21.
where you ascribe to this his c deep sorrow of zeal for men's sins his
sweating blood in his agony above nature after a strange and marvelous manner.
I dare say, you deliver strange mervayles in Divinity.

The Fifth Cause f you say, ^ag. 21.
might be the Cup of Gods wrath tempered and made ready for the sins of men:
which you interpret to be g Eternal Malediction. Page 22.
Touching which you say, Christ knowing what our sins deserved might
intentively pray to have that Cup pass from him, which was prepared for us.
For us, whom mean you? The Elect, or the Reprobat? What malediction? The whole
and absolut Pains thereof only, or the Eternity of the continuance thereof
also? For so the Reprobats do suffer it. If you mean the Elect, As you af^^me
most ^^angely, pa. ^^2. 133. 144 ^93. 294.
Christ knew, that he must not only h see and contemplat, but feel and suffer
all the whole Pains of that Punishment which our sins deserved: and this was
prepared for himself our Ransom-payer and not for us. Wherefore the truth is
he could not by any means pray against that nor decline that, only unless he
were for the time in some astonishment and perturbation of his senses, which by
the infinitnes of that Pain he might well be in, yea he could not but be (in
his Humane weak nature) and yet still remaining utterly sinlesse, as is before
showed to have happened in Moses and Paul in a far less perturbation then this
was in Christ. Now this is the very point of our Defense: affirm this, and you
affirm with us all that we hold and profess. Otherwise if you mean that
Christ prayed intentively to have the whole and entire Cup of eternal
Malediction and death pass from him, which both the Elect deserve, and the
Reprobats sustain, that, as it is passing strange doctrine, so it is also
simply impossible. For he could not intentively pray against that, not fear
that, which he most perfitly knew concerned him not at all, and by no means
could ever possibly come near him. But indeed all this is nothing else in
effect then your 1 Cause, His submission to Gods majesty sitting in judgment.
Wherefore you might have lessened your number, and so your answer to this might
have been the same which is made to your foremost. But here furthermore you knit
in with this As you^ kon the^ geathe^ 27.
4 other several causes of Christ's Agony. 1. His taking of our infirmities in
his flesh to cure them: 2. His breaking the knot betwixt (bodily) death and
Hell, which none but he was able to do: 3. Gods anger which might be executed
on his body, but was mitigated by him: 4. The desire he had to continue the
seeling and inioying of Gods presense with his body.
The of these makes in my mind much all the infirmities and passions
whereunto men's nature is subject to the end that he might cure all and every
kind of them in us; then it follows that he wanted not the proper and
immediate sufferings of pains inflicted by Gods own hand in his Soul. For
these are our Souls subject unto and capeable of, yea and tormented with, and
finally we are by this apt and proportionable medicine of Christ thoroughly
cured of the^. And this is the very same matter which our 4 Argument Page 8^ 87.
before concluded: that Christ had experince of the same infirmities and
passions generally whatsoever, whereof he has cured us. And this your own
Authors here do fully affirm, Cyrill Ambrose, and others, as Page 88
before we have observed. It is then most unreasonable which here c you do
(if you do as you seem) to understand them of mere Bodily death, ^a. 25, 26,
27
and of the infirmities merely of his Flesh. Before page ^1.
Wherein then you deny our d Assumption also, and are again Contrary to your
self and to f your own Authors. Cyrill names flesh here, Page 10. (...)
Ie^om. Pde.
meaning not Christ's Deity, but his whole Humane nature, as the Scripture
does in a multitude of places: and so not his Body only. Thus then it is that
he says, as you observe, Page 25.
that g Christ as a man abhorred and feared death: not the bodily death only,
but as it was conjoined with the sorrows of the 2. death. He would not, he
could not so fear and be afrighted, yea and pitiously astonished with such
sorrow oppressing him, as to sweat drops of blood only for fear of his
bodily death: neither would he pray at all, much less so vehemently and so
oftenty mes as he did against that which he perfectly knew was Gods will and
his own most willing purpose to undergo. Or else Cyrill means no more but
that he naturally misliked and shunned (eve^ as all flesh does) all bodily
pain and death. This we always yield, and it makes nothing against us. For
nevertheles he constantly embraced and suffered with joy whatsoever bodily
grief he knew did come unto him by his own most free will, and by the holy
ordinance of God: yea he could and would bear it with joy far beyond all the
joy and constancy of h men in their sufferings. Who yet ^rink not at (...)
neither for ^^dily pains ^^r for Reli^^ous fear of ^^ll.
Only he might fail of the outward appearance and use of this constancy and
joyful patience (as now he did) without taint of sin, if his Humane nature
were overwhelmed with other infinite pains, and his mind and senses disturbed
with more horror then naturally it could bear. Therefore I conclude he thus
feared not his mere bodily death, but it was the Pains of the 2. death which
he felt and so feared. But you say i The sorrow and fear of death which it
pleased our Savior to feel in our nature, ^ag. 26.
came not for want of strength, but of purpose to quench and abolish those
affections in us. I say it came from both: as your self also do avouch clean
contrarily in an other place: k To die even in Christ was infirmity, ^ag. 161.
though voluntary. And generally in another place; ^ag. 289.
l Natural infirmity was common to Christ with all the godly in like cases.
Wherefore Austins sentence will not help you here, Page 25.
m that Christ was troubled not by infirmity, but by (his own) power. For he
means, not only by infirmity, but also by his own will and power: or else
you confute him yourselfe. Neither there is this any reproach to Christ, as Page ^
you most iniustly insinuat. But as it was glorious to him so to debase his
Majesty for our sakes to take our true and perfect Nature, yea to be humbled
therein to the most shameful death of the Cross, so was it also glorious to
him to take all the true weaknesses of our nature together: and so it was his
singular good will toward us to become thoroughly like us, and feelingly
subject to all our Calamities, pains and miseries, to heal us of them. Only
in him the guilt and corruption of sin it self was excepted. Feign you would
Page 2^
wipe away that Argument of ours which sticks nearer to you the you will
seem. In Malefactors there is a quiet and contented suffering of most exquisit
and extraordinary torments oftentimes, The cou^^ and st^^^ of Ma^^ctours
^^^ments.
which they endure only by a natural strength and courage of mind. How much
more likely is it then that Christ the very rock of all strength and fountain
of patience, would not thus seem affrighted and astonished and so woefully
behaving him self for his mere bodily death, and that before it came unto
him. All your answer is, that this is no fit comparison for the Son of God:
for they are desperate, not having any fear or care of God till they feel the
force of his wrath in Hell fire. What an answer is this? They have no fear nor
care of God. What then? Yet naturally they have fear and care of most bitter
pains, and namely then when they feel them. If you say, before they feel
them they are so desperate and so hardened by Satan, that they care not for any
torments: that in deed is commonly true. But what will you or can you allege
to hinder their full and most dreadful sense of them, when they are in them?
Satan wishes them not so much good as to benumme them now in their senses, so
that the cruel pains of death should not trouble them in the time of their
death, which he would rather make more fearful and intolerable unto them.
Let them be then in their life time as desperate as they will, yet in death and
in the midst of most horrible tortures which oftentimes very quietly they
endure, surely they cannot choose but feel as lively and as perfitely as other
men do. Only it is a natural boldness and strength of mind (in it self no
discommendable property) that sustayneth them in such extreme pains: One
instance for all may serve in this kind, even that wretched Murderer of the
Prince of Orange in Netherland. What strange quietness did he show in suffering
most wonderful and rare torments until death. Now to make our Savior
Christ less able or willing to suffer quietly outward torments no greater
then that wretch and many other such have suffered, I suppose is a bad
endeavor. And it is no unfit matter for you to think more upon, before you
skip it over with silence. We compare not the Son of God with them, but are
sure that his Humane nature had beyond all comparison more commendable courage,
boldness, strength of mind, patience, and contentment even in the midst of
his extremest pains (were they but mere bodily) then such caytifs had, or
possibly could seem to have. This that I say, pertains alike to the Thieves
that were Crucified with Christ. Of whom the H. Ghost says, a They were
together in one and the same Condemnation with Christ. (...). 23.40.
That is they suffered from men all one and the like torments of death
adjudged them by the Magistrate: except happily Christ suffered less then
they, because they endured them longer then he did. Yet we find in none of
them any such piteous and strange Complaints and Cries and Tears, as we find
in Christ. But to leave these, and to come to the patience of Martyrs in their
sufferings. That also is admirable, what joy, what peace, what triumph they
show, yea how they sing in the midst of frying flames, in their rosting on
gridirons, in their fleaing off their skins, and tearing of their flesh by
piece-meales, with a thousand other of most strange and butcherly torments, no
less, if no greater in outward show, then the sufferings of our Savior
Christ. To this you answer: If death be not fearful to the Servants of Christ,
they are the more bound to their Lord and Master. Who knows not that? But
what answer is this to our argument? And you will also give a reason of your
saying: Because he was the first that by death disarmed death, and severed
Death and Hell. He was surely both the first and the last: both a and o. For he
^^ly, and none with him, nor before nor since him conquered Death and Hell. Yet
what is this to our Reason? The effect that Christ wrought is not our
quaestion, ^he matter (...) or Ob^^^, and the ^^iect of his ^^ffering are (...)
question.
but " the manner and kind of suffering whereby he wrought it. You tell us of
the effect which he performed which we gladly acknowledge: viz. that Christ
did this in deed by his death, he made our death since to be no Cursed death,
but a blessed death. But how did he this, by suffering nothing but his mere
bodily death only, or also a Religious fear of Hell? All which other godly men
do also suffer and feel, which they take passing joyfully and quietly. But
thus Christ did not seem to do, neither indeed did he in his Agony. Or did
Christ suffer some greater sorrow? You say, The death which Christ suffered
when it approached came fast clasped with Hell. What mean you by that? mean
you, that Death and Hell both alike came jointly upon Christ, and that both
jointly were ordained of God to seize upon him? Then it is the same that we
affirm. Otherwise how came they clasped together against him? By breaking the
knot betwixt Death and Hell, he could not be so woefully affected and afflicted
above measure as he was, if he did not suffer by them somewhat extraordinarily.
Unto this you have nothing to answer. Only you say, he severed them, and none
else but only the Son of God could dissolve them. Which we deny not. Neither
can we see how Death by Gods ordinance might seize upon Christ, and not the
pains of Hell: seeing neither of them is in themselves sin, but both alike are
the due vengeance of sin which he was ordained to suffer so far as was
possible. Why then did he suffer the one, and not touch the other. Neither yet
do you show that which you take in hand here, how bodily death is contemptible
to the Godly which was not contemptible to God himself by your assertion. It
was not therefore that only, but some other death far more dreadful and
intolerable, which made Christ man (being also God) in such wise to tremble
and quake. In deed Christ had far greater cause (as you say) to fear even
his bodily death, then any of his Members have. For it was therefore because
death approached unto him clasped fast with Hell, so that he could not by the
ordinance of God meddle with one but he must feel the other. And thus he did
not contemplate and look on them a far of, nor had to do with one more then
the other, but by suffering one, he felt both: and by enduring one, he endured
both. And thus in deed Christ was left by God to the full natural sense of his
bodily torments. But the Godly and the Martyrs deal only with bodily Death;
the pains of Hell, or of Gods wrath they fear not, because they know by
Christ's suffering the same they are abolished, and removed far from them.
Sin stands not threatening the^ in the prefence of God, as it stood now at
this time against Christ our Suertie and Ransom-payer. Nay, they deal not with
Bodily death wholely and naturally: for they have Gods comfort with them to
mitigate it, which Christ now felt not. Yea they mind not their pains very
much for their great hope and joy presenly following: but this was all
overclowded in Christ at this instant. Therefore he had exceeding great cause
to be affrighted and terrifyed and to cry out with bitter tears, though the
godly have cause to triumph and sing in Death. Thus also you forget * my
argument: (...). 1.51.
that Christ always charged his Disciples not to take their bodily Death
heavily for righteousness sake: Ergo, He him self would never be so dismayed
with the fear of it. Here you have a notable saying in the margen, which
must not be forgotten: we must prefer Christ's suffering before all Martyrs *
not for his pains, (...). 26.
but for his patience. Not for his pains, but for his patience? A rare
distinction: If you could make us believe that the greatest patience is tried
and discerned where the smallest pains are, then you said somewhat. I know
Christ's patience was perfect in all his pains both small and great: and so is
not the patience of his servants in their pains neither small nor great. But
what is this to our purpose? We speak not of his inward habit of patience
which our faith believes to be in him: but of the outward trial and
discerning thereof by natural means and signs whereunto it pleased him now
to submit his patience after the very course and operation of Nature.
Wherefore as Christ had in him indeed far more patience then we have, so it
is out of doubt when he came to the chiefest trial thereof in his Passion he
would not in any wise (as he did) show less in use then many men do, unless
the trial and encou^tring thereof in him were infinitely greater.

Corporal castigation above his strength. (...). 22.24.
For why may not Martyrs and others fear as much cruelty and extraordinary
torments at the hands of men, as Christ had cause to do? Again, why should
the fear of any whatsoever mere bodily pains so overcome his patience, as
outwardly it seemed at this time? Why should he not be able to bear it
quietly? And principally seeing he knew well enough before what his death
should be, and that God had unchangeably appointed it for him. Wherefore in no
wise ought he so to shun and shrink from his mere bodily pains, if they
were no greater, which he suffered. If Page 2
you mean that he felt greater concurring in and with his bodily punishment
inflicted by the wrathful hand of God, Page 2
armed with infinite vengeance, then you say well, and we acknowledge it.

Your other Page 2. 27.
Cause is, for that by death his body should want a Page 2^
greater perfection in him then was in other men? Again, could this thing in
any reason be such a horrible grief unto him, to have his flesh ly dead
without pain for a day and a few hours, yet his Soul continually living and
inioying the comfort of God: and that for such an occasion as to procure
thereby the Salvation of mankind, would the thought of this make him sweat
blood for grief, and to need an Angel from, heaven to comfort him, and to pray
3. times vehemently that this Cup might pass from him? verily it is
unreasonable to think so. Which Cause also, if it were true, is flatly
contrary to your Page 29^
own resolution. But of all these I wonder where you have found any inkling,
that any of these may be believed to be the true and effectual cause of
Christ's most dreadful Agony. You say excellent As be (...) have n^^ page 28.
well, but by your practice in all matters so far as I see, you never mean
to observe it: Epist pa^
in Gods cause let Gods book teach us what to believe and what to profess:
Page 91
I love to follow and not to lead the holy Ghost. In matters of so great depth
I dare not wade without or before my guide. Again Page 41.
what I read in Gods word, that I believe: what J read not, that I do not
believe. Show me then where you read in Gods word any or all these to be
effectual Causes of this strange Agony, or some sure ground whence evidently
we may gather so much: or else for my part I shall never bever believe you.

Your Sixth and Page 27. etc.
last maine Cause is, that Christ by this his bloody sweat and vehement prayers
did nothing but voluntarily perform that true bloody Offering and Priesthood
prefigured in the Law. This we simply grant: it hinders not our Assertion.
Except you mean voluntarily in such sense that he was not also urged
thereunto by any violence of pains or fear procuring it in him naturally.
Wherein you seem to labor by bringing some Fathers, and misapplying some
Scriptures, ^ag 29.
and do say that a you are content to admit also (this) exposition, and of
this, with all the rest you pronounce that b they are sound and well agreeing
with Christian piety. ^ag 37.
Yet is it contrary to c your resolution also: yea it is contrary to the
Scripture, ^ag 290.
expressing his d fear and vehement sorrows and e discomfort to have caused
his Agony. ^^^h 14. (...). ^4. ^^b^ 5.7.
Again if you mean that all this was voluntary in him and not felt indeed
according to the outward semblance and as men beholding him would iudg^, Luc.
22.43
then belike you make him to have counterfayted. Which thought God for bid
should ever come into any Christians heart. For no cause you say f I jest and
iybe with the Apostles words: Page 302.
but I fear this is to jest and iybe in deed with the most dreadful and
bitter sorrows of our Savior in working for us our Salvation. And here why
say you not as well that his Death and bloodshed on the Cross showed in him no
pains nor infirmity, but only that voluntarily he made him self there the
true Priest, and pe formed the prefigured bloody and deadly Sacrifice for the
sins of the world. As good reason altogether you have to say so, as to affirm
it of his Agony. ^ag. 29.
As for the Scriptures which g you cite, they prove in deed that Christ now
executed his office of Priesthood: but will you "divide and exempt his Death
on the Cross from his Priesthood? Or his ^ines and fit mity from there?
The sanctifying of him self does it not as well intend and comprehend that
Sacrifice on the Cross, as that of his Prayers in the Garden? To think
otherwife is without all show of truth or reason, yet I see not why you
should cite these textes, unless you meant so: neither can I see what else you
mean, where you conclude, saying, Christ's Agony being alleged by the Apostle
to demonstrat Christ's Priesthood, must not rise from the terror of his own
death. ^ag. 27.
And yet h a little before you openly do confess and grant, that his Agony
did rise from the fear of his death, and that Christ had far greater cause
then any of his members to fear it. Also it is contrary to your citing of
Cyrill page 25. And here why should i Hilary deny that Christ's bloody sweat
came of infirmity? ^ag. 28.
Or k Austin, that his fear and perturbatio^ was of infirmity? ^ag. 25.
Surely there is no cause. For though it be against the common course of our
Nature, for any pains or fear to sweat blood: yet the Divine power with and
through pains and fears might wring out of his body that trickling bloody
sweat. As it is plain that it did by the words next before in the text, Luke
2 44.
An Angel came to give him some comfort, that is, least he should have been
overwhelmed quite in his sorrow and discomfort: but still he was in his Agony,
and swet like drops of blood trickling to the ground: and presently says,
My Soul is full of sorrows even to death, and thrice he prayed that this Cup,
and this Hour might pass from him. It cannot be therefore but that by
Sorrows and Pains this sweat came: though also Gods power caused it by laying
upon his Soul and body invisible, supernatural, and unspeakable sorrows and
horrors, and by making his flesh visibly to express in some sort this
spiritual and extraordinary torment of pain and fear which he suffered. And
in deed where they say, Not Infir^^ty but Po^^^ did this.
Nec infirmitas, quod potestas gessit, that proves the clean contrary: For
Jdeo and infirmitas, quia potestas gessit. 2 Therefore there wa^ firmity,
^^cause th^^^ was Pow^^
For the working of his Power in him argues the suffering of his Infirmity:
The power of God is pe^fited in infirmity. And because it was above the course
of nature, therefore nature was herein oppressed, not exempted from pains.
Thus these speak fully for us and against you, that here appeared, not
Christ's infirmity only in suffering, but his Divine power also in punishing.
And this I judge in deed to be their very meaning. But those other mystical
and figurative sayings of Austin, Page 28.^
Bid, and Bernard, how shall we admit them without better warrant? That
Christ's bloudshead was to signify that Martyrs should shead their blood, what
reason have we so to think? Or that his blood head should signify the purging
of his Disciples hearts from sin, yea or of all his Church in the whole
world? It did not signify this, but it did it in deed. Lastly, if it had th^se
significations in it, yet withal his Agony might rise from his very Pains
and Fear coming from the present sense of Gods justice and wrath now
reveal^d and working upon him.

Hitherto we have made it manifest that in truth you have nothing in all these
words against our doctrine, that Pains and sorrows were the true and proper
cause of Christ's dreadful Agony: nor to prove that his mere bodily pains
or death was the whole Cause. Now we are to show the like in his most we full
Complaint on the Cross: where he says My God, my God, Math 27.
why have thou forsaken me? You will ask me here, what kind of Forsaking may
this be? I showed you plainly Treat 1.^ 6^, 65, 6^
before, if you had regard^d it. Namely, that Christ being also now (yea
specially) in the feeling of infinite Pains inflicted on him sundry ways, ^^w
Christ on (...) Cross was ^^^saken of ^^^d. See also ^^^g. 112.113
and that directly from Gods proper Wrath for our sins, he felt his whole
Humane nature for the time left all comfortles and alone without any joyous
assistance of his Deity. I say not, that he wanted now all assistanc of his
Deity: for it surely would then have quite overwhelmed him with this
intolerable burden. But his Godhead, as it were withdrawing and hiding it
self from him for that season of his Passion, gave him no sense nor feeling of
ease, comfort, or joy, but all the sense of sorrows and pains as well in
spirit, as in soul and body, that might be: all the sense of his joy and
comfort for the while being clean gone and wholly swallowed up in that huge and
bottomless gulf of sorrows and pains issuing upon him out from the fierce
Wrath of God. Howbeit yet even now he wanted not sufficient assistance of the
Deity to sustain him in life herein, as I said. Phil. 2.7. Romans 8.32. ^eut.
10 17. ^^c. 16.17.
This was that extreme humiliation and " exinanition of nature, wherein God
spared not his Son, and wherein also Christ spared not him self. For he
undertook all this most willingly: and yet being in it naturally grieved and
sorrowed for it, and at some moments being astonished with it, suddenly and
naturally desired ease and release from it. This forsaking or dereliction
beseems the time, place, person, and case of Christ our Ransompayer, and
Purchaser of salvation with the price of his own most direful pains. Page
24. etc ^^^r 6. Expo^^^ions of ^hristes Co^^^aint, are all ^^^isse.
Not any other far fet, or hardly applied, or strangely devised by the
brains of men. As in truth all those other senses hereof are, which " you
rather embrace. They are 6. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, by this
word me, he should mean His Church. For the which you have no reason in the
world, but the bare names of Austin, Leo, Athanasius. Show me their reasons,
See before ^ag. 28.29.
press not their authorities. Which " your self also rejects, when you
list: though when you list again they must be your best, yea your only reason.
But even these Fathers if they be understood, Page 79.
as * before I have showed Cyprians meaning to be: that Christ spoke these
words, as doing now the part of the Surety of his Church, and as standing in
the case of his Children whom now by his suffering pains he saved: then they
agree just with our mind herein. For then doubtless it was for the infinite
pains which now he felt in our steed, that he so cried out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Otherwise if you think they meant that Christ spoke
this by some strange Metonimy, naming him self but meaning his Church: that
can have no good sense. For how can it be that we were forsaken of God when
Christ was on the Cross. Nay, even there and then were we Act. 20
purchased unto God, not forsaken by God. Again your own rule is, which I
like well, that no Figure is to be admitted in Scripture where there is no ill
nor hurtful sense following literally. But I have showed a little before a
plain, easy, and Christian sense hereof, taking it literally: that me
signifies Christ's own person namely his Manhood bearing now, as our
Surety, intolerable pains inflicted by Gods wrath upon him: and so he may
mourn and sorrow that he was forsaken, that is left in unmeasurable pains
with out feeling of any comfort or succor for the time. Wherefore neither you
nor any of the Fathers ought to conceave that me here should signify not
Christ properly, but the Church Figurativelie. What other construction you can
make hereof, I can not discern. Finally, this 1. sense is contrary to your 2.
and 3. following: also to your 5. and 6. senses. If either of these be taken as
the true meaning of this place, it cannot possibly stand with the rest:
although you allow them all, as by and by we shall manifestly see. Now then
your sense, what is it? Even this, that Christ's humane Page 13
you. But as I said, this is directly contrary to your 1. sense, and to the
rest following. Also Here 11.50.
before we saw how greatly Christ's sufferinges specially on the Cross
differed from such, as the godly do also suffer. Yea there is surely no reason
nor show of reason, that Christ here should so mournfully and so uncomfortably
complain that God had forsaken him, if it were only but for such distresses as
the godly also do equally suffer at the hands of evil men. Seeing most of
the^ at the hour of their martyrdoms do never utter any such show (as Christ
here did) of a mind vncomforted. Where also note this well, that no godly man
not Martyr did ever ascribe this forsaking of themselves to God in the time of
their martyrdomes. For though then they are oppressed with greater violence of
bodily enemies, yet they are assisted with far greater abundance of heavenly
comfort, even in the midst of the pains of death. So that they never mourn
nor complain at such extreme dealing, as Christ now did, when he said my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me. Wherefore it is a great shame to imagine
that Christ was less able to endure such a dereliction, or that he would thus
complain and mourn for it only. Page 35.
The bare names again of c Austin, Ambrose, Hierom do here likewise no good.
This is but a weak kind of reasoning for so learned a Divine as you are.
Although also these very sentences of the Fathers I can easily admit, if they
import no more then they seem: namely that these outward afflictions on the
Cross were some cause (and that not small) of his complaint, always
remembering that some greater cause also did concur and was conjoined flesh
now should want all feeling of his heavenly comfort for that while, ^n that you
(...), His God^^ad depar^^ now from (...) body, etc.
that it should remain dead. A marvelous exquisit and far fet cause. Yet me
thinks, as this crosses your other expositions here, so it is flat contrary
to the Scripture also: which gives after a sort to Christ's dead Flesh this
lively affection, (...). 2.26.27
e my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my soul to remain
as all other flesh dying does, in the unseen world of the dead, neither wilt
suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Is it likely is it possible that he
should so dolefully mourn that either he should bodily die, or that his body
should want the sense of his divine presence so little a while, when as in his
mind he speaks so triumphantly of his constant and continual joy in God:
yea not excluding even his body though dead from participating in some sort
therein: as we read in the former place at large. I beheld the Lord always
before me, for he is at my right hand that I should not be shaken. Therefore
did my heart rejoice and my tongue was glad, and moreover my Flesh shallrest in
hope, etc. Now can a man in this exceeding general and constant joy so
uncomfortably mourn, in that sense as you urge, My God my God, why forsakest
thou my flesh? It cannot be. Many things more may be strongly alleged against
this opinion. As first: seeing he perfitly knew thath as his flesh now should
quietly rest, and have a present end of all his most bitter sorrows, so even
all that while and continually after, his soul (which was his best part) should
enjoy perfect glory and comfort more then before it did: Also seeing this
senseles rest of his flesh was to be but for a very little while, and then
presently to receave a most glorious and eternal felicity jointly with his
Soul and with his Deity, who can imagine that Christ would (now ready to die) so
extremely mourn and complain only for this cause, as your fancy imports?
Further he knew perfitly that this was the very appointment of God, and for the
fulfilling of Prophesies, for the obtaining of his most desired purchase of our
health, for the more advancing of Gods glory, yea and for the more advancing of
his very manhood also after so low humiliation. Finally it was his own most
free and fore determined will. Would he then so mournfully grieve and
complain thereat? It has no reason, nor likelihood in it. John 1^^
Lazarus when he was returned from the joys of heaven to take again his
rotten carcass ofter it stanke having lain 4. days dead in the grave, yet he
grieved not at it, neither ought he so to have don. Much less ought Christ so
to grieve and mourn, for a lesser want and for a shorter season (as we may
think) then that was to Lazarus. But this matter is not worth the speaking of
See b^ to this pu^ page 10^
any further. Neither do your Fathers prove any such improbable, yea unlawful
mourning and complaining in Christ. If they prove any thing toward your
meaning, it is this, that he complained because of his bodily dying. Howbeit
they say not that he thus complained only and merely for that: neither I
think will you plainly hold this, neither do we deny the other. The truth is
they mean he suffered in his whole Humane nature: How the ^^thers are (...)
taken.
and namely that he suffered not as God. They strove here with Haeretikes,
whose controversies were far from this our question Hilar. (...) Trin* li. (...)
Hilary and Epiph. (...) Arioma (...)
Epiphanius wrote against Arius, to prove that Christ in this complaint showed
rightly a humane infirmity, and that this was not the voice of a Deity
inferior to the Father, as Arius blasphemed. These Fathers then had no purpose
here to exclude the sufferings of Christ's Soul, but only to deny that his
Godhead suffered and complained as being left to punishment by his Father, when
the sorrows of death began to prevayle against him. The very same does In Ma^^
can. 33. (...)
Hilary also where he says that this in Christ was Corporis vox, the outcry of
his body. He plainly means it of his whole manhood, the opposition being
between it and his Godhead: ^reat. 1. ^^g 9.
as the Scripture often does. And where he says, he was morte peragendus, to
be co^summated by death: he means that death ended all his suffering, not
that he suffered nothing else but merely death. And if their words do any
where come near to our question, ^ertul. cont. ^^ax. ^^ila in Mat. ^^au. 33.
as it is very likely that h Tertulian and the one place of i Hilary does, then
surely they are plainly for us and against you. Tertullian points in this
place at certain Haeresies maintained in his time wherwth it seems Praxeas
was infected. 1 That the Father suffered as well as the Son when Christ
suffered: 2 That the Deity suffered: 3 That Christ was no true nor perfect man.
All these points Tertullian overthrows here, Quid de isto quaeris, etc.
What inquire you of Christ? You here him crying out in his Passion, My God my
God why have thou forsaken me? The Son therefore suffered, being forsaken of
his Father: but this is meant of the Flesh and of the Soul, that is of the
Man, not of the Word nor of the Spirit. Here it is plain that Tertullian
shows besides the rest, this point exactly, that Christ was a very man, in
that he had a proper Body and a Soul, and that this his suffering on the
Cross was in both these parts, and so in his whole and entire manhood. Also
that he suffered in both these parts even from his Father. ^eere page 63. ^at
1. pa 4
But he could not suffer in his Soul from God, if he felt only and merely but
a bodily death, as you hold. And to suffer the stroke of Gods hand in his Soul
as the proper vengeance of sin, is far more then to feel in Soul by
sympathy only the bodies smart. Neither had Tertull. overthrowe^ but confirmed
that Haeresie of Christ's being no true natural man, if he had said, that in
this case he suffered in Soul only by symphathy with and from the Body. But
this is absurd to think in Tertullian. Therefore in this place he is flatly
against you. And this Derelictio^ of his Father which he speaks of, is Death
indeed to the Son. But what death? Forsooth more then the separation of the
Soul and Body. ^at Death ^^e Soul in ^ist we ^^ne.
Even the separation of the Deity from the whole manhood: which is the death of
the Soul. I speak here nothing but the Fathers words, yea the Scriptures.
Your own place of Epiphanius says that now his Deity departed from his
manhood. So says your own Hilary also, Corporis vox contestata recedentis a
se Dei dissidium. So says Ambrose, Clamavit Homo Divinitatis separatione
moriturus: The man Christ did cry being about to die by the separation of his
Godhead. Again Sequestrata delectatione Divinitatis aternae taedio meae
infirmitatis afficitur. The joy of his eternal Godhead being parted away, he
was afflicted with the tediousnis of my infirmity. Here the Fathers do show
in deed that Christ dyed, but more then a mere bodily death: even the death of
the Soul also. For what is the Separation of the Deity from his Soul else,
but the death of the Soul. Howbeit note, I pray, that neither the Fathers, nor
I do mean any Separating 1 of the union of The D^^ and Hum^^
both natures in Christ, nor the Separating 2 of any Holiness or habitual grace
of God from his Soul, 3 nor the Separating of Gods love from him, See before
page 10^
but the Separation of all comfortable feeling and assistance of the Godhead,
in that he felt not any supporting of his Soul and Body now pierced through
with the Pains which he felt inflicted by God. This Separation is meant, and
it Thoug^ haps the there is d^ this ph^^ rarely.
may be called the Death of the Soul. For as it is Psalm ^^
life to the Soul to feel and to enjoy the glory of God: So it is death to
feel the want and absence thereof utterly, and the rather being also then
overwhelmed with incomparable pains. That heavenly life Christ tasted a little
while in his Transfiguratio^: this Hellish Death he felt besides his bodily
death upon the Cross. And thus Tertull. means here that not Christ's bodily
death only made him now thus to cry out, but that death also which was the
Separation of his Godhead from both his body and Soul; which is the death of
the Soul. And so he says true: the Dereliction of the Father, is Death to the
Son. Your Page ^^^
4. Exposition Cyrill seems also to concur: that Christ's words of
complaint were the removing of the dereliction which had fallen on us. Was it
removed from us? then surely it was laid upon some body else. Now that must
needs be upon him self. Where you object Athanasius, Cont. A^ Sermon.
that He could not be forsaken of his Father, who was always in his Father. It
is merely wrested: Athanasius speaks against Arius also, that Christ's
Deity could not be forsaken of his Father, seeing it is always in his Father:
and so was not inferior to the Father, which was Arius haeresy. Touching his
humanity he denies not but God might forsake it: For the Scripture says so.
And in deed he forsook it by causing in it the feeling of all Pains for
sin, and by leaving it therein for a while all comfortles. Your 5. Exposition
is Leos conceit without warrant, far fetched, hardly applied: tha^ here Christ
puts us in mind why God does often not hear our prayers, but provideth
better for us then if our wills were satisfied: and that this is a mystical
sense. ^^g. 37.
a Origin also is here as weak: that Christ means nothing else but that he
was abased lower then his divine majesty. ^^al. 22.
only to show the Jews that their wrongs toward him were Prophesied of
before. This Treat. 1. ^^g 66.
already I fully answered, which you refute not. Likewise where you say, ^^g.
65. 66.
He sung the whole Psalm: it is d answered. Whe^in moreover this is to be
noted, that surely he now uttered no more of this Psalm but the 1. verse,
Eli, Eli, Lamma sabachtham, For hereby the standers by imagined that he called
for Elias. Therefore he sung not the Psalm. Your authorities are bare
arguments. Ierom brings no reason but his own word. Chrysostom, I see not
what he says to your purpose at all. Finally those kinds of Dereliction which
you mention c besides, ^^g 32. 33. etc
are nothing fitter then the former. Thus far I have waded in examing your
sundry and variable expositions of one poor little plain sentence of
Scripture. At least 6. or 7. diverse, yea contrary senses you have brought of a
few words: (...) 14.
and of them all you say, They are f all godly expositions, and All these
interpretations are sound, ^^g 37.
and stand well with the rules of Christian piety. How sound and fit they are,
it has been seen. But verily you have a good head if you can reconcile all
these: and make them stand together: and a very bad opinion of the holy
Scriptures you seem to have, if you think they may be handled by
interpretations and expositions thus, that a man may take them in 6. or 7.
diverse senses and all justifiable. Your saying therefore, ^^g. 113.
that g you have spoken before as much (to this matter) as may content any man
that is not fastened to his fancies more then to to the truth, I omit as vain
and frivolous.

Now it rests that I gather some reasons from the express Scripture, ^^s for
us
to show you that indeed very pains and the vehemence of sorrows, namely
which he now sustained by way of yielding. Satisfaction and Sacrifice for
sin, were the principal and only proper Cause of his most dreadful Agonies
and Complaint. Which truly though it need no reason for proof of it, (the
matter being so clear in it self) yet your unreasonableness is such that it
draws somewhat from me about it. First, No Christian doubts (I The Prince
of our Salvation was consecrated through Afflictions. Therefore Afflictions
Sorrows and Pains were the Cause of his Agonies and Complaint: not his
religious fear, not his Piety or Pity. If you say, These were Afflictions unto
him. I answer, they properly belonged to his Holiness as parts thereof, and
were not Before p^^ See al^o (...) 91.9^.
immediately directly nor properly in him as the Wages and Price of sin: as
his whole Passion was, and every part thereof. Again that these should, or
could afflict Christ so much above his strength and patience, it is more then
strange. Yea also it were no virtue but sin in any, to give way to our
Affections (though about good things) immoderatly beyond our patience and
strength of nature. Lastly though they somewhat molest the mind, yet in truth
they are most pleasing and delightful to good men, not tedious, much less
painful unto death. Therefore you do very ill to make these parts of Christ's
Holiness to be proper parts of his satisfaction, and the maine Causes of his
Agony and Complaint. And worse you do if you ascribe them Page 27^ and 115.
not to any Pains in him at all. Secondly, The sum of these Page 90.
forenoted Texts must be against Gods known will in one respect, though
always after his known will in another respect, as afterward we shall see.
And here are expressed (with his strange Astonishment) his mighty Sorrows,
and Fear of them, partly felt and partly further to come. You Page 9.^
skip this Fear when you reckon but 4. kinds: For this was neither a
religious care, nor doubtful fear, nor desperate nor damned fear, but a right
Natural fear in Christ. Which was as I said for the infinitnes of his
sorrows partly now revealed, and partly further to be laid upon him
afterward. Whence also his sweating drops of blood trickling down from him,
and his intolerable Agony, and his comfort received by an Angel from heaven
that now in this his woeful discomfort ministered unto him: and his complaying
on the Cross that his Father had forsaken him: finally all his prayers and
supplications with tears and strong cries against that death which he feared.
Now all these things we see in Christ, came because of his sorrows and Pains
in his Passion, not for his zealous Holiness and Sanctification. ^^^l 51.11.2.8.
David wa^ted sometime the present feeling of Gods comfortable spirit, and
mourned dolefully for the want of it, albeit yet he were not destitute of his
spirit indeed: which also himself knew well enough. And thus did Christ even
in his greatest plunge of woe: for then he called God his God resolutly.
Nevertheles, he being infinitely more punished then David, nature could not but
suddenly cast out that affection (which yet was merely natural in him) to
wish ease, and release of his unmeasurable and Ioh. 12.27. ^ark 14.35
when in this season he prays, that a this Hour and This Cup may pass from
him. That which This Hour and This Cup do signify, the same is the proper and
principal cause of his Agony. But what can be meant by This Hour, unless the
Pains of his suffering set and appointed by God for him to bear at this
determined time from Gods Justice for sin? What is this Cup, but the bitter
taste of the same Pains aforesaid? This I hope was not his Holiness and
sanctification which so troubled and molested him: Pains, his overabounding
Sorrows and anguish: saying, My Soul is full of pains or full of sorrows
even unto death. Here he names the Cause. For which Cause also, even of
intolerable and unsupportable sorrows and pains it must needs be that he
cried at his end, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? This then
manefestly was the only proper and principal cause of Christ's most dreadful
Agonies and perplexity in his Passion, even excessive Pains, and the entire
want of feeling of Gods comfort, Page 17.
and nothing else. How hard soever b you make it (I c know not why) to show the
proper and principal cause thereof. Treat. 1. Page 72.
And here we will remember again what is taught by Authority in England. The
rather for that you take on as a man impatient, because I do affirm that our
doctrine, (not yours) has the public Authorie for it. Page 334.
You d call it an egregiously, an insolent and impudent speech, well becoming
an alehouse. etc. And yet in the very next Page ^^
page in plain terms you grant the same to be taught in our Homily of
Christ's Passion: for you say thus the Hom: teaches, The Justice of God
pursued Christ with most paynefull smart and anguish even unto death: and
forced the weakness of his humane flesh to cry, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Here I am sure you think not that our Homely makes Christ's
Piety or Pity, nor yet his mere Bodily pain to force him thus far. Nor in
those words next following there, Hom ^ Pass. 2.
O that Mankind should put the everlasting Son of God in such pains for the
grievousnes of our sins. And in truth that the Homily is far from both
these your meanings, I have plainly showed Page 6
before. Add hereunto the full and large declaration hereof in the
authorized Catechism: Now techis^^
Christ suffered not only a common death in sight of men, but also was
thoroughly touched with the horror of eternal death: he fought and wrastled as
it were hand to hand with the whole army of Hell: before Gods judgment seat he
put him self under the heavy and grievous severitie of Gods punishment: he was
driven to most hard straights: he suffered for us and went through horrible
fears, and moct bitter sorrows of the mind that he might in all things
satisfye the just judgment of God and appease his wrath. For to sinners whose
person Christ did here bear, not only the sorrows and torments of present
death are due, but also of death to come and everlasting: So when he did take
upon him and bear both the guiltines and just pain of Mankind damned and
lost, he was affected with so grievous fear, trouble and sorrow of the mind
or soul, that he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Finally
the Annotation of our great Bibl. 1591. and ^
Bible authorized and appointed to be read in our Churches, iustifyeth all this
saying, Anno^ Luke 2^
Christ here felt the horror of Gods wrath and judgment against sin. I pray,
who is that Egregious liar now? I hope for my part I have spoken the truth in
avouching my doctrine and that forenoted Proposition and Assumption also, by
you denied, to be our public doctrine and fully authorized in England.
Wherefore you may mean some other to be Page ^^
a giddy Spirit lately buzzing in the peoples ears the contrary: I hope I am
clear from it. And thus it remains that we conclude even our whole Reason to
be firm and true, which is Page 9^
before delivered. The pains of Christ's Passion which now he felt and feared,
were the principal and proper cause of those his Agonies. But his mere Bodily
Pains and death, or the fear of them, caused no such things and lamentable
effects in Christ: much less did his Piety and Pity. Therefore Christ felt
and feared Pains more, and infinitely greater, then mere Bodily pain and
death: which were the principal and proper Cause of this strange plight in
him. Which consequently can be none other by necessary reason, then the Pains
and sense of Gods wrath in his spirit properly. Therefore Christ suffered that
also: and not only in Body, as you hold.

Howbeit you have yet here and there some exceptions against this our doctrine
which are not to be clean neglected. First, you say, ^ag. 290.
a I extend Ch^istes Agony too far: because I will have it proceed from b
the intolerable sorrows and horrors of Gods fyrie wrath equal to Hell.
Treat. 1. ^^g 80.
I show not there the Cause of Christ's Agony and Fear: I showed it of
purpose in the c beginning. Why did you not refuse that? Treat. 1. ^ag 6 7
You ought to have dealt directly against that which I expressly mention to have been the cause. Thus I said, His Sorrows and sufferings for the redemption of
sins, The Cup of Affliction and sorrow which now he felt and was to feel
yet further, Caused him to mourn and fear. Say then plainly, that this Cause
is mistaken, and too far extended: or else you say nothing to us, but by
indirect and p^aeposterous collectio^. Now if this Cause which we gave and do
give, be true and right, (as I hope it is before proved more then sufficiently)
then I doubt not it is as true also by invincible reason, that Christ suffered
the intolerable sorrows and horrors of Gods fyrie wrath equal to Hell. Which
I hope also is as fully proved: ^^g. 91. 117
being the effect of our d Assumption before. Seeing it could not be his mere
Bodily pains (much less his Holy Affections, as you hold) that brought him to
this miraculous misery and distress, wherein we see by the Text he was.
Therefore they were the intolerable and incomprehensible dolours of his Spirit
(questionles) which wrought the same. There is no other sorrow in the world to
be found which can be imagined to be the Cause possibly. ^ag. 290.
And then my other words also which e here you cruelly condemn, shall stand
well enough, * That Christ as touching the vehemence of pain was as sharply
touched as the Reprobats themselves, ^reat. 1. ^^g. 81.
yea if it may be more extraordinarily. Though you labor with might and maine
to make them amount to Haeresie and open blasphemy. But why do you not bend
your odious outcryes and accusations against that Authority before truly cited,
which maintayneth the same so fully and amply as I deliver it? You do wisely
to dissemble your enmity to all them, and yet nevertheles by me to smite and
wound them. Howbeit what reason have you against our Assertion? Verily only
this you oppose, because Page 29 292.
all the sorrows of the Reprobat are but sinful guiltines of conscience or
fears of judgment for seen, which is executed Page 14
only in the next life: you mean only in the definit and local Hell. Which
yet is no refutation of my assertion, that Christ was as sharply touched with
pain as the very Reprobats. For though the wicked in this world did never
suffer any real effect of God burning wrath working actual vengeance on their
Souls for sin, but only some guilty remorse or fear and nothing else, yet
this lets not but that Christ whom God ordained extraordinarily, and alone,
to be in this life a whole and absolut burnt Sacrifice for all sin, did feel
and suffer the same truly, properly, and perfitly. Sec: How I have always
expressly excluded from As being Extraoro^^^^ry sufferer^^^
Christ Likewise (...) those your (...) things (...) Hell page 49. The Rept^^^
bats do so^^time here (...) a real taste (...) Hell pains
all sinful adhere^ts or consequents in pains and fears, which are in the
wicked: and do resemble his to theirs only and merely in sharpnes and
vehemence of pain, I have often declared before. Thirdly, the case is clear
enough that the Reprobat many times in this life do not only fear the
judgment to come, but also do feel some real and actual impression of Gods
burning wrath, and even of Hell torments, though not being yet in the local
Hell. For proof whereof, that which before Treat 1. page 46.
I alleged out of Job 6.4.
Job, and Ephesians. e. 6. ^^ 16. Ion. 2.
others, that even the godly here want not experience of the sorrows of Hell
sometimes, you pass over answering nothing thereunto. Which yet being so in
the godly, it must needs be in Cain, Judas, and the Reprobats, far more
direful and intolerable sometimes. As also their own confession, and behavior
do sundry times testify in this life: Again the Devils are many times Mat. 8
2^ 32. Ephesians. 2. and 6.12.
out of the local Hell, as when they are in this world. But the Devils are 2
Pet. 2.4^
never released of Hell sorrows. Therefore the true sorrows of Hell are even in
this world: and then possibly may be inflicted on wicked men as they are on the
Devils which are sometime out of the local Hell. Lastly the true joys of
Heaven may be out of the local Heaven: as when the glorious Angels have been
and tarried some while here on earth with men. Yet did they never for a moment
want the joys and glory of Heaven. And if Angels may enjoy Heaven really
being in this world, ^^^e Godly ^ay have a ^^t here some ^^nes of Hea^^nly
joys.
then is it possible by Gods goodness to communicate some real foretast thereof
even unto some blessed men also. Further that God does thus indeed i reveal
some real taste of his Heavenly joys to his chirdren even in this life, I have
k showed already, but am not answered. Cor. 2.9.10. Treat. 1. page 80
Yea the Transfiguration of Christ on the Mount declares that some real part
of Heavenly glory may be here on earth, Page 115.
which your self l somewhere confesses clean m against your self. Page 337.
338.
Only this n you have to object touching men, that we here do but hope and
joyfully believe. Page 338.
Now faith and hope is the o evidence of things not seen: Hebr. 11.1.
neither are our greatest joys the same nor equal to them which we shall
possess in the next world. I answer, our Reasons before do prove more then
only Hope in the faithful sometimes. Sec: It is true the Apostle says that
here we walk by faith and live by hope. Cor. 5.7.
This is the general state of the godly in this life: also it is spoken in
Comparison of the life to come, which in truth infinitely exceeds, and
lasts. Yet some rare exceptions do not overthrow the general course: and
here may be notwithstanding some particular instant times when some real
sense may be revealed to the godly. ^esame in nature, not in ^easure, with ^albe
heere^ter.
As there was unto Christ in the mount, which was to him not only a joyful
hope, but a real taste of his very Heavenly joys. Likewise the godly sometime
may taste of it in their measure, and yet they may generally in the course of
their whole life walk by faith, without that actual sense which I speak of,
saving still a most joyful remembrance of it. Again, though we are not to
doubt but that the real sense of Heavenly joys here and hereafter are the
very same in nature (as in the examples before we have seen) yet I say
hereafter we^ shall receave unspeakable increase farther and above this that
we taste here. 1. When we shall have all darkness and corruption taken from us,
wherewith now we are compassed and clogged all this life long. 2 When the
fullnes of Gods appointed time shall come for it, then will he of purpose
reveal himself and his glory unto us as it were with open face, which here
is don but under a veil: and specally then when our bodies also in the
Resurrection shall be conjoined with our souls in glory. 3 When we shall
eternally enjoy and possess the same, which here in this life is but now and
then revealed unto us, in such persons, times, manner, and measure as the Lord
shall think good.
Thus we grant the joys of Heaven here, are nothing equal to those
hereafter: only we say the very same in nature may be and are by the
effectual working of Gods gracious spirit in his elect revealed in some
measure, and sometime, eve^ in this world. Neither is this (as your charity
speaks) any lewd or wicked error. Now then if more then Hope only, eve^
Heavenly joys may be on earth, surely it follows; that like wise more then
Fear, even Hellish pains them selves may be in men on earth also, and not in
the local Hell only. And if Hell pains in this world may be in any, much
rather may they have been in Christ: whom God purposely sent Hebr. 2.
through pains and afflictions (the extremest that might be) to be
consecrated the Prince of our salvation. If you say, yet thus it will follow
that the extremest pains of Hell are not to be found in this world, as the
highest joys of Heaven are not likewise, by my confession. Wherefore Christ
could not be so extremely punished (any thing near) as the damned be in
Hell, no not for any moment: which yet my, conceit (as you call it) does reach
unto. I answer, I know not, neither mean I to determine the measure and
depth of sorrows which Christ in his Passion suffered: as also it is not
possible to define that glory which he tasted of (for the time) in the mount.
Only grant this plainly, that Christ suffered in his soul the true effects of
Gods proper Justice or wrath: and we seek no more. Grant this I say, and then
we will see further (if you will make it a question) whether the sense of pain
in Christ was lesser for the time, then that which is eternal in the damned:
and whether the true and proper wrath of God taking full vengeance of sin
here in this world, might not be as sharp and violent as the sharpest torment
in Hell, yea the very shame which is in Hell the sharpest. Truly, though
Christ suffered all (which he did suffer) here in this world, yet for any
thing I can see, there is cause why Christ should be an Extraordinary person
in the case of Suffering for sin in this life: and that therefore, as touching
sorrow and pain, he might feel more then ever any else has or could feel for
the time. You seem to grant unto Christ Page 2
all natural sorrow and fear. Neither do we seek any more. But you trust
the pain of the Damned is more then a natural oppressing and afflicting of
the heart with humane fear and sorrow. Forsooth it is not. It is no more then
a very natural humane sorrow and fear. It proceeds immediately and
principally from God him self: who is the Nature of natures. Also Humane
nature is apt to receive such sorrow and fear from him. Thus the very pains of
the Damnedare merely natural. Yet supernatural I grant they are, if we
mean this, that they are above our natures state to bear or to comprehend
them. This therefore hitherto is a very slight exception against our doctrine
before delivered.

The next is as vain, Page 296.
where a you think it not tolerable that I say, Treat 1. ^ag 59.
Christ b in plain words prayed contrary to Gods known will. I pray have
patience: I say no harm, nor mean no ill. Did not Christ in plain words
pray, ^^aek. 14.35
c That, if it were possible this Hour might pass from him: Ioh. 1^.27.
and before, d Father; save me from this hour. By this Hour he means this
his pain and punishment appointed him by God for to suffer at that time. And
this Christ knew well, seeing he says presently, But therefore I came into
this hour. Does he not then pray in plain words contrary to Gods known
will? Therefore never skoffe at it, nor reproach it, nor wrest it. We ought not
to be ashamed to acknowledge that weakness of Humane nature in Christ, which
Christ was not ashamed of for our sakes to undergo. If this could not be
possibly in Christ's Manhood without sin, then I were a wretch to affirm so
much of him; especially still to affirm it. But if it be possible by any means,
through the mere instinct of man's Nature, (as it is Gods creature and free from
all sin) thus to speak and to wish suddenly, and suddenly to control it
again, as Christ did: then what mind bear you, and how may we judge of this
your striving, which is not to clear Christ from all sin in his Agony. For
that we do all, and Nature it self witnesses with us that in such a case as
he now was in, this was nothing strange to be thus perplexed, and moved. But
your striving seems to be altogether to exempt Christman from our mere
natural affections and infirmities: and to give him Humane flesh indeed, but
not such as ours is in all and every point, except only sin. You will say,
If he knew it to be Gods will and prayed against it, how could he want sin?
I answer, He knew it; but at this instant he considered it not, he thought not
on it: and so his sudden desire may be clear from sin. But why thought
he not on it? or how could he choose but think on that which he well knew,
and did so greatly concern him? I answer, His Pains and sorrows being so
great and so infinite as they were, not in his Body only but chiefly in his
very Spirit and Mind, and these more extremely revealed upon him now at these
instant times, then they were otherwise or continually, as by the effects of
them in him we may perceave. I say, these things acknowledged and well wayghed
as they ought to be, then it is easy to show why, and how Christ came thus
affected, and yet without sin. First, he was now Ekthamb istha^, is to
astonished v^ ^eare. Man. 1^.33.
astonished as the text says: and you Page 124.
acknowledge that he might be. Sec: these inco^prehensible sorrows and
incomparable pains astonished him: yea impossible it was but his mere humane
nature must be astonished with them. And it is utterly untrue which you say,
Page 196.
Many things might astonish our Savior for the time besides such pains. In
these instant times of his Passion, nothing could astonish him but Pains and
Sorrows. Which before Pa. 115.1^
I have proved, or at least that Pains and Sorrows now did chiefly: and that
nothing could possibly without such Sorrows and Pains as these, which I
speak of: even spiritual, and infinite, and incomprehensible pains,
proceeding from Gods Justice upon him for our sins. Thirdly, Add hereunto
that which you rightly grant, Page 12^.
It is true that a mighty fear may so affect a man for the time, that it shall
hinder the senses from recovering themselves, and stop the faculties from
informing one the other. But this must be some sudden object astonishing the
heart, and so terrible, that it suffers us not presently to gather our wits
together, and to consider of it. Likewise very fully afterward, Page 29^.
Astonishment draws the mind so wholly to think on some special thing above
our reach, that during the time we turn not our selves to any other
cogitation. Even as the eye, if it be bent intentively to behold any thing, for
that present it discerns nothing else: So fares it with the Soul, if she
wholly addict her self to think on any matter, she is amused; if it be more
them she conceaveth, or more fearful then she well indureth, she is amazed or
astonished: but not of necessity so, that she loses either sense or memory:
only for that time she converteth neither to any other object. Now thus Christ
being astonished with sorrows and fear lost not either sense, memory, or
understanding, much less his virtues and graces, being cast into an infernal
confusion, as you untruly Page 289.
charg me that I say. But I say, as you say, He now on the sudden might turn
neither sense nor memory to any other object, and so not think on any thing
else, but only on this terrible and mighty sorrow and fear, which now smote
him and bruized him to pieces. And thus for the very sudden he might not
think at all upon Gods will, and his own certain purpose to suffer this very
same, or that he was to suffer it longer: but only on the intolerablenes of the
pains and woe, which instantly he felt. Now Natures very instinct is, in such
dolours to wish and desire ease, and the more vehemently it is pinched, the
more earnestly it desires: and this is Gods own gift and workmanship in
nature, and simply thus to desire, is in this respect truly to be reckoned Gods
own express will. And thus for the sudden not remembering, nor thinking on
Gods particular will otherwise, but feeling the instinct of nature in such a
case only wishing ease to it self, he prays rightly That this Hour and This
Cup might pass from him. Wherein yet I say he prays in one respect against
Gods known will, but in an other respect even according to his will. According
to his will which now he had sense of, even to wish release and ease from such
deadly sorrows and fear: contrary to his particular will being this that he
must yet further suffer them. Which (as I said) suddenly being astonished he
remembered not, he thought not upon it. Lastly it was contrary in the outward
words, and in the particular affection of his mind now wanting this
remembrance: but it was fully and wholly according to Gods will in the general
disposition of his mind and whole man. As appeared by his present applying
himself with all readiness even to this most dolorous obedience of Gods will,
forthwith so soon as he recollected himself: saying Not my will, but thy
will be don. Where even this also shows, that before Gods will and his in
some respect were contrary, but absolutely now they agree. If you abhor this
in me, yet see what Chrisostom taught, a These words (Not as I will, but as
thou will) do signify 2. Wills, (says he) one of the Father another of the
Son, Joan Constantinop in Theodoret. Dial. 3.
contrary the one to the other. Igraunt M. Beza uses some terms differing from
ours, yet his sense is the selfsame with ours. Bez. Annot. (...) mat. 26.
He said b Christ corrected not his speech as if he had before spoken amiss. I
say, He did correct his speech: not mending it as being any whit amiss, but
making it being good to be better. That is by showing his general conformity
to Gods will now more particularly, and distinctly. Which sentenses in effect
and indeed do not differ: and this latter, I think, may well be called a
correcting, no less then the former. Also he says, The Humane and Divine will
are not Contrary, but Diverse. I understand even Differing from Gods will, to be
Contrary. Namely in that particular respect wherein the difference is. For
otherwise now there may be a general perfect conformity to Gods will, as is
before said. Neither is this particular contrariety to Gods will any sin,
namely when by Gods own ordinance we know not what Gods special will is, so
that we always remain apt and ready thereunto when we know it. So did David 2 Samuel 1 16.
desire the life of his Child. It was contrary to Gods will one way: as the
event showed, for the Child dyed. Yet he prayed well and rightly according to
God will in natures affection, seeing he knew not Gods secret will to the
contrary, neither was to have known it before the event. And thus likewise
stood the case with Christ at this season. His sudden Not remembering Gods
particular will (by reason of his fearful astonishment) was all one as if he
had not known it at all (yea thus also he ought not to have known it) for that
instant. Namely, seeing this Not remembering and not thinking thereon came not
of any negligence or default in him, but only and merely by Natures infirmity
(Gods own ordinance) which could not possibly but fail under such infinite
violence of pains. This M. Beza calls Diverse rather then Contrary to Gods
will: but in effect it is the same, and he plainly means even there all one
with us. You say Page ^^
I am captious against Christ in not supplying one Evangelist with another. For
so Christ's desire will appear to be but Conditional, therefore not Contrary
to Gods will. Yes, nevertheles; as touching the desire it self and his
particular present inclination compared to Gods particular determination
herein. And so was also David's forenoted desire for his child's life: yea
Balaams Numb^^ 19.
bad desire was such in this point. These were all Conditional, yet contrary
to Gods particular will. Herein stood the difference: Balaam then knew Gods
will was otherwise, at that time when he inclined after his own mind. David
simply knew not, Christ also knew not (that is, he remembered not) at that
instant the contrary. Therefore Balaams desire though Conditional and with
reservation (as it seemed) of God will, was nevertheles wicked and against God:
his conditional words excused not the opposition of his Will against Gods Will.
Yea, in this case when we perfitly know and remember Gods certain will, every
light affection and sudden wishing to the contrary, (howsoever conditionally)
is no less then manefest sin against God. But in David and Christ here the
case is not so, as before I noted. Their desires indeed were, and ought to have been conditional: for who knows not, that all good prayers and desires for
temporal things must be conditional, that is with reservation of Gods will
always employed, though not always expressed? And albeit they were
conditional yet they might be and were contrary, as also I have showed. Yea
the very nature of all Co^ditional desires is such, that it includes evermore
a possibility (at least) of being contrary to his will, whom we desire. And
therefore we use sometime expressly to qualify our desire, saying, Jf thou will,
and Jf it please thee, etc. Now thus was David's and Christ's: yea not only
possible to be contrary, but contrary indeed, as the sequel showed. Howbeit
both their desires were nevertheles holy, ^ag. 298.
made in faith, assured to receive, (as co^dicional desires may be) directed
aright, prepared sufficiently: yet only for this cause, seeing David simply
knew not Gods contrary will: Christ knew it not at that instant. Howbeit the
truth is, Christ could not but now know and remember it very well, if he were
not at this instant grievously astonished. Neither could he be so astonished
and woefully distressed in his Soul, without that intolerable and infinite
weight of sorrows before spoken of. Therefore briefly, so it was doubtless
with him at that season. All in vain then you charge me that I " streth the
Scriptures beyond their words and the truth, ^^g. 289.
when in my discourse I show that Christ in the garden was astonished and
grievously perplexed: the text having only, He began to be astonished and
grievously perplexed. I grant the text is so. But think you, that phrase in
Scripture signifies a begging only, and no further proceeding at all? It is
written, ^^rk. 6.34.
a He began to teach them many things. Also, b And Jesus answered them and
began to say, (...). 13.5.
Take heed least any man deceave you, (...). 10.45.
etc. And c He began to cast out them that sold in the Temple, (...) 1.1.
etc. And d All that which Jesus began to do and teach. (...). 24.2
And, e Tertullus began to accuse Paul, saying, etc. It were very simple to say
that the Scripture means these things were only begun, and no more. Nay
verily, they were here don to the full. Again, as Christ was indeed
astonished and grievouslie perplexed, so he did at the first but begin to be
thus, and then afterward grew to the full. Now these degrees and proceedings
of Christ in his sorrorwes, and that they were not at the highest at once, this
word here he began may very well signify. For the text following does
invincibly show that he did fully come to the extremity of astonishment, and
began not only. For did he but begin when he swet clotted blood trickling from
his body to the ground? Also when an Angel was sent from Heaven to refresh and
comfort him: did he then but begin to be heavy? Again when most moornfully he
complained that his Soul abounded with sorrows even unto death: Finally when
he 3. several times prayed to his Father with strong crying, tears, and
fear, that the Cup of Gods punishments now given him to drink, might pass
from him if it were possible, which at other times he most perfectly knew that
it neither could nor should escape him: whereunto may be added that at last
when he so dolefully complained that his God had forsaken him; was he now all
this while but beginning to be troubled and sad? You would have mademe ashamed
of it, if I had had any such thought in my mind. Wherefore the text is no way
abused as you pretend in that after he began, I show from these places that he
grew to be mightily astonished and grievously perplexed. As for Ierom, if he
deny this, I must crave leave to dissent from him. I bring (you say) Page 29^
a fardell of phrases to express his Agony, he was amazed, astonished,
forgetful, distempered, overwhelmed, and all confounded in the powers of his
soul, and senses of his body? Yea, and I think all to little sufficiently to
express our Lords sufferings for us. All those words which I used and many mo
cannot show all that unspeakable veheme^cy of Sorrow, which now cast him into
such a plight. So far of it is, that Page 28^
I do the Lord of glory wrong: when I labor but to show how he loved us, and
to what baseness of our nature he submitted him self for our sake. For all these
are but mere effects of natures infirmity, if it be oppressed with any
infinite sorrow and fear. Seeing then Christ might be and was now thus
infinitely afflicted (as we have showed) why should we fear to acknowledge
extreme Effects in him, where we have extreme Causes. Nay, God forbid that
we should rejoice in any thing so much, neither can we praise and magnify him
for any thing so highly, as we may and ought for this extreme " abasing of
Christ for us. (...) Pilip. 2.^.
Remember your own words out of Austin: that there is in some men Insipiens
honorisicentia, a fond intent of honoring Christ. If there be any such, surely
this is one point thereof which you maintain. Mr Calvin, a worthy Minister of
Christ, ^alvin ^ath. ^6.
and a pillar of the Church, is bold and says: Fatemur certe hanc esse crucis
stultitiam quae scandaloest superbis hominibus. We consesse indeed such is the
baseness and folly of Christ's Cross, that proud men cannot away with it. In
another place where I showed from the more to the less, ^eat. ^. pa. 57
how Christ might have (for the sudden) the powers of his mind astonished,
and yet no decay in him of faith, nor of obedience, nor of patience, nor of
love; like as there is not in a man benumbed and bound in his senses more then
Christ was; namely in a man a sleep or amazed with a violent blow on the head.
For thus any reasonable man would have conceaved me: seeing who would imagine
that I thought Christ now to be altogether so without sense as one that
sleeps or that lies in a swoune? Heerevpon you ask me skoffingly, Page 299.
a was Christ a sleep, or in a swoune? b cast into a trance, Page 120.
or c in a fit of a Lethargy. But what I do think of Christ's Agony I have
said before. Page 121.
Indeed, as d you grant that Amazednes and Astonishment comes naturally from
sorrows and fears: and that, Page 293.
both in these causes and effects there be diverse degrees: so I think in
Christ both the one and the other was in the extremest and most violent degree
that might be. And therefore no marvel though his Astonishme^t were far
greater, then is to be seen in any man else that ever was or shall be. The
Lord made Solomon to excel all others in e wisdom, 1. Chro. 1.12.
and riches, and treasures, and honor, so, that there has not ben the like
among the Kings which were before him, neither after him shall there be the
like. Of Christ (I judge) we may altogether as truly and as fully say, that the
Lord made him so subject to infirmities and to suffering of sorrows that there
has not ben the like among me^ which were before him, neither after him shall
there be the like. And yet none of those your former imputations are true. Page
300.
But f for my life I cannot answer this that follows, All that Christ
suffered was and must be meritorious with God. The suffering of Hell pains
which astonish and confound all the powers of the Soul and senses of the Body,
neither was, nor could be meritorious with God. Therefore Christ suffered not
such pains as did astonish and confound his bodily senses, and powers of his
Soul. I deny your Assumption. Not only all Christ's pains were meritorious,
but even all his very infirmities also: his wearines, his hunger, his sleep,
and so his astonishment and amazednes (being in him but a mere natural weakness
and infirmity) was exceeding meritorious in him and highly accepted with God.
Man has his mere infirmities all agreeable to Gods will: but Christ directly
and properly glorified God in and by them more then can be uttered, I say, in
every point whatsoever of his Humane infirmity and baseness, whereunto he
humbled himself. If it seem a hard phrase which in my former Treatise I used,
saying Christ at this instant became forgetful of that which before he knew:
my meaning is (and so still I speak now) he remembered not, he considered not.
Which many times we use to name forgetting: but indeed strictly and properly
it is rather not remembering. Where you would Page 296.
wring out a contrariety in my words, as if I had said: That Christ being in
the depth of his astonishment did then perfitly know that the dominion of death
should not hold him: you do me wrong, I say not so. In that place I argue
from your suppositio^, that if Christ were now not astonished, but in his
perfect memory and full considering of such things (as you seem to affirm,
but I deny) which otherwise he knew well, then it could not be the Dominion of
death that he thus feared, since in his firm estate he knew perfitly that it
should not prevail over him. To conclude this matter: thus we may see how
without color of reason Page 297.
you wrest a plain text, which otherwise taken (as it lies) makes strongly
against you. They are our Saviors Christ's own words, Ioh. 12.
Now is my soul troubled: and what shall I say? Father save me from this
hour: but therefore came J unto this hour. You say these words do import a
Deliberation of 2. parts. But you speak against all reason, considering the
nature and frame of the very words. A Deliberation must needs be set
interrogatively in both clauses, thus: What shall I say? Father, save me from
this hour? Now the text is not so: it pretends a plain resolution, or at
least a great inclining toward resolution, thus: Father, save me from this
hour. It can not be a Deliberation. Chrysostom and Epiphanius do descant about
it, trying how the text may bear such a meaning: but it cannot stand being so
evidently against the course of the text. Chrysostom. ^^b; Lacet turbatio d^^e^e
(...) serva^^^^ contrari^^^ tamen ^^^o.
You say, S. John beer speaks of another time and place. What then? Yet he
may speak of the same matter, namely of his Passion, or of a Foretast thereof.
Which indeed the text it self m shows that he did speak of. Wherefore
neither can we deny, ^oh. 12.31.^.33. and all titers heer^pon.
but this place of Scripture (even as the other about his Praying in the
Garden) does surely confirm that his Passion was more then mere bodily, which
did so miraculously terrify him. It could be no less then the pains of the
infinite wrath of God upon his Soul. Hence also I reasoned effectually n
before, Treat. 1. pa. 1. 63.
but no where you answer it; If Christ's such sufferinges in his Soul were
ordained of God for him, then most certainly indeed he did suffer the same.
Now we see such sufferings were ordained for him: seeing he says, but
therefore came I unto this hour. Therefore most certainly indeed he did
suffer them, at one time or other.

Yet further you except, Pa. 22 23. ^oo, etc
where you avouch that this was a Fear of Eternal death and Everlasting
damnation which caused in Christ this Agony: and from his fear he was
delivered. Ergo, he suffered not that which he feared. First I grant indeed
this was the 2. Death, the death of the soul, or Hell torments which Christ
here b feared: neither can this by any means be denied, as anon we shall see.
Howbeit to say (as you do) that it was Eternal death and Everlasting
malediction which here Christ thus woefully and distresfully feared, is the
strangest speech in Divinity that ever I heard. See: you can not help you
self in making Christ's fear of this Death to be only a c religious fear,
Page 23.
and d a fear for others. These imaginations I have removed e before. Page 304.
Every Reader will easily see in his own judgment that these affections so
vehement were not likely at this season, Page 93 94. etc.
nor likely in him at all, much less likely to be Causes of such Effects.
Again these are not Fear properly: they ought rather to be called (as they
are) a religious Care, Commiseraetion and pity. Which differ greatly from the
nature of Fear properly taken, such as we ought to co^ceave in this place.
Page 305.
You think the f nature of eulabia will not admit any proper Fear, and namely
no perplexed Fear, as I take it here to signify: but a careful and diligent
regard to beware and decline that which we mislike or doubt. What say you? Did
Christ doubt Eternal Damnation, and therefore Feared it? you speak so darkly,
that I know not how to take you. But it may be you mean he him self misliked
it only, and was sorry for others who ran headlong into it. But all this still
is nothing else save Piety in him properly: yea and so you say this comes
nearest to the signification of the Greek word. I grant it does touching
Eulabia: but in Mark the l^ktham^ ber^tha^.
word does import properly Fear, and that in extreamitie. Again touching
Eulabia; my reason that here it signifies Fear properly, yea a perplexed
fear, and not not only a religious devotion as you say, is grounded not so
much on the nature of the word, as on the Circumstances and the other words of
this Text: Heb. 5.7
Christ in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from Death, and was
heard in that which he feared. Here these other words do show that this
Fear was more then a careful regard to beware that which he misliked: it was
no less in deed then a perplexed and troubled fear woefully dreading that
which he was to suffer. Which also the strange and wonderful signs thereof in
the Garden do more then confirm: as I have showed Page 11^ 116. 127
often. Thus my meaning is that the nature of eulabia admitting the sense some
time of Fear properly, admits here this sense, yea of necessity it must
admit it for the reason noted above. Howbeit I grant the Apostle may intend
this also by the nature of this word, that Christ notwitstanding all this
dreadful fear, yet (being merely natural in him) it declined not a jot from
Piety nor from a most reverend regard of obedience to God, which still in all
this his perplexity he kept firm and safe. This he may withal (I grant)
insinuat: yet the other proper fear and grievous dread must needs be admitted.
To like effect this word signifies in that place of the Act. 23.
Acts: as the Circumstances there also will confirm. Now then this being in
Christ a proper and most vehement fear: where you argue Christ was delivered
from his fear of Hell torments or the Death of the Soul. Ergo he suffered
them not. I deny your sequel. This proves directly the contrary. He feared
the Death of the Soul; specially he thus feared it. Ergo he did suffer it.
For Fear being of that which is to come, as Page 30^
you well observe. Ergo seeing Christ feared (yea in such manner) the Death of
the Soul, it surely came unto him: namely either now, or before he dyed in the
flesh, or both now and then also. For he might well suffer it eve^ now, and yet
fear it more ensuing. Yea such a manner and measure of Fear, as this
manifestly was, could not be but a very Suffering of these spiritual sorrows.
Which also that shows where he says, My Soul is full of (actual) sorrows
even unto death, etc. Neither is there in this any a doubt full word, Page 304.
which is your manner of writing: Page 296.
nor b device unfit for Divinity, but your Co^parisons of c fearing Captivity,
Page 301.
loosing a purse, etc. are very unfit to be matched with this fear in Christ.
Page 302.
You think this was but a d jest, if God be said to have heard Christ and
delivered him from that he feared, and yet to let him suffer it. Forsooth no
jest: for he doubtless suffered it as before we have seen. Now nevertheles GOD
might well hear him 2. ways: 1. by sufficient sustayning him in it: 2. by
delivering him out of it in due time: In one place you seem to observe a point
both strange, and very contrary to your self, Pa. 118. 119
in saying, e Fear is more intolerable in Christ the^ doubting. Is fear so
intolerable a thing for him, when as you have so often and so earnestly
affirmed that he feared, Pa. 22. 124.
and for f fear became thus astonished? Page 303.
Where * you seek a weak advantage in that I said eisakoustheis may seem to
show that Christ was heard being in that which he was saved from: you see I
challenge no certain but a seeming reason from that word. But your self
makes a stranger conclusion. Ergo the Active referred to God imports that
God being in the same Pains did hear him. Lastly you say, g Indeed but in the
Garden Christ never prayed with strong cries and tears to be saved from Death,
Page 22:
that we read in the Scriptures. I hope neither do you read expreslie in the
Scriptures at all, that thus he prayed in the Garden. You may soundly gather it
from the Scriptures, I grant, Ioh. 12.27.
and so you may, that his praying h before was of the self same nature and
manner, also after in that most doleful complaint on the Cross, when he cried
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Where the very like request is
plainly employed, as he made in the Garden when he said; Let this Cup pass
from. Ieb. 5.7.
So that the i Apostle in all reason may be understood to have respect to all
these times and woeful cries of our Savior Christ. Page 30.
And thus it is without all reason that you say k his Agony ended in the
Garden: Pa. 115. 116
and that on the Cross he had l always persistance in joy without
obscuration or intermission. Likewise also that otherwise his astonishment must
Page ^^
continue 18. hours from his entering into the Garden after supper to the
ending of his life the next day at 3. of the clock after noone. How vain is
this consequence? how false are these sayings, and contrary to Scripture in all
the circumstances. But you say, Pa. 30.
the cause continuing, the effect could not cease. The Cause was, Gods leaving
his weak nature in these sorrows at sometimes more, at sometimes less: also
he is to be thought to reveal and inflict the very sorrows not always in one
tenor, but sometime more sometime less: finally his Manhood apprehended these
arrows of Gods wrath sometime more suddenly, then at other times. These were
the true causes of his Astonishment: but these continued not 18. hours
together, therefore the effect was not to continue still in that manner on him.
Then you Page 29
say, in the uttering of these words the Cup did pass from him, by my own
confession. I confess it not. But I confess his extreme astonishment did
even quickly pass from him: yet the sense and taste of that Cup might continue
longer, in such a manner and measure, as he was better enabled by his Deity to
sustain it. Now what ill is there in these conceits, I pray you. What folly
is there in them? Against us herein you do nothing else almost in your large
Treatise, Iniuriou^ s^eache^
but heap up many and most false imputarions: That we think Christ was in
Page ^^^ 116. 1^^
doubt and fear of Gods favor, Page 1^^
destitute of faith, hope, love, joy, forsaken of Gods favor, grace, Spirit:
that Page ^^^
he continued 18. hours together amazed as it were in a trance: that he Page
^^^
vehemently and often strugled and strived in his prayers against the known
will of God, and sought by all means to decline the work for which he came
into the world: His flesh feared death, though his Spirit submitted it self to
the will of his heavenly Father: Page ^^
We put Christ besides him self when it pleases us, that he knew not what he
prayed, nor prayed in faith. Your L. if you had reasons but any thing probable,
wants not outward means enough to commend your cause: you need not to
devise against us such gross and base untruths. But it bewrays how desperate
your matter is, which can not come forth nor make any show to the world,
without such proppes to lean on. Besides that which here in several places
we have declared to the contrary, in our Page 5^ 70. 71.
former Treatise we showed our mind though briefly, yet sufficiently against
these injurious speeches. How you seem to avouch that Christ was by God
forsaken in a Body, (...) 114.116.^^2.103. ^^ore (...).
but not in b Soul, let them declare that can. For my part I know not your
secret therein. I am sure no man can in truth maintain it. As for c Ambros^,
114. ^^^e page 113. 128. 1^0 (...). 1. of ye ^^^ion See ^^^re page
you wrest him as you did Hilary, etc d before. After this you are bold, and
ask if e any dare doubt of your doctrine? Yea surely, I dare not but doubt of
it. Also we have seen that the public f authorized doctrine in England dares
to doubt of it. Which makes Christ's putting him self between Gods Wrath and
our sins a part diverse from his bodily death on the Cross, ^^^ore page ^.
yet the extremest part of his Passion. See also other g authorized
testimonies hereof. But why may not any dare doubt of your doctrine? Pet. 2.
Because the Scripture says, h Christ suffered for us. leaving us an example
that we should follow his steps, etc. And this is very true also: the godly
do follow his steps herein (many times) as I i showed you before. ^at. 1.
pa. and here 120.129.
Some are conformable in some measure with Christ even in these his
sufferings. Then k you say, we ought to be glad and rejoice thereof. I answer,
we ought to turn them to joy and gladness, though not properly to be glad of
them. Nay we ought most instantly to pray against them. No affliction at all is
good in it own nature: and the greatest of all is good to Gods children by his
grace. So that touching this use of them, therein we are to rejoice: even when
we are most bruized and pierced in our souls with the terrors of God.
Lastly, (...) 134.
l you frame an objection against your self, which you neither do nor can
answer: Christ's soul might feel the torments of Hell for the time without
any distrust or doubting of his salvation, or our redemption. You pretend this
answer: The essential torments of Hell are the absolute loss of Gods kingdom
everlastingly, and that m Eternal continuance is of the nature and substance
of Hell. But we show you, ^.53.
although the damned are in Hell torments everlastingly, and of necessity so
must be: yet eternal continuance in them, and to feel them but for a time,
are indeed but Circumstances, not of the essence or nature of Hell torments.
Gods proper and extreme wrath only and his sharpest vengeance for sin is the
essence or nature of Hell pains. Which (against the Damned indeed is eternal,
and vnsatisfyable: but lighting on Christ it was not eternal, because it was
satisfyable. Wherefore it is plain that you have answered in effect nothing to
your own objection.

Thus far we have gone, showing that we Page 2
neither extend the cause of Christ's Agony to far in affirming it to have
com of most bitter and extreme Pains which he suffered properly for our sins:
neither that we continue it to long in affirming that he felt the same most
extremely on the Cross. Contrariwise that you curtaile it to short, when you
say it was no more but Page 1 290.
Devotion to God and Compassion to men: also that Christ's Agony touched him
Pa. 11^
not at all on the Cross. So that Before 90.91.116.
our Maine argument which you would have frustrated, stands firm and good
still: that seeing his Agonies, Pains, and Fears were such and so great (as
the Scripture by the effects and signs shows that they were) both before his
death and at his death, therefore they were more then mere bodily pains and
more then mere bodily death: much less were his Holy and Religious affections
the proper and special Cause thereof. But (of necessity) they were the Pains
proceeding from the infinite and sharp Justice of God which Christ truly
suffered in his Spirit, and Soul and Body.

After this Page 3^ Touchi^^ Death o^^^ Soul.
you set vehemently against my last argument, That Christ suffered in some
sort the death of the Soul. First if we should speak strictly after the
manner of Death in the Body, then no man is so mad or foolish as to say that any
man's Soul can dye at all: that is, want life and sense, as a dead body does.
Thus the very damned souls in Hell suffer not death. But such a death as
immortal souls are subject subject unto, is Gods separation from them. And
this is 2. fold. The 1. death and the 2. death, as the Scripture speaks. The
1. is the separation of them from Gods grace, which is in this life by sin
reigning in them. The 2. death is Gods leaving them in the feeling of the most
sharp and most vehement pains inflicted by Gods justice for sin. This last
kind of death is so called and named in many places of Ezekiel. Genesis 2^ Romans 6^ 2.
Cor. and 3.7.5.20. a^ 1. Ioh. 17.
Scripture. It has also a double consideration. First, ordinarily and commonly
it belongs only to the Damned for their own inherent sin, where withal
are the ordinary Accidents and co^comitants together, Desperation, induration,
blaspheming, utter darkness, etc. with Perpetuity of punishment, and that
locally in Hell. In this sense the Fathers generally do take it, where they
deny that Christ suffered the death of the Soul: and so likewise do we.
Secondly, The death of the soul, or the 2. death may be extraordinarily and
singularly considered, namely to imply no more but simply the very nature and
essense of it. (...) Death the Soul ^^rist tasted
That is, the feeling of most deadly infinite pains inflicted by God himself
in his proper justice for sin, all sense also of his comfortable presense
being taken away. This is a Death to the Soul, ^^g. 113. ^ag. 135. 6. ^ag. 112.
3.
as * before we have showed: according to this sense the " Scriptures and
Fathers before noted may rightly be understood not to deny it in Christ: so
that this kind of Death in the soul (but none other) we may safely say, Christ
did suffer for our sin imputed to him. Moreover, let it be observed: that if
we had no proofs at all in Scripture for this point, yet our Question is
fully proved and confirmed notwithstanding by those other sufficient and
pregnant proofs alleged and justified before. For it is be to noted, that no
man sets the question in these terms, That Christ dyed in his soul,
neither do we at all use them very much in speaking of this matter. We do,
only when some special occasion draws it from us: neither then do we utter
it in those terms but with using some further declaration of our mind. The
reason of this warynes is, because we are not ignorant how ambiguous the phrase
is, and how apt to be mistaken, specially where men list to cavil. Also people
untaught and unsettled in construing the scriptures sense do quickly take
offense at things, which they ought better to digest. So that you do very
injuriously to grate still one this phrase of speech and to strain it to the
worst, as you do: as if by no means it could bear any good sense, and as if
we built our maine Assertion only heerevpon. Which in truth is nothing so. The
same also do we affirm touching our using (in this matter) the phrase of
Christ's suffering Hell pains. Both these phrases are but seldom and
respectively used by us. Howbeit we deny not, but that both these phrases may
be well and rightly applied unto Christ on occasion, ^^g 16. 52. ^^. and 113.
as * before is observed: and may both serve truly and most emphatically to
express the infinitnes of the pains and sorrows of his suffering for us. Yea
this very phrase of death extended in Christ further then to his mere bodily
dying, has (I doubt not) express ground in the Scripture: and therefore may
the better be used soberly, and admitted charitably. You will ask where is
there any scripture, Proofs.
that Christ suffered any other death ^ebr. 5.7.
He offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears to him
that was able to save him from death. It is not possible that this Death here
should be his mere bodily Death, which he so woefully and impotently feared: as
I have before sufficiently confirmed. Therefore it was the death of the soul,
the 2. Death which here is understood to have thus mightily afflicted Christ.
Which also your own self do Page ^^
fully grant and affirm with me. Yea you affirm further then we do, or then
the truth is, or possibly can be. You say Christ here thus feared Eternal
death and Everlasting damnation. What a speech is this? Christ could not
possibly fear in such woeful manner that, which he perfitly knew should never
come near him. But he perfitly knew that eternal Death, and the Cup of Gods
everlasting malediction should never touch him. He knew and saw that this by
Gods almighty and unchangeable Decree was set further from him then the East is
from the West, yea then Hell is from Heaven. Therefore he could not by any
means possibly fear eternal death, nor pray in such sort against it. Again,
that which he feared, and so pitifully prayed against was that, which he knew
was by God John 12
ordained for him. Yea Fear always is of that which is to come. But Eternal
death was not by God ordained for him: that was Which Christ (...) right w^
not to come unto him. Therefore it was not Eternal death which he so feared.
Finally when in the Garden he prayed against that Cup which he feared, that it
might pass from him, there he yields and submits himself presently to
the undergoing of it. But it were, I know not what, to say, that Christ did
ever yield and submit himself to undergo Eternal death, or to taste the Cup of
Gods everlasting malediction. Therefore it was not this, that he feared and
here prayed against. And yet it was I grant the Death of the Soul, or the 2.
Death: that is simply the essense thereof, Gods withdrawing himself from him
in the Pains and torments thereof. This only it was, He suffer that death
which he feared.
not the eternity thereof nor sinful concomitants, which he thus feared. And
this (for the infinitnes of it) naturally he could not but fear, yea and that
so extremely: also he feared ^ozein
for him self, as knowing it to be ordained for him. So that hence it
follows invincibly, that Christ in deed suffered (since he thus feared) more
then the mere bodily Death, even the Death of the soul. For he could not (I
say) thus Much yield to i^ he did: s^^ing, Thy ^^^don.
fear, but he must needs know that it was to come or might com unto him: ^wed
fur^^ before 131.132
if he but knew that it might come, then it * certainly did come unto him, at
one time or other in his Passion before he^ Christ abolished through death him
that had the power of death that is the Devil, and so delivered all them which
for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. ^^b. 2.14.
Here I see no reason in the world but that the Apostle by ^his often
repeating of death, and by mutual referring of it in one place (as it were) to
the other, does understand and signify one and the same death altogether. But
it is the death of the Soul which the Devil has the power and execution of,
also the death of the soul chiefly sinful men were held in fear of all their
life long. It follows then (I suppose) that even through this death of the
Soul Christ abolished the Devil, and deliveted his children. Specially seeing
there is no enormity nor impossibility herein. Against this you have no
reason at all but words and wrestings, and vain ostentation of Fathers; none
of them all denying Pet. 3.18.
saying, k Christ in his suffering was don to death in the Flesh, but made
alive by the Spirit. Where Death may be very well referred both to the Soul
and Body of Christ. Because the text here speaks (as I judge) of the whole
and entire sufferings of Christ. And it is manifest by that before, that Christ
did suffer not in his body only but properly and immediately also in his Soul:
we have seen also that the * phrase of Death, (...) 135.136
or Dying, may in a good sense be applied even to Christ's Soul. Again, this
word Flesh (it seems) can not here in this place be understood to signify
only the Body of Christ, but even both parts of his Humane nature, thar is
the reasonable Soul and the body. My reason is, because wheresoever in
scripture the Flesh and the Spirit are noted oppositly together in Christ,
^^m. 1.3, 4. ^im. 3.16 ^oh 4.2. (...) 1.14. ^or. 5.7. and ^4 and 1.4.1. ^^g.
320.
there the i Flesh signifies always his whole Humanity, even both parts
thereof, the Soul also and not the Body only: the Spirit signifies his Deity,
or Divine power. Now what have you against this? Nothing of weight but floutes
and mockes, that k this observation is made out of the hinder part^ of my head,
etc. But what pretend you against it? Some Scripture palpably abused. First "
Matthew, where Christ speaks of his Disciples that their Spirit (their inward
regenerat man) was ready to watch, ^ath. 26.
but their Flesh (their corrupt nature) was weak and sluggish. What is this to
Christ's Flesh and Spirit. Think you that Christ's Soul was willing to suffer
as God had appointed, but that his Flesh resisted? Verily so you seem here to
understand: An vntr^^ conceit
and it is as likely, as your applying of Flesh and Spirit to Christ in your
page 104. Then Luke 2.
Luke; where both Spirit and Flesh are not intended of Christ (as our
observation before requires) but only the Flesh. Then the Romans: where I
affirm that Romans
Flesh signifies the whole Manhood of Christ according to the which he came
from David even as well as Salomo^ or Nathan did, who were David's sons in
their entire and perfect nature. So likewise Christ was kin to the Jews
according to his Romans 9
whole Humanity, as well as ver. 3.
Paul was. And here Paul means him self to be kin to them according to
Nature wholly, and that only by Regeneration in the Gospel he was differing
from them. Now Nature opposed to Grace and regeneration, has reference both to
Soul and Body in a man. Howsoever the Soul comes in Generation, that is not
here considered; neither is it necessarily to the purpose. Which difficulty
also your self have utterly Page 2^
renou^ced before, to make it any argument for you in this matter. Thus yet the
Flesh and the Spirit thus opposed here in Christ, shall signify the whole
Manhood and Godhead in him. Further, that which Pa. 32
you bring out of the 2. Cor^
Corinthians compared with this in Peter, does most fitly and clearly open
and confirm the same: He was crucified touching his infirmity, but lives by
the power of God. His infirmity the text here names Metonimically
understanding in Christ that, in which his infirmities were. Now his Soul had
infirmities of suffering in it, as well as his body. Therefore his Soul also
is understood here that it was Crucified and dyed, that is according to the
condition thereof, as likewise his body according to the condition thereof. And
thus that which Paul calls infirmity, Peter calls Flesh; and that which
Paul calls the power of God, Peter calls the Spirit. That is, his Deity is
set oppositly in both these places to his whole Humanity, even to body and
soul. Aug. de 4.13.
To which purpose that place also to the Romans
Romans does serve, where the like opposition is found (as I have showed)
between the Flesh and the Spirit in Christ, that is his Manhood and Godhead.
Other reasons also Treat 137.1^
I have noted serving well hereunto (as the 4, 5, and 6.) but I omit to
rehearse them again. For it seems your self agrees with us in them: ^^g.
324.
holding a expressly that the Spirit here in Peter is the Deity of Christ
according to Austins judgment. Now this being granted and acknowledged, that
the Spirit here signifies Christ's Godhead, how can it be likely but that the
other opposite part the Flesh, must needs import his whole and entire Manhood.
Verily thus it seems most plain that Peter here distributeth the whole and
absolute person (both God and Man) into these Natures, the Flesh and the
Spirit. Wherefore I can not think, but that the Apostle here understands by
Flesh the whole and entire Manhood of Christ, even his Soul and his body. Now
this being so, then it follows by the text that Christ in his Passion was don
to death both in Soul, Page 320.
and body. Here " you object, that thus I make all the attributes of the body
common to the Soul. Nay forsooth, that I do not. Nor yet this attribute of
Dying understood in such sort and manner, as the Body properly dies: that is to
become without life and sense. I ascribe Death to both, but yet according to
the diverse condition and state of both. ^reat. 1. P^g. 78.
And thus you might understand my b meaning to be, where I say it is absurd and
false that Christ was made alive in his Humane Soul: that is, it neither lost
nor recovered life and sense, so as his body did. ^^^e before (...) 135, 136
Howbeit as Death is oftentimes attributed to men's souls in the c Scripture,
that is the feeling of the extreme wrath of God and the punishment for sin,
so d I make Death common both to Christ's Soul and body, ^^eat. 1. ^^g. 79.
even to his whole and entire humane Nature. Which if you do not acknowledge,
the shame of ab surditirie and co^trarietie which in your fancy e you accuse me
of, that Christ's Soul dyed and dyed not, ^^g. 322. ^^3.
will sit nearer to you the^ to me. Also in such a sense I deny not but Christ
may be said, that he was quickened in the Spirit, that is refreshed and
comforted again in his Soul, and restored from that bottomless gulf of
sorrows to the lively feeling of heavenly joys and glory, which for a season
he had no sense of at all. Howbeit though this sense be a true quickening in
his Soul, yet I deny that here in this place of Peter it can be translated
quickened in the Spirit meaning the Soul, because Spirit here in this
opposition is set indeed for the Deity of Christ, ^^^d you with ^^^stin do
^^sent.
* as before I have showed. Thus the matter I hope is clear to reasonable men,
that Christ's Soul even according to the Scripture phrase may be said in some
sort to have tasted and suffered Death, that is the extremest feelings of
Gods wrath for sin, and the most vehement pains of the damned, though not as
the damned do in respect of the Accidents and concomitants of their ordinary
damnation, but in a singular manner and extraordinary way as became the son
of God and a sinles man (yet a very man being our Redeemer. Now besides the
matter you Page 3
gird at me in diverse places: as where I say, The Death of the Soul is such
Pains and sufferings of Gods wrath, as always accompany them that are
separated from the grace and love of God. Forfooth it is true, they are always
wicked whom these Pains do accompany ordinarily. They came upon Christ
extraordinarily: as in Treat. ^ page 77.
this place I expressly noted. That was therefore my meaning here, if you would
have seen it. In another place also Page 33.
you know that I say, Hell as I take it (that is such pains of Gods wrath) is
Treat. 1 page 80.
sometime found in this life. Thus then you might have understood my former
words: and not that the torments of Hell do always accompany the wicked in
this life. I pray conceave not my meaning, against my express words. Again
Page 31^
you pretend to have much against me where I say, The feeling of the sorrows
of Gods wrath due to sin in a broken and contrite heart, is indeed the only
true and perfitly accepted sacrifice to God. True, so I said, and again I say
it. What see you amiss in it? Then unhappy men are the godly which are at any
time free from the pains of the damned. To what purpose is this? I speak of
Christ's Sacrifice. I pray, is any other Sacrifice perfitly accepted? or a
Sacrifice at all, but Secondarily, that is in and by Christ's Sacrifice? They
are not. His Sacrifice then is the only true Sacrifice, and perfitly accepted
to God. All others are imperfit, and accepted not in them selves but only in
and by Christ. Thus your triumphs before the victory, come to nothing but
blastes of vanity. But Augustine Page 32
does flatly deny that this text can be thus understood, or that Christ's Soul
might die. Austin Epist. 9^
denies that Christ suffied any pains of damnation locally in Hell after his
death, as it seems some held about his time who^ here he labors to
confute. So that he means to reprove only the Sea bes^^^ page 139
1st sense of the Death of the Soul in him, viz. that he suffered it not
Ordinarily after the manner of other men, nor any way locally. H^ has no
n^cessarie cause to speak of the 2. sense thereof how the Soul may be said to
suffer death Extraordinarily for sin imputed only, neither does he speak
against that in Christ. Nay according to Austins own Definition of the Souls
Dying it will easily appear that Christ's Soul may be said to have suffered
some kind of Death. de verh (...). Ser ^0. (...) Trin. 4.
Says he a Moritur anima si recedit Deus: and b Mors est spiritus deseri a
Deo. The Death of the Soul is Gods Forsaking of it. ^^fore page ^. 113. ^.
108. 113 ^. 134.
But the Scripture says God did leave him, or forsake him for a season: yea
the Fathers also c agree fully thereunto: the manner how d I have showed before.
Therefore by Austins definition largly and rightly taken, Christ may be said in
some sense to have dyed in Soul. Howbeit though the Fathers do grant the
thing in effect (as I have showed) yet I acknowledge they do deny this phrase
generally, and so does Austin in this place. But thereabout we never made
question: this is no part of our matter. It may be even for the same cause
they shunned it, for which we also do use it very rarely and warily, as "
before I observed. Page 136.
And let this be the Answer touching all your Fathers and Counsels, which you
bring abundantly (here and there) about this point of the Souls death.
Though peradventure some of them may seem to insinuat even this very phrase
touching Christ sometime, as in some I touched before.

Where you say, ^^g. 317.
Ask the simplest child that is Catechized in my charge if I have any, what
death Christ dyed for us, and he will answer me out of his Creed, Christ was
Crucified, Dead, and Buried. It is true: But our authorized Catechism
published by M. Nowel, and the Homily i shows the meaning hereof to be,
(...) before (...). 67.117.^
that Christ suffered far more sharply the^ mere bodily Death, even the
infinite pains of Gods wrath in his soul. Which I pointed you unto k before, but
you fairly leap it over, ^^eat. 1. pa. ^.
as also the Archb. special allowance (with others) of M. Now. Catechism as
being fully grounded on the word of God and containing the very doctrine of the
Church of England. Now to this effect the youths in my charge being asked would
have answered surely. For indeed such a charge in London I had I thank God,
wherein I hope I was faithful according to my power, and might have continued,
had not your il seasoned teaching so contrary to the established doctrine in
England burst forth.

a You say, ^ag. 325. ^^a. 53.12. ^r he pow^^^ (...).
I should have don well to have laid that down for a show, which is written in
Esaias, b He c laid down his Soul unto death; verily if I had, it would have
made some show. Considering that Pa. ^6
you earnestly affirm that this word signifies Soul (or Spirit) in a proper
sense. Also how resolute you are forbidding to Page 1^
divert from the native and proper significations of words, but when the letter
impugneth the grounds of Christian faith and charity. This considered, surely
that in Esaias makes some show indeed, that Christ submitted, and humbled, and
afflicted, even his Soul to Death. The rather if we note that which follows:
He was counted with the sinners, and bare the sin of many. That is, he was
punished by God as the sinners are See bes^^ page 76.
punished, and was not by the Jews only counted among Thieves. But chiefly
considering withal that also before, Isa. 53.^
He made his soul a sin offering. Here you must remember, Your pa. ^
we shall leave nothing sound and sure in Gods word, if we may avoid all
things by figures, that please not our humors. Therefore you must needs
grant that Gods word here makes Christ's Soul to be sacrificed for our
sin. And we desire no other death of the Soul. We deny not but this phrase
Anima^ p^nere is to lay down the life, and in diverse places signifies no more
then simply to Die, both concerning Christ and other men: as you observe page
70. Yet this is no necessary reason, that here in J say the Soul should be
taken figuratively, for the Life only: the rather seeing here the text
precisely sets down the great and perfect work of our Redemption. And to
take it as we do literally, impugneth no ground at all of faith or Charity. The
like peradventure may be affirmed also of that in Matthew, Mar 2^^
The son of man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his soul a
ransom for many: although the translatours commonly turn it, his life. But I
will not strive about these phrases. Aust. has not a word against us in that
great place which Page 32^
you cite: his whole argument there being to another purpose. The Jews slew
only the flesh of Christ: and yet it is true that they slew Christ. Who
doubts this? Also, where you think those words to be so Page 327^
plain and express as may be spoken, so effectual as Paul's heart could
invent or his tongue utter, that Christ reconciled us to God in the body of his
flesh through death, we have answered you Page 45.^
before. As for all your other discourse here against me, it is as every where
almost nothing but revilings, and reproaches, and bitter skoffes. Yet you say,
Page 108. ^
you have not learned, nor used to give reviling speeches. Have you not learned
it? Is it then natural unto you? Nay you mean Page 264^
these are Fatherly Warnings and admonitions. If your Fatherly admonitions are
such, what are your Lordly rebukes? If these be your Bishoply blessings, what
are your Cursings? But I am to blame, herein stands not the trial of our
quaestion. As for all th^se hogepots (as n (...) 3^8.
you call them) which you make of my words, they are nothing but your own
either wilful writhings, or uncharitable surmises: as by every particular in
then places may be seen. Finally that is not true where you say, (...). 330.
Flesh does often signify the soul in us. It signifies often the whole
Manhood together in us, and so it may and does in Christ as well. Also it
signifies in us many times our whole and entire corrupt nature both in body
and soul: so it never signifies in Christ. And here I desire the reader to
change a word or two in my former Treatise: Note. ^reat. 1. pa. ^6 lin. 2. ^^d.
lin 7. ^ Cor. 7.1.
for p always to set usually, and for q a man to set Christ. Because since I
find that Flesh and Spirit together applied unto men do r once signify
merely the Body and Soul: which then I thought every where did signify in us
our corrupt and regenerat man. Which oversight the Bishop spyeth not, but in
this place confirms indeed.

Finally to make an end with your Fathers and Councels: it is strange that you
thus vainly boast of them, (...). 135.327
saying they are a all wholly for you for this 1400. years space. I have showed
before that your large claim proves a very short gain. For in substance and
full effect they are evide^tly and generally against you, and for us. As for
their denying that Christ Dyed in his Soul, I b have answered to that before.
^ag. 135. ^6. 142.
Further where you bring them in many places saying, by his blood only he
redeemed us, and he suffered only in his Body: Fathers (...) handled.
they are abused by you wonderfully. Not in their words, but in their meaning.
For they striving against Arians and such other Haeretikes who would have
Christ's Deity to take part in his sufferings for our redemption, ^ee before
(...). 111.113 ^4 etc.
and so consequently would prove it inferior to the Father, " the godly Ancient
Writers do heerevpon say, he suffered and satisfied for us only in his body, in
his flesh, etc: not excluding the proper and immediate sufferinges of his
Spirit, nor any passible part of his Manhood, but only his Godhead against
those Haeretikes: showing thus also, that no other Creatu^e besides him or with
him satisfied any way for us: altogether after the Apostles like phrase in
many places. Let the Authors themselves be viewed, if you think I affirm of
them falsely. Tertullian and Cyrill will give a taste hereof for all the rest.
Tertullians Page 3 ^
words Contr. ^
id est carnem, thas is to say Christ's flesh, are expressly opposed to his
Deity, not to his Soul: so that evidently he means thereby his whole and
entire passible Manhood. If he had meant to exclude any part or faculty of
his Soul from suffering, as he does his Godhead, he had confirmed that Haeresy
against which he striveth, as f before I noted. Page 1^
Also it seems he yields the name of Death to this suffering of Christ's
whole Manhood, in saying Quod vnctum est mortuum ostendit: that Dyed which
received the Annoynting. For I hope his spirit was Anointed with the Holy
Ghost, as well as his Flesh. And he says thus, as indefinitly, so also by way
of oppositio^ to his Deity, as I said: therefore he means the whole Manhood
dyed. Howbeit in what sort this might be, I showed page 113^ 135. 136^
before. My false tra^slating of him which you note, is not worth the noting.
But you do worse in false placing those his last rehearsed words for
advantage: in Tertull. they are used more generally in their own place coming
long before those words, after which you set them. As for that Denique posuit
spiritu^, etc. it shows that Christ's bodily death also (but not only) came by
reason of Gods forsaking and separating from him. For before we saw how
Tertull. expressly attributes Gods Derelectio^ both to his Haec v^^^ animae and
poris.
soul and body on the Cross: though you grudg thereat. Thus (I say) he
excepteth only his Godhead from Dereliction and Suffering etc. Cyrill also even
in that book which you cite for you, shows that he excludes but Christ's
Deity, though he mention only his suffering in Flesh: Ad Reg lib. 1.
Carne passum dicit, docens patiendi ineffabilem naturam a passionibus alienam.
Deus igitur Christus Divine quidem impassibilis, passibilis secundum carnem. He
excludes only the Deity from suffering, when he says, he suffered in his
Flesh. In a word, so do all the rest, as Page 1^
before is partly noted. Against Nestorius Page 33^
they affirm the union of Christ's Natures, with preserving the properties of
each. They therefore hold not his only bodily sufferings. Is this then your
great boast of all the Fathers and Counsels? Nay, are they well used at your
hands, to be thus drawn clean from their purpose to an opinion which they
never thought of? Is this good dealing toward Gods people, to tell them that
the Fathers generally teach the only bodily sufferings of Christ, and deny our
Assertion of his Souls peculiar suffering, ^^efore 47.48.66.71.88.112.
which * they justify and confirm indeed? Yea, this (...) the profit that
comes by ordinary slanting with Fathers, which use many do frequent in these
days. Think they, if the scriptures alone suffice not for all things in
Religion, that the Fathers will suffice? Or if the Fathers make a sense upon
some text, that therefore this must be the right meaning always? Or if the
Scriptures may be wrested by subtle heads, that yet the Fathers cannot? Or
that Gods people may sooner see and find when the Fathers are abused, then
when the Scriptures are? It is great pity that men are, yea will be so deceaved
with vain shows. Let us in Gods name content our selves (in handling matters
of Religion) only with Gods al sufficient word: unless where the importunity
of an Adversary forces us. Otherwise let us spare the Authority of men in Gods
matters, to them that make an Idol of it. Finally if in this case we were to
look after any man, surely we have more cause to regard our later faithful
Teachers, rather then those of old. Who being equal with the best of them in
any of the excellent graces of Gods spirit which he uses to bestow on his
servants for the edifying of the Church, yet herein these have advantage of
the former, that they were directly provoked and occasioned to study and sift
out this question against the Papists, which the Ancients were not occasioned
to do.

After, ^ag 341.
a you set your self to prove that in Hell there is material fire. But it
seems you are now almost afraid so to call it: yet b you call it true fire.
^ag. 343.
Which also we utterly deny. All your proofs (such as they are) run to prove
corporal and material fire: yet eternal. Except your Scriptures, which
utterly prove nothing at all: for they show no more any corporal, or
material, or true fire to be now in Hell, then a corporal worm, material
brimston, and much wood, and true chains. Which you say is a sleeveles
objection, but neither your self, nor Austin whom you cite against it, does
any where answer it. Yea Austin thinks that incorporall spirits shall be
fastened to corporal fire. But he says not that now they are: which only is
our question or, else nothing. For my part I see no reason to believe that now
there is corporal fire in Hell, whatsoever there shall be hereafter when Bodies
also shall be there united and tormented with the Souls. Again Austin here
does not prove that there shall be such fire: he only shows the manner how it
may be so hereafter, if God will. Now if all your reason be the power of God
only, then as well you may prove that the sky is fallen. For as touching Gods
will herein, you name it indeed, but you show it no where, nor seem to show
it. All the rest say nothing further, nor indeed so far as Austin. Yet you
think it may be called Page ^^
a true created fire. That no Christian ever doubted of, if you mean that it
is a true creature. If you mean simply, that it is true fire, that still we
deny. And me thinks you should not care for corporal fire now in Hell, seeing
you seem to believe no torments for Damned souls save only at the
Resurrection. For thus you reason, Page 25
As the Body has been the instrument of the Souls pleasure (in sin) so it
shall be of her pain. Page 20^
But all provocations and pleasures of sin the soul takes from her body,
all acts of sin she commits by her body. Therefore the justice of God both
temporally and eternally punishes the Soul (only) by the Body. Or Therefore
all the Souls pain for sin both temporally and eternally is by the Body.
This is your own reason: which being true, why should you care for corporal
fire in Hell, before the last judgment?

Your striving to Page 34^
confute my allegations of Fathers, I hope I have refuted sufficiently before.
And then Page 35
Sir Refuter ends as be began with egregious lies. What lies began he with,
and with what does he end? In the beginning our lies have proved tales of truth,
and in the end your words will prove injurious at least. I said, that not some,
or the most, or best, but even all and every one both Churches and Writers in
the world who are Protestants, teach as we do: except only your self, or
happily some after you, since the year 1597. What ly is there in all this? Why
name you not in all ye world one man (of those whom we call Protestants) of your
mind? that it may appear who deserves such rebukes. Nay in this, being the
very point of the matter you are silent: in revilings, outcryes, and
accusations you exceed.

Where I avouch that Treat. ^. page 8^.
only the hoatest and cunningest Papists, Jesuits, Priests, and Friars have
always until this day had this controversy with all Protestants, and all
Protestants against them: and namely Bellarmin, Campian, English Rhemists, etc.
To all this scanalous and suspicious argument you reply not a syllable. What
shall we think of such doctrine, which in this learned age has none but such
defenders. And yet among the Papists I noted 2, Cusanus and Ferus as liking of
the Protestants doctrine herein, which also they do in some other matters. Now
these 2. and only these (though more there are) c you cite at large: (...).
140.141
whose words indeed (especially the Friars) seem excessive. But our own
most worthy and learned Teachers d M. Fulke, ^rea. 1. p. 88
M. Deering, M. Whitakers which against you I alleged, you vouchsafe not a
look toward them. Nor to M. Nowels Catechism, nor to the Synod authorizing
it, before page 42.
nor to the Archb: great * approbation thereof: Not to our Common Bibles note
authorized publikly to be read thorough out England. Only against my alleging
of our Homilyes e you take exception: Page 355.
but I trust I have before fully and clearly defended them to be for us, and
against you. Neither does any such matter appear in them as f you avouch.
Page 136.
Thus then I end our 1. Question: being sorry that I have been so long. But I
trust the friendly Reader will pardon me, considering how I have been occasioned
thereunto.

A brief Collection containing the whole effect of our Doctrine before
delivered: brought into 4. Assertions.
See page 8. 9. 75. 82.

page 8. 48 52. 61. 74.

page 8 13 74 86.

page 13. 14. 16. 43. 66. 75. 87. 134. 135.

That Christ after his death on the Cross went not down into Hell in his
Soul.
THe 2. part of our Controversy is this, That Christ after his death on the
Cross went not down into Hell in his Soul. Where note first, Notes
that we understand Hell properly and locally (as our common speech in English
does usually take it) for the very place of the Damned after this life. Now
against them that believe Christ's Soul did go down locally into Hell, thus I
reason. Reasons against Ch^^ Descendi^^ locally is Hell.
First, If there be a good and sound general reason in Christian faith that
Christ's Soul leaving his Body ascended up to Heaven and there remained till
his Resurrection, and if there be no special reason of authority to the
contrary that his Soul now descended downward: then surely every good Christian
ought to believe that his Soul ascended to Heaven, and descended not locally
into Hell. Two ma^^ points to noted.
But both those former points are most true: First, There is a good sound
general reason in Christian faith that Christ's Soul after death Ascended
Namely the Analogy of faith requires that the Head should be there where the
members were: and where they remain till their Resurrection, that there he
tarry till his Resurrection. It seems also these texts will prove it Ioh. 1^
Where J am, there also shall my servant be. cap. 17
I will that where I am, there they also shall be with me. I see not but that
he promises here his servants even a local acco^panying of him after this
life, and that also generally whither soever he went. Moreover this the Fathers
Only A^ wavereth where af^^^ming, for where d^^ting.
all with one voice (I may truly affirm) do teach and believe: even that
Christ after death went no whither, but where his faithful and holy servants
were: yea and there remained till his Resurrection. To which consent of men
somewhere you ascribe exceeding much, so that Perpe^^vern epis^^ 10.
you plainly avouch the contrary always to be a notorious, if not a pernicious
novelty. To which purpose also other Scriptures do make very much: as where
Christ, being in the pains of death and presently about to end his life, says
Father into thy hands I commend my Soul. This being spoken at such a time, in
the depth of such woeful sorrows, and by such a person, in all good reason
Gods hands whereinto he commends his Soul (according to our common use of
speech) must be Gods joyful peace, and Heavenly glory. which is also suitable
to the scripture phrase, as " already I have showed: ^reat. 1. ^^g. 151. ^^g.
361.
neither show * you any thing against this. For what if Gods hands on other
occasions do signify his Power, and general protection only. Does it follow
that therefore Holy men (oppressed with pains, and now about to Die) when they
say, Father into thy hands I commend my Soul, they mean not the joys of
Heaven? You ask was David dying when he spoke those words? He might be in
deadly sorrows or dangers, for any thing you know to the contrary. But suppose
he were not the^ in danger to die. Yet the Prophets general sentence may fitly
be applied to this more special case of Christ: as all men know. Howsoever
then David were when he spoke thus, yet Christ (now dying, and ready to come
out of most woeful pains) does surely mean when he said so, (as other holy
men do in like case) namely, to go to Heav^n. To like purpose serves that
comfort, given to the Thief and common to himself: This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. As touching Austius diverse opinion and yours, ^our p. 360
^ag 29.
see "before. Be you reconciled unto him, and then let him speak for you.
Lastly, where the eternal and general Ordinance of God is showed to be such,
^^^k. 16.26.
that * none can go out of Heaven down to Hell, nor come from Hell up to
Heaven. The text excepteth here not one. This therefore I doubt not is in
truth a clear point (against which we shall find not a word in scripture)
that Christ's Soul after death was there where the holy Patriarchs deceased
were, and there remained till his Resurrection. So that how you will do to
maintain that Christ c went indeed unto them, (...). 220.361.
but presently left them that he might go to Hell, I know not. In this I doubt
you walk f without your guide. ^^g. 91.
But to proceed, I add that which is a clear and certain: (...). 189.193
(...). 219.
yea that which g your self rightly believes and professes with us, though
against the opinion of the Fathers, That the Souls of the holy Patriarchs dead
before Christ were not beneath, but above; not in Limbo, but with God in peace,
joy, and blissee even in Paradise, (...). 192.203.
that is h Heaven. The which to be a doctrine most true (against the Popish
error herein) I have briefly i heerto fore, ^^eat. 1. ^^g. 131.
yet (I hope) sufficiently proved. Therefore hence I conclude, that Christ's
Soul after his death Ascended indeed, and descended not downward beneath us
here. 2. Only except there Austin himself avoucheth well and faithfully: that
is, supposing there is no express nor plain Scripture for Christ's Descending,
then (says he) Epist. ^ Miror si quam ad ros cum d^ diss^ asser^ auderet.
it were marvailous bouldnes that any should dare say he went down to Hell. And
again Sermon. ^temp. 14
Nemo de Christo credat nisi quod de se credi voluit Christus. No man ought to
believe any thing concerning Christ, but what himself (in his word) would have
us to believe. Now I assume this, and by Gods help shall make it manefest, No
Scrip^^ at al yt Ch^^^ Soul as^^ death d^ soended.
That there is in all the Scripture no one place whereby it may be proved by
any show of reason that Christ's Soul after this life went locally downward from
hence, or diversely from the Souls of all good men deceased besides. Yea
whatsoever is pretended from the Scripture expressly to prove that he did
Descend, is but very little, and exceeding weak. Script. pr^ded.
Only there are 2. or 3. places sensibly wrested and drawn to this purpose.
Your pa^^ 212.
That, where Christ is said to have ^ph. 4.
come down into the lowest parts of the earth. Treat. ^^^ page 14^
But I have largely and plainly showed that this place speaks not a whit
neither of Hell, nor of Christ's Soul descending locally; neither before his
death, nor after. It notes only Christ's sensible and apparent Humiliation to
the last and lowest point, that is to the Grave. According to the Hebrew
phrase, which the Apostles frequented in their Greek writings very much. So
that no reason appears why or how this place may show that his Soul after
death went downward. The rather seeing you, will have Christ's going down Page
41
to Hell the first, and that a notable part of his exaltation and triumph. But
this was manefestly (as I said) his lowest abasement. Therefore this touches
not his going down to Hell. Where Page 2^
you expound the text, and say, He descended to the lowest and ascended to the
highest that he might fill all places with the presence of his Manhood: you
speak both In respe^^ vbiquita^^
inconveniently, and far from the Apostles meaning. Who signifies only
Christ's filling Ephe. 1. and ^.19.
all his Church with the gifts of his Spirit, which by his Ascending he Ioh.
16.7^ Luck. 24.4^
promised to do, and Act. 2.33.
so did indeed. Here is nothing about his filling all (places) with the
presence of his manhood. Much less is there expressly in the text that which k
you add to it (with his presence) very deceitfully in a differing letter like
the text and together with the text. ^^g. 212.
What censure this deserves the godly do know. Wherefore yet we must be so
scrupulous still, as to stick at the phrase of Christ's Descending in Soul: for
as yet we see no word in all the whole equivalent thereunto. If you will urge
that, where Christ is said to have a ben 3. days and 3. nights in the heart
of the earth, ^at. 12.40.
there is nothing else then as before, ^ag. 21^.
even his Burial. Your exception that b Christ's sepulcher was in the higher
parts of the earth frustrateth not the manner of the Hebrew phrase, after which
the Scripture speaks both here, and in the last before: as I c have declared
plainly in my 1. Treatise. It seems, (...). 144.146
your not considering (or not caring for) the use and manner of the Hebrew tongue
causes your mistaking as in these places, so likewise in all, or most of the
rest: yea indeed it causes your error in this maine question, as after it
will more appear ^ag. 213.
which does you not a pinnes worth of good: where it is asked e who shall
descend into the deep? ^om. 10.7.
that is, to bring Christ again from the dead. If the deep here did signify
Hell, (which yet certainly it does not) but suppose it does: How will that
follow (which you presume) that Christ dying descended into the deep. The text
says no such thing. It says he was with the dead, and that from thence he
came: and therefore by this I rather conclude, it was thither only that he
descended. Which also is signified elsewhere in the same words, ^ph. 1.20.
f from the dead. Thus I say the dead here imports the general condition
and state of all the Dead, as it is opposed to the state of the Living, and so
it shows Christ's lowest and last Humiliation, as the other places did
before: saving that before his Grave particularly is intended, here the state
of death may be applied to his whole humane Person, and to both parts thereof
dissolved. Yea it is not unlikely that the former word g the deep is used also
here by the Apostle to signify (not Hell, Abyssus.
but) even this condition and state of death which is as a Gulf bottomless,
never satisfied, and vnrecoverable. Like as Sheol in Hebrew does likewise
properly signify: as after we shall further declare. This meaning the Syriak
Translator (an ancient writer, of no small credit) seems to have, since he
turns it Abyssum Sepulchri, the deep of the Grave. And then the deep
signifying here the state and condition of Death, the Apostle seems to
express his meaning to that effect more clearly in these next words, this is
to bring Christ again from the dead: that is, to frustrate Christ's Death,
whereunto he descended for our sakes. We may consider also that this word here
the deep many times is referred to the vast Gulfes and deep pits of the
earth, and likewise to the unknown, deep, and furthest parts of the sea. Now
the Apostle may seem to use this large signifying word of purpose to express
the infinite searching about of an incredulous and comfortles mind which
seeks justice before God by the keeping of the Law. Who indeed thereby
gets nothing, but makes void unto it self the Gospel and all Christ's
benefits therein; His Death and Resurrection, his Ascension, etc. The Apostle
then may insinuat in this word all these senses and significations thereof:
namely I say, (with other) even such a seeking to the deepest and farthest
parts of the Sea, to learn somewhere (if it might be) among all the Creatures
of God how to fulfill and keep the Law. For so Moses (whom here he does
cite) Deu. 30 13.
expreslie signifies: then so the Apostle also signifies the very same. For
these 3. things the Apostle delivers here togeathet: 1. That the Law and the
Gospel do greatly differ, and namely in that the Law does not save us, but
the Gospel does. 2. He shows the cause hereof, for that no flesh can keep
the Law, nor ever could: as he confirms by this out of Moses, where men
thinking to live by the Law, are noted to seek and search every where far and
near, by all ways and means, that they might satisfy their own hearts, and
find how to keep it: which proves that their own hearts bear witness that
they keep it not, neither can keep it. 3. He shows that thus by seeking to
live by the Law, they loose the life of God coming by Christ's Death and
Resurrection in the Gospel.
Thus the Apostle rightly keeps him self to the whole matter and meaning of
Moses, whose words (though shortened) he cites and discourses upon. But then
it is not possible that the deep here should have any reference at all to
Hell. For what color is there to make a man pensive about keeping the Law to
ask, who shall go down for him among the Devils and damned spirtis to bring
it thence unto him? or to imagine that the keeping of the Law might be rather
there, then in his own heart? or that any means might be got from thence to
help men, that they might keep it? There is no likelilyhood for this out of
doubt. Therefore also the deep here signifies not Hell any way: seeing the
Apostle doubtless retayneth Moses sense, as is aforesaid. Lastly I may not omit
to show how you deal here again with the text. You allege it a He descended
into the deep, ^ag. 220.
all with special letters differing from the rest of purpose, to show that
Christ's descent into Hell (for so you take the deep) is found written in the
very Scripture. But He is cu^ningly added to the text: neither are these words
meant of Him, but of a Pharisaical Meritmo^ger, searching everywhere for
righteousness by works, ^ag. 153.
b as is before declared. The like practice c you use again in the Psalm:
^ag. 147. ^sa. 139.8.
where the d text has only veatsignah Sheol, If J lodge, or, if J spread my
couch in Sheol, thou art there. There is no word to express beneath, which you
put into the text of your own head. The same also I noted in e you before. ^ag.
152. ^^fore pa. 66
Somewhere you charge me (but f vainly) with falsifying of Ierom. If I had by
oversight don so, yet that were not like this falsifying: which is not of men,
but of Gods own word; not by oversight, but of purpose for advantage.

These are all the Scriptures that can be brought, to make any show of
Christ's Soul descending locally after his death. Which being abused to this
purpose so palpably, as before we have seen, I must in earnest say, I marvel
that any will believe it as an article of faith, that Christ's Soul descended:
Specially considering our next reason which follows.

Our 2. and most principal Reason is this: ^ason. 2
If there be not one place of Scripture to prove that Christ's Soul was in
Hell, then you ought to deny that opinion. But you have not indeed any one
place that proves it. Therefore it ought to be denied.

Against this Argument you " say you have one place, Page 167.
Act 2: 27. Even only one, where you think it is plain that Christ says, He
rejoices because God would not leave his soul in Hell. ^r one only ^e need
^^e passing ^re, and be^^^ all ex^^^ion: as this ^^t.
For so you must have it here translated (in Hell) even because you will. But
if men with reason resist your will, and prove unto you that it ought not to
be taken here for Hell, then I pray take it patiently, and use not such
raging and despitefull terms as against me you do: as if I were not worthy to
speak of those matters that you speak of, unless I would be bound to say
your words. How be it I beseech you give us leave. This sentence taken out of
David's Psalm ^^
Psalms and alleged in the Acts, signifies the very Page ^^
same thing in both places. The Hebrew word controversed is Sheol, the Greek
Hades. Now must the word Sheol and Hades needs signify Hell, being applied to
souls departed hence? So indeed you Pa. 1 ^02.
avouch more confidently then truly: and heerevpon it seems you Pa. 1^
pawn the trial of this Question, saying; Till we bring you some one good
proof out of the Scriptures that the Souls of the righteous before Christ's
coming were in Sheol or Hades, you will rest in your opinion, that by this
only plain place Christ's Soul was in Hell. We hope then, when this proof
(which you asko for against your opinion) is showed, you will correct your
opinion in this point. Let it therefore be considered, I pray, which the
Psalmist also has elsewhere of this matter. Sheol and attribut^^ the Soul^ just
after
Let us interpret the Psalms by the Psalms. First this we observe in them,
how it is written Psa. ^^
What man lives and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of Sheol? Here now the Soul attributed to every man living, must be
properly taken as well as in the former place, where you take it for Christ's
very Soul. For, Page 1^
This rule must be held Much in one a^^ same W^ in one a^^ same man and man
speech.
thoughout the Scriptures, that we divert not from the native and proper
significations of the words, but when the letter impugneth the grounds of
Christian faith and charity. Otherwise we shall leave nothing sound and sure
in Gods word, if we may avoid all things by figures that please not our
humors. So long then as the proper sense of the Scriptures may stand with the
Analogy of faith and direction of charity, we offer violence to the word of
God if we wrest it to a figurative understanding. Now then it is apparent that
here the souls of all me^ living, both good and bad (after death) are
appointed to Sheol. For there is none whosoever that can possibly escape it,
says ye text. Yet many good men there are and then were, who could and did
escape Hell. Therefore in the Script. Sheol and hades applied to departed
souls, is not always Hell, but the Condition or place, as well where the just
men's souls are after death, as that where the damned are. Wherefore we hope
that you will keep your word, that is, to acknowledge Sheol and Hades may be
applied to the Souls of just and blessed men deceased. And withal that
Christ's Soul after his death (having Sheol applied to it by the Psalmist, who
applies the very same also to all just men's Souls in the world when they die)
ought not therefore in any wise to be thought to have been in Hell: even because
he was the iustest and holiest man that ever was. Unless some other scripture
(more plain then this) do affirm it. Which because there is utterly none, I
say not one, that does lean any thing toward such a sense; therefore you
ought not stiffly to maintain that Christ's Soul was locally in Hell, as
hitherto you have done. But Austin a collecteth this opinion from this place in
the Acts. ^^g. 253.
Oh, then this point of faith is grounded on Austin: it is his collection (not
the text it self without him) that serves your turn. Certainly so it is. But
this the^ agrees not to your worthy protestations noted b before: ^ag 28. 29.
^^r page 91 ^
this becomes not such good words. I beseech you, be not you of them qui
virtute^ verba puta^t. Then touching Austins authority, ^^fore page ^
c you know how you leave him, when you think good: and regard not his d scant
probable proofs, and coniecturall inclinations. Finally, ^^r pa. 169 ^
that here Austin has no better then scant probable proofs and mere
conjectures, we shall plainly declare (God willing) after we have showed a
general consent and correspondence of all Authors for our sense of Sheol and
Hades: which I hope presently you shall see.

But first you must note that we go not about to prove Sheol and Hades to be
Heaven. We never thought it, neither need we so to think. The more is your
injury, when you have nothing to reprove, yet with skoffes, and floutes, and
bitter reproaches to disgrace me as you do, and that even for this your own
mere conceit. Neither yet can your e witty reason prove, ^^g. 146.
that Limbus hereby can not be avoided. Consider a word of like use in Latin:
Defuncti signifying the Dead, may be applied generally to the Souls of men
deceased. Yet notwithstanding this, I hope Limbus may be easily avoided. Also I
pray, are Defuncti none other but the Damned only in Hell? The blessed in
Heaven may be likewise called Defuncti, I suppose. Howbeit not in respect of
their being in Heaven: Note.
but only in respect that they have done with this life, and are gone hence.
The word is properly general: signifying by it self neither the Blessed nor
the Damned, neither to be in Hell nor in Heaven. Yet restrained by
Circumstances (such as they may be) it signifies either. Certainly so does
hades, and also Sheol* All these (the Latin, the Greek, The prope^^^ sense of
Sh^^ and Hades
and the Hebrew) words are indifferent and common in them selves; signifying
in deed no positive thing properly, but a mere privation of this life, and of
a former visible being here sometime. And so it is, that the Psalm says,
Even the just men's Souls, and all, must come to Hades and Sheol. Moreover,
thus in effect they are all one with Thanatos, Death: but that Thanatos
belongs properly to Bodies. Hades and Sheol sometimes to Bodies, sometime to
Souls of Men indifferently. Yea sometime these 2. are applied (though more
rarely) to other things also which are in this visible world, namely when they
com to Destruction, and No being any more: as anon we shall better understand.

Now let us proceed, and show further even by the Scriptures first, that Sheol
and Hades are (as I say) more then once used for the general condition of
death wherein even just men's souls are held, or the mansion of souls departed
as well good as bad. Then afterward the common consent of others will avail the
more.

That Psalm. 4^
Psalm which entreats wholly of Death, of the impossibility to escape it, of
the power which it has over the wicked whose joy and pomp is only in this
world, in that it cutteth of all their hopes, it ends their pleasure, and
marreth all their bewty. I say in this Psalm, where all express circumstances
do show that the Prophet speaks of this death, not of Hell, yet David here
says: verse. 1^
notwithstanding God shall deliver my soul from the power of Sheol (that is
death, or the state of death) when he shall reoeave me most mightily. So
Tremelius turns it, noting here David's hope of the Resurrection, which I
think he has well understood in this place. Otherwise David might here
comfort himself in this, that he knew God would save him alive from this
common death, not always as you friuolously object, but oftentimes: yea
always till he should enjoy the Kingdom, which indeed God did for him when he
was near death not seldom, and when his enemies and the wicked were caught
therewith. Again, that Psalm. 8^
Psalm shows it also where it is thus written, My Soul is filled with
sorrows, and my life draws near to Sheol. By his life he means his soul
the proper cause and fountain of life in him, which also in the first part of
the sentence he expressly named. As the manner of phrase in the Psalms is; in
the 2. part of the sentence commonly to speak of the same things that are
uttered in the former, but varying the terms. That life here should signify
the body distinctly from the soul, there is no such likelihood nor reason.
Indeed I deny not but life may signify here the whole person of man, As in
these ^esaide Psalm. ^, 48. and 49, ^ and 10, 16. al ^116, 8. and in ^^y many
^aces of scrip^^e besides.
and so may c nephesh the soul also very well: and then Sheol and Hades
signify not peculiarly and distinctly the Grave which only is for the carcass,
but the condition of the Whole man after he has no being in this world. In
which regard, chose what sense you will, either that nephesh and chai shall in
all these places of the Psalms before handled signify strictly the soul, as
very fitly it may, or the whole person of man consisting both of a soul and of
a living body, contrary to which estate Sheol and Hades is very often taken, g
That is, if it ^re not strictly ^^d peculiarly ^^e habitation ^s^y Souls, yet
^^s the condi^ur of ye whole ^son, that is, ^^^h of Soul and ^^dy separa^^ by
Death. ^ob. 30.23.
and d peradventure so it is understood here in these places. In which sense
Sheol and Hades are far from signifying hell, yea or heaven either, yea or only
and merely the Grave: but it signifies destruction from out of this world,
and no-being here any more as before time to the whole person, that is, both to
the Soul and to the Body. And thus Sheol and Hades Job resembles to a house
or Habitation, where he names it Beth m^gned lecol chai: the habitation (after
this world) appointed for every person, or (if you will) for all living things.
The same also Job wishes and desires of God to himself, that God would hide
him " Bisheol in this world of the deceased, ^ob. 14.13.
and would give him term till his wrath was overpast. In another place he
comfort himself thinking quickly to enjoy it, saying, Jf I have any hope,
Sheol or Hades, ^ob. 17.13.
the world of the deceased shall be my habitation. He joins thereunto also
particularly the grave: but as touching Sheol seeng Job speaks of it as his
continual habitation till the worlds end, it cannot be meant only of the
Grave for his body, which endured but a very short time; neither had his flesh
any being at all after it was turned to very earth and worms. He speaks
here therefore also of his souls continuing habitatio^, or mansion in another
world. Genesis 37.35 because they ^^ch die, their ^^ons do fall ^^vne, according to
ye Latin ^^tase, cadere, ^^idere, occu^^^, to Die.
And in greatest reason this is that which Iaacob means, when he says, " He
will go down mourning to his son i^ Sheol. That is, He will mourn till he
die: for this he means by * going down here speaking of death. And then he
hops to enjoy the society of his dear son in soul. For his body he
thought was devoured and digested in the bellies of wild beasts, therefore he
would go to the soul of his son in Sheol. Or else understanding here the
dissolution and passage of his Whole person, he may mean partly his going
down to the grave as touching his body, and yet also the enjoying of the
society of his dear son in Sheol, which surely (as J said) could not be in
body but in soul. Thus Sheol here has respect to the changed estate of
Jacobs whole person dissolved, and not to one part thereof only, his body, but
to his soul also: and it has respect likewise to the estate of his dead
sons soul, where this loving Father hoped again to have society with him
(not any where else) without which he could not be comforted. Albeit in another
place it seems he limiteth Sheol to the grave only: but that we do so
understand by reason of the Circumstances, Genesis 42.
you will bring my Gray Head with sorrow to the Grave. But again to follow our
purpose: Good Hezekiah also looked for Sheol to be his habitation likewise
after this life. I said (says Isay. 38. ^^ 11, 12.
he) I shall go to the gates of Sheol (the Land of the dead:) I shall not see
the Lord in the Land of the living; I shall see Man no more among the
inahbitants of the world: My habitation, or Mansion is translated and removed
from me as a sheapheards tent, etc. This here cannot be the Grave, nor Hell
which he describes. For he thought he should the^ have dyed: and thus his
habitation he thought should have been removed and translated from him: that is,
I take it, his body should be removed from his soul, which was the mansion or
habitation of his soul while he lived, but now he should have another age,
D^r^ (...) age, my co^^nuance, or during, o^ my ma^sio^,
or enduring, or Mansion, and be removed to another place. This can not be
understood of his Carcass, rotting and wasting away to nothing in the grave,
and therefore indureth not as the word signifies: therefore he means it of
his Souls removing and abiding elsewhere. Also he expressly opposes the land of
the living to Sheol: therefore Sheol is the land of the dead, not the grave
only, nor Hell only, Which al^ to be collec^ of that in Prophet to^^ing Christ,
scinditur^ ra viventi^ Isai. 53.8.
but as large and as general to the dead, and as fit to receive both the
parts of men, yea both good and bad men, (but separated, and dissolved) as the
land of the living is to receave both those parts united and knit together.
Again Hezekiah was a godly man, therefore hell was not for him: also though
he should not see the Lord in the land of the living, which was the thing he
desired, yet thereby he seems to insinuate that in the land of the dead he
might see him, whither he was about to go: and that must needs be the place of
blessed Souls, even that which here is noted by the word Sheol. ^^g. 150.
It is a most vain reason that you give, that " sheol here is to be taken for
Hell and so to be translated because death to the wicked is the passage to Hell,
which death Hezekiah was now near unto. It is untrue that Hezekiah was near
unto that death which the wicked die, or that he feared that kind of death, or
that there is no sound difference between the death of the godly and the death
of the wicked, or that by any means according to sound divinity the death of
the godly may be named or taken for Hell. This is so vain that I will not
stand any longer to answer it. Another objection of yours a is as weak, Page
400.
where you say Sheol here must be the Grave, because it is said b afterward,
ver. 18.
Sheol does not confess the, death cannot praise thee etc. Though I grant that
the Grave is not here excluded especially in the words next after, They that
go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth: yet I affirm that Sheol namely
in the former place verse. 10. cannot exclude the mansion of good men's souls
departed hence, and that for the reasons above noted. Neither here does this
circumstance limite it to the Grave only, because it is said Sheol confesses
not thee. For it is evident that He Zekiah means not absolutely that there is
no praising of God in Sheol, but only he understands that which c he so
greatly desired, which was yt ^^inary great ^re of the ^lly gene^y: psalm. 42.
and 84.1.
the outward frequenting of the Temple, the holy Ceremonies and Sacrifices, and
joining to the visible congregation, and publishing of Gods goodness to others.
Which he expresses immediately to be that praising of God that he means and
cannot be in Sheol, by knitting close to the former these words, d The living,
^sa. 38.19.
the living, he shall confess thee, as I do this day: the Father to the
Children shall declare the truth. This is that which he denies of sheol: that
none there do praise God to the example and edifying of others. He denies not
simply nor absolutely that there is none in sheol at all, in any respect, that
praise God. The very same David expresses also very plainly, Psalm. 116.9.
saing, e I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 118.17
and f I shall not dye but live and declare the works of the Lord. Where
unless they meant only this visible praising of God to others edifying,
otherwise these holy men had no cause so greatly to desire to praise God here,
for they knew very well, how that (for their own parts) they should praise him
much better, and more perfitly in the next world.

The Se^^^^gint use (...) in ye fan^^^^^.
To the very same purpose the Septuagint use hades in other places also, besides
in their translating of these aforesaid. For it is truly and well acknowledged
by you, Page 4^
that both these words Sheol and Hades are just all one. Now the Septuagint I
say in other places do show thus much also. Psalm. 9 (...) after the ^^^tuagint.
Jf the Lord had not helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in Hados: in Hebrew
it is in silence. Which is not meant of hell for there is weeping, and wayling,
and gnashing of teeth: but of the state of death. Nor yet of the Grave, only,
because here it is named to be the Habitation of the Prophets soul, whither
it was almost come when he was like to have dyed. Again, Psalm. 7^
My soul was filled with sorrows, and my life drew near to hades. How my
soul and my lift here, are taken for the self same, I have showed before. As
also in that of Job, Job. 3^
his life (or soul) is in hades, in the world of the Dead.

Again, it suffiseth for our purpose, that Hades and Sheol are often used even
indifferently for Sheoll (...) Hades a^^ ^sed often (...) only Dea^^ effect.
Thana^^^mors.
Death and as being in effect the same, or for the state and Condition of
Death, or the Power of Death. Which also sometime we may likewise conceave of
the Latin Inferi: which is by the Translatours and other writers used for Sheol
and Hades, though (I deny not) very daungerously and corruptly in deed. First,
for Pro. 2^
misheol, the Greek has ek thanatou from death, reckoning Death and Sheol to
be all one. So in Ecclesiastes Eccle.
Sheol and ve^s
Hammethim the dead are in effect all one. And the very same does Esai call
Isa. 3^
Shagnare Sheol, the gates of sheol, which the Psa. 9.^.107.18.
Psalms and Job. 3^
Job do call Shagnare maueth, the gates of Death. In the P^o. 3^ and 27^
Proverbes he means Death, not Hell nor the Grave strictly taken; where, by
an excellency the greedines of it is noted for being Never satisfied. For
Death generally cra^eth more then either Hell or the Grave strictly taken, do.
So likewise Abakuk coupleth them together as being in effect alone, Aba^
Like sheoll and Death it will not be satisfied. Thus also it will appear that
that which Psalm. ^
David reioyseth for, the very same in effect Psalm. ^
Christ here reioyseth for. Only with this difference, David reioyseth that
God had delivered his soul from death the^, when he was likely to have dyed:
Christ reioyseth because God would deliver his soul from the Condition of
Death (sheol) after he was in it, and speedily even before his flesh should
corrupt. This might be evide^tly showed in infinite places mo, but that it is
utterly needles. In this sense it is that the Reprobates and the Elect after
death are said to be together. ^^n. 28.19
a To morrow thou and thy sons shall be with us, says the supposed Samuel to
Saul. Not that there is any positive thing common to the Elect and Reprobates
after death (which b you observe well: ^^g. 396. (...) Simp^^li. ^^qaest. 3.
^^g. 209.
) but only that they be alike dead, and alike remain in death. Yet I say, they
are not like any further. This c Aust. very well shows whom you d bring:
says he, mortuus mortem vivo proenuntiabat: Fathers (...) it me our (...) of
Hadea
that is, being dead he foreshewed death to him that yet lived. So that it was
the same condition of death both to Saul and Samuel, but not the same fruition
of happiness. Thus the old Latin Translatour uses Infernum, as commonly for
Hades, so sometimes for e Thanatos death, ^ct. 2.24. ^ Cor. 15.55 ^ Act. 2.24.
^piph. in ^^nacephal: (...) Anchor. ^ustin. In ^^yph.
and sometimes f Mors death for Hades. Epiphanius reads the g Text
indifferently h Thanatou or i Hadou, as reckoning the^ in effect all one.
Justin Martyr long before, says, k Christ a little before his death noted the
folly of those men ton nomizonton me einai auton Christon all hegonmenon
thanatosein auton, kai hos koinon anthropon en hadou menein: that thought him
not to be Christ, but that he should die and remain in Hades as a common man.
He means not here as a wicked man in Hell, but as any common man (whether
good or bad) dying abides in Death, or in the Dominion of Death, or in the
world of the Dead. Irenaeus says, l Herein Christ (legem mortuorum servavit)
did but as others do that Die, ^nae. lib. 5. (...). vlt.
and conversed 3. days vbi erant Mortui (sancti) where the dead (Saints)
were. And this he calls Locum invisibilem the unseen World. What means
this but Hades, ^es an invi^^ place of ye ^ed Souls.
as we take it? Yea a little before he expressly calls it Paradise.
Nevertheles I grant that he thought this unseen world was indeed beneath in
the earth: wherein his proofs do vnterly fail him, as your self do fully
grant, and profess in that point as well as we. Again m he further shows:
that in the n Scripture he takes Hades to be all one with Death, ^ib.
5.13.3.38. ^ Cor. 15.55
or the Dominion of Death, where he reads the Text thus, Absorpta est mors in
victoria, vbi est mors aculeus tuus? vbi est o mors victoria tua? ^ Greek.
^^des.
Death is swallowed up in victory, Death where is thy sting? Death where is
thy victory? And he adds, Haec autem just dicentur tunc, etc. These things
shall truly be spoken then, when this mortal and corruptible flesh, (about
which Death is, and which is holden down by a certain Dominion of Death)
arising up into life shall put on incorruption and immortality. Then verily
shall death be overcome, when the flesh which is holden by it, shall come
forth out of the Dominion thereof. Thus he takes here Thanatos and Hades for
one and the same thing in effect, that is for Death, and the power of death,
and nothing else. Tertulian does likewise: for Terrul^ Anima. (...)
speaking of Inferi, which he takes for the same that Hades is, he notes it
as the place Quo vniversa Humanitas trahitur, whither all mankind must go. And
therefore of Christ's going thither he says, Cap. 5^
Quia and homo, mortuus secundum Scripturas and sepultus secundum easdem, hic
quoque legi satisfecit forma humanae mortis apud inferos functus: Because also
he was a man (therefore) he dyed according to the Scriptures and was buried
according to the same, also here he satisfied the common law (of nature) by
following the form of men's Dying (and going) to the world of the Dead,
Tertullian is for us yet further. He takes Hades in the 1 Cor. ^
New Testament merely for Death, or the Dominion of Death, even as Irenaeus
before did. Thus he reads the Text and that often times, De R^carn c. 4^ 54.
Vbi est mors aculeus tuus? Vbi est Hade^
mors contentio tua? Aculeus autem mortis delinquentia: virtus autem
delinquentiae Lex. O Death where is thy sting? O Death where is thy force? The
sting of Death is sin: the force of sin is the Law. And again, Adver^cion.
5.
Scriptum est apud Hose.
Creatorem, Vbi est Sheol (...) Hades.
mors victoria, vel contentio tua? Vbi est mors aculeus tuus? Verbum autem hoc
Creatoris est apud Prophetam. It is written by the Creator, Death where is thy
victory, or thy force, or strife? Death where is thy sting? This is the word
of the Lord God by the Prophet Ozee. Still he makes Hades and Sheol nothing
else but Death in these places. And says he, Deo gratias dicit ( 1 Cor. ^
Apostolus) quod nobis victoriam vtique de morte prestitit. The Apostle in the
New Testament applying words of the Prophet to the Resurrection, gives thanks
to God because he causes us to get a victory indeed of Death. So still he
makes Hades to be Death and not Hell. Which yet is further most clearly to be
seen: De Ido^ cap. 13 (...) See also (...) before p^^
Lazarus apud inferos in sinu Abrahae refrigerium consecutus, etc. Lazarus in
the world of the Dead inioyeth comfort in Abraham's bosom, contrariwise the Rich
man is in the torments of fire, both of them (there) receaving their diverse
rewards. How clear is this, that he makes Hades and Inferos even in a Luke
also, ^^^e 16.23
to be nothing but the common state and world of the Dead. Whereupon the
learned Junius notes thus, Observandum autem quod ait Apud Jnferos etiam de
Lazaro. Nam inferos Latini Patres (vt Graeci Haden) pro omni loco aut statu
mortuorum dixerunt promiscue. Atque in hunc sensum Lazarus and Dives apud
inferos collocantur. (...) before ^^^g 162. ^^^m de ^it. (...) anima, (...). 55.
Quomodo b Irenaeus, and c Chrysostomus ex verbis Luc. 16.23. locuti sunt, and
Tertullianus locis quamplurimis. This therefore it is that Tertullian says in
another place, d Constituimus omnem animam apud inferos sequestrari in diem
iudicij: We determine that every man's Soul is kept apart in the world of the
dead til the day of judgment. And, Are all souls the^ in the power of the
kingdom of Death, penes inferos? Will you nill you, there you shall find
punishments and comfortes, as in Lazarus and the Rich man. For why should you
not think that the Soul may be both punished and comforted in inferis, in the
World of the dead? Neither does he c Montanize in this (as f you object) but
consents with Irenaeus before and with others after him as shall appear,
(...) Innius (...) on this chap. 188.
who were no Montanists. Notwithstanding it is true, that somewhere he takes
inferos, pro locali determinatione (as he speaks) for the peculiar and
determinat place of the wicked deceased, that is, Hell strictly and properly.
(...). 4.
Thus he does in that g against Marcion, with you cite page 201. Also in that h
objection of certain Haeretikes whom he confuteth, (...) anima 55.
not the true Christians, as i: you k misconceave. They argued thus (as you do)
in hoc Christus Jnfiros adiit, ne nos adiremus. 188. (...) title of ^ooke in
^^^elius and ^^^s editio^.
Christ therefore went to Hell, to the end that we might never come there. He
answers them that it is false that Christ went to Jnferos in that sense,
that is to Hell: for then what difference is there between the wicked Heathens
and the godly Christians, if one and the same prison after death were for them
both. Taking it for a thing generally granted in the church, that Christ being
dead went only thither where the godly Dead were, and therefore that it were a
wicked and Haereticall thing to think he went where the Damned were, that is
into Hell. And so he quite overthrows your opinion together with the reason
thereof, as an opinion, which if any held, they were ill thought of in those
days. (...) 99. De ^^^es. ad lit. (...). 33.
Thus also is Augustine well l understood, where he denies that the Patriarchs
were apud inferos, in Hell, namely the place of the Damned, because they were
in Abraha^s bosom. Which yet Epist. 5^ De civi. ^ 20.15.
elsewhere he grants unto, that they might be apud inferos in the world of
the Dead, and namely where the Godly dead should be. So that thus if you had
but distinguished these and other Fathers like words as you ought to have done,
there needed no such folly of Contradiction to be imputed unto them, as Page
18^ 200. 204
you do lay to their charge in this point, altogether vndeservedly. Which
being well observed you shall see that all the Fathers (as Mr Iunius says)
both Greek and Latin, do take Hades and inferos Promis^^
indifferently for the state of the Dead, as well pertaining to yt Souls of the
Godly, as to the Damned likewise. Athanasius also saying Athanas. incar. Ch^^^
vbi tenebatur anima humana in morte, ibi exhibuit humanam suam animam: Where
Humane Souls were held by Death, there he brought his humane Soul, Means
nothing else but that his humane Soul came under the same condition of death,
as other men's Souls did: not that he went to the place of the Damned. Neiter
must he be understood after Page 179 186. 214.
your partial translation, but after his own language the Greek. When you say
ex Orco, out of Hell, him self says exhadou, out of the power of Death. So
that De salu^^ vent. Ch^^^
he says not a word that Christ was in Hell, but only that his Soul was in
Hades, in the Dominion of Death, as Ad no^^^ similitud^
other good men's Souls were also: whence he by his victorious return
conquering Death De salut advent. C^^^st^.
brought us immortality, and wrought resurrection for us. Here Hades being
ennemy and opposite to the Immortality and Resurrection of men's persons, cannot
by any means be Hell: For Hell agrees with Immortality and Resurrection, and
in Hell shall be immortality and resurrection as well as in Heaven. But it is
the common Death and dissolution of our persons, which is contrary to the
immortality and resurrection of them. For as Resurrection is nothing else but a
restoring and reuniting of the Soul to the Body, so the contrary is nothing
else but merely the dissolution and separation of the Soul from the Body:
which is Death, and not Hell. Now in this death (says Athanasius) Christ was
held till he spoiled and conquered it; thereby giving us resurrection and
immortality. This can not be Hell out of question. Hilarious verily has this
meaning also, saying; Hilar. ^ Psalm. 13^
This is the Law of humane necessity, that their bodies go down to the Grave,
their Souls to the world of the Dead, ad inferos. Which descent the Lord did
not refuse, that he might prove him self in every point to be a true man. His
going to Hell proves him not to be a true man: but his Soul to com under the
power of Death, as well as his body to com to the Grave, (...) koino^ ^^^opos,
^^^em mor^^^ serva^^
that right well proves him in deed to have been a true man, and wholly in
nature like all other men. Also this was indeed the Law of humane necessity,
(after the like phrase as a Justin, ^^^gi satisfa^^^ forma hu^^^ mortis ^^^us.
^ag 157. before. (...) Death and ^^es a^e v^^^or ye same.
b Irenaeus, and c Tertullian also speak:) but not to go to Hell. Now this
Death properly belongs to the Body of Men; d as it is left without life. Also
no less properly it belongs to the whole Person of men, as it is dissolved
and destroyed thereby. Thirdly, by consequence it belongs to both the
dissolved parts: yea even to the immortal Soul (though blessed; not as it is
in blessedness, but) as it remains held from the Body by the force of Death.
And so all these last named are very excellent places to prove (which afterward
I shall further show) that all those articles of the Creed He Dyed, was Buried,
and descended to Hades do indeed signify but one thing in effect, that he was
a true man: seeing thus it befell him as it does all other men by the Law of
our Nature: that is, to Dye. And therefore that it was clean left out in all
ancient Creedes, (where both those other clauses are specified) as being no
diverse point in effect from Dead and Buried. Which Creedes nevertheles are
worthily deemed to be absolute and perfect touching Christ's works of
Redemption which he has wrought for us. Since perhaps, when it came into the
Common Creed, they signified hereby Christ's going to Limbus. Which opinion
indeed men generally inclined unto (though erroneously) for many years: yet
that the Ancients put this Descending to hades, (meaning Limbus, or howsoever)
into the vulgar Creed distinctly from both the other foresaid clauses, I believe
not. The contrary is proved afterward: as anon we shall see. But to proceed
here: ^^rys. Hom. ^ivit and de (...) bol Tom. in 1. Cor. Hom. 40. ^^^asil. in
(...) 48. ^^^mbr. de (...) mort. (...) 10. ^^^rom. in (...) 1^.14. ^^^uffin. in
^^^bol. (...). 413.414
c Chrysostom and d Basil likewise (with the rest of the Greeks) may be noted,
how they yield Hades to the Souls of the godly and just men deceased remaining
in joys. Also Ambrose is to be considered, who right according to all the
rest, says, e Souls departed from their Bodies did go to Hades, that is, to
an invisible place, which in Latin we call Infernum. And Jerome, f Infernus is
a place where the Souls are included, either in rest or pains. And Ruffinus
upon g Descendit ad inferna gives this sense Descendit in Mortem, He submitted
unto Death. All the rest which h you cite (or can cite) have nothing contrary,
but rather consenting heerewith. So that it is certain by all the Fathers
generally, 1. That Hades and Sheol are taken for Death, No^^.
the Common state of Death, or the invisible world of the dead common to the
Souls both of good and bad, though their particular places were far separat and
distinct. 2. That Christ went not into Hell the place of the Damned, as you
hold: but to the Habitation of the blessed deceased (called also by them
Abraham's bosom:) which we know (and you also) was indeed Heaven: according to
that word of Christ, Ioh. 16 16.
I leave the World, and go to the Father.
Which I have proved further before, page 149. 150. I doubt not but they erred
generally (as Page 21
your self also holds) in thinking that this Habitation of the blessed Souls
was beneath in the earth, or that it was not heaven: nevertheles this is the
point wherein we agree, and wherein they erred not, and which I cite them for,
and which is directly against you, that hades (which also is sheol) belonged to
the Blessed souls deceased, as well as to the Damned: and namely that Christ's
going to Hades was to go to be Blessed deceased. Which in Latin also they
called Jnfernu^, but so improperly and so unaptly in respect of the truth, that
even this ill term surely both sprang from error, and began in them their
error, or confirmed and spread farther this error.

Now thus your vain boasting of Page 41
all the Fathers is but a bubble: and that All the Fathers without exception do
touch and teach Christ's local Descent to hell. So that if you be content (as
Page 41
you say) to be tried by all the Fathers Greek and Latin, they quite overthrow
you, notwithstanding your great words. For the truth is, they are all against
you: and with us, in such sort as I said. Only Austin doubtingly and waveringly
differs from all the rest: who somwhere seems to think that Inferi cannot
be attributed to just men's Souls departed. For thus doubtingly he speaks,
Aug de (...) ad liter. ca.
Illud me nondum invenisse confiteor etc. I confess I have not yet found that
Inferi are named where the just men's Souls are at peace. Yes surely the
Ancientes named the places for all the deceased both good and bad Inferos, like
as they named (where both wicked and good do live in the world) Arnob. Psalm 137.
Superos. And Austin (if he had marked it well) might have found even this
(which he says he found not) in the Latin translation of the Scripture: Psa.
88. Lat. edit.
Quis est homo, qui vivet, etc. What man is there that (ever) shall live and
shall not see death? Shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of Inferi, that
is Death. For he can not here understand Inferi to be the Grave, because then
the Soul must signify the dead body: which a you say is more then absurd. ^^g
168.
Wherefore the Soul here being taken properly for the Soul, then Inferi is
found applied to just men's Souls deceased, as well as to the wicked: which
Augustine might have observed. ^pist 57. (...) civit Dei, ^.15.
Yea he him self b elsewhere grants also that the just in peace might be in
inferis after death. And here he denies it but coldly and waveringly, Proinde
vt dixi nondum inveni, and adhuc quaero, nec mihi occurrit inferos alicubi in
bono posuisse Scripturam. Now this is Austins difference herein: let the
Reader judge, Page 363. Before pa. 56. Page 175.
if you say truly that c Austin iudicially and resolutely affirms it. Or is
it not rather (as I call it) his Co^iecturall inclination: yea his only. For d
Fulgentius denies not inferos to the godly deceased, nor that Christ was
locally with them only in inferis. So that in saying, He was where the wicked
are tormented, he means that in respect of the Common place; which in whole
he calls infernum. Thus then we may see that Austins differing herein is to
little purpose. 1. Because it is contrary to all the ancient Fathers before
him, with him, and since him. 2. Because we must not esteem his saying by the
Latin Inferi, but by the original Sheol and Hades, which are more against him:
as before I have showed. 3. Because it is waveringly delivered, and with doubt
in him self; yea contrary to him self, as I have showed. 4. Because he
secketh to maintain it erroneously.
For he gives this reason and end of Christ's going to Hell (the place of the
Damned) that he might deliver some of the damned sinners out of Hell torments,
quos esse solvendos occulta sua iusticia iudicabat. Which most strange conceit
of his your self e do confute rightly. Page 199.
But either grant this end and reason to be true, or else say his maine opinion
is false also, that Christ went thither: feeing he makes that the reason of
this. And why may not Austin err as well in saying that he went to Hell after
death, as in saying that he went thither to loose out of pains such and such?
It seems Austin was carried into this conceit, Vt neque frutra ill^c
decendisse existimetur nulli ^orum prosu^urus qui ibi erant. Epist. 99.
because he could not imagine what f else Christ should do in Hell: and that
he was there in deed he thought, because he ghessed (contrary to all antiquity
besides) that the meaning of inferi and hades could not be applied to the
estate of blessed souls after this life. Which mistaking of his (as also yours
with him) is plentifully convinced (I hope) before. Wherein I desire the
learned to judge. As for Austins opposing against this our sense of Hades,
saying: In graeca lingua origo nominis quo appella^tur inferi, ex eo quod nihil
suave habeant, resonare perhibetur. It shows his mistaking more: yea the very
ground of all his mistaking, as I think. First it appears by this, that
Austin had very little knowledge in the Greek: seeing he thinks that Hades
should originally signify nihil suave, nothing sweet. I conjecture that he
thinks Hades is made of hedys sweet, and a the Privative. Wherein then he
misseth much: for hades in Greek has always iota written under, The nature
Hades.
which shows that in the true original whence hades comes, there is the
letter iota expressed. But in hedys sweet there is none. The truth is, it
comes from (...) to see, and a the privative: as all Graecians (Plato,
Plutarch, etc.) yea the Fathers, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Ambrose, etc.) do show:
and that it signifies, An invisible state after a visible being in this world,
and sometime Darkness, or a place of darkness. Not that the state of all the Dead
generally was thought to be in darkness, but because Death took them out of
this cheerful worlds light, and covered them (as it were) with darkness and
oblivion from the worlds sight and knowledge here. This etymology of hades
was most familiar and frequent with all Grecians, with whom it seems Austin
was not much acquainted: as by this his wide conjecture we may think. Neither
impute this (I pray) as arrogancy to me, for so judging of such a man. I think
all men will so judge of him likewise, and yet derogat nothing from his great
desert in Gods Church. Him self does soberly acknowledge it of him self,
saying, Contr^^ Pe^il. 2^
Ego quidem Graecae linguae perparum assecutus sum, and prope nihil. Truly J
have but little Greck: yea almost none. Neither would he here have said
perhibetur, thus it is reported, touching the Etymology of Hades: if he had
pretended any skill in that tongue. Yea Possidonius in his Life testifies, that
he had no love to the Greek language. Besides many other arguments hereof,
if it were likely that I wronged him in judging thus of him. Wherefore seeing
it was thus, no marvel if Austin easily mistook the proper and right meaning
of hades: etc then much sooner of Inferi, for the reason Page ^ Treat. 105.
before noted. Thus also he might readily imagine heervpon, that Hades and
Inferi (in Scripture specially) were no where applied to blessed Souls. Which
oversight in him is much more pardonable, then it can be in you: who I doubt
not in the languages want no skill, if you would but sincerely judge according
to that you do understand. Yea and in comparison of my self, I unfeignedly
confess, that I suppose I have not seen many books in the learned tounges,
which you are likely to have read and studied. Nevertheles I am well assured
that in the sense of these words Hades and Sheol; you are greatly over hot: and
most of all in this unsavory opinion coming therefrom, that Christ's soul
after death went to Hell. As I hope it has hitherto well appeared. Yet you
will say, Austin speaks marveilous resolutely, pist. 99.
that a None but an infidel will deny that Christ's Soul was in inferis. So
he may well, understanding here Jnferos to express Hades in Greek: for that
is the Scripture in deed. Which to deny were infidelity. But he is no
insidell that denies inferos to be a fit Latin word for Hades in Greck: (...)
some have (...) ^t simply (...) the state (...) cath. pa. ^3. etc. (...) Graeca
^^^ua origo ^^^nis, etc.
or * admitting the translation, yet denies in English that Christ was in
Hell. After all, yet I may not forget how Aust. here "would have in this
controversy the very nature and proper Etymology of Hades to be regarded and
precisely followed: notwithstanding that him self mistook it much. How then is
it, that you skornfully call this endeavor (touching the H^brue Sheol) b
Rabbinicall Grammar observations, ^^g. 153.
and (touching Hades in Greek) the Poets fantastical imaginations? In this
therefore Austin also is not a little against you. Other exceptions of his
touching the matter, we shall afterward consider together with yours.

Now I come from the Ancients to the later learned Writers: that we may not
neglect their judgment in this question. (...) late De^ors of the ^^^ll con^^^
o^^ ex^^ion.
Who as they were generally freer from error then those of old for the most
part, so they testify this point with me more clee^ly and more constantly then
they. Who were observed * before. Yet because you let them go without (as it
were) saluting them, and as if they were not worthy (belike) that you should
cast a look on them: (...) cat. 1.
therefore they shall be noted once more, that I may press you with the^, and
that others at least wise, may consider them better. Bucer says, The "
Scripture no where speaks of Hades or Infernum, but as being common as well to
the blessed as to the damned. (...) in Mat. (...) 50.
But Gehenna is proper only for the damned. Again, In that we acknowledge that
the Lord went down to Infernum, we understand that in his Soul he joined to
the society of the souls of the dead Saints, even as in his body he was
joined to their bodies by Burial. P. Ma^tyr, P Mart Symbo.
That Christ descended to Inferos (or Hades) signifies nothing else, but that
he did undergo the same state as other souls do that depart this life.
Mollerus, (touching Sheol, Hades, and Infernum ascribed to Christ Moller. Psalm
1^
says, they do signify but that Christ dyed: and to be no more, then as if he
should say in the Psalm, Therefore I rejoice because I know that although I die
yet I shall rise to life again. Bulinger (speaking of Christ and indifferently
of the godly) shows Bullin D 1.7. and 8.
that To go to Inferos, is to go to Abraham's bosom, that is into Heaven, not
into Hell: and that Inferi and Hades do make difference only between the
Living and the Dead, and nothing else. Lavater says, Lavat. E^ech ca^^ 31.18.
Hades in Greek is a general word for the condition of the dead both in
torments and in peace. Tremellius says, Anno^a^ Psalm. 49.
This Hebrew word Sheol does signify any station or state of the 'Dead in
general in very many places of Scripture: and Hell it may sometime signify,
but by a figure synecdoche. Lastly Iunius in his note upon Tertullian Page 16
before rehearsed, does confirm all this most fully. These men I think every
wise and faithful Christian will highly esteem and prefer, for their learning
and namely for their skill in the toung^s, for their syncerity and soundnes in
Religion, for their unity and conse^^^n this point, for their diligence,
faithfulness, and m^d^sty in all things.

The lear^ Heathen thout^ co^our sense Hades.
The rather this sense of Hades we are to acknowledge, because it has been the
ancient phrase and common use of speech before Christianity: that this word
should signify the general state of Death applied even to the Souls both of
the Blessed and Damned Which sufficiently I showed Treat. (...) 97 98.
before out of Plato, Homer, and others. Yea no less I showed also touching
the Latin word Inferi out of Pa. 100 108.
Cicero: though this word naturally implies an error, which Hades does not, as
before also I have declared. What is your answer to this? Forsooth (I think
because you have been a master of Grammar) you go about to teach Cicero Latin,
and for his general phrase implying that all the Deceased both good and bad were
apud inferos, vou do so whip him and handle him Your p^^ 387. 3^
here, that it seems you forget by whom your self has profited, and that
even he in time past has been your Teacher. I will not now enter into any
defense of Cicero: his speech and language will defend it self. Also that were
to leave our maine purpose. But it is the lesso strange that you use Cicero
thus: for others also have had the like correction at your hands with him.
^^g. 310.
a Before Torence escaped not. And b here Plato and Socrates and other Greeks
have also their parts, (...). 374.378
for their using and taking of the Greek word Hades so largely as the
natural Etymology thereof does bear. But let them defend them selves
whether they speak usual and right Greek and Latin, or no: I will leave them
in that. They are eloquent enough, they can speak in this case for them
selves. Only I will take their words at their hands evens as c I find them,
and so I refer the judgment of all to the learned and wise Reader. (...) also
all (...) forenoted ^^^ned W^^^ have loud (...) and used (...) likewise. ^^g
385.
Also for that charge against me of d lewd lying, and open falsifying of Plato,
I remit all to the indifferent Reader. Yet I can not but smile truly (for
offended I will not be) that May. Bilson is so strongly persuaded, that c I am
of Platoes and Ciceroes religion touching Hell, ^^g 370. (...). 389.
Heaven, the Gods, and wicked Spirits: and that I seek indeed to bring in
their fantastical Hell into our Christian Creed. This fantastical conceit of
his, let him feed him self with it: and let him persuade it to whom he can.
Thus much the sober and indifferent Reader will consider and acknowledge, that
the Holy Apostles do teach the Heavenly truth with the very words and
Grammar of the Heathen men: whereunto that serves which is written of them, f
We every man hear them speak in our own tounges and languages wherein we
were borne. (...). 2.8, 11.
Then the Apostles surely spoke according to the current speech before their
times and in their times, and yet thereby never g Canonized the fables and
fancies which the nations employed in their words. ^^g. 368.
Whosoever he be that will say otherwise, knows not what he says: neither
shall any credit or greatness which he has, get him credit in so saying. Yet in
a certain place you most strangly and confidently avouch, h That neither with
the ancient Masters of the Greek tongue which were Poets, ^^g. 410. (...) 1.
Treat. (...). 97.98. ^^to in ^^done. ^m. iliad. 1 ^^lutarch. ^rallel. and
^^nsol. ad (...)
nor with the 70. nor with the Writers of the New Testament, nor with the
people of that time Hades did ever signify the world of Souls without any
limitation of state or place. I thought that those few allegations which " I
brought of * Plato, Homer, and " Plutarch for the Greek, and of Latins for the
Latin would have suffised to cause you not to deny so clear and manifest a
truth, which here you deny even against your own knowledge, as after shall
appear. Wherefore to demonstrat this point a little further to you, and to al
men, if any yet do believe this your assertion, (which is most untrue) I will
not think it to much to note some more places out of the Heathen authentike
Greeks, (for that is the principal controversy) that Hades with the^ did
signify the World of Souls, with out any limitation (in the very word it
self) either of state or place. But as all men know that by reason of
Circumstances it often signifies with the^ Hell determinatly, Note.
so by reason of circumstances also it signifies with them many times
determinatly the Habitatio^ of the Souls of good men in joys and pleasures,
which was to them as their Heaven. And for this I will only put you in mind of
some places, which you know well enough already. First note that common epithet
or title of Hades: Hades t^^ world Souls (...) ye Auther Greeks.
Lycop^^
Hades pandokeus or pandocheus. The unseen world or state of Death that
receaveth all, both good and bad. Hom. (...) 15. He^ in The^^
Others imagine Hades a God or mighty power power of Death, and do call him,
eneroisin kataphthimenoisin anasson, Ruler (not of Hell only, but) of all that
'Dy. And therefore to this place com not the wicked and damned only, but the
noblest and best also, (as Achilles says being dead and being in Hades) Hom.
(...) l.
Aidos de katelthemen entha te nekroi: Hither into hades all we that are dead
do come. This Plato Gorgia^ Plutarc^ Consol^ Apollo^
Plato and Plutarch do acknowledge in that place which Pa. 37^
you cite at large: together with a number mo both of the Poets and
Philosophers. And this also it is that Homer showing how Jupiter cast down his
rebellious Angels into Hell ( Tartaron, with them the proper place of the
Damned) he describes it to be so much beneath Hades the place of the other
Dead, Hom.
hoson ouranos esti apo gaies: as heaven is from the earth. So in regard of
this it is that Sopho^ Aiant.
another makes it to be much better to be in hades, as it is the common place
and condition of the dead (not Hell) then to be sick vnrecoverably: kreisson
aida keuthon e noson matan. And so Plutarch makes Hades (not Hell, but) the
place of the Dead or the stare of the dead in general to be a sovereign
comfort to the afflicted and miserable in this world, Plutarc^ swering Aeschy^
O Thanate paian iatros molois, Limen gar ontos aidas an' aian: Aiden d'echon
boethon, ou tremo skias. Lastly that which Page 37^
you bring of Orpheus describing the true God, that he is King both of the
Unseen world aitheros ed'aidou, and also of this present visible world ponton
gaieste tyrannos, confirms all that is before said. For aither aides here is
to be construed together, not separatly; and so he signifies thereby that the
true God indeed is Lord and King not only over this whole Visible world (which
he understands by the Sea and Land) but also over the whole Invisible world
or air, that is over all the Dead both good and bad. I marvel therefore very
much what you mean to speak so plainly contrary to the truth and to your own
knowledge, that Hades did never signify the world of Souls without any
limitation of state or place, no not with the ancient Masters of the Greek
tongue which were the Poets. The rather this your speech is directly against
your knowledge because you expressly collect and confess the contrary, that is
the same which I do: ^ag 403.
thus you say. a Hades before (the Apostles time) extended to good and bad.
page 371.
And " within Plutoes kingdom under the earth which they call Hades, as well
the places and pleasures for the Good, ^ag 379. ^^^d, in Ho^^r, Virgil,
^istophanes ^^pides and ^^ers you shall the World ^he Dead, ^he world of ^^es be
they (...) or bad to ^^in Plutoes ^^gdo which Greek^ ^^ts call ^^les.
as the prisons and punishments for the bad are in their conceit prepared and
settled. Again, b Hades with them was the Ruler or place of Souls, were they
in rest or pain. Where you make a strange answer, that Christian Religion will
assure, that this place must needs be Hell. What? That place where some good
men's souls deceased are in rest? Is this Hell? Yea is it Hell in Christian
Religion? Who then henceforth will care for Hell, if some souls have rest and
pleasures in Hell? But you say also that those Heathen Greeks did think that
this place of Souls was c under the Earth. It is true, they thought so indeed:
and it was their "error, as also the very same was the Christian Fathers error
likewise. Which they drew certainly from their acquaintance with those
Heathens, (...) 379.381 (...) Hades it ^^^fe impor^^^g no such ^^^ng.
but no where at all from the Scriptures. Yet none of these thought this place
to be very Hell, where souls were in rest. There is small rest, and few
pleasures in Hell. But these Heathens d understood Hades chiefly for Pluto the
Ruler of this place under the earth. (...) 371.374
So that though the place were also called Hades, yet this was but secondarily.
I answer: This is questionles utterly untrue. For rather the Place or the
Estate of the Dead was first and originally called Hades. The God thereof (whom
afterward they idolatrously imagined) they did conceave secondarily in respect
of the place or thing. Which beside the evidence of the matter, I am persuaded
that Plato and Plutarch do show also plain enough, even here where you cite
them. Howsoever: this is not maternal, nor to any purpose, whether the place
and state were with the^ first and chiefly called Hades, or whether the feigned
Power of death, and Ruler of the Dead (as they imagined) were first and
principally so called. This is certain, that this Power or Ruler which they
conceaved to be over the Dead, as they like Idolators made it a God, so their
meaning was to esteem him as the God of the Dead in General, and his state
and kingdom to be the Which ^^ing a pri^^^pall pom^^^ our qua^^^ is fully
g^^^ted by y^^^ before.
Habitatio^ of the Dead in general, not of the wicked only in Hell, but of the
good also in their Elysian happiness: which was to them in their estimation and
reckoning, that which Heaven indeed is to us. But Page 39
you say, there is no one place in truth common to all souls departed this
life, but some are in Hell, and some in Heaven. I doubt not but the blessed in
Heaven and the Damned in Hell are both in condition and situation separated a
funder exceeding far. Yet nevertheles as they are somwhere with in the compass
of the created world so they are in a common place; opposi^ indeed to this
visible earth and world of the living, but common to all the Dead, namely in
this only respect as they are Dead and departed hence, and are unseen, and
utterly exempted from all mutual meddling together with us that do live.
Moreover we stand not so much on this, that by Hades must be understood any
one place common to all the Dead, but the State and condition of death among
the Dead, or the Power and Dominion of Death which very aptly also it serves
for, and fitteth our purpose as well as to understand there by a common place.
But indeed all this I doubt not Hades very well may signify, when it is
referred to men, according to the circumstances of the author where it is
read. But this Hades you say in those Heathen authors Page 3^^ 378.41^
is the very Devil himself. Therefore his Kingdom must be needs nothing
but Hell. I answer, The Heathen in their conceit thought him not to be a Devil
but a V^z yt (...) or of d^^^ wc by (...) is some signifie^
God, even the God and Ruler over all the Dead: and so they worshipped this
foul Idol. Therefore his whole kingdom and region they reckoned to be the
World of the Dead or Dominion of Death, which also they called Hades: It may be
Page 37^
Porphyrie means that they held him to be Lord and Ruler over Hell and all
the wicked Spirits and Devils therein: yet he says not but that Hades or
Pluto was thought by them to have power over all the Dead: his rage against
men, and the fear that men had of him, signified the unmercifulness of Death
sparing none, and how it is to the nature of all men a thing most terrible. So
that they esteemed a part indeed of his Dominion to be Hell peculiarly: but a
part also to be the Region of the Happy, which was their Heaven. But you say,
this was the Devil. Yea even as the rest of their Gods were also very Devils
indeed, and nothing else. So was their Highest Jupiter, and so was Apollo, and
so was Mercury, and all the rest of the Gods and Goddesses which their
impiety adored. They were indeed none other, then very Devils illuding the
vanity of men. And thus I grant was their Hades or Pluto likewise. Howbeit in
their estimation he was not properly the Devil, but a Power or Ruler over the
Dead both good and bad: and his Kingdom the Dominion and world of the Dead both
good and bad. Page 171.
But a you remit Poets and Pagans using this word to the alleagers. Yet Poets
and Pagans are the authentike masters for Grammar both Greek and Latin. Yea
they were yours I doubt not in time past. Before page ^70.
Austin (as we " saw) allows the Etymology and natural property of hades
to be regarded. Yea all learned men in all ages condemn this your rejecting of
Pagans and Poets for the Grammatical use of words: whom still they do regard
and follow in this respect.

But here let us observe, how the holy Apostles do teach the truths of the
Gospel with the very words and language of the Heathens. ^bservations.
There are in this point 3. or 4. things that must be Zeus Jupiter, was among
the Heathens their great God, and he only was their highest: of whom besides
they held a 1000. fables, and indeed he was none other but a Devil, as is
before noted. Nevertheles the Apostle uses the same for the only true God the
author and governor of Heaven and Earth (passing by all their Fables) when he
applies the Poets verse, Act. 2^
His generation also we are. Tartarus which Page 3^
you object, though rarely and sometime perhaps a Philosopher will note thereby
the Air, yet indeed usually and in a manner always they meant Hell by it, with
a thousand of dreams thereto belonging. Yet Peter not canonizing nor
commending their dreams and fictions of Hell, notwithstanding signifies Hell
indeed by that word of theirs according to their common use thereof, and
according to the proportion of truth which therein they held. So Daimonion,
which also Page ib^^
you object they used to signify by it both good and bad Spirits following and
conversing with them: and the good they honored as Gods. But indeed and in
truth seeing these same were all Devils, therefore the Scripture holds not
the Heathens erroneous meaning in this word: yet it does retain that which
they understood by it truly, that is to signify Devils and bad spirits.
Again, Theos the Heathen used for to express the Nature of God: but so as
that they thought it common to many several Gods. The Apostles use the word
also for the true God, yet not understanding therein a nature common to many:
which error they otherwise clearly and often refute. And thus we might speak
of infinite mo the like words: as Fear, the power and strength whereof they
also fained to be a God, and of Hope and of Revenge Goddesses, etc. Like
whereunto is Hades, even that which presently we have in hand. The dive^^
applicat^^ of Hade^
With the Heathen it commonly and most usually signified the state of Dead men:
sometime rarely, the Destruction of other things which perish out of this
visible world and have no more being here. Whereof anon we shall see further.
Howbeit now to consider it as it respects men only, thus the Heathens chiefly
and commonly by Hades understood the state I say and Condition of men both
good and bad deceased and gone out of this world. And they meant it commonly
for the Destruction of their persons from out of this world generally and
indifferently. Again, oftentimes particularly touching their Bodies burial:
also particularly many things touching their Souls state being parted from the
Body. Some of which they believed were in Blessedness, some in Torments:
although they signified neither of these in the word Hades, but only (as I
said) their state after their departure hence. Also they thought some of the
Blessed Souls to be in the a chiefest Blessedness, ^Vhich you ^^iect page ^^4.
376.
that was in presense with the Gods. Yet they were in Hades also, that is in an
other world after they were wiped out from hence. Hither they admitted only
Philosophers, Treat. 1 pa. ^.
Heroes, and such like. Thus hither it is that b Plato assigns Socrates, and
thus Socrates him self hops to go to Hades, to the wise and good God. Other
Souls of good men they gave Blessedness unto in the Elysian fields under the
earth: as they fancied, or where else I know not. And these were also in Hades.
So that both these estates and conditions of blessed Souls deceased which was
their Heaven (though differing very much in places) they yeeld^d to be in
Hades. Whence I think some of the Fathers, and after them some Papists, have
feigned diverse places of rest and joy to the Dead. Heaven presently to the
Martyrs, but to other good Christians an other place of rest and joy (which
they called Abraham's bosom) either in the earth, or where they also knew not.
Howbeit into the glory of Heaven and the presence of God and of Christ they
admit none, save only the Martyrs before the last day. But this error and all
other errors about Hades, the Apostles sufficiently confute in their writings:
so that we are not now to respect the same in the use of Hades. Only we are
therefore to note how much and what (besides all errors) may be truly
retained and meant by the Apostles in applying this word Hades, as the Heathen
did, to both sorts of Souls of Dead men. They might truly understand that
both have one common condition and state as touching their being in another
world, as they were dissolved, departed from and wiped out of this visible
world, and a^ they were now in the world of the Dead an opposite estate and
condition to the living. This also the very Natural Etymology of the word
according to Grammar, does properly yield in that it signifies c Unseen,
Hades. The ^^ke may be ^^^id of Sheol.
or Not seen any more in this world, or an estate not seen here with us:
topos aides, an Unseen place, as Plato calls it. Where note, it cannot be
referred to the estate of Angels, because Hades is the unseen state of them
that once had a visible and ordinary being and conversation here in this
world. So that in very deed it has properly but a Privative sense, and not any
thing positive in it: though this d you can not brook. All this then the
Apostles might well understand and allow in the word Hades, Page 396.
without any taint of Heathenisme. And therefore also doubtless so they did. But
the heathens further made Hades a Divine power (whom also they called Pluto, as
it were the God of Death, or of the Dead) because (as before is showed) they
dreamed that he held all that were Dead, under his power, both blessed and
damned souls. And because no man that dies whether good or bad, does ever
live here again: and because all whosoever without exception must die,
therefore they call him Hades ameilichos kai adamastos, impla^able and
vnmastered: and Nelees etor echon having a mercilesso beart. In which sense in
Latin also they used Parca, Destiny: the end of all, because it spares none.
Certainly this Deifying of such a Power or to make a God of it, the Apostles
abhorred: and every where in their writings they show what Idolatry and
extreme impiety it is. But yet they may and do acknowledge such a power of
Death, which works this Destruction of all men from the world, and detayneth
them in Death afterward. Wherefore they have in sundry places Prosopopoeas
thereof as in the Revelation the Keys of Death and Hades: Death riding on a
pale horse, and Hades following after him: Death and Hades yielded up their
dead, and both were cast into Hell. Likewise that, O Death where is thy sting,
O Power of death where is thy victory. But of these more anon. Hitherto the 1.
observation is manefest that the Apostles using the Heathens words, yet need
not, nor do nor understand in them any of their fancyes and errors, which by
their doctrine otherwise they refute; nevertheles they may and do understand
the general truth signified in them, whatsoever the Heathens used by them to
signify and imply. And thus is our word in controversy Hades cleared. But to
clear the rest also of those which Page 36^
you object: Sec: we are to observe that the Apostles transfer the Heathens
Civil words many times to their Ecclesiastical Apostle, Bishop, Deacon,
Gospel, Law, Sin, Repen^ance, Hope, Conscience, Concupisence, etc. Which
change is small and easy, since the words have a just proportion still together
both in Civil and Ecclesiastical use. Only if any difference or odds be, it
is expressly uttered in some part of the Apostles doctrine besides. There is no
such cause, nor matter of difference to be found in Hades. Third. The Apostles
do use some words kat' exochen by an excellency, and yet in no point altering
the native use or property of them. ^^^a all the (...) before ^^^med, or ^^^t
o^ them (...) ^e con^^^ed also ^^^er this ^^^e. ^ag 403.
a Thus Scripture is used commonly for the Word of God only, Diabolos for the
Devil, although sometimes other writings are called also Scripture, and other
Accusers and slanderers Diaboloi. But neither has this consideration any place
in Hades, that in Scripture it should signify chiefly Hell: much less only.
Which thing b you avouch. Lastly, Some think the Apostles altered the word
Faith from the Passive sense of it importing Faithfulness and honesty, as the
Heathens commonly used it, to the Active sense which is True belief or Trust
used in the Scriptures: which you also object. But I suppose the Apostles took
this Active sense of the word Faith from the Old Testament, merely translating
the Hebrew into Greek. For I see not what difference at all there is between
c Pistis, ^^^om. 1.17. ^^^bac 2.4.
and d Emunah whereby the Jews signified Faith to salvation. Which is reason
enough for this use thereof in Greek by the Apostles, namely if it be a
Hebraisme, though it be not very suitable to the Heathens use thereof. The
like I judge of Elder, Law, Sin, etc. But Hades for Hell has no like reason.
Further I think even the Heathens have used this word Faith, sometime Actively
as the Gospel usually has it: likewise the Gospel abhors not altogether
the Passive use of it for Faithfulness. Lastly, if it were so that the Apostles
did follow no other reason, but merely transferred that word from the Civil
passive to the Ecclesiastical active use, we say on necessity they might do
it. For having some Spiritual doctrine to deliver and the ordinary speech
wanting some fit word for the same, then they might, yea of necessity they were
forced to take some word nearest in nature and sense to their purpose, and so
they might give to that word a peculiar Ecclesiastical use further then
anciently it had. But Hades for Hell has no help by this reason: they took
the word Gehenna from the Hebrews, and used it properly for Hell. Therefore
they need not alter hades for that purpose, for which they had another proper
word. It is manefest then that the Apostles still kept the proportion of the
sense in all their words translated from the common and usual speech of the
Heathen so far as any reason of truth might be alike in both, and so they spoke
indeed still the tongue and language of the Nations: and therefore Hades with
the Apostles can not be properly Hell, as even with Heathens also properly it
was never.

I suppose yet you will say, The Fathers take Hades for Hell. I answered Pa. 1
before how they sometime take it determinatly and strictly; so they signify
Hell by it. Sometime they take it largely and generally according to the Ancient
Heathens use: and so they signify by it nothing but the general state of
Death pertaining alike both to good and bad deceased, as I have declared. Thus
you get nothing by them: albeit sometime the^ restrain the word Hades more
then they ought to restrain it.

Here also were place to have added somewhat for justifying that I said, The
Fathers do alter the ancient true use of some words both Greek and Latin, from
whom (in controversies) we ought to appeal to their authentike use in
Scripture and Classical authors. But because Page 3^
you send me about Chirotonia to another place, I am content to examine what
you have there to the contrary. Which, seeing it draws me into further matter
thereunto appertaining, I will differ for this time.

Hitherto we have tried the nature and use of Hades, and have found it to be
not properly Hell, as Page 1^. 171. 40
you avouch. No, not when it is applied to souls of men deceased. And
therefore also that it can not be so understood in Act. 2.27. where it is
applied to Christ's Soul after he was dead. Which yet is the only place that
you have to pretend. How th^^ in Act. ^ may si^^^ and tr^^^ vnders^^^
Now something more you bring for your purpose from the Circumstances of this
Text: which we must consider. But first let us simply and plainly understand
the same, according to our former true declaration of the nature and use of
Hades. Where the text is, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hades, or to Hades:
we may simply take Hades for the invisible state or place of the deceased. And
so supplying the defect of a word which must be understood, thus we may say eis
ton topon, or choran hadou: in the place or region of the invisible state or
Aither dou. Or before p^^^ 173.17.
World of the Deceased Otherwise we may take it simply for Deaths force and
strength and power: supplying also the same words eis ton topon, or ten choran
hadou, in that place where the power and strength of Death prevails and
holds the deceased Souls from their Bodies. This is the World of the Dead,
implying nothing else but ap estate opposite to our Visible estate in this
world. Thus may hades be fuly taken, since I have largely proved before how
Hades and Thanato^ Death are in effect all one: and may both be applied even to
just men's Souls deceased, but hades more easily and naturally. Last of all we
may take hades here by a Prosopopoea conceaving it to be eis ten choran,
topon, or oikian Hadou, in the place, region, or habitation of this mighty
power. Or eis to kratos, exousian, dynamin, or epikratian tou Hadou, to the
strength, power, or dominion of this Destroyer of life. Thus howsoever we take
it, (though this last way is not the vnlikelyest) Hades here signifies in
effect nothing else but Death, and that Christ's Soul (departed this life) was
held therein, but could not be holden fast. ^^g. 166.
You object, c We must not make a Figurative sense but where manefest need is.
Here is no need of a figurative sense. Therefore here ought to be no Figure
supposed. I answer, First we grant your Conclusion: whether of the 2. former
ways soever that we take hades, so there is simply no Figure at all therein.
Sec: Then your own sense of Hell in this place is clean overthrown by your
self. For whenever hades and sheol do signify Hell, it is indeed by a
Figure: namely Synekdoche, where the Whole is set for a part, Which I have
proved at large before: ^^re page
and particularly by d Tremellius a sufficient man for his Hebrew skill.
Wherefore by this reason Hell cannot possibly be meant here, if no Figure be
admitted. Third: it seems convenient and also likely to take hades here by a
Prosopopoea, after our 3. sense before noted. Which kind of Figure supposes
(as it were) a Person of that thing which otherwise a word properly signifies.
So that by this figure nothing of the words native signification is
diminished. Thus our word hades is used in the Corinthians, O Hades where is
thy victory? Also as it may seem in the " Revelation Death and Hades were cast
into Hell. ^^ther as pa. 17^
Thus then it is nothing but emphatically signifying the power of Death.
Fourth: Admit that hades and sheol did properly signify Hell, as (we see) they
do not. Likewise that sometime they signify only the Grave, which also you
acknowledge: and it is true, when it is applied to a dead Body. Again admit
that nephesh by a Figure may signify the whole Person, yea e the dead Body
sometimes. (...) does (...) 21.1. and (...) and 2^.4.
Then I affirm, that here in this place of necessity there ought to be
understood a Figurative sense. Here is plainly most necessary cause. For take
them thus literally (as you do) and they impugn the grounds of faith and
charity. Which Page 1^
you grant (and that rightly) is sufficient to cause a Figurative sense in
Scripture. But how do they impugn faith or charity, being taken as you take
them? Verily thus; Your sense implies by the way and consequently, Points in
Assertion ^^^trary to ^^^co^mon ^^o^ Faith (...) charity.
that a good and sinles man (yea the best that ever was) worthy of Paradise and
the highest Heavens, yet after death did go to Hell. And further, that being in
Heaven, yet he stayed not there (as you say) but immediately came out again to
go into Hell. Again, that a Humane soul being in the depth of Hell, yet
should feel no pains: and that being locally in hell it should com out thence
also. What can be more against the general rules of the Scripture then these
things? Yea how does this impugn our general charity toward all the just
when they die? Besides many other disproportions and unreasonable inconveniences
following withal, as anon we shall further see. Wherefore if by any meames
possibly a Figure may be here admitted, certainly it must be so: for these
most necessary causes last rehearsed. The rather seeing no other text any where
insinuates any such peculiar matter in Christ, that he should differ in these
points from all good men else, as you do urge.

But you say, The Cir^^stances (...) against y^^
the circumstances here do prove that the word must be Hell properly taken.
That I would feign see. What are these circumstances. First, this place shows
Page 1^
a special prerogative verified in none but in Christ. I deny it: here is no
such prerogative mentioned. Except this, that whereas some other men after
death have returned to life again, it was not by their own power, as Christ's
Resurrection was. Again God in his revealed will having signified by his
Prophet long before that he should be restored speedily to life again: thus it
was simply impossible that Christ should be holden fast by the power of Death,
although it had got hold of him. And so indeed he had a prerogative before all
men else, which also is here showed us: but no other prerogative in the world
neither here, nor any where else ca^ be gathered touching his return from
Hell. You add, No flesh (dead) was ever free from corruption but only
Christ's. What then? Ergo his Soul was in Hell? Or else, why bring you such
needles and impertinent matter. Besides, I judge that not to be true. Were not
Page 1^
some being dead raised to life again before their flesh putrified? But non^
(you say) in the sepulcher. And what then? How will this infer or prove, that
so none but Christ's Soul was ever supported in Hell, or that it was ever there.
These are simple reasons for so great a conclusion. Then you say, Jf by Hell we
understand Paradise it was no privilege to be there not forsaken, but rather a
childish absurdity to think any Soul might be there forsaken. It is a strange
absurdity still to abuse your reader calling this word Hell, ^^tio prin^^ (...).
which indeed is nothing but Death in effect, the Power of death, or the
condition and state of death. Again to presume that we take it for Paradise
or Heaven, or Hell at any time: when we refer it always to the general
state of the Dead, and no further immediately. Now in this Christ had cause to
rejoice that neither his Soul nor Body was left: but so soon raised up to
perfect life again, and so sitted to a full receaving of glory, which within
few days after he had. Also besides this cause (his deliverance from the
condition of death) he had an other inestimable cause to rejoice that he was
raised to life again, namely that he might fulfill his whole work for our
Salvation, which before his Resurrection, Ascension, etc: he could not
accomplish. ^^g. 170.
Further b you object, that Peter makes mention that the sorrows of death were
broken, that they should not hold Christ nor hinder him from rising again. But
there were none such in the Grave, none in Paradise. Therefore in Hell Christ's
Soul was, whence he was delivered when he rose again. I deny utterly this
sequel. Because the text says not that there were any present sorrows in
Hades where Christ was. Here is not a word to any such purpose. (...). 2.24.
What says the text, " God raised him up, loosing the sorrows of Death,
because it was impossible for him to be, holden fast of it. Will you conclude
from hence: Ergo there were present sorrows in that place where Christ was?
There is no strength in this reason. The Apostle signifies here 2. or 3.
things. 1. That God loosed Death from him; wherein he was held, but could not
be holden fast. 2. That this Death had been a most sorrowful and painful
Death: which indeed he tasted to the full upon the Cross. As this Hebraisme,
the sorrows of Death (for a sorrowful Death) may emphatically signify.
Also he may set these 2. the sorrows of Death thus together, as the Cause
and the Effect: signifying that by the violence of sorrows and bitter pains
which he suffered Death came unto him and took hold of him: but it could not
hold him fast, because God himself loosed and dissolved it. Thus then it can
not follow by the text, that there were sorrows now in hades where Christ was.
Further the very text implies that Christ was holden in this which was loosed
from him: I say, he was holden but not Kra^^ to b^^ fast, ^^en^^^ ^ctori^^
hold^^
holden fast. Now he was not holden in sorrows, for then he could not but have
felt them after death: which you will not affirm. It was therefore Death (which
came by sorrows) whereof he was holde^, but not held fast. Again it appears
that Christ was in that which was loosed and rid from him: Thou will not
en^a^sai.
leave my soul in hades. I say, he was now in the same wherein he was not left
nor forsaken. But he was in no sorrows at all now, for then I think he should
have By (...) Sorrow^^ felt of (...) who a^^ them.
felt them: he was in death and in the power thereof. Therefore it was Death
and the power thereof, which was loosed at Christ's resurrection: not any
present sorrows and pains. Neither is it the nature of Sorrows to hold and
hinder from Resurrection: but it is the strength of Death which does that. Thus
Page 1^
your collection out of Austin is against the true and plain meaning of the
text, where you say that the sorrows of death (or hell) were broken before
Christ, and so he was never in the^, but as the snares of hunters are broken ne
teneant non quia tenuerunt before You (...) the ve^^ pa. 17^ ^^ting ^h^^ it.
they took hold, not after they had taken hold. This is merely imagined: the
text plainly means an other loosing and dissolving, namely of the power of
Death (as I said) under the which Christ's manhood (even the Body also, as well
as the Soul) was now for a while held, but not victoriously holden fast, when
Gods will was that he should rise again. Yet you mightily urge, how that it is
Page 1^^ 196.
Austins collection from this text. I perceave your argument is from Austin,
and not from Peter, as Page 13^ 170.
you pretend. When you cite Scripture it is enough belike, if any learned man
do collect and frame an opinion from the text, whether right or wrong. You may
easily see by that before, that this collection of Austin has no ground nor
reason in the text, but is indeed disproved by it. Which may the sooner be
conceaved, if we note how he missed in his Translation of these words. Thus he
reads- solutis doloribus inferni, August. (...) 99.
quia impossible erat teneri eum in illis: whom God raised up loosing the
sorrows of hell, because it was impossible that he should be held in them. But
the text has, Loosing the sorrows of Thanat^^ not Had^^ which he (...)
staketh for Hell.
death, seeing it was impossible that he should be g holden fast or strongly
holden h of it. ^^teisthai: (...) is more (...) Austins ^^ri to be ^^ply
holde^ ^^^p' a^tou: (...) illis, in (...) sorrows, (...) has it.
Thus it seems Austin looked not to the original, which he ought to have
don: specially now inquiring into and sifting out an obscure point of
Christian faith, as it appears that here Austin does. In no wise ought he to
have leaned to a faulty Translation, as this is which he follows. Seeing
therefore he failed in expressing the text, no marvel if his Collection from
it were wide. Wherein also he is no where resolut nor persuaded indeed:
therefore a weak stay is he alone, for our faith to rest on in this article. Nay
in the winding up of that Epistle his godly modesty is registered for example to
you and all Christian Ministers. He gives us good leave to refuse his
collection and opinion here, so that we bring better reason. Thus he says,
Hec expositio verborum Petri cui displicet, etc. Now whether we bring reason to
dissent from Austin herein or no, I refer it (not to you to judge, who are
to partial, but) to every indifferent learned reader. The rather for that mo
Circumstances of this text do make also affirmatively for us. (...). 2.29.
First, a Peter plainly grants all this matter of David as well as of Christ:
except this, that David was left therein even till this day, as Christ was not.
But David was never in Hell. Therefore neither Christ was ever there, whose
figure David was. Sec: If it be altogether here from the purpose of Peter to
speak to the ignorant and unbelieving Jews of Christ's Souls being in hell,
then there is no reason to take these words hades and sheol here for hell.
But by the whole b (...) ^2.
Text it is evident, Peter had no reason nor purpose to speak to the Jews of
Christ's Souls being in hell. Therefore I see not how hades and sheol (if they
but might signify otherwise) can here signify hell. His whole and direct
purpose was to show them of Christ's Souls departure out of this world, and of
his Body lying dead in the grave, as is the manner of other men when they die,
and that he was from thence mightily c raised up again to life, (...). 31.
more then other men were, or can be. Here to speak to them of his Souls
being in hell, what were there in it? 1. They being (as I said) ignorant,
unbelieving, and stubborn. 2. The thing being invisible strange and uncouth,
not subject to sense, and without all example of the like in the whole Law, and
namely no Figure foreshaddowing any such matter to be fulfilled in him. 3. He
intending only in all this speech to show them that this Jesus whom they had
slain was not now dead but risen again, why should he speak here of hell?
Christ's being there made nothing the more to show his Resurrection, which was
the ver. ^^
only scope of his speech.
But being so disproportioned with then former faith and understanding, it
would rather hinder then further them to the Christian faith. Both these
Circumstances I noted before, but I see no answer to them. Wherefore I hope,
they with the rest of my assertions herein are firm and good.

Thus it appears that hades does not every where signify Pa. 17^ 403.
Hell in the New Testament. We have seen that it has no such meaning in the
Acts, which yet is the only Scripture whereon you build. Alas, how little a
show serves your turn, when affection leads you. This were sufficient to
end this Argument: but yet it shall be good also to try whether any where else
Hades properly signifies Hell. Verily it does so signify no where at all in
the Scripture. Yet I grant it is and ought to be translated Hell in Mat. 1^ Luc.
16.
2. places. Not that the word it self does necessarily signify Hell, but
because the circumstances here do require that meaning, as the fittest and
best for these particular purposes. In the 1. Christ promises that ye Gates of
Hades shall not prevail against his Church. He means no destruction nor
desolation shall root it out, nor take it away from the world utterly. Now
seeing of the Churches Destroyers Hell is the chiefest, and the malice and tage
of Satan is the most violent adversary: that the Church (being assured against
the worst enemy) may be confirmed and comforted against all other whatsoever,
therefore kat' exochen Hades here signifies Hell, and for special emphasis
we are to name it Hell. Which particular is here intended thus indeed, being
always contained otherwise in the compass of this general word Hades. So that
albeit the gates of Hades in their own simple nature and common use are the
same as the gates of Sheol or maveth, (which are no more but the gates of
Death) as Page ^^
before I have showed, and as Zuingl^^ Esaias 38^ Moller. (...) Psalm. 16^
others call it, periphrasis moriendi, a phrase or speech signifiing Death: yet
I say the circumstances here in Matthew do require a greater emphasis in it.
Even that Hell should be chiefly and particularly noted as to weak against
Gods Church; that so we should much less fear al other evils. Likewise in
Luke 1^^
Luke, I grant Hades is to be translated Hell: yet only because of the
circumstances there. Seeing the wicked miser being now in the state of Death,
was in torments: now where could this be indeed but in Hell? So that here also
for better emphasis sake it is best to name it Hell, but not for the nature of
the word Hades. Which the worthy M. Bucer notes well, saying, Dives non
simpliciter scribitur esse in Hade, sed and in Gehenna: quia in tormentis and
stammis. The Rich man is not said to be simply in Hades, but also in Hell:
because he is said to be in fiery torments. Thus I grant in 2. places Hell is
intended by Hades in the Scripture. But what then? Will you conclude from this,
as you do about Abyssus? ^^g 213,
In the Revelation, and Luke d Abyssus is used to signify Hell. Therefore it
signifies hell in the * Romans: or therefore every where properly it
signifies hell. ^^n 10 7.
" Death sometime is the 2. Death. ^^g 170.
Ergo it is so, Act. 2.24. If you will argue so about hades also from those 2.
places before named, I can easily deny your argument in all. The untruth
whereof has appeared before in that principal place of the Acts: and likewise
shall appear in all the rest following by Gods help. ^^g. 403.
Next let us a consider, b And thou Capernaum, (...) 11.23
which art lift up to the Heaven, shall be brought down to Hades, to
Destruction. I say Hades here is not hell, but the Destruction of Capernaum
the City. Christ threatens 1. this proud and lofty City it self: also the
inhabitants thereof for despising his Gospel. The City it self with
destruction and razing out from the face of the earth, which is it that he
means by Hades. The inhabitants the wicked people thereof he threatens with
c Damnation in hell. (...) ^4.
For the 1st. I understand that so Hades sometime may be referred to the
Destruction even of unreasonable things, as well as of reasonable men. For it
seems the generality of the word Hades is such that it signifies No visible
being here any more, (...) in the (...) gene.
or Destruction from this world (as the proper Etymology thereof admits) to
any visible Creature perishing from hence. Though it be certain, it is not so
often applied to other things: but it belongs most commonly and usually
indeed to Men only. Notwithstanding to other things we may find it applied: as
where Plato (which d you stumble at) says in Hades were Birds, (...) ^4.
Beasts, Trees, Flowers, Fruits, etc. I deny not but they had fabulous and
toyish conceits about these things being in Hades: but wise men may see how
their meaning was, these visible creaturs being once brought to Destruction and
to have no being any more here, that then they yielded hades unto them also,
like as they did unto me^ departed hence. ^^tarch de ^^^ult. viv.
This may be the meaning also of Plut. where d he makes Hades to have the
whole contrary part to the Sun (who^ they called also Apollo, and Delius, and
Pythius) because al Creatures under the Sun (as we use to speak) when they
perish hence and have no more being in this world, com to Hades. And thus it
seems Moses also uses Sheol, when he says, Numb. 1 30 33.
men, women, children, and cattle alive, yea howses and riches went to Sheol.
Therefore here Moses certainly means not Hell, as Page 1^^^
you think: but he signifies 2. things. 1. That all these things were taken
utterly away out of this world by an vnrecoverable Destruction: which is the
most general and large sense of Sheol. 2. That they descended down into a As
also Ps^^^ 86.13. an^ 88.7. Deuteronomy. 32.
vast and deep Gulf in the earth: which also Sheol does very often signify
in the Scripture, like to Abyssus in Greek. After which manner also those Psalm.
49.
Sheep in Sheol (which Page 399.
you turn to the worst) may be understood.
Thus I say Sheol may show the utter taking away (not of men only, but) of
other things also when they have no being in this world any more. Which Abacuk
also means in saying, Abac. 2.2^
neither Sheol nor Death can be satisfied, if he make any difference in these.
Also in the very like place of the Pro. 30.1^^
Proverbs, Sheol seems to be most rightly understood in the most large
signification. To which sense likewise, I take it that phrase in Daniel, en lo,
may be compared, though here it be used of Messiah: ^tikkare Messiah, ve en
lo, Dan 9.26
Messiah shall be cut of and shall have No being. He means, Not any more as he
was before in this world: which in effect is nothing else then that which Sheol
signifies. Yet we must come nearer. You allege 2. frivolous proofs of
Sheols signifying Hell: viz: when it has Page 147.
Opposition to Heaven, and Situation as the lowest. For the Situation of Hell,
it is a secret which Gods word has not revealed at all. Neither ought we to
determine, as you very rasly do, Page 112.
Jf Hell be any where, there can be no doubt but it must be in the lower parts
of the earth. You know the Apostle mentions the Ephe. 2.2.
Air, and that cap. 6.12.
on high, as being the place of Devils. Notwithstanding far be it from me to
affirm that hell certainly is not beneath. Yet your pretended scripturs are
merely forced to prove it. As in the chief I have showed already. In the rest
it will appear likewise anon. Howbeit, wheresoever Hell indeed is, though we do
grant in it to be locally in the earth beneath us; yet every Opposition between
Shammajim the Heavens or Skies, and Sheol does not signify the opposition
between Heaven and Hell. This you shall never be able to prove: Shammajim thus
placed signifies the Skies, not the very place of Heavenly glory in the
presense of God, which in English we call Heaven. And Sheol thus placed
signifies not Hell, the place of torments: but it is taken thus 2. ways.
Sometime for a vast and deep Gulf only or pit in the earth, Abyssus.
the bottom whereof we know not. Amos. 9.2. Job. 11.8. Psa. 139.8.
So do a many of your places mean, which you draw and wrest to signify Hell.
Sometime for Ruin and Destruction or Abolishing of any visible Creatures from
hence: which seems to be the largest and most proper sense of Sheol. ^heols
proper sense.
So does it in Jsay signify, where Sheol is threatened to the King of Babel, b
Though thou be lifted up to the Skies, Isa. 14.15.
yet shall thou be brought down to Sheol, that is (in this place) to an
inglorious Destruction and No being in this word: and (thy carcass) unto the
sides of the pit, that is the Grave. This the contrariety here shows, Thoug^
thou be lifted up to the Skies. He means not here, into the glory of the
Saints of God in Heaven: but lifted up in great pomp and worldly glory, as the
Latin phrase means also when they say ad sydera tolli. Now says the Prophet
to this King of Babell: Though at this time it be thus with thee, yet surely
thou shall be brought down to the contrary point, to an inglorious Destruction,
and a wiping out from the Earth. Which sense of Isay is also very well
confirmed by the like matter in Jeremy. c Though Babel should mount up to the
Heavens, ^er. 51.53.4.
and though she should defend her strength on high: yet from me shall her
Destroyers come, says the Lord. A sound of a cry comes from Babel, and of
great Destruction from the Chaldeans, etc. Where that which Isay called Sheol,
Jeremy speaking of the very same matter names Destruction, utter laying wast,
and overthrowing of that City and State. And so to come to our purpose, A very
He^raisme.
d this is the very same phrase here in Matthew touching Capernaum: Thou
Capernaum which art lift up to the Heaven shall be brought down to Hades: that
is, to Destruction, and to an inglorious Not being any more in the world as
before time it had been. ^^des Destruction, Razing, ^aking away
Which also is confirmed by that which he adds presently of Sodom, that if
they had had the means of repentance as Capernaum had, Sodom might have
remained a City to this day. Inferring by this that Capernaum for their greater
contempt of God and his word, deserved more then Sodom to be destroyed and to
become no City. Hitherto this is the first judgment threatened to the state of
the City; Hades Destruction, or an utter razing out from the earth. The 2.
judgment here threatened follows in the next verse, Moveover I say unto you
that it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of judgment then
for these. Here indeed is Hell threatened to them of Capernaum: yet as touching
that before, there was nothing else but the overthrow and destruction of their
City signified by that word Hades, applied to the City, as is before
declared. And contrary to this you have not any piece of reason in all that Pa.
147.1^ 409.
you say here about. The world of Souls (which Page 403.409.
you play withal) Hades may and does signify: but yet then only when it is
referred to deceased Souls, and not otherwise. Next, let us view the Corinthes
Page 408. 1. Cor. 1^.55
O Death where is thy victory? O Hades, O Destruction, or, O Power of Death
where is thy sting? Here it is referred to the destruction of the whole and
entire Persons of men taken away by death out of this world: who in the end by
this conquest and triumph over Death and the power thereof (at the last day)
shall be restored to life again in a true and perfect Resurrection and
restitution. This is the whole scope and drift of the Apostle here: and you
grant it. But you infer, that therefore it is meant of Hell. Of Hell, which
way? Because since by sin Hell gat possession of both parts of man as well of
his body as of his Soul, the full deliverance and conquest over Hell, is not
but in the Resurrection. This is very untrue. Our full deliverance from Hell
and from Satan is obtained in this life: as it is written, Luke 1.7.
We being delivered from our enemies and from the hands of all that hate us,
must serve him without fear all the days of our life in bolines and
righteousness before him. That is, we being here truly justified by his grace,
are fully freed and delivered from all the power of our enemies. Satan is Luke.
11. (...) Rom 8.33. Ioh. 8.51, 5 and 5.24.
conquered, spoiled, bound, and cast out from us. So that your speech is very
bad and scandalous, where you say, Page 216.
The bodies of the Saints lying in their graves are in the Devils walk. For
then the Graves where bodies ly senseles, are a part of Hell, properly taken.
At least the Deaths of the Reprobat and of the Children of God, ( Answerab to
your do^trine pa. 24
touching the state of their bodies) till the resurrection, are all one: And
men truly justified are justified but in their Souls, Sin remaining still
charged on their Bodies, and therefore in their bodies they remain subject to
the power of Hell, and to the curse of the Law, and to the claim of Satan,
till the day of our Resurrection at the last judgment. You call it (...) part
of the ^ages of sin.
And thus the godly must pay " a part of their own redemption and satisfaction
for sin. And then Christ was not our only and absolut Redeemor. If this be
good doctrine, let the godly judge. Your self overthrows this enough, Page
156.
saying, f He changed the curse of death and made it now a rest from all
labors. So that I hope the Bodies of the dead Saints are not in the * Devils
walk: Nor subiec^ed to the R^^ge of Sa^an
much less are they g in the possession of Hell, Page 216.
in the handfast of Hell. Further you say upon the text: Page 178
h Through death Christ destroyed him that had the power of death, that is the
Devil. Page 179.
Whereby i it is evident, that Hell is spoiled of all right and claim to the
members of Christ, he brake, etc. I hope in this life the godly are the
members of Christ: then in this life they are fully freed from Hell for ever.
Wherefore it is very untrue that Hell properly taken, has any possession of the
just, and handfast or power on them, or that Hell is not fully subdued for them
until the Resurrection. I grant that the common death here is called an
enemy: Cor. 15.26.
but he means not such an Enemy as Hell is, especially as this is spoken
touching the godly. Yet it is an Enemy even to them, not as any Curse at all,
but as a Memorial and consequent of the old Curse (like as a scarie is where
was a deadly wound) also as a peaceable and quiet stopp or stay unto them, ^^ea
and because (...) is pain^ull ^o the flesh in (...) his life.
that their whole persons cannot yet enjoy their appointed felicity. Howbeit
for all this toward them it has not the least affinity with Hell at all.
Therefore Hades here in no sort signifies Hell, but only Death, or the power
of Death, or the world and kingdom of Death, or something to that effect only.
Yea the very text seems thus to expound it self, saying, Where is thy sting,
O Hades? The sting of Death is sin. Where the later seems a very direct
answer and exposition of the former words. Thus, The sting of Death (or Hades)
is sin: noting these 2. words (Hades and Death) as Synonimaes for one thing,
being applied to men. Or if Page 408.
you will have them to differ, He may take Hades for the As it utterly ^aketh
away, (...) witholdeth from a visible ^^ate.
Power and strength of Death (which the brainsick Idolators made a God) or the
Dominion and Kingdom of Death. These respects Hades might well have with the
Apostle, which differ from Thanatos Death, the mere separation of the Soul
from the Body: which yet in effect are all one, and have no difference touching
our purpose. Like as we saw Pa. 1^ etc. 1
before how all Authors have used them. Further, The Grave of the Wicked is
not to be n^med nor reckoned Hell properly, nor any part thereof. In Hell there
wants not sense of pain. If you say, it is an entrance to hell, and that
which holds and reserveth the wicked unto hell. Yet then it is not Hell: for
even thus the Grave and Hell do greatly differ. Finally, Hades is See (...)
page 1^
adversary to the Resurrection. But Hell would not be adversary to the
Resurrection. Therefore Hades here is not hell, no not to the wicked. Death in
deed and the Dominion of Death is an adversary to the Resurrection, and at
that day it shall be vanquished and utterly abolished, when all flesh shall live
again. As for Hell that shall increase the^ and be advanced, when all the
wicked both bodies and Souls shall be subdued under it for ever. Therefore Hades
here is not hell, but the power of Death, as has been said, or the Dominion
of Death or merely to that effect. Also we are to note, that the Apostle here
plainly alludeth to that of Hoseah: Hose.
O Sheol, o kingdom of death, or power of 'Death, I will be thy destruction. Not,
o Hell. For the Prophet speaks this to comfort Israel in their captivity
against their continual Destructions and razings out from this world, showing
that now the Lord would stay his judgment that way, and Death (which had
consumed them) should now destroy them no more, but they should live and
flourish again. This the Apostle might notably allude unto, speaking of the
Resurrection. As for Hell if the Prophet had meant it (as he does not) the
Apostle could make no allusion to it, nor have any thing to deal which it in
this matter of the Resurrection simply. So that where you say, what reason is
there to exclude out of these words Christ's victory over Hell, it is very
weak. What reason is there to include it, where the Apostle speaks only of
our resurrection from bodily Death, and of nothing else. Next we come to the
Revelatio^: First, Rev.
I have the Keys of Hades (that is of Destruction, or of the The ^^ble w^^^
the D^^^
kingdom of death and of Death. Or, we may take them as 2. words for one and
the same thing: that is, both of them for Death. For here Christ shows only,
that as He was dead, so now he has overcome Death. and has power to die no
more: as I hau^ Trea^ pa 11^
heretofore noted. What show of reason have Pa 17
you then, to bring in here Christ's power over the Damned Souls in Hell?
Because there is mention ^lswhere of the Key of hell: Therefore the Key of
h^des here is the same. What color of reason is there in this? Again a One
sits on a pale horse whose name was Death, Rev. 6.8.
and Hades Des^^^on the world of the Dead, or the Kingdom of Death followed
after ^^m. Th^^ in no wise can be Hell: because the text adds, Power (...)
them to slay with the sword and with samine, and death, and with wild beasts.
Hell slays none in that sort, these are not the weapons of Hell: but of the
Dominion and Power of Death th^se and such other mo, ^ag 406.
are the proper weapons. b You take it to b^ the power of the Devil, because
the Devil slays som^times the bodies of men. Which you prove by the bodily
slaying and siniting of Job and his children. This indeed is the thing which we
hold. This is not the Torments of Hell in the place of Damned: these be only
bodily harms and death. So that hereby you confirm our purpose: for we deny
not but God sometime uses Satan to punish and to slay the bodies of men. But
seeing this is nothing but Death, not Hell which then is inflicted: therefore
it is b^st to take Hades here most generally as the nature of it is, for the
Power of Death, or the world of the Dead. Hell by no means it can be. ^^g. 398.
You tell me in c one place, that my best skill is in varying phrases. It is
better to vary phrases then to vary opinions, as you very often do. I vary
phrases to express Hades, which in Authors is not always the same thing: or
at least not after the same manner. Whose general largenes which it properly
has, can not in one word be expressed in English. Wherefore my varying of
ph^ases to this purpose (I hope) is pardonable, since indeed it is necessary.
That conjecture of mine of the 4th part of the worlds not going to Hell at
once, I never esteemed it worth the standing on. I he last place is, Death and
Hades (that is the Dominion, or power of Death) were cast into Hell. ^^v. 20.14.
I said, it was absurd to say Hell was cast into Hell: You answer, it is more
absurd to say the world of Souls was cast into Hell. Where you do but dally
and play with words. ^t ^e wo^^^e ^e Dea^ A^^ally.
For I use not that term * the world of souls, though it may be named
sometime, in a good sense. Which you will by no means conceave: only you
delight much to sport your self with it. Our answer the^ is this; There is no
absurdity to say, that at the last (day when the * last enemy shall be
destroyed) then Death, ^^^ore page 2.
and the power of Death, or the Kingdom and Dominion of Death shall be cast into
Hell: that is eternally d^st^oy^d and ab^^ished, and shall r^turn to the Devil
wh^^^ they came. To say many so^t that the^ Hell phalbe cast into Hell,
sou^deth sens^les in my ^at^s. Although you mean the Containing to b^ put for
the Contained, H^ll for the Devils of Hell: and that the Devils shalb^ the^ cast
into h^l fire. Yea although one Andreas and ^eda understand it so likewise. For
neither you nor they (it ^^^meth) do cosid^r, that this place assigns them to
Hell then at the last day, who yet are not in Hell, but shall be then cast into
Hell and destroyed. But the Devils are 2 Pet. 2. I^d. 6.
in Hell already, and reserved in e^^rlasting ch^mes of darkness. Therefore the
Devils cannot be vnd^^stood here by Had^s, that they shall be then cast into
Hell, seeing ^hey are already cast in to Hell for ever. Death, and the Power
thereof being the last enemy that shall be d^stroyed, is not yet, but shall be
indeed at the last day aboli^hed and swallowed up of Hell. Lastly ^eere is
showed the most general and universal rendering up of all the ^ead whatsoever
to judgment. But Hell plainly has not all the Dead* Death, and the world of the
Dead, or the Dominion of Death have all. Therefore Death and Hades here do not
signify properly the Div^ll and Hell: but this only, that Death, and the
universal Dominion or power of Death yielded up to judgment all the Dead, both
great and small both good and bad to be judged according to their works.

Thus it is evident and clear that Hades no where in the ^ew Testament does
signify properly Hell, as you say it does. Thus also that is concluded fully
and perfitly which my 2. Reason Page 15
before affirmed: that you have not one place at all in the Scripture to prove
that Christ's Soul was in Hell. Act. ^.2
One place only you have stood upon, that Christ's Soul was in Hades: but that
helps you nothing at all, as we have seen. You must prove indeed that
Chri^ts Soul was in Gehenna, if you would persuade any man of knowledge, which
you shall never do. Gehenna in the New Testament is properly Hell: but Hades is
never properly so taken, as I hope it is sufficiently before proved. Therefore
the Conclu^ion is good, To think that Christ's Soul was ever in Hell, is a
thing that ought to be v^terly denied.

Yet, here we must consider a maine objection of yours: ^ven those words of
our common Creed, Touching C^^^^. (...)
which usually in English w^ utter thus; He descended into Hell: originally
(...) is, He descended into Hades. And in truth this is all that you have to
all^age for your opinion. ^swere.
But I answer 2. ways. First, Admitting, then Denying the authority of th^se
words in our Common Cre^d. 1. Admitting came under the power and Dominion of
Death, or that he d^caying in this world and * falling down from that state of
life wherein a while he flourished, went absol^tly from hence into the world of
the Dead, (...) before (...). 153.
according to the law of nature which all other men follow likewise when they
d^. How this sense does fully agree also with the minds of the ancient Fathers
generally, we have at large d^clared c before. Page 166. Page 1^4.
But this serves not your turn: and therefore you will needs inioyne us d 3.
Rules to be exactly and pr^c^s^ly kept in the expounding of these words: namely
1. Distinction of matter. 2. Consequence of order. 3. Propriety of words. You
must know that we can be no more strict, Note.
nor more religious in observing the Ci^cu^stances of matter and order even in
the holy Scriptures themselves, then you inioyne here to be observed in these
words of men. Might not these godly men (think you) miss in some such
Circumstance or light point, although the Scripture can not? Or if they might,
why impose you such strictnes on our consciences about men's words, as if here
were no possibility of any the least missing, or imperfection. How beit we
admit your 3. Rules also, 3. Rules.
and will observe them sufficiently. First these words He descended to Hades
may very well express a Distinction of matter differing from all the words
here besides. They naturally and properly signify (as before we showed) that
Christ came to utter decay in this world, and being taken hence was gathered in
both parts (of his Manhood dissolved) wholly and entirely to those who were
departed before him into another world. Or else thus, that he came under the
full power and before Page 192.
Dominion of Death. Now either of these differs verily from mere and simple
Death. ^vian. ^^^^^^ce ^ea^h.
For to Die prope^ly is nothing else but the going a sunder of the Soul from the
Body. That other is to be wholly razed out from the presence and sight of this
world, also a remaining under the possession and strength of Death, and a going
to the society of them in another world. g. 192.
These indeed are f differing points and degrees in Death: albeit in effect
generally they be all one with Death, that is they be necessa^ily consequent,
and always conjoined unto Death. Again if those words in the Creed were only
but a more emphaticall phrase of through and perfect Dying and Departing hence,
if there were in them no further Distinction of matter then so, yet this were
enough to distinguish them from the other words, Dead and Buried. This is cause
enough (especially in the Ancient times, when men suppose this Creed was
framed, and when Christ's Humanity and natural Death was by all means subtly
and violently oppugned after a short word signifying his Death and Burial,
yet for more emphasis sake, and for further Viging the same, to add^ this other
short familiar phrase importing (no other maine matter then was before noted,
but only) a more effectual and more absolut signification thereof. Which in
truth these our words in question do well perform, He came under the
Dominion of Death, or Went to the society of the Dead, following presently
after these words Dead and Buried. And thus your 2. Rule Consequence of order
is rightly kept. For even in respect of time it is certain, that Christ's whole
person perishing from hence was wholly joined to the Dead, after the precise
separation of his Soul and body, which was his Death. And his Burial being
the visible part thereof, in good reason may be set before that which
signifies the whole containing also his Souls invisible going unto the Dead.
Lastly, if there be no more in this but a stronger emphasis merely, and a more
full-signifying phrase, it might well come after terms of less emphasis. Your
3. Propriety of Words is plainly for us, and against your self. For that
which we strive for, is the Pa. 157 169 17^
native and proper sense of Hades, even according to the etymology of it, and
according to common use. You, if you urge it to signify Hell, do indeed make a
Pa. 171.
Figure in it, viz. Synecdoche, a part for the whole, as before we have showed.
As for the other word here in the Creed katebe or katelthe, He descended, or
came under, it is not necessary to take it always to signify a local going
down, specially thus joined with Hades. For thus it may aptly and lively show
the fall or whole casting down of a man's person from the state of life, to
death and utter destruction out of this world: as also men are said to stand up
and spring up when they live. Or it may serve to express the Force and
Dominion of Death which Christ came under when he dyed. Or the abasement and
humiliation of Christ yielding and submitting him self so far, that is not
only to Die, but also to come under the strength and force of death by lying
held, and subdued (as it were) for so long time in it. All this the very
property of the word katebe admits very easily: and Ruffinus likes it
where he interprets this phrase ^uffin. in ^^mb.
" Descendit in mortem, He descended unto Death. If any think this to be
somewhat figurative, yet it is verily so familiar and easy to all people as
that other word in this Creed is, He sits at the right hand of God: yea it
is farie easier indeed. And herein all the later famous, learned and godly
Restorers of Religion in a manner do join with us, as Mat. Bucer, P. Martyr,
Bulinger, ^^slitut.
Olevia, etc. Yea M. Calvin "liked this also well enough: though yet he seems
to lean more to another sense (viz. Christ's Hellish sufferings) which indeed
is a true doctrine, as before is declared, though to this place of the Creed (I
think) not so fit. Now these men your L. ought not to skorne nor reproach,
though you have leave to deal so with me. Their piety, learning, and
authority is such with all that love the Gospel, as will overwaigh your big
words and high looks, and whatsoever else you are lifted up withal above our
mediocritie. Hitherto we have answered, admitting the authority of these
words He descended to Hades.

But we are in truth to know, ^ere.
that (as you cite them and vige them) they have no such authority and credit,
as hitherto we have yielded unto them. And that for 3. causes. First, for that
your Tra^slating and terming them, He descended into Hell, is corrupt, partial,
and untrue. Which I trust is manifest by that which I have showed before
touching the true property and natural use of Hades. If you say among us all
men do so speak here and translate hades Hell. I pray you consider that this
article (as also I think this whole Creed) was at first written in Greek, and
not in English. Wherefore the English term (how common so ever) must not
prejudice us, nor the truth in this matter, as very unreasonably a you
endeavor to make it to do. ^^g. 420.
Convince us evidently and soundly by Greek authority, that Hades is always
Hell, or that Hades is never applied to the condition and state of the godly
deceased and then I will yield: or else my sufficient proofs before to the
contrary will convince the untrue and partial translation. Another reason to
deny utterly the authority and credit of these words (He descended to hades,)
and so to hold them unable to make any argument as from our Creed, is because
this special clause of Christ's descending to Hades or to Infernum is new, and
lately put into our vulgar Creed called the Apostles Creed. Ruffin Symb.
Ruffinus witnesses (who lived about 500. years after Christ) that it was not
at all in the Creed in his time. I say not at all^ neither in the Roman Creed,
nor yet in the Creed of the Eastern Churches. His words are these, Sciendum
sane est quod in Ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non habetur additum, Deseendit ad
inferna: sed nee in Orientis Ecclesiis habetur hic sermo. Will you say,
Ruffinus lies? Or can you bring to the contrary any proof? I think not: yea
I am sure you can not. Then if there were no such Article as this, nor any
such words any where in the Creed for the space of 500. years after Christ, I
mervaile what authority they have now to be taken necessarily for a distinct
article in our Creed, and as differing materially from Dead and Buried. Sure,
it is Namely Des^^^le. Hades.
to new to be received for doctrine, which Page 13^
sprang up so late. Yea, thus Erasm. (...) Symb. Ca^^ 4.
Erasmus may seem to have some color for his conjecture, that about Thomas
Aquinas time they might (peradventure) be put into this Creed. Third: we can
not see, but that whenever whosoever put it first into this place, they
signified hereby it seems, that Christ went to Limbus, a place under the
earth, where they imagined the blessed Patriarchs rested. For this was indeed
the opinion generally of the ancient Christians even for Limbus inter tay^
before Ch^^ descendin^ bades wa^ our set ^c^ o^ the Cr^^
a long time, and still is retained among the Papists, though now grown much
worse the^ it was of old. But this you justly condemn as an error as well as
we, how general and how ancient soever it be. Now also though this were the
1st meaning of this Article, whenever it fi^fte took place in the common
Creed, yet this was not Hell: this gives no furtherance to your assertion,
that Christ went into the place of the Damned in torments. But Thaddaeus,
Jgnatius, Athanasius, have these very words. Yet they say not any where that
they were in that set form of the Apostles Creed Which ^^deed they (...) had
not.
which we now have. Also they are clean against your opinion here, as
presently we shall see. You will say, yet even Ruffinus in his exposition of
the Creed alleges this article, and he allows the doctrine thereof. I
answer, He alleges truly these words Descendit ad inferna, but not out of
any example of the Apostles Creed: yea he expressly denies it to be therein any
where at that time, as before we showed. Only it being his own and the common
opinion then, he groundeth it upon other reasons (namely certain mis^aken
scriptures) yet such as he was content to like of, and so holds indeed that
Christ went down to Infernum, that is to Limbus Patrum, as an opinion then
common among men, and worthy (as he thought) to be believed, and to be applied
to this place of the Creed touching the Death of Christ, ^asin. in ^mb. Ca^h. 4.
although as yet no such matter was contained in the common Creed. Erasmus
says, The Fathers would not be so rash as to put it into the articles of
their Creed, seeing their opinions heereabout were so varying and doubtful.
Now this you know was all mistaken, wrongfully gathered from the Scriptures, as
badly applied to the Creed, and nothing else indeed but the common error of
those times. Yet then hitherto all this is far from justifying your opinion,
ner^^er may you allege the Creed for your warrant. Where note also that
Ruffinus here understands the very matter it self (precisely signified by
these words Descendit ad inferna) to be immediately but this, that He dyed like
other good men, and was buried. For he says, Vis verb^^adem videtur esse in
eo quod Sepultus dicitur: The effect of this phrase He descended to Infernum,
seems to be all one and the same with this, He was Buried. And afterward
going ab^ut to prove by the Scripture that Christ descended to Jnfernu^, he
shows that he means his death hereby and his burial: Quod in infernum
descendit evidenter praenu^tiatur in Psalmis, vbi dicit: Et in pulverem mortis
deduxisti me. Et iterum, Quae vt^litas in sanguine meo dum descendo in
Corruptionem. And before upon those words: He was Crucified under Pon. Pilate,
and descended to infernum h^ gives this sense among other words, Divina
natura in mortem per carnem descendit. The Divine nature humbled it self eve^
unto Death in respect of the flesh. Howsoever then he thinks consequently
that Christ descending to infernu^ did after Death go to a place beneath unto
the godly Souls departed before, and then set them free from thence and carried
them with him, yet it appears that immediately by this phrase and properly he
meant no more, but that he Dyed and was Bu^ied: all the rest was consequent as
an effect after this, according as he and most others of the Ancients did
think. Lastly here we see that Ruffinus extends this his Descending to the
Divine nature: but he means it improperly and in a certain sort, according
to that also in the Philippains, Phil. (...)
He being in the form of God, Verse
humbled himself and became obedient unto death. So that properly he means
it of the very death of his Manhood, and nothing else. Which is our very mind
and judgment, agreeing also generally with the Fathers herein Pa. 162
before rehearsed. But Ignatius Page 1
you think, is clearly yours: likewise one Page 17
Thaddaeus, by Eusebius report one of the 70. Disciples which the Evangelist
Luke speaks of: also Page 41
Athanasius Creed. Ignatius saying, Christ descended to Hades alone, but rose
again with many, Igna^^us.
means evidently his Burial and going down into his Grave: as you
acknowledge that Page 14.
Hades many times may well signify. Which is the plainer to be his meaning,
for as much as he notes his Buryall here in no other words besides. And sure
he alludeth to that in Matthew, Math 27 53.
The Graves did open, and many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose* And
came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City and
appeared to many. This is touching the Resurrection of their bodies out of
their Graves, not of their Souls ansing up from Hell. Neither in Ignatius is
there any show of reason that he meant Hades for Hell. He may mean, I grant,
(that which is in effect all one) the restoring of their whole Persons taken
away hence by Death, or their coming from under the Dominion and power of
Death: which indeed is according to the proper largenes of this word. Also that
Christ (katelthe) came under the same. Not that he went locally downward,
except in his Burial; but touching his whole manhood that he was humbled and
abased even under the Dominion and strength of Death. And thus it is true, that
As Ruffi^^ also vnd^^ stood ^t. (...) 200.
Christ by his Death (including also together his Burial) came down or
Descended. But only this you urge and stand upon for your claim to Ignatius,
because it is said. He brake down the wall or stop, which was never broken
before. Where you may know that the meaning is this: The power of the Grave, or
the strength and force of Death was now by Christ's Death and Resurrection
utterly overcome and dissolved, which remained in deed from the beginning of
the world (till Christ's death) as a mighty Wall not broken down. But now the
virtue of his death and resurrection brake it clean down for ever. So that
hereby Christ is taught to be (as the Apostle also to like effect speaks)
the first fruits of the Dead. Page 179.
But you say, a Many rose from the dead before Christ, and therefore that
partition was often broken by others before him. I answer, Though some being
dead did rise to life again before Christ's Resurrection (as touching the
time) yet the virtue and power of Christ's resurrection was before them, by
which only and merely they rose again. Neither yet was Resurrection to all
the Dead forth with performed by the Resurrection of Christ: nevertheless
thoroughly purchased it was eve^ then, and by the only power and virtue thereof
is and shall be performed to all in due time. So that thus Christ alone brake
that wall and stop, and absolutely he has broken it down, which no man before
him nor besides him ever brake. The like unto this is your Thaddaeus sentence:
^^^ddaeus. ^^^^nasius.
also Athanasius in his Creed. Whom the rather thus I understand, (as it
seems, most reasonably and necessarily) because they express neither his
Death, nor his Burial at all in any other words save these, He descended to
Hades. Therefore surely this is it, which here they mean by his descending to
Hades; and this is all that they mean therein, that he was brought under the
dominion of death and was Buried. ^^escending ^^plied to ^^^^ts Soul (...)
Death) ^ever found ^^cripture, in any ^^cient ^^ed.
Consdering also that * no Ancient Creed in the world has all these 3. diverse
and distinct Clauses, He 'Dyed, was Buried, Descended to Hades: not the very
Apostles Creed (as we call it) in Ruffinus time had them, as we have seen. But
this last clause which is in question was put in "since that time (to signify
Christ's going to Limbus, it seems) by whomsoever it was put in, ^^t well
ob^^ed: Treat ^ag. 93. ^^g. ^15.
as is before said. b Your seeking to prevent this reason, because the Ancient
Creeds want sundry other Articles which now are in our vulgar Creed, is to no
purpose. For as much as they all do evermore intend to set down persitly the
sum of Christ's accomplished Redemption and Mediation at the least. Not any of
those his maine works are in the^ omitted. Now always in the Creeds where
they express his Dying and Burying, there is omitted his going to Hades. Where
they express his Going to Hades, Note.
there they omit his Dying, or his Burial, or both. Therefore I may well
conclude, I think, that no Ancient Creed in the world ever meant to teach that
Christ went to Hades, except in such a sense only as was (in their judgment)
in effect all one as to Die, or to go among the Dead, and to be Buried and no
more. Thaddae^^ co^n^e^
Thus far of Thaddaeus and Athanasiaes Creeds. Howbeit to speak plainly, your
Thaddaeus whom Page 1 179.
you so highly esteem, is a mere cou^terfait. You say, This report of him in
Page 1^
Eusebius, by some men is counted fabulous. Nay, who ever since Eusebius. (I think)
held it for better? Many other like matters are to much allowed by Eusebius. in
other cases also: notwithstanding his story of the church affairs the^ (I
grant) is justly received as the best that we have extant. But it is strange
that this fable and forgerie of Thaddaeus should so please you. It is all
forged, or else foully corrupted; for these reasons: 1. This writing touching
Thaddaeus brought by Eusebius from Edessa, says, that Judas the Apostle (who
sent this Thaddaeus being one of the 70. Disciples) was the same who is called
also Thomas the Apostle. But the Scripture it self shows that Judas and
Thomas were 2. diverse and several Apostles. Therefore this writing is false.
2. Here also we may probably conceave an other error; that this Thaddaeus
(one of the 70.) seems to be mistake^ in this Syria^ writing for Thaddaeus
one of the 12. Apostles. 3. Further this counterfeit Thaddaeus was content to
receave (and did receave) even from a King him self, and also (as it seems)
from one of his Nobles, Adoration and worship. Whereas the true servants of
Christ Peter and the Angel refused utterly the same in such very manner offered
unto them by meaner persons in respect of state. Therefore this Thaddaeus, if
he were any, was some false Apostle, and came not by Christ's sending, but led
by the spirit of error and seduction: as some were, who went abroad in the
name of Disciples and Apostles, in those days. 4. Neither do I see how it can
possibly be true which this Thaddeus says, that Christ ascended up to his
Father with a great multitude: seeing the Scripture shows how after 40. days
(the time that he conversed with his Apostles) he ascended in all their
sightes, alone up into Heaven.
You get nothing therefore by citing these vngainful None which (...) prove
(...) very Ph^^ to be in postles (...) then: the prove (...) Matter (...)
witnesses for you. Nor yet by citing the Apostolic Creed: seeing you stand
only upon the precise order of the words He Dyed, was Buried, descended into
Hades. Which how weakly they make for you, Page 1^ 199.
before we have showed. Whereunto this may be added, that verily it seems
there was no certain prescript number of Articles in the Creed of old, much
less any precise or exact form of words, such as now we have, and which is
all your hold. This partly by Ruffinus writing upon it, We may ink that ye
postles Creed (...) no exact ^rm of words ye primitive ^es.
may be understood: who among the words of the Creed then, rehearses not
diverse material words, which our usual form now has expressly. The Ancients
Ignatius, Irenaeus, Justin, Tertullian, Origin, etc. in their Creedes do
differ more both for words, and matter also. Yet they all pretend to rehearse
the Apostolic Creed, as by Tradition they received it, and as they severally
conceaved it: at least so far always as concerned Christ's maine and distinct
works of Redemption wrought for us. Neither overthrow you this, in saying, that
b some of the^ want a good many of the Articles which are in the Apostles Creed.
For (as I said) they want none (neither ought they) concerning Christ's
mediation wrought for us. His going to Hell was a maine and a distinct part
thereof, if he went thither indeed. Wherefore they might not in any wise be
defective therein. Again though they want Articles which are now in our form
of the Apostles Creed, yet how prove you that they want any of that, which with
them was vulgar and common? Last of all, though some of the Ancients do not
perhaps rehearse all the Articles of the Apostolik Creed, (as it was then
current by Tradition in the Churches) yet you have no color in the world to
think that none of them all should rehearse it wholly and entirely. But in none
of them all is this form of the Creed found which we now have, and do observe.
Yea by the variety and difference of them all, who still profess that they
utter the Apostolic Creed taught them by Tradition, we may see that the
Apostles Creed had not any exact nor precise form of words at the beginning
(as now we have it used among us) but it contained only (as we may think)
certain Heads of Doctrine fundamental, ^^om the A^^tles (^t see^^th) there
(...) received ^^rief sum ^^tter, no ^^cise form words for (...) common ^^ed.
That there is one God, 3. Persons, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
That the Son Jesus Christ is both God and Man, That as man he was extremely
humbled for us even unto Death, and after that exalted unto glory in Heaven,
whence in due time he shall come to judgment, etc. This in effect all Creeds do
express, but in words they differ greatly, and sometimes some have mo articles
then these: yet such they seem to be as were on some special occasion more
particularly and expressly noted, being otherwise either some part or else some
proper effect and consequent from these. And so it might come to pass that
some of the Ancient Creeds differed somwhere in some particular articles from
other Creeds, yea all of them in words from each other: and yet in substance
and effect they were all one. Seeing then that the Apostles Creed for the
precise form of words was not the same in the primitive Churches which we now
have: yea that at first it had no exact form of words at al. For it is sure
that no man can prove by good testimony that there was any, or indeed any other
then such as these ancient Fathers thus variably and differingly rehearsed.
Seeing also it is proved, that this set form which we now have, specially our
article in question was not As a (...) the C^^
received for many hundred years after Christ; some supposing that these words
were not put in till near 1000. years after him. I say, All this being
considered, it is evident that your Argument only from the precise and exact
form of words in the Creed, and from the order and placing of He descended to
Hades, namely after Dead and Buried, is not worth any thing, to induce thereby
an Article of faith, That Christ's Soul went to Hell.

After this it shall not be amiss to consider some other reasons of good
moment. Our 3d. Reason is: REAS^^
If there be no certain benefit to the godly by Christ's going to Hell, then
doubtless he went not thither. But there is no certain benefit to the Godly by
Christ's going to hell. Therefore doubtless he went not thither. This Reason you
Page ^
call our strongest fort. It is not our strongest, but yet strong indeed: for
you have made no where any good answer to it, neither can you. I know a number
of words you have throughout your whole treatise denying the Assumption, but
they are nothing in the world but mere presumptions. You say, Page ^
Is the subduing of hell powers, and the treading on all their force, and the
restraining of all their fury so small a matter with you, that it does no good
to the Godly? And elsewhere most tediously and vainly you augment and repeat
the marvelous things that Christ did by his Humane presence in Hell. I would
willingly believe it, but alas who says so besides your self, or only such as
can tell no better then you. Where is that become now, Page ^
what I read in the word of God that I believe, what J do not read, that I do
not believe, etc. It is easy to say, that you will only hold what the
Scripture assures: but in practice you will slip from this precise order, when
you list. I know well that you boldly say that the Page ^
Purpose of Christ's descent is plainly professed in Scriptures, to be the
spoiling of Satan, and delivering of men from the power of Hell. Is it plainly
professed? I beseech you, where? I wott well what you will feign and devise of
the Fathers, when you impute so palpable untruths to the word of God it self.
Show us one title, one jot of any benefit which (by the Scriptures) Christ
wrought for us by his local presense in Hell, and then I will cease to gainsay
it forever. Otherwise tell us never so much of the wonderful and singular
fruit of Christ's being there, the more you amplify, the more you hazard your
credit, and the more we shall wonder at your bold avouching matters which are
not in the word of God. The benefits all and every one (which you every where
rehearse) I most unfeignedly and religiously believe: namely that he deserved
all good things for us, and obtained the^ for us in his Resurrection, etc.
Ascension: and that finally and fully he shall in his last judgment tread down
Satan under our feet. But what is this to his local being in Hell? Show
therefore I say by the express word that Christ in Hell did these, or any part
of these good things for us. If you do not (for as yet I see no title to prove
that) surely all your talk is but blasts of vanity. The which I rather
believe that you never can nor will do, because you confess as much somewhere as
overturneth all your show of Christ's doing good to us in Hell. ^^g. 160.
For, a This conquest (you say) Christ purchased by his passion, but he did not
execute it till his resurrection. If he executed nothing till his Resurrection,
and purchased all in his Passion, then he did nothing in Hell. For his
Resurrection was distinctly after his supposed being in Hell, whither he never
afterward returned to execute there any thing at all. Nay, Austin your only
stay thinks * he descended in vain, unless he did good to some who were even
there in Hell in torments. ^^e before ^^g. 168.
But this you utterly renounce. So that every way still it remains good, that
seeing there is no certain benefit that Christ did in Hell, neither to us, nor
to any, therefore we are not to believe that he was in Hell.

Our 4d. Reason: There is altogether as great reason and as urgent cause that
Christ whole man (both Soul, ^SON 4.
and Body) should be present in Hell to free us thence wholly, (that is our
Souls, and Bodies) as there is that his Soul must be there present to free
thence our Souls. But simply it is confessed that his Body was never there,
neither had any cause to be, for the freeing of our Bodies. Therefore it
follows, that neither his Soul was ever there, nor had any cause so to be,
for the freeing of our Souls. Here I wish, you would answer my proposition
without Skoffes and taunts and haughty disdain, as your manner is. But bring
some evident and clear difference that his Soul must go more necessarily
thither alone then that his Body also should, and let it be truly grounded on
the proportion of faith and Christian Religion, if not on express Scripture. I
wot well what you bring from some Fathers, Page 17^
Fulgentius, Page 17^.181.
Athanasius, and others, That his Soul by being present in Limbo, (that they
mean by Hades and Infernum) saved us from Hell, and by his flesh temporally
dying he gave us life eternal, and by lying in the grave uncorrupted he gave
us incorruptio^. Here we allow them so far as they mean, that what one part
of him did, that our whole man and every part received good by. But if they
think, his Soul by Divine ordinance had need to be actually present elsewhere,
then only with the godly deceased, to execute his victory gotten before on the
Cross against Satan, to thend that we might be free from Hell, the^ let the^
show us the Scripture for this Divine ordinance: and so (by Gods grace) we shall
forthwith embrace it. Otherwise at least let them show us a reason (or do you
so much for them) why both parts jointly should not rather have gone thither by
like necessity to execute that together, which both jointly had got and
deserved for together: the benefit also whereof is to come (not to one part
alone, but) jointly to both in us. Again, why this going to Hell by our
Savior Christ was not rather after his Resurrection, when he had begun his
actual Triumph in deed by joining together again both parts of his manhood,
in both which together before he had been humbled. Neither is it likely that
he began it before his Resurrection, seeing the Scripture Math. Luke 2^ Act 2
2. and 3.15 40 and 1 17.3. and Romans 4.6.4. and (...) Cor. 15 ^ 1.20 1 14. 2 T^^
11.
every where notes this as the first part of his exaltation after death, and
it being strange in Christian reason and against proportion of faith to think,
that one part of Christ (his Soul) should gloriously triumph, the other (his
Body) all this while lying in Humiliation, possessed with death in the Grave,
which you say is the Devils range, a part of his power, and of the Kingdom of
darkness. Yea also seeing it is most likely that he would clear himself first
wholly and entirely in both parts, before he would begin to strip and spoil
Satan for us. Lastly seeing it is a greater degree of triumph and victory to
spoil the enemy, to tread him under foot, to break his houses and strong
Holds, to set free the captives, to make him and his to bow the knee to the
conqueror, then to get perfect life and freedom to himself. So that always
that, is after this. Wherefore it seems that Christ did thus also. If he did
actually such things in Hell, it was not till after his Resurection; before
which time he had not perfect life and deliverance himself. Let us I pray have
some clear and Christian reason against these strong likelyhoods: and then let
us ask a point or two more, which we think will follow likewise, if your
assertion be true. First, if one part of Christ, viz: his Soul only were in Hell
to execute his victory which before he had merited on the Cross, then why in
his sufferinges, righteousness, and obedience might not one part of Christ's
manhood have as well sufficed. I say why might not one part alone have in this
world merited enough (which Appollinaris an Haeretick affirmed) as well as that
one part might serve to triumph for us in Hell. Again seeing his Body in the
Grave by overcoming corruption which is a part of the Kingdom of Satan as you
say, ^^g. 216.
did thereby save our bodies from that part of Satan's walk as you call it, by
what reason is it that thereby he destroyed not consequently the whole kingdom
of Satan, saving thereby our Souls also, in so much that Christ's Soul might
not have needed to have come into Hell for that purpose. Or if they mean that
his flesh being in the Grave, and his Soul being in Hell did severally and
distinctly save our flesh and our souls, then how will you be reconciled with
them, ^^ur self ^eth it, (...) all men ^^g
a who do deny that point. Further for the actual stripping of Satan of his
spoils, why was it needful that an actual presence of any part of his
manhood should be in Hell, seeing indeed it is certain that the whole actual
triumph of Christ over Satan proceeds not of the proper virtue of the
manhood, but only from the virtue and power of the Godhead of Christ.
Therefore that might possibly be as effectual and as fully accomplished in the
absence of the manhood as in the prsence: all the while that the Godhead and
manhood were still united and continually together in one Person.

Last of all, if it were the very humane presence of his soul that so
delivered our souls from thence that they shall never come thither why did not
the presence of his flesh in the Grave keep ours that it should never come
there, or at least that it should never putrify nor rot, as his flesh did not.
All these sequeles and consequences are as good and as likely as your
assertion, that Christ's Soul (and not his flesh) ought to be locally in Hell
for this end, that ours might never come there.

Further, I made this Argument in my Pa^ 160
former Treatise, that Christ's Descending into Hell (if ever he did so) could
not be judged any part of his Exaltation or Glorification. To which your reply
is, I know not whether more strange, or skornful. But you Pa. 416.
resolve that these words He descended to Hell, imports his Exaltation and
Triumph. Yet you skoffe at me for the like: as if I had said, Pa^^^
His Descending was Ascending: and Hell was Heaven. But heerin you affirm
untruly. 1. I say, Though his Soul leaving his body Ascended: yet this is not
meant by that phrase, He descended to Hades. 2. I never said that Hades
signified Heaven, although some in In a^^^ble s^^^
Hades are in Heaven. 3. Much less did I ever say, that Hell is Heaven. Why
the^ cry you out of Page ^^
impudency, facing, ridiculous, and audacious, presumption. etc. Who presumes
let the advised reader judge, when you thus confidently avouch as an article of
faith that Christ's Soul locally descended; and yet bring not one proof of it
from Gods word, nor from any man's opinion, whom you will cleave unto fully.
That Pa. ^^
you avouch ve^^^
Phil. 2. for it, is more strange: where we have not one word of his local
being in Hell. And that the ver^^
Colossians 2. should prove it, passes all the rest. Where (though we grant
you your reading) yet the express text refers that triumph to Christ's
Cross: which you openly deny. That of the Counsels, how Christ rose again,
The prove for yo^
having spoiled Hell, I easily yield; seeing that proves not his local being
there. The same I affirm of that Allegory in Luke; which shows Christ's
Luk^ ^^
Overcoming, Binding, and Spoiling of Satan in deed: but not by his local
being in Hell. What if Christ do set out many points of doctrine by Parables?
Yet such are those points, as are proved otherwise and elsewhere. The Parables
do but illustrate them. Howbeit this Parable in question, Christ expressly
applies to his Dispossessing of Devils out of men's bodies. Wherefore you
ought not to wrest it to another thing, whereof there he has not a word, nor
any where else: that is, to show how Christ bound the Devil in Hell locally.
Rather remember, I pray, how God showed his displeasure against your wresting
of his word, by that strange terror that happened even then, when you were
descended into the depth of this uncouth doctrine at Paul's Cross. Which for
the time so affrighted many 1000. of people, that it will never be forgotten in
England while your opinions be remembered: albeit this grew but of a small
occasion, as after it seemed.

Where you charge me in the end, arrogantly and absurdly to falsify the Synod
of our Realm, (...) 17.
it is but what your self does in effect. I said, Our Synod corrected K.
Edwardes Synod. You acknowledge and profess that " in the later words of that
former Synod now left out, (...). 419.
are 3. things that cannot be justified by the Scriptures. 1. That the Spirits
of the just were in Hell. 2. That Christ there preached unto them. 3. That he
stayed there till his Resurrection.
Which our Synod since very profitably has overskipped and suppressed. First
then your self grants, that our later Synod corrected the former about this
matter: which in my words you cannot endure to hear. 2. You charge these
words of K. Edw. Synod. with 2. points, which are not in them. 1. That it
says, how the Spirits of the just were in Hell: and that Christ descending
thither, stayed there till his resurrection. In me you would make this a great
matter, so to misreport the words of a Synod, which in deed says nothing
hereof. 3. It is well that you * renounce that of " Peter, (...) 22.^^.3.19
(by Austins direction) as making not at all for any local being of Christ in
Hell. But yet herein your self openly refuses the mind of all your
predecessors, yea of our later Synod, if they believed as you urge that they
did. For if they liked Christ's local being in Hell, they misliked not the
applying of that in Peter thereunto: as by May. Nowells Catechism may appear.
Neither misliked they his tarying there till his resurrection: which Austin
also holds as firmly, as that he was there. All which you utterly disclaim,
as well as I. Why then do you aggravat my differing from them, and see not your
own. 4. That our English Clea^gie generally did or do believe Christ's local
descent into Hell (although they read and rehearse those words so translated)
certainly no man will, nor ought to acknowledge. Every man is assured of the
contrary. You can argue nothing then herein by our usual naming of this word
Hell, in this place of the Creed. Which yet is all that you Page ^^
have here. So that your conclusion is vain. If Hell in English be Hell, and
going down be descending, etc. Likewise is that, You are content to be tried
by all the Fathers both Greek and Latin. Who all (as has been showed) do make
against your opinion. Also as touching the Scripture you are utterly destitute
thereof: which yet alone must take place with us in this matter. All that you
bring for your purpose, are merely mistaken and mistranslated words of
Scriptures, Creedes, and Fathers: as (I hope) has plainly been proved. This
therefore may suffice for us to refuse your doctrine in these points. Wisdom
shall be justified of all her children. To God only wise be praise through JESUS
CHRIST for ever. Romans 16.17.

FINIS.
Pagin. Lin. Faults. Correction. 13. in marg. page 8. page 7. 23. 37. he they
24. 2. their the 27. 29. will well 36. 22. in marg your you 49. 24. ne 57. 7.
herefore heretofore 65. 28. externally eternally. 65. 8. better buter 77. in
marg: b page 51.55. b page 71.73. 103. 33. torments. torments: yet no only to
it.

The diverse Significations of the Greek word Hades; Which is ha^^ according
to the Circumstances of the places where it is used. See page 177. Whereunto
also the Hebrew Sheol may be rightly compared.
Hades a mere Priuatio^ of this visible World; No visible being here any
more: pa. 157. etc. 169. 178. applied

Natively Seldom, yet sometime to All visible transitory things when they are
Destroyed from out of this World, and are seen here no more. page 188. etc.
Often, and chiefly to Dead Men: yea to al dead men, both Good and Bad, Blessed
and Damned. page 155 etc. Yet only in respect yt they are Dead, and seen no
more in this world page 156 162. 166. 169 177. 178. Thus sometime it signifies
concerning the^, that which Took them away hence, and holds them still: pa.
169. 179. 181. 192. either. Death it self. pa. 161. 1^^ The Power, Strength,
(...) Force of death. page 194.
their State and condition: pa. 171. 175. 178 viz: of their Whole Person
dissolved, and taken away hence. pa. 158. 177. Parts; both Soul. pa. 155. and
Body. pa. 201.

Place; pa. 173. 181. in respect of the dissolved Pa^tes, so (...) as they have
a Being somwhere in a place after Death. no Positive thing in any place, but
mere. Privation (as is said) from thi^ Visible World.



Figuratively: by a Poetical fiction; making it sometime (as it were) a Place
of things, which in truth have no Being nor Place after they cease to be here.
page 188. Prosopopoeia, lawfully setting out ye Power of death, or of
destruction from hence, as if it were a Person having this power. pa. 182. 179.
192. Idolatrously making such an imagined Person, a false God. 173. 179.
Synecdoche, and so it is sometime Hell: page 187. 171. Heaven in Plato. page
178. the Grave. page 159.



