REASONS TAKEN OVT OF GODS WORD AND THE BEST HVMANE TESTIMONIES PROVING A
NECESSITY OF REFORMING OUR CHVRCHES IN ENGLAND. Framed and applied to 4.
Assertions wherein the foresaid purpose is contained. The 4. Assertions are set
down in the Page next following.

I believed, therefore I have spoken.

Psalm. 116.10. One thing is necessary.

Luc. 10.42. 1604.

The 4. Assertions.
Page 1. 1. It is necessary to reform the Churches of England, their
Ministry, and Ceremonies. Page 57. 2. For the space of 200. years after
Christ the Visible Churches using government were not Diocesan Churches,but
particular ordinary Congregations only: and the Bishops (as they were
peculiarly called after the Apostles) were only Parishionall not Diocesan
Bishops, differing from other Pastors only in Prioritie of order not in
Maioritie of rule. Page 67. 3. The Scriptures of the New Testaments do co^taine
and set forth unto us (besides the government by Extraordinary Offices,
Apostles Prophets Evangelistes) an ordinary form of Church-governement used
then. Page 70. 4. The ordinary form of Church-governement set forth unto us in
the New Testament, ought necessarily to be kept still by us; it is not
changeable by men, and therefore it only is lawful.
To the high and mighty Prince JAMES by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc. Grace and peace be
multiplied in Christ our Savior.
RIght high, mighty, and gracious Sovereign, in most humble wise your
Majesty's loyal and devoted Subjects who for the safety of our souls desire
the Reformation of our Churches according to Gods word, do cast down our
selves in the true affection of our hearts before your Royal presence, whom
we acknowledge to be the noblest pillar of the Gospel and the greatest hope
for the propagation and establishing thereof that is in all Christendom.
Beseeching your Highness to extend your Kingly aid and furtherance unto us in
our foresaid most necessary and just desire, with protection also toward our
innocencies against the Oppression of our Adversaries in this cause. Their
Oppressions of us are and have been many, very grievous. and of long
continuance. For the which we* have known that your Majesty formerly has been
touched with a godly and tender commiseration toward us. As it is with all
humble thankfulness acknowledged (to your immortal honor) by * a Reverend
Father, M. Cartwe. Epist. to the King before his Homil. on Eccles.
one that heretofore tasted thereof, and now lately sleeps in the Lord. The
truth of God maintained then, is the very same which we now dutifully seek
for. Our consciences are rather more certified of the goodness and necessity of
these Ordinances of God, by how much more time we have spent since in examining
and trying the Reasons alleged to and fro about the same. The great increasing
also of Papists and Libertines among us since this time, assures us that the
present Ecclesiastical Orders are more friendly to them then to the synceritie
of the Gospel. Besides, the most lamentable dissentions and diversity of
opinions in matters of Religion breaking forth every where among the people
(contrary to lovely Unity, which the Diocesan Bishops do vainly pretend to be
a proper fruit of their Office, and contrary to that which other Churches
refusing them and their Traditions do sweetly enjoy) this animateth us with all
dutiful endeavor to seek this Reformation aforesaid so divinely commended
unto us. Lastly, we have had it from your Majesty very often, that whatsoever
things in our Churches we can show to be Contrary to Gods word, shall be by your
gracious means removed: and whatsoever (yet out of use with us) may appear by
Gods word to be Necessary; shall be established. May it please your most
gracious Majesty, let this word stand. We crave, we desire nothing more. And
less then this how can we desire? I hope it is showed and declared competently
in the Treatise following that the matters in question wherewith our
consciences are troubled, are in very truth Contrary to Gods Word. And here we
most humbly beseech your Majesty on our bended knees to think of us no
otherwise. The Lord is witness to our souls, we by not; that of mere
conscience to God we seek the right, and refuse the wrong, namely these Humane
Traditions Ecclesiastical: and not (as our Adversaries suggest) of any
contentious or peevish mind. There is no other reason in the world moving us in
this matter, but because we see it with our eyes that all such things are
directly Contrary to Gods word; and that Christ's own Ordinances which yet we
want are necessary to be enjoyed for our souls health. They are vain words of
men unadvised, yea of corrupt minds, and studying to flatter, which cease not
to inculcat (and specially in greatest presence) that these things are
Indifferent, and arbitrary. I pray God it com not to pass by such reasoning,
that many will hold all things indifferent likewise: indifferent of what
Religion they be: indifferent whether of any, or of no Religion. Which conceits
I fear already are entered in to the hearts of many, yea of thousands in
England. But we believe (and the truth is) Gods word never knew any
indifferency in matters of the Church or of Religion: wherein all things
(whether great or small) have ever ben either simply good or evil, necessary
or unlawful. Our Adversaries do sharply rise up against us, and labor to
charge us with most odious reproaches and accusations, chiefly laid out to your
Majesty and others near you. Where as they know well, that we com nothing
short of themselves touching any duty to your Highness Crown and Dignity. And
in affection to your person we have been before them all, yea then when it has
gone the harder with us for it. Only in a point of Religion we differ from them,
that we believe Gods written Word ought to be our sole warrant for all things
Ecclesiastical, and even so namely for those with us now in controversy, if
at all they be lawful. Which point they utterly deny. And for this cause they
cry out importunatly that we are Schismatikes. There is no end of their
speeches and writings loading us with this extreme injury. Whereunto though
we have to long used more then patient silence, yet always we can not do so.
Ierom. ad Pammach.
We are taught by a worthy saying of an ancient Divine; Jn crimine Haereseos
neminem oportet esse patientem. When any is accused of Haeresie or Schism, (as
we are) he ought by no means to put it up in silence, but to make his lawful
defense, Wherefore I thought it needful (being, though the meanest of my
brethren, yet by Gods grace one of his servants in the Ministry of the
Gospel, and being not only in general, but also Answer to the humble Petition
of Ministers desiring Res. etc.
in particular thus traduced by them) needful therefore I thought it to be to
give out some Reasons of our faith and conscience in this cause. Whereby our
innocence and sound judgment herein (through Gods blessing) shall be made
manifest, and our Adversaries chiefest evasions being taken away the truth and
necessity of this Reformation is more distinctly and clearly demonstrated. I
deny not (most noble Prince) but that there be diverse Brethren desiring this
Reformation, who yet affirm not all that I affirm in this Treatise, or
something not so fully. Neither are the Diocesan Bishops, nor their followers,
all wholly of one mind. Yet touching us, I know we wholly agree in the ground of
our desire; which is the Sufficiency and perfection of Gods word in whatsoever
matters merely Ecclesiastical. I say, merely Ecclesiastical. For in matters
any way Civil no man doubts but God has left liberty unto man's judgment and
liking. Howbeit not so in things merely Ecclesiastical; as after shall
further be showed, God willing. And thus every sober minded man well
considering the Reasons hereafter deduced from this ground, will (I hope) in
short time not hardly accord with us.

But now it remains (Gracious Sovereign) that I entreat your Majesty,
which in most lowly and humble manner I do, to pardon my boldness. First in
gathering these Reasons, and to such a purpose as here is signified. Secondly
in presenting them to your Highness. Thirdly in presuming herein to allege and
cite some of your own goulden sentences. Your religious wisdom easily
perceaveth that this purpose, beside mine own due defense; concerns a most
weighty and holy work: viz. the Reformation of many and great disorders (as we
are persuaded) in our Churches, which hitherto have been the proper causes of
unspeakable hinderance to the Gospel, and of calamity to infinite faithful
lovers thereof among us. In which regard how glorious a work this will be and
how acceptable to God, how honorable for your self, and how necessary for us,
your Highness (I am sure) right well understands; and I hope by viewing these
small labors of mine you may somewhat more understand. My desire was to be
brief and plain in so important a cause. Wherefore I have touched the pith of
all in a few, namely in 4. Assertions fortified with short and clear proofs.
And to whom ought I chiefly to offer them but to your Highness? Considering that
you have willed us to prease by patience and well grounded Reasons to persuade
all the rest to like of our judgments, In Basilicon Doron, to the Reader.
or where we see better grounds on the other part to incline thereunto. Which
by Gods grace we shall be ready always to perform. Considering also that yours
is the Sovereign power here to give general redress to these our not only
temporal, but also spiritual grievances in our consciences. And considering
that you not only know, but also embrace and profess most religiously the same
maine Principle of our faith and ground of this persuasion of our Consciences
which we rest upon: viz. The holy Scriptures absolut perfection in matters
Ecclesiastical. Lastly, considering how you have established the Churches in
your Majesty's other Kingdom of Scotland, and in your Islands of Iersey and
Guernsey, accordingly already. Therefore have I ben bold in all duty to offer
these Reasons to your Majesty, as to one whom they principally concern. Where
also we do all beseech you to suffer these words of exhortation. Be strong in
the Lord, and loose not the things which you have don. Yea proceed, and do this
noble work among us also. The Lord is with you, while you be with him. When
you follow close his ways, your very enemies shall be at peace with you. It
shall be easy to do it. To your people generally it will be most acceptable, as a
thing looked for before: to all neighbor Protestant Countries joyful, as
wherein we shall be all nearer linked together. To be short, every way it shall
bring more Honor and less inconvenience to your estate, then perhaps you may
suppose. Finally, Gracious Sovereign, as touching my presumption in meddling
with your writings and applying them to this purpose, I can say nothing, but
only submit my self to your wise, virtuous, and religious consideration. Sure
I am, when we your loyal and faithful Subjects did first see and read the
same, it was the greatest joy and comfort to our hearts that could come unto
us. And therefore I could not but give some notice thereof, always in the most
dutiful and obedient affection of my heart that I can express. The Lord Jesus
in mercy bless your Majesty for ever, and preserve your precious soul from
flattery and falsehood. AMEN.

Your Majesty's humble, obedient, and faithful Subject HENRY JACOB, a Minister
of Gods word.

Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem.

Tertull. ad Scapul.
The 1. Assertion. It is necessary to reform the Churches of England, their
Ministry, and Ceremonies.
A general Argument.
ALl things Contrary to Gods word ought of necessity to be reformed.

But with us in England there are Forms of some reputed visible Churches, viz.
using Church Government, their proper Ministeries or Offices, and also diverse
Ceremonies Contrary to Gods word.

Therefore with us in England it is necessary to reform the Churches, their
Ministry, and Ceremonies.

The Assumption is proved in 8. Reasons.
FIrst, we have the 2. Commandment in the Decalogue; Exodus 2^.4.5.
Thou shall not make to thy self any image or likeness of any thing, etc. Thou
shall not bow down to it nor worship it. Which is a perpetual and universal
Law now still for all Christians, to the same very effect and purpose also, as
it was heretofore unto the Jews. Where we must note, that God forbids not
the same Idoll-worship here, which is forbidden properly in the 1.
Commandment, where he says; verse. 3.
Thou shall not have any other Gods before me. This here forbidden is an other
kind of idolatry. In the first he forbids whatsoever Divine or Godly honor
given unto any thing beside unto God himself. But verse. 4.5.
here he forbids all Means being Humane Inve^tions, whereby men would give
honor to the true God. And namely all Outward means; which we call Gods
Externus Dei Cultus; Liturgia.
Outward Worship or Service. Yet consider always that in this Commandment
such Outward means of honoring God are not denied to men's discretion as are
Civil, either merely or mixtly. But only such are here denied as are merely
Ecclesiastical things, and serve simply to the exercise of Religion. As all
Ecclesiastical Rites, Actions, Ministeries, and Forms of Visible Churches;
which being (as it were) sensible images serving simply for religious or
Ecclesiastical uses, and being merely the inventions of men, must needs by
this Commandment be all simply unlawful. Or, in Gods Outward worship this
Commandment gives leave to men's discretion and wisdom only touching mere
Circumstances, which are nothing else but Occasional or Accidental things
therein. And these Occasional Circumstances or Accidents are always such
Particulars, as whose Generals are either Civil, or Natural, or Written in
the word. I say, these Particulars only (notwithstanding this Commandment) are
permitted to men to appoint, or to change again, at their discretion. In this
text then there are 3. points to be noted. 1. The matter. 2. The Author. 3. The
respect due from us unto the matter here contained.
The matter is the whole spiritual Means of worshipping the true God. And
namely the Outward spiritual means; that is, Gods Visible Church, his
Ministry, his whole Outward Worship and Service. 2. The Author of all this is
precisely determined, viz. God himself, and no Man. 3. Such Inventions of men
must have from Gods people no reverence: but Gods own ordinances must. And
thus this 2. Commandment is truly understood.

To this effect likewise ^re many other places of Scripture, excellent
expositions and interpretations of this maine Commandment. As, Deu. 12 32
Whatsoever I command you, take heed that you do it: thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Isa. 30.21
This is the way, walk ye in it: turn not to the right hand nor to the left.
Psalm. 19.7
The Law of the Lord is perfect. Psalm. 119.113.
I hate vain inventions, but thy law do I love. Nomb. 15.39.
Ye shall have fringes, that when ye look upon them, ye may remember all the
commandments of the Lord, and do them: and that ye seek not after your own
heart, nor after your own eyes, after the which ye go a whoring Matt. 15.13.
Every plant that my heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted up. 2.
Tim. 3.16.17.
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, making the man of God
perfect unto every good work. Ioh. 16.13
The holy Ghost shall lead you into all truth. Gal. 3.15.
No man add to any thing to a man's Testament: much less may we add unto
Christ's Testament. Which is only the holy Scriptures of the Apostles, and
nothing else in the world. Lastly, Romans 16.17.18.
Mark them which make schisms and offenses (...) sc^ Gal. 1.8. 1. Cor. 3.1^
Besides the doctrine which you have learned and avoid them. For such seruenot
the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. With many other mo places to the same purpose.

Out of all which this doctrine remains clear and firm, that all Humane
inventions, or Unwritten Traditions Ecclesiastical are directly contrary to
Gods word. Yea being but Beside the Scripture, they are flatly contrary to it
in these places. And therefore Gods own word (which is only the holy Scriptures
as was before noted) ought to be religiously believed, and held to be for us
as a most perfect and absolute demonstration of all things whatsoever being
properly and simply Ecclesiastical or religious. Which was the special end
and use they were given for. As likew^se they were given unto the Jews; even
to be so absolute and perfect for them, ever since God did give them any holy
Scripture. From which grounds and principal places of Gods wor^e thus
declared, we will now conclude and frame our first Reason.

Unwritten Traditions.
then we have some reputed Churches as touching their outward visible form,
and ministeries, and Ceremonies, contrary to Gods word.

But we have Diocesan and Provincial Churches using government, their proper
Offices, viz. the Provincial and Diocesan viz. as they inflict Ecclesiastical
Censures.
high Commission, Provincial and Diocesan Ruling Bishops, also controverted
Ceremonies which are all Ecclesiastical unwritten Traditions, no ways
contained in, but clean beside the Scripture.

Therefore they are contrary to these places of Gods word, they are simply
evil, and of necesitie the other, viz. the Parish Churches in England ought to
be reformed, freed, and cleared of them all.

Where it is first to be noted,

Reputed Visible Churches of diverse kinds.
Again it is to be noted, that in the es^imation of men a Visible Church (that
is, which is endued with power of Spiritual outward government) is of di^ers
forms and natures. Nevertheles in truth and in ve^ie deed Christ has
ordained for us only one kind of a Visible Church in his word. And this only
ought to be allowed and believed to be a true Church by all Christians. For who
is it, that can or ever could make any society of people to be a Visible
Church, but Christ only? Catholic or Universal visible Church. And the
Catholics taking hold hereof, do conclude that likewise there is and ought to
be one Catholic and universal government Ecclesiastical unto which all
other Churches and their governments must be subordinate. But in Gods word
there is no such visible Church nor government any where to be found. This is
merely devised by the wit and will of men. Again men esteem a whole Nation
professing the Gospel, to be one visible Church, National church. Likewise a
Province a Provincial church: Diocesan Church. Particular ordinary constant
Congregation of Christians in Christ's Testament is appointed and reckoned to
be a visible Church. Particular and Parishionall Churches are the only true
Visible Churches.
And therefore so stands the case now here with us in England also, and so
we ought to esteem it. The which that it may more clearelie appear to be
true, I have thought good to set down this brief Table following, wherein all
the diverse and sundry senses of a Church in the We speak not of the Jews
church under ye Law, which we know was National and only one in the world
under one High Priest. Which were Figures and are ceased. Such also was that
One Church in the wilderness, Acts 7.38 which was yet nevertheles but one
particular Assembly a^^o in one plate gathered to geather so near as such a
multitude could be, Exodus 19 11 etc.
New Testament are plainly and distinctlie showed. And yet none of the 4.
forenamed visible Churches (as some do repute them) are any where there to be
found.

A Table briefly showing all the diverse and sundry significations in the New
Testament of this word (...) which commonly we translate a Church. Wherein we
may easily see which is the on^^e true and proper visible Church of Christ to
which the government Ecclesiastical of i^ ^^^fe does always of right
app^rtaine.
Ecclesia in ye new Testament is taken. Ciuilly and originally for a Act.
19.3^.39.40.
particular Assembly of Citizens in one certain public place about matters of
the Common wealth. Ecclesia in ye new Testament is taken. Religlouslie for a
Church Properly in the next and nearest proportion aunswering to the Original
civil use thereof. This is a Particular Visible Ordinary Congregation of
Christians meeting for religious and Ecclesiastical actions and exercises. And
this is the only true Visible Church of Christ having from him the Spiritual
power of order and government in it self ordinarily. The proper Ministers
thereof are the only true ordinary Ministers of Christ. This we read of in
the Scripture in 2. respects: Definitly; This is some certain known Mat. 18.1^
Revel. 21. Col. 4.16. Gal. 1.2. ^. These. ^.14. ^. Cor. 16.1, 19. 2. Cor 8.1.
Romans 16.4.16
particular Congregation in some certain particular place which we may go unto
consult with and obey. Indefinitlie; where is understood This, or That, or Mat.
3^.^. etc. 1. Cor. 12.11. Mat. 6 33. Isa. 2.1.2, 3. ^. Pet. ^.5.
any other particular ordinary Congregation.
in a proportion more remote or further of. Such is the Invisible or
Intelllgible Church absolutely Catholic: that is the number of Ephe. 3.10, 15,
21. and ^.27.
all Gods Elect both in Heaven and in Earth.
Figuratively by a Metaphore; Such is a holy and well ordered Christian Romans
16.5 ^. Cor. 16.^^.
family resembling as it were a very Church though in deed it be but a part
of a true and proper Church. Synecdoche viz. of the Visibilitie, when the
Church it self that is the whole cannot but only some parts of it may be
Visible or Sensible at any time to any one man that needs the use of it Such
is the Catholic Militant Church, wc is Mat. 16.18. 1. Cor. ^2.28.
properly an Invisible and Intelligible Church as it is considered wh^ly
together, that is, as it is one Church. Society; as when only the Act. 15.4.
^^.
People of a particular Congregation (having Ministers, yet without and beside
their Ministers) are called the Church.



Whereby it is evident that no Catholic, or Universal Church Visible is any
where in all Christ's New Testament to be found: and therefore in no wise is
such a Church to be allowed. Neither yet any National, or Provincial, or
Diocesan Church. Only a particular ordinary Congregation is here found (and
so is to be held) properly and only a true visible Church of Christ.

Moreover hereby it appears, and it is likewise to be noted, Note III.
that the nature and office of a Bishop also is not of one manner, but of
diverse. It is as the former word Church very ambiguous, and must be likewise
necessarily distinguished. Bishops of six sorts.
Six sorts of Bishops have been and are known in the world. 1.
A Parishionall Bishop, who is a Pastor of one ordinary Congregation only. Such
are all the Bishops mentioned any where in the New Testament, and also in
writers within the space of 200. years after Christ. 2.
A Diocesan Titular Bishop, who was Bishop of a Diocese in title and in name
only, in Ecclesiastical government having no more power then any other common
Pastor. He differed not in any essential part of the ordinary Pastoral
Office, but was only President or Moderator constantly (yet by his fellow
Pastors free consent) over the Pastors of a Diocese. Such perhaps first of all
was Ann. 190
Iulianus the tenth Bishop of Alexandria. In whose time first Eusebius. 5.9.
mention is made that there were diverse Churches in that City, and he Bishop
of them. The first sort of these Bishops we wholly allow. The second we do not
simply deny. They were not much unlike to the Bishops now lately appointed in
Scotland. 3.
There is a Diocesan ruling Bishop. He had more power then any of the rest of
the ordinary Pastors (though yet not any sole power) to rule in his Diocese.
It may be this began at Alexandria with Ann. 260.
Dionysius the thirteenth Bishop of that place: which seems to be Ieroms
meaning, where he Ierom ad Evagr.
says, that some prioritie in Bishops continued there from Mark to Heraclas
and Dionysius. At Heraclas (it is probable) was a period of one sort, and with
Dionysius began another. Prioritie of Order 1. Pari^hionall. 2. Diocesan. 3.
Maioritie of rule Diocesan.

Prioritie of order in one Bishop over a Parish (that is one particular
complete Congregation) seems to have continued exclusively from Mark unto
Iulianus: over a Diocese from Iulianus to Heraclas inclusively: and then
Maioritie of ruling in the Diocese to have begun with Dionysius the next
Successor after. Nothing lets us but that thus we may probably think:
Seeing thus Eusebius and Ieroms relation shall well agree. How soever it was,
this is certain, that neither the one nor the other was known before these
times here expressed. 4.
A Diocesan Lord Bishop was he, who ruled ordinarily in his Diocese by his
sole power. This grew up from the former by little and little. But it seems not
to have been established in Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustines time: though soon
after (we doubt not) it took place over the Churches. 5.
A Patriarchall Bishop: and they were first 4. in number, Of which kind the
Archbishop may be reckoned also.
viz. at Rome, Antioch, Or else Cae sarea. Council. Nic. 1. Can. 7.
Jerusalem, Alexandria. They began by men's voluntary regarding the Bishops of
those principal Cities above other, sometime before the Nicene Council. But
they were by an ordinance established first in that Council. Howbeit yet they
were not Lords over the Churches, till a long while after. In the first
Council of Constantinople, an other Patriarch was established at
Constantinople. 6.
A Catholic or Universal Bishop Bonifacius was the first
began at Rome, about 600. years after Christ. Who also has had his growinges
and increasings, and was not perfect Antichrist, till some ages after. Now all
these latter, that is, the 3.4.5. and 6. sort, are at least Besides the
Scriptures: yea they are clean Contrary to the first, which has place and
allowance in the Scripture. And therefore these are plainly contrary to Gods
word, and utterly unlawful. Wherefore also the As namely that in D. Bilsons
perpet. government, page 260.
common accounts and Catalogues of the succession of Bishops from the Apostles
times to our days are very deceiptfull and false. When as al these are called
by one name indifferently Bishops without distinction, yet their Offices are
exceeding diverse and no way like. Yea these later directly contrary to the
first, as has been said.

Against this it is D. Bilson in perpetu. govern pa. 299.300. in effect
objected, that Timothy and Titus were properly Diocesan ruling Bishops. Yea
such as we call Lord Bishops, that is, using page 232.
sole authority: and had charge of mo particular Churches then one. Which is
to be in deed a Diocesan Bishop. But they and their Offices are found in the 1 Timothy 3. and 5. Tit. 1.5. and Tit. 3.
Scripture: viz. To ordeine Pastors in diverse Churches, and to censure them,
etc.

I answer, the very Apostles did not Act. 14.23. and 1.15, 23. etc. 6.3 5, 6.
and 1 Ti. 4.14. w Act. 16.2.
make Ministers nor Censure by their sole and single Authority, but evermore
in the presence and with some liking of that particular Church whom it
concerned. Therefore much less did Timothy or Titus such matters solely and
singly, who were lower then Apostles. And therefore they were no Lord Ministers
certainly. Further it is untrue, they were no proper Bishops at all: neither
Diocesan, nor any other. For all proper Bishops were D. Bilson page 227. and
232.
affixed to certain places and certain charges where they were to serve and
Act. 20.38 1 Pet ^ 2. Theodoret. ^n Ephe. 4.
attend (in purpose) continually. But Timothy and Titus were never affixed to
one certain charge. For they (like the Apostles) intended not a constant
continuance in a place, but after a time of their aboade in one Nation,
translated both their presence and their labors into another Country. Being
Comites Apostolorum, Companions or Assistants to the Apostles, See Bez.
Annotat. in Acts 19. and de Mini. grad. cap. 5.
endued doubtless with the extraordinary gift of diverse tongues, and therefore
did go (being co^monlie sent or called by the Apostles) hither and hither, to
the end that they might perfect such Churches as the Apostles had planted, but
not thoroughly furnished. And this is evident by the text. First Timothy was
chosen and ordained at Act. 16.
Lystra, went into Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia, Troas: being at Philippi was sent
to 1 Cor. 4.17.
Corinth, from 1 These. 3.1.2, 6.
Athens went to Thessalonica: from Act. 19.22
Ephesus went to Macedonia: after he was left at 1 Timothy 1.3
Ephesus again to order and redress things there. And yet 2 Timothy 4.9.1.
thence he was sent for away and departed. A little before Paul's death he was
at Phil. 1 1.
Rome, and from Phil. 2.19 23.
thence to go to the Philippians. Wherefore Timothy was no ordinary proper
Bishop of any sort, nor affixed to any certain place, but a very Evangelist
(as also the 2 Timothy 4.5.
Scripture calls him) that is, an unlimited, extraordinary, and te^porarie
function in the Churches. The like was Titus. Paul chose him for his companion
and helper, and had him Gal. 2.2.
with him to Jerusalem. Also he sent him to 2 Cor. 8, 17.
Corinth. He left him in Tit. 1.5.
Crete a while: but sends for him thence Tit. 3.12
away anon after to Nicopolis. A little before Paul's death he was with him at 2 Timothy 4.10.
Rome, and from thence he went into Dalmatia. Both these therefore were very
Evangelistes, and no manner of ordinary Bishops. Neither in deed were there
any Diocesan Bishops, or Diocesan Churches, that can be found in all the New
Testament.

Then they will object, that some things are Indifferent in Ecclesiastical
actions; and doubtless so are certain Circumstances, etc. It is not necessary
that these should be warranted particularly in the Scripture.

I answer; The Papists do hold their Ecclesiastical Traditions or Rites to be
meerelie indifferent in their nature, and to be necessary only as the Church
commands them. This is manifest by D. Stapleton saying: Staplet^. Promtuar.
Catholic. part. Quadragesimal. page 99.
Omnes vident in little [Rituum Ecclesiasticorum] vsu nullam necessitatem poni,
sed libere assumi vel non assumi: modo absit contemptus, qui non in Ceremoniam
sed in Ecclesiae prepositos, qui came instituerunt, imo in Christum cadit,
dicente ad illos Christo, Qui vos spernit me spernit. Also by the Rhemes
Testament, saying: Rhem. T^ stame. Annotat. in Math. 15.1^.
Neither flesh nor fish of it self does defile, but the breach of the Churches
precept defiles. Likewise writes Bellarmine in his discourse of their
Church-Ceremonies. But yet notwithstanding every good Christian knows well,
that their Traditions are plainly superstitious and unlawful. How then shall
not ours also be the like? What are ours better then theirs? Further, though
Circumstances be indifferent and may be changed by men, yet Forms of Churches
are not so; nor the Church Ministeries, nor Ceremonies, nor (in a word) any
Traditions Ecclesiastical, whereof our former Reason wholly entreats. We
deny not then but that in Ecclesiastical actions the mere Circumstances are
in some sort indifferent, that is, not necessary to be determined by
Scripture. But these truly are not to be called Ecclesiastical Traditions.
Wherefore we must know that there is a great difference between Traditions and
Circumstances. Besides Gods Ordinances specified in Scripture, there are 2.
other kinds of lawful things in the administration of Church matters. 1.
Natural Necessities. 2. Proper and mere Circumstances.
Natural Necessities, are Persons, Times, Places, etc. what things only are in
different. Circumstances.
Proper and mere Circumstances (which only are indifferent in Church actions)
are Accidental things whereof there is no necessity, but either may or may not
be used. They are of 2. sorts, either Civil or Occasional. Civil
Circumstances are such as though they be used in Church actions, To this do
belong all things of Comeliness and Dece^cy.
yet even there they import only and merely a Civil use. Which we shall
easily discern thus: viz. when the same things in the same manner are used
also in actions merely Civil at other times and places. Such were Christ's
John 13. with 1. Tim. 5.10.
Washing the Disciples feet, the Romans 16.16.
Love feasts, and Iud. 12.
Kissings in the Church meetings of old. The manner at this day of the French
Preaching covered. To come to the Church in this or that decent and comely
common apparel. A commodious and distinct House for Gods Service, etc.
Occasional Circumstances are such particulars as some special occasion
requires and moves us unto, namely when the General things are either usual
in Civil custom, or by Gods own ordinance in Nature, or in the Word written.
As such or such Places, Times, Persons, Things. Namely to come together in
Synagogues, or Temples. To use Pues, or Pulpits, etc. To Pray Kneeling, or
Prostrate. To eat and drink at the L. Table leaning, or sitting, etc. In the
Mat. 26. 1 Cor. 11.23.
Evening, or at Acts 20.7
Midnight. To Baptize in Acts 16.15.
Rivers. Also the Apostles using of some Gal. 3.24 and 4.9.
Jewish Ceremonies among the unconverted Jews a while after Christ's death.
Their Acts 6.3, ^, 6.
letting the people to nominate their Ministers. Churches more or less
populous, etc. These and such like we doubt not, are in Ecclesiastical
actions in some sort Indifferent. I mean they are changeable, and either can
not or ought not to be perpetual: neither need they to be determined in
Scripture. Although yet in their use they are not to be reckoned so
indifferent, but that they ought necessarily to be ruled by the general rules
of Discretion and Charity. Namely that in all of them Comeliness,
Edification, the Avoiding of offense, and Gods glory may be respected. Thus
then let it be noted, that we affirm in Ecclesiastical actions no other thing
at all beside these is or can be any way indifferent by any means. None of ye
things in controversy are indifferent; neither are they proper Circumstances.
But touching our forenamed Ecclesiastical vnwritte^ Traditions (whether
Forms of Visible Churches, Ministeries, or Ceremonies) they are of no such
nature, as those things beforenamed either Natural necessities, or proper
Circumstances are. They are no way like to any sort of them. Wherefore though
Circumstances be indifferent, yet men's Traditions in Religion can not be.
Neither did these things stand otherwise among the Jews under the Law. So
that it remains sure, that all Church-Traditions without Gods word (and
therefore all invented forms of Visible Churches using government, offices of
Ministry, and Ceremonies) are simply evil and unlawful; and therefore of
necessity ought to be reformed.

Yet some will reply and say, If men may institute Temples or places merely
Ecclesiastical, why not also Garments merely Ecclesiastical, etc.?

Touching Temples I answer: They are esteemed merely Ecclesiastical or
Religious places, because things merely Ecclesiastical or Religious are done
in them. Howbeit the truth is, their proper and principal use is partly
Natural and partly Civil. It is necessary in Nature for Church Assemblies
to be in a place. It is Civil (namely when peace and prosperity is) to have
a commodious a comely and a distinct House for the public exercises of Gods
worship. Which very thing is in Civilitie no less requisite for the public
grave actions of the Common Wealth also. So that at the most, a Temple
appointed by men can not truly be accoumpted a thing merely, but mixtly
Ecclesiastical. And so this Humane institution we acknowledge is lawful even
for Religious affairs, when there is no further use thereof at all. That is, if
it be not held as Religious merely, nor in the proper and principal use
thereof. As the Surplice is with us. It is an Ecclesiastical Rite: So are
likewise the Kneeling, Crossing, Churching, Burying, etc.
which the Temple can not be. It is merely and simply Ecclesiastical. There
is no respect had to Civilitie in it: considering that it serves never in any
Civil business nor place, but it is only in and for the Church and Church
actions. Much less is there for it any Natural necessity. Beside, the
Preface of the Co^mon-prayer-booke makes it to have (with the rest of the
Ceremonies) a special signification in Gods worship. Even as the Papists do
also use it; from whom immediately we have received the same. Wherefore doubtless
such prescript garments merely Ecclesiastical being Humane Inventions, are
simply unlawful: although Temples for Gods Service be not so. Moreover we have
to answer to this and such like matters objected to us, in this wise. ^. Cor.
11.^3. and 14.23. and 5.4. Math. 18.^7.
Such * places of Scripture as do command Church Assemblies and the public
Worship of God, the same do also by necessary consequence (in time of peace)
command some commodious and distinct Houses for them. But no Scripture by any
necessary consequence commands any distinct and mere Ecclesiastical
Garment at any season. Therefore these things can not be compared nor likened
together. They are not both things indifferent alike. Nay, the one is by Gods
word necessary, the other unlawful.

Some think that the appointing of the Altar in Josh. 22.
Joshua, of the Feast of Hest 9.
Purim, and David's ordayning 1 Chronicles. ^5.1.6.
Singers and Musicians in the Temple, do prove that all religious matters
invented and instituted by men, are not unlawful.

I answer, Howsoever they who appointed and set up that Altar in Joshua might
have devised some other thing less scandalous then the form of an Altar,
which yet might as well have served to the use they made it for, as the Altar
did or could do. Nevertheles this Altar was truly no more but a civil
monument or Sign, as being used no way in any Ecclesiastical or Religious
action of worshipping God, but set up as a spectacle only in the open fields or
by the river side, though it served for a token that the 2. Tribes and a half
had a part with the rest of Israel, and in the worship of their God. Not
unlike it might be to this; if the States of the low Countries should command
every inhabitant (being no Anabaptist) in that Country to wear a little
Dagger on their garments, to show that they believe Magistracy and the use of
weapons to be lawful. Or as perhaps the Sign of the Cross was used by the
Ancient Christians dwelling among Heathens, to let them see they were not
ashamed of Christ crucified. All these are clearly Civil, and therefore (we
acknowledge) in men's power it is to ordain or abrogate them. As for the Feast
of Purim, that appears no where in the text to have been a Religious Feast or
Holy day. But only a day of Civil use also: viz. of rejoicing, of making
merry, of sending presents to friends, and gifts to the poor. As may appear
Hest. 9.22. Yet if any contend that it was a Holy day for solemn
Thankes-giving and worshipping of God in memory of the rare deliverance of the
Jews from Hamans malice: Though this appear not, yet we may answer, neither
can any man disprove it, that Mordecai the Jew (the ver^ 2^.
Author of this institution) was a Prophet of God, and Author also of this
book of Hester. So that then he ordained this constant Holy Day, not by humane
discretion, but by Divine authority. Even as David did institute the singing.
Levites with Instruments of Music in the Temple. The 2. Chron. 29.25.
text (as it were of purpose) meeting with this objection, imports that David
neither did nor might do these things by his Kingly power, nor by any
discretion Humane, but only by Prophetical authority through Gods own
commandment. Where it is to be noted, that by urging Gods absolute and all
sufficient Law for matters Ecclesiastical, we do not restrain nor bind
God, but only us Men from adding of any thing in the exercise of Gods worship
besides that which he him self has instituted and sealed up in his Testament.

It will be again replied, This is true in deed, God has given us in his word
this sufficiency for all Ecclesiastical or Religious matters necessary to
salvation: but not for all Ecclesiastical matters what soever.

This is a frivolous exception, and most false. For first, diverse of our
present matters controverted are necessaric enough. They can not be thus
rejected as things not necessary: viz. the only true Form and Constitution
of Christ's Visible Churches, with their due Ministeries proportioned to them.
According to Gods ordinary dispensation of grace by his word, there is even
Necessity to enjoy these (Gods own) Ordinances, and to be free from all
Traditions of men, especially such as are contrary to his. Touching other
things, which seem sinaller and of less importance, as some esteem the Rites
and Ceremonies to be in Gods worship. I answer: our Argument before laid down
generally includes all mere Ecclesiastical or Religious things. I say, All.
And where All is included, Nothing is excepted. Wherefore we still affirm and
profess that all lawful Ecclesiastical Rites whatsoever are contained now in
the Scriptures of the New Testament, and not only things simply necessary to
salvation. Besides that we must not forget how the wilful maintayning of small
things amiss becomes a great and heinous sin, whereunto is due a fearful
punishment. As may be seen in him who Number. 15.30, and 32.
with a high hand did but gather a few sticks on the Sabbath day.

Nothwithstanding all this, yet it seems to many that these external things
Ecclesiastical are not matters of Doctrine, nor of Faith, etc. And therefore
may be lawful, though they be not contained in the Scripture. I answer, They
are all truly and properly matters of Doctrine, of Faith, and of Religion,
appertayning to the 1. Table and 2. Commandment in the Decalogue, and to many
other places of Scripture, as before has been showed.
It is the error of men not knowing the holy Scriptures proper and full use, or
true extent, when any do think such Ecclesiastical things as these here
controverted are not contained in the Scripture, and yet that they may be
lawful. They are all simply unlawful, if they be not contained in the holy
Scripture. Wherefore, even all these things both the lawful and unlawful,
contained in the Scripture or not contained (Forms of visible Churches using
Government, Ministeries, and Rites) are matters of Doctrine, of Faith, of
Religion, viz. true or false. So that the one ought as our life to be embraced,
the other as the very ways of death to be avoided, especially when we discern
and see them thus to be.

Reason 2.
EVERY Visible Church of Christ (truly and properly so called) ought by Gods
Mat. 18 17.
express word to have and use the Ecclesiastical government of it self.

B^^ ^very particular Congregation of Christians is a" Visible Church of Christ
truly and properly. The true Churches and the false.
"

Therefore every particular Congregation of Christians by Gods express word
ought to have and use the Ecclesiastical government of it self: viz.
according to the order set down for a Visible Church in Gods word.

And so in England consequently the things that are directly contrary
thereunto ( Diocesan and Provincial Churches using government, with their
Ministers, etc.) are directly contrary to Gods word, and therefore ought of
necessity to be reformed.

Here first let it be noted, A Visible Church.
that we understand a Visible Church of Christ to be a Society of Christians
which any member may and must (on occasion) have a visible or sensible use of
entirely and wholly together, the same having the power of Eccle siasticall
government in and for it self immediately from Christ. I say, The Church
entirely and wholly together may and must be used on occasion. Considering
that against this there is no text of Scripture in all the New Testament, nor
any force of reason appearing.

Then let us also observe and mark these 3. points. Note.
For proof of our Assumption last before. 1. 1 Cor. 11.16. and 4 17. etc.
many and diverse (and not only one) by the ordinance of God him selse. So that
it is false which is Hooker lib 3. Sect. 1. pa. 132.
held that there is a Universal Visible Church like the Sea; which being but
one properly, is distinguished and called by diverse names according to the
Countries and places by which it comes. Nay, the Visible Churches of Christ
were by the Apostles ordination many in number, and actuallie divided Bodies or
Societies: The Sea properly and always being but one Continued Body, was and
is distinguished meerelie by diverse names. The Universal Invisible Church was
and is in deed one in number: but I have showed there were many* in number of
the true and proper Visible Churches. Again, the Jewish Visible Church
according to the Law, was in number only one properly under one High Priest,
and having one Temple only at Jerusalem. But Christ and his Apostles changed
that form, and did institute and leave the Christian Churches properly in
number many and diverse, as I said.

Secondly they instituted and left particular ordinary or constant
Co^gregations true and proper Visible Churches: Or, Corinth was 1. Cor. 14.23.
but one particular Congregation. Whereof the Apostle says thus, When the
whole Church is come together (...)
into one place. Which also we may likewise affirm of the Church of Act. 14.27.
Antioch, and of Iusti. Martyr Apo. 2
Rome, and of Act. 15.22, 25.
Jerusalem, and of Act. 20.28
Ephesus, etc. in those days. For though these Cities were great and populous,
yet being unbelieving and hateful enemies to the Gospel, each of them had
then of faithful Christians but one particular constant Congregation only.
Like as the Protestants are in the Cities at this day under the Spanish King;
or as they were in diverse Cities of France before the peace was made, and as we
were here in London in Queen Mary's time. Where yet we deny not, that then
some particular Co^gregations being (as that of Jerusalem was Act. 4.4
before) greater then other some, did by reason of persecution meet
occasionallie and vncertainlie in diverse Act. 12.1^
smaller numbers. But these smaller numbers were not so many Churches
properly, because they were uncertain and occasional. A true and proper
Church being always necessarily an ordinary set company and a constant
society. Those therefore notwithstanding made but one Act. 6.2.
particular and complete Congregation or proper Church, which in time of peace
(chiefly they growing yet more populous) were to be distributed and divided
into sundry proper and ordinary Churches, each of them a competent
Congregation. Which we do observe further near the end of our handling the 2.
Assertion afterward. Moreover, likely also it is in these cruel persecuting
Cities that so great a multitude of Christians did not long keep together,
but many of the^ did quickly disperse and scatter them selves abroad into
other quarters and Countries, whereby the whole number there became smaller, as
we may see they did at Act. 8.1.
Jerusalem by reason of Stevens persecution, etc. immediately after the great
and sudden increase of the Church there. All which being considered, it is
plain yet still that in the greatest Cities, or wheresoever else, the Apostles
appointed and left true and proper Visible Churches particular constant
Co^gregations. Which further alfo appears by those many and distinct Churches
of Gal. 1.2. 1. Cor. 16.1
Galatia, of 2 Cor. 8.1 19, 23.
Macedonia, of 1 Cor. 16.19.
Asia, of 2. Cor. 8.24
Achaia, of 1. Th. 2.14 Gal. 1.21.
Judea, of Act. 9.31.
Galile and Samaria, of Act. 15.41
Syria and Cilicia, of Act. 14.23
Lycaonia and Pisidia. Likewise by those many Churches of the Romans 16.4
Gentiles, and the Churches of the 1 cor. 14 33
Saints, the Churches of 1 Cor 11.16
God, the Churches of Ro^. 16.16
Christ, and 2. Cor. 8.18. and 11.28 1. Cor. 4.17 Reve. 2.23. Act. 16.5 1 Cor.
14.34 3. Ioh. 6. Rev. 22.16.
All Churches. All these in number were (not only one, but) many proper
distinct Churches. Each of them being severallie but one particular constant
Congregation. Whereunto most fitly agrees that iniunction and commandment of
our Savior Christ touching a Visible Church where he instituteth the external
spiritual power thereof, saying, Mat. 18.17
Tell the Church or Congregation: If he hear not the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen and a Publicane. Where he must necessarily be understood of
a particular Congregation. Which may be told and spoken unto only. As also
that description of a Visible Church, which our public Authority in England
teaches: Artic. 19.
viz. A Visible Church is a Congregation of faithful people where the word of
God is preached, and the Sacraments ministered, etc. Doct. Bilson also, where he
says D. Bills. against the Seminaries. lib. 2. p. 170
The Church is never taken in the New or old Testament for the Priests alone,
but generally for the whole Congregation of the faithful. In Act. 20.28. The
Church is taken for the People. And it is Lib 3. Pa. 70.
Math. 18.17. The whole multitude of the faithful where he and they (the
Offender and the Offended) live.

The 3. Proposition before) is a general and sure Maxim in Divinity: viz.
The true and proper Visible Churches of Christ both heretofore, now, and
hereafter, though many in number, yet all are but one in nature, form, and
Constitution. And each of them has simply one and the same spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power immediately from Christ (not derived from any other) to
govern it self withal. To which purpose the Scripture often speaks of the
Visible Church indefinitelie as of only Math. 22.2, etc. 1. Cor. 12.13. Mat.
6.33 1. Pet. 2.5. Isa. 2.1, 2, 3. 1. Tim. 3.5.
one. Because in Nature and Form and in the true Constitution, as also in the
spiritual power thereof, it is only one. Yea it says also in plain terms
that there is Ephe. 4.4. 1. Cor. 12.13
one Body: where is meant the Church. But it is to be understood, that it is
one in nature and power, as I said. Which must of necessity be so, because
Christ's Math. 18.17.
Institution of a visible Churches external spiritual government before
noted, must belong equally to every true and proper Visible Church. Wherefore
also the nature, form, and Constitution of every one must be the same that
this is which here Christ signifies in Matthew. Which evidentlie was a
particular Congregation, as before we observed. To which purpose also one of
our Adversaries Hooker lib. 3 page 132.
a famous Schole-divine shows that by clear and undeniable reason the
government Ecclesiastical belongs to every Visible Church properly so
called. And the practice of the Apostolic Churches does justify and confirm
it. Which being ordinary particular Congregations, each of them did or might
by their Ministers (and them selves in presence consenting) Act. 14.23 2. Cor.
8.19
choose Elders and 1. Cor. 5.4, 5. Mat 18, 17.
excommunicate offenders. Neither certainly did Christ ever institute or the
Apostles practice diverse kinds or forms of Visible Churches. Neither let they
any to have greater or lesser spiritual power then other. But they appointed
one form and one power for the Churches (questionles) every where and
always. Therefore they all (though being many in number, yet) were and are one
in nature, and form, and power everywhere and for ever.

Whence now it follows by a necessary and undeniable consequence that these
3. Conclusions ensuing are likewise certain and true.

1. Every particular ordinary Congregation of faithful people in England I^r^
Divine. By right from God.
is a true and proper Visible Church. 2. Every such Congregation here and
every where is endued with power immediately from Christ to govern it self
Ecclesiasticallie or fpirituallie. 3. Every true and proper Visible Church
every where is but one ordinary or constant Congregation only.
And then no one Church consists, neither can consist of many ordinary
distinct Congregations. Wherefore no Diocesan Chuch is ordained or allowed by
Christ, no Provincial, no National, and so likewise no Universal visible
Church with an external government correspondent to the same, as the
Catholics heretically do hold. A Catholic, an Heretic.
A Universal Militant Church I deny not: but a Universal or Catholic Visible
Church with correspondent government I do deny, and so likewise the rest. Now
here thus we do for this reason, because it is not possible, if there be
indeed one Universal Church properly, or where there is a National Church, or
Provincial, or Diocesan, that there the particular ordinary Co^gregations are
or can be esteemed so many true and proper Churches. These can not stand
together with any of the former. Every of those is directly contrary to
these. Seeing these in such case are properly but Members and parts of the
other, and not in them selves proper and intier Churches. Which yet in the
places of Scripture * before cited the H. Ghost does plainly affirm. Where if
he speak not properly, who does? Page 19.20.
Or what is in Divinity a proper speech, if the continual phrase of the H.
Ghost in Scripture be not proper? Note.
And surely to this point, if we mark it well, does all our present
Controversy come; that is, to set down What is a Visible Church of Christ
truly and properly. Seeing each true Visible Church has evermore from Christ
power and right of government in it self, as before is noted. Let this
therefore be well declared what is a true Visible Church, and we shall soon
agree. We affirm that every particular ordinary Congregation is and ought to
be allowed for such a Church. And heerevpon do we stand. I am not ignorant of
the common and vulgar phrase of speech among men both ancient and of late, both
unlearned and learned, who have used to call every of those other a Church (as
a Diocesan Church, a Provincial, a National, and also a Universal Church)
meaning, it seems, that every of these may be truly and rightly called a
Visible Church. But this is only the custom of speech among men. And Mos trium
literatum tyrannus. Bez. Annot. in Luc. 23.17.
Custom is a Tyrant, as a Reverend Father says well. It is no warrant nor
ground for any thing in Religion. The word of God alone must suffice us
herein. Yea we consider not what advantage we give the Heretic Catholics
against us, by acknowledging a Catholic Visible Church. It follows from this
necessarily that there is and ought to be on earth a Catholic or Universal
government Ecclesiastical. This is a Conclusion whereunto M. Hooker sets
down expreslie Hook. 3. Sect 1.
both the Proposition and Assumption: viz. Every Visible Church, Page 132.
truly and properly so called, ought to have a correspondent Ecclesiastical
government.

But there is a Catholic or Universal Visible Church on earth. Page 126. and
132.


To which Premises every child now can quickly add the Conclusion.

Ergo, There is and ought to be on earth a Catholic or Universal government
Eccle siasticall.

And I am persuaded, that this oversight or error among us has caused
Thousands to turn Catholics, that is members of Antichrist and enemies to
the true Churches and servants of Christ. For if there be properly one Visible
Church and government Ecclesiastical throughout the world, then this must be
in some one place eminently. For some whither we must go, when Christ bids
us Tell the Church. Now there is no place in all the world so likely as Rome
is to be the Visible seat and springhead of the Universal government of the
Catholic Church, if in deed there be any. Therefore most easily me^ are drawn
to be Roman Catholics, when this is not denied that there is a Catholic
Visible Church. Which self same advantage we give also to our Pontifical
Hierarchy in England against the true estate and due government of Christ's
Visible Churches here. For while we grant them (whether by error or by
oversight) that there is and may be truly and properly a Diocesan Visible
Church, they will easily conclude that then there may and ought to be a
correspondent Diocesan government. Which (as before I observed) overthrows
quite the proper being and government of each particular or Parishionall
Church. But we, because Christ and his Apostles throughout all the New
Testament have appointed and every were allowed the Parishionall Assemblies, as
to be clearly and absolutely distinct in themselves, so to be Visible Churches
truly and properly, and withal a correspondent Ecclesiastical government to
be in each of them, as before has been showed; therefore heerevpon do we
stand, this do we urge that the Institution of Christ and the Apostles practice
ought to be a rule for Christian Churches, as every where, so here in England:
upon this do our Consciences rest assuredly. Because (as before I said) who is
it that may presume to ordain any form of a Church save Christ only?
Especially overthrowing that form of a Church and government which Christ
has ordained, as these Diocesan and Provincial Churches with their proper
Ministers do. Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and contra Ecclesias dimicatis. You
arm your selves with the name of the Church, and fight against the true
Churches.

In this place I can not forget how some thinking themselves deep Politicians,
do imagine that they see our Grounds to be directly against a Monarchy or
Kingly State. For this Ecclesiastical government being Popular (say they) it
will require the Civil government also to become conformed to it. Also they
think it can never be menaged without trouble and tumult.

First we absolutely deny that any manner of Ecclesiastical Government
requires the Civil Government to become conformed to it. This is a most false
conceit. The bounds of either Governernement are distinct and cleerlie severed
the one from the other: albeit each does aid and succor the other. But what
should I reason hereof? This their insimulation is against none other then
Christ him self and his blessed Word, wherein he has instituted no other
state of a Church Visible but a particular Congregation only. Shall we impugn
and accuse the true Church of Christ? Nay, shall we accuse Christ him self and
his Gospel; that herein he yields us not the true, right, or best form of
a Church? And therefore we will of our own heads devise and constitute a
better. God forbid that any Christians should so do, and wilfully maintain
this doing also. But they think this manner of government will become tumultuous
and troublesome in the State: and so it will prove hurtful to the Prince. I
would demand, why think they that the Church government (as we desire it)
will be troublesome and tumultuous? They will answer, because we require of
necessity that Elections of Ministers, and Excommunications, etc. must be
Popular. Which can not but bring with them commonly tumult and much trouble, if
not confusion and peril to many. Whereunto I reply, that this were very
true in deed (viz. much trouble and tumult would commonly follow, and perhaps
peril to diverse) if we desired or sought for popular Elections of Diocesan
Bishops. Such as we read of and find to have been used in many places under
Christian Princes from 300. years after Christ hitherward for a long time. As
for example at Antioch, Alexandria, Rome, Constantinople, etc. In these and
other Cities very great stirs, tumultes, and confusions among the People
have risen in deed not seldom times, even in and about such their Elections.
The Ecclesiastical Histories are full of examples to this purpose. But such
running together of a whole City or Dioces, such voice-giving of such
multitudes of people we desire not: neither do we any ways allow it. It was a
corrupt remainder in deed of the Peoples ancient free voice-giving to the
Election of their Parishionall Pastors or Bishops. For such all ordinary
Bishops and Pastors were primitively in the Apostles days, and such every
where they were left by them, as before we have showed. Every ordinary Bishop
then (I say) was only of a Parish (as the Ancients call it) that is of one
particular Congregation only, and no greater. And so their Elections were
accomplished by the free consent and voyce-giving only of the People of each of
these particular ordinary Congregations, or Parishes. Now it is true indeed,
we acknowledge we allow and do desire such Elections and Excommunications by
the People. Neither is this to be reckoned any Popularitie which can be
either prejudicious to Princes, or tumultuous in it self. No, it can not be an
inconvenient order, but most reasonable for any place or people in the world.
Namely seeing we do expressly hold this assertion no otherwise (and we heartily
pray that it may be noted) but as it is grounded on 4. Circumstances. Power
Circumstances whereon the fitnes of the Peoples consent stands
1.
In regard that it is (as we are well assured) a Divine order and ordinance
instituted for each Church by Christ and his Apostles: the truth whereof (we
hope) has evidently appeared in this 2.
Reason last handled. Considering that we allow the Peoples consent and
voice-giving in Elections, Excommunications, etc. to be done only by the
Christian People of one Parish, that is, of one particular ordinary
Congregation only, and by no greater nor larger number of People by any means,
as before has been likewise showed. 3.
Considering that in the manner hereof we hold this only to be necessary and
ordinary, that the Ecclesiastical Guides there (apart from the People) do
first by themselves prepare and determine the whole matter, namely in such sort
that the People may not need to do ought afterward but only Consent with them,
and freely signify their consent it it. 4.
If any where it should fall out that this People thus guided, and being so
few, will yet presume to be in their Church-Elections, etc. unruly and
violent, then the Princes next dwelling Officers of Justice may and ought to
make them keep peace and quietness. Which thing how easy it is for the meanest
of them to do, the simplest may perceive. All which verily being well
considered, this Ecclesiastical Government questionles is most reasonable,
yea necessary. And it is childish, and without all wit to cry out against us
(as our Adversaries do) Popularitie, Anarchie, and Enmity to Princes, for this
our so well grounded and so approved an assertion.

Another thing is here to be well remembered, that M. Hooker and M. Tooker the
noble Patrons of Pluralities and Nonresidencie are utterly defeated in this
their purpose. The former Hook. lib. 5. sect. vl^im.
makes this his Reason for them, because it is a mistaking (says he) to
think that the particular Congregations are by Gods ordinance so many distinct
and proper Churches. For (as he holds) there is but one Visible Church
properly, and the same Universal thorough the whole world. As for particular
Congregations they are not properly so many Churches, neither distinguished at
all by God but only by men. And therefore every Minister is a Minister
properly to the Whole Church; but by men according to discretion only is
limited to this or that Congregation, there to have maintenance made sure to
him by Law, and there to teach, till men see it fit to employ his gifts in
another Benefice, or elsewhere. All which because they are merely Men's
ordinances, by men they may be disposed and dispensed with again as to those
in authority seems good. And so both Plurality of Livings and Nonresidencie
from the same shall be both lawful and honest. This is the effect and drift of
his reason. And even on the same foundation also builds D. Tooker. Yea only
this ground he has, and none other. Where nothing else needs answer but this
his assertion; Fabrike of the Church, page 45.
Distinction of Parish Churches is of mere positive law, not of Divine. For my
part, I would grant this Reason to be in deed sound and good for their
purpose; (and not only for that, but also singular and most pregnant to set up
the Roman Papacy too) if this their Foundation were not manifestly contrary
to Gods word. But before it has been showed to be cleerer then the light that
Distinction of Parishes in some sort, that is, of particular Churches is by
Gods own ordinance in the Apostles Writings, and not by the mere positive law
of men. Wherefore this is evident to be a most ungodly and shameless Defense
pleading for, or excusing that wretched sin of soule-murdering Nonresidencie,
as if it were a thing allowable and not simply evil. It can not excuse this
sin to allege that Plurified men may have their 2. Benefices near
together; perhaps within half a mile, a mile, or 2. mile the one of the other.
This will not help them any more then a man can be excused, who takes and
keeps two wives at once: though yet by the one he be not drawn far away
from the other. Gods law disalloweth that former no less the^ this latter. Yea
I avow, There have been who have kept two wives at once, honester men and more
approved of God, the^ any Minister now in England having 2. Churches or Charges
lying howsoever. And yet I acknowledge, to have two wives at once, is simply
against Gods word.

Well, yet this will not satisfy some: neither will they yield that every
particular Congregation of Christians should be allowed for a distinct and a
proper Church Visible; and so to enjoy their own Ecclesiastical government
within themselves. Albeit against it they have no reason, unless perhaps this
only. If it were so (they will say) yet will not thereby all things become
perfect. Somewhat notwithstanding will be wanting or amiss oftentimes. How
then shall this be helped or amended? Not by Archbishops, or Diocesan Ruling,
or Lord-Bishops?

I answer, Somewhat will be amiss always in whatsoever Ecclesiastical
government upon earth. Nevertheles there is no need, nor good use of these,
nor of any Ecclesiastical Unwritten Traditions in Christ's Churches. We
believe and know Gods Written word to be sufficient. Specially seeing these
are so directly contrary to the only true form and nature of Christ's Visible
Churches in his word, as has been showed. A greater Ecclesiastical
government then the Churches we know none. There is nothing without the
Church above it: viz. Ecclesiasticallie and spirituallie. Seeing each Church
has her power and government (as before is declared) immediately from Christ.
Yet it is true (beside the Magistrates honorable assistance) very often there is
great, and singular, yea sometimes in a sort necessary help to be had by
Synodes. Which are meetings of choice men out of many Churches: and these are
lesser or greater as occasion requires. Whose counsailles, advises, and
determinations are most expedient and wholesome always. But touching any
certain Governeme^t by Synodes, or necessary imposing of their Synodall
Conclusions, Decrees, or Canons upon Churches without their particular free
consentes, this seems to be a mere Humane ordinance. I can not find it
(either expreslie, or by necessary consequence) in any part of Christ's
Testament. Thus writes hereof the Reverend M. Whitaker, Whitak. de Council.
page 44.
Quod omnes atttngit, ab omnibus approbari debet. That which concerns all,
ought to be approved of all. Again, Page 23.
Concilia si simpliciter necessaria sint, Christus alicubi precipisset
celebrari, aut cius saltem Apostoli. Quod tamen nusquam ab illis factum esse
legimus. If Councills were simply necessary, Christ somewhere would have
commanded to keep them, or at least his Apostles. Which yet we read that they
did no where. Further, Page 35.
Etsires ipsae de quibus in Concilio deliberatur and consultatur, sint sacrae
and religiosae, tamen hoc ipsum Congregare Episcopos est mere (...). Although
the things deliberated and consulted of in a Council be holy and religious,
yet this thing to assemble Bishops or Pastors of diverse Churches together, is
meerelie Civil. I know well sundry godly men do hold that Synodes have power
to prescribe and rule Ecclesiastically by Gods Law even sundry whole Churches
though they severallie consent not. But with reverence to their names, I take
it the truth is otherwise. Only in the Acts we find somewhat that has a
kind of likeness to such Synodes. And it is but a kind of likeness, or scarce
that: for it is far from the same thing. Thus it is: In Act. 15.6.25. we find
a coming together of the Apostles, with the rest of the Church at Jerusalem
and with a few other sent to them from the Church of Antioch. Where these do
make Decrees and impose them on the Churches: yea on diverse Churches which had
Act. 16.4.
not sent any in their names thither. And on the Church of Antioch, who had
perhaps but 4. or 5. there present. This shows that this coming together at
Jerusalem was a very Extraordinary Synod, comparing it with our Synodes in
use now, yea indeed nothing like to them. First here the Act. 15.2
text says, The Apostles only and the Elders at Jerusalem were sought unto.
And it is manifest that herein the Apostles Extraordinary office and power
took place: viz. by imposing their Decrees on Churches who had no persons, and
on one Church, viz. of Antioch who had few for them there present. In which
respect they at Jerusalem assume also aspeciall authority of the H. Ghost,
where they say, verse. 28.
It seemed good to the H. Ghost, and to us. Which no Assembly of ordinary
persons could or can assume to them in such manner. Only where the Apostles were
present and consented, there they might. Finally after this we never find
that any Churches used the means and power of Synodes till about Constantines
time for almost 300. years space. Which if it had been an ordinance Divine for
the Churches always, they neither ought nor surely would so long have
neglected the same. Seeing in that while there were most weighty and
continual occasions requiring this Divine help, if they had so esteemed it.
Which seeing they did not, we may well think in those first times they held it
not to be so. Nevertheles Synodes (when they may be had) are for counsel,
advise, and better resolution continually profitable and most wholesome, as has been said. And being well ordered, do make singularly for Unity. Whereby also
each Churches ordinary government may be much helped and amended. And yet the
same with power and authority ought to be held still within it self only.

Now touching our Synodes at this day in England, they may be excepted against
justly in 3. respects. First because they consist principally, if not only,
of Provincial and Diocesan L. Bishops (whose Offices are here showed, to be
plainly contrary to Gods word) and of such other as are theirs. Also our
Synodes power is not superior, but inferior and subject to the L. Bishops will
and liking: which is utterly against the nature of true Synodes, and the rule
of Gods word. Lastly they impose Ecclesiastical Canons on the Churches which
give no consent unto them: as if they had power from God over the Churches thus
to do. All which before we have seen to be clean contrary.

Reason 3.
To have no place nor part in any Church.
THAT any (being a Christian) should have no place nor part at all in any true
and proper Visible Church of Christ, is contrary to Gods word. Specially that
any such so standing should Ecclesiasticallie rule many Churches.

But our Diocesan Bishops (professed Christians) have not any place nor part at
all in any true and proper Visible Church of Christ. And yet they rule
Ecclesiastically, some 300. some 400. proper and distinct Visible Churches.

Therefore they are all contrary to Gods word, and ought necessarily to be
reformed.

The first part of the Assumption is thus proved.

If a Diocesan Bishop with us have any part at all in any true and proper
Visible Church, then he is Pastor in some Church or one of the People.

But one of the private People he is not any where. Neither is he a right and
true Pastor sustayning the charge of souls in any proper Visible Church with
us.

Therefore a Diocesan Bishop with us has no part at all in any true Visible
Church.

I am not ignorant that our Bishops themselves say that they are very Pastors
in all those several Churches of their Dioces, and so are in a principal
place, and have a chief part in them all. Which notwithstanding is utterly
false, considering that they have some Hundreds of Churches in their Dioces
which they never saw, nor by law are bound to see in all their lives. Are they
then, or can they be true and right Pastors unto them? They can not be. It were
a shame for any once to think that they might. Neither are they Pastors to any
one of the Churches under them more then they are to all. Therefore in deed
they are true Pastors to none of the^, nor to any proper Visible Church at all.
Howbeit imagining and supposing them to be (as they say they are) Pastors to
those Churches which are under them, then I reason against them and conclude
thus.

If Diocesan ruling Bishops by the nature of their office are very Pluralistes
and Nonresident Pastors, Acts. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. Prou. 27.18.23.
then they are plainly contrary to Gods word, and ought of necessity to be
clean abolished.

But Diocesan Ruling Bishops are very Pluralistes and Nonresidents by the
nature of their Office. Seeing every particular Congregation is a true proper
and entire Visible Church, as before has been showed: and seeing they assume to
them selves a Pastoral charge of the Peoples souls in mo then one, yea very
many such several and entire Visible Churches in England, which they neither
do nor can serve as Pastors ought.

Therefore they are plainly contrary to Gods word, and" ought of necessity to
be clean dissolved and abolished.

Or thus.

Common sense or the light of Nature (besides the forenoted" scriptures)
shows that one proper Pastor should" have only one proper Visible Church. For
indeed 1 Cor. ^.16. 2 Timothy 4.^.
who is sufficient for that one?

But a Diocesan Ruling Bishop has not only one proper visible Church in his
Charge. He has 300. or 400. as before is said.

Therefore a Diocesan ruling Bishop sins against the" word, and also against
the light of nature.

We deny not that one proper Visible Church may possibly have many Pastors.
But that One Pastor should have many proper Visible Churches, is a thing
senseles, unnatural, and condemned both by God and man.

Reason 4.
The true Pastors office.
IT is the natural and immutable off ice of a Pastor both to Teach and to
Govern (with the assistance of other Elders) his own flock.

But every Pastor of each particular Church in England is truly and properly a
Pastor of the same Church whereof he is, and shall answer for the souls of his
flock which depend upon him.

Therefore every Pastor of each particular Church in England ought of
necessity not only to teach but also to govern his own flock.

Touching the Proposition, it is manifest to be the natural and immutable
office of a Pastor to govern his own flock. First seeing the word (...) which
signifies to do the office of a Pastor, does in the natural property of it
imply Government and rule. Rain, Co^fer chap. 3. divi. ^ page 140.
As we may see this word is used, Math. 2.6. Reve. 19.15. and 2.27. And
therefore even Civil Magistrates are called Rogne Pastors, Ezekiel. 34.2 and in
Homer (...) the Pastors of the people: in Euripides (...) the Rulers of
chariots. Secondly the whole office of a Spiritual Pastor is found in the
Scripture to be both Teaching and Governing: as first this very word does most
plainly signify Ioh. 21.16. Act. 20.18. and 1. Pet. 5.2. Also where the
distinct parts of the Pastors office are noted as 1. Tim. 5.17. and 1. These.
5.12. Math. 18.17.18. Ad hereunto D. Bilsons consent with Athanasius, Perp.
gov. page 199.
To whom Preaching, and Offering at the Lords table do belong to them also
careful ruling and governing the Church does appertain. Again he says, page
162. 108. 202.
These self same persons that were in one, were in all these actions: and the
Churches were governed by the common counsel of the Presbyters. And page 133.
The Apostle joins both these properties in good Pastors. And page 111.
They must be trusted with both or with neither.

Now touching all this Gods word charge us expressly saying: Col. 4.17 Romans
12.7
Take heed to your Ministry which you have received in the Lord, to fulfill
it.

But to this our Churches order is clean contrary by reason of our Diocesan
ruling Bishops. We may not fulfill our Ministry for them.

Therefore our Churches order in respect of our Diocesan ruling Bishops is
clean contrary to Gods word. And therefore of necessity herein we ought to
be reformed.

Where yet I can not but note, Note.
how by our own Parliament law this is wholly yielded to every ordinary Pastor
in England. As namely where the book of Ordination makes every one of them to
undertake Book of Ordinatio^ Printed Ann. 1596
to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments and Discipline of Christ as the Lord
has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same according to the
commandments of God. Though it says, as this Realm has received the same;
Yet we must mark that it says not so simply, but with special restraint,
according to the commandments of God. Yea before also it requires the
Discipline of Christ to be ministered in such manner as the Lord has commanded.
So that here this restriction and certain direction is set down expressly
twice for failing. Wherefore the Laws intent and meaning is not here to do
beside, much less Act. Parl. Henr. 8. Ann. 25. cap. 19.
against the order set down in Gods word, but to do according to it. And not to
take from Pastors the ordinary power of Ecclesiastical Dicipline (as now the
practice is) but to give it them. Namely if Gods word do give it them; which we
saw before that it does. God forbid therefore that we in England now should be
Math. 19.6.
barred from the ordinance of God in his word, this being also the true intent
of our own Laws.

If our Adversaries will say that this brings in a paritie of Ministers. And
we can not be ignorant that our most wise and Noble King professes his mislike
of the paritie of Ministers.

I answer with all reverence and submission to his Majesty, that I conceive
his meaning not to be against the paritie which before I have spoken of. And as
for a general paritie we mislike and detest it also. Yea in a sort we say that
the Churches state is Monarchical. For we affirm that in every several true
Church there ought to be a disparitie of Church Ministers: viz. the Pastor
above the Elders, and the Elders above the Deacons, ad Smyrne^.
as Ignatius says. And in Co^ferences and Synods where many Pastors meet, we
do not only allow but require a disparitie and prioritie also, namely in the
President or Moderator. Yea we do not simply disallow a continuing President,
so that his continuance be subject to his Brethrens free liking, they seeing it
to be not against the glory of God and the common good. And for all this we
are well assured there is sound warrant in the word of God. But as touching a
farther disparitie then this, We answer, comparing Pastors with Pastors among
themselves in their common office, or in any of the natural parts thereof, we
see not how there may be any disparitie or difference in them. May one Justice
of peace permit the rest in the same County to call before them, to reprove
and rebuke Malefactors, but not in any wise to commit to prison, or to bind in
recognizance any man? May one assume this power alone to himself, and exclude
all the rest? Surely this were in the common wealth arrogant, injurious, and
unlawful without express warrant from the same authority by which they all
hold their Offices. How much more unlawful is it for men without Gods warrant
to presume in Gods matters in altering and changing, in making greater or
lesser the Spiritual offices of Christ's Church? Magis and Minus in common
reason can not be admitted in the nature of one and the same Office, what Is
one King more a king, then an other? One Father more a Father then an other?
Office soever we speak of. But this is so, more specially in the
Ecclesiastical. For it is exceeding strange that among true and proper Pastors
some should be more, some less Pastors: which yet must needs be, if some may
have more some less Pastoral power. The unreasonableness hereof appears
further if we consider in like manner the nature and condition of the Visible
Churches. One Visible Church can not be more a Church then any other, though
some may be greater some smaller, some richer some poorer. Yet as Churches they are
all equally Churches, and one has as much Ecclesiastical or spiritual right,
power, and authority, as any other. Even so is it with their Pastors, being
compared (I say) together as Pastors among themselves. Again as the Apostles
were all equal Apostles; so surely the Pastors ought to be, who are in deed
their right and proper Successors. Pari consortio prediti and honoris and
potestatis. As Cyprian cypr. de unit. Eccles.
says: The Apostles were endued with equal honor and power. Therefore the
Pastors their Successors ought to be so likewise. To which purpose also is that
in the same place following. Ibid.
Episcopaius vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. There is but
one kind or nature of the Bishoplie or Pastoral office, whereof every one
participateth in whole. And in another place, Cypr. in Council. Ca^thag.
Nemo nostrum Episcopum Episcoporum se facit: None of us makes him self a
Bishop of Bishops, or over Bishops. Signifying that it was not lawful for them
so to be: neither likewise a Pastor over Pastors. And to what purpose else is
that of Jerome to Evagrius, where speaking of Bishops or Pastors says he,
Icrom ad Evagr.
Eiusdem sunt meriti, eiusdem Sacerdotij. They are all of one and the same
preeminence, of one and the same Office. These sentences are very memorable,
tending to allow ordinary equality in all Offices which are of one and the
same kind or nature. Howsoever yet a declination from the right and perfect
Pastoral office began to come in, in the days of these men, and also to get
allowance even of the most famous Doctors, specially about Ieromes days.
Whereby it is manifest how a paritie of Pastors ought to be held, and yet
notwithstanding how a paritie of all Ministers ought not to be in any Church.

But some will say, this is not enough. For this nevertheles will be the cause
of strife and discord in the Churches.

We answer, The clean contrary is true. Your humane disparitie in the
Ecclesiastical Ministeries both is and ever Nazianz. in orat post redi.
has been the true cause of discord. But our Divine disparitie, that which we
hold and allow, is the true cause of peace and unity. For where, in what place
can discord be? In every Church we acknowledge a Superior, and in every meeting
out of many Churches a Superior likewise. Now no other place can be imagined
where discord and strife Ecclesiastical can arise. If therefore Superiority
and disparitie will cause peace, we through Gods goodness and blessing shall
both have and keep peace every where. If any other Superiority be required,
and namely Yours, which crosses yea cutteth of Gods own ordinance in the
Pastoral office, we deny that it can ever procure peace. And this our present
experience does show in all the foreign Reformed Churches compared with ous.
They all inioying this ordinance of God have most admirable unity. We only
wanting this, notwithstanding many and sundry worldly advantages, yet do
remain still (now these 50. years almost) in woeful dissentions, desolations,
and dissipations. Neither can the Lordly Prelacie, neither will they remedy it.

If herein yet men will not be satissied, but will hold it still to be
special wisdom to take away from some Pastors the power of spiritual
government, and to give it to some few. We answer again with the holy Ghost,
It behooveth us not, it is high presumption 2 Cor. 4.6.
(...): to be wise above (much rather contrary to) that which is written.

Reason 5.
THOSE Elders or Pastors (as they count themselves) stand directly contrary
to Gods word, Lord-Ministers.
who do rule their fellow-Elders or Pastors (and specially many whole
Churches) with a Lordly Ecclesiastical power, or sole authority: also who do
rule them Civilly with outward force and compulsive power: and who receave
Civil Titles and Styles answering to the worldly honor due to high Magistrates
in the world.

But our Diocesan Bishops in England are such Elders or Pastors, and do thus
rule and stand by their public Office or Offices which they hold.

Therefore our Diocesan Bishops in England even by their public Office or
Offices which they hold, stand directly contrary to Gods word.

The Proposition (whereof only there can be doubt) is proved by many plain
places of Gods word. Christ earnestly forbad his Apostles this whole matter
(and in them much more all other Ministers their inferiors) in these words:
Mat. 20.25.
Ye know that the Rulers of the Nations have dominion over them, and the Great
men exercise authority over them. But it shall not be so among you. But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant. Luke has the same
thus: Luke. 22.25.
The Kings of the Nations have dominion, or rule as Lords over them; and they
who exercise authority over them are called Gracious Lords. But ye shall not
be so. And Peter an Elder (as he calls himself) charge all Elders that
they be not 1 Pet. 5.8.
as Lords over Gods heritage, but examples to the flock. And Paul renounceth
it for his part, saying, 2 Cor. 1.24.
Not that we have dominion ^ver your faith, but are helpers of your joy.

Here it is a silly evasion (which some use) or rather a delusion of these
manifest Scriptures, to say; Christ here forbids his Apostles to expect
Civil power and authority by virtue of their Ecclesiastical Ministry: or,
it is here denied that Civil power is necessarily annexed to the
Ecclesiastical function. And besides this that nothing else i^ here denied by
our Savior to his Apostles and Ministers. I say this is a vain shift. The
Apostles manifestly desired this outward preeminence no other way but by
Commission from Christ, whom they hoped should have been a great Prince in the
world. This Math. 20.21. Marc. 10.^7.
they simply desired and this Christ simply denied, both to them and in them to
all true Ministers of Christ for ever. Besides Luke also adds the Magnificent
Titles of worldy authority, and these to be likewise denied them. Which indeed
necessarily follows. Finally both Matthew and Luke do principally speak of
the forbidding of Civil rule to Ministers, yet their words are so general
that we must needs grant, that Christ there forbids his Ministers simply and
generally al Lordly rule, or domination, or sole authority whatsoever. And
therefore Ecclesiastical domination or sole authority in Church matters also.
Even as it is manifest that Peter and Paul do (without controversy) in the
places before rehearsed. It is no better shift, to say that Christ here forbad
nothing but Tyrannical overruling of the brethren. Or only the ambitious
desire of Lordly rule, sole power, and civil authority: but not the things
themselves.

But all this D. Bilson alone (though now he be a L. Bishop himself) has most
fully and substantially confuted. Against the Jesuits and Seminaries obiecting
thus [The word is Math. 20.25.
(...) they Overruled their Subjects with iniustic and violence. You shall not
do so.] He replyeth, D. Bills. against the Apol. of ye Seminar. part. 2. page
174. print. Land. 1586.
So your new Translation over-ruleth the word. Howbeit Christ in that place
does not traduce the Power of Princes as unjust and outrageous, but
distinguishes the calling of his Apostles from the manner of regiment which God
has allowed the Magistrate. Christ says not Princes be tyrants, you shall
deal more courteously then they do: but he says Princes be Lords and rulers
over their people by Gods ordinance you shall not be so. Again the word which
S. Luke has, is (...) without any composition; They be Lords and Masters: and
S. Paul confesses of himself and other Apostles, Not that we be Lords or
Masters of your faith. Ye the compound (...) is with power and force to rule
men whether they will or no, not with wrong and injury to oppress them. And
therefore the conclusion is inevitable, that Princes may lawfully compel and
punish their Subjects, which Bishops may not. Page 175.
All Pastors and Bishops are straightly charged not to meddle with the sword. Page
182.
To compel Heretics and Schismatikes neither is it possible sor the Preacher
if he would, nor lawful if he could: he lacks both means and leave to
constrain them. Bishops be flatly forbidden to reign, and must not meddle
with the material sword. Page 227.
Commanding and forcing our Savior forbiddeeh to all his Disciples. Where the
full effect of all his discourse is this: All Civil i^risdiction and power of
the sword to command, compel, and punish by loss of life, limme, or
liberty, is secluded from the Ministers function and reserved to the
Magistrates. Luke 22.24.25.
Christ precisely forbad his Apostles to bear rule and exercise authority
over their brethren: not unjust and tyrannical rule, but all compulsive power.
And where the thing is not lawful, the sign is not lawful. etc. To like
purpose also he writes in his book of the Perpetual Government of Christ's
Church: Page 137.142.
where he says, Many gifts may conioyne in one man, many offices cannot. Page
52.
The Ministers shall not have any such rule or dominion as the great States
have. Page 55.
The thing so much prohibited by Christ and his Apostles, is, that Preachers
and Pastors should (...) behave or think themselves to be Lords and Masters
over their brethren. And Page 56.
To increase the love of the sheep toward their Sheepheards, Christ would not
have his Apostles to be feared as Masters, but to be honored as Fathers; and
consequently Pastors not to force, but to feed; not to chase, but to lead the
flock committed to their charge; neither roughly to entreat them as servants,
but gently to persuade them as coheires of the same kingdom. Here are
Testimonies of this man for us most full, most clear, and above all exception.

Reason 6.
IF in the Laws estimation the calling of Ministers with us is given by those
who in Gods word have no power to give it, Usurpation
then this is contrary to Gods word and necessary to be reformed.

But in the Laws estimation the calling of Ministers with us is given by those
who in Gods word have no power to give it. Namely it is given by a Diocesan
ruling Bishop, who is no where found (as before I showed) in all the New
Testament. So that he can not therein have any power or authority to give
Ministers their calling, nor yet to take it from them. Again by the rule of
Gods word that particular Church which is to have the Minister, ought to be
present and to show a liking and consent in their Ministers calling. Which
proves that no Bishop has any power or authority in Gods word to give any
Minister his calling, or to take it from him in absence of that Church to whom
the Minister belongs, yea and (as the practice now is) utterly without their
liking.

Therefore this, that is the giving of the Ministers calling with us by such as
now do give it and in such manner, is contrary to Gods word, and ought of
necessity to be reformed.

Where I say; by the rule of Gods word, The Churches right.
that Church which is to have the Minister ought to be present and to show a
liking and consent in their Ministers Calling: this is evident by many
testimonies, and reasons. First, because in the Apostles time the Church had a
consent in Excommunication, as it appears to the Corinthians, where the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.4.5.
I have determined already, when ye are gathered together and my spirit, in
the name of our L. Jesus Christ, that such a one, by the power of our L. Jesus
Christ, be delivered to Satan. And, verse 13.
Put away from among your selves that wicked man. Which agrees with Christ's
own ordinance and precept, where he says, Mat. 18.17.
Tell the Church: If he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen and a Publicane. Now if the Church was to Excommunicate, surely the
Church also was to elect her Ministers. For these are the 2. maine parts of
the holy Government Ecclesiastical, both which must belong to the Church
equally and alike. Further it is apparent by the Apostles practice. First, the
calling of Matthias to the Apostleship was permitted (so far as was possible)
to the Churches Election. For they Act. 1.23 etc.
appointed two, whereof one should be and was divinely chosen. This questionles
was done (not of necessity for that Calling which was then to be given, but
only) for an example in Ecclesiastical Elections which the Churches after
should and did imitate. Besides, howsoever the very Election of Matthias was by
Divine lot, yet it was all done in the Churches presence with the actual
concurrence of their prayers and free consentes instantly. Now these acts of
the Church as they may, so therefore they ought to be perpetual in every
Election of whatsoever Minister; seeing even for that end the Apostles caused
now the Church thus to do. It is a slight answer and untrue, to say, Parpet.
govern. page 69.
Examples are no precepts. For the same answerer elsewhere confesses, that
Per. gov. page 373.
the Apostles taught the Church by their Example. But if he had not confessed
it, yet the truth of this general point is in it self most certain.
Wherefore was the Book of the Apostles Acts else written? But that their Acts
in the Churches should be Rules and patterns for us to do likewise. All Divines
use the Argument drawn from an act of Christ or his Apostles, and urge it even
to bind us no les then if it were a formal Precept. And so we read that Christ
himself and his Apostles too, reasoned sundry times from the bare Acts of the
Prophets and men of God in the old Law. I know in diverse Examples there are to
be found Circumstances which fit not all times, places, nor persons. What then?
Neither do Precepts commonly fit us in so general a manner. By this shift then
we may avoid express and direct Precepts also. And thus scarce any thing in
Gods word shall suffice to constrayne and bind us. Wherefore always we urge
no other Examples of the Apostles, or not in any other points, then such as do
and may fit us continually, and every where, even so well as they fitted those
of old. In which case it is a miserable denial to say, Examples are no
precepts. God grant us and all true Christians, to enjoy our Churches ordered
after the Apostles examples, and to have all other Customs of men (when once
we discern them) utterly abandoned. But to proceed a little: The Apostles again
Act. 6.3.5.6.
charged the Church at Jerusalem to choose their Deacons: therefore much more
ought the Churches (who are not ignorant beasts, but men taught of God) to
choose their Pastors. Lastly, they Act. 14.23.
ordained Elders to sundry Churches which were actuallie present and
consenting. So much is most evident by the very text: neither can any except
against this; which suffiseth our purpose. So that it is vain where Perpet.
gov. page 70.
some contend that this word (...) here used will not necessarily prove
that the Churches did elect their Elders. I answer, this very word (yea thus
as it is here co^strued) is not so weak for our purpose as is pretended. For
we find the same word in good Authors, having the very like Gra^maticall
construction, that is, joined not with the people, but with the Guides or
principal in the assembly. And yet the very nature of this word (signifying in
the ordinary use thereof the custom which was then to give Voices by lifting
up of hands) implies the Peoples concurrence and voyce-giving jointly with
the Guides of the assembly. For as much as this gesture of lifting up hands
for voyce-giving in the the public meetinges did always and most chiefly
concern the People. In this very manner to this purpose we have this word in
Demosthenes: Cont^. Timocr.
(...). Which of the Laws the Nomothetae (which were the principal Authors)
shall ordain or constitute by lifting up of hands the same is ratified. Where
notwithstanding, the Lifting up of hands (as is well known) was not the
Nomothetaes or chief Authors part only: but the Peoples act is understood also
by implication. Whose part was chiefly to Lift up hands, either before or
after the Nomothetaes act. Even so likewise this same word used here in the
Acts in the very same manner shall import the Peoples part also: viz. a present
consent in the appointing of their Elders, though only their Guides the
Apostles voyce-giving and ordayning of them be named. But we will not press
this. We may (as I said) clean omit this consideration, and yet this text in
the Acts does fully serve our main purpose. Namely it proves fully that
these Elders were ordained by the Apostles in the presence and with the free
liking of the several Churches. Another conceit there is, that the sense of
this word here is the same which the Greek Ecclesiastical Writers long after
do use it in: viz. only to lay on hands in Ordination, and no more. It is an
idle conceit. All do know, that the later Ecclesiastical Greek Writers have
altered the original and proper use of this word, as they (yea and the Latins
also) have done in other: as after we In the 2. Assertion and 9. Reason in the
end thereof.
shall further see. In the Apostles time they spoke the ordinary and known
phrase taken from the former times. But then no man used this word in such
sense. They which followed some hundred years, can not prove that the Ancients
spoke like the after-commers. Wherefore, to our purpose again: By all these
textes thus declared, it remains evident that the Church, which is to have a
Minister, ought to be present and to show liking and consent freely to their
Ministers calling: since we have seen that it was so in the practice of the
Apostles, and by the ordinance of Christ. Which also (it seems) our very Book
of Ordinatio^ (which is by Law) intends and requires, where it says, Take
thou authority, etc. in this Congregation. The word, this, imports that the
very particular Congregation wherein he should have authority, should be
present. And why should they necessarily be present, but freely to consent?
Also here by it is evident that the Law would not that any Minister should be
ordained but to a certain Congregation. All which good, necessary, and
Christian rules how they be now every where broken and despised, who sees not?
Yea though the manifest intent of our Law does require them. A word more let us
add touching D. Bilsons approbatio^ also of the Churches free consent in
chosing their Pastors. Whose testimony I do delight to apply to our purpose for
diverse good considerations. D ^ils again the Seminar part. 2. page 353.356.
Says he, We have the words and warrant of the H. Ghost for that which we say,
etc. viz. that the People can and ought to discern and try the doctrines and
spirits of the Teachers; and so to chose and refuse them, as they by the word
should see good. page 355.
How can the People do either, if they have not skill and leave to discern
both. Perpet. gover page 360.
The Apostles left elections indifferently to the People and Clergy at
Jerusalem. The People had as much right to chose their Pastors, as the Clergy
that had more skill to judge Page 339.
Well may the Peoples interest stand upon the grounds of reason and nature, and
be derived from the rules of Christian equity. Page 359.
The late Bishops of Rome have not ceased cursing and fighting, till excluding
both Prince and People they reduced the election wholly to the Clergy. But he
tells them, by their leave it was not so from the beginning. Page ^30.
I acknowledge each Church and people stand free by Gods law to admit,
maintain, and obey no man as their Pastor without their liking. It is true he
adds this, unless by law, custom, or consent they restrain themselves. But
this he himself elsewhere answers roundly: Page 22 ^^.
What authority had others after the Apostles deaths to change the
Apostolic government? And such additions he calls Page 19.
Corruptions of times, inventions of men, and a transgressing of the
Commandment of God for the traditions of men. And again he calls this
plainly Page 11 1^
Intrusion, and Presumption. This suffices to show, that he well understands
the truth in this cause.

But now it will be demanded: How can we then allow the Calling of the Ministers
in England, judging them by the rule of Gods word. I answer; First this is
ever a sure ground (not in the Schools only, but) with all faithful
Christians reasoning about any matter: Consequens incommodum non solvit
argumentum. An inconvenient consequence takes not away an Argument. We must
not then decline from the truth for any inconvenience which may follow. Rather
it behooves us to look well to our selves and to our profession and standing
wherein we abide, and Christianlie with speed to amend our error. Howbeit I
speak not this, as if I absolutely denied the whole Calling of our Ministers. I
do not so. The Lord knows there is none in England more unwilling to run
upon this rock then I am. And yet nevertheles I dare not, I can not, (nor any
good Christian else) agree to change Gods Ordinances after our occasions.
Wherefore I answer to this question thus. For my part, I believe that the true
ratification and warrant of our Ministers calling which is by Gods word,
stands in this, and only in this, The Churches acceptance. See Bez. in Act,
14.23.
that our Visible Churches do consent and accept them whom they receave for
such. I say, they do consent and accept them, after what sort soever it be
done. And this their consent, I acknowledge, gives them (before God) their
Ministry, though conjoined with many, great, and public corruptions
otherwise.

In which respect the Papists are soundly answered, who calumniat our
Ministry as if either we had none at all, or else had that which we have from
them. Again this answers others, who because in our public orders there are
many evils joined with our Ministers Calling which are not to be justified,
nor to be communicated with, and because they are commonly esteemed to have
their Calling from these unlawful means, viz. from the Diocesan ruling
Bishops without the Church, though in deed it be not so: therefore they do
wholly and absolutely deny the Ministry in England, which in truth and by good
reason they ought not to do absolutely and altogether. How beit yet I speak not
this in favor to such persons or Congregations among us, which do evidently
appear to refuse of wilfulnes Christ's Ordinances, and to speak evil of the
way of God. Toward such I can not deny but the Apostles Act. 19.9. 1 Timothy 6.5,
pra^^^^ and precept ought to be followed, who teaches in this case, saying,
" Separate from such. Ephe. 5.12* ^ C^^. 6.19.
Have n^ fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. * Touch no unclean
thing. Romans 16.17.
Mark them which cause schisms and scandalles beside the doctrine which you
have learned, and avoid them.

Reason 7.
TO wantany maine part of the (...) Luke 12.42*
ordinary appointed means of salvation is Math. 28.20. Isa. 30.21.
contrary to Gods word and necessary to be reformed.

But the right and true Discipline Ecclesiastical in each proper Visible
Church, is one maine part of the ordinary means of salvation Mat. 18.17* Ioh.
20.23. Mat. 16.19*
appointed by God for every soul: and this we in England do utterly want.

Therefore we in England in respect of Discipline and Government
Ecclesiastical do stand contrary to Gods word, and ought herein necessarily
to be reformed.

Or thus.

Where the Apostles true Suceessors are spoiled of their Office and Ministry
of binding and loosing, forgiving and retayning of scandalous sins, there is
grievous Sacrilege, and there ought to be of necessity a reformation to
restore them to this their spiritual Math. 18.18. Ioh. 20.23.
right and duty.

But the ordinary Pastors and Teachers of all the Churches in England are the
Apostles true Successors, and they are spoiled of the office of binding and
loosing, forgiving and retayning the scandalous sins of their own flocks.

Therefore the ordinary Pastors and Teachers of all the Churches in England do
suffer the wrong of sacrilege, and ought of Necessity to be restored to this
their spiritual right and duty which yet they are held from.

Or thus.

Where the Apostles true Successors are barred from using Math. 16.19.
both the Keys which Christ himself gave them and put them in trust with all,
there the use of both ought to be restored to them. Otherwise 2 Timothy 1.14. Tim.
6.20.14. Cor. 9.17 ^6.
how can they say in their consciences before God that they walk in their
calling, and fulfill their Ministry, and discharge their trust? And how can
the flock assuredly expect that Heaven shall be opened to them?

But the ordinaric Pastors and Teachers in all the Churches in England are the
Apostles true and only Successors among us, and they are barred from using one
of the Keys, namely the Key of power or government, as it is called.

Therefore the use of this Key also ought of necessity to be restored to them.

Obedience is better then sacrifice,

1. Samu. 15.22. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them,

Ioh. 13.17. Reason 8.
Christ out Prophet and King.
WHOSOEVER denies Christ the Savior to be our entire and perfect Prophet and
spiritual King (by taking away from him some parts of his Prophetical and
Kingly Offices, and ascribing the same unto Men) he disninisheth the honor and
dignity of Christ, he impugneth the Foundation of saving faith, and is 1 Cor.
3.11. Act. 4.12. ^oh. ^4.6.
contrary to Gods word.

But the Diocesan Bishops, etc. do (by necessary consequence) deny Christ the
Savior to be our perfect Prophet and spiri^uall King by taking from him some
proper parts of his Prophetical and Kingly Offices. For they hold sound and
entire only Christ's Priestly Office. Briefly, as the Catholics do join Men
with Christ in all these 3. Offices, so do our Diocesans in the 2. former.

Therefore the Diocesan ruling Bishops, etc. do diminish the honor and dignity
of Christ, they impugn the foundation of saving faith, and are contrary to
Gods word.

The Proposition if it be wisely considered, is plain. For it can not be
doubted, but Christ Jesus has 3. Offices: viz. he is our Prophet, King, and
Priest; and by virtue of all these 3. properly he is our Savior and Mediator.
Again we are necessarily to believe that Christ Jesus has in his own only
person all these 3. Offices entire, absolut, and perfect. In so much that if
any shall (with what color soever) communicate these Offices to others,
denying them to Christ's sole and proper person, or any of them, yea or any
manifest and certain part of them; the same verily do impugn the foundation
of saving faith, and deprive Christ of a part of his sole and proper glory.
Where also I desire it may be remembered, that Christ Jesus though he properly
works our Redemption only by his Priestly Office, that is, only by the
Sacrifice of his own sufferings; yet he works our Salvation and
accomplisheth his Mediation not but by all these 3. his Offices jointly
together. So that it is the error of a number who think; to believe only that
Christ dyed for us, this is enough to salvation. We need not to regard in
Christ any more. Whereby men co^monlie forget the other parts of Christ's
glorious work toward us, viz. his holy complete Doctrine, and Government. But
both these also ought to be believed and yielded unto the person of our Savior
Christ entirely and wholly, even in respect as he is our Savior and Mediator;
no less then the other, that he perfectly suffered for us as our Redeemer.
This is well to be considered.

The Assumption our adversaries do make to be true. For they take from Christ
personally a manifest part of his Prophetical Office: and likewise of his
Kingly Office. It is a part of Christ's own proper Prophetical Office to
teach us with authority by him self Proved in Reason 1. pa. 1.2 etc. And Heb.
3.2, 3, ^, 6. Math. 17.5 John. 14.6. and 16.13.
alone in his own word and Testament the outward form, nature, and
constitution (which is but one) of all his Visible Churches whether in
Countries rich or poor, Monarchies or Democraties, etc: likewise all the true
Ecclesiastical Offices and Ministeries in them, with every kind of action and
thing properly Ecclesiastical used in the Church, or where soever else
Religiously. Also it is a part of his proper Kingly Office, Matthew. 6.33. and
22.2. etc. Luke 19.14. 27. Iam. 4.12. 1 Cor. 12.5 Mat. 18.17 John 20.23.
by him self to constitute and inioyne the singular and only true form of all
his Visible Churches, and to admit whersoever none other; spiritually to rule,
to guide, and to bless us in them only, by his own Ministeries and Ordinances
instituted by him self or by his Spirit in his Apostles, and by none other.
All which the foresaid Diocesesan ruling Bishops, etc. do take from Christ
himself personally, and do D. Whit-gift against May. Cart-wright, pa. 370.376.
permit them unto Men. Saying, it is indifferent (and somwhere sometimes
convenient) for Christians thus to do. Therefore the Assumption is true.

It will be said, if this be so, then likewise the ancient Writers Austine,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Leo, Gregory, etc. did err in faith to salvation, and
believed not some parts of the fundamental Offices of Christ our Savior. For
those ancientes did hold sundry Ecclesiastical Inventions of men, besides that
they were themselves Diocesan ruling Bishops. Wherefore (by this reason) they
diminished not a little of our Saviors most holy and healthful Offices, both
Prophetical and Kingly. Which to affirm will be very hard. The same must be
said likewise of our late blessed Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Ferrar,
etc.

I answer, we embrace these holy men of God (both the elder and later) for
their other manifold testimonies of piety. Therefore we judge them as
faithful servantes of Christ according to that measure of light wherein they
lived. That is, they did generally and indistinctly believe and profess
soundly all the whole Offices of Christ to salvation. Yet true it is they erred
in these foresaid external parts pertaining to Christ's Prophecy and Kingdom
through the common sway of the times then: the Mystery of iniquity (that is
Antichrist) advancing it self daily very much even by them, and by these
their errors, though they for their parts were unwitting and unwilling. The
case thus standing with them, we are not to doubt, but these their errors
(though of them selves very great) were graciously pardoned in Christ: chiefly
considering that these matters were not then examined nor any thing looked
into; which with us now these 40. years have been much debated, tried, and
sifted. Yea and by Gods word are so cleerlie discovered, that we must needs
now say, He that is ignorant let him be ignorant still: and he that is perverse
let him be perverse still. Wherefore the condition of our Diocesan L. Bishops,
etc. in England, is far unlike at this day, and in no sort to be compared
with that of those Bishops then. Ours have no excuse, which they might have.
Cyprian says well in such another case. Cypri. Epi. 2.3.
Si quis de antecessoribus nostris vel ignoranter vel simpliciter non hoc
observavit and tenuit quod nos Dominus facere exemplo and Magisterio suo docuit
potest simplicitati eius de indulge^tia Domini venia concedi, nobis vero non
poterit ignosci qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus. If any before
us either ignorantly or simply has not observed and kept that which the Lord
by his example and doctrine has taught us to do, by the Lords mercy his
simplicity may be pardoned, but we cannot be forgiven who are now warned and
instructed of the Lord.

Yet some will say, We can not show any such form of a Visible Church sometime
for many hundreds of years together. Shall we then think that this is
Christ's perpetual ordinance? I answer, first for 2. hundred years after
Christ there is no man can show any other form of a Visible Church (but this)
any where in the whole world, as in the next Assertion presently (God willing)
we shall further see. Which (beside the all-sufficient word of God) is an
excellent testimony also: neither need we look further into Humane writings
for the perpetual necessity hereof. Second: they who list to search may
find arguments of diverse particular Congregations being entire Visible
Churches in all ages, I think. Howbeit, what is that to us? Must the Christian
faith or any part of it, stand or fall by the report of Men's stories? Or may we
in this case conclude from them, Negatively? Men's writings mention not such a
Church at sometime. Therefore then there was none. And specially to infer thus;
Therefore this is not Christ's ordinance always necessary for us. To esteem
men's writings so sufficient as that by them we should prove or disprove a
matter of Religion; I say, it is very foolish at the least.

Finally our Adversaries will object, that by these Assertions and defenses we
detract from the Kings authority and power: namely thus misliking that which
he allows, and specially holding an authority Ecclesiastical not derived
from him. I answer, even so did evil and slanderous men accuse the faithful
Christians in the primitive age. They cried that, Act. 17.^^
These all do against the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another King,
one Jesus. Our reply therefore unto them for this shall stand in 4. points. 1.
We most gladly Math. 20.21.
give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, but to God the things that are
Gods. Tertul. ad Scapula^^
2. Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem 3. We gladly non (...): Civilly, not
Spiritually or Ecclesiastically. 4. The King is Custos and Vindex, the Keeper
and Maintainer (by compulsive power) of the whole state of Religion. But he is
not Author or Minister of any Ecclesiastical thing or Co^stitution whatsoever.
Will our Adversaries yield more? Or is not this sufficient? I hope this shall
suffice to cease hereafter their slanders against us in this cause. And thus
much touching our first Assertion.

The 2. Assertion.
For the space of 200. years after Christ the Visible Churches using
government were not Diocesan Churches, but particular ordinary Congregations
only: and the Bishops (as they were particularly called after the Apostles)
were only Parishionall not Diocesan Bishops, and differed from other Pastors in
Prioritie of order not in Maioritie of rule.

IN this Assertion we observe 3. distinct parts. 1. A and generally in each
City then there was but one such

The first is proved by these Testimonies following.

FIrst let us consider that in the Apostles days the ordayning of Elders City
by City. Tir. 1.5.
(...)and Church by Church, Act. 14.23.
(...) was all one thing; namely because in each City in those times there
were not many Churches in number, but one only proper Church or Congregation
of Christians. Which also Page 19.20
above we further declared. Then for the next age after, Anno 100
Ignatius plainly shows the common state of the visible Churches in this time
also to be such: where he thus writes. Ignat. ad Trall.
Without a Bishop, without a Senate of Elders, without Deacons, etc. (...).
Without these there is no Church, no company of of Saints, no holy
Congregation. Which proves that then each City had but only one ordinary
Congregation of Christians. Since doubtless each City then had but one such
Senate of Elders, and but one Bishop, in Ignatius understanding. Further also he
persuading the Church of Philadelphia to unity and concord says. Ad
Philadelph.
I exhort you use one Faith, one Preaching, one supper of the Lord, etc. For
there is but one Communion Table (...) to the whole Church (here in this
City) and one Bishop with a company of Elders and Deacons. Therefore in this
City there was then but one Ordinary Congregation of Christians. Neither
speaks he of this Church in Philadelphia as being of an other form or
constitution then other Churches then were, but indeed as being conformable and
like to the manner of the rest. If we translate (...) as some like better [to
every Church] distributively, then our Assertion is more clearly avouched.
Again touching the Church of Philadelphia he says, Ibid.
The Bishop is Gods Ambassador to a people (...) that are together in one
place. Lastly writing elsewhere to the same effect he says so much touching an
other Visible Church, namely in the City Magnesia; Ad Magnes.
(...), etc. All of you com together into the fame place to prayer; Let there
be but one common prayer, one mind, one hope, etc.

Justin Martyr showing the manner of the Churches worshipping Just. Mart.
Apolog. 2. Anno 142.
(...). On the Sunday as it is called All (the Christians) dwelling in the
Cities, or abroad in the Country, do com together into the same place, etc. It
is very like that this was specially spoken of the Church of Rome then: seeing
there Justin wrote and offered up his Apology to Antoninus the Emperor. Though
with all he signifies that he means other Churches in other (...).
Cities, and in Country-places likewise indifferently. Therefore then, All the
Christians in each City (yea those in Rome) made not diverse but one constant
and ordinary Congregation only.

Irenaeus in his time observes no material difference Bishops and Presbyters
Ministers of the word. Which is a plain argument that Bishops then were not
Diocesan Bishops overseeing many constantly distinct Congregations, but were
Pastors of one particular ordinary Congregation only. Thus he says, Irenae.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Traditio vi^. scripta: vel necessario consequens ab (...) quod
est scriptum per Apostol^s.
Traditio quae est ab Apostolis per successionem Presbyterorum custoditur. The
tradition which is taken from the Apostles is kept by succession of Presbyters.
In the same place also: Episcopi ab Apostolis instituti in Ecclesijs and
Successores eorum vsque ad nos. Bishops ordained by the Apostles in the
Churches, and their Successors until our times. Where also the Roman Bishops
Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, he names Presbyters. By all which it is evident, that
the name Bishop and Presbyter was not yet exactly distinguished as after it
was, but remained yet (as it were) common and indifferent to all Ministers of
the word, even so as it was used by the Apostles in their writings. Also it
appears hereby that there was not then any kind of Diocesan Bishops. For the
name then ought to have been very distinct, and peculiar to him, as afterward it
came to pass. Much less had any Bishop a power to rule over a whole Diocese.
Otherwise Ireneus should not have used these names and terms then so
indifferently.

Tertullians testimony also seems very agreeable in this Corpus sumus, etc.
Pertulian. Apolog. ^ ^9.
we are all one Body, etc. And again Coimus in Cetum and aggregationem, etc.
We all com together into a Company and Congregation. He says not plurally in
cetus and aggregationes into diverse Companies and Congregations; as surely it
seems he should and would have said, if there had been then in one City many
ordinary constant Congregations. Specially seeing he says also of the same
singular Congregation: Ibidem (est) Censura divina: iudicatur magno cum
pondere, etc. There are divine Censures exercised. The judgment is given with
great weight, etc. Which surely was done in every such constant Congregation as
before he spoke of. And yet but in one singular Congregation and not in many,
nor in one over many constantly appointed in one City at that time.

Eusebius History shows that the Churches of the most Parish only; that is,
but one ordinary constant Congregation only. As wehre he names the Church of
Jerusalem Euse. lib. 3.11.
the Parish of Jerusalem, of Ephesus the Parish of Lib. 3.28.
Ephesus, and so of Lib. 3.13.18. lib. 4.1.4.5.19.
Alexandria, of Lib. 3.32
Hierapolis, of Lib. 4.22
Corinth, of Lib 4.25.
Sardis, of Lib. 5.5.
Lions, and diverse Churches the Lib. 4.22 6.
Parishes of Crete. He no where mentions many Churches nor Parishes under one
Bishop in any City till Iulianus time in Alexandria, as before we observed.

By Epiphanius testimony also our Assertion is maintained. Epiph co^tr.
Ha^^^^. 73.
in a small Congregation a Bishop was ordained alone without other Presbyters
assisting him. And in some places only Presbyters and Deacons without a Bishop.
In other places, that is in great and populous Congregatio^s where they had
meet men to be chosen, there they chose in each of them a Bishop with other
assistant Presbyters. By which it appears consequently that everywhere a
Bishop then was but of one particular Congregation only whether greater or
simaller.

The second part is proved.

The particular Congregations had their own government Ecclefiasticall. Ignat.
ad Philad.
NEither let any imagine that these particular Congregations then wanted their
own Ecclesiastical government among themselves only. It is most evident that
they had it and exercised it only within themselves ordinarily. Which is plain
by that of Ignatius writing to one of them thus: (...). It is meet for you as
being the Church of God to chose by common consent your Bishop. And to an other
particular Church thus, Ad Smyrna.
(...). In the Church (which is with you at Smyrna) there is not any thing
above the Bishop. He means the Bishop or Pastor of the particular
Congregation is of greatest authority and above any other there whomsoever. So
that they in that Congregation had all government simply and solely among
themselves. He speaks here of governing (...) Spiritually, not (...)
Civilly. For thus the Magistrate is Supreme both in and over each Church and
whatsoever Church matters, as May. Beza religiously and dutifully Theod. Bez.
de Excom. and Presbyt.
speaks, and we Page 57.
before observed. Yea verily thus the Magistrate is supreme whether he care for
the Church, or care not. Hence therefore we conclude, that these particular
Churches had the ordinary Ecclesiastical government of themselves among
themselves. Tertullia^ also in the place before cited shows so much, speaking
of each particular ordinary Congregation in his days: Ibidem (est) censura
divina. Iudicatur magno cum pondere vt apud certos de Dei conspectu. Apol. ^.39.
President probati quique Seniores. There are divine Censures. They judge with
great weight and advisednes, as being sure that God sees them. The approved
Elders are the chief, or do govern these Censures. Therefore all particular
ordinary Congregations inioyed their own spiritual government then in those
times. There is no suspicion of any restraint or abridging of them therein till
Dionysius the 13. Bishop of Alexandria, Anno 260.
at the soonest.

The third part is proved.

No Maioritie of rule, but only Prioritie of order in a primitive Bishop.
BEsides the testimonies before alleged, Ambrose in plain words tells us
this, that primitively Ambro in Ephesians. 4. and 1 Timothy 3.
A Bishop was no more but primus Presbyter, the foremost in order among the
other Ministers of the word in the Synods, or where there were other in the
same Congregation with him. Therefore any Diocesan Lord Bishop then.

Jerome does likewise: Where he says, Ierom. ad Evagr. and in Tit. 1.
A Bishop and an Elder or common Pastor, by Divine institution and ordinance,
are all one. And Maioritie among them came in by the custom of the Church and
Humane disposition. He means Maioritie of Ruling, because he shows here
that formerly all did rule in co^muni^ or communi Presbyterorum consili^.
in common. Wherefore by his judgment there was not at the first any Maioritie
of rule in a Bishop over Pastors. Much less were there any Diocesan L. Bishops
ruling by their sole authority in those times. Some Prioritie in order, we
doubt not, was always: First Parishionall, and then Diocesan some good while
after, as before is showed. Yea the Parishionall prioritie of order was (we
deny not) constant, yea even among Pastors who had otherwise all one Office
entirely. I say, this was where there were diverse Ministers of the word in one
particular Congregation. As we doubt not there were in some places. Now for this
matter, viz. Bishops Maioritie in government above Presbyters, and also
concerning Ieromes opinion thereof, it is not amiss to observe what D. Bilson
also has taught and avouched. In his Against the Semina. part. 2. page 318.
First Book he says, It was not by the institution of Christ, nor his
Apostles, but long after by the consent of the Churches, the Custom of the
times, and the will of Princes. Where also he shows that this was Ieromes
judgment likewise. Howsoever since (I can not tell how, nor why) D. Bilson
Perpe^. gov. page 236.237.238.
changed much his mind herein: and yet with no more discrepance from himself
then from the truth, and from almost all learned men beside both ancient and
later.

Further, this reason prooveth the present whole Assertion. If the word (...)
used religiously for a Church keep in all good Authors a just proportion
answerable to the Civil and Original use thereof, then it must needs be in
proper signification a particular Congregation only. For Originally and Civilly
in all Greek Authors (...) signifies one particular Assembly in one place
only, as an Assembly of the people at Athens, in Ephesus, in Corinth, etc being
com together in their public iudgement-place. Which is evident by the
writings of Plato, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Xenophon, etc. Yea in the Act
19.^2.39.40.
Acts of the Apostles we do find it likewise so used.

But the Apostles and other Ecclesiastical writers for 200. years after
Christ using this word for a Visible Church with order and government do
speak properly, and so ought to keep a just proportion in it answerable to the
Civil and original use thereof. This sentence is undoubtedly true and
undeniable. If any think he can show to the co^^^rie, let it be showed.

Therefore the Apostles and other Ecclesiastical Writers, for 200. years
space after Christ using this word for a Visib^^ Church with order and
government, do signify by it a particular Congregation only. And it no where
signifies in them a Diocesan Church, etc.

Where note that the strength of this reason stands wholly in the proper
taking and using of this word (...) a Church. Note.
The Adversaries error has advantage by the improper and ambiguous use of it:
which is Sophistical. Yea if you will, their sense is a By the Scriptures
verdict.
false sense of it; wherein yet it often used in Writers and in common speech
for want of due regard. By which means also sundry other errors have crept in
heretofore and much prevayled, even by misunderstanding of certain words.
As we may see in (...): and in Latin Meritum, Equivocall words.
Poenitentia, Crux, Sacramentum, etc.

Out of all those Testimonies before alleged, this general reason may be
concluded. No Diocesan Church

But there was no Multiplication nor distinction of many ordinary and constant
Congregations in a City, till about 200. years after Christ. Some conjecture,
it was long after this. No man shows that it was before this. The truth in
deed hereof, that for this while generally in each City there was but one
ordinary constant Congregation of Christians, has been plentifully showed in
the Proofs of this 2. Assertion before going.

Therefore till about 200. years after Christ there was no manner of Diocesan
Church or Bishop known, nor once heard of in all the Christian world. No not
the Diocesan Titular Bishop: much less any Diocesan ruling Bishop.

Where yet we deny not but that one particular Congregation or Church being
populous might occasionally and uncertainly in the time of persecution for
their safety sake assemble in diverse smaller Meetings. As before we noted page
19.20.
As also they did we doubt not, many times within the space of these 200.
years after Christ. Howbeit yet these smaller Meetings were not so many
Churches properly: because they were not ordinary set Companies, nor
constantly distinct Societies, as Churches ought to be, and as our Parishes now
are. Those diverse Occasional and uncertain meetings made but one Church and
ordinary Congregation, Act. 6, 1.
yea though the whole number were too populous for one actual Assembly
ordinarily. It is true in such case they ought to distinguish and distribut
themselves into diverse competent set Congregations which should be so many
proper and entire Churches. But when they are (as they were in those primitive
times) daily in great peril of cruel persecution, they may with reason
remain somwhile vndistinguished, and not so distribute themselves, which in
time of peace and safety they always ought to do. Wherein now some Reformed
Churches beyond Seas do seem to offend.

If any say the troublesomnes of those times or the young age of the Churches
who were not yet grown up to perfection, caused that there were no Diocesan
Churches with government nor Diocesan ruling Bishops then. And we take
advantage of the special state of those times, urging it to our purpose
generally.

I answer; we urge from the state and order of the Apostolic primitive
Churches nothing but what is general in them, and ought to be perpetual with
us. So that neither the troublesomnes of those times, nor the young age of the
Churches then do give us our advantage. For notwithstanding these special
Circumstances the Visible Churches using government and the Bishops then,
might have been very well Diocesan and Provincial, if Christ had so instituted
and the Apostles had so framed and left them. Nothing in the world hinders
but they might easily have been such even in those times. But the world knew
none such then, as I have said. And it is impiety to say Christ's Churches
were imperfect then, as touching their Visible form and constitution, their
Ministry, and the whole lawful order of worshipping God in them. Or that the
times since have made them more perfect then they were as the Apostles left
them. Wherefore this advantage do we stand upon, and this do we urge, viz. the
same pattern and form of Visible Churches using government that was then
universally practiced and received immediately from Christ and the Apostles;
which was Parishionall not Diocesan, as has been declared.

The 3. Assertion.
The Scriptures of the New Testament do contain and set forth unto us (besides
the government by Extraordinary Offices, Apostles Prophets Evangelistes) an
ordinary form of Church-governement used then.

IF in the New Testament one kind of a Visible Church using government and no
other is to be found, 1. Reason
also if special distinct ordinary Offices for Church-governement, and
special Actions thereunto belonging, be set down therein; then the Scripture
contains a special form of Church Government which was ordinary then.

But in the New Testament See before 1. Asse^tion 2. Reason.
One kind of a Visible Church using government (namely a particular ordinary
Congregation) and no other is found: also special distinct ordinary Offices
for Church-governement are set down therein, as Parishionall Tit 1.5, 7 1 Timothy
3.1, 2. Ephe. 4.11. Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.28 1 Pet. 5.2. Act. 14.23
Bishops or Pastors, and an other sort of (not Lay but Ecclesiastical) 1. Tim.
5.17. compared with Gal. 6.10. and 1 Timothy 4.10. Romans 12.^ 1 Cor. 12.28. Iam.
5.14 Add the ancient Writers: Ignat. Epist. ad Trall. Tars, and Smyr. Tertull.
Apol. c. 39. and d Baptism. Ambr. in 1. Tim. 5, and in 1. Cor. 12.28, Ierom.
in Isa. 3. August. Epist, 137.
Elders, who by their Ordinary office were only to assist in government.
Third: the special Actions belonging to Church Government are also set down in
the Scripture; as Election of Ministers, Excommunication of spiritual
offenders, etc.

Therefore the Scripture of the New Testament co^tayneth a special form of
Church-governement ordinary then.

Where it is to be noted, that in those first times there were also those other
Officers in the Churches: Note.
Apostles Evangelistes and Prophets. But they had Calling and gifts
immediately from God; the others Calling was always by men. They abode not in
one Church, as the other did. Their government and use was not perpetual but
temporary and extraordinary. They therefore hindered not the other, neither
can they now hinder: The rather since they do not now remain, but are ceased.

Also, those Parishionall Bishops and those other Elders assisting in
government, Note.
did differ in their Ordinary office. Yea though they both did sometimes Preach,
etc: yet thus they differed notwithstanding. But a Parishionall Bishop or
Pastor cannot differ in his ordinary office of Preaching, etc. from an Elder
who is also by ordinary office a Preacher, etc. Therefore he is here an other
Church Elder, viz. by ordinary office no Preacher, but only a helper in
government, who in those forenoted places is spoken of, and differs in his
ordinary office plainly from every Bishop or Pastor.

Yet some object vehemently, that all Elders in the Primitive Churches who
assisted the Bishop in government* were very Pastors: seeing they had power to
preach the word, etc. And that those mentioned namely in Ignatius and
Tertullian. before alleged, were only such. And therefore then there were none
such only governing Elders at all, as we conceave.

I answer, That they differed even then in their ordinary office from Pastors
it is clear and questionles (not only in those fore-alleaged places of
Scripture, but also) in the foresaid ancient writers Ignatius, and Tertullian,
etc. Yet for more evidence to this point which some labor mightily to obscure
and darken, I affirm that Preaching and Interpreting Gods word is of 3. sorts
in the Scripture, Preaching of 3. sorts.
and so it was used in the first Churches after. 1.
We read of Preaching which was by Romans 10.14, 15.
ordinary office. This, we say, the Pastors and Teachers only did perform. 2.
That which was for exercise and for trayning up, for the making of some apt and
able for the Ministry of the word, yea and for a further increase of gifts
even in the Ministry themselves. This was the exercise of Prophecy or
Interpretation, as the 1 Cor. 14 29. 1 Cor. 12.30.
Scripture calls it. Wherein were received some 1 Cor. 14 1.24, 31.
Lay men, namely by the Churches order. And then so likewise might the Deacons,
and Elders also sometimes Preach, though they were no Preachers by office.
Nevertheless yet we acknowledge the Preachers were and ought to be the chief
herein. But the 3.
sort of Preaching is most of all here to be marked. Third. upon occasion (in
Churches without order and scattered, and also unto persons who were not yet
gathered to any Church) there was Preaching which was general and common for
Acts 11.19.
all true Christians lively Members of Christ, endued with gifts of knowledge
and sound judgment in Religion. In which sense Ambrose is to be understood,
Ambro. in Ephe. 4.
where he says that in the first times every Christian preached the word.
Neither is it now a fault but a singular virtue for godly Householders to
instruct in the word of God their own children and servantes. Howbeit in
Churches orderly governed and settled, no private Christian may presume, neither
did any then presume publicly to preach or interpret the word, except for some
special reason he were specially appointed so to do by the lawful Governors of
the Church. And so did some preach publicly, yea in the very Churches after the
Apostles, being even but Lay men as Ignatius and Tertullian do witness in the
foresaid places. Where they show, that also the Deacons did and might preach
after this manner. And also that the Elders which were ordinary Assistantes in
government, did and might preach thus likewise. I say still, after this 3.
manner; that is like as the very Lay men did, and as the Deacons did; that is
not by their ordinary office, but by the Pastors and Bishops special
appointment to them all. Wherefore this proves not the Elders there spoken of
to be Preachers by Office: nay it proves plainly the contrary, that by their
ordinary office they were not Preachers, but only governing Elders. And this is
the purpose that we allege them for.

Finally we may observe that some shadow of them seems still to remain,
though greatly corrupted, in the Church Wardens of our Parishes. Yea some such
depravatio^ and degencration in them was begun (we doubt not) in Ambrose,
Jerome, and Austines time: although yet the ancient truth appears well
enough thereby notwithstanding.

The 4. Assertion.
The ordinary form of Church government set forth unto us in the New
Testament, ought to be kept still by us: it is not changeable by men, and
therefore it only is lawful.

IF the ordinary form of Church Government appointed by God in his word, 1.
Reason
was never since repealed by himself, then Mat. 28.20. 2 These. 2.15. 1. Tim.
6.14.
the same remains still appointed for us; it is still necessary, and is not
changeable by men.

But the ordinary form of Church-governement appointed by God in his word, and
specified before in our 3. Assertion, was never since repealed nor changed by
himself.

Therefore the same remains still appointed by God for us, it is now still
necessary, and is not cha^geable by any men.

If every lawful Visible Church using government, and also if every lawful
Church-Office, and Action, 2. Reason
ought to be particularly allowed by God in his word, then the ordinary form
of Church-governement set forth unto us in the new Testament, is necessary for
us now still, it is un. changeable and only lawful.

But every lawful Visible Church using government, and also every lawful
Church Office, and Action 1. Assert^ 1. Reason. Heb. 5.4. Mat. 21.25. 1 Cor.
12.5 28. Ephe. 4.11, 12, 13. 1 Timothy 2.5 Ioh. 10.1.
ought to be particularly (as touching the kind thereof) allowed in Gods
word.

Therefore the Ordinary form of Church-governement set down unto us in the
New Testament, is necessary for us now still, it is unchangeable and only
lawful.

Hereunto (for a conclusion) let us add certain learned men's very clear
Testimonies, which persons yet are no way partial for us. Doctor Bilson (who
is now Lord Bishop of Winchester) says thus: D. Bilson perpet goy. page 3.
We must not frame what kind of Regiment we list for the Ministers of Christ's
Church, but rather observe and mark what manner of external government the
Lord has best liked and allowed in his Church even from the beginning. And,
Page 19.
It is certain we must not choose out the corruptions of time nor inventions
of men, but ascend to the original ordinance of God, and thence derive our
platform of Church-governement. To do otherwise, is To transgress the
commandment of God for the traditions of men. Page 49.
The Apostles had their mouths and pens directed and guyded by the Holy
Ghost into all truth as well of doctrine as Discipline. The Apostles Page 43.
set an order amongst Christians in all things needful for the government,
continuance, peace, and unity af the Church. Page 221.
What authority had others after the Apostles deaths to change the Apostolic
government? Page 111.
They that have authority in the Church must look not only what they challenge
but also from whom they derive it: If from the Apostles, then are they their
Successors: If from Christ as colleagues joined with the Apostles, we must find
that consociation in the Gospel, before we clear them from intrusion. No man
should take this honor unto himself but he that is called of God as the
Apostles were. If they be called by Christ, read their assignation from Christ:
if they be not, surcease that presumption. Page 339.
If the name [of Diocesan Bishop] were new and lately invented by men, the
loss thereof were not great: yea retayning the name they must be known to be
of men and not of God. Hereunto accords D. Sutcliffe in his book entitled
O. E. against N. D. where he refuting the calling of the Jesuits, says thus:
D. Su^^liffe, or O. K. against N. D. page 110.
It is not enough to say that they have a rule and learning, and live orderly
but they must have their Office and calling allowed by Christ Jesus, if they
mean to take upon them the office of Pastors Teachers and Governors in
Christ's Church. Wherefore either let them show themselves to have a lawful
calling, or let them not think much to be thrust out as intruders. We do not
find either in the Epistle to the Ephesians, chap 4. or the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, chapt. 12. any such extravagant Friars. Thus do both these
learned men (and our no great friends) maintain with us singularly The
Scriptures perfection even in these outward Ecclesiastical matters. Yea further
considering the Scriptures phrase and manner of speech perpetually signifying
that there is not only One Visible Church of Christ properly, but Many in
number in the world; nor only one in a Nation or Province, but many, as before
Page 19. 20.
we have declared: therefore one of these (viz. the B. of Wint.) is to be well
observed how he avoucheth the holy Scriptures perfection also even for the
phrase and manner of speech, and how unlawful a thing he holds it to be to
use any (...)
new words (for religious matters) other the^ the very Scripture uses. Thus
generally he affirms, though he applies it to another point the^ now we
speak of. Says he The full redemption of man by etc. Page 41.
What I read in the word of God that I believe, what I do not read that I do
not believe. In Gods causes we may not easily leave Gods words, and with a new
kind of speech make way for a new kind of faith. We must learn from God what
to believe, and not by correcting or inverting his words teach him how to
speak. This religious strictnes even touching the words of Scripture, is
indeed (I grant) to be held religiously and perpetually, understanding the
words to be such as either the Scripture it self uses, or may be necessary
consequence be proved and allowed from the very Scripture.

But now how unjustly are we used by them, yea how unchristianly, when toward
us they will stand to nothing of all this: and yet (forsooth) all must go still
on their side. The very Papists do see and acknowledge this that I say; viz.
both that these grounds of the Scriptures absolut perfection in all
Ecclesiastical matters (whereon we exactly do stand) are the true and right
principles of the Protestants Religion, and also that the Diocesan L. Bishops,
The only true Protestants.
do, and must needs turn away from these principles, and deny them when they
deal with us: and must ioyn plainly with the Catholics in their answers, if
they will maintain themselves. Thus say they, when one objected that Ne^ves
from Spain and Holland
The Puritans (as they falsely and maliciously call us) would certainly be
extinguished if the Queen should live any number of years. Tush says an
other, you are deceaved. Nay much more possible and likely it is, that the
Puritan shall overcom the Protestant, then the contrary. For that the Puritan
builds directly upon the Protestants first grounds in Religion, and deduceth
thereof clearly and by ordinary consequence all his conclusions. Which the
Protestant can not deny by Divinity but only by Policy and humane ordination,
or by turning The Catholics Supplication An. 1604 has the like. page 17.
to Catholic answers contrary to their own principles. And it is hard for any
man sincerely to be a Protestant, but that he will easily pass also on (more
or less) to be a Puritan. And only they in effect will be against them, who
are interessed in the other side (as Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Canons,
Notaries, Registers, Civil Lawyers, and the like) for not leesing their
Commodities, etc. This do the very Papists discern and confess. Wherewithal
they prophecy also (as it were) if the Protestants Religion be not rooted out,
that the Puritanes profession will finally prevail both against the common
Protestants and the Catholics also. Which some with us much fearing and
ungraciously striving against, when they could not endure Scottizing and
Genevating for Discipline, pa. 31.
our hope of one Darius coming to build up the Temple of God among us, they
made it no less then a Treasonable mind in us when we could not conceal in
deed such a hope that we had long ago of this Princes after-comming. Wherefore
also they maintained Seminary Priests (very Traitors in deed) publikly to
tax this our most Christian and Noble Darius (whom God has of his singular
mercy now sent unto us) as a Puritan King, saying: Quodli. page 26, 27.
The Puritans have Princes none at all (unless it be one) on their side. Their
malice was thus moved, because they were not ignorant of the Kings most holy
and religious Confession of his faith made long since and published to the view
of the world, as no other King in Christendom has don, and altogether
agreeable to our Profession. Where Confess. of faith At Edingburg. Ann. 1580.
he detesteth all Rites, Signs, and Traditions brought into the Church without
or against the word of God. Promising and swearing by the great Name of our
Lord to continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline of the Church
(that is in Scotland) and shall defend the same according to his vocation and
power all the days of his life. Which also of late again he has in effect
renewed and confirmed: and that even then when there was doubt how his future
subjects in England would entertain his coming. Thus lately writes our
worthy and gracious King admonishing his Son the noble Prince Basilicon
doro^. page 43.
The doctrine and discipline preserve in purity according to Gods word. Page 7.
The whole Scripture is dited by Gods Spirit, thereby, as by his lively word to
instruct and rule the whole Church Militant to the end of the world. Page 6.
The first part of man's service to his God which is Religion, that is the
worship of God according to his revealed will, it is wholly grounded upon the
Scripture. Page 5.
Frame all your affections to follow precisely the rule there set down. Page
15, 1^.
By Superstition I mean when one restraines himself to any other rule in the
service of God then is warranted by the word the only true square of Gods
service. The form established in Scotland is To the Reader.
the only true form of Gods worship. which we understand as spoken in this
respect that they profess to renounce all humane Traditions therein. For these
things have those evil Beasts maliciously reproched his Majesty, as if this
were worthy of no better name then a Puritan opinion. In deed for this only
opinion thus they have, and do still revile us. But we commit the judgment
hereof to the Lord. Wherefore finally let us observe here (in regard of the
premises) that godly, wise, and necessary counsel of Peter Martyr, a man of
worthy memory. Says he, Martyr Epist. ad Dom. Polo.
Consulo praeterea vt Disciplinam quanto ocyus fieri poterit in vestras
Ecclesias omnino invehatis, etc. I counsel you moreover that as soon as
possible may be, you bring in the Discipline wholly into your Churches. For if
it be not received at the beginning when men are whot in love with the Gospel,
it will not be easily let in afterward when some coldness shall creep in, as
usually it comes to pass. And how vainly men labor without it, England
described.
very many Churches may be an example unto you: which from the foundations of
their restoring when they would not undergo so healthful a yoke, they could
never after in their life and manners be brought into order by any rule. Whence
it is (with grief I speak it) that all things almost have little firmenes and
do threaten ruin on every side. Therefore it is a grievous damage, and a
certain destruction of the Churches, if the sinew of discipline be wanting
unto them. Neither may they be said truly and soundly to have and profess the
Gospel which either want the Discipline, or despise it, or have no desire of
it. Surely seeing it is delivered us with so great diligence in the Gospells
and Apostles Epistles, we must confess it to be not the least part of
Christian Religion. Whereby it comes to pass that the Gospel seems to be
neglected by them, who do put away from the^ so excellent a part thereof: etc.
Thus say these learned men.

Howbeit yet our Adversaries do and will accuse us that we are Schismatikes and
Seditious in refusing the Diocesan Bishops authority and rule Ecclesiastical,
which is publicly received.

But we answer; It is no sedition nor disloyalty at all, it is no misbehaviour
against the King, dutifully to endeavor that those parts of Christ's Gospel,
which yet are wanting, should be entertained among us; that Christ's true
Visible Churches should be acknowledged and regarded as by Gods word they ought
to be, and that in the^ Christ's own spiritual ordinances (and none other)
should be established. Nay, it were disloyalty against the King and his estate
to endeavor otherwise. Again touching Schism, 1. We affirm (with the
Canonistes) Non separatio sed causa facit Schismaticum: Not separation, but the
cause makes a Schismatike. Wherefore it behooves all wise men to see where the
cause is. 2. Then we affirm and prove that our adversaries themselves do
cause or make the Schism, which in deed is amongst us.
For the Apostle says, They make Schisms who teach [any thing Ecclesiastical]
(...). Romans 16.17.
beside the doctrine which the Apostles left us, and they ought to be avoided.
Now our Adversaries do teach and urge all their forenoted Traditions most
evidently besides the Apostles doctrine and ordinances. Yea verily contrary
unto them, as before we have showed. Whereby it is manifest who are in deed the
Schismatics, and to be refused. To which purpose also Cyprian witnesses,
saying: Cypr. de Lapsi^.
Non Ecclesiae iungitur qui ab Evangelio separatur. He that differs from the
Gospel joins not to the Church: but schismeth from it. And Augustine, Aug.
co^^. Peril. 2.25.
Vtrum Schismatici nos sumus an vos, nec ego nec tu sed Christus interrogetur,
vt indicet Ecclesiam suam. Lege ergo Evangelium and respondet tibi, etc.
Whether we or you be Schismatickes ask not me, nor your selves, but ask
Christ that be may show his own Church. Read the Gospel therefore and it
answers thee, etc. Again, De Vnit^. Eccle cap. 3
Ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram. Nolo humanis
documentis sed divinis oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari. Contr. Crescon.
Gram. 1.33
Ecclesiam sine vlla ambiguitate sancta scriptura demonstrat. There [in the New
Testament] let us seek the Church. There let us examine our cause. I cannot
abide that the holy Church should be showed by men's doctrines, but by the
Divine Oracles. The holy Scriptures do demonstrat the Church without any doubt.
Chrysostom. operis imperfect. Hom ^3.
Ecclesia cogn^scitur tantummodo per Scripturas. Only by the Scriptures is the
Church known. And another says: Basil de confess. sid.
Manifesta ^st (...) a Fide, and Superbiae crimen aut reprobare quid exijs quae
s^ripta sunt, aut aliquid superinducere ex non scriptis. It is a manifest
falling away from the faith, and a sin of pride, either to refuse any thing
of that which is written, or to bring in any thing besides that which is
written. Again Cyprian says, Cypr. epi. 2.3.
No other thing ought to be don of us then that which our Lord for us has don
before us. Epist. 1.7
Whosoever gathers from any other ground, he scatters. It is adulterous, it
is impious, it is sacrilegious whatsoever it be, which mad men do institute
violating thereby the Divine or dinance. And again, Ad Pomp.
Vnde est ista Traditio? Whence comes this Tradion, (speaking namely of an
outward Ecclesiastical custom) Whether is it from the Lords authority in the
Gospells, or from the Apostles precepts and Epistles? Where his meaning in
brief is, that every such (that is Ecclesiastical) Unwritten Tradition
whatsoever, ought to be utterly rejected.

These Reasons I had, Christian Reader, which long since persuaded me in this
cause. Wherefore I was moved in conscience to communicate them to Gods people
now in this seasonable and necessary time. Considering that these things are
far from matters indifferent or arbitrarie, but are in deed very greatly
importing the common salvation. Besides we have been often and vehemently
provoked thereunto. And the present opportunity exacteth it at our hands, as
all men do understand. To God only wise be praise through Jesus Christ for
ever, Romans 16.27.

Via vna, cor vnum.
AN EXHORTATION.
To all the godly, learned, and faithful Pastors of the several Churches in
England, HENRY JACOB Minister of Gods word, wishes grace and peace to be
multiplied in CHRIST JESUS.
BRETHREN, my hearts desire and prayer to God for the People of England is that
they may be saved. And this you know well, can not be attained ordinarily with
comfortable and firm assurance in Gods Promises unto us, but by the due
execution of the whole and entire Pastoral office sanctified and set by Christ
himself in his Churches to this purpose. For which cause I have been specially
at this time moved with inward compassion toward our whole Nation; wherein
through Gods merciful goodness the Gospel has been famously professed now
these 50. years almost wholly together. And yet notwithstanding never all this
while have any of you (the Pastors of our Churches) executed your whole and
entire function toward your flocks. Being by all means forbidden and
forcibly kept from one natural part thereof, and most effectual, which Christ
in his word prescribes and has left for you and for all true Pastors to
perform. Namely the holy Government and spiritual Discipline; as by the 2.4.
and 7. Reasons in the first Assertion before has appeared. Whence manifestly
it is com to pass, that 3. unspeakable evils do reign among us. First a
general impeachment and wrack of the souls health of the People every where
throughout the Land, by wanting this Ordinary means appointed of God for
salvation to every man. Secondly, an injurious spoiling of all you (beloved
Brethren) the true and proper Pastors in England of a principal part of your
holy function and spiritual right. Third: no small diminution of the honor of
Christ and of his heavenly word. Bound to answer before God. O my Brethren,
what are all your worldly benefits besides to this loss? What are your
dignities to this indignity? Or else are you not the men you are taken to be?
Are you not rightly and truly Pastors to your several flocks? Are you the
Diocesan Bishops Curates, and Substitutes only? Have you not properly the
charge of souls, and shall you answer to God nothing for the straying and
leesing of your sheep? If you think so, let the world understand this matter.
If otherwise, look to your charge, fulfill your ministry which you have
received of the Lord. Or else consider how you can be in such an office, and yet
not do the office; not intend to do it. The things which God has conjoined,
who may separate? The Lord for the saving of his children needs no man's
sin, which you here commit in thus violating his Ordinance. Yea he will save
his by his own means, and not as we think he will. Heaven and Earth may
perish, but one Jot or title of his spiritual Ordinances may not perish, nor
be changed by men. It is not in men therefore nor Angels to dispense with you
herein, nor to discharge you of a part of your holy office. Much less may lay
Chancelors or strange Pastors take into their hands the spiritual censures
(which belong unto you) both over your flocks and over your selves also. The
last, do see in this Treatise (I hope) how directly contrary they are to Gods
word, how prejudicial and dishonorable to your holy calling, and likewise how
pernicious to the souls of all the Christians in the Land. Which also very
experience shows us too much. For how do Libertines and Atheists grow by this
means? How does Popery and other Heresies spread abroad and get footing by
it? There is no other such reason truly to be given of these evils, as this,
even because the Churches are deprived among us (contrary to Christ's ordinance)
of their power to correct and redress the same. And, because every man wants
this heavenly defense and preservatiue appointed for us of God; without which
how should they be preserved? Yea it may be truly said, that they all do want
one part of their ordinary appointed and sanctified food to eternal life, and
that they all do want the use of one of the Keys which do open the Kingdom of
heaven ordinarily, as before has been showed. Why do you not therefore,
brethren, chiefly now at this time, seek unto God by prayer and to our most
wise and noble King, by humble and earnest suit, both for your own, for your
peoples, yea for Christ's due right? Our Sovereign is a gracious Christian
Prince: He (as we daily see) righteth every man's te^porall wrongs who do come
unto him. Much more will he (being dutifully and diligently sought unto) give
you and your Flocks (every of which is Christ's proper visible Church) these so
manifest and so necessary spiritual rights appertayning unto them, and
concerning so nearly all their souls health. And for Christ's honor who will be
more forward then he, who has don many things most virtuously, most
religiously already heretofore. For the better procurement whereof now, and
for the easier persuading of you and all men duly to seek this blessing, I
have taken a little pains in the collecting of these Assertions and Reasons
before going. Hoping that even our Adversaries herein, who have consciences
fearing God, and frameable by his word wishing sincerely the right state of
Christ's Visible Churches in England, will accord with us, and not prefer their
own temporal respects before Gods true glory, yea and their own principal
good. If any (as I fear to many) will resist and pretend reason, and Religion,
and care for the State, etc. Them I desire to be as willing, as we are,
Christianly to discuss these questions. Wherein humbly we desire that the King
him self would judge; who is wise as an Angel of God, to understand and
determine this whole cause by the trial and evidence of Gods written word.
Which is and must be among Christians the end of all religious controversies.
Wherefore now Brethren, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build us further, and to give us an inheritance among them
that are sanctified.

Your Brother in the Lord HENRY JACOB.

I am the way, the truth, and the life.

John 14.6. I will not give my glory to another.

Isa. 42.8. They teach things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake.

Tit. 1.11.

