THE COPY OF HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER, SENT ON TVESDAY THE 26. OF June 1604:
signifying his Highness pleasure to the Commons House of Parliament, in the
matter of Subsidy.

AT LONDON Imprinted, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of
the Swan. 1604.

THE COPY OF HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER, SENT ON TVESDAY, THE 26. OF JUNE 1604.
signifying his Highness pleasure to the Commons House of Parliament, in the
matter of Subsidy.
Having been informed, that within the space of these eight or ten days
past, there has been diverse times speeches made in the Lower House of our
Commons for a Subsidy to be at this time granted unto us, we have thought it
convenient that ye should in our name acquaint the House with the sincere
truth of our meaning in that matter, to the end that they being at a point in
that question, may with the greater expedition conclude such special things as
are necessary to be done before the ending of this so longsome Session of
Parliament.

It is true that ever before and a certain space after the sitting down of
this Parliament, we were constantly resolved neither to think, nor in case it
had been offered unto us, any ways to have accepted a Subsidy at this time:
For as in our first speech to this whole Parliament, we declared how unwilling
we should ever be to be a burden to our people; so thought we it an unfit
time, at our first Parliament, after our so happy and peaceable entry in this
kingdom with so great and general an applause, for having a Subsidy raised
upon them, notwithstanding of our present great necessity, and that thorough
the occasion of diverse great expenses, whereunto we were driven at our first
entry here. But after the assembling of this Parliament, we were so often
dealt with and informed by diverse members of that House, that were otherwise
strangers to our affairs, that it was a thing both honorable and reasonable,
that a Subsidy should be granted unto us; that both our necessity required
it, and the people in their love were ready to offer it unto us; That it was
ever the form of all Kings of England to have a Subsidy given them at the
very first assembling of their first Parliament: That as it was honorable for
us to receive it, (being an earnest penie of the peoples love toward us) so
would it be a thing nothing prejudicial nor hurtful for them to yield unto;
and that there was enough in that House that were striving amongst themselves,
who should be the first propounder thereof, as at the last we were moved to
be contented that some should prove the Houses mind in it. Only in this
point were we careful that in case it were propounded and put to a question,
it should receive no public refusal, which could not but be dishonorable unto
us, especially in the sight of all the strangers that are now here. But having
now with time more narrowly examined both the custom in the like cases at the
first Parliaments of our predecessors here; as likewise that the last Terms
payment of the old great Subsidy is not yet come; so as a double burden shall
appear to be laid upon the people, and yet our commodity never a hair the
nearer: We have hereupon concluded with our self to resort to our former
determination, and therefore is it our express will that ye shall in our name
signify to our said House of Commons, that we desire the^ at this time not to
meddle any further with that question, assuring them in the word of a King,
that we will be so far from taking it unkindly their not offering it unto us
at this first Session of this our first Parliament, as by the contrary we will
only interpret it to proceed from the care they have that our people should
not have any occasion of distaste of us offered unto them at this time, for the
reasons above mentioned: assuring our self that the said House will in the
own time be careful to see our state supplied by such means, as may be
most convenient for our weal, and least hurtful to our Subjects, wherein we
remit our self to their discreet considerations in the due time.

James R.


