THE TRVE GVIDE To GLORY.

A SERMON PREACHED at Plympton Mary in Deuon, at the Funerals of the Right
Worshipful, and truly (...) the LADY (...)

10. When (...) knowledge (...)

11. Then shall (...) thee, and understanding shall keepe^^

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM, for Nathaniel Newberrie, and are to be sold
at his shop under Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, and his approved good friends; Sir WILLIAM STRODE of
Nowingham in Deuon, Knight, with his SONS and DAVGHTERS.
WHen the watchman (Right Worshipful) said to David, The running of the
foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz; then the King said, He is a good man,
and comes with good tidings. Now I would it could at this time be truly
testified of me, in both particulars: but it may not; it cannot. For I am like
to him that adds fuel to the flame; rubbeth a green wound; or that
presents, before the eye, some fearful, and to-be forgotten object. The
tidings I bring, are like the Amalekites to David; Joseph's brethren to Jacob;
or Jonah his Sermon to the Ninevites: Notwithstanding, bear with me, for I
cannot help it: It Is God that did it; and good use may be made of it.

We must all fall in the wilderness of this

(...) To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, John the Baptist was not amiss compared to a mourner: for
his attire was hairie; his food locusts and wild honey; and his Doctrine, to
flesh and blood, sounded harshly: So may all my Sons, and that not unfitly,
be styled the subjects of sorrow; for the weeds, wherein they be wrapped, are
black; their faces, eyes, cheeks represent death, judgment, the grave; and
their tongues tell of heavy and terrible tidings. Notwithstanding, do not thou
too rashly condemn their father; for their mother, Time, was womanfull of
great infirmities; in whose womb they were conceived; so that he gave them not
all, but part of their being. Are not these the days of danger, times of
peril, so long agone foretold, prophesied? Shall we then expect issue of
Peace, or sons of Laughter? Nay rather look for a sorrowful seed and
cruel Posterity.

Yet this I would have thee to understand, that (though their heads be hanging,
their looks lowering, and this Motto imprinted in their Brow, Woe to the wicked
inhabitants of the Earth:) thou have no just cause to shut thy doors, veil
thine eyes, or to deny them a friendly entertainment; for they, in many
things, do resemble thy self, bear the engraven image of thy person, and
truly declare, what, before long, shall certainly befall thee. They speak
rudely, bluntly, yet truly; and therein censure them not ouer-suddenly: for
it is their fathers language; of him they have learned it; so that it is become
their natural Dialect: And he taught them all, and first of all, this
impartial lesson; That, in their progress and speech, they should value all
men alike, of what cloth soever their coats be cut on, until a New birth had
put a difference.

I easily conceive the murmurings of many, mumbling: What? is not the world
full of such children? I have often seen, that such as have no seed of their
own, seldom affect the posterity of another: Or, peradventure, some (who are
past begetting any) may object or cauell; Why, this is not the same, I was
present at his birth. My good friend, know (if it were so) that a better coat
changes not the subject; neither does a new patch alter the form of an old
garment; for then Joseph in his Princely Robes, had been another man, and
Zebedeus his old nets had become new by mending. Shall we conclude, that when
an Hebraisme, by our Lord an^ (...) Disciples, is turned into a Graecisme, that
the Scripture is wrested or altered? But these persons are like the barren
womb, in a double respect; they are unfruitful, and yet with foaming out
their own shame, and spetting innocent infants in the face, they be never
satisfied. Credit his Father, suspect thy own censure: for when thou saw
him first, he was running; and thine eye might easily deceive thee: now he is
sitting, thou may take a more certain view of him, and see him as he is.

He that will judge wine for color, in the pouring; or men's suites on their
backs, running; may easily deem amiss in his forward censuring. But handle
the one, and see the other in a glass settled, so shall thou not be at all
deluded: In like manner, words uttered are in motion; the Ear cannot so well
receive them, as being imprinted in papers, the Eye will apprehend them:
Therefore, be swift to hear, slow to speak; and then judge righteous
judgment.

From my study in Ply^mouth. Thy Christian friend, I. B.

THE TRVE GVIDE UNTO GLORY.
PSALM. 73.24. Thou will guide me by thy counsel; and afterward receive me to
glory.


COncerning this Psalm, two things may be considered: First, the Author of it;
Secondly, the Subject of it. Asaph, 2 Chro. 29.30.
some think, Penned it; for it is styled A Psalm of Asaph: Again, he writ
Psalms as well as David: also, 1 Chro. 25.2.
he and his Sons were singers in Israel: But whether he, David, or Moses
made it, the matter is not much, seeing it is most certain, he was carried
and directed by the Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 1. vlt.
that penned it.

As touching the subject matter of it, if we look into it, we shall find a
plain description of a wicked and godly man; the very map of both in lively
colors declared, and that for the present and future time. The ungodly is set
forth. First, by his Adjuncts, which are six. 1. In his title fool. 2. his
Strength. 3. his Riches. 4. his Success. 5. he is not corrected as others. 6.
lastly. He dies in peace; for there is no bands in his death. Secondly, he is
descri ed by his Acts, or Effects; which are likewise six. 1. he declares his
Pride. 2. he is violent. 3. he Oppresses. 4 he Corrupts, either himself
or others. 5. he uses bad Language, for his tongue walks. 6. and last of
all, he accuses God of ignorance; Is there knowledge in the most High? Yet you
have not heard the worst of him: for four accidents remain behind. One, his
present estate is tickle; for he stands upon a slippery foundation: another,
he dies Suddenly: a third, he must come to Judgment; and in conclusion, then
his image shall be despised. And thus have you an end of him: From all which,
by the way, we may observe diverse instructions.

1. That, wicked men are fools: yet, the more wicked, the more foolish.

2. That, the strongest bodies possess not the soundest minds: These two do
not always lodge together. 3 John 2.
John, writing to his friend Gaius, wishes that he might prosper and fare, as
his soul fared: But he that would send an Epistle to many of our Gallants, if
he did well, should in his salutations desire, that They might fare in soul as
their bodies fare; for, they are lusty and strong, Job 22.23.
their breasts full of milk, and their bones run full of marrow; Ier. 5.28.
they are waxen fat and shining. But where grace enters, like a pinching
frost, it makes the flesh wither and fall, freezeth the very marrow, and
congealeth the fatness; so that the body often is weak and pineth away. Psalm.
39.11.


3. That much goods and Grace are not inseparable companions.

These two meet not, as the Sun and Moon run their course night and day,
in one and the same subject. Therefore says our Lord, Matthew. 19.23.
How hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven, and be saved?
Sometimes we grant they may, but seldom. It is said that Naaman the Syrian, 2
Kings 5.1.
was a mighty man, and valiant, but a Leper: great for riches, (peradventure)
valiant for body; so that it may prove this (at the least the former) Doctrine.

But what rich or strong man amongst us believes this report?

4. That, wicked persons often prosper. Their Bullock gendreth and fails
not: Job 21.8 9. etc.
Their Cow calueth and casts not her Calfe. They send forth their children
like sheep; and their Sons dance: Their Seed is established, and they grow
up in wealth.

5. That not to be afflicted, is a mark of the wicked. They have no changes,
therefore they fear not God: Psalm. 55.19.
whereas the godly are chastened every morning; else bastards, not sons. Heb.
12.8.


6. That, peace in death is no sure sign of a better life. They that live like
Lions, and dye like Lambs, may not have their names writ in the Lambs Book of
life. But if a good life be the Antecedent, this no bad, but a desirable
consequent; this crosses the judgment of the common people: Oh say some, how
quietly he dyed? But I say; how well has he lived? Let us then judge men by
their lives, not by their deaths; lest we acquit the guilty, and condemn the
innocent: For all outward things come alike to all men; just, or unjust: This
is one of those evils, Eccles. 9.1.2.3.
that the wise man saw, under the Sun.

Again, from their Effects or Actions, might many things be observed; as,

1. That, when wicked men have most, then they sin most. Hence it is, that
some having much money, turn biting Usurers, and devour by oppression. The
bountifulness of God toward them, does not (though indeed it ought) lead
them to repentance. Romans 2.4.


And from the four following accidents, we note a fourfold instruction.

First, that notwithstanding the wicked be rich and strong, yet they stand upon
a sandy foundation. They are set on slippery places; either upon the Ice, on
the which if they slip, or it break, they be drowned, spoiled: or upon a
Quag-mire, that is grown over with a thin skin, through which, if they
shrink, they stick fast, and are all be-mudded.

Secondly, that wicked men shall dye certainly, and suddenly, Job 12.2.
in a moment: the Text says; They spend their days in pleasure, and suddenly
go down to the grave.

Thirdly, that profane persons shall rise, and come to judgment.

And lastly, that at the day of judgment they shall have their full torment:
Dan. 12.1.
For, they shall rise to shame and contempt eternal. And thus we leave them,
where God shall leave them, wishing their harms may make us to beware: And so
proceed we to the godly person, of whom we have many things to say; but
because time will not permit us, we will omit them, only reducing them to
these heads, 1. A Conflict, and 2. The Issue of it.
In this Combat, note 1. Who they be that quarrel. 2. The causes of it.


It is the Flesh and Spirit, Faith and Infidelity that strive; these twins are
in every regenerate person, man or woman. Sin must not be counted as a mere
privation, or nothing; but we must conceive of it as a strong man, or
corroborated habit. Romans 7.24. etc.


The ground of the quarrel grows either from the fell opposition, that is
betwixt them; for these are contrary one to the other: Gal. 5.17.
or the diverse condition of the wicked and the godly. When the profane man
prospers, and the righteous are in adversity, it works strangely, even in
the most sincere hearted: Therefore the wicked are counted blessed; For, they
that work wickedness, Mal. 3.15.
they are set up, and such as tempt God, they are delivered. From this
consideration, this good man's steps had almost slipped, and he embraced the
world; yet he having recourse to the word of God, saw his own folly, and their
miserable end; so that though the combat for a time was fierce, and the issue
thereof doubtful, notwithstanding Faith prevails at the length, and winnes
the field, triumphing with this confession; Lord, thou will guide me, etc. But
before we come to the words, let us observe some things by the way. And here
we may see, that

1. The prosperity of the wicked fretteth the godly. There is a secret enmity
between the seed of the Woman, and the Serpents; Also that,

2. In the time of temptation, the flesh will play its part. Furthermore, that

3. He that would see the present and future condition of good and bad, must
have recourse to Gods word; not flock to the Stage or profane History, for
they may deceive; this Book cannot.

And so we come to the words in hand, the which have a double reading at the
least: Some read them prayer-wise; Lord guide me, etc. But I rather choose to
read them as a Confession, being a speech of great rejoicing, and a
declaration of the fruit of his faith, that followed this great and terrible
combat.

In the which we may observe a double proposition, and in either of them, two
principal things comprehended. In the antecedent part, this good man says;
First, that the Lord will guide him. Secondly, he acknowledges wherewith, viz.
by his counsel. In the cons^quent proposition, he conf^sseth, that he will
also glorify him; and tells the time when, or order how; after he had guided
him by his counsel.

Thus you see the parts of it. Now we come to show you the meaning or sense of
the words.

Thou,] that is, GOD; Father, Son, and holy Spir^t; for all three consent in
every action done toward the creature: what one does, all do, mediately or
immediately, yet in a diverse manner: God the Father is said to guide, by the
word; Christ, by his example, and the Spirit, by immediate motions and
irradiations iniected upon man's understanding; yet with one joint consent, all
tend to one and the same thing. There be Relative properties in the Deity, that
are peculiar to the distinct persons. As the Father to beget, the Son to be
begotten, and the Spirit to proceed: but these we speak of are internal,
not external, actions upon the creature.

Shall, or wilt.] This word contains in it, the faith and confidence of the
person; how that he did depend upon God, and assure himself, that he would be
his guide for future time, as well as for the present season.

Guide.] This word seems to be borrowed from a Traveler, and so all the Text
is metaphorically set down, or by way of similitude; the sense is, that the
Lord would direct, quietly and securely conduct, lead and govern him, in
these his spiritual travels.

Me.] That is, Asaph, David, Moses, or some such Seer, or faithful person.

By thy counsel.] In Scripture counsel has many acceptions, which we omit;
for in this place is meant, the Lords counsel: And it is twofold; secret, or
revealed. Job 15 8.
Who has known the secret (viz. counsel) of God? that is, what things he
purposed with himself, to bring to pass from all eternity.

counsel be ascribed unto God? for he sees at the first, with one act, what
is best.

whilst we behold things, how successively they come to pass, and are
effected by secondary causes, we acknowledge it to be in him; and so attribute
counsel unto him.

Genesis 1.26. Job 12.13.
(I speak after the manner of men) not rashly or ignorantly.

Now for the Reueiled counsel of God, the which is here especially meant; that
may be double also: being considered, in his works, or in his word. In his
works; Isai 46.10. Prou. 19.21.
and that of Creation, Providence: For in both does the counsel of the most
High declare it self.

But I understand, principally in this place, to be meant the word and reueiled
will of God, both Law and Gospel; the one was declared, (b^ing writ in Adams
heart) at the Creation; the other part after man's fall, in the means of his
recovery and Redemption; when indeed was manifested the depth of his counsel;
things, that before they were reueiled, past finding out; after, to man most
wonderful. And in Scripture, both the Law and the Gospel are called Gods
counsel; Ier. 23.22. Luke 7 30.
and as isntrumental causes, of necessity to bring man to his eternal home.
And thus much for the first proposition.

And afterward,] that is, when my change, or time of dissolution comes; Job
145.14.
which is the end of this his pilgrimage.

Receive me.] Take me into thy protection, when I shall depart hence.

Into glory.] For the words Etymology it signifies weight gravity. Paul
alludes to this, 2 Cor. 4.17. Some read In glory, having respect to his
person, without spot or wrinkle. For, Revel. 21. vlt. 1 Timothy 3. vlt.
No unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, or into glory,
meaning heaven, the glorious place of the blessed; both may be meant. And he
has (no doubt) relation too, to the day of judgment, Phil. 3. vlt.
when the body shall also be made glorious. So that the plain and full meaning
of this parcel of Scripture is; Lord, I confess, that when I, with the eye of
flesh and blood, viewed the prosperity of the ungodly, how that they were lusty
and strong, abounding in all wealth, living in great pleasure, and had no bands
in their death; moreover breaking forth into envy, malice, oppression, pride,
cursed speaking, and to blaspheme thy Name it self; and yet not plagued like
other men, who did live in awe and fear of thy Majesty; careful to keep all
thy commands, and to approve their hearts to thee in all their proceedings; I
was sore troubled, and wonderfully perplexed; insomuch as I had almost fainted
and publicly proclaimed, that I had and others of thy righteous servants
also, cleansed our hearts in vain, and in innocence washed our hands to no
purpose: Thus brutish was I, and full of infidelity: But at the last, having
recourse unto thy word, the Rule to decide all these things; I then saw
(notwithstanding all their pomp, pleasure and prosperity) that they stood upon
a tickle foundation; shall dye certainly, suddenly; rise again, and come unto
judgment, when they shall receive their full punishment for their sin. And,
I also am verily persuaded that though I am naturally subject to wander, and
go astray, yet thou will direct, guide, and safely lead me on in this my
spiritual and perilous passage (thy word revealed to me, being my refuge as
heretofore, and the means to conduct me, next thy Majesty) until my abode
here in this world, shall be no more: And having done this, I am further
assured, that my soul, without spot or wrinkle, shall be received into thy
heavenly kingdom, where, in peace and safty, it shall remain, until that
great day, when all shall awake out of the dust, and then shall soul and body
be reunited, changed into the glorious image of thy Son, and for ever remain
in the mountain of thy holiness.

And now let us proceed to some points of instruction. We having heard of this
great conflict betwixt the new man and the old, flesh and spirit, faith and
infidelity; yet corruption being at the last overcome and conquered: hence I
gather this Doctrine; that

True Faith may faint, but it never fails utterly.

The degree of it (probably) may be decayed, wasted; the acts and effects of it
(certainly) weakened, decreased; but the essence of it shall never be totally
or finally consumed, destroyed. Jacob may wrestle with the Archangell, his
sinew shrink, thigh fall, and his steps be found halting; yet shall he be
named Israel: Gen 32.28.
because he found favor, and prevailed with God. Sampson, by the deceit of
dancing Dalilah, may have his head cut, hair shorn, and strength go from
him; notwithstanding in tract of time, his head shall grow, his vigor return,
his prayer be heard, Judge 16
he kill the uncircumcised Philistims, and have his name enrolled for ever
amongst the faithful. Heb. 11.32. Acts 7.32.
The presence of God may make Moses the man of God to break out, I quake and
tremble; Isaiah, Woe is me, I am undone; Manoah also, Isa. 6.5. Judge. 13.21.
We shall surely dye. Notwithstanding all this, they shall conquer, overcome,
pass to their iourneyes end in peace, win the combat: for the acts of faith be
but for a time suspended; the essence is not annihilated, utterly consumed.
Valiant Gedeon may cry aloud, How can the Lord be with us, seeing all these
evils be come upon us? where be his miracles of old, our fathers told us off?
has not God forsaken us? Yet, Judge. 6.13.14.
shall he not, anon, hear a voice, Go in thy might, for thou (thou that thus
doubtest, fear) shall save Israel? And may not just Job think himself to
be the subject of Gods wrath? the very Butt of his justice? and (in his own
feeling) find the arrows of the Almighty drunk with his spirit? Job 6.4.
But let him stay a little while, the Bow shall be ^^^ent, the string slacked,
these peircing shafts shut up in the Quiver, and his end become blessed. Iam.
5.11.


I might here make mention of Ieremiahs complaining, and accusing the Almighty;
Ier. 20.7.
Lord I am deceived, and thou (wonder at this) have deceived me; David picking
a quarrel with his nature, Psalm. 77.7.10. and 116.11.
concluding, This is my death, and all men are liars; Didymus doubting; Peter
cursing and swearing; Paul howling. Spoiled man that I am! Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Yet for all this, Faith
shall win the field, infidelity be foiled, grace conquer, corruption loose
the combat: And although the Flesh be the first borne, claim possession,
expect a day of mourning; yet let him do his worst, he shall loose his
birthright, serve the younger: for Faith has been blessed once, and it shall
be blessed ever. Art thou yet in doubt? Do thou demand, How can this thing
be?

the gift of God? and are not his gifts and calling without repentance? Ephesians
2.8. Romans 11.29. Iam. 1.5.17.
Shall he bewail his bounty? recall his liberality? No, no, he gives freely,
and vpbraideth no man's person, there is no variableness, or shadow of turning
with him. Man may, through error of judgment, mutation of affection, or some
forced necessity, withdraw and take possession of his former favors conferred:
But God cannot err, be moved, or brought to poverty; therefore his gift of
grace that is once given, 1 Samuel 16.14.
is ever given. God took his Spirit from Saul. Saul of the scepter, then we
might fear Faith might fail, and be took from us; but God has a resolution
to give his little flock a kingdom; Lu^e 12.32.
and where he intends the end, the means that tend to it, shall certainly in
some measure be continued.

Christ long agone prayed to his Father, L^^^e 22 32. Romans 8.34.
that it might not fail? And is he not now at the right hand of God, to make
intercession for the Saints? shall he not prevail? will his heavenly Father
deny him any thing? Psalm. 2.8.
Why, this were to deny himself, to make Christ a liar, seeing we have his
own testimony, That he is heard at all times, John 11.42.
in all things. Let Satan therefore winnow the godly, as in a sieue, tempt,
plot, use his most profound depths, and raise up his most boisterous winds;
yet his fan shall never empty the Lords garner of this grain, though it be no
bigger then the smallest mustard-seede; yet it shall grow up in despite of
him, increase, flourish, and be green for ever.

Temple of Gods Spirit? be they not his own building? 1 Cor. 6.19.
shall he then suffer the cornerstone (Faith I mean) to be tumbled out, and
beaten to powder? shall the Spirit of all truth be accused of that, which he
condemns for a sin in his Creature? shall it be said to him, Luke 14.30.
that he began to build and was not able to make an end? What hinders a house
begun from perfecting, but, either former ignorance, or want of future ability?
shall we accuse the holy Ghost of either? Take heed what thou do, for his
ways are not man's ways. Man is blind and weak, so that in process of time
he may see, that the situation of his house was not good, the foundation
firm, or the model commendable or useful: If all this be well, yet
Sanballats and Tobiahs may prevent him, poverty pursue him, sickness may
ceaze upon him, that his work may not be finished. But this builder we speak
of he sees all things in one act and together; he is not, Semel and simul.
nor cannot be wiser at the second thought, Prou. 11.30.
and what power or wisdom can prevail against the Lord?

Be thou therefore assured, that as the Father (for we in special manner
appropriate the works of Creation to him) till all was made very good never
rested: Nor the Son (to whom, in like manner, we attribute the work of
Redemption) until it was finished, ceased; No more shall the Holy Ghost (to
whom peculiarly we impute the work of Regeneration) until that honorable
house be perfected, rest from his labor: for shall he not be equal to the
other, in himself, and toward man, out of himself, for power, wisdom and
goodness? Then hold the one, and grant the other.

remain sure? 2. Tim. 2.19. 1 Ioh. 5.18.
Are they not such as he freed from sin? that evil one comes not near them;
Romans 7. vlt.
they sin not to death; neither with full consent, or a settled resolution.
What may I more say? they pray, read, and use all means to preserve it; shall
it then die, and wither? No: for if we use the means, God shall confer a
blessing.

1 I^m. 1.19.20.
Hymeneus and Philetus made shipwreck of faith. Therefore it may fail
finally, totally.

Sol.
1. It was no true, but a dead faith. 2. The Apostle (in the judgment of
charity, till they became open persecutors, and revolted from their former
profession) deemed that they had faith: And this is the true interpretation,
that they seemed to have had faith, but had not any sound faith at all.



Is this manner of speaking so strange? Sol.
does not our Lord say, from him that has not, Matthew. 25.29.
even that he has shall be taken away? Luke makes it plain, saying, That
which he seemed to have, shall be taken away: Luke 8.18.
Thus does Christ resolve Antichrist, Jesus the Jesuit. We will omit the like
objections, and so make use of the doctrine.

is not from above, pure, peaceable, and easy to be entreated; but from below,
sensual, earthly, and devilish; and therefore (as Paul speaks of
Covetousness) let it not be once named (except with detestation) amongst you
as becomes Christians. For variety of faiths existence, does not prevent the
perpetuity of it is essence.

Achitophel or Judas creep into the Court, be companion to David, and his
Lord, take sweet counsel with them, receive promotion from them? yet if they
conceive iniquity, expect opportunity, lift up their heel against Gods
anointed, and bathe their hands in the blood of his destruction; (though the
Pope and his poleshorne brethren would canonize them for Saints, engraue their
names with great red capital letters in their Calendars) they are but
deepe-headed, cruell-hearted Traitors; trees without fruit, twice dead, rent up
by the roots, and reserved for the blackness of darkness for ever.

Let Iehu, march in fury, demand, is thy heart upright as mine? cry, give me
thine hand; call, come see what Zeal I have for the Lord of Hosts; reply,
What peace, whiles the whoredoms and witchcrafts of thy mother Iezabel
remain? charge, Cast that painted faced strumpet down from the window: Yet if
afterward, he pace like the slugge, burn as the Ice, and his whole heart go
not after (but wholly depart from) the God of Israel; we may note him by a
letter, judge him a proud-spirited person, and a mere castaway.

Nay, let Balaam prophecy, I shall see him, but not yet; bless, who can tell
the dust of Jacob; confess, the eyes that were shut up, have thou (Lord)
opened; pray, let me dye the death of the righteous; protest, that for a house
full of gold or silver he cannot pass the commandment of God: notwithstanding
all this, if he consult with the son of Zippor, consent (and give counsel
too) to curse the children of Israel; he is but a base wisard, a lewd person,
of the Serpents brood, and God, one day in justice, shall pay him his wages.

Finally; let Hymeneus and Hermogenes; Philetus, Alexander and Demas preach
Christ, or profess him, have their praise in the Gospel, send salutations to
the brethren: but if once there come a New, wherein their callings shall be
rejected, or neglected, the world embraced, Paul persecuted, and the sincere
preaching of the word by them resisted; they never were the owners of true
Faith, or good conscience, comprehended in the covenant of grace, and therefore
a day will come, when, according to their works, they shall be rewarded. And
as we may deem of such in former times, so may we of the like in these latter
days; for it is an eternal Canon, They went out from us, because they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. And
this (observe) is come to pass, that it might appear, they were not all of
us, 1 John 2.19.

may Faith faint, yet not fail for ever? Why then here is a ground of comfort
to such as in former time have felt it, though, for the present, it be not in
their apprehension. Tell me, did thou ever believe in the Lord? have thou
given this guest a nights lodging? art thou sure thou once had it? then
certainly thou have it, though for the present thou be otherwise minded. What
if Jorden fill not her banks to the brimme every morning? John the Baptist
stir not in the womb at each season? Jacob apprehend not the Lords presence
continually? Yet, shall not the tide return? the babe be alive and borne? and
the God of Abraham be in that place? yes of certain: so Faith may not at all
times fill the soul with joy, spring in the womb, or be discerned in the
hearts habitation; notwithstanding, it is not dried up, nor dead in the mother,
nor has took his last farewell. Faith may not be compared to Ionah's gourd,
that withers in a moment; neither to the fig tree, on which fruit shall never
grow any more; nor is it like the Lilly, which to day is, and to morrow cast
into the Oven; for God will not send a worm to smite it; Christ shall never
curse it, or the Spirit burn it, totally consume it: The chilling cold of
Winter may pinch it; the heat of the Summers sun may scorch it; and the
lightning from above, in some degree, blast it: yet the Spring shall revive it;
the dew from above water it; and the South-winde refresh it. It may be, like
gold, tried in the fire; but it shall be found more precious, come forth the
purer, and preserve the owners of it unto praise, honor, and eternal
salvation, at the appearing of Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 1.7.

In my meditations I have sometimes thought, that Faith is like the Daizie (a
word compounded of Day and Eye) or Marigold: when the Sun sets, she shuts;
when it rises, she reuiueth; for by this Planets motion, she is in a diverse
estate, and condition: So when the Son of righteousness goes (as it were)
beneath the Globe, disperseth his beams another way; then Faith closes it
self, hangs the head, and it is leaves are contracted: but when he has
fetched his circumference, and arises within our Horizon, spreads his beams
of heat and mercy upon it; then it sprouteth up, opens and dilateth it is
self, sends forth it is pleasant fumes, to the great content of him or her
in whom it is planted: So that I say to thee, Be of good comfort; for as Christ
said of Lazarus: It is not dead, but sleeps. Labor therefore to awake it out
of this slumber, that it may recover it is former estate, do it is first works
and better.

And for thy direction.

1. See that thou settle not thy self amongst Mutes, pitch thy tents where the
silver Trumpets are sounded, and Aarons bells ring in the Sanctuary every
Sabboath.

2. Live not with Liquides; beware of lewd companions. If Peter come into
Caiphas his porch, hang his head over, and warm his fingers at, the
Highpriests fire; he will curse, swear, and shall (without reprehension too)
deny his Master: whereas Saul will prophecy among the Prophets.

3. Up, and be doing; be not idle, either in thy general or particular
calling: who ever fell a sleep working, walking?

4. Do not feast, but fast; for that will diminish and weaken the fumes of
sin; hinder these drowsy exhalations, preserve the pores and ventrikles of
the mind from cloasure, and give the lively spirits full passage for motion
and action: This is the way to awake it, sleeping; and to keep it from
slumbring, being awaked.

and carfulness, in the expectation of a good crop of corn at the time of
harvest? Will not the Merchant launch out into the deep, cut the huge waves
and billows of the Sea, proudly pass by the dangerous Rocks, and polling
Pirates, in hope that his Bark shall one day return filled, fraughted with
the richest Spices? What Patient so flegmatique, desperate, but will swallow
the most bitter pill, suppe off the most loathsome potion, being beforehand
persuaded, that it will not kill, but cure him? Shall we then be dead on the
nest? want spirit? and have no heart to use the means that might either beget
it, awake it, or preserve it? Does not hope of the end set all men aworke in
their several proceedings? and shall we have such a prize as this, in our
hands, and have no hearts? Consider then what Faith is, and be idle if thou
can.

Is not Faith a Prince, that wheresoever he pitcheth his Tents is accompanied
with royal atten^^n^s? Does it not purify the heart? settle and secure the
soul? quench Satan's darts? and overcome the world? I say more; Faith is the
very essential form of a Christian: Are we not, by it, from all other persons
distinguished? what action good before God, but from it, as it proper cause,
has proceeded? By faith we are enliued, moved, justified and finally saved.
Therefore hear, read, pray, confer, and receive daily the signs and seals
of thy Masters coming, the very food and nourishment of it; outface sin,
out-liue sin; seeing thou art assured, that thy labor is not lost, vain in
the Lord. And thus we proceed to answer an Objection that some might cast in
the way.





God guides man in his spiritual journey.

There be inferior and subordinate leaders, but in this voyage the Lord is the
principal conductor; we may all of us thus far safely confess with Balaam,
Numb. 24.13.
that We cannot pass the commandment of the Lord, to do good of our own
mind. And that which the Prophet speaks of Nebuchadnezzar, or Ashur, may be
in general applied to all the sons of Adam; The way of man is not in himself,
Ier. 10.13.
neither is it in man to direct his own steps. David knew it well, as you may
see in the 119. Psalm, the point proved near 119. times: and Paul about to
travel with his friends to Thessalonica, prays, 1 These. 3.11.
Now God even the Father of our Lord Christ, guide our journey unto you: and
how easily may Reasons be brought to confirm it?

1 Cor. 2.14.
is he not borne with a veil over his understanding? h^w can he then find out
the right way? or discern betwixt paths that differ? If any demand, how came
th^s strange thing to pass; we may truly answer; Rom 3.11.23.
Our Parents have sinned, and we too (in them) so that we are all borne
blind: Ionathans eye waxed dim by fasting, but ours, and our fathers too,
Romans 5.12.
were clean put out by feasting. And though Man be in honor, Psalm. 49 vlt.
yet he has no understanding, but is like the perishing beast. Every man is a
mole.

Bethesda, was no more unable to step into the water of himself; then we to
walk in the paths that lead to the kingdom of heaven: we must first be cured
and healed. Therefore the Prophet so often (as one that had experience of his
own infirmity) prays. Give me the Spirit of life and power, Psalm. 119.32.37.
and, Then shall I run the way of thy comm^ndements, when thou have set my
heart at liberty. That sin, which put out our eyes, has also deprived us of
strength, so that we cannot creep or crawle in this our spiritual journey,
until the Lord bid us (and give us power too) to arise, and walk.

Gen 65.
has he power so much as to think a good thought? 2 Cor. 3.5.
can he of himself study to find out the way? No: he will not give his mind to
turn unto his God: Hos 5 4 Ier. 6.16.
he says in his heart, I will none of thy paths; I will not (and yet he
cannot if he would) walk therein. (...) ^.16.
For it is not in him that wills, or in him that runs, ^ut in God that
shows mercy.

Ephesians. 2.2. 1 Timothy 2.26.
does not Satan rule in the sons of men? take them captive at his own will?
and lead them at his pleasure to the land of darkness? And let none object
and say; that these things are only so in the children of disobedience: 1 Cor.
13.9.
for the best man does but know in part, believe in part, Romans 1.17. and 7.9.
Gal. 5.17.
and is but healed in part; and who ( Christ only excepted) that has not in
his best condition been led out of the way? plodded some by-path? yea,
stumbled, fallen, and wounded himself in this his pilgrimage? for no sooner
can any, get the least peep of light, but Satan clappes on a veil; gather
any strength, but he labors to weaken it; or have so much as a mind to
return to his heavenly country, but he hales him on, by power, policy, or
some pleasant object, as the Shepherd or Butcher does the poor lamb by a
green branch in his hand, from the fold, and it is bleating Dam, unto the house
of slaughter and destruction: So that this point is true concerning all
persons. Shall we make some use of the same?

ex congruo, ex condigno: and compare a man to him that went from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell amongst thieves; (indeed this Text, Luke 10.30.
and we too, are fallen among Thieves) for say they, The eye of the mind is
but dimmed, the will wounded, and the soul weakened: but Christ says, Without
me ye can do nothing; Ioh 15.5. Ephesians. 2 1.
and his disciples, that we are dead; Now all men know, that he who is dead,
can neither see, hear, speak, move, or do any thing. And whether it be more
safe to credit Paul, or the Pope; Jesus, or the Jesuit, judge you.



Sol.
1. That we may take knowledge of our own weakness.

2. Flee to him for power.

And 3. because he gives his spirit with his precept, therefore we must be
called upon.



Solut.
Well enough: for had we not power in Adam, and lost it? Thus shall God be true,
and every man a liar.

man's principal guide? Here then is matter of thanksgiving, to all that be in
a good condition, and are set and settled upon a Rock, and sure foundation:
Job. 10.10. etc.
Who powered thee out like milk? thickened thee like curdes? clothed thee with
skin and flesh? gave thee life and grace? and preserved thy spirit? Psalm.
22.9.10.
Who lead thee in safety out of the womb? why might not thou have perished
with thousands in that perilous passage, and thy mothers body have become thy
sepulcher?

But I will turn my speech to you that have understanding and judge you what I
say.

Who guided thee into the unsearchable path of that hidden decree, out of which
so many millions are excluded? Who found out, that new and ever living way,
when thou, by thy sin, had shut up that good old way, that leads to
heaven? how comes it to pass that thy Parents were believers, there being at
this day so many sons of Infidels? tell me, if thou can, the true reason,
that the word of truth has run to and fro near thy habitation? how is it,
that thou art turned to heauen-ward, and so many be going backward? if thy self
be converted, who directed that speech in the congregation, published to all,
that it should open thy understanding, boar thy ear that was closed, and bend
thy rebellious will to obey the paths of those divine precepts? why were not
others, as well as thy self, thus wrought upon? are thy steps straight, others
crooked? art thou separated, many hardened? Is thy face toward Syon? thy
garments not defiled by falling? and is thy course to the land of Canaan, the
new Jerusalem? why then boast not, presume not, but confess it is the Lords
own work, and let it be marvelous in thine eyes: break out into
thanksgiving, confess, that it is the God of Abraham, that has wrought these
great works for thee, by thee.

I have seen this evil, amongst many, under the Sun; that saving graces are
but accounted as common favors, general gifts; and to be in the path to
heaven, reputed as an ordinary benefit; such as have had their eyes to see,
ears to hear, and feet to run, esteem these things as no great blessings;
but this argues an ungrateful mind, and graceless heart: So, to have the
eye of the understanding opened, the ear of the soul boared, and the feet of
the affection, to run aright, prepared, be not esteemed, or, as they ought,
regarded: And is not this forgetfulness, ingratefulnesse, and a sin to be
for ever abandoned? Take up words therefore of praise, admiration; Make a song,
Exodus 10.1.
with Moses, for this thy great deliverance: confess with Joseph, that the
Lord sent thee this journey; Ne, break out with David, Lord, thou have bin my
God and guide, from my mothers womb; or with Jeremiah, it is thy endless mercy
I was not long ago consumed. Yea, let this always be thy long; I was as a
sheep going astray, 1 Pet. 2. vlt.
but by the hand of my God. I am now turned to the shepherd and Bishop of my
soul.

This is a use worthy the pressing, amplifying; and loath am I thus to leave
it; yet this little that I have said, may give you just occasion to search more
deeply into the matter: only I will add one thing. Would thou see the
wonderful goodness of God toward thee, in this thy pilgrimage? why then,
look back so far as the very beginning of this thy journey, which is at thy
conception; labor to s^e the dangers that thou wast subject unto, and have
escaped: consider what evils have befallen many of thy fellow-trauellers;
behold the distinct acts of Gods providence over thee in particular; (and then
be unthankful, if thou can;) for this is the way, and I cannot give thee a
better: And so we come to another use of the doctrine.

Does God guide man in his spiritual journey? Here then we must learn a
l^sson of patience, content and subjection, and that for our persons, actions.
Art thou with Joseph sold into Egypt? murmr not, the Lord may have done it,
to save many a live. Joseph and Mary must take the Babe and be gone; Why? Herod
is not yet dead, that seeks the childs life. Abraham must trudge, he knows
not whither; What thoe? shall not the Lord be with him? Jacob must to
Padan-Aram, for does not his brother threaten to kill him? Assure thy self,
that if thou be guided by God, thou shall never be led into danger; or dwell
longer in a bad place, or strange country, then shall be good for thee: For
the present thou may doubt of it, but the end shall declare it. Murmr not,
repine not, like the old Jews, in this thy journey, be content with thy
present habitation; follow Gods hand, to what place soever he shall call thee;
have an eye to the cloud and pillar of his providence; and though thou seem
to go from home, thou go toward home; out of the way, thou go the
safest way, and thy end shall be blessed for God, as he was with David, shall
be with thee, whither-soeuer thou go, and he shall rest where thou do,
though (peradventure like Jacob) thou art not aware of it.

Again, take thou any thing in hand, and does it not prosper according to
the desired expectation? be not impatient, for he that guides thee, guides
all thy actions, and directs them to their proper ends. David did confess,
that God sent Shimei to curse him: and in trouble, Psalm. 39 9.
he would hold his peace, because the Lord had done it. The Physician may
search into the nature of the disease, administer the choicest ingredients,
temper and mix them with great skill, observe time, and all convenient
circumstances: yet for all this, if God give not a blessing, old Chancers rule
holds, Then farewell Physic; For God is above Nature, who first made Nature
of nothing. We must all do this in our several callings; use we the means,
and refer the success to the Lord; imitating that religious resolute Woman,
who after prayer and fasting thus concluded; Ester 4.16.
Now if I perish, I perish.



And because men, naturally, are not prone to put this point in practice; take
these following motives to further thee in thy duty.

1. Who is it, that thou art to depend upon for direction? Is it not he that
formed thee at the first, and whom thou do confess to be thy Father? who
then would offend so good a God, so merciful a Creator, Governor? tread
underfoot the Lord of life, and have no care to walk after his steps? Shall
we not follow the Sons example, who learned obedience of his Father? must the
holy Ghost not be obeyed, whose invitements are more worth then all the world?
Is it so, that his motions must be resisted, and the Spirit of all truth
wearied, grieved? Take heed what thou do, for if we put this guide far
from us, he will not be fetched again (as the proverb is) with a we^ finger.

2. Again, is not man's life short? uncertain too? why should we then omit
the season, let slip the present opportunity? Days will not be redeemed, time
recalled: Miserable experience have we of some, who putting off the occasion
offered, were never reclaimed. Lots sons thought their father mocked, and were
they not suddenly destroyed? Jerusalem would not attend the day of her
visitation, but what became of her? Iezabel had a time to turn, but would not;
was she not suddenly cast into a be sorrow? Therefore up, and travel to
little Zoar; Come out of Babel, and what thou have to do, do with all thy
power; least thou want time, when thou may be willing. The rich Glutton in
hell, then would have had his brethren instructed; possibly he would (had he
been alive again) have hired a Preacher; But, he that may and will not, when
he would he shall not.

3. In the third place; let the example of others and their success also, move
thee to run unto the Lord. How did the lame, blind, deaf, and dumb s eke
to our Savior? and was their labor lost? Go to God therefore, and say, Lord
open mine e^e^ (...) sleep not in death: Heal me, for I am sore wou^^^^
Convert me, and I shall be converted. You that are Parents, take your sons
and daughters by the hand, f^ll down before God, and cry, Lord be merciful to
this my child; for he falls often in the fire, and is miserably seduced by
the Devil. Let Masters imitate the good Centurion, and desire God to recover
their servants. Shall they thus call and cry for the infirmities of the body?
and shall we take no pains for the desperate diseases of our souls? Weep
we, pray we therefore for our selves and for our children; and no doubt but the
Lord will hear us, help us: And what a joy will this be, when they and we
shall return home again, seeing, walking? But alas! our words take no
impression, because men think they have no need of the Physician.

4. Moreover, do but weigh well in thy mind what a misery it is, to be out of
the way; we pity a poor Traue ler, that has mist his path, and seem to take
compassion on him: And yet we by others harms cannot learn to beware. Christ
(I cannot tell what others may) did account this a fearful condition; and
makes it a reason to move the people for to walk in the light; these be his
words, Job. 12.35.
Least ye go, ye cannot tell whither. If a man do but set his face toward
some steep rock, or deep draw well, oh, how will we cry aloud that he might
return! Is this so fearful? Then by earthly dangers, learn to avoid Hels
damnation.

5. Besides, consider where we shall arrive if we be not guided by God? Is it
at Samaria? shall we find a Prophet there, that will feed us with bread and
water? No, we shall not have one drop to refresh us, after our iourneyes end.
We count that man's condition wretched, that falls amongst Thieves, or that is
cast into prison; But whose ears will not tingle, and heart tremble, to
consider at what a doleful haven wicked persons (if they turn not) shall one
day be landed? Never had any earthly Traveler, so cold entertainment: But
wicked men are unwise; therefore they think not of their latter end, Deuteronomy.
32.29.

6. And in the last place, add to all this, that they shall not depart thence,
till they have paid the uttermost farthing; and that will be never: Was it a
grievous judgment to be captive 70. years in Babylon? Did David complain,
and cry, Woe is me, that he dwelt a few days in Mes^ek and Kedar? What will
it be then, to be bound hand and foot, cast into utter darkness, with the
Devil and his damned Angels? If they that go to this place of darkness,
might but hang their Harpes upon the Willowes; in sorrow of heart think on
Jerusalem, as many thousands of years as there be S^arres in the heaven, drops
of water in the great Ocean, or grains of sand in the earths whole Globe and
then have hope to return, it might be some mitigation of torment; But their
eyes shall fail with waiting to return, yet they shall never be returned:
Consider this therefore ye that forget God, Psalm. 50.22.
least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. And thus
having finished this Point, we come to gather a third, which is, that

Those that be guided by God, are guided by his word.

When the children of Israel obeyed not the Law, are they not said to forsake
the Lord, Judge. 10.6.
and not to serve him? and when they had no Priest to teach, or Law to direct,
2 Chronicles. 15.3.
were they not all that season without the true God? Acts 20.32.
Paul (at his last farewell) commends his friends to God, and the word of his
grace; David often prays to be guided by his precepts: Psalm. 5.8. Malac. 4.4.
Does not Malachi conclude, Remember the Law of Moses, with the statutes and
judgments?

Vrim and Thummim, dreams and visions, mirac^es and extraordinary motions, and
immediate irradiations of the spirit are ceased. In old time, Heb. 1.1.
at several times, and in diverse manners the Lord spoke to his children; for
then the word was not perfectly and fully written. The Apostles too, had
dreams and visions in their days; for they having their calling upon the very
border of the Law, and commission too, to preach to all Nations, had need of
them; otherwise their Doctrine would not have been so well credited, neither
they have understood (having no revealed rule of direction) to what Towns or
Cities, Acts 16.9.
especially, they should have preached.

Rom 7.12.
I am sure they may. God is holy, and just, and good: and is not his word the
same? he is true, and faithful, and no accepter of persons: may we not
conclude the like of his word? What God commands, it commands; what he wills, it
wills; what he intends, it intends; and if the word have a Quarrel with thee
(note this: Romans 7.7.8.
) the Lord has a Quarrel with thee; for they are not contrary Masters, but
agree in all things. And so I pass briefly to the Use.

Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.12.
strangers from the common weal of Israel, and mere Atheists? Truly it is no
better: who is so blind that sees it not? or so incredulous, that believes it
not? Instead of the Law, they must have Traditions; a Picture, for the Gospel
of Christ. Did not the children of Israel, when they left the law, work
wickedness, forsake God, and served him not? 2 Chronicles. 15 3. etc.
And for this thing are they not said to have followed Baalim and Ashtaroth,
Judges 10.6.
and the gods of the children of Ammon? Be not therefore deceived; for these
Papisticall Priests, world compassing Jesuits, are but wandering planets,
blind pilots; after whom whosoever shall sail the ship of his soul, shall
split her, at the day of his dissolution, upon the rock of that dangerous
position; and then what can follow, but perpetual condemnation? I have
wondered at these men's madness: for the knowledge of the rule is of absolute
necessity in all arts or functions, to the well-doing of an action: For example:
Can a Mariner rightly guide his ship through the sea, without the knowledge of
Card and Compass? The Carpenter build a house in comely order, being ignorant
of that pattern, by which it is to be framed? Or a schoole-boy speak exact
phrase and true Latin, and have no understanding in the precepts of Grammar?
And yet in the most curious work these deceiving guides would have us want the
Rule: Exodus 31 3. 1 Kings 7.
This is not to judge righteous judgment.

No Christian should take his ground first from the word, but the Spirit; for
the Devil alleges Scripture, and does wrest it to his purpose. But poor
souls! these know not of what spirit they themselves are. would ask such a
man this Question; How can he discern the motion of the spirit to be from the
Spirit? He will answer, Because it is good, and tends to holiness; Well: how
can he tell what is good, or evil? must he not go to the Rule to try it?
These would see the image of God without a glass, understand truth, before
they hear it uttered: Alas! professing themselves to be wise, Romans 1 22
they are become fools. For what a strange Position is this (if it be true,
that came lately to my hands) how that Grace being once wrought in the heart,
the spirit abolisheth all former knowledge? and they bid Away withal Scripture
knowledge. These will try the spirits (I fear) till a lying spirit possess
them. 1 Timothy ^ 5.
Let us therefore beware of (if we know any) such.

if they that be guided by God, are guided by his word; we are informed what to
think of all those, that live in palpable, more then Egyptian darkness; who
neither know God, or understand any one sentence in the sacred Scripture. Is
not their estate fearful? who is these men's guide? surely Satan, sin, and
the fashions of the world.

And that (if God give the blessing) I might a little move these people to come
out of Babylon; and fire them (as it were, like Ioab to Absalom) to return
unto their God; Let them hear what judgments have befallen the ignorant, what
be threatened against them that tread these dark steps.

Did not the people of God, go into Captivity, Isai 5.13.
for want of knowledge? Say, this was but a temporal punishment, yet it had a
curse with it. And how does the Lord complain, Hos. 4.6.
My people are cut off for want of knowledge? We count it a miserable thing,
and it causes wringing of the hands, folding of the arms, and many a tear
shed, when we see, at the Assizes, a proper man cast away, having had his
Book, and could not one word by art, or tell a letter: Oh, say we! he might
have been saved, if he could have read: But what a day will that be, when all
ignorant men and women, must hold up their hand at the Tribunal Throne of
Christ, and be cut off, and cast into utter darkness, because they knew not
him, or his Gospel? Therefore, thou that art ignorant and hear me this day;
Get knowledge, get understanding; for if thou dye in this condition, thou shall
dye the second and eternal death. Why? has not Christ threatened to come in
flaming fire, 2 These. 1.7.8. etc.
to render vengeance upon all that know him not, and obey not his Gospel? Did
not the Prophet imprecate, that the Lord would pour out his fury upon such as
knew him Ier. 10. vlt.
not, and the families, that called not on his Name? I cannot (by the way) but
commend you, in that you have gotten guides: but, Learn the Law at their
mouths; practice what is delivered; square your actions by this word; so shall
it go well with you at your latter end. But if for all this, you will walk in
darkness (be not deceived) one day to darkness ye shall go; Io. 12.35. Jude
13.
for, if it be eternal life to know God, and whom he has sent; then by the
rule of contraries, How shall the ignorant escape the damnation of hell? Io. 17
3.


Christ shall call us to an account, I doubt not but such will wish, they had
had a greater care to have walked in thy steps; and with all their hearts would
change their own for thy condition: But till then, thou can not apprehend
the rich fruit of thy walkings; neither they, the fearful effects that shall
follow their wanderings.

And now the fourth and last doctrine to be handled, we gather from the
Connection or knitting together of the parts; which is, that

They, who (here on Earth) are guided by Gods Counsel, shall (when their
changing comes) be received into Glory.

They, and none but they. Psalm. 1.1.2.
Blessed is the man (says the Psalmist) that does not walk in the counsel of
the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the
scornful: But has his delight in the Law of Jehovah: and in his Law does
meditate day and night. And is this Blessedness perfect here on earth? No: 1
Cor. 13.9.10. etc. Psalm. 16. vlt.
why then, they shall have it in the fullness thereof, in the world to come.
Are we not bid to inquire of the old way, which is the good way, and to walk
therein, Ier 6.16.
and we shall find rest to our souls? Rest, not corporal or temporal; but
spiritual, and eternal may well be understood; for they that die in the Lord,
are said to rest from their labors. But this point is more easily proved, then
credited; and better believed, then practiced: yet take a Reason or two,
further to confirm the one, and persuade the other.

Prou. 2.10.11. and 3.15.16 17.18.
He that would travel to London, if he find out the true way and walk
therein, shall he not come to it at the last? for the City will not be removed:
So he that does know the right path to this Country, which is above, 1 Cor
9.26. 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
let him travel on therein, and he shall assuredly come to it, at his iourneyes
end. God will not give his children a crooked rule.

There be but two things for to conduct us to this Kingdom; and are not both
expressly contained in his Counsel? Ioh 3.16.
The one is, To believe in Christ, for so we be justified, Romans 8.1.
and placed in the right path: The other is, The precept, after which if we
walk, we shall certainly finish our journey with Glory.

Josh. 21. vlt. 2 Timothy 2.13.
therefore if we keep the condition, the Lord will accomplish what he has
promised. If any man should say unto me, Sir, inquire the way that leads to my
house; and come to my home, and you shall have all kind entertainment; Now if
I should accomplish his command, in seeking out the path, and pass on until I
come to his habitation; what if then I be not entertained? were not the fault
in him that promised me this kindness? But God is not like man; for let us walk
toward heaven till death, the Gates of heaven shall not be shut, 1 These. 5.24.
but open; for faithful is he that has promised, who will also do it.

Act. 17.30. Gal 6.16. Heb 4 2. 1 P^t. 4.17.
that were never guided by this Rule? For the one sort, we deny not, but God
can work extraordinarily: but for the other, who have had the kingdom of
Christ come to their doors, yet would not give it the least entertainment, or
be ruled by it; shall we not fear, if not certainly conclude, that they are
utterly deprived of the glory of God? And I pray, that there might be none such
in this place and congregation: But if there be; let that person know, that,
one day, his ignorance, and careless neglect of the glorious Gospel, shall
deeply be laid to his charge.

follow the fashions of this evil world; step after a multitude to do
wickedly; obey sin in the lusts of it; or, be guided by the Prince, that
rules in the children of disobedience: But learn the revealed counsel of the
Lord, take straight steps to our feet; so shall we, at the time of this our
change, be received from earth into that place, which is full of glory, and
that shall have no end. For, Gal. 6.16.
as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be upon them, with mercy,
and upon the whole Israel of God.



You therefore that are, or may be Majors or Governors of Towns and Cities:
have you begun, with Nehemiah, to build and guide the Lords people? why, faint
not: let not such men as you flee; go not into the idols Temple to live; let
no burdens be borne on the Sabboath: set peace, and remove oppression amongst
them committed to your charge; Let not sin go unpunished; godliness be
unrewarded; or your high callings, by your slacknesse, be abused. It was David's
prize and praise; not, that the Lord chose him, Psalm. 78.70.
took him from the flocks of sheep, 71.
following the ewes with young, to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
possession: but in this; that he fed them according to the perfection of his
heart, 72.
and led them by the discretion of his hands. He that did this, is now in
glory; and they that tread in his steps shall assuredly, 2 Timothy 4.8.
when they have ended and served (thus) their time, be received and glorified
with him.

And you (Right Worshipful,) whom God has made great in the Country and
Commonweal; take heed what ye do: Let Joshua his resolution be yours;
whatsoever others have done, or may do, Do you, Josh. 24.15.
and your people serve the Lord. It Is your goodness, that one day will be your
greatness. And seeing that you have received much already from the Lord, and
have a further promise of a glorious crown and scepter, does it not stand with
equity, that such as you (above all) should take heart to your selves, and with
more cheerfulness run the ways of Gods commands? For will not you your
selves expect from them the best and most work, to whom you give the greatest
wages? Besides consider, what will your callings or riches profit you one day,
Mat. 1^.^^.
if you should loose your own souls? Is it, or will it be any benefit, to have
large possessions on earth; and not a foot in heaven? high callings; and not to
be called of God? a wise disputer in this world; and be dumb before Christ at
his coming? clothed with purple, and fine linen, and fare delicately every
day; and yet be found naked in the great day of the Lord? Therefore be friends
to the word, procure it is liberty to run, and do you and yours run after
it too; for this shall one day be your best portion, and great reward.

And you that are of the tribe of Leui, and my brethren: Let me exhort you, as
one unfit to instruct you, that you would quit you like men, and be strong:
Preach in season, and out of season: pull out all the arrows of Gods mercy and
judgment, forth of the Quiuers of the Law and Gospel; draw them betwixt the
arms of power, and a sound mind; loose them from the finger of affection, let
them fly with a will: and then entreat the Lord, so to guide them, that, like
the sword of Saul, and bow of Jonathan, they may never return to your hands
empty. Be heard above, and seen below; let your lives shine before your
doctrine, as the lightning does precede the Thunder; so will your words pierce
the deeper, and cause your people quake and shudder amidst the Congregation.
Have care of the flocks, over which the Holy Ghost has made you ouer-seers;
for this will be your joy at your iourneys end, when you can truly say, I have
coueted no man's silver or gold, I have delivered the whole counsel of God;
Act. 20.26.27.28.33.
and am free from the blood of all men. And when Christ shall come (who after a
little while will come) be able to present your flock, as a pure Virgin to
him, spotless, Ephesians. 5.27.
blameless. He that does this, shall shine as the Sun for ever and ever;
Dan. 12.3.
but he that is careless, must undergo a heavy account, a fearful
reckoning.

And in conclusion, that which I have said to one, I say to all; Learn, learn
this lesson; set before you the glory prepared for you, and though you find
rubs in the way, out-skip them all; for your death shall be better then the day
wherein you are borne; Heb. 12 2. etc.
and the time of Christ's second coming, of more worth then all the world.
Travelers must not conceive what they, for the present, are, being in a
strange country; but what they shall be, when they come unto their friends,
and eternal home; for that will cheer the sad heart, refresh the decayed
spirits, cause a man to trusse up the loins of his mind, and be trudging.
Remember then, that thou cast thine eye forward, peep within the veil, and
steadfastly think on the royal entertainment at thy iourneyes end.

1 These 4.13. etc.
I will therefore apply it to the present occasion. Be of good comfort for your
friend deceased: she is not dead, but sleeps, and is at rest from her
labors; her fight is well fought, and she is dividing the spoil.

But because of all things, immoderate affection upon the like occasion, has
too much accompanied Gods best children; I will (as much as in me is) give you
some preservatives to prevent or expel a hopeless, and (not to be endured)
heartlesse mourning.

Vanity and vexation of spirit? Is it not a Sodom, where men burn in lust? an
Egypt, where Israel is burdened by the unmerciful Taske-masters? a Babylon,
where the faithful Jew hangs his Harp upon the Willowes, and sings his
Hebrew songs in a strange land? Whereto shall I further liken it? Why, to an
Hospital, where be both deaf, dumb, lame and blind; a very Pesthouse, where
be many sick of every soar, die of each disease: Does not the purple, red and
scarlet tokens of sin, that presage a certain and a second death, break out
daily amongst the inhabitants? Truly, it is a very Bedlem, pestered with
fools, filled with mad and frantic fellows; who know not, either their
own misery, or can endure to be cured by the bottomless depth of Gods mercy:
In a word, it is a sink, a whirle-poole and colluvies of all uncleanness.
Shall we then grieve, sigh and torment our selves, that our friends are
removed from so bad, and no better, an habitation?

Take a strict view of this world in her greatest beauty, being clothed with
green, white, red and scarlet, with all variety of the choicest colors; the
Rabbets and Lambs skipping and leaping in the pleasant valleys; the fishes
swimming and playing in the siluer-hewed streams of the purest waters; the
birds singing and pruning themselves on the sprigs, and tops of the hills and
mountains; every branch bearing fruit; each herb and flower, sending forth
her sweetest smell of perfume: yet will not one pinching frost, Northren blast,
or scorching heat, rent her purple Robe, wither her tender face, wrinckle her
smoothest brow, and spoil her clean of her well-tempered complexion? so that
her rich attire and comely gloss, will but carry a cold report to the
inhabitants heart (as Joseph's party-colored coat, torn and all be-blouded
did to old Jacob his father) being represented before him, and be a mean to
bring amain, his gray or gay hairs unto the Grave.

But alas! we consider not, how the fashion of this world goes away: we judge
better of it, then she deserves by far, and so, through mis-apprehension, we
pierce our selves through with needless sorrows. We send our sons from
country to Court, from England to Ireland, in the naked expectation of some
better preferment; and yet weep, mourn and bawle, that our friends are gone
from earth to heaven; and from forreiners in a poor cottage, to be the
chiefest subjects in a glorious kingdom.

house, where be many mansions? and shall the Lord thereof want inhabitants?
must such seats be empty and not replenished? why then; should he not loose the
end and fruit of his creation? David's room must not be void for ever; but at
the time appointed, by his own person supplied. We must all of us, in our
turns, up to this Jerusalem; for Christ, our High Priest, will not have us
absent: Heaven does not admit a perpetual vacuity. Jonathan cannot excuse us
at the great feast day, when our good King calls for us.

Soon after the Creation, men lived longer, that the earth might be peopled:
Now toward the consummation, they dye the sooner, that the heavens may be with
greater speed replenished: Do we not see that a Father will sometimes part
with his own son, to be his friends by adoption? will not one kind
neighbor pull up his tender plants, to pleasure, and supply the vaste ground
of another? and shall Eden lie waste, the garden of our God? shall he want
sons when we have any that can content him? or plants to replenish it?

Solomon above, gather his spiritual stones and fetch his choifest timber from
the four ends of the world? He that is about to build, will he not cut down
the most ancient Oak or Elmo? what if they would keep off the beams of the
scorching Sun? shelter thee under their cool and (much to be desired) shade?
beat back the blustering and bitter showers, and storms? Yet, down they
must, notwithstanding their profit, pleasure, or (the which man naturally
affects) antiquity: otherwise how should the building begun be perfected, well
edified? Gods pleasant plants (we grant) on earth, by their presence and
prayers, would yield the Church much comfort, benefit; but then the new
Jerusalem would not at all be made perfect. Mourn not therefore overmuch, for
thy friends departed; for this were to grieve overmuch, that Gods building
goes too fast forward.



And what can I more say? Are not we our selves come to the very brinke of
lorden? must we not one day (and that before long) land at the Key of Canaan?
And shall not they and we then, for ever in glory and peace remain together?

Ponder this seriously, believe it unfeignedly, apply it particularly; and then,
for thy friends departure (if thou can) mourn immoderately.

NOw having spoke of the Text, what I purposed; I persuade my self, it will be
expected that I should say something in the praise of her, whose Funerals, at
this present be celebrated; the which I am unwilling, yet willing to do:
unwilling, because it has not been my usual custom upon the like occasion;
and therefore I may give offense to some in the Congregation: Again, it is to
be feared, that some Preachers imitate bad Lawyers (let this be no prejudice to
the best,) who for a fee, will plead and commend any cause, speaking good of
evil, and evil of good; making the heavens to lowre, grow dark, and shroud
themselves in a veil of blackenesse; more like to weeds of mourning, then the
persons, attired with their suites of sorrow, in the present assembly.

Yet I am willing to say somewhat; first, because I know for whom I am to
speak, it is either God, or his servant departed. God (I assure my self) as he
would have the name of the wicked to rot; so would he, that The memorial of
the righteous should remain for ever: And, a true testimony is a good action,
unto which he has (though not by way of merit) annexed a reward: why then
should I in this thing be silent, if my heart be upright?

Now for the person departed, I know in part with whom I have to deal; and all
that I will say, is either what I have heard by the report of credible persons,
or have known by my own experience, which is, either concerning her public
carriage, or private conversation: of both the which I have not much (though
much might be said) to utter.

^
She, in respect of her birth and pedigree, shall of me receive no praise
(though, for any thing I know, in that commendable:) we are all of one blood;
God little respects to commend that in any: and they are most honorably (as I
persuade my self she was) descended, that are borne again by the word and
spirit; and where the Lord is silent, I wish to be silent also.

For her public carriage, I have heard that, which if I should at large
relate, would much return to her commendation; but it is so well, to the most
here present, known; that I omit all, save one thing; which is, that she was a
Notary, and took the Sermons which she heard, by her own pen. I know not
what some will judge of this action, but I hope the best cannot but give it a
Christian probation: she did this, when as many (by much meaner then she)
come with their Fannes and Feathers; whereas (me seems) a Goose-quill would
far better befit their fingers.

But a private life is least subject to hypocrisy; therefore I proceed to
that. I have been credibly informed, that she did in her Chamber repeat to
her Maid-seruants, the Sermons she had heard and penned; Catechize them in the
principles of Religion; and, upon every fit occasion, would labor to season
them with the true fear of the Lord. Again, she spent (having health) three
or four hours in her private Closet every day, in Reading, Meditating,
Praying, and Writing. But what was the subject? for otherwise to write is no
great commendation: Amongst other things (all tending to good uses) she has
left (and that in no small volume) diverse disputations, that she had with
Separatists and Papists; her answers; and what was her own resolution in the
controuerted opinions; annexing her reasons. Moreover, (as one that expected
the time of her change before it came) she left under her own hand, what (if
it might stand with her husbands good pleasure) she would have performed; as
diverse gifts to several persons, both for cloth and coin, in value amounting
to a large sum; And her desire was, that there might be no blacks worn for
her, at her Funerals, except by her own house at the most, or in particular,
by her dear and especial friend; because she had rather have them receive
some private gifts of remembrance; and, in that she would not follow the common
custom of the world: It was not covetousness, (I persuade my self) but
conscience, that frustrated, in that respect, any man's expectation.

And thus having touched a few particulars; I come in brief to mention, what
my self can speak by experience: And that is, either in the time of her
health, or sickness: In which former condition, I not many times came into
her presence, because of the distance of our habitations: But for her apparel,
it was so modest, not with gold put about, or broidered hair, that a curious
eye could not justly pick a quarrel at it: her speech was not much; her words
well composed, and the matter such, as to a judicious Auditor might yield
comfort, and in some thing administer profitable edification.

In the time of her sickness, I heard her never utter one word, that favored
of impatience: she took all helps willingly, that might have restored her
(if God had given the blessing) to health and her former condition: and in the
receipt, she would pray, and desire others also, that God would bless it to
her. And she spoke much in the commendation of the Gospel; affirming, that all
things, without that, were worth nothing. She left certain Bibles to be
delivered to her daughters, with this writ on them; I have said, that my flesh
shall perish and rot: But the word of the Lord shall endure for ever: And
blessed shall you be, if you constantly, unto the end, delight to seek and
follow that, with faithful and true hearts. She also gave a gift to the Pastor
of that place, by which, she said, she would tie him, to be as careful over
the poorest sheep in his flock, as if he were the greatest Lord. Not long
before her death, she said, that she hoped God would give her power against the
Enemy: (But alas! we many of us, cannot tell, what by Enemy, is meant,) which
phrase of hers, stroke into me a deep suspicion, that her change was near at
hand: For I have always observed, that when Satan most tempts the
truely-religious, they seldom recover of that sickness: He has great skill
to discern how Nature is weakened; and therefore takes the fittest time for
his purpose.

She prayed with judgment and affection, not long before her desolution. In
the which petitions, she used words and sentences, worthy of admiration,
imitation. She mentioned the King in particular; remembered his kingdoms and
subjects, with others, (that for breuity I pass over) as her friends,
kinsfolks, and children.

These things I my self saw and heard, with many others, that were worthy to
be recorded, and of the best practiced. At which time I absented my self out
of the chamber; neither after that, heard I her voice, or saw her face; for
within a short space she departed.

From all which I wish we may (for, I am sure, we ought to) learn instruction.

Laus Deo.
FJNJS.

