The humble Supplication of Thomas James Student in Divinity, and keeper of
the public Library at Oxford, for reformation of the ancient Fathers Works,
by Papists sundry ways depraved.
WHEREAS the Works of the ancient Fathers, and holy Councels, have of late
years been most shamefully and wrongfully, manifestly and manifoldly
corrupted and depraved, by authority from the Church of Rome to the
maintenance of Popery and superstition, is their sundry Iudices Expurgato^^
daily pra^t^^e, and evidence of the fact it self, does abundantly declare, the
falsehood and enormittes of whose noted corruptions, might within a very short
time, and for no great charges be di^couered unto the sight of the whole world:
May it therefore please all such as are unfeigned lovers of the truth of
Religion here in England at this day professed and haters of all Romish
corruptions, timely to proui^e that there may not want due encouragement and
maintenance for the effecting hereof by those orders following, or any other,
which shall in the judgment of the learned be thought necessary and
convenient.

1 First, there may be six discreet and sober students in Divinity electe^
chosen for this business; such as are Batchelers of Divinity and have
already entered into the Ministry.

2 These six so nominated and appointed, shall take a solemn and corporal
oath, before they undertake the work, that they will faithfully and sincerely
discharge their duties in this behalf, truly relating and reporting the
differences of the written Copies of or from the printed Books.

3 In this collation or comparing of Copies, they may observe this order
precisely, to take for printed Copies the last of the Protestant and Popish
Editions: for the Manuscript or written Copies, to procure or get into their
hands as many as can conveniently be had; which are very ma^^ throughout all
England, and especially in both our Universities, which are by confe^sion of
the adversaries, very true and correct copies.

4 Amongst so many written Copies, they shall choose out four of the most
ancient and approved Books, which shall be exactly compared with the two
before mentioned printed copies of the Fathers: the diverse readings shall be
noted in the margent of one of the printed Books. In places of greater moment
and consequence in Religion, they shall consult all the ancient Copies, though
they be never so many.

5 Having thus noted the differ^nces, one of them (which shall be appointed for
ouerseer of the whole business, and shall take upon him the charge and burden
^^ereof) shall gather and copy out into an other Book, such places as shall
be thought most necessary and convenient to be reformed in the judgment of
the best learned Divines, whose pains because they are to be greater then the
rest, his reward may be accordingly appointed.

6 To the end that they may ^o^e cheerfully and willingly bestow their pains
in this so necessary and profitable a business, they may have such a reward
and recompense assigned them, to be paid either quarterly, half year, or
yearly at the furthest, as shall befit men that are ingenious studious, and
which is chiefly to be regarded, Divines.

7 By reason of this reward (...) they shall be bound to bestow at the least
four or five hours every day in this collation (Sundays and holy days
^^^^pted. If any one by business, sickness, of otherwise shall be hindered
from coming to the rest, he shall be bound at his owned ^^arges to find an
other as sufficient as himself, which shall take the same oath that he has
done.

8 Thus bestowing their pa^^ for ^oure or five years together, without
interruption or cessation, I make no doubt but that by Gods especial grace
they shall be able to bring the whole work unto a most happy and wished end

9 To the end that students D^^initie may neither long be detained from the
fruit of their labors, nor be at too great cost and charges in buying the
Works of the Fathers again, it may be so ordered, that as soon as the
collation of any of the Fathers Works shall be finished, and renewed by the
best Divines, there shall be presently printed an Index in octauo, or quarto,
which shall show the corruptions of the printed copies of either Papists or
Protestant Editions, which have been very lamentably abused in this kind by
too much trusting of the Papists.

10 The Manuscript or written copies, which shall be used in this Collation,
shall after the collation is ended be preserved, with all possible diligence
and care, either in the private Libraries, of Colleges, and Cathedral
churches, or else in the public Libraries of both our Universities, as well
for a perpetual Monument of this their pains taken: as also and especially for
the further manifestation of their truths and honesties in this behalf. So
that if any Papist shall question, the readings thereof, he may see the copies
whether it be so or no.

11 Lastly, for the antiquity and verity of the written Copies which are with
us at this day extant in England, in great store: though many of them be such
as have been many hundred years ago brought over into England from beyond
the Seas, and bestowed in our Libraries, and other written as aunciently by
sundry Monks and Friars here in this land, which were rather partial against
us and our Religion men otherwise: yet we do most willingly appeal unto the
truth of those Copies, and not only unto them, but unto all other ancient
Copies throughout Christendom wheresoever.

God save the King.
Imprinted at London by John Windet.


