THE PICTVRE Of Patience. OR, A DIRECTION to Perfection.

Most needful and useful in these dangerous days of sin, and public
fears.

James 1.4. But let patience have her perfect work that you may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing. LONDON, Printed by T.H. for Robert Milbourne, and are
to be sold at his shop, in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Gray-Hound.
1629.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, and right virtuous Lady, The Lady ASTON, Wife to the
right honorable the Lo. Aston, B. of Forfar, W.I. wishes all increase of
happiness; external, internal and eternal.
Good Maddam
VOuchsafe, to accept this, once your own by private Devotion and now made
yours by public Dedication, and when your Religious Soul shall make a pause
from your more holy Meditations, I beseech you, vouchsafe to cast an eye upon
this treatise, it may be you may find and feel the spirit of Consolation,
working in it. The Lord of Heaven bless you unto my Lord, my Lord unto you,
and you both with all your hopeful issue to his saving Grace, which is and
shall be the hearty Prayer of

Your most humbly devoted servant William Ieffray.

The picture of Patience. OR, A DIRECTION to Perfection. Most needful and
useful in these dangerous days of of sin, and public fears. A discourse
confined to that place of the Apostle,
James 1.4. But let patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect
and entire, wanting nothing.


NOt so anciently, as most truly and divinely was it said; Fortior est qui se
quam qui for. tissima vincit moenia: A Christians valor is better expressed in
conquering his affections by patience then in vanquishing of the whole world by
violence. Many have powerfully subdued others, which poorly and basely have
been conquered by themselves. And this I dare affirm (since the Scripture
warrants it) That he who well governs his passions, Pro. 16.32.
is more honorable then a Commander over Nations. They bear sovereign power
over others, this over himself. They are but rulers over some part of the
(...); but he is absolute lord and governor of the whole (...), the Isle of
Man; which yet by an inevitable decree is as subject to the distemper of
Affection as the largest Regiments to the distraction of Opinion. How great an
Emperor then may he be that guides his affections by the Rule of Reason, and
subdues his passions by unconquerable patience? who sails in a Harbor, though
the Tempest storm at Sea; and by a divine Moderation sails happily betwixt
Scilla and Charybdis, stoutly withstanding the frowardest blasts of Calamity,
and comfortably appreprehending the sweet gale of Peace; not dejected by
Adversity, not erected by Prosperity, but like the neuer-fading Laurel green
as well in Winters calamity as in Summers comfort. The Apostle then seeing the
excellency of this virtue, and knowing of what sovereign power and precious
use it would be to cure the miseries of all the dispersed, (and therefore
distressed) Jews, commands them to plant this herb in every one of their
Gardens as being the true Hearts ease: which though it be planted by Pain,
watered with Tears, cherished with Sighs, yet the flower it bears is
Perfection, as he here shows.

Let patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing.

Which words contain a third reason, of the formerly propounded duty, verse
2. My brethren count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations; where
having charged them to bear afflictions and temptations, and that with all
joy, knowing what a bitter and tart doctrine it was to the palate of the flesh,
he does enforce it by a threefold reason, Eccl. 4.12.
as a threefold Co^d which is not easily broken.

First, because temptation is (...); A trial of our faith. Secondly because
our faith being tried brings forth patience.

Thirdly, if patience may have her perfect work, then (ab effectis) she will
make us perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

Here by an excellent gradation he brings us De profundis to In excelsis, from
the bottomless pit of Misery to the highest pitch of Glory. For temptations
do deeply plunge us into the depth of calamity, but if by remembrance we
consider, and with consideration remember that they are Gods Touchstone, for
the trial of our faith, they will make us patient, and if patience may have
her perfect work by perseverance, she will make us perfect.

See here Jacobs Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven, G^. 28.12.
mounted from bane, but aims at bliss, listing us even from the gates of
hell, to the Port of Heaven; leading us by the hand from Egypt to Canaan, from
man's deepest misery to his highest folicitie.

So that in the Coherence, we may observe the former Admonition enforced by a
powerful Reason, and that Reason seconded by a worthy Admonition, which easily
divides this portion of Scripture into 2, parts.

1. An Admonition; Let Patience have her perfect work.

2. A Reason enforcing the Admonition; That you may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing.

In the Admonition 2. things are considerable, 1. the subject of the
Admonition, which is Patience; 2. the Admonition it self, Let her have her
perfect work. Thus for a while must I divorce Patience and Perfection, the
Author and the work; but in the end I will conioyne them like Hippocrates his
Twins, and leave them to live and die together.

The first object that offers it self to the eye of our consideration, is the
subject of the Admonition, Patience; Let Patience etc.

Plato was wont to speak of wisdom that if she could be seen with humane
eyes, without doubt she would moon men's hearts, greedily to affect her: So may
I say of Patience, that if the eyes of our mortal bodies could see the
excellency of this virtue, no doubt but our eyes would teach our hearts to
affect so excellent a beauty.

Your eyes might then perform that duty which now my unskillful pencill must
do, for the sight of that divine virtue would easily bring forth in you
Amazement; Amazement would procure Respect; Respect would breed a reverend and
observant love: She being like the Tree which Moses cut down and threw into
the bitter waters of Marah to make them sweet: Or Eliah his cloak, Exo. 25.25
2 Kin. 2.14
by which Elisha diuides the waters of Iordaine; for Patience it is that turns
the Gall of bitterness into sugared and sacred Content; that divides the
troubling waters of affliction, to make an easy passage for us into the Land
of our celestial Canaan

But that we may the better discover the beauty of this virtue, I will first
express her by her definition. Secondly delineate her by her Picture. Thirdly
decypher her by her Character. And lastly commend her by her Effects.

First for her definition (which Logicians call Definisi evolutio): S. August.
defines her thus. Patience is a religious man's grateful undergoing of all
troubles and labors for the love of God, and the hope of the reward of eternal
bliss. Gregory thus, To be Patient, is with an equal mind to endure
mischiefs from other men, and not to be moved with anger toward them that do
inflict them. Others thus, Patience is a virtue by which a man bears all
infirmity and adversity that can betide him, with an undaunted and constant
resolution, for God and godliness sake. And this later definition may be
preferred to the former, who though they do express Totum Patientiae, yet
they do not express Patientiam totaliter. They do express the whole of
patience, but not patience wholly: And to this last agrees the definition,
which may be gathered out of Calvin and other Orthodox writers, namely, that
Patience is a voluntary suffering of all losses and crosses for Christ's sake
and the Gospels, grounded upon the neuer-fayling providence of God. Now when I
speak of a voluntary suffering, I mean not a Stoicall stupiditie, as when a
man seems to be senseless in affliction; but I mean such a suffering as
pincheth and pleases; pincheth with grief, pleases with relief; pincheth
with grief, when we feel the rod upon our shoulders, and sit with Israel
mourning by the waters of Babylon: Ps. 137.1.
pleases with relief, when we feel Christ drying up our tears and curing
our wounds and telling us in the ear, This grace is sufficient: 2 Cor. 12.19.
either by trying us in the fire to make us pure, or by changing our Elegies
into Eulogies, by a happy and heavenly deliverance; for then shall our water be
turned into wine, our mouths shall be filled with laughter and our tongues
with joy. Again it is not every suffering but a suffering for Christ, wherein
patience truly can show her self; for Heathens so can show us patterns of
patience, but the Christian must arm himself to suffer patiently, not for
evil but for good, yea for God: And happy are those souls that so suffer, for
if Patience have her perfect work, we shall be perfect.

The second thing observed, was to delineate her by her picture, for which I
will be beholding to that exact Symmetritian Tertullian, who does thus decipher
her; Patience (says he) has a most quiet and a most pleasant aspect, her
forehead pure, void of all wrinckles either of sorrow or anger; her eyebrows
sweetly but modestly inclined to Mirth; her eyes cast down, but by humility,
not by infelicitie; her mouth sealed up with the honor of Silence; her color
such a; Security and Integrity are wont to have; her head she often mooues
with a threatening laughter against the Devil; as for her apparel about her
breasts it is white, close to her body, to signify she is neither puffed up,
nor yet disquieted, she sits in the throne of the sacred spirit: for where God
is, there is his Nursechild Patience: here you hear not but may even see the
admirable beauty of this virtue, which Prudentius that divine Poet, or
Poetical Divine does (after Tertullian) thus delineate, Behold how Patience
with a mild aspect,
Stands in the midst of virtues chiefest foes,
No trouble can her settled mind deiect
From Resolution: She undaunted goes
Into the midst of danger, whose rough piles
Does lend her wounds which she repaies with smiles.


See here (and admire to see) the excellency of this virtue, and let us learn
at last (at least for shame) to love her, whom thou see to be so excellent:
is not beauty loves loadstone? why should it not then attract thy heart to be
enamored of her? that Patience may have her perfect work etc.

The third thing was to decipher her by her Character and a kind of moral
instruction as not much in use among the ancients so happily received in these
times of ours. I will therefore thus presume to Characterike her: Patience is
Miseries best Physic which if she does not extirpate, does yet extenuate the
disease: she is the nurse of valor and Christian Resolution, the Child of
Calamity, and Mother of true Constancy; she goes the Milkie way to the golden
Mean, bearing as well from the Rock of distemper as of distraction; she sets
her self a work with Dorcas to make clothes for virtue, against the winter
of Adversity; she sleeps contentedly upon a bed of Nettels, and rises with
comfort from the Couch of care; she may be made subject to, but never the
subject of Misery: Misfortune may be an usurping Tyrant over her to pain her,
but never a received Sovereign to command her; she weeps the tears of
Comfort, and finds Content in the midst of discontent; thus by a heavenly
Neglect she makes Troubles and Calamities the Foil of her Luster, making the
deepest misery the Basis of her highest triumph: Gold she is, and therefore
pure for the Fire; Wheat she is, and therefore clean for the Fan; Oil she
is, and therefore clearer for the press: In a word she gains by loss, and
mounteth from the vale of Misery to the mount of Glory. See here the Character
of this blessed virtue, and blessed is he that can enjoy her, not to possess
her only, but to be possessed of her.

The last thing observed was to commend her by her Effects. So that as the
women said, See what Dorcas did when she was alive; so may I say, see what
works Patience would do if she were alive. Now these effects are admirably
laid down by Tertullian and after him by Cyprian, the happy Imitator of
Tertullian (as Lorinus notes) namely that Patience defends all God his
Decrees, obeyes his Precepts, fortifieth faith, governs peace, assisteth
love, instructs humility, expects repentance, assigns confession, rules
the flesh, preserves the spirit, refraineth the tongue, restrains the hand,
infulteth upon temptations, expels scandalls, finisheth Martyrdom. She
comforts a poor man, moderates a rich man, sustaines a sick man, protects a
strong man, she delights the faithful, inuites the gentle, she commends the
servant to his master, and his master to his God, she is the ornament of
woemanhood, and the touchstone of manhood, she is loved in a child, commended
in a young man, but admired in an old, in all sexes, in all ages, she retains
a neuer-fading beauty. These be the works of patience, these she performs,
wheresoever she resides, so that for the conclusion of this point I may speak
of her as Hugo does of Charity, I know not what I shall more say in thy
commendation, but that Patience made Christ like us, and will (if we embrace
her) make us like Christ.

The second thing observed was the Admonition it self, Let Patience have her
perfect work; where by perfect work is meant the work of perseverance, So
Hierome expounds it: Then shall Patience have her perfect work if she continues
to the end: for Patience is not perfect if she endure the first or second
storm of tribulation and then prove recreant, but she must persevere to the
utmost end, if she will be perfect, for not to persevere to the end, were to
overcome some sharp and perilous sickness, and dye by a Fever; or to escape
in the Onset, and be slain after the conquest; or securely to pass a raging
Tempest at Sea, and then sink in the harbor for in vain, whilst we live we
do good, if whilst we live we cease to do good: Our lives must end before
we end our obedience, and the cause of our suffering determine before our
suffering; for we must not be like the Tiger, which if he obtaines not his prey
at the first or second leap, will leap no more; but as Noah his Dove, Genesis
8.11.
which was not sent out once only, but again before she brought the Olive
leaf in her mouth, So we must not only endure one brunt, but if the waters of
affliction be still up, we must patiently continue our suffering, till our
suffering bringes us the Olive branch, the perfect Hieroglyphick of our assured
quietness, and eternal rest. For it is the end that approoues the act, and
perseverance crowns the head of Patience. In the old Law we were commanded to
offen the Tail on the rumpe of the beast, Levit. 3.9.
in sacrifice: what is the meaning of this Precept? may I not speak as Saint
Paul speaks to another end, Does God take care of Oxen; 2 Cor. 9.2.
So say I; regards God the Rumpe, or rather says he it not, altogether for
our sakes? Surely there is a kernel under this shell, there is Gold under this
Oar, what it is let Saint Gregory expound: We are commanded (says he) by
Moses to offer the tail of the beast, to this end, (namely) that every good
work which we take in hand, we should by perseverance bring to his perfect
end. It is not then for that God stands in need of the beast, much less of
the rumpe that God commands it to be offered; but this is the reason why the
Lord requires the Tail in the Sacrifice, to teach us that he crowns not the
beginnings but the ends of our best Actions. For (as Mellifluous Bernard
reaches the Ianuenses) it is only perseverance, that gives the wealth of
glory to the sons of men, and sets the crown upon the head of virtue,
without which neither the soldier can obtain the victory, nor the Conqueror
his crown; she being the nurse to Merit and a Mediatrix to reward, her sister
Patience and daughter Constancy, the friend of Peace, and knot of friendship,
the bend of unanimity and Sanctuary of sanctity. Had Saul perseuered in his
obedience, he had not lost his Kingdom with his life. If Sampson had
perseuered in his cautelousnesse and Solomon in his devotion, the one had not
been deprived of his wisdom, the other of his strength. So that without the
assistance of this virtue it is impossible for us (we see) ever to attain to
the crown of glory: for we run in a Race, 2 Cor. 9.24.
and therefore must not give over till we come to the end: but as a Runner
regards not how much he has run, but how much he has to run; so must we
forget what troubles we have suffered, and make our selves ready to run the
rest of our course. We fight Gods battle, and must not fail in the
enterprise; for Vincenti dabitur, Reave. 2.17*
to him that over comes is proposed the Reward: salvation is the end of our
Aims, and our Aim at our ends. Mark 13.13.
Let us then continue to the end that we may be saved.

How patiently does the Merchant endure storms and calmes, heat and cold,
tempests at Sea, trauells and troubles by Land, and all for gain? and shall
not we for the gain of Heaven, go even by the gates of Hell? The Israe^lites
that murmured at their trial in the wilderness had a Denial of the land of
Canaan, Number. 14.18.
only Caleb and Joshua, which expected bitterness in the wilderness of Syn,
but sweetness at Mount Zion, happily arrived in the Land of promise. Let us
then with Caleb and Joshua patiently endure the bitterness of the way, that we
may come to the City which is not only Jerusalem, the vision of peace, or
peace in a vision, but peace in fruition, together with eternal security
attended by neuer-sading felicity, following this our Apostles rule, Let
Patience have her perfect work, etc.

The second thing observed, was the Apostles Motive, to induce to this duty;
that you may be perfect, entire wanting nothing: See here a threefold Cord
(which is not easily broken) used by the Apostle to draw us to let Patience
have her perfect work. Ecc. 4.12.
First that we may be perfect, secondly entire, thirdly wanting nothing. The
first is perfection, To. 8.22.
which is the All-satisfying object of man's boundless desire; yea the
Creatures even groan for their perfection; all things being carried away with
a wonderful longing to be made perfect, and shall not a Christian (whom
Paradise inviteth, and the celestial troop of Angels instantly desire to
have him united unto them) shall not he I say, patiently endure those troubles
that tend to his perfection?

Now when I speak of perfection I mean not such a perfection as is absolute,
for that attends us in the life to come, and is not attained unto in this; but
I speak of perfection (...), of a manner of perfection, though far short of
that which is absolute, and this perfection consists, first in relation to
others whereby a man is preferred before others in his Rank. So Noab was a
just man and perfect in his generation: Genesis 6.9.
where Noah is not termed perfect* for that he had attained to the degree of
absolute perfection, but (only by way of relation to those of his Time) he
was found more perfect then the rest of his generation, and therefore he
obtained mercy that in the deluge he might be s^ued, and his household. So in
the new Testament. Luke 1.6.
Zachary and Elizabeth are said to be righteous before God and to walk in the
Commandments and Ordinances of God blameless. Now what kind of righteousness
and innocence they were endued with; Saint Angustine treating upon these words
does manifest, They were just (says he) in regard of their commendable and
allowable conversation, which no mar instly could complain of. They were
righteous then and perfect, but not in an absolute, but relative perfection; so
that I may conclude this point with that of Ambrose; There are many perfect in
this world (speaking of a relative perfection) who if you look for true
perfection (meaning absolute) they cannot be perfect.

Secondly this perfection consists in Acceptance when it pleases the Lord
to accept our imperfection for perfection. Now this acceptance is accomplished
by a two fold means; first by the acknowledgement of our imperfection, for as
in knowledge it is not the least part for a man to know, that he knows
nothing; so in perfection it is not the least degree to know our selves to be
imperfect: For as (that Hammer of Heretics well observes) The virtue which
now remains in a righteous man is so far forth called and accounted perfect,
when as to the perfection thereof, there does pertain both in verity an
acknowledgement, and in humility a confession of our own imperfection. Hence
we discern a perfection grounded upon the humble confession of our
imperfection: this being indeed the greatest part of the wisdom of Man to know
himself to be imperfect; for (as I may so say) the perfection of all men
living in the flesh, is but an imperfect perfection (that is) such a perfection
as is slayned with many imperfections. For we know the Church (and consequently
every actual member thereof) though she be comely as the Curtains of
Solomon, yet is she black as the Tents of Kedar, having her beauty (like the
Moon) slayned with some blemishes of imperfection. So that I conclude with
Augustine that without all doubt he is a good proficient in this life, that by
his profiting knows how far short he is of true and absolute perfection.

The second means whereby in Gods sight we may be accepted, as perfect, is by
endeavoring to attain to absolute perfection; for as he that aims at the
Sun (albeit he is sure he shall not reach his mark) must yet upon necessity
shoot higher then he that levelleth at a bush; even so he that sets before him
the pattern of absolute perfection, as the aim of his endeavor, shall be
sure to attain to an higher degree thereof then he that either aims not at
all, or else but leuells at imperfection. And of this perfection Ambrose
speaks, (led by the occasion of those words of the Apostle, Phil. 3.15.
Let every one that is perfect be thus minded) In comparison (says he) of
such as be negligent in divine matters, they are to be called perfect, who with
all careful diligence do walk in the ways to perfection: and even this
endeavor is in the eyes of God accepted for perfection; for so
gratiously-mercifull is the Lord to the souls of his Saints, that if he see
them endeavor to attain but even the lowest degree of perfection, he accounts
them as perfect, accepting the will for the work, the desire for the design,
the affection for the action. Thus as a man does begin to be good, when he
begins to desire to be good, so a Christian begins then to be perfect,
when he begins to endeavor to be perfect, if then we can endure all
miseries for the obtaining of Gods glory, to suffer all imperfections of the
body that we may attain to the perfection of our souls, we stand pefect in
this kind of perfection; for it is not enduring, but the will to endure
calamity that makes us perfect, (as S. Cyprian observes) for Abraham and that
earth-despising troop of Patriarchs were not always tossed in the tempest of
misery, who yet arrived at the Haven of perfection, And those were not Martyrs
only which died for Christ, but those also that had a Will to die for Christ.
Abraham did not offer up his son Isaac to death for a sacrifice, and yet God
says that he for his sake did non spare his son, hence Saint Chrysostom
gives us this observation; consider (says he) not the event but the Will, for
as touching Abraham's Will, he had already bathed his sword in the blood of his
son; hence says the Lord unto him, Do it not, for thy Will contents me, and
for it I crown thee: for my Rewards are awarded according to the Will, and I
use to crown even holy affections. Thus God accepts the desire as if the
design had been accomplished. So shall it be with us, if we sacrifice not our
Isaac, I mean our life for Christ; or if our souls be not exposed to the
misery of affliction, yet if we can be contented patiently to endure what may
be inflicted, albeit it be not, even this desire shall make us perfect in the
eyes of God. For as in matters of alms, he has given which has a desire to
give; so in matters of tribulation, he has suffered that has a will to
suffer: if then thou have a desire to offer thy soul for the confirmation of
thy faith, and can be content to have it made for Christ's sake like Ezechiels
book, Ezekiel. 2.10.
which was filled with lamentations, mournings and woe without and within; and
art determined in thy self that no storm of calamity shall break the Anchor
of thy patience, or drive thy soul into the tempestious sea of passion, from
the harbor of thy settled resolution: then assure thy self that thou art
perfect, for If Patience have her perfect work, she will make thee perfect
and entire lacking nothing.

The second maine reason why our Apostle exhorts us to suffer Patience to
have her perfect work is, because it will not only make us perfect, but also
entire.

The original word is (...), which one English word can hardly express, for
it intimates that we should be Integri, universales, Ad omnia quare, as the
proverb runs, or Homines quadrati, men at all points, such as dare look
danger in the face, and will not be dismayed with its fiercest assault. They
know the worst of trouble, and affliction shall never be able to daunt their
undaunted resolution; for by patient suffering they are so inured to
tribulation, as they are ready to entertayne it not as a hated enemy, but as a
well beloved and long expected guest, do thou then o Christian soul, do
thou desire his entirenesse? There are two things necessary to assist thee in
the attayning of it. The first is Knowledge, and the second is Imitation: both
are expedient, that so our knowledge may move us to imitation, and our
imitation may confirm our knowledge: for without knowledge how can we
imitate, and without imitation what are we the better for our knowledge?
Knowledge without imitation is wrechlesnede, and imitation without knowledge is
but mere apishnesse. Our understanding must then be first informed, that we
may know; and then our Will, will be more easily conformed, that we may
imitate; and both these joined together will make us Let Patience have her
perfect work, etc.

If we then desire to be thus entire, by suffering Patience to have her perfect
work, our understanding must apprehend a twofold object; First that
afflictions are Christ's legacy; secondly they are Gods highway to felicity.
First, we must know that they are Christ's legacy bequeathed unto his Apostles,
and in them to us by his last Will and Testament. Ioh. 16.33.
They are a christian man's recognizance whereby (as Joseph by his parti-colored
coat) they may be known; for he that is exempted from the rod of God, is not
the child of God. Man's life is a warfare upon earth: now who intends to be a
soldier, and not meet with danger? Nay every christian man is enrolled in
Gods Muster-booke in his baptism, and therefore must fight the Lords battle,
and will he, that must war and fight, not expect to feel smart and wounds?
Let us therefore that are Christians arm our selves with that resolution, in
the Poet Superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est, and here, to the end that
patience (having her perfect work) may thereby work our perfection and
entirenesse; it is necessary for the Christian soldier to know two things,
First, that since tribulation is Christ's legacy, that therefore all crosses,
losses and calamities, which can betide a Christian man in this vale of misery
are not casual (as vain Atheists suppose) but are directed and inflicted by
the al-seeing and al-guiding providence of God: Amos 3.6.
for What evil is there done in the City that I do not, says the Lord? does
the Lord speak by his Prophet of the evil of sault, no; for God cannot sin:
how then? of the evil of punishment? yes verily, for God cannot choose but
punish sin: 1 Pet. ^.^.
therefore S. Peter concludes; We are troubled according to the Will of God;
which may be secret and unknown, but never can be unrighteous, or unjust. Is
it then Gods will that we should be troubled? and shall our will be refractary
and not rather subject unto his? shall our heavenly Father lay his lering rod
upon us for our correction, and not for our confusion, and shall we shrink
from such a fatherly correction? Know we the reason why he now whips us with
Nettles? may it not be that he may hereafter crown us with Roses? Let us then
patiently endure his castigation, that we may tend to the entirenesse of
perfection.

The second thing that we must know, is, that our Saviors blessed legacy, I
mean those crosses or losses that do overtake us, or are inflicted upon Gods
children in this life, are not demonstratiue arguments of his wrath, but rather
infallible Testimonies and perspicuous tokens of his love: For Whom he loves,
Heb. 12.6.
them he chastises, and scourges every son that he receives. For like as
some careful father, that intends for some lewd courses to cast off, and
finally to disinherit his son, gives him leave to walk in the ways of his
own heart, and in the lust of his own eyes, Eccl. 11.9.
not regarding though he make his soul the very source of sin, and the den
of Devils; and all because he has lost his paternall love: but if the same
father has a son whom he tenderly loves and intends to make the heir both
of his virtues and fortunes; if he see him but slip awry, or forsake that even
path of virtue, which his example had trod out before him; then his tongue is
ready to check him, and his rod to correct him, why? because he hates him? no,
but because he loves him. Even so our heavenly father suffers the sons of
Belial, to feed like fat Bulls of Basan because he intends them for the
slaughter, and to flourish like a green Bay tree, because he has ordained
them to be fuel for the fierce fire of his wrath: but those whom he has
predestined by an ever loving and euer-lasting decree, to be made heirs of
his never fading Kingdom coeternall in the Heavens, these if he sees (as what
does not God see) but slip aside out of the way of righteousness, out of that
way that his Heasts commanded them to walk in, strait his rod is upon their
shoulders, immediately he corrects them, but not in anger, fury and judgment,
but in love, mercy and compassion. 1 Cor. 11.32.
Thus when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord that we should not be
condemned with the world: for such is Gods loving care and careful love over
his Saints, that he lays his correction rod upon them for diverse ends, best
known unto himself, yet always tending to the good of his servants.

Sometimes he corrects them to weane them from the love of this world, Judge.
16.15.
which, as that enticing Dalilah endeavored to bereave Sampson of his
strength: so this alluring world sets all baits to bereave Gods Saints of
their strength in Grace. Now because there is such an Antipathy betwixt God and
the world, Iam. 4.4.
that the Amity of the world is Enmity with God, therefore the Lord scourges
his Saints, to make them leave the world and cleave unto him: for as the Nurse
lays bitter things to the Teate of her breast, to weane her child from the
love of her milk, so the Lord lays bitter afflictions upon his Saints, to
weane them from the love of this life. Therefore (says holy Augustine) does
God mix the gall of bitterness with the sweetness of terrene felicity, that
he might make us seek for another happiness, whose sweetness shall never
fail. God hedgeth up this way with thorns, to make it unpleasant to the
flesh, least we should forget the happiness of our country: why did God
afflict his people Israel in the desert of Sin? but with longing desire to make
them seek for Canaan, and the joys of Zion: and why does God afflict us here,
but to make us desire to be dissolved, that we may rest in peace? For the
vanities of this world does so intoxicate the soul with flesh-pleasing
objects, as it makes it forget that soule-delighting subject, the crown of
bliss. Even as the sweetness of Aetnaes flowers bereaues the best-smelling
dog of his Sent: so this soule-deceiuing sweetness bereaues us of the sense of
bliss. Is this then the end of Gods chastisments, only to polish us for
himself? and shall we murmur against him, that deals so graciously with us?
No, let us but patiently endure what it pleases him mercifully to inflict,
that Patience having her perfect work, we may be perfect etc.

Sometime God corrects and scourges man for sin, and to bring him from
sin: for such and so great is Gods care over his Saints, that if he see any
wickedness in them, straitway He punishes their offenses with a rod, and
their sin with scourges: which was promised as a great blessing unto David.
The ancient Heathens seeing the servants of God in the Primitive Church sore
chastized under perfidious Tyrants, began to think that the God whom they
served was not the true God, because speedily he did not deliver them from the
hands of persecuting Tyrants. Thus the natural man cannot discern the things
that are of God, because he looks upon them through the glass of his own
conceit, measuring the miseries of this life, only by the Mete wand of blind
and corrupted nature; but what answers Lactantius a Christian to their
unchristian surmize? Let no man marvel (says he) if we for our sins be
often chastized of the Lord, yea when we are pressed and oppressed, then
especially yield we thanks to our most indulgent Father, because he will not
suffer our sore to grow to a full head, but launceth it with stripes and
wounds, that by this wonderful plaster he may heal the disease. From whence
(says he contrary to your conceit) we easily understand that God has a
special care of us, because he is angry with us when we sin. See here a
Christian, like a laborious Be, sucking honey from the sharpest thistle; and
mark the difference betwixt a carnal and a spiritual eye, the one sees a
wave of sorrow coming, and distrusts with Peter; the other viewes it and
rejoices with Stephen, in the midst of calamity. Is this the end of Gods
striking that he may wound us here, and heal us hereafter, that sin may now
be punished in us, and that hereafter we be not punished for sin? Who will
not then patiently kiss the rod of so louingly-gratious a father, who changes
eternal damnation into a temporal punishment? For do we not know, To. 6.23.
that The reward of sin is death? doc we not know, that daily, nay hourly
we have deserved this reward? May we not see Hells mouth wide opened, as
ready to devour us, if mercy did not relieve us? Why then should not Gods
stripes be unto us stripes of comfort, having deserved ten thousand times more?
Let this consideration move us to Patience, and let patience have her perfect
work, etc.

Again, such is the nature of man, that of all lessons it is the hardest for
him to learn to know himself, and the easiest to forget that knowledge. Act.
6.
For as the Eunuch stood in need of a helper to make him know what he read; so
we stand in need of a helper to make us know what we are. As Christ then made
lumps of clay to cure the eyes of the blind, Ioh. 9.6.
so he must cure our blind eyes, before we can know our selves to be but
lumps of clay: and this the Lord performs by tribulation. An instance we have
in Manasseh, 2 Cro. 33.12.13.
who whilst he happily sailed in the Bay of humane bliss, forgot his God, and
defiled the holy city with blood; but when the wind of affliction began to
change this calm of comfort into a tempest of trouble, when the liberty of a
King was turned into the bondage of a captive, and his stately palace turned
into a loathsome prison; then in his affliction he besought the Lord and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, then Manasses knew the Lord was
God. Thus when the staff of sustentation could not, the rod of correction
brought this wandering sheep to Gods heauen-gayning fold. The like we read of
Antiochus, 2. Mac. 9. ver. 4.19.

Thus when man's pride begins to swell, God lanceth the tumor with the razor of
affliction, to make him learn to know himself. And as this is the most
difficult lesson to learn, so it is the easiest lost, for man can easily be
content to remember to forget himself: for (as Saint Ia. speaks to another
end) as he that looks his face in a glass forgets immediately what manner of
man he was; Iam. 1.
so when in the glass of verity we have learned to discover our vanity, we
are such natural Dunces, as immediately we forget to remember what vain
things we are; yea even aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus; fearful security;
like a fawning and flattering Dalilah, luls too often asleep even the best of
Gods Saints upon the couch of prosperity; Vigilancie, the euer-waking Sentinel
of the soul of man, grows oftentimes drowsy with too much ease; The Apostles
eyes were heavy with sleep, when Christ's soul was heavy unto the death: and
certainly their death is imminent, where there is such eminent drowsinesse. But
our gracious father preuents this mischief in his adopted sons, by sending a
blustering tempest to awake the sleeping Jonah; which David found by
experience, Ps. 119.
for before he was troubled he went wrong; but tribulation sets him in the
right way again. So when prosperity has locked up the ear of the heart, then
adversity is the best key to open it; for the school of tribulation is the
school of illumination; so that as the Angel struck Peter to rowse him from
the sleepy fear of adversity, so God strikes us by tribulation, to raise us
from the fearful sleep of security: Is this then the end of Gods
corrections, to correct us for so good an end? and shall not we endure his
correction? Know we not what became of the secure rich-man? and shall we still
love security? Nay rather let us rejoice, when this Cock rayseth us with
Peter, from the dreadful sleep of security, that we may patiently watch for
our hopes happy consummation, and let Patience have her perfect work, etc.

And lastly, since we fight the Lords battles, wherein the further we
proceed, we proceed the further into danger, and imminent danger is wont to
make even Gods eminent soldiers sometimes prove recreant: therefore the Lord
tryes them sometime by crosses and troubles, to embolden them the better in his
service thereafter: 1 Samuel 17.48.
when David had encountered with the Lion and the Bear, and returned Victor,
he grew resolute to cope with Goliath; so when we have overcome, by Gods
ouer-gracious assistance, some one or two troubles, we shall grow courageous
to cope with all: like a courageous Soldier who coming from the field, though
wounded, does yet from his wounds suck settled Resolution: so we though wounded
by troubles, yet not vanquished, gain hence more courage, against the next
assault, and like expert Mariners, sailing in the tempestious Ocean of this
world, learn from a gust of calamity how to withstand the greatest tempest of
Misery; as excellently and most divinely Virgil speaks: Aeneas, the pattern
of noble Cheiftaines:

My dear companions, whose remembrance knows
Our hard escape from Sea, from want, from blows
Those we escaped, which most could us offend;
And shall not God to these too grant an end?


Nor disagreeing also to this purpose is the consolatory counsel of Ovid to
Livia:

Therefore the Thunder lightly did thee smite,
To make thee valiant in a sharper fight.


So does Gods wrath-denouncing Thunder sometimes lightly touch his Saints, not
to harm them, but to arm them for a further trial: far be then so great a
pollution from the servant of Christ, that Patience prepared for infinite,
should be dashed with finite troubles: Nay rather let each victory be the Basis
of a succeeding conquest, and every deliverance an entrance to a further
trial; Ier. 12.5.
for if we be out-runne by footmen, how shall we match horses? Paul was a
man subject to the same infirmities we are, and yet he proffers a rare
challenge, having once felt the supportation of Gods soule-sauing grace, Romans
8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as if
these (or what else the Devil or his instruments could raise up against him)
were of no force against the armor of proof of his undaunted Resolution.
Danger could no more appall him, then a hammer the point of a Diamond. Let us
then imitate his suffering, and go on from trial to trial, from danger to
danger, Till Patience have her perfect work, and then we shall be perfect,
etc.

The second object of our knowledge (which being known must be a motive to
induce Patience to suffer till Perfection) is not only to know that troubles
and Crosses are Christ's Legacy unto us by his last will bequeathed, but (which
is more) are Gods highway to eternal felicity, Job. 5.17.
Blessed (says Eliphas to Job) is the man, whom the Lord corrects:
correction you see is so far from a curse that it is a means to obtain a
blessing; so also our blessed Apostle affirms, Iam. 1.12.
Blessed is he that indureth temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive
a crown of life; on the contrary our Savior pronounces a we to them that
laugh now, Luke 6.25.
for they shall mourn and weep: thus one poor laughter is attended with a
double mourning. Shall we not then desire (with our Savior) to be crowned with
a crown of thorns, that hereafter by our Savior we may be crowned with a
crown of Stars? Reu. 7.14.
Those that come out of great tribulation have white robes: to teach us that
purity follows troubles, and reward afflictions; tribulation being that
Heauen-bred herb of the celestial dyer, that dies our souls in purity: for
as we have been afflicted so shall we be comforted. According to which says
holy Augustine, As many persecutions and tribulations as we here endure by
poverty, power and cruelty of our enemies, so many Rewards after our
Re^urrection shall we receive in the Retribution of the Saints. Let us then
desire rather with Lazarus to live in misery, and dye with comfort, than with
Dives and Polycrates, to live in iollitie, and dye in misery: the one being
that happily-painfull way, which leads to endless happiness, the other that
painfully-happilesse rode, which leads to remediless torment: resembling
herein the Violets of America, which in Summer please with a sense-delighting
sweetness, but in Winter kill with a life-deuouring poison. See the geeat
worldlings, the darlings of fortune with greediness gape after her pleasures
in the Summer of their strength, which speedily proves their poison in the
winter of their age: but christians must look for winters continual tempests
here, that do expect to obtain a Summer of glory which never shall be subject
to alteration hereafter. For as the wood of the Egyptian Firre-tree, thrown
into the water, against the nature of wood, sincketh to the bottom, where
having for a space been deeply steeped, and as it were drunken with that
liquid humor, does immediately (beyond natures ordinary course) mount it self
aloft upon the euer-varying face of the water: so a christian man having the
floods of tribulation entering even in unto his soul may for a while seem to
be suppressed, (when indeed he is but oppressed) with so great an inundation,
but straight the hope of a harbor mounts him aloft, and Patience easily wafts
him to the Haven of Felicity. Let us then not be dismayed when Tribulation, like
a Tempest, heapeth billows of sorrows upon our backs, for a calm shall follow
when Christ shall say, Be still, Mark. 4.3^
(but of this point we shall speak more largely at the end.) Only now, let
the sweetness of Felicity give a relish to the bitterness of Miseries, that
it may make us patiently endure what God lovingly inflicts, that Patience may
have her perfect work, that we may be perfect, etc. And the rather, because
we read in Ezechiel, that he saw a strange beast with the face of a Man, a
Lion, an Ox, and an Eagle; and in the 10. Chapter he says he saw the same
beast again, but the face of an Ox was now changed into the face of a
Cherube. Ezech. 10.14.
To teach us, that labor, toil, and affliction open unto us the Glory of
Eternity, making us of Laborious Oxen, Glorious Cherubins in Angelical
perfection. For it is not the Beauty of the Face of Man, The fierceness of
the Lion, nor the quick sight and Agilitie of the Eagle that help us forward
in the way to perfection; Only the Face of an Ox, the Trouble, and Patience in
that trouble, under the yoke is changed into the face of a Cherub, and this is
not another, but the same Beast; for They were the same faces that he saw by
the River Chebah. Ezech. 10.22.
If then thou desire to be loosed from the yoke of Humane affliction, and be
made partaker of Angelical perfection, Then let patience etc.

The second maine Motive unto this duty, to let Patience have her perfect
work; that so we may be entire, is Imitation, and that of those perfect
patterns of Patience, which have been before us (for Examples usually
prevail more them perswasiue arguments) and herein the most perfect Pattern
must needs prove the most forcible motive, to induce us to let Patience have
her perfect work. For as Aristotle commanded that Children should not look
upon Pauson's imperfect figures, but upon the perfect figures of Polignotus,
least they indeauouring to attain perfection, might by imperfect patterns be
inueloped in the Cimerian dark clouds of Imperfection; So I, being about to
build this absolute Aedifice, even the perfect work of Patience in your
hearts, will not present unto you an imperfect pattern of so needful a
virtue, but will entreat you to behold the Pattern which Christ Jesus
himself has left unto you, he being the perfect Picture, as of all graces, so
especially of Patience, which blessed Jesus, as in his divine Nature he is the
perfect Image of his fathers glory, So in his humane Nature he is the absolute
Image of perfect Patience; let us therefore follow his stepps, as we are
directed by the Spirit of God, who to this end vouchsafes to give us this holy
and heavenly exhortation; Heb. 12.1.2.3.
Let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy which was set before him
endured the Cross and despised the shame, and is set down on the righ hand of
God: For consider him that endured such contradiction of Sinners against
himself, least you be wearyed and faint in your minds. See here the Synopsis
of Christ his Patience together with with an exhortation to us, to insist in
his stepps. When the pillar of the Cloud went forward, the Israelites followed
it, and when this Pillar of Health goes before, shall we stand still and not
follow him? We desire to be called Christians, and yet have not learned Christ,
vain is the name, if the nature be wanting. What shall we do with the
appearance, when we want the Essence? Ought not the masters conversation be the
disciples Instruction.

How willingly do we see the Subjects of Kings? imitate their Sovereigns
example, and shall not we imitate the King of Heaven? Bernard upon these words,
Cant. 2.1.
I am the flower of the field, shows that two things are therein signified;
either the form of our fighting, or the glory of our Triumph; and adds, Lord
thou art both the glass for my Patience and a reward for me Patient; if then
I seek for the reward, I must imitate the pattern, draw me therefore after
thee (dear Jesus) and grant me so to imitate thy patience upon earth that thou
may crown my patience with thee in heaven. To this agrees that of S. Peter,
1. Pet. 2.2^
Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his
stepps. We are not then worthy of the Merit of his sufferings, unless we
desire to imitate his blessed example, who from his Cratch at Bethlem to his
Cross at Jerusalem lively decyphered the perfection of Patience. For here we
may see the Son of God whose power is boundless, as his Mercy is endless,
hungring and thirsting, who feeds us with Manna, and gives us pleasure to
drink as out of a River; wearied with want, who had no want of weariness:
dying for sinners, that sinners might not die: Bound with bonds, that frees us
from fetters; Accused, by whom we are excused, condemned by whom we are
absolved; Crowned with Thorns, that adornes us with Roses; nailed to the
Cross, who redeemed us from the loss we felt by Adam; Counted with Thieves
that does match us with Angels; all which Torturing torments and tormenting
tortures patiently he endured, to teach us Patience. Shall we not then follow
his stepps? He was innocent, but we are nocent; he deserved glory, by his
Obedience, we shame by our Disobedience; he merited life by his Death; we
Death by our wicked lives: Thus was he pure, but we impure, and yet all these
things he endured for us, and shall we endure nothing for him? Art thou
persecuted; so was he, 1. Sam. 26:20.
yea even as a Partridge upon the Mountains; Do thou want? So did he, for
Foxes have holes, and Birds of the Air nests, Mat. 8.20.
But the Son of Man had not whereon to lay his head: Art thou hated? so was
he, yea even of those for whose salvation he was Incarnate; Art thou falsely
accused? so was he, though he were the truth it self: Art thou iniustly
condemned? so was he; though he be the Judge of the world: Art thou punished
with death? so was he, yea even with the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8.
what can thou endure, which he has not endured? Temptations from Satan,
Tribulations from the world yet all this, which This All could inflict upon
him, he endured patiently for thy sake: Violls of Gods wrath from Heaven, and
of Man's envy from Earth, the first in the Garden at Gethsemane, and the second
on the Cross at Mount Caluary. Oh blessed Jesus! what an Agony did est thou
endure in the Garden, when the burden of our sins made thee fall into a
bloody sweat, Luke 22.44.
and that in great dropps trickling down to the ground. The torments of the
body are sull of misery but those of the soul do far exceed these, Por.
18.14.
for A wounded spirit who can bear? The pain of the body is but a body of
pain, but the sorrow of the Soul, is the very soul of sorrow; yet this
painful sorrow, he was pleased to suffer for us, to teach us patiently to
suffer all sorrowful pains for him. Let then Patience have her perfect work,
that we etc.

But let us not stay here, but with weeping eyes look to the bloody stepps he
set, climbing to Mount Caluarey. Consider how barbarously he was apprehended,
uncivilly arraigned, unjustly condemned, and most cruelly murdered. Stay,
stay, you bloody murderers of the Son of God, who is that you go about to
appreahend? is it not he that came to save you? why then do ye endeavor to
destroy him? Why do ye bind him in the bonds of sinners, that came to loose
you from the bonds of sin? But so it must be, for so his own good pleasure
has decreed that it should be, bound then they bring him before the high
Priests, where by injurious scorn and scornful injury, innocence is
arraigned, truth accused, and righteousness condemned: this could not choose
but be the darkest night that ever was, wherein the light of the world even the
Sun of Righteousness was so Eclipsed, Hence in the morning of that mourning
day was he posted to be presented before Pilate, whose ambitious selfeloue made
him, without further inquiry into his cause, to condemn himself first to the
Post to be whipped, and then to the Cross to be crucified; Crucified and that
amongst Thieves, amongst Thieves upon Mount Caluarey before a stinking
dunghill, but made glorious by his blessed death. And now mark here the
admirable Patience of our dying Life, who in the midest of their derision,
mixed with despite, does neither rave nor rage, but makes that den of thieves a
house of prayer for them, that before had made his house of prayer a den of
thieves, with Pater ignosce: Father forgive them. Thus he dyed, Tanquam Ouis,
And opened not his mouth. Let then this Lamb of God, teach the Lambs of Gods
Church, humble Patience, and patiente Humility, shall our great Master read
unto us this lecture, and shall not we endeavor to take it out? Oh Beloved!
Let us look to Jesus and his blessed Patience, and it will teach us patience
for blessed Jesus sake: when the Captain gives the Onset, what Coward will
stay behind? The Bees follow their King, and the Beasts their leader, and shall
we be more senseless then Beasts, or more witless then Bees? No let us with
undaunted hearts follow the stepps of his patience, and though troubles arise
never so fast, yet to withstand their violence by the Bulwark of Patience,
suffering her to have her perfect work that we may be perfect etc. Christ that
was naturally the Son of Man, was also eternally The Son of God, both
Natures being united by a divine Combination, in one Hypostaticall union, by
which he became (...) God-Man in one Person: by which Grace of Union he was
able to endure more in his humane Nature, then our Humane frailty can possibly
endure. But alas I am a Man, whose weakness makes me the Example of
Imbecility, the spoil of time, The play of fortune, The image of inconstancy,
The Balance of Calamity: and therefore it may be no marvel if the Crosses
of this life do sometimes drive me to impatience.

Well then if thy dull Eyes cannot Eagle-like behold the illustrious luster of
Christ's divine Patience, Men subject to the same weakness that we are, whose
Nature was as subict to slide, nay to fall as ours is or can be. And since thy
Bleare-eye dares not behold his sunne-exceeding brightness: yet view it
guilding the Mountains, or at least gliding upon the waters: Mark the
wonderful effect of his exemplary patience in all his holy Saints and Martyrs,
whose admirable Patience may serve as a Lodestone to thy iron-exceeding heart
(in respect of Hardness) to draw thee neer^r to thee practice of this
Excellent virtue. What should I speak of Joseph? Psa. 105.18.
Whose Feet were hurt in the stocks, the Iron entered into his Soul what of
Job? whose sorrow-conquering Patience, Gods holy spirit has vouchsafed to
Register? what of Jeremy? What of all the Prophets? Heb. 11.37
whereof some were stoned, some were sawen asunder, were slain with the sword,
wandered about in sheepe-skinns and Goates-skins, being destitute afflicted and
tormented of whom the world was not worthy, because they were worthy of a
better world. What should I speak of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ? How rejoiced they when they were accounted worthy to be Scourged
for his Name. This made S. Andrew go securely to the Cross and account that
pain a pleasure for his Masters sake. How constantly did S. Bartholomew endure
Excoriation, and S. Peter, and Saint Paul lay down their lives? Nay tell me,
which of all that holy fellowship did not in some measure taste of the bitter
Cup of Martyrdom? What should I speak of all the heavenly Army of Martyrs in
the primitive Church, whereof some (as Ignatius) besought their friend, not to
be their hinderance in that happy race: How did that holy Saint long to have
his body and bones ground with the teeth of Beasts, that it might be made fine
Manchet for his Masters Table? Others conquered their Tormentors with Patience,
and blunted their swords with suffering; and in the middst of Tyranny were more
then conquerours: Romans 8.
For when Dacianus saw the admirable Patience of Vincentius he cried out, Victi
sumus; So happily did his undaunted Patience conquer the Tyrants implacable
malice. Did not S. Lawrence upon the Gredyron, by patient suffering, conquer
the malicious envy of that raging Tyrant? Not to speak more of the never too
much to be commended patience of Romanus, which because it is admirably laid
down by Prudentius, I do therefore thither refer thee: In a word to
conclude; without further ripping up of that Tragical story of that sacred
Troop, who longing for the water of life, desired to pass to it through the
straight gate of bitter death, who by their blood sealed the profession of
Jesus: Let one man's Testimony speak for the whole in general, even
Tertullian in his Apology, who thus discourses concerning the
neuer-sufficiently admired patience of the Christians in his time. Every
Malefactor (says he) is subject either to shame or sorrow, Murmuring at those
torments which they justly have deserned. Christianis vero quid simile? etc.
What is there in Christians like to these Malefactors? They are not ashamed,
nor ever do repent them of their profession; If a Christian his name be taken,
he boasts, if accused he defends not himself; if demanded upon
Interrogatories of his own accord, he confesses; if condemned he gives
thanks. Thus their accusation is the ground of their joy, and their punishment
the foundation of their eternal Felicity. Thus patiently did those Martyrs
demean themselves, with Cygneane songs (like Cyprian) singing the Dirge to
their own Deaths, making Diem fatalem diem natalem, their Death's day more
joyous then their Birth* day; for they knew that vltima dies, is prima quies,
their last day is theri best-day; yea their blessed day, which prefixeth a Period
to Misery, and sets open the gate to Immortality.

I but (you will say) they suffered for Christ, so do not we: I but (say I)
they suffered in Christ, and so do we; Our reward shall be no less then
theirs, if our Patience be as much as theirs, Let then our (...) be our (...),
Our sufferings, our instructions let our Nocumenta be our Documenta, let our
Harms, be our Arms, to make us ready even to dye (with Paul) for Jesus Christ
his sake; Heb. 10.36.
And let Patience have her perfect work, knowing that we have need of
Patience. Luke 18.15
For as by warmeth of Clothes, our Bodies, so by patience our Souls are
preserved from the frostes of afflictions Through patience we bring forth
frutie, Luke 21.28.
the want whereof makes us like the fruitless Figtree, liable to the curse of
Christ: yea In patience, we possess our souls, as if we were not proper
owners of our Souls, unless Season and Possession thereof be delivered unto
us by Patience. Thus with Patience through Patience, and in Patience, we
attain unto Perfection and Insyrenesse; For all virtues though of never so
great luster in themselves are but barren widows, if not married unto
Patience. Let us then strive to imitate the happy Example of our blessed
Savior; or if we think that too difficult, for our weak power (which is but
a powerless weakness) yet let us follow the stepps of his Saints; it may be
we have deserved more then they, yet have not endured half so much as they;
Persevere then to endure whatsoever it shall please the Lord to inflict, that by
patience you may obtain the Laurel of Immortality which Vincenti dabitur,
shall be given only unto those of S. Vincents order, namely to those that
continue to the end; and let these Motives be digested in thee by meditation
That Patience may have her perfect work etc.

I come now, unto the third and last (but not the least) Reason used by the
Apostle, to enforce us to let Patience have her perfect work, which in induced
from the want of Want; We shall want nothing, nothing here, nothing hereafter,
nothing in this life, nothing in the life to come: and this is the Argument of
Arguments, for who will not be content to go to Heaven even by the Gates of
Hell? and thus by (Gods gracious assistance) we perceive how man passes
through the floods of affliction (as Israel through Iordaine) and happily at
last ariueth in Canaan the Land of promise, I mean at perfection, intirenes,
and the want of Want here promised, as the Guerdon of perfect patience. And now
we see, that though Misery goes before, yet mercy follows, for no sooner has
the bitter Tempest of Calamity spent her utmost breath, but immediately all is
quiet, and we sail in the harbor of Perfection. Thus as Solomon hewed his
stones in the Rock, 2. King. 6.7
that there might be no noise in the Temple: Even so our prince of Salem,
Christ Jesus, polisheth his lively stones here, that they may grow (without the
noise of weeping) into a Heavenly Temple hereafter; Thus blessedly after the
clamorous Noise of Thunder, Rev. 14.2.
is heard the Harmonious voice of Harpinge. For when troubles cease, joy
begins, according to that of the Psalmist; Sorrow may endure for a night but
joy comes in the Morninge. Psa. 30.5.


Great were the troubles which S. Paul endured, but his Crown of
Righteousness made amends for all; No better means to make us patiently to
drink the bitter waters of Marah, and think them sweet, then by meditation
to remember and by remembrance to meditate on the Milk and honey that flow in
the Land of Canaan When Job was in the midst of his misery, what made him
patient, but his belief that his Redeemer lived and that he should rise again
etc. Job. 19.25.26.
For when the eye of the Soul apprehends the Crown of glory, it makes the
tongue confess with S. Paul That the tribulations of this world are not worthy
of the glory that shall be revealed. Romans 8.18.
The least drop of that Water of life sweetens the greatest draught of misery
that is here proposed unto us in this life. For Gods Saints know that here they
may last Misery, but there they shall not, for the Momentary lightness of
Tribulation procures an Eternal weight of Glory for us; Thus for lightness are
we rewarded with weight, and for troubles momentarie have Joys of eternity;
for whilst our Earthly Tabernacle is in dissoluing, the heavenly Jerusalem is
in Building: Which is not the spoil of the warrior, but the inheritance of
those that suffer patience to have her perfect works etc. How happy then are
those Souls that patiently endure the Rod, that blessedly they may receive the
Crown? Oh my Soul! how happy shall thou be, when after the finishing of the
troubles of this life thou with Noah's Ark shall happily rest upon Mount
Ararat, Genesis 8.4. Psa. 15.1.
upon the Mountain of Holiness? When having finished thy miserable Pilgrimage
through the Wilderness of Sin, thou shall happily arrive at Zion, at the land
of promise, which is not possessed by the sword, nor attained by the power of
the Arm but is purchased by Patience, and possessed by Perseverance. Rouse up
thy self then (Oh my soul!) and be not disquieted at the sight of Affliction.
It is true, Affliction is a harsh Summoner, yet he summons thee to Glory; Run
on my Soul, Run on, to obtain the proposed prize; Know thou not yet,
that Isaac which is laughter, is the son of Sarah, which is patience?
Troubles may go before, Comforts shall follow after: now thou may be
punished, but hereafter thou shall be glorified: Glorified? Luke 12.34 2 Timothy
4.18. 2 Pet. 1.11 Luke 14.16.
yea glorified in a Kingdom, a King dome not terrestrial, but Celestial; a
celestial Kingdom not enduring for a day; but for ever; A celestial eternal
Kingdom, not of men, but of God, here is our Reward which is far more
plentiful then our pains; For all the miseries of this life are but pains,
not torments; pains on earth not in Hell; pain on earth enduring for a while,
not for ever; darkning or ecclipsing the Sun of Comfort for a minute or
moment, but immediately vanishing. Nay further, all that can light upon us, is
but inflicted by the Arm of flesh, they are but men that trouble us, whose
power is finite, and their days determined, but our Reward is glorious and
far transcendeth our sufferings: for our Sufferings are on earth, our glory
in Heaven; our sufferings diurnall our glory diururnall; our sufferings from
men, our glory from God. Look how far then God precedeth man, Heaven, Earth,
Eternity, time, so far transcendeth that glory these suffering; Now we sigth,
then we shall sing; now we weep, then we shall rejoice; now men laugh at us,
but then we shall laugh at them, When the ungodly shall perish, Thou shall see
it. What grief then can the incourse of these troubles being us, when we have
recourse to the hope of happiness? For take away our Crosses and you bereave
us of our Crowns; Take away our vexations here, and you bereave us of
glorification hereafter. Happy yea thrice happy are those Souls, who can
suffer for God, to be rewarded by God, that being ransomed from the miserable
fast of this life, they may be thought worthy to sit down to feast with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all Gods Saints at the banquet of the Lamb. O
Blessed Supper, Luke 12.37. Heb. 1.
or Celestial banquet, where Angels shall attend us, and Christ himself shall
Minister unto us. We read that King Ahasuerosh made a stately banquet, to his
Princes, but this far surpasses his; He was a mighty King, but this to
which we are invited is perpared by Almighty God; He fed his Princes with
delitious dainties, but they were but fruits of the earth; Christ shall feed us
with Dainties, but they shall be the fruits of heaven; his Banquet lasted 180.
days, but this shall endure Millions of Ages, even for ever; He made his in
the Palace of Shushan, but this shall be in the midst of Jerusalem, of which
we may sing with the Psalmist. Very excellent things are spoken of thee thou
City of God. Yea things so excellent, so glorious, as man's eye has not
seen, Man's care has not heard, yea his heart was never able to conceive the
excellency of that glory, seeing that it flourishes with that Peace which
passes all understanding. Shall I not then eat sower herbs here in Egypt,
that I may be feasted at this banquet in Canaan? Oh my Soul! were thou once
esteemed worthy to taste a drop of that celestial drink, then should thou
be saitsfied; fly then my happy thoughts, fly upon the wings of Contemplation
unto the Palace of your God, see what Rooms, what Provision, what Glory is
provided for you, and let not the base trouble of this life hinder you in your
happy flight, But account all things as dunge in respect of Christ, that
forsaking all things for him, in him you may possess all things. Cheer up
your hearts then ye Soldiers of Christ's Camp, look to the wreath of victory
which attends you in the Heavens, and see what you gain by the loss of all
earthly things: for these are but vanity, here we see nothing but misery,
there nothing but glory; who would not then desire to be delivered from the
burden of the flesh to enjoy that liberty to be released from the prison of
this life, and to be admitted to the Quire of Angels? Surely if we had tasted
but a bit of the fruit of Paradise, we should easily despise the Fleshpots of
Egypt, or what other sublunarie delight this world can afford us. For when we
arrive at those celestial Mansions, when once we enter within that gate of
glory, then shall our eyes see God, and this sight shall make us blessed; Nay
more, then shall we know God, our understanding shall conceive him as he is,
yea then our Hearts and affections shall totally addict themselves to his
Diuinest love; yea our tongues then truly shall perform the end of their
Creation, for they shall praise him for ever; being then placed in this Bower
of bliss, our eyes shall see him, our understandings know him, our hearts
shall love him, and our Tongues shall praise him. Our eyes seeing him shall
move our understanding to know him, our understandings knowing him, shall
enrich our hearts to love him, our hearts loving him shall cause our tongues to
praise him. Our eyes shall see him perpetually, our understandings shall know
him perfectly, our hearts love him entirely, and our tongues praise him
eternally; Because we shall ever see him, therefore we shall perfectly know
him, because we shall perfectly know him, therefore we shall entirely love him,
because we shall entirely love him, therefore we shall eternally praise him;
The sight of our eyes shall give light to our understanding, our understandings
enlightened shall inflame our hearts, our hearts inflamed shall inform our
tongues to praise that God whom we see, and know to be so admirable; Praise him
then we shall because we love him, love him we shall because we know him, know
him we shall, because we see him; Thus shall we see him that we may know him,
know him, that we may love him, love him that we may praise him; happy eyes
that so shall see him; happy understandings that so shall know him, happy
hearts, that so shall love him, and happy tongues that so shall praise him, and
happy, nay blessed shall we be when our eyes, Souls, Hearts, and Tongues shall
so know, love and praise him for ever. Here is the Reward of Affliction, and
the end of trouble, Behold joy in the end without End, Reward exceeding man's
desire or hope of reward. Shall we not then follow the Apostles admonition, to
be pertakers of this Crown, even to Let patience have her perfect work that
you may be perfect and entire wanting nothing?

The Father of Patience and the God of Perfection, who works all things in
time and measure, grant us Patience from above that looking to the end of the
Race and the Crown at the end we may Let Patience have her perfect work, that
we may be perfect, and entire wanting nothing. So be it for thy mercies sake;
and that it may be so, Thou which art Amen, say Amen to our prayers. So we
that are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture shall give thee thanks for
ever, yea, we shall Laud and Magnify thy name from generation to generation;
we thy poor servants here on earth shall ascribe those prayers and praises
which thy Saints and Angels daily and duly ascribe unto thee in heaven, even
all honor, glory, praise, power, dominion and thanksgiving, be ascribed unto
thee O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons but one everliving,
euerlouing, everlasting, and only wise God, of us, of Angels, and of all men
from this time forth for evermore Amen.

(...).
The Printer to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, in regard of the Authors absence, and the multiplicitie of
Authorities by him cited; and the smalnesse of the Volume not affording
convenient place in the margent, I have presumed to put them here in the end
of the Book by themselves, referring thee to the Page and Line, as follows.

PAge 1. line vlt. Bella gentium legimus superasse quamplurimos, quos tamen
legimus pugnas Carnis non vicisse, and audiuimus eos dedisse delitijs pectora,
qui dorsa hostibus non dedere, Petr. Rauuen. Ser. 4.

Page 2. line 22. Magnum regit imperium quisibi dominatur. Sen.

Page 3. line 9. Sicut laurus fulmine non percutitur, plin. lib. 2. c. 55. Ita
firma virtus calamitate non Euertitur; est enim constans virtus pulchra laurus
semper virens, Nullo igne Nubibus erumpente, nullo impetu tormentorum exusta
aut labesacta. Stell. in Enarr. in Lu. c. 21.

Page 6. line 16. Si sapientia etc. Plat.

Ibid line 25. Oculi sunt in amore duces. Propert.

Page 8. line 2. Patientia est Religiosi viri laborum and dolorum omnium,
futurarum Rerum spe, mercedis aternae and amore dei grata tolerantia, Aug. and
in Flor. Bar. in tit. Pat.

Ibid. lin. 7. Patientia est aliena mala aequanimiter perpeti and contra illum
qui mala irrogat nullo dolor moueri. Greg super Euang. Hom. 35.

Ibid. line 11. Patientia est virtus qua quis pro pietate and pro Deo quicquia
accidit aduersifert constanti animo, nec frangitur, Feuardent in Ep. Iac. Cap.
1.

Ibid. line 25. Institut. l. 3. c. 7.

Page 9. line. 24. Tristitia vestra vertetur in gaudium, hoc est, Aqua vestra
vertetur in vinum. Ber. S. de V. Apost: Non est Regnum Dei esus and potus etc.

Page 10. line 14. Vultus illi tranquillus and placidus Frons pura, nu^a
Maeroris aut irae rugositate contracta, Remissa aeque in Laet^m super cilia.
Oculis humilitate non infaelicitate dejectis, ^s taciturnitatis honor
signatum, Color qualis securis and innoxijs, Motus frequens Capitis in Diabolum
and minnax risus Caeterum Amictus circum pectora candidus and Corpore
impressus, vt qui nec in^la^^^ nec inquietatur. Sedet in Throno spiritus
mitissimi, nam vbi Deusibi Alumna eius Patientia. Tert lib. de Pat. in fine.

Page 11. line 14. Ecce modesta graui stabat Patientia vultu, Per medias immota
Acies, variosque tumultus, Vulneraque and Rigidis vitalia peruia pilis,
spectabat defixa oculos and lenta manebat, Prudent in psychom.

Page 12. line 15. (...): Auream quisquis mediocritatem diligit. Horat. lib. 2.
od. 10.

Page 14. line 4. Tert. De pat. Cyprianus instar fontis purissimi dulcis
incedit et placidus. Hie. ep. ad Paul. Lor. in Eccles. uide etsam Feuard. in c.
1 ep. Iac. vti ex Cipr. 26. Patientiae effectus enumerat.

Page 15. line. 2. Nescio quid magis in Laud tua dicam etc. Hug. de laud. Char.

Ibid. line 8. (...), id est, duret (...), sicut dicitur, Mat. 10.22. (...),
Pisc in schol. in loc. Tunc erit perfectum opus patientiae si in finem
perseueraurit. Hier. in c. 2. ep. Ad. Romans

Ibid. line 23. Lauda Nauigantis faelicitatem sed cum venerit ad portum, Ber*
de passi. Domini c. 14.

Page 16. line 9. Stell. in Luc.

Ibid. line 21. Exitus acta probat Ovid. in Ep. Virtus boni operti,
perseuerantia est. Aug Med. c. 36.

Page 17. line 7. Vtin Terra aurum, in nuce nucleus, in hirsutis Castanea
operculis sita: diuinus sensus altius est pers^rutandus. Hier. in Eccles. c. 12.

Ibid. line 10. Per Mosen Cauda Bestiae in Altari offerre precipitur, vt viz
Omne bonu^ quod incipimus etiam perseuerante fine compleamus. Greg. Mor. lib.
2. Cap. 4.

Ibid. line 23. Perseuerantia viris meretur gloriam, virtuti Coronam. Absque
perseuerantia nec qui pugnat victoriam, nec palmam Victor consequitur, Nutrix
est ad meritum, Mediatrix ad praemium, soror Patientiae Constantiae filia,
Amica pacis; Amicitiarus Nodum, Vnanimitatis vinculum, Sanctitatis
propugnaculum Saul non perseuerans in humilitate and regnum amisit and vitam,
Si Cautela Samsonis, Salomonis denotie perseuerantia^ retinuisset, nec h^c
sapi^ntia priuaretur, necille viribus. Ber Ep. 129.

Page 29. line 4. Finis nonpugna Coronat. Ber. de pass. Domini c. 14.

Ibid. line 10. Impiger extremos Currit Mercator ad Indos. Hor.

Page 20. line 24 Quid hoc ad Christianos, quos paradisus invitat Ciper. cont.
Demetr. 1.

Page 22. line 7. Secundum quandam inter homines couersationem laudabilem, and
probalibem, quam nullus hominum p^ssit just in quaerelam vecare, lib. 1. c.
48. cont. Pelag. and Celest.

Ibid. line 16. Multisunt Perfecti in hoc mundo, qui si perfectionem veram
respicias perfecti esse non possunt. Amb. in Esaias vt Citatur ab Aug. Loc. citat.

Ibid. line 26. Vnum scio me nihil scire. Socr.

Page 23. line 5. Virtus, quae nu^^ est in homine justo, hactenus nominatur
perfecta: vt ad Ejus perfectionem pertineat etiam ipsius imperfectionis and in
veritate agnitio, and in humilitate confessio. Aug. ad Bon. lib. 3. c. 7.

Ibid line 14. Haec est hominis vera sapientia, Imperfectum esse se nosce,
Atque (ut ita loquar) cunctorum in hac (...) ne viuentium, imperfecta perfectio
est Hier. cont. Pelag. lib. 1.

Ibid. line 26. Nigraper ^nhaerens (...) Be^. in loc.

Page 24. line 4. Multum in hac vita pro^it, qui quam loage sit a perfectione
justuiae proficiendo cognouit. lib. desp, etc. 35.2.

Page 25. line. 1. Ad comparationem caeterorum qui res negligentius curant
Perfecti dicendi sunt qui adhibita solertia Perfectionis iter ambulant, Amb. in
Phil. c. 3.

Ibid. line 14. Magna pars est bonitatis velle fieribonus. Seneca.

Page 26. line 6. Aliua est martyrio animum deesse, aliud animo defuisse
martyrium acc. Cipr. de Mortal Ser. 4.

Ibid. line 17. Nen Euentum considera sed voluntatem, quantum enim ad
Voluntatem, cruentauerat dextram Patriarcha, and per Ceriucem Pueri immiserat
gladium, perfectumque obtulerat sacrisicium: idcirco and Deus quasi sacrificie
reapse peracto, laudat justum, and dicit. Ne ^eceris ei quicquam contentus sum
Voluntate tua and ex hoc Te Corono, Ego enim voluntatem coronare soleo and
propter mentem praemia praesto. Chrysostom. Hom. 47. in Genesis

Page 27. line 7. Qui non habet vnde faciat Eleemosynam liber est quantumcunque
dare Voluerit tantum dedit qui voto dedit. Hier in Ps. 111.

Page 30. line 8. Si exemptus es a numero flagellorum etiam a numero filierum.
Greg.

Page 31. line 19. Suprema sententia est non est cognita, non tamen credatur
iniusta, sed eo saltem justum credatur omne quod patitur, quo nimirum constat
quod Deo Authore patitur. Greg. lib. 32. Mor. cap. 5. and habetur In Annot in
lib. 1. c. 3. Sent. Isid.

Page 33. line 20. Ideo hic quibusdam parcit ut Eos in perpetuum feriat, Ideo
hic me ferias non parcendo vt in perpetuum parcat, Greg. lib. 7. Mor. c. 8.

Ibid. line 26. (...) Hesiod.

Page 34. line 20. Hine justi in Scripturis dicuntur ablactari vt Isaac, quod
de impijs dictum non legimus. sicut notat Procopius ad Genesis 21.

Page 35. line 10. Ideo Deus foelicitatibus terrenis amaritudinem miscet, vt
alia quaeratur foelicitas, cujus dulcedo non est fallax. Aug. de ^^u. Dei l. 2.

Ibid. line 16. Electis Deus suis iter hujus mundi asperum reddit, ne
amaenitate viae obliuiscantur patriae. Greg. Mor. lib. 23.

Page 36. line 6. Diodor. Sic. lib. 4 Rerum. Antiqu.

Page 37. line 18. Nemini debet esse mirum si pro peccatis nostris saepe a Deo
castigamur: Imo, cum vexamur ac premimur tunc maxim gratias agimus
indulgentissimo Patri quod corruptelam nostram non patitur longius procedere,
sed plagis and Verberibus emendat. Ex Quo intelligimus esse nos Deo curae
quibus quoniam peccamus irascitur. Lact. lib. 3. Diu. Inst. ^. 25.

Page 40. lin* 23. (...) quam propere legimus tam cito Negligimus Aus. Edall. 3.

Page 42. line 5. Aurem cordis tribulatio aperit, quam saepe prosperitas hujus
mundi claudit. Greg. Mor. l. 26.

Ibid. line 8. Schola Crucis Schola lucis. Cyp. Ser. 4. de Immortal.

Ibid. line 22. Gallo canente snos relinquit latro insidias Amb. Hex. lib^e. 24.

Page 43. line. 19. Duris vt ilex tonsa bipennibus, Nigrae feraci frondis in
Algido Per damna per caedes ab ipso Ducit opes animumque ferro, Hor. Car. lib.
4. od. 4.

Page 44. line 7. O Socij neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum O passi grauiora
dabit Deus his quoque finem. Virg. Aencid. 1.

Ibid line 14. Scilicet exiguo percuss^ es fulminis ictu, Fortior ut possis
cladibus esse tuis. Ovid. ad Liuiam.

Ibid. line 20. Absit a seruo Christi tale inquinamentum ut patientia,
majoribus praeparta, minoribus excidat. Tert. de Pat. Vt proxima quaeque
victoria instrumentum sequentis esset, Just. Hist. l. 1. Paulum sepultae distat
inertiae Celata virtus. Hor. Car. l. 4. ed. 9.

Page 46. line 20. Vni risui, duplex respondet luctus, Paez. in o. 1. Ep.lac.v.
12.

Page 47. line 9. Quanto hoc saeculo persecutionibus, paupertate, Inimicorum
potentia, vel maloru^^ crudelitate fuerimus afflicti, tanto post Resurrectionem
majora gaudia consequemur. Aug. ad Cip

Page 50. line 26. Exempla and Similitudines plus valent quam argumenta. Cicero.

Page 51. line 5. Ne inspiciant pueri Pausonis figuras quia imperfectae, sed
Polygnoti quae perfecta fuerant. Arist. pol. 8. c. 5.

Ibid line 25. Paez in Ep. Iac.

Page 52. line 23. Frustra appellamur Christiani, nisi and sumus Imitatores
Christi, qui ideo viam se fecit ut Conuersatio Magistri, esset forma discipuli.
Leo in 7. Ser. de Not. Christi.

Page 53. line 3. Totus componitur orbis Regis ad Exemplum, Claud.

Ibid. line 13. Vel quod Pugnandi forma vel Triumphandi gloria, vtrumque es
Domine and speculum Patiendi and Praemium patientis. Ber. in. Cant. Ser. 47:

Page 54. line 16. Coronalur spinis, qui Martyrs floribus coronat aeternis.
Cyp. s. 3. de bon. Pat.

Ibid line. 22. Dum legimus and Audimus quot and quanta ille sine culpa
sustinuit, Intelligimus nos Peccatores omnia debere libenter sustinere Theod.
ad Cap. 5 ad Romans

Page 59. line. 11: Durum; sed leuius fit patientia. Hor! Car. l. 1. od. 24

Page 60. line 1. Imbecillitatis Exemplum, Temporis spolium, Fortunae lusus,
Inconstantiae Imago, Imbecillitatis tr^tina, Apul. lib. de Deo. Socr.

Page 61. line 21. Non modo patienter sed and libenter sed and audenter, ad
Tormenta sicut ad Ornamenta, ad paenas sicut ad delitias properabat. Ber de S.
And. in Ser de triplici genere bonorum: and Aug. Ibat Andreas securus ad
crucem: Bartholomaeus propriam pellem dedit etc. Aug. Soliloq. ^. 22.. 3

Page 62. line 6. Ign. passim in Ep. praesertim ad Romans

Page 63. line 3: De donde salio a quel roz de Daciano, el qual dispues deauer
prouade tanto genero de tormentos en el cuerpo de san Vincente espantado dix^
Vencidos so mos, Luys de Gran: en la prim. part Del Amor de Dios. Prud. Him de
Romans

Ibid. line. 18. Omne malum vel timore vel pudore Natura perfundit etc.
Christianis vero quid simile? quos nec pudet nec poenite sed plane antea non
fuisse Siquis denotatur gloriatur, si accusatur non defendit, Interregatus vel
vltro confitetur, Damnatus gratias agit, Quid hoc Mali est? cujus reus gaudct,
cujus accusatio votum, cujus paena falicitas. Tert. in Apologet.

Page 64. line. 9: In vita Cypr.

Page 65. line 13. Per patientiam animas nostr as possidemtes, quia dum nobis
ipsis dominari discimus hoc ipsum incipimus possidere quod Sumus. Greg. and
habetur apud Tho. Aquin. in Euang.

Ibid. line 24. Nam virtus vidua est quam non Patientia firmat, Prud. in psych.

Page 67. line 20: Electorum namque est hic conteri, vt ad praemia debeant
aeternae haereditatis erudiri. Greg. lib. 26. Mor. c 18.

Page 69. line 13. Illa coelestis Hierusalim non est bellatorum spelium, sed
mansuete omnia tolerantium sperata baeredit as. Basil* in. ps. 33.

Page 70. line 5. Illa terra promissionis non gladio possidetur, nec brachio
acquiritur, sed patientia possidetur, and acquiritur, Amb. In Ps. 43.

Page 71. line 6. Nubecula est, cito transiuit. In vita Iuell. Ep. Sarisb.

Page 72. line 2. Nullus dolor de incursatione malorum quibus fiducia est
futurorum Cypri. com. Demetri.

Ibid. line 6. Toll certamina, Toil coronas; Toll cruciatus, Toll
Beatitudines. Amb. ad ea Verb. Consummata omnitentatione. Luc. 4.

Page 74. line 12. Ibi victor miles post Dolores, Donis ineffabilibus cumulatus
Nobile perpetuum Caput amplectente Corona, Aug. in Soliloq. 6.8.

Page 77. line 9. Ecce gaudium in sine sine fine. Ber. Ser. 2. de rub. Apost.
Non est regnum etc.

FINIS.

