As Iheronimus, shows In this beginning, so will I write of the.iiij.
Tokens, the which shall be showed before the dredefull day of Dome, of our
lord Ihesu Christ. For there shall we show ourself young and old. etc.
Iheronimus.
portrait of St. Jerome
AND our Lord, will yt there shall be showed.iiij. tokens after doctors saying,
For our lord is so merciful that he will not punysshe us but he will show some
tokens before. And yt we may be sorry of our sins, and do penance. And after
these foresaid.iiij. tokens shall yet be xv. other tokens be showed. which
Iheronimus had fou^den in the rinskens Cronicle of the Jews. Of which.xv.
tokens foresaid shall be declared by order here after.

And the first token of the iiij. shall be that the might of Satan through the
passion of our lord was made lasser, and was bounden, and shall be vnbonden. All
be it that he by the might of ye passion be bounden, and may not do so much
harm to the menshen as he was wont to do. But the devil is bounden at certain
times, and he shall be vnbou^den that he may do the more harm to the people with
temptacio^ and trybulacio^ for to assaye them tho that be chosen.

But in the last time of the world, shall the good be very good, and the
evil, shall be very badde. Like ye holy writers show in the last chaptre of
apocalipsis. Tempus prope est qui nocet noceat ad huc et qui i^ sordibus est
sordescat ad huc. et iustus iustificetur, ad huc et qui sanctus est
sanctificetur, ad huc.

The.ij. token.
THe second token, of the four, shall be, as love shall be lost, and no more be
used. Likewise, as the menshen waxen old, and the nature waxes cold in them,
which the Philosopher calls it the little world. Likewise is it of the great
world. who the more comes to the end, The more the love waxes cold i^ her
self. But the heart of a body is ghostly of living in the greatter world. And
shall al hole fail, for it gothe sore to the end of the world. As apostolus
ad hebreos. Qui antiquatur et se nescit prope interitum est. And a man may
now know how that god is served without devotion. And how he is blasphemyd,
and by them sweryng, and al so pull him all a sonder in pieces. And ye may well
know that the love is almost done and is waxen cold, and dried away, but
some be naked, and pray hertely, but they find no help, And they that be
hungery dye for hunger, and have no socoure. The gate of mercy is shytte, the
founteyne of compassyon has shytte her conduytes. And through failed among
his friends, and she shall not be founden before God shall give sentence upon
them that have hunted charity and pacyence out of this world.

The third token.
THe third Token, shall be as al manner of evil and sins, shall be i^ this
world, and the fere of God be put down, and have none thynkyng on him. And
when faithful and pacyence shall not be set by: but all manner of evil shall be
used: and when the me^schen should love with a secret love and care of no man:
but for her own profit. And also we shall be before the end of the world: be
poude and hye shall make much of them self: and shall blaspheme the name of
the Lord, and they shall not care of Father or mother, and than they shall love
flesshely nature more thanne God. As the Apostle in the.ij. Epistle of
Thimotheum.

Therefore let every body remember in them self what people now a days be
living in this world, and look well if this aforesaid things be not now a
days showed and done, and set by no sin. For it is not well possible that
any body might write the great sins that now a days be done Pray we to
God that he will come to his people, that they may do penance before their
departing.

The fourth token.
THe fourth Token, that shall be before the end of ye world, and before the
other.xv. tokens, and before the great orryble day of Dome. And than shall there
be great peruerten and war, and there shall be war in many diverse Lands of
the world, and also among all creatures in this world living. For as Matheus
says in the.xiiij. Chapter. Fighting and wars shall be among us, and also
one body shall arise against the other, and also one king against another, and
also treason shall be in cities and towns, yet for all that they made peace, and
peace shall be throughout the world, and laid down again, and up with war
again, throughout the world: and also the Prince against his commons: and his
commons against him. Also there shall be no clouster of Monks, nor of Nonnes,
yet there shall be full of peruertes contrary one the ocher. And than shall it be
as Iheremias writes i^ his.x. chapter. Vnusquisque se a suo proximo custodiat.
That is for to say Every man keep him of his neighbor or friend: and trust
not in his brother, for one shall show another a fair face, but the heart of
him is full false, And also one brother shall mock that other, and he shall
lay snares and grynnes for him, to begyle him if he may. And tha^ is it
fulfilled like. Messin as the Prophet said, Keep you of, beware you of your
own wife, the which slepeth in your arms all night, for she shall begyle her
own husband. And also the child shall begyle the Father: and the Father the
child: and the daughter the mother: and the mother, the daughter. And also one
brother shall deliver the other to death. And the Father the sone, and the
children the father. And when all these things and peruerten shall be
throughout all the world Than great men and mean men shall look for their own
Synguler wealth, and not for no common wealth, for they shall scrape twenty men's
living, or a hundred, and care not for the Commandments of our Lord Ihesu
christ, saying they him regard not a whyt Than shall it be a Token of the
last Termyne, or end of this world. Other peruerten shall be in the fyrmament:
but commonly it shall be a dear time. not alone in one prouynce, or kingdom, but
throughoute all the world: but it shall be that the earth shall bear none
fruit to our behoufe, or need to live with all. And it shall be also great
earthquakes be against all nature, that there shall fallen down Castles and
howses. And also in the sea and ryuers shall be more peruerten than it has be
before, And the eyer shall be full of corrupcion and venym, thereof shall come great
Pestilence, as well i^ the beests as in the menshen thereof: they shall dye. And
also it shall be thonderynge, and lightening, and great tempests, and wyndes
shall be more peryllous than they were wont to be. And the people shall before
aferde. And likewise as saint Iheronimus has found in the.xv. pryncipall
tokens, they shall be before the dredefull day of Dome, of our Lord Ihesus
christ.

But we know not if these xv. Tokens shall be showed one after another, or if
there shall be any other token shall be showed between. Thereof said saint
Iheronimus, no certain, nor no Doctor, but they put it in the will of our
Lord, but our Lord may therewith do his will, for he is almyghtye.

This translated out of Duche into English, by Iohu^ Dousbrugh.

Imprinted by me Robert Wyer.

ROBERT merchant's monogram WIRE.



