A BRAND, TITIO EREPTA.

On the fifth day of November last, before the Honorable Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council, and the grave Judges of the Law, etc. this Sermon
PREACHED By the Reverend Father in Christ, William, Lord Bishop of Rochester.

Nigra sum, sed formosa filiae Jerusalem. Cant. 1. 4.

LONDON Imprinted by John Windet for Matthew Law. 1607.

To the Kings most Sacred MAJESTY.
GReat Kings have vouchsafed poor presentsfrom mean persons: a poorer or more
base then TITIO, a Brand, a Cole-Brand, never King accepted, because no stayed
Subject durst ever offer it; and yet I must. Not for that I dare do it, yea, I
dare not but do it. For what am I, that I should either gainesay, or delay to
execute the command of so great a Monarch, and my most gracious Master?
Perhaps my obedience in performing your pleasure, will not counter-ballance
this presumption, in fronting it with your Highness Name; because, published it
might have been, and yet not aspired to so glorious a PATRONAGE. If that be
the offense, I humbly crave pardon, (only of your Majesty). For this being a
BRAND, fit matter for fire to work upon, and my case as the Prophetts,
Iaceo inter wentes, I live among men, that are Psa. 37.
set on fire, whose teeth are darts, even those Ignea tela, Ephe. 6: for the
tongue Ephesians. 6
is inflamed by Hell, says Saint James): to whose protection, should I rather
submit it, then to HIS, whose gracious countenance, like unto thar Angels
roscidus flatus, in the midst of the furnace, shall so keep it, that the
most Dan. 3.
fiery spirit shall not touch it to scorch it: Since therefore it pleased your
Majesty, (most dread Sovereign) to command the diuulging thereof, I here in
the duty of a Subject, and in all humility, as becomes a Christian, offer
it to your Highness, wishing that it may answer the report, which those worthy
Personages of great Honor and Wisdom, who were present and heard it,
vouchsafed to afforde it. If your Majesty in the depth of your judgment
approve it, it need not fear the censure of any. For why? I never yet heard*
But I must stay my self, least that your Majesty's due prasyes (such is some
man's hap) be as they are, by many, accounted for vndueflatteries. My prayers I
trust shall not so be; namely, that seeing the Highest King has graunte^d
unto your Majesty, as unto Solomon, a LARGE HEART, replenished with all,
capable of more then Royal Endowmentes, it would please him to increase his
Graces in you, to prolong your days among us, and to give us thankful hearts
for the fruition and affections loyally serviceable to the pleasure of so Wise,
so Learned, so Gracious, so Religious a King, whose unworthy servant I am, even.

Your MAJESTY'S poor Chaplein, VV. ROFFENS.

Non omne quod nigrum est, continuo deforme est. Bern. in Cant.
Zach. 3. 2. Nonne Iste, Titio, ereptus ex igne? Is not This, a Brand, snatched
out of the fire?
GReat deliverances to have perpetual remembrances, both Heather in their
Stories show it usual, and God in Scripture inioynes it necessary. (Cave ne
obliuiscaris, is thrice repeated Deuteronomy. 4.
in one Chapter, concerning the deliverance from Egypt.) And those memorials
were of two sorts, both Mute and Vocal: for Mute, first, those which the
Scripture calls Libros Monumentoru^, Hest. 6. 1. as Chronicles, Hest. 6. 1.
Annals, Ephemerides, and books of record (for Books are dumb
Schoolmasters, say Gellius and Plutarch) secondly, those which the Scripture
calls A^. Gel. Plutarch.
Acervum testem, or Cumulum testimonij, Gen 31 47. Trophaes and Pillars erected
for posterity; whereon Genesis 31. 47.
oftentimes they fastened the name, or manner of their de iuerance, as David
straightly environed by Saul, who by an unexpected message was suddenly pulled
from him, erected a Pillar and called it Petram diuidentem, a stone of
separation, or division, 1. Sa. 23. 28. Thirdly, special days selected for
assemblies, 1. Sam. 23. 28.
either for extraordinary cheer, which the Scripture Deuteronomy. 16. 14. calls
Epulas festiuitatum; or exempt from ordinary work and trade, which the Deuteronomy.
16. 14
Heathen termed Ferias, vacant and idle days; or spent in religious services,
sacrifices, and killing of beasts, such as S. Iac. 5. 6. calls Diem
mactationis: upon which, oftentimes they imposed the Name of Iac. 5. 6.
the Deliverance, as Esa. 9. 4. the day of Madian, signifying the overthrow of
Madian, and the rescue of Esa. 9. 4.
Israel, from their intended spoil. Nor did they use only these dumb
remembrances, but Vocal also: and they were both Artificial, as Amos 6. 5, Vox
psalterij, the voice of the Organ, and all instruments of Amos 6. 5.
Music, which David 2. Sam. 6 5, in one general term calls Ligna
abietum, the wood of fur trees. 2. Sam. 6. 5.
(for even things without life have a voice, says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14. 7.) and
Natural also, as Psalm. 47. 1. 1. Cor. 14. 7 Psalm. 47. 1.
Vox melodia, which S. Paul expresses by particulars, Coll. 3. 16. Psalms and
Hymns and spiritual songs. For with all these, were solemnized the Scripture
Col. 3. 16.
Festiuals, as Psalm. 81. Sing we merrily unto God our strength, make a
cheerful noise to the God of Jacob, take Psalm. 81.
the Psalm, there is Vox melodiae, the voice Natural verse. 1. Bring hither
the Tabret, the merry harp, with the Verse. 1.
lute, blow up the trumpet, there is the voice Instrume^tall, ver. 2. But
these, though they have in them, as S. Paul speaks, virtutem vocis, the
strength of voice, Verse. 2.
1. Cor. 14. 11. working strongly for the time, not upon the senses only, but
even the affections also: 1. Cor. 14. 11
yet because they have not vocem virtutis, a voice of power, (for that God
reserues to his own voice only, Ps. 68. 34. Dabit voci suae vocem virtutis)
therefore, in Psalm. 68. 34.
their feasts they inioined Gods voice also to be heard, by the mouths of his
Ministers; who in those solemnities, not only like the Angel in this Story,
Chap. 1. 13. should utter Debarim tobim, Debarim Zach. 1. 13.
Nehummim, Good words and comfortable: but, being masters of the Assemblies,
so Solomon calls the^, Eccles. 12. 11. their speech should have in it,
especially at Eccl. 12. 11
such times, both Clauos and Stimulos; Nails, fastening in the most obdurate
and forgetful minds, a deep impression, with an horror of the enuyroning
danger: and goades, exciting and provoking the dullest affections to praise and
thanksgiving for the danger escaped, for the rescue made. Which very course
our Church and State has continued, point devise, for this dates Memorial,
more then any other (it being more extraordinary then any other) even that,
which Psalm. 81, is for that solemn Psalm. 81.
feast ordained and performed; both statum diem, a set day whereon to meet,
verse. 3. and statutam legem a statute Law, which inioyneth the meeting verse. 4.
Verse. 3.
With us an Act of Parliament for this day, prescribing Verse. 4.
in some sort, the manner of the celebration (suitable to the custom of each
several place) both with mute and dumb Memorials, as ringing, firing,
feasting, etc. and with vocal also, singing of Psalms, sounding of Organs,
winding of Cornets, with other instruments: and, which is the chief of all,
Gods voice to be heard by the preaching of his word, that so in the Assemblies
of the righteous, there may concur that which David commends in the
Tabernacles of the righteous Psalm. 118. 15, Vox Iubilationis, and vox salutis,
The voice of melody, to express our joy and Psalm. 118. 15
thankfulness: but withal, Vox salutis, a vioce which may describe both our
Temporal safety from the deadly blow in this life: and vox salutis, which may
help also to the furtherance of our Eternal safety for a better life. To the
effecting of both which, I have chosen this scripture, Is not This, a Brand,
snatched out of the fire?


A base subject, ye may think, and a dry matter to Zach. 3. 2.
work upon [a Brand, a cole brand] yet as base as it is, most of the ancient
Fathers make our Savior Christ this Brand (represented here in the person of
Ichoshua) scorched with malicious reproaches, and such devilish pursuites
followed, which in the end wrought his death; yet was raised again, as
snatched out of his grave, and the fiery jaws of Satan, when he thought he
had him surest, to have devoured him. And the best of the latter Divines, make
the Church of Christ this Brand, described in the Canticles to be Black,
persecuted and in the worlds sight Cant. 1. 4.
burnt up; yet unexpectedly rid from them all, and raised by the Christian
Emperors, beyond all hope. But if by Theological application to our
spiritual Danger, who were by nature and sin Brandes, ready for Hell fire:
and our spiritual Redemption by Christ, dispatching us so strangely from that
fire, I should discourse hereupon, it might so be made vox salutis, and
meditations framed for our souls good. But by Moral resemblance of the
literal story to this Days occasion, I could choose, as I thought none more
fit. First, for the vicinitie to the danger 1
intended, in the word Titio; We that were appointed to that massacre, as fit
for it, as near to it, as the Brand for, or to the fire. 2. For the matter and
nature of the designed murder, in the word [ignis] 2
a flagrant, a speedy, an impartial combustion (only the quality of the
fire here wants: but that is no marvel, for in Scripture we read of Gods
fire and thunder, but these Diuel-thunder-claps of fire, and powder, the Holy
Ghost never heard of, for if the Devil in the Bible raged with thunder, it was
ignis de Coelo, as in Jobs case we see, Job. 1. But this underground fire,
Job. 1.
this Barrel-thunder, the Scripture-diuels had no skill of.) 3. The manner of
the rescue, that is in the 3
word [Ereptus] a powerful and an incredible deliverance. 4. Nonne? The
memorial or Sermon 4
made upon it (for every period of Gods own speech, (as this here is) is a well
furnished Sermon) wherein 3. things are obseruable. 1. A commiseration that Iste
should be Titio, such Great and Excellent men should be Brandes, the Objects,
the Subjects of such fiery designements. 2. An Increpation of Satan and his
accomplices, that is, in the word Ignis; their malice such, as not content till
Titio be Torris, the Brand be set on fire to be brent to ashes. 3. A Vine
description of the strange both Danger and Delivery, with a word, as well of
deep Impression, Nonne ignis? was it not a fearful danger? as of high
admiration, Nonne ereptus? was not the deliverance strange? So that every way
it fits our case, upon this day, in the chief circumstances: 1. For the time,
the fury of Satan enraged, this combustion engined, (Satan a dextris, ver. 1.)
here, when the message was returned Chap. 1. 11. Ecce omnis terra habitatur and
quiescit: with Verse. 1.
us, when our Land was multiplied, and we had peace Zach. 1. 11.
as well within our own borders, as with foreign nations. 2. Forth persons;
here Zerobabel the Prince of the people, and Iehoshua the head of the Priests:
and ver. 8. Socij vtriusque, the chief States men (So Ezra calls them) and
assistants to them both: with us, Verse. 8.
the head of our Nation, the hope of his succession, the chief of our
Priests, and the most principal of Choice for Honor and Worship in the whole
body of the Realm. 3. Their Escape here, so strange, that they are entitled
verse. 8. Viri prodigiosi, or portendentes, Monsters rather then men: Ours, so
miraculous, Verse. 8.
that it was portenti simile, rather to be wondered at, then credited: In so
much, that our selves were affected, as they here at their rescue from Babylon,
Ps. 126. 1. Facti sumus sicut somniantes, we were like men in a Dream, we
could not tell whether we had Psalm. 126. 1.
escaped or no, the Plot was so fearful, the Rescue so strange. 4. Their
danger escaped, Fornax Ignea, a fiery furnace (so is this Captivity of
Babylon called, Ezech. 22.) Ours, Fornixigneus, a fiery Vault, which Ezech. 22.
would have caused both a present Orbity, and a future Captivity. Behold, says
S. James, 3. 5. how great a thing a Iac. 3. 5.
little fire kindles: and here you may behold, how much and fit matter
Titio, a Colebrand affords. But because this scripture is a piece of a
Dialogue, between Jehovah and Satan, who were the principal Actors in this
encounter. I will observe first, Jehovah his wisdom, in permitting that Isti,
such great men as Iehoshua here, should be Brandes, a matter so combustible,
fit fuel for fire. 2. Satan his malice, that he would have these Titiones in
igne, these Brandes set on fire. 3. Jehovah both his mercy and power, 1. in
the Delivery: 2. in the manner thereof, Eripiendo, even at the very pinch, and
in the extremest hazard to deliver.

Of these parts that I may speak to Gods glory, and to the furtherance of our
thankfulness unto his The prayer.
Divine Majesty, I shall desire you to join with me in humble and hearty
prayers unto our God so glorious, unto our Father so gracious. In which Prayer,
etc.

IT is a Soloecophanes an appearance of ill construction in Grammar, that
[Iste] should be joined with [Titio,] and as great an incongruity in common
sense, that Men should be Brandes: yet he which called himself Ashes (and he
was no less man then Abraham, Genesis 18. 27.) aiming at Genesis 18. 27.
the element whereunto his grave should reduce him, argued that the whole
course of his life to his grave, was but a Brand burning, flaming, in the end
to be consumed to Ashes. And no other it is in the opinion of David, for my
days (says he) vanish like smoke, and my bones are dried up, sicut Cremium,
as it were a Brand, Psalm. 102. 4. Neither is this any disparagement Psalm. 102.
4.
for man to be thus meanly resembled; for a Brand is a thing substantial, and
of it there is some use: but, as if there were neither substance, nor profit
in man, David asks, Psalm. 8. 5. Lord, quid Ps. 8. 5.
est homo? What is man? and answers himself in his own voice, Psalm. 144.
5. Homo est nihilum quid, Ps. 144. 5.
Man verily is a thing of naught; and therefore the holy Ghost vouchsafes not
every ordinary man the honor to be called Titio a Brand, which is in scripture
attributed to none, but either to whole States (as unto Jerusalem, Amos, 4.
11.) or unto great Princes, Amos. 4. 11.
(as Esa: 7, 4. and in this place [Iste] Such as in this Es. 7. 4.
next Chap. ver. 14 are called Filii Olei, Zerobabel and Iehoshua, Princes and
Priests anointed: and qui Dominatoriterrae Zach. 4. 14
assistunt, Counselors and Statesmen which supply Gods place, execute his
laws, and promote his cause' For what is in Man, as he is a Man, that can
procure an other man's envy or treachery? Have they not all one father, says
the Prophet, Mich. 2. 11? If there be a general equality, there Mich. 2. 11.
is no matter for Envy to work upon. Were all the Trees in the forest
Figge-trees, or O lives, or Vines, the Cedars of Lebanon need not fear that
same ignem de Rhamno, Iud. 9. 15. that fire out of the Bramble to devour them.
Therefore as a Brand, by reason Iud. 9. 15.
of the composure thereof, being partim ignea, partim lignea, is more
attractiue of flame, more capable of fire, then either a green stick never
scorcht or a perfect cole thorough burnt: So men, which never were eminent
either in place, or quality; or having been, have lost both: are not so subject
either to Satan's rage, or the malignity of his instruments, as they which are
excellent in either. It is not every stone that procures offense, but if it be
Lapis angularis, Psalm. 118. 21. a corner stone, In quo tota domus Psalm. 118. 21
inclinata recumbit, that is lapis offendiculs, the stone that causes offense,
Romans 9. 22. Dig out that Romans 9. 22.
stone, at least dig at it. Not every mothers child is so narrowly watched by
the Devil, but if the Woman clothed with the Sun, travel with a Child, that
shall govern the whole earth with his scepter, him Rufus Draco, the red fiery
Dragon, will eye at a pinch, that he may devour him, Apoc. 12. 4. To keep our
selves Apoc. 12. 4.
to this Metaphor, if it be Vdh, an ordinary Brand, that is good for nothing
but smoke, God almighty himself will say, it is not worthy regarding, Esa. 7.
4. Esa. 7. 4. Ari. Mont. in Zach.
But if it be Audh, as Arias Montanus reads it here, (the letters all one in
both, but this uttered in a Dipthong) a master Brand, such an one, as it seems
by him they use in Spain, and we here, (where there wants an iron forke)
for ordering the fire, to stir it if it burn not fresh, to lay up the wood
if it be feign, to remove that which is superfluous, to remble the oven to
try whether it be hot or no, etc. As such a Brand is very subject to catch a
flame, by reason of the often employments in the fire: So great Men, who by their
place are to order both Church and State, and by their office must dissipare
Mala, Prou. 20. 26. reprove, censure, direct, execute, etc. are more obnoxious
Pro. 20. 26.
to be traduced and scortcht by the fiery spirits of Satan and his Impes, then
those whom Prou. 22. 29. Solomon calls Chashukkim, Men of mean Prou. 22. 29
birth, of obscure place, of no imploymentes. As he that walks in the suune,
cannot shun a black shadow to accompany him, whereas he thatsits in the
dark, yeeldes no reflection for encounter. We may see in the chief Branch
(for so our Savior is called verse. 8.) how it was made a Brand: so long as
Zach. 3. 8.
he was at his supposed Fathers occupation, Marc. 6. 3. Nonne hic Faber? and
was a Carpenter employed, (...), as Justin Martyr describes him, Just. Mart.
making of Bedsteads and Ploughes, on he went without any impeachment: but no
sooner was he baptized, crowned with the Holy Ghost, and testified from heaven
to be his fathers delightful son, which was Mat. 3. 17, but presently in the
very next words Mat, 3. 17.
Tunc ductus est, he was even then carried into the wilderness to he tempted by
the Devil. And this is the case in private persons (as true Christians by
experience find in themselves) so long as a man gives his members over to
unrighteousness, to serve sin, on he shall go without any encounter of
Conscience, either monendo to forewarne him before he commit sin, to say to
himself with Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. Quo-modo hoc faciam? How should I commit so
Genesis 39. 9.
great a sin? or mordendo to reprove him when he has done it, with the
Prophets, Quid feci? Ier. 8. 6, What have I done? But on he shall go, as a man
without Ier. 8. 6.
sense, to commit sin even with greedines. But Ephesians. 4. 19.
if once the spirit of God strike at his heart, as that voice to S. Paul Act.
9, Quid me persequeris? Why Act. 9.
do thou crucify afresh the son of God, with thy wicked and unrepentant
life? If the fire of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of Regeneration be effectual in
him, and make him to renounce sin, and to reform his life; then goes the Devil
to work (Satan erit a dextris) both without and within* without, setting upon
him those whom S. Peter caleth (...), 1. Pet. 4. 4. that shall 1. Pet. 4. 4.
howte at him as a strange thing: What, th eluxurious branch thus scorched?
that young gallant a mortified convert? Within, that which S. Paul calls
Legem Romans 7. 22.
membrorum, Romans 7. 22, his Lust and concupiscence rebelling, and boiling, and
provoking him more then before, making him as a man distraught: insomuch that
v. 19, what he would he cannot do, and what he would not, that he shall do:
yea, which is worse, if Satan see Ver. 19.
him to be Titio a Brand, indeed capable of flame, inclinable to sorrow, he
will put fire to the cole, and a sorrowing he will set him, till he be burnt
up and devoured with sorrow, 2. Cor. 2. 7. These are Satan's Ethikes in the
private course of particular men, and 2. Cor. 2. 7.
such as are his Politiques also in the public government of States: for who
are his Brandes there, whom he endeavors to set on fire? We will go no
further then this Story. 1. Zorobabel the Head of the people, Chap. 4. 6,
Kings and Princes: Zach. 4. 6.
2. Iehoshua, ver. 1, of this Chap. the chief Priest, Ca. 3. 1. Verse. 8.
Church Governors: 3. Socii vtriusque, ver. 8. Counselors of State, Chief
Officers both of Church and Realm; these are the Brandes thus fitted for the
fire. But what is the attractiue, to draw on the flame of Satan's envy, of
Satanical treachery, to consume these more then others? we shall find them
here also, two in number, 1. inward in themselves, their purpose and endeavor
to build the Temple, to restore Gods worship, Cap. 4. 10: Establishment of
true Religion, Zach. 4. 10.
a violent attractiue of Treasonable plots. 2. Outward in God, both that Murus
igneus, Cap. 2. 5, in Zach. 2. 5.
that he is a wall of fire, to enuiron the State from Tatnai and Sanballat,
Nehem. 4. the dangerous counterplotters and disturbers of the work: as also
Nahem. 4. 1
that same pupilla oculi, verse 8. Gods loving favor, [Hee that touches you,
touches the apple of mine eye:] Zach. 2. 8.
Nothing so enrageth Satan and his coraplices, as Gods special protection of a
Nation, and his tender care over the Governors thereof. So ye see who are the
Brands, and the causes, which so expose them to the flame. A word of each of
these for explanation, and so forward.

First, for Zorobabel, the King and Sovereign: It is no marvel, that to whom
God has given the Principality of our Estates, to them S. Paul would have us
give the Principality of our Prayers, 1. Tim. 2. 2: [Pray for all men, first,
for Kings, etc.] For if S. James rule be good, Iam. 5. 13. (...); Is 1. Tim.
2. 2. Iac. 5. 13.
a man disquiet in mind? Let him pray; Surely, Kings have need both
continually to pray, and to be prayed for, sithence that even to be a King, is
the minds continual disquietnes. I speak not of evil Kings, either usurpers
or impious, who have their torment within them, an affrighting, and an
affrighted conscience, whieh like a cursed wife, (as Plutarch out of the Poet
compares it) (...), burns without Plutarch ex Hesiod.
a Brand, inwardly and inuisibly, or, which is the Prophets Metaphor, Esa 57.
20. Quasi mare seruens, Esa. 57. 20.
like the boiling sea, works and rages, though there be no wind stirring;
that is, says Solomon, are in a continual fear, though there be no cause
emergent, Prou. 28. 1: But even of good Kings, and they most rightfully
possessed: not Heathen only, Pro 28.
who having felt the hazardes of a Crown, made this their conclusion,
Simulista posuit Conditor Mundi Deus, Seneca.

Odium and regnum-
That hatred and fear, are inseperable attendantes upon a Diadem, which make
it no happy (though a beautiful) attire, as Philip of Macedon said: But
Philip Maced.
scripture Kings, and the best of them, David, at least one in his person and
place, Psalm. 89. 39. Posuisti Psalm. 89. 39.
firmamentum formidinem, the place I thought surest, there I find most fear.
And this is one misery, says Solomon. Eccles: 10. 9, which I have seen, Quod
homo Eccles. 10, 9
homini dominatur in malum suum, that a man's souerainety procures his own
misery. Particulars will demonstrate this. Is a King prosperous in his reign,
and are his Territories enlarged? it will be Salomo^s 1. Reg. 11 21.
case, 1. King. 11. 21, Hadad and Rezan his neighbor Princes will envy and
malign it; and so there is fear of an Invasion. admits he to his secrets,
some not popularly applauded; or disco^tents his subjects with some boon
denied? there is Rehoboams case, 1. Reg. 12, Jeroboam one of his great Lords
will make 1 Reg. 12.
a great head against him, either to surprise his person, til his favorites be
removed, or rent the State by a division, till the request be satisfied, and
there is fear of a Rebellion. Is there an heir apparent to succeed? It may
then be David's case, that his own dear Absalon shall steal the hearts of his
subjects from him, 2. Sam. 15. 6, (for many love to adore the 2. Sam. 15. 6.
Sun rising) and then is there fear of a strong conspiracy, (so it is there
called verse 12,) for no insurrection so dangerous, as where the next of blood
is chief: at Verse. 12.
least, it may be Isaac his case (for he had within his limittes, a regal
authority, as a Patriarch) that the elder son shall think his father lives
to long, Genesis 27. 41. and then every fit of a fever must be Genesis 27. 41.
a proclamation of death. Is the Successor uncertain, either through orbity,
as in the case of Ochoziah, 2. c Chro. 22. 9. Non spes vltra de stirpe: or non
apparane 2. Chro. 22. 9.
in a Multiplicity? There is an other case of David's, 1 Reg. 1. 5. Some Adoniah
or other will band for the crown, before the breath be out of the oulde 1.
Reg. 1. 3.
man's body. Yea, even in the best estate, and when he is most at ease, if he
mean to sit sure, his grauest Counselors will tell him, that he must be
Seruus populo huic, 1, Reg. 12. 7. First, Seruus a servant, 1. Reg. 12. 7
and that is no glorious estate; then Seruus populo, a servant to the people,
and that is no stately service; thirdly, populo huic, to this querulous people,
and in that service can be no contentment: for then, let him conclude a peace
with a Prince of an other Religion, it will prove Iehosophats case, 2. Chro.
19. 2. and be said, as unto him, Would thou help the wicked, and love them
that hate the Lord? Does he, upon just 2. Chro. 19. 2.
reasons, either break the peace, with whom he had concluded it; or be at
enmity, upon great injuries offered, with a King whom the people approve, or
trade withal, whereby, either charges for war are levied, or their traffic
hindered? then it will be Moses case, Exodus 5. 21, Videat Dominus and iudicet,
Exodus 5. 21.
The Lord look upon you and judge, for you have made our savor to stink
before Pharao, and before his servants, and ye have put a sword in their hands
to slaie us. To these fires, to these fears and disasters, is this
master-Brand exposed; in so much, that some Kings have auowed it, if Men knew
the hazzards annexed to a Crown, they would not stoop to take it up, if it
lay upon the ground.

We now come to Iehoshua, the second Brand, men of government in the Church. As
the case stands now, neither their eminences, nor their pre-eminence such,
as it need fear any danger of riddance by death: and yet Ierem. 11. 19, there
is a plot laid to Ier. 11. 19.
poison the Prophet; and Act. 23. 12, there was a Conspiracy, with a vow, to
kill S. Paul. But there is a twofold Act. 23. 12.
fire, which hazzardeth this Brand; the first, that Iud. 9. 20. Ignis
Shechemiticus, the fiery spirits of Diui Iud. 9. 20. Verse. 23.
sion and separation, which verse. 23. the Holy Ghost says, is laid to, and
kindled by an evil spirit: the other, that in the 2. Sam. 16. 3. Ignis
Shemeiticus, fiery tongus 2. Sam. 26. 3
and reprochful contumelies, which David Psalm. 120. 4 for the scortching heat
thereof, calls carbones Iuniperi, Psalm. 120. 4
the coals of Juniper; the vulgar translates it Carbones desolatorios, a fire
which lays waste a man's good name. But what is in these Brands, that makes
them, as Solomon speaks, Carbones ad prunas, Prou. Pro. 26, 21.
25. 21? thus combustible, thus attractiue of these flames? for ought I can
learn in scripture, two. Scientia Prou. 26. 21
and prelatura. we will go no further then the first verse of this Chapter;
Iehoshua is first a priest, and secondly an High priest: for the first, the
priests lips must preserve knowledge, Malach. 2. 7. Et in multa scientia, multa
est indignatio, says Solomon, Eccles. 1. 18. Much Malach. 2. 7 Eccles. 1. 18.
knowledge breeds much indignation. Now Indignation is a fire, says the
Prophet, it will vex the party whom it malignes, as fire vexes the raw
flesh in the Psalm. 58. 9.
rosting or boiling. Si aut fiscellam iunco texerem, aut palmaru^ folia
complicarem, aut sudore vultus panem comederem; were I a Basket-maker, or a
garland winder, or of any base trade that should make me sweat for the bread I
eat, says S. Hierom, Nemo me morderet, Hieron.
nemo inuideret, No man would malign me, no man would traduce me; but now,
that I give my self to the study and interpretation of the Scriptures, I am a
Divine, a Writer, a Preacher, Me obelescis notant, I am scortcht coleblack with
their oblisques, and obloquies. And certainly so it is, the meanest mechanical
tradesman amongst us, inioyes his vocation, with less envy and regret, then
the Minister does (for, eue^ to be a priest, is reproach enough it self, in our
times.) Secondly he is an High priest; his superiority and Degree draws on
the first fire, for thither issues the fiery blaste of Corah and his
accomplices, You take too much upon you, Moses and Aaron, ought there not to be
a paritie in the priestbood? Nomb. 16.
And this fire as you know, and we feel, has set Rotam nostra generationis,
as S. James speaks, into a Combustion. This S. Paul himself seems to Iac.
3. 6.
acknowledge, for no sooner had the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2. Cor. 11. 28
11. 28. declared his Prelacie, namely, that he was encumbered with the care of
all the Churches; but presently, in the next verse, as if he had been in the
fire already, he cries out, Quis scandalizatur et ego non vror? Who is
offended and I burn not? which, because it cannot be understood of scandals
active, (for S. Paul was very wary of them, as appears, 1. Cor. 8. 13.) 1.
Cor. 8. 14
must be meant of scandals passive, offenses unjustly taken, for which S. Paul
must smart, by the scortching calumnies of false brethren: and doubtless so it
is, all the errors and abuses in the Church are laid upon the Prelates and
Governors of the same. Is the Clergy ignorant or dissolute? surely, the
Bishops are too blame; for like old Elie 1. Sam. 2, through want 1. Sam. 2. 17
of executing discipline, they suffer Ophni and Phineas, the inferior priests,
to make the Lords service and Religion abominable. Are they severe in
punishing the refractarie and disobedient? the Bishops fault, it is the tyranie
of Diotrephes, 3. Ioh. ver. 10. Who loves to have the preemine^ce, and thrust
the godly brethren out 3. Ioh. ve. 10
of the Church. Discharge they any public service imposed by authority? they
are Carnalists, Time-seruers, Me^-pleasers, Balamists, preaching for
Preferme^ts. 2. Pet. 2. 15.
Thus are we scortched as black as any cole, and as the Apostle speaks 1.
Cor. 4. 9, as men appointed to death (that is, as Brandes prepared for the
fire) 1. Cor. 4. 9.
Spectaculum facti sumus, we are made a blazing spectacle unto the world: and
though, says the Prophet, we neither offer, nor do wrong, Ier. 15. 10, Omnes
tamen maledicunt nobis, every contumelious mouth Ier. 15. 10.
is open against us. Neither may the third sort, [Sacij vtriusque] escape this
branding fire. For, seeing it is Gods prerogative above all earthly Kings, to
manage his affairs without the advice of others; Quis enim Consiliarius eius?
says the Prophet, Esa. 40. 13, And that even the wisest Kings (unless they
Esa. 40. 13.
will, as Pliny said of Domitian, have elinguem Curiam, Plin. Iun.
a Senate for pomp not for direction, but do al alone) will and must have some
to communicate their secrets of state withal: let these look to it; for if the
counsels they give, whether in spiritu vertiginis, as the Counselors of Zoan,
Esa. 19. 14, misled Esa. 19. 14.
by error; or in spiritu veritatis, upon good grounds and to very good
purpose, as Ahitophels to David, whose counsels were as the Oracles of God: 2.
Sam. 16. 23: If, I say, they have not success to the general expectation and
wish, upon them must the 2 Sa, 16. 23.
whole burden of the event alight; All errors in the state, either personal
for the King, or general for the Realm, heaped upon them to their reproach,
because it is supposed, and the spirit of God seems to implie it, 2. Chro. 22.
4, that the Sovereigns actions, 2 Chro. 22. 4
are according to his Counselors directions. If therefore in that honorable
rank, there be either a Mecenas or an Agrippa, some one or two, to whom the
Prince imparteth (...), the most inward, weighty, and secret affairs of the
State, as Augustus to them two, they are sure (of all the rest) to be most
Dion.
Branded and traduced, (for Plutarches reason, of States-mens ieoperdies, I will
not mention, Plutaer.
because I am persuaded, and know there are none such with us. vz. that men of
great employment in State matters, being (...), instructors and maintainers of
disloyalties and treacheries, by their Otacousts and Intelligencers in other
king. domes, are themselves hazarded with the same instructions from other
States. Thus much of the word Titio; wherein ye see, how men of place and
Quality become Brandes.

We now come ad Ignem, to the fire; But in the passage betwixt the Brand and
the Fire, these 2. words give me occasion to observe out of the first verse,
the difference of affection toward these parties, between Iehouam
ostendentem, and Satanam Zach. 3. 1.
stantem. God shows them Titiones, scorched and made black; but Satan
tells Jehovah, that a Brand is made to be burnt, and therefore to the fire
with them. Sed increpet te Jehovah, sath God himself, verse Verse. 2.
2. The Lord rebuke thee Satan: which makes good the distinction between Gods
temptation and the Devils. Jehovah is content that men (especially of such high
place and worth) should pass through the fire, and be tried with hazardes of
danger and obloquies of speech: but it shall be Jobs fire, Job. 30. 30. ignis
denigrans, not denorans, like the making Job. 30. 30.
of a Brand, black't in the outward part, but the inside scarce touched: For
though Is quisoris est, says S. Paul. 2. Cor. 14. 16, our outside be scorcht,
yet 2. Cor. 14. 16.
qui intus est, our inward man is renewed day by day. which is a point of high
wisdom in God, because these, either proditorious devises, or prodigious
plots, or malignant contumelies and imputations should be unto them, as that
same (...), be it what it was, unto S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12. 7. the Angel of Satan
2. Cor, 12. 7
to keep them, least, as his high Revelations, so their sublime and commanding
places, should hoaue them up to a surquedrie in themselves, a forgetfulness of
God, an oppression to their underlings. For first, if al Kings could record
the last part of the Queen of Saba her acclamation, 1. Reg. 10. 9, and remember
that God has placed them in their thrones, to do equity 1. Reg. 10. 9
and righteousness, as well as the first part of her admiration, verse 4. 5, the
state of their Courts, the statelines of their palaces, the multitude and
order of Verse. 4. 5.
their servants, the choice and charge of their diet: this schooling or rather
scortching them by mallalents, and disastrous fears, were not so necessary.
But seeing that some of them can too readily proclaim with the King of Egypt,
Esa 19. 11, Filius Sapientum Esa. 19, 11,
Ego, ego filius Regum antiquorum their Regal descent, their Royal
indowments; And that of Salomons, Eccles 8. 3: Omne quod voluerit faciet Rex,
their unlimited authority and prerogatives, and that, verse 4: Nec Eccles, 1,
3. Verse. 4.
potest quisquam dicere quare ita facis? their uncontrollable commandes, their
power paramount; And that of Nebuchednezar, Dan. 4. 27, Is not this Great
Babel? etc. The extension of their territories, the magnificence Dan, 4. 27.
of their buildinges, and the affluence of their wealth: It pleases therefore
this our Jehovah to hazard them, either in their persons, or in their States,
with some dangers, that they may acknowledge with the Prophet, Psalm. 82. 7,
Though they be Gods in Ps. 81. 7.
dignity and place, yet that Princes may fall and die like other men. He was
a King (and a famous one) Psa. 30. 6
that said and sung it, Psalm. 30, 6. Ego dixi in abundantia mea non mouebor in
aeternum, I said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy
goodness have made my mountain so strong; vz. given me victory over mine
enemies, stablishment in my throne, peace within mine own boorders, fidelity
of my Subjects, and children of my loins for succession: but presently ver.
7. auertisti faciem tuam, some extremity or other attached him, and then he
changes Verse. 7.
his tune, Et factus sum conturbatus, and what profit is there in my blood [in
sanguinibus] to be borne a King, or to be a father of Kings, being thus
continually exposed, and subject to such fears and dangers? The like is
Jehovah his trial of Governors, subordinate to Princes, but chief both in
Church and State: for the first, there is a fear, it seems by S. Paul, 1.
Tim. 3. 6, That Church-prefermentes will 1. Tim. 3. 6.
make men proud for knowledge, as a quill (...), 1. Cor. 8. 1, blows up the
cheeks, and makes some 1. Cor. 8. 1
men look, and speak big: and Authority joined withal (...), puffes up their
minds, 1. Tim. 6. 4, and like 1. Tim. 6. 4.
that ventus Typhonicus, Act: 27. 14, makes them bluster, and carry themselves
like a tempest, that whereas Act. 27. 14.
they are set over their Ministers to be Fathers unto them, by advise to direct
them, with love to censure them, they do, which is S. Peter's word, 1. Pet. 1.
Pet. 5. 3
5. 3, (...), dominere like Tyrants over their Clergy; yea, which is S.
Paul's, Coloss. 2. 18. (...), lead them in triumph, as if Collos 2. 18
they had gotten them in conquest, and for a spoil, keeping them rather in
awe, then order, and in a servile fear, rather then a reverent awe: but if to
knowledge and authority wealth accrueth, that (...), 2. Cor. 4. 6. blindes
them, either lulling them 2. Cor. 4. 6. Mat. 15. 14.
in idleness, that they become blind guides through ignorance: or hood-winkes
them to be blind Censurers, not willing to see offenses for gifts and
rewards. Deu. 19. 14.
And therefore it pleases God, to let them pass through the fire, either of
some reproachful Shemei (for the tongue is a fire, says S. Iac. 5. 6.) to revile
their persons: or some unnatural Cham, to reveal Iac. 3. 9.
their turpitudes, or some Yelping Rhetorculists, to cry Mart. Mar in Epist.
Mar. Iun. 2. Cor. 12. 21
them down into Premuniries; or which was S. Paul's fear in himself, 2 Cor.
12. 21, God himself will abase them among the people, that it shall break
their hearts to see that, which S. Paul complained of in the same Chapter,
verse 15, their much care returned Verse. 15.
with little love, their labors many, but fruitless and unprofitable.

And if Socii Zorobabel, Kings attendantes, and Officers of State, had not
some fiery trials to pass, perhaps, as they have the Queen of Sabaes
blessing, 1. Reg. 10. 8. Happy are thy servants which stand ever 1. Reg. 10. 8.
before thee (for it is a blessing of God to stand before princes in daily
attendance and service, and was wont to be the reward of diligence, Prou. 22.
29, not a gift of favor) Pro. 22. 29.
So, their behavior may be such, that (as the taskmasters under Pharao, not
caring how they vex the subject, so the Prince may be enriched, Exodus 5. 10,)
the people shall curse them: for when Exo. 5. 10.
the wicked are in authority, populus gemit, Prou: 29. 2. and their groans ost
times break out into execrations. Many therefore, says Solomon, do affect
Pro. 19. 2.
the face of the Ruler, that is, to be his favorites and officers, Sed iudicium
a Domino egreditur singulorum, Pro. 29. 26, but God has aiudgement for every
one of the^, Ibid. ver. 29
either to restrain them from oppressing, or punish them for oppressing.

Thus far goes Jehovah with his fire. Now we come to Satan's, for they both
use fire in their executions: but as the Greek Fathers elegantlie distinguish
upon 1. Pet. 1. 7: Gods fire is (...), 1. Pet. 1. 7. Zach. 139
ignis adprobationem. In the 13. of this Prophesi e, 9. ver: Vram eos sicut
vritur argentum, I will try them in the fire like as silver is tried. The
devils is (...) Ignis ad perditionem, a consuming, a devouring fire: for it is
well observed by Gregory, that nihil Satana^ satiat, nisi animam sauciet, nay,
nisi animam tollat: the Greg. in Job, 1
Devil is not satisfied, unless he wound the soul, nay unless he take away
the life. The ground thereof S. Barnard tells us, is Envy, bonis quae nos
facere, quae nos habere videt, inuidet. His envy of Adams Bern. in Cant.
happiness in Paradise, made him tempt Eve to sin, but his end was to have
kilde them both; for taking hold of that threate, Morte morieris, it he
wrought upon, and at that he aimed, which made our Savior, John 8. 44. to
term him a murderer from the beginning. In which case he uses Ioh. 8. 44.
a shrewde policy: for though he would not care, if all the men in the
world were on a light fire, yet, if he epsy that there be Titiones, some
whom God (for best reasons known to himself) does afflict, hazard, or
endaunger, he will not be quiet, but as in this place, stare a dextris, and
still be Ver. 1.
urging God to set these Brands a flaming, to consume them: you see his course
in Jobs case, if God give leave for impouerishing of him, he will add for
killing him. and skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for
his life, says the Devil, Job, 2, 4: Job. 2. 4.
yea, God himself in this very story did see it, and acknowledge Zach. 1. 15.
it, Cap. 1. 15? Ego iratus sum parum, ipsi vero adiuuerunt in malum, I was
angry but a little, and they helped forward the affliction, that is, I made
them Brandes; suffered them to be scorcht in the fire, brought them into
captivity, but Satan and his instruments the Babylonians, not content with
their thraldom, would have kept them in, utterly to have consumed them. Marry
of all other, these Brandes, Zerobabel, Iehoshua and their friends he
maligneth eue^ to death, because they are the mainest enemies unto him, and
his: and therefore for Kings, he and they are affected like them, who in the
19. of Luke verse 14: said, Nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this man to
reign over us. first, if they might Luc. 19. 14.
have their minds, it should be nolumus regnari, they would have no King at
all, because vbi non est gubernator, says Solomon, where there is none to
govern, Prou. 11. 14, the license to sin is general; Anarchy Pro. 11. 14.
lets loose the reins to all impiety; and men shall do whatsoever is good
in their own eyes, as in Iud. 17. 1. And that is it which Satan intends, for
license Iud. 17, 1.
inlargeth his territory. 2. Nolumus hunc regnare, if he be such a King as
that parable describes, Luc. 19. 24.
austerus home, a severe man, taking a strict account of his subjects, such a
one as ioynes David's practice to Salemo^s judgment, whose opinion is, that
wicked men are an abomination unto the King, Prou. 16. 12: and that, therefore,
a wise King will either banish them, or put them to the wheel, Prou. 20 Pro.
16. 12 Pro. 20. 26.
26: And David made it good by his practice, Psalm. 101. Io In matutino,
speedily will I destroy all the wicked Psalm. 101. io.
of the land, and root them out from the city of the Lord: then no marvel,
if Satan's Soldiers say unto such a King as their Captain spoke unto the King
of Kings, Quid nobis and ttibi? Mat. 8. 29. What have we to do with thee? or
do as he did, never Mat. 8. 29,
lin plotting and engining, til he had brought him to death. A good King must
expect to be destroyed before his time, if he seek to destroy the wicked in
their time, especially, if he be as Zorobabel here, A temple-builder, a
religious King, one that endeavors to restore and retain Religion in her first
purity. Who so reads the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, shall see Ezra. Nehem.
how these very parties were incountered, and endaungered. But, put case it be
a Monarchy, and there must be a King, and he which is, no severe exactor:
yet Nolumus hunc regnare, if Satan and his, may have their will. One shall not
hold long; because, as in the change of the Person, there may be a change of
Religion; so in States unsettled, as in often changes they must needs be,
dissolutenes of life, Atheism in opinion, breach of all laws, both Gods and
man's, goed unregarded and unpunished; for Satan knows it is best fishing in
troubled water. And no other, but utter extirpation intendes he, for Iehoshua
the Prelates and Clergy: for, that the ministry is made the worlds disdain,
and the Chief in that order, as S. Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 4. 14, are accounted
(...), the offals of the laystall, 1. Cor. 4. 14.
the dust of the Smithes forge, loathsome and contemptible, yet, if they live,
their doctrine may annoy both him and his: and therefore, though he have
leave, to be spiritus mendax, 1. Reg. 22. 22, to seduce all the Prophets,
four hundred at once, 1. Re. 22, 22.
that is nothing with him, so long as either Michaiah that speaks truth
unfeignedly, or Elias that reproues sin impartially, do live and breath. John
Baptist, though in prison, may do good with his preaching, and therefore the
best service is to have Mat. 14.
his head in a platter. And if Satan might have been a Lion in the Den, Daniel
should not have so escaped as he did. Divinity is the souls physic, if then
it may be effected, which is Ier. 8. 22, that there shall be no Physician in
Gilead, none to recover the Ier. 8. 22.
health of Gods people: as the Psalmist speaks, psalm. 74. 9, that there be
not one Prophet left, not one that Psa. 4. 9.
understands any more, that is it, which this Destroyer desires, for where
Prophecy (1.) preaching fails, says Solomon, Pro. 29. 18. the people lie
open for a pray unto his teeth. Pro. 19. 18.


None other end does his malice aim at, for these Socii Zorobabel, great
Counselors of state, because (thinks he) though Solomon be dead, yet so long
as his grave Senators and Counselors do live, they may keep young Rhehoboam
in some awe, 1. Reg 12.
and the State in some order. Counsel is the foundation of a Realm: So the
Hebrews call it Iisrah, wherein there is says Solomon first salus, Pro. 11.
14, saftie and Pro. 11. 14, Ibid. 15. 23.
assurance, secondly, stabilitas, Pro. 15. 23, no fear of general alteration,
but hope that things shall be in statu quo, a firm stabilitie; that though the
roof be fallen, the old King be dead, yet, if the foundation, his counsel
remain, the whole fabric of the state stands as it did, and the chief
stone, Primarius lapis, as our Prophet calls it, Cap. 4. 7, Zach. 4 7.
his just successor may be the sooner reared; whereupon, all the Rhetoric and
force Satan can apply, shall be to importune God to do in all States, as in
this captivity he thought would have been done, (and the Prophet much feared it,
Lam. 4 11.) to turn Lam. 4. 11.
Iisrah into Iitsah, Fundamentum in incendium, to kindle a fire in Sion, qui
deuoret fundamenta eius, utterly to subvert the fundamental stones and stays
of a Kingdom. Ye know what Philip of Macedon his Phil. Maced. Demosth.
demand was of the Athenians, to dismiss al their Orators: and Demosthenes
Apologue as an answer thereunto, that the Wolves desired the shepheardes to
dismiss their dogs, to which they yielding, the Wolves entering, devoured both
the sheep and the shepheardes also. In this Story, as Zorobabel and Iehoshua
are entitled silii Olei, Cap. 4, 14, being Zach. 4. 14 Vatable. abi.
Gods Anointed: So their Socii are called Septem Lucernae ver. 2. the lights
and eyes of the King and Ver. 2.
state: not ordinary lights, but, as the great Philosopher Aristotle
resembles them, (...), such as stand in the division of highways, which have
Aristot Polit. 4.
a light to show the way, and a hand to direct which way: such is their office,
who are in counsel of state, both detegere proditoria, to retriue and bewray
conspiracies and treacherous plots, if there be any, as Mordecai to
Ahashuerus, Hest: 2. 22: and Hest. 2. 22.
also dirigere ad sana, to advise the best for the King and Realm, as the old
Senators to young Rehoboam, 1. Reg. 12,
1. Reg. 12. These lights therefore, as standing in his light, the Prince of
darkness [stat a dextris] incessantly labors to blow out, at least to blow
up. Ye see the King of Aram raises as great a force, and sends robur
exercitus, 2, Reg. 6. 14, as mighty an 2. Reg. 6. 14
host to surprise Elizeus the chief Counselor of state unto the King of
Israel, as to the inuading of a Realm, or the surprising of an impregnable
hold. And no marvel, for herein does Satan make known both the intention,
and nature also of his malice; his intention to ruinate whole States, for where
no counsel is, the people fall, the Realm Pro. 11. 14.
is subverted. His nature, that he is an Abaddon, Revel. 9. 11, that is a
Destroyer. S. Peter says, Revel. 9, 11.
he is a Lion, 1. Pet. 5. 8. not content to range, unless 1. Pet. 5. 8.
he roar, nor satisfied unless he devour, a right Incendiarius, that will
not suffer a Brande to escape, but if he can, it shall into the fire. Sed
increpet te Iehoua, is the beginning of this verse; there is a hook for this
Behemoth, who though he have the pray in his mouth, yet his jaws shall not
mere; he not so greedy to devour, but Jehovah as watchful to deliver.
though it be Torris inigni, and even now taking flame, yet it shall be Titio
erepta, snatched out and saved; wherein two things are to be observed. 1. the
safety in general. 2, the manner of the safety in the word [ereptus], and
that is twofold: 1, in the simple raptus, a speedy and unexpected deliverance.
2. in the compound, ereptus, a full and a powerful rescue.

It is the Lords mercy that we are not all consumed, says Jeremy, Lament. 2.
22: but his principal Lament. 3. 22.
mercy it is to rescue and save Kings and Governors; for rather then they shall
miscarry or perish, he will, says David, Psalm. 57, 4, send from heaven to save
them, Psa. 57. 4.
from those that would devour and swallow them: other men he saves by
diverse means, but he is robur salutum vncti eius ipse, Psalm. 28, 8, yea
therein is the extention of his mercy, because it is communicated Ps. 28. 8.
unto many; for the safety of the King, is the incolumity of the whole Nation:
but, if Herod be trobled, all Jerusalem is troubled with him: Mat. 2. 7: Mal.
2. 7.
and percusso Pastore dispergitur Grex, says our Prophet, Cap. 13. 7, Smite
the shepbeard, and the whole flock Zach. 13. 7
will be scattered. And as it is his mercy, so it is his wisdom also, for they
represent his Person, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm: 82. 6, that is, for
Kings and state semen; Ps. 82. 6.
and present his message, pro Christo legatione sungimur, 2 Cor. 5, 20. we are
ambassadors for Christ: 2. Cor. 5. 20
that is, for Prelates and Churchmen. Magistracy of both sorts is his
ordinance, Romans 13. 1. What he has Romans 13. 1.
ordained, it stands with his wisdom to maintain. And as the rescue of them
argues his mercy and wisdom, so the manner thereof, his power, and glory. His
power, for therein he shows, that he has as David observes, omnimodam
salute^; Psa. 68. 20, all Psa. 68, 20.
manner of deliverances, by detection of the conspiracy, by protection from
them, by prevention before the danger, by subuension in it: the bird in the
air shall bewray it, Eccles. 10. 20, or the wing of the bird, the pen of a
quill shall reveal it. A Ecces. 10. 20.
Pannicus terror, as in the siege of the Assirians; a 2. Reg. 7. 1. Sam. 23.
Act. 23. Act. 16.
rumor unexpected, as in the streights of David, a youth not thought of, as in
the conspiracy for Paul; a sudden Earthquake, as in the duresse of the
Apostles: briefly, as David speaks, Psalm. 68. 21. Domini sunt Psalm. 68. 21
exitus mortis, the issues of death, and the variety of issues are the Lords:
According to the danger such shall be the issue: are there degrees of perils,
not Psalm. 84.
only the pit, but the horrible pit? from thence he has fetched me out,
says David, Psalm. 40. 2. Are there degrees of death? as it seems by S. Paul
there Ps. 40. 2.
are, not only mors a death, but tanta mors so great a death; He has
delivered us from so great a death, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 1. 10. Now if
there be a 2. Cor. 1. 10
tantum in any danger or death, it is in that which is by fire, an unmerciful
Element, the Egyptians call it Belluam animatam: See the rage of this beast, in
the 1. Reg. 18. 38, the fire fell; and presently, vorauit 1. Reg. 18. 38
Holocausta, and ligna, and lapides, and puluerem: it devoured the sacrifice,
the wood, the stones, the dust also, and twelve barrels, besides a whole
trench full of water, all at once in a moment. See the breath of this beast,
the very heat of the fire out of the furnace mouth, slew the men that brought
Sidrach, Misach Dan. 3. 22.
and Abednego to their execution, Dan. 3. 22. So that this requires more then
an ordinary delivery, it had need of a Rapuit (for so the Angels snatched Lot
out of Sodoms fire, Genesis 19. 16:) the danger Genesis 19. 16
thereof being so deadly, the death so present, the presence so dreadful.

And so have we gone thorough this Text: wherein we have showed, 1. who are
these brands: 2. Gods wisdom in suffering them to be so; 3. Satan's malice to
have them set on fire; and Jehovah his powerful mercy in delivering them, his
glorious power, Eripiendo, in so delivering them.

A word or two, by way of Application, to the occasion of this days assembly,
and so I end. Application


What here was presented in a vision to Zachary, was as this day twelue-month
visibly acted upon us; for there is none in this Church, or in the land, of
Honor or birth; or office of State, or place of justice, but he may (me
thinks) give for his Imprese a Brand placed just to the mouth of
Nebuchadnezzers flaming furnace, smoking, but escaping the flame; and his
Motto, this scripture Adage, TITIO EX IGNE. The King in his Diadem; the Queen
in her frontlet; the Prince in his Coronet; the Nobility in their Collers; the
Clergy in their Signets; and so the rest whom it did concern (and whom did
it not concern?) may fitly and truly use this for their Poesy, Nonne ego
Titto? Was not I, a Brand, snatched out of the fire?

To particularlize the designement and the danger intended, were to burn day
light, indeed, to light a Torch before the Sun; so many of honor here
present, better acquainted with them (as is fit) then my self: and so many
Treatises, extant, amplifying it more fully, then either my skill will afford,
or this time permit.

My office is, by Salomons rule (as you heard in the beginning) to enforce my
speech at this time Clauis and Stimulis, to imprint in your minds the horror of
the danger, and to excite you to thanksgiving for the Rescue. And my duty is,
to keep me to my Text. Of the Incendiarij, the Boutefeux (So David calls
such wretches, Psalm. 57 Psalm. 57, 8,
8.) those fire brandes that would have set these master brandes on a flame,
not one word, either by way of inuectiue or commemoration. For first, they come
not within my text: secondly it is Gods Exo. 17. 14
own direction to Moses, Exodus 17. 14: Deleatur memoria Amalech sub coelo, let
their names be forgotten, their houses forlorn, and their posterity odious,
sed scribatur memoriale, yet let there be a memorial reserved of the
Deliverance.

First, therefore, we will begin with Titio. Had they been Titiones
sumigantes, smooking brandes, (who were principally intended for the fire) good
for nothing but to stifle the throat, and make the eyes to smart and weep,
some pretense there had been, and yet I must tell you, ye of honorable place
were so indeed; ye made them to weep, for there are a sort of men, of whom
the Poet speaks, Vixque tenent lachrymas, quod nil lachrymabile cernu^t.
This was it that grieved them, that you gave them no just occasion to be
grieved. But had the King been, as the Bramble, Judge. 9, base of Judge. 9.
birth, and raised by a faction: The Queen a Iezabel, Idolatrous and
dissolute: The Prince an 2. Reg. 9. 2. Sam. 25
Absalon, ambitious and disloyal, the Clergy, Ieroboams Priests, the rags
of the people; the Statesmen, Rehoboams Yongsters, urging whippes 1. Re. 12.
31 Ibid. ver. 11.
and Scorpions; the case had been somewhat altered: and yet it becomes not
good Subjects to be their own Reuengers. Christianity teaches Patience, not
Rebellion. But having a King so royally descended, so rightfully enthronized,
so mildly affected, (to say no more) so incomparably endowed: A Queen so
virtuous, so courteous of demeanor: A Prince, the star orient, even the
Cynosura of Europe (of the Clergy I will not speak) Counselors so grave, so
Honorable; like so many rich Jewels, compassing the Kings crown; fast and
faithful, and therefore precious to their Sovereign, of perfect luster in
themselves, of radiant and comfortable aspect to the Subjects: Quid meus
AEneas in vos committere tantum,
Quid Troies potuere?


What fancy, what fury, what Devil could have so enraged the spirit of any,
to have set such glorious Brandes on fire, at once to consume them? and so
might I go on in amplifying this point. But I come to the second [Ignis] The
nature and manner of the co^mbustion intended: the expressing whereof,
requires rather a Nuntius in a Tragedy, then a Preacher of the Gospel of
Peace. For how might he whet his Style, and raise his Muse, in purtraying the
horror of this designement, which was, not in Arms and open rebelling, that
had been more manly: not with stab of Dagger, or shot of Dagge, that had
been mote visible and auoydable: but with an insensible element, and the most
deadly of all elements, fire; and of all fires the most hellish and speedy,
GVN-POWDER FIRE; cowched in a dark Vault, enclosed in barrels, environed with
yrons, enueloped with wood and coals (all fiery fuel) to have hoisted, to
have crushed, to have dismembered, the most Honorable Assembly of Christendom,
sitting in their State, in the house of Peace, in their Senate of sacred
Counsel, and that in the twinkling of an eye, with one deadly thundering
blow; as if the house of Parliament had been an other Mount Sinai, Exodus 19,
16, and were to deliver laws cum igne, tonitru, and fumo, and tremore
horribili, Exodus 19 16
with fire and thunder and smoke, and an exceeding trembling. Surely, we
might have begun the verse with David, [Wee went through fire and water,] but
God knows whether we might have ended the Psalm. 66. 22.
verse with him or no? [thou have brought us out into a wealthy place,] for I
doubt whether the most secure in his own conscience, could have acertained
himself, being surprised with so sudden a frush, that he was sufficiently
prepared to he received into Heaven. A damnable fire that should have
destroyed both body and soul. I come to the third; that is, [Ereptus] the
manner of the delivery. And therein my song must be with David, of mercy and
judgment: of mercy, in delivering us: of judgment, in so delivering us. Their
own tongue (which Basil calls Plectrum mentis) or their Pen rather Basil.
(which is plectrum linguae, and makes the tongue to speak, where it cannot be
heard) covertly describing it: but withal Gods spirit, inspiring the King to
reveal it fully, though incongruously: for surely, had he not been a better
Prophet then, in that point, he was a Grammarian, we might all have perished,
and never known who had hurt us. But this is Gods glory, which adds much to
his mercy, that though he bring us ad os sepulchri, to the mouth of the grave,
to the pits brinke, yet he will not leave us in valle mortis: die we must,
and it is a Statute in the Parliament of Heaven, (Statutum est omnibus semel
Heb. 9. 27
mori: but he will not tradere nos morti, says David, Psalm. 118. 18, give us
over to die, PER TRADITIONEM, Ps. 118. 18
that is, by treason and conspiracy.

Lastly, which is my principal part, and that which I am to urge, is this same
(Nonne) Nonne? was it not a strange delivery? and then again, Nonne? Is it
not perpetually to be recorded? Surely; if Jehovah remember us with his Nonne?
Is not this a brand snatched out of the fire?? verified of our whole land (as of
Jerusalem here): shall not we answer him with David's Nonne? Psa. 62. 1. Nonne
Deo Ps. 62. 1.
subiecta erit anima nostra? Shall not our souls wait still upon God, since
that of him comes our salvation? Zerobabel, Iehoshua, and that Company
celebrated this their delivery, Cap. 7, in Frogosis acclamationibus, Zach. 4.
7.
with shouting acclamations, and the fa-hur-den of their shoutes, and songs,
was Gratia, Gratia: we surely in our rescue have seen Gratiam Dei: shall we
not in our Memorial thereof sing Gratias Deo? if he in our delivery have
verefied the last verse of the 147. Psalm, He has not dealt so with any
nation: It may be a shame for us, if we go Psa. 147. 20.
not on forward to the first verse of the very next Psalm: O praise the Lord
of-Heauen, prase him in Ps. 148. 1.
the highest. To him therefore, as for all his mercies we are most bound, so
for this deliverance, (next to our redemption, from Hellfire by the blood of
Christ) above, and more then all, be ascribed all Glory, power, praise and
dominion, now and for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

