THE Haughty Heart HVMBLED: OR, THE PENITENTS PRACTICE: IN THE REGAL PATTERN
OF KING EZEKIAH.

Directory and consolatory to all the mourners in Sion, to sow in Tears, and
to reap in Joy.

By S. I. Preacher of Gods Word.

Toll and lege, and experto creed. LONDON, Printed for Richard More, and are
to be sold at his Shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1628.

THE HAVGHTIE heart humbled; OR, The Penitents Practice. The first Sermon.
1 The Context: But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done
unto him, for his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and
upon the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.

The Text. 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Notwithstanding Ezekias humbled himself for the
pride of his heart, (both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem) so that the
wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of Ezekias.


CHAP. I.
THis very Text at the first blush speaks it own Title to any judicious, and
ocular understanding: The Text divided.
it may rightly be styled and called Ezekias humiliation; in which for method
sake (which is the mother of memory) we may briefly, and succinctly observe,
and prosecute these remarkable circumstances: First, the subjects of this
humiliation, that is Ezekias: primarie as in sin, so in sorrow: secondarie,
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: Secondly, the cause, occasion, or exterior motive
of this humiliation, and that is the pride of his heart, (for the interior cause
or inward impulsive or maine Agent, was the Spirit of God) Thirdly, the
sequel, or effect of this humiliation, the remouall of due, and deserved
wrath: wrath came neither upon the King, nor upon his subjects, in the days of
Ezekias. These are the prime parts, and the very materials of the Text, which
(as a fountain into her streams, or a maine stream into her several sluices)
admits many other lesser circumstantiall subdiuisions, if we narrowly take what
ever the words will afford: and first for the subject here humbled, which was
Ezekias.

This first word of the Text, (notwithstanding) as a Relative, to something
foregoing, pluckes us by the sleeue Cynthius aurem vellens.
, and wills us to look backward, or rather forward to something preceding; by
virtue and authority whereof It is one of the rules of Illiricus lib. 2. in
Clav. Scripturae, and of Kickerman in his Rhetorica Ecclesiastica: to compare
text with Context.
we may well, as having reference to Ezekias the subject in hand, consider the
substance of the whole Chapter: without stretching the Text, we may reflect (as
every one of them of excellent use) first, upon Ezekias virtues and Graces:
secondly, on his sins and infirmities: thirdly, on the Lords castigations,
and corrections: fourthly, upon his rising by repentance, and humiliation:
fifthly, upon the renouation, and manifestation of the Lords love, and favor to
him: demonstrated both priuatiuely in withholding from him, that wrath which
his sins have deserved: as also positiuely, in enriching him, both with these
outward blessings of gold, silver, jewels: as also inward Graces, for the pious
and prosperous governing of his kingdom, which his soul desired. First
Ezekias Graces, and perfections are described and largely exemplified, partly
in this Chapter, but more fully, and significantly, in the three former
Chapters going before, which are all taken up in delineating and expressing the
worthy acts of this worthy King: 1. so zealous for the glory of God, for the
restoration of his decayed, for the purging of his polluted worship 2 Chronicles.
29. v. 16, 17, 18.
: 2. so careful to walk with his God, to do that which was right in his
sight verse. 2.
, to approve his very heart as his father David; 3. to praise and to worship
the Lord, both in his own person, and by his example and Iniunction, throughout
his whole kingdom: 4. to Institute ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. et ver. 25, 26.
, and encourage, and increase righteous and zealous Levites, for the service of
the house of the Lord; to prepare and provide by his extraordinay costs, care,
excessive charge, and indefatigable pains v. 31, 32, 33, 34 et Chapter 30 v. 2
for all things thereunto belonging: 5 by his Proclamations v. 6, 7, 8.
, Posts, and Edicts, to excite and prepare his whole Land for the righteous and
religious celebration and solemnization of the long pretermitted Passover: 6.
to extirpate and root out ver. 14.
Idolatry: 7. firmly and resolutely to seek the Lord Chap. 31. ver. 20, 21.
and his Glory, his face and favor: 8. to plant (or replant) his depopulated
Church: 9. to supplant all Idolatries and superstitions: to do every thing
strictly and exactly according to all that the Lord commanded, for the matter
and manner, of right, and religious governing of the Church, and the
Commonwealth, committed to his charge, that it may well be said of him, as was
said of Josias, (who with his Father David, being only excepted) like unto him
there was no King, that turned to the Lord, with his whole heart, his whole
soul, and whole might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him
arose there any 2 King. 23, 25.
. And yet the fair sun of these virtues, wanted not his clouding, his
eclipsing, in his infirmities: this beauteous Cedar had his blasting; the
fading of his leaves (his failing in some duties, his falling in some sins)
exposed him to nakedness, even to the deserved blasts, and storms, and
blowings down by the whirlewinde of Gods wrath on him and his people, unless
his humiliation (as rain that allayes the wind) had prevented what was ready
to be executed. For to come to that, which we propounded in the second place,
Ezekias Infirmities: the holy Ghost taxes him of the omission of one maine
duty, and that is gratitude and thankfulness, for a mercy received: he is
branded and marked for an ungrateful person; he is culpable in this sin of
Ingratitude: a sin odious and hateful to God and all good men Contra ingratos
lege apud Patres, Bernardum Sermon. 1. in Cantica Epiph. Augustine. in Psalm. 108.
Cassiod lib. 2. and 4. epist. Lactant. lib 2 c. 1. Instit. and lib. ^. cap. 3.
yea abhorred of the very heathen, Apud Ethnicos, Senecam lib. 1. de benef.
Tullium lib. 2. Offic. ad Atticum 8, et in passim in Orationibus.
by the instinct of nature, yea even of birds and beasts, apes and Lions, that
in their kind (as appears by Histories Of which see my Irelands Iubilee.
and experience) have been found thankful to their Benefactors: yet even this
sin (besides his other failings) is chalked on Ezekias score: for the holy Text
says: that Ezekiah being sick to death, he prayed to the Lord, and he spoke
unto him and gave him a sign: of which we may largely read 2 King. 20.10, 11.
but Ezekiah rendered not again, according to the benefit done unto him: (an
usual culpable carriage in most men, both toward God and man) withal setting
down the mother and original of this and other her hell-bred daughters: that,
which (as Augustine said of concupiscence) is a sin it self, and the cause,
and root of other sins, even that sin which as God first punished in
Angels Jude ver. 6.
, and Man Genesis 3.5.23.
, he still abhominates and abhorres: into that sin Ezekiah falls, with that
sin he is leauened, and his other Graces in part, and for a time poisoned;
and that is pride of heart, the bane of virtue, the mother, nurse, and midwife
of vice In superbiam lege Patres invehentes: praecipue Bernardum, ser. 3. de
resurr. Augustine. sermon. 19. sermon. 31. and in Psalm. 19. Hieron. in Marcum.
Gregor. in Morral. Hugo. lib. 2. de anima. Isodor. lib. 3. de summo bono. and
Cassiod. in Psalm. 18. et in Psalm. 147. ver. 25.
, the Colioquintida in the best broth: the soiler of the best Jewels, the most
lustrous perfections of men eminent in the Magistracy or Ministry: the most
prejudicial to Gods glory: the best agent and factor for Satan: the greatest
Enemy, and opposite to God: the greatest curb and cross for doing good, to
those whose Talents might otherwise gainfully be employed: even this pearl
grew on Ezekias eye: this leprosy (like Gehezies) cleaues to his flesh: nay
like poison, it was infixed in his marrow, and bones, nay it had searched all
his veins, and got to his very heart: for the Text says further, his heart
was lifted up: and this pride of heart, (as fruirfull in other sins, daily
generate, as from a fruitful womb) like a liver or lungs inwardly corrupted,
breaks out (as into other blaines, and biles, and vlcerous sores, so) into
this great swelling grievous plague sore, or Carbuncle of Ingratitude.

Thirdly, in the same verse vshering my Text (as very near a kindred, closely
combined, even hanging together as Burrs, or Bells which ring all one peale,)
we have as Ezekiahs sin, so his sorrow: as his fault, so his whipp, or rod:
as his transgression, so his castigation: as that wherein he deficiently
sinned, so that which he deservedly suffered: nay his suffering, like Jacob,
comes after this Esau of his sin, takes close hold on it as it were by the
heel Hosea 12.3. Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26. Amos 1. Psalm. 11. Mal. 4. Apoc. 28. ver.
25.
to overthrow and supplant it: for it is said, therefore, even because of his
pride of heart, and her proud daughter Ingratitude; even therefore, as the
meritorious or deserving cause, there was wrath upon him, and upon the
Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem: Plainly demonstrating, the Lord the Author
of the evil of punishment, as man the Author of the evil of sinning.

Fourthly, here in my Text we have the clearing again of Ezekiahs Sun, the
dissipating of the congealed and gathered cloud, ready to fall on him and his
people in a shower of vengeance: the calming of the threatened Tempest that hung
visibly over his head: as the fruit of his Faith, the honor of his
humiliation, the acceptable sacrifice of the stooping of his haughty heart,
wrath came neither upon him nor his subjects in his days. verse 26.

To give to every one of these premised parts a little more luster by
amplification, or a soul as it were, to the bodies of them, by explication,
ere we come to the special parts and particulars of Ezekiahs humiliation, in
which I intend chiefly and mainly to insist: Every one of these in which
Ezekiah was either an Agent, or a Patient, afford us special and principal
matter of meditation and obseruable consideration.

For first in Ezekiahs sin we have a pattern of man's sinning misery.

Secondly, in Ezekiahs castigation; a demonstration of Gods just and strict
severity.

Thirdly, in his humiliation, the force and fruit of Gods all-sauing grace.

Fourthly, in the remouall of his rod, upon his renewed repentance, a plain and
perspicuous argument of Gods all-sauing mercy.

To enlarge every one of these a little more perspicuously.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1. Of man's sinning misery.
FIrst, I say, in Ezekiah we have a president of man's sinning misery: every man
in his Glass, may see, and perceive himself, his own estate, what he is,
what his power and ability is in himself, from himself, without a superior
continual eye of grace watching over him, hand of grace corroborating and
strengthening him: alas what is the best man living, if the Lord leave him to
himself, never so little, in a trial of temptation from Satan, as he did
David, when in the pride of his heart he numbered his people 2 Samuel 14.1. 1
Chr. 21.1.2.
: or in a trial of probation from himself, as he did Ezekiah, when in the
like pride, in a vain ostentation he showed his Treasures to the Ambassadors
of the King of Babell 2 Chr. 32.3^.
: oh what can the best man do, though regenerated by the Spirit, sanctified by
grace, renewed according to the heavenly Image, cast in a new mould, made a new
creature, adorned with the best jewels of sanctified graces, but in such
spiritual desertions for a time left to Satan's winnowing, and to the
corruptions of his own heart yielding, to his treacherous flesh, that
domestique enemy, betraying; but fail in that which is good, fall into that
which is evil: our condition in that reference and relation we have unto God,
being significantly expressed, by that reference, which the travelers staff
has unto his hand: the weanling child in his first footing, to the hold of the
mother, or the Nurse: the Vine, or the Hop, unto his upholding prop: for if the
Lord uphold us by his preventing grace, and his assisting Spirit, we stand like
the house built upon the rock, Mat. 7.24.25.26
as the Castle built upon the mines of Marble, not to be undermined, as the
cliffes and rocks in the maine Ocean, or upon the shore, against all the
surging waves, and boisterous billows, and raging winds of sathanicall
temptations and suggestions: but if we be left in any trial or temptation to
our selves, as was Peter, Satan desiring to winnow us Luke 22.31. v. 60.
, we fall like the house that is built upon the sand; or the ruinous tottering
building, in an earthquake: even Ezekiah himself here, though adorned with
many Graces, though tied and obliged to the Lord with the golden cords of many
and manifold blessings, privileges and prerogatives, above most of the sons
of men, in his time, having received a peculiar and special mercy, even new,
and fresh bleeding in his memory; his restoration and miraculous restitution
to desired health, in a great and daingerous sickness, repriued for a long
Lease of life, even after his summons, yea sentence of expected death: even
this Ezekiah forgets God his Savior too soon, is not so mindful of his mercy
as he ought to be, nor so thankful as the Lord desired, or as the beneficence
required.

SECT. 2. The different effects of prosperity and adversity.
SEcondly, in Ezekiah see briefly the difference betwixt prosperity and
adversity, or the different carriage and condition of men, yea sometimes of the
best men, in these two different estates: Ezekiah in his sickness, having by
no less then a Prophet, as the mouth and unerring Oracle of God, received the
dismal sentence of death, sets his house in order, and no doubt of it sets his
heart in order, turns himself in his bed, 2 King. 20.1, 2, 3.
remembers his sins, in the bitterness of his soul mournes like a Dove,
chatters like a Craine Esaias 38.14.
, turns himself to the wall and weeps, verse. 2.
turns himself from man and from humane means, (now vnauailable) unto the
might and mercy of God, as the Needle touched with the Loadstone Apud Albertum
lib. 2. metal. tract. 3. cap. 6. and Plin. lib. 36. c. 16.26.
turns to the Pole, and so rests reposed: in the soliloquies of his soul, he
poures out his heart and his spirit before the Lord, vnloades his burdened
soul in the Lords bosom, unfolds his griefs, cries for redress, with such
zealous feruency, and importunity, that his prayers and ^iaculations darted
from faith and feeling, surmount the Clouds, ascend (as fiery meteors Arist
lib. 1. and 2. meteor, and Mizaldus lib. 1. Cometog. c. 4.
) the highest Regions, penetrate and pierce the Heavens, as importunate suitors
and urgent Ambassadors, have audience, acceptance, and a comfortable answer
from the God of Heaven, even to the reuoking and recalling of that conditional
sentence verse. 4, 5, 6.
, and verdict (as after with the Ion. 3.10. See D. Abbot and B. King in loc.
Ninevites) which God himself had passed upon him. And the like demeanor we
have of him, in another strait and exigent, when Senacharib brings such an Army
against Jerusalem, as his railing Rabsakah in the pride and presumption of his
heart, christened and called, (as once that Armado which threatened this sinning
Island) Invincible 2 King. 18.22, 23, 24.
: then having (as 2 Chro. 2.12
Iehosaphat said, and did in the like case) no power nor strength in and from
himself, his people being but as a little flock of Kids to the troops of the
Assyrians, that were spread as Grasshoppers: he betakes himself to the Lord, (as
an endangered child by the ramping of a Lion, and a Bear) cries to his father
2 King. 19.15, 16, 17.
, makes speedy recourse to the God of Hosts, as the Tempest-driuen Ship puts
for the shore; in the day of his trouble calls upon the Lord, makes him (as
every Christian ought to do in the like extremities) his rock Psalm. 18.1.
, his refuge, his Asylum, and Sanctuary: spreads the Letter of reuiling
Rabsakah before the Lord, entreats the prayers of the Prophet Esaias 2 King. 19.2.
, for himself and his distressed people; has a comfortable answer according
to his faith verse. 6, 7. and verse. 20, 21.
. A promised hook verse. 28.
put in the nostrils of Senacharib, an Angel employed in his behalf, as the
organ of Gods wrath, to make riddance of his enemies verse. 35.
, even 1085 at one clap: but now here is an alteration in Ezekiah, Noua rerum
facies, a metamorphosis, a strange change; Mutatus ab illo, and Totnam (as the
phrase is) turned French: Ezekiah in his prosperity has got a cooler, his hot
zeal has caught cold: It is lukewarm, or rather key-cold, or frozen for
want of stirring and agitation; as a standing poole in a winters freeze: the
next news we hear of Ezekiah, he is unmindful of that God, who was so
mindful of him, and merciful to him: he forgets God, he renders not according
to the benefit received.

Oh thus it was with him, thus it is with us; Application.
thus with most of us, with best of us, yea even generally with all of us (so
far as corruption and our carnal unregenerate part preuailes, as it
preuailes in many too far) in our adversity, we seek the Lord, in the
pressures of poverty, penury, upon our estates: sickness, aches, pains,
diseases, upon our bodies: Infamy, scandal, reproach, upon our names: horror
upon our souls, terror upon our consciences: we perhaps press hard to the
Lord by prayer, petition, supplication: we wrestle with him, as Ose. 12.4.
Jacob, to bless us; we cry to him as the Disciples in the tossed Luke 8.24.
ship; as Peter walking on the waters, ready to Mat. 14.29, 30
sincke; or environed with our enemies by sea or land, beset with horse and
foot, as David once by 1 Samuel 23.26.
Saul, hunted and pursued by our enemies, as the Partridge by the Hawke; in
peril by the fury and force of any of the creatures, animate or inanimate,
Fire, Water, Wolves, Dogs, Bears, Lions: we cry out as Iehosaphat did in
the battle when the Archers shot at him 2 King. 22.32
, and put him in peril: yea, in sickness chiefly, and the summons of death,
we turn our selves to the wall and weep, we wash our beds with tears, as
David Psalm. 6.6.
; we make perhaps many fair hights and vows, and promises to God, of
reformation of much amiss, mortification of many lusts, stricter life and
conversation, upon our restitution to health, which we indent with God: we
confess any thing, as men on the Rack, in the tortures of conscience, we
will suffer any launcing for the healing of sins wounds, for the asswaging of
their rage; we will covenant and promise any thing, as Schoole-boyes under
their Masters Ferula: when alas, when the Lord eases our shoulders from our
burdens, which we cast upon him: when the God of Jacob delivers us out of
troubles: when he pluckes us out of the stocks, and sets us at liberty: pulls
the strait shoe off our foot, takes us off the Rackes, leaves smiting and
scourging us, seems to burn our rods as it were before our faces, turns our
storms into calmes: Alas, then we forget him, as some man does his friend,
that has done him most good in his need, perhaps saved him from the Gallows:
we remember the Lords kindnesses as fools and children remember good turns:
or as the Oestrich remembers her eggs, buried in the sand: Our promises we
keep with God, as the perfidious Carthaginians and lying Cretians Titus 1.12.
with men, as the banquerout his word, Bill, or Bond with his creditor: our
vows in sickness prove still languishing and sick vows, unperformed, even
in our best health: our devotions are as hot as some sea men's, who pray aloud
and cry out as Jonas Mariners Jonas 1.5.
in the storm, and are Reuben-like Genesis 4^.4.
as light as water in excess of riot upon the land: when the Lord turns our
sickness into health, our pain into ease, our perturbations into pleasures,
our poverty into plenty, our daingers into delights, etc. we then turn praying
into playing, fasting into feasting, mourning into music, sorrow into carnal
solace: yea even the grace of God, many of us, into wantonness: at least we
are too forgetful of God, and of our selves, as were the Israelites, who (as
you may see throughout the whole book Judge. 3.5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12.15. chap.
4.1, 2, 3. chap. 6.1, 2.
of Judges) when they were in affliction, oppressed by the Midianites,
Ammonites, Philistines, Canaanites, they continually cried unto the Lord, and
were in outward show exceedingly humbled; but when the rod was off their back,
when upon their seeking to God, (though with a dissembling and double heart) the
Lord sent them deliverance, and deliuerers: Othoniel, Gideon, Iphtah, Tolah,
Sampson, and other victorious and valiant men, to defend and deliver them in
war, and to judge them in peace: Psalm. 106. per totum.
according to the ancient wont of their Fathers, they forgot God, forsook his
laws, revolted from his covenant, ran with as fast a contrary bias to their
idolatry as ever, committed sin as greedily, neglected Gods worship as
carelessly, fell into idolatry as superstitiously, etc. Yea David himself,
though a man after Gods own heart, as he confesses of himself, in his
prosperity sung a requiem to his soul, said he should never be removed, and
before he was troubled went wrong Psalm. 119.67.
, though (Crux dans intellectum) in his trouble he sought the Lord diligently,
yea with his whole heart: and sure this is the case and condition of most of
us, we crouch and bow, and bend to God, cry peccaui, entreat for favor, beg as
it were the Psalm of mercy, as the fellon before the Judge, when we are in
exigents, and dainger of execution, and falling either into the hands of God or
man: but if the Lord bail us, or repriue us, or absolutely free us, upon our
humiliation, or let us escape with some little smart or punishment, as it were
with burning in the hand, we then presently, or after some space, when the
burning is eaten out, when our former affliction is forgotten, and those
sins, that caused it, as we think forgiven: we as stearne fellons, as
bone-bred thieues, felloniously transgress again, break his statute laws
again: steal again, in purloyning glory from God, by our scandalous sinning,
that we should have given him as his due, by a constant course of repentance:
thus we use God, as a perfidious man uses his friend at need; but when our
needs and turns are once served, we neglect to observe him, who has so well
served us; we have relation to him, as the Spaniell to the water, use it for a
time, for our turns, then once on the dry land, when we have done with it,
shake it off.

SECT. 3. The reason of long afflictions: with Application.
ANd here my desire is that all and every one of us, chiefly those that are in
affliction, and on whose shoulders the rod of correction has long laid, whom
it most concerns, to take notice of the reason why God keeps often times his
dearest children so long under the rod or ferula, sometimes under one cross,
sometimes under more, successively coming (as several waves or blustering
winds, or as Jobs Job 1.14, 16, 18.
messengers with cross news) one in the neck of another; the end of one,
being the beginning of another: will any know the reason of this (leaving to
pry into the Arc, the secret and inscrutable ends that God has reserved to
himself, he being holy in all his ways, Psalm. 51.4.
and righteous in all his works, justified ever when he is condemned:) we our
selves from our own experience, if we take true notice of our selves, and of
our crooked natures, rotten rebellious hearts, and perverse dispositions, may
easily swim without a cork, and of our selves, in our selves, and from our
selves, see sufficient reason, of Gods strictest dealings and proceedings with
us. For the Lord knows what we are, he knows our mould, and metal, whereof
we are made, he knows our stearne, stubborn, vndomable natures, that we are
sturdy heifers, hardly brought to the yoke of obedience, without much bowing
and bending: headstrong colts, unwilling to take the saddle of subjection,
without much beating and breaking: flinty cobbles, marble and stony hearted:
knotty Timber, unfit to fill any room, to supply any place in the spiritual
building, unless we be much and many times squared, and hewn, and fitted
with the axe and hammer of several afflictions Of the admirable use and
effects of these afflictions lege Augustinum in Psa. 21. in Psalm. 60. in sermon.
ad Lippium: et in Psalm. 125. Greg. lib. 11. moral, et super Ezekiel. Isodor. de
summo bono, l. 3. et soliloq l. 1. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Iejunio hom. 44. in
Mat. et Saluian. de prouidentia Dei lib 6.
: our Physician knows, we have gross and full bodies, many glutinous and
viscous humors, tumors of Pride, Vaineglory, Self-love, conceit of our
selves, formalitie, hypocrisy, emulation at the places and graces of our
brethren, with such like, which are so conglutinate together, that they are
hard to be purged, and therefore he gives us pill after pill, glister after
glister, sends cross after cross, he sees we will grow gross, and fat, and
corpulent, and sluggish, yea even lethargicall in security, unless he
continually diet us with the bread of affliction, and the water of our tears:
unless he keep us in continual exercise, as Scipio did his soldiers, and
use strict martial discipline, our generous General knows we will grow
luxurious, licencious, cowardly crauens, unfit for the Christian camp, unable,
as unwilling, to weeld any spiritual weapons, against that tripartite
Cerberus, that common enemy, the alluring world, the insnaring flesh, Our Mr.
Downham his Christian warfare, as also the Tract called Joy in Tribulation, In
my 7. Helps to Heaven.
the deceiving, destroying Devil. The Lord knows we must as schoole-boyes
be kept at it, held to it, by discipline, as well as doctrine, else we will
never prove proficients, but deficients in the school of Christianity; never
commence Graduates in any far degrees of Grace: our Vinitor knows, we are
his vines, that must be constantly lopt, and pruned, or else we will grow
rank in many superfluous lusts Hinc illud Lactantij, ex prosperitate luxuria,
ex luxuria vitia omnia: In hanc rem, lege etiam apud August. de verbis Domini.
lib. 2. and cap. 13. cum Greg. lib. 25. Moralium, lib. 1. and Crysologo
Curialium Nugarum: habemus etiam exempla in scripturis in Gideone, Judge. 8.13,
14. Salomone 1. Reg. 10. v. 26.27. Jeroboam 1 Reg. 12.20.28. in Amaso 1 Reg. 24
v. 7.9 Osia 2. Chr. 26.16, 17. in Israelitis, Nehem 4.23. in alijs, Dan. 4.
Luke 12. Luke 16. Act. 12. in Herod, etc.
: he knows we are a strange kind of metal, that will never work kindly
without the fire: yea that our hearts are indeed as iron and steel, soft and
and tender, and flexible, easy to be wrought any way, in the furnace and
forge of affliction; but once out of the fire, they grow hard, and cold, and
congealed as ever: yea that as lukewarm water, in the winters frost, they will
freeze faster then ever they thawed, and heated, unless they retain their
warmth, by some heat and reflection from afflictions fire. If it were thus with
Ezekiah, as my Text and Context plainly demonstrates, and with David and the
best of Gods servants; then sure it is and will be so with us: our less Grace
stands need of quickening, our stronger corruptions have more need of curbing
and restraining by the Bit and Rod of Correction, then ever theirs had.

CHAP. III.
SECT. 1. The best men subjected to their falls, their failings.
THirdly in Ezekiah so good and so godly a man, even a Phoenix amongst men, yet
as the Scripture says of Elias a man subject to infirmities James 5.17.
, as we are, culpable here in a sin of omission, in ingratitude, in not
rendering thanks gratulatory, and Eucharisticall Praises proportionable to the
mercy received of life and health: after transgressing in a sin of
commission, in showing his Treasures in the pride of his heart, to the
Ambassadors of the King of Babel: we may see in him the condition of the rest,
the best of men: that as the bright Sun is subject to clouding and eclipsing:
the clear Moon, to her waining, and shadowing, and ouercasting; the strongest
and healthfullest body, to a sickning, a fever, an ague, a weakening: the
purest lawne to a spotting, and polluting; the nimblest joints subjected to
falling; the most metald horse, to his stumbling: so the best of men are
subject to sinning: the holiest of men have their infirmities Vide etiam et
testimonia patru^ praecipue Augustini in Psalm. 5. in lib. 1. de nuptijs et
concupisc. cap. 25. in tract. 41. in Ioh. et in lib. 1. de peccat. meritis cap.
23.
, as the purest gold has his dross: the best corn his weeds: the fullest
ears, their awnes, and their husks: to begin from the beginning of man's fall,
and to reflect ever since on man's frailty, Abraham's denying Genesis 12. v. 13.
Genesis 20.2.
, and twice dissembling his own wife: Jacobs fraudulency and subtilty Genesis
25.31. Genesis 27.19.
, in twice defrauding his brother Esau: Joseph swearing Genesis 41.15.
by the life of Pharaoh: Iudahs incest with his daughter in Law: Genesis 38.25.
Rubens incest with his mother in Law Genesis 35.22.
: Lots incest Genesis 49.36.
with his own daughters: Moses his murmuring Numb. 20.12, 13. et 27.14.
and infidelity: Aaron his emulation Numb. 12.2.
, and consenting to Idolatry Exodus 23.5.
: David his adultery 2 Sa. 11.4.17.
, bloodshed, in defiling Vriahs his bed, his blood, his conniuence at his
childrens sins 1 King. 1.6.
, his injustice 2 Samuel 16.4.
toward Mephibosheth, his dissembling 1 Samuel 27.10, 11.
with King Achish, his pride of heart in numbering his people 2 Samuel 24.1.
: Salomons Idolatry 1 King. 11.
, concubinary uncleanness, Polygamy: with the Polygamy of all the Patriarchs:
Sampsons Judge. 16.1, 4.
effeminate folly: Job Job 3.3.
, Jeremy Ier. 20.14, 15, 16.
, Elias impatiencie 1 King. 19.4.
: Zacharies incredulity Luke 1.20.
: Peter's denial Luke 22.57.
, temporizing Gal. 2.12, 13.
, disswasion of Christ's passion Matt. 16.22.
: Thomas his doubting John 20.25.
, and strange diffidence: all the Disciples culpable ignorance, want and
weakness of faith Mark. 16.13.
: James and John's fiery zeal Luke 9.54.
, and aspiring presumption Mat. 20 20, 21
. Paul and Barnabas dissension and division Acts 15.39.
. Or to come to history: Augustines once Manichisme, and luxury Apud Cent.
Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. page 1113.
, Cyprians Funccius fol. 103. et tom. 1. conc. p. 242.
Rebaptization, Tertullians Montanisme Magd. cent. 3. p. 235.
, Origens Idolatry Niceph. lib. 5. c. 12.
, Chrysostom and Epiphanius hot and hasty bickerings Socrates l. 6. c. 12. et
14. et cent. 3. c. 9.
, and carnal mutual reuilings: Jerome and Ruffinus Extant scripta.
strange and strong unbrotherly oppositions, etc. Or to come to nearer times,
Beza his once youthful, light and wanton verses: Luther as also Zwinglius in
their heats, and intemperancies every where breaking out in their writings and
disputings: Picus Miradula his wanton effeminacy with the Ladies and Curtizans
of Rome De eius vita et morte P. Iouius
, colipsing all that glory which he had won by his learned and witty writings
and disputations: together with all these Neui, as Scultetus calls them Passim
in medulla patrum.
, these warts, defects and wants, which Illiricus, the Germane Centuries, and
our Modernes observe in the writings of the Fathers, in the Greek and Latin
Church Hence have we the errors o^ Justin Mart. apud Magd. cent. 2. page 212.
Of Ambrose, apud Osiandrum, in Epit. cent. lib. 3. page 391. Of Theophilus,
apud eundem cent. 4. l. 4. p. 454 Hence read we too, of good Constantine,
murdering his son Licinius, apud eundem, cent. 4. lib. 2. page 143. Of
Theodosius bloodshed, lib. 4. page 442. Of the East and West Churches
dissenting, apud Funccium, folio 101. Et Magdab. Cent. 2. page 152 ad p. 163.
: these and al these, with the experience of al Ages, and Times, in all
Countries, Churches, Families, etc. do plainly and demonstratiuely write upon
the Columns and Pillars of Truth: That as soon shall we find the heavens
ever without clouds, the air without storms, the Sea that moves, without
froth: Corn growing without Chafe, or husks; as any mere man, yea the best
man, without his sins, his frailties, his infirmities: prudently sing one
Adam, Sampsonem, Dauidem, Salomonem,
Decepit Mulier: quis modo tutus erit?
If Adam, Sampson, David, Solomon,
By Women fell: from all sins pure, who one?
Nay, nay, posse non peccare, to have stood in integrity, so far as to fall
or not to fall, was once in the power of Adams freewill: but now non posse
peccare, not to be able to fall at all (since in Adams fall, we have lost our
selves, and our freewill, as Luther De seruo Arbitrio.
learnedly disputes) this is proper only to God, and the elect Angels, who
even by Christ's redemption have obtained the Grace of Confirmation in the
purity of their created integrity, without ever dainger of falling, much less
falling away, as the Reprobate Angels and men do: the very heathen Horatius.
could see thus much, with the eyes of nature, that sine vitijs nemo nascitur,
optimus ille, qui minimis vrgetur. There Is no man borne without his faults, his
failing,
The Best is he, in whom sinne's least prevailing.
From whence no doubt of it, came also the proverbs; Bonus dormitat Homerus:
et, Bernardus non vidit omnia.
Learned Laureat Homer may in somethings wincke,
Nor in best Bernards brain, does each truth sink.
As also this; Qui pedibus vadit quat nor, ipse cadat. The nimble foure-foot
Steed, may chance to trippe,
And best of men may fall, or slide, or slip.


And in these specialties enumerated we have in Ezekiah and the rest, plain
evidences of man's humane frailty, his sinning misery.

SECT. 2. The force of inbred corruption.
NOw if any will be further inquisitiue, in diuing into this mystery, (this
misery) of man's iniquity; and would know the reasons for his further
satisfaction of this sinning condition incident to the best of men: they may be
referred I think to these 3. heads, respecting God, respecting Satan,
respecting Man himself.


To begin with the last first. There is in every man duplex homo, as it were a
double man, if he be regenerate (for of such we now speak) there is the old
man, and the new In me duplex Homo, Caro et spiritus, Jacob et Esau, etc.
Hieronimus.
, (or as divinity uses the phrases) the old Adam and the new: the first Adam,
and the second: Grace and nature: flesh, and spirit: corruption, and
sanctification; these says the Apostle, lust the one against the other Gal.
5.17.
; these have in their commotions, contrary motions, appetites, desires,
inclinations, affects, effects: betwixt these there is a continual Duel, an
irreconciliable civil war, till it be stinted by death: their striuings and
strugglings within the heart, are as the wrastlings Genesis 25.22. See Downam his
Christian Warfare.
of Jacob and Esau within the womb of Rebecca: the Christian soul, the place
of this conflict, is often, as Rebecca, so greatly distressed, distracted, with
the broils and bickerings, she knows not oftentimes (she is in such
straites) what to say, or think of her own estate, Now, as in all civil
wars, as we know (as betwixt Romulus and Remus, Scylla and Marius, Caesar and
Pompey, etc.) now the one party had the better end of the staff, now the other
Of the effects of these and other civil wars, vide Daneum in Aphoris. polit.
p. 18. et p. 21. Pezelitos in postillis part. 3. page 504. et Antim^tchiauellus
l. 2. p. 366. 367. 368.
, (as in a pair of weascales) now the one party went up, now the other down:
so it is in this spiritual conflict. As it is with two combatants that are
weekly in the Field, with Sword, or Rapier, even the stronger may sometimes be
foiled: so how ever corruption be in us, as Saul in the Field, pursuing David,
the greater party, and Grace be in us, as little David the lesser party, but
the stronger because God is with him, and on his side; yet David may fear to
fall some day into the hand Saul 1 Samuel 27.
, his pursuit is so vehement, and violent: and sure by the allurements, and
flatteries of the treacherous flesh, that lays in wait, and ambushment
continually to betray the soul, as a domesticke inbred Traitor, within the
bosom, the soul is often soiled, quelled, overcome, and carried as a manacled
and fettered captive to sin, by the strength of corruption; as it was with
David, when by that poisoned bullet of Bethshebahs beauty, 2 Samuel 11. Cur
lumina noxia vidi.
which his treacherous eye shot into his heart, he was so hot and lustfully
inflamed, that his fire could not be quenched, till he actually committed
adultery with her.

SECT. 3. The prevailing power of Satan's Temptations.
SEcondly, as the Apostle says, we are not ignorant of the wiles of Satan, he
goes about (says St. Peter) as a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour 1
Pet. 5.8.
. He is the serpent that deceived Eve, says S. Paul 2 Cor. 11.3.
, the old Dragon Reu. 12.3.
in the Revelations of S. John: this Lion, this Dragon, this Devil, this
Serpent, this Satan, this Tempter Math. 4.1.
, (as he was to Christ) this accuser Reu. 12.10.
of the brethren (as he was to Job 1.9. See Zanchius de sex operibus de malis
Angelis. Casman his Angelographic: and Smalcald of the nature of Angels.

As also Wierus, de prestigijs Demonum. Delrius. l. 2. Disquis. Psellus de
Demonibus, Cycogna de Magis, with Augustine de ciuitate Dei. Of the nature,
power and employment of wicked spirits.


Job) is another cause of the sins of the Saints: he was chief author of,
chief actor in, the fall of the first man, as an envious man whose house being
on fire, fires his neighbors too; or having the plague upon himself, seeks
to infect a whole town: Satan falling from heaven himself, plots and
practices man's fall on earth: by the means of the woman, he effects it: This
roaring Lion, this Cerberus, or dog of hell, as a slouth-hound being flesht
then, ever since seeks the blood of souls: and for that purpose, as he is a
spirit, and so restless; as he is a Devil, and so wicked; as he is Satan, so
envious; as a Lion, so powerful; as a serpent, and so subtle: with
continuated incessant motion, circling and compassing the earth f out of his
wicked and deuillish disposition, he improues all his power and his policy,
his might, and his malice, his force, and fraud, uses all his tricks, his
traps, his engines, by himself, by his instruments, by outward objects, by
inward suggestions, by iniected Temptations, from pleasure, profit, and the
like, to ensnare men's souls in sin, and so to bring them to desired
destruction: and as his malice is against all mankind in general, so chiefly
against the Elect, in whom the Image of God is most resplendent, Grace most
eminent: his hatred being mainly and immediately against God, against his
Christ; it is most extensiue against the best servants of this Lord, against
the dearest children of this Father The Devil is like a Panther; who when he
cannot devour a man, tears his picture, says Basil. exem. hom. 10. et
expressius hom. 50.
, hating (as is the manner of his impes in their inueterate malice) even the
children, for the fathers cause. Rich preyes, (souls richliest laden with
precious jewels, lustrous Iems: justifying faith, lively hope, ardent zeal,
fervent love, the spirit of prayer, Doue-like innocence, invincible patience,
etc.) are the most desired booties of this infernal Pyrate. Therefore he does
not only fill the heart of Ananias and Saphira with hypocrisy Acts 5.3.
, possess the heart of Judas by the lusts of Treason John 3.2.
, and covetousness, etc. but seeks even to winnow Peter, a disciple Luke
22.31.
, a chosen vessel; rises up against Israel 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
, tempts even David himself the sweet singer of Israel, the man after Gods
own heart: neither are the best free from his temptations; no person free, not
David, not Peter, not Ezekiah, no not Christ himself in the days of his
flesh: no place free, not Paradise Genesis 3.
, not the wilderness Matthew. 4. To all these is Satan often alluded by Berchorius
in Reductorio Morali, and by Geminianus in summa exemplorum virtutu^, et
vitiorum.
, not the Chamber, not the Temple: no time free, day, nor night; no truce with
this Tempter: no weapons vnweilded by him, to be victorious in his warfare: for
he has, as a skillful Archer, arrows for every mark; as a Nimrodian hunter,
Gins for every beast; as a deceiving fowler, lures, and whistles, and glasses,
and nets for every Bird; as a skillful fisher, baits for every fish.
Temptations different for every man, accordingly suited, to his Nature, Nurture,
Inclination, desires, disposition, calling, education: yea accommodated (by
this best observing Physiognomist, that the world has beside) according to
every man's humor, complexion, constitution; Joining his suggestions ever so, as
he by five thousand years observance, together with his still retained,
created knowledge, conjectures our inclinations: vexing Saul's Melancholy 1 Samuel 16.14.
, and dejected sadness, to force his desperation: Inflaming David's Sanguine 1 Samuel 16.12.
, to luxurious prouocations 2 Samuel 11.
, and so of the rest: Insomuch that considering Satan's nimblenesse in motion,
and our sensuality and sluggishnesse; he a spirit, and we flesh; he ever
watching as a waking Dragon, we for the most part sleepy as were the Disciples
Luke 22.46.
, even in the greatest perils of his plottings and practices: considering his
advantage, he in the air as invisible How the spirits were dispersed in the
fall, some in the air, some in the earth: whether they be any way corporeal,
or no: how they work on our bodies, minds, fantasies: read Aug. l. 9. c 8. l.
10. c. 6. de civit. et l. 5. c. 9. l. 8. c. 22.

Amb. epist. l. 10. epist. 8. et. 84. Chrysostom. hom. 53 in 12. Genesis Bartho. de
propriet. l. 2. c. 20. Zanch. l. 4. c. 10, 11. de malis Angelis.


(to whom yet we are visible in the works we do, and audible in what we
utter, or mutter,) and we on the earth: the enemies Cannonry planted on the
hill, and we exposed in the veil below: considering his wiles and our
weakness, his might and our imbecility, his courage (as long flesht with
victories) our cowardice; all these paralleld and laid together, we shall not
so much marvel when we see even strong oaks fall, strong pillars in the
Church or Common wealth shaken with the violent blasts of his temptations; but
we shall much more admire that any one stands, be his graces never so eminent,
or is kept from even scandalous falling: we shall not so much be offended at
those which sin through frailty, but we shall bless God that the violent
streams and torrents of his temptations drive not even all down along before
him.

SECT. 4. Gods permission of the falls of the Elect.
THirdly, the Lord himself permits the false and sins of the Saints, he
permits Satan to tempt them: as a master that lets loose his chained mastiffe
upon a beast, to try the courage and valor of the beast: he leaves his
children in the trial, sometimes to themselves, as he did presumptuous Peter;
as a mother sometimes leaves a daring aduenturous child, to go without hold,
till it fall and break the nose, and cry, and bleed, that it should make more
of the mother afterward, and take heed of being so fool hardy the next time:
or as the Nurse suffers the child to singe and burn the finger in the candles
flame a little, that it may ever after dread burning: in this sense it is said
that the Lord was angry with Israel; and he stirred up David to number Israel,
2 Samuel 24.1. not that God tempted David, or prouokes, or stirs up any to
sin, for the Lord tempts no man, says S. James, but every man when he is
inescate, (as the fish by the bait) or intised, is led away by his own lusts
James 1.13. Hinc Augustinus allegans hunc locum in respons. ad artic. sibi
falso impos. art. 10. and art. 13. Detestanda, inquit, est opinio quae Deu^
malae voluntatis aut actionis facit authorem.
. As well may we say that darkness comes from the Sun, cold from the fire,
as evil from God: it is false which Bellarmine objects to Calvin and
Melancton, that they make God the author of sin Calvin and Luther are cleared
by D. Field De Ecclesia, and by D. White in his Way to the true Church, etc.
: no, the just God is neither author nor fautor of any iniquity, which his
soul abhorres, and hates: what then, how does God stir up David? He leaves
him to the temptations of Satan, and the corruptions of his own heart: and
therefore it is said, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. that Satan stirred up David to number
Israel; how can that be, that God and Satan concur in one action of sin?
Yes very well: for in sin, Satan, Man, and God, all concur: 1. Satan
temptingly, as in David's adultery, Peter's winnowing. 2. Man's will, yielding
consentingly, though sometimes with reluctance and resistance: (Satan's feed of
temptation being as the father, man's yielding heart as the mother, by which
this monstrous issue, this deformed spurious brat of sin is produced.) 3. God
concurs two ways: 1. Permissiuely: 2. Disposingly. 1. Permissiuely (not
operatiuely,) for God that is liberrimum agens, a free agent, not obliged or
tied to give grace to any, further or longer then he will, in the temptation,
as he did Adam and Eve, and his Saints ever since, permits their falls. Why will
he do so? were it nor better for him to keep and uphold them ever in the
fiery trial, then suffer them to be conquered? No. Why so? (and thus comes in
the second, that as Oedipus dissolues the knot, and resolves all,) because he
knows wisely how to dispose of sin (which he permits) when it is perpetrated
and committed, to his own glory, and his childrens good. To his own glory?
how is that? either to the glory of his mercy in pardoning sin, as he did the
sins of David, Peter, Sampson, Solomon, upon their true and unfeigned
repentance, and satisfaction of the scandalized Church; or to the glory of his
Justice, in punishing sin, first here in outward plagues upon the body, as
he did the Sodomites Genesis 19.24.
, the Egyptians Exodus 7.8, 9, 10. chap.
, the Philistims 1 Samuel 5.7.
, Herod: secondly, in inward plagues upon the soul, as he did on Cain, Judas,
Saul: thirdly, and in eternal hereafter. And so God that does none evil
actually, operatiuely; works yet in the evil wisely, prouidently,
dispositiuely Non agit molum, nec male, sed agit in mal
.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. 1. God glorified in his mercy in the sins of his Saints.
ANd indeed (as worthy our discussing) me thinks the Lord in permitting the
faults and falls of his servants, or their failings in good duties, as here in
Ezekiah, has a fourefold special reference and relation.

1. To himself permitting. 2. To his servants sinning. 3. To his Saints that
yet stand. 4. To the wicked that stumble.
All which being considered, first we shall with more caution look to our
selves; secondly, with more charity censure our brethren; thirdly, with less
carnality rejoice in their infirmities; fourthly, with more devotion glorify
God.

First, I say the Lord in the sins of the elect has a special reference to
his own glory; that glory of his (to which as to a center every thing tends
Ioshuah 7.19. Psalm. 12.1. Mat. 6.9. John 9.24. Acts 3.12. and 12.23. 1 Cor.
6.20. and 10.31. Philip. 1.20. etc.
in heaven, earth, and hell,) shines as the bright stars in the darkest
night, yea as the Sun, through the clouds of the sins of his Saints: he
brings good out of evil, light out of darkness: and this as I said, is the
glory of his mercy, in pardoning upon their repentance: oh this mercy of his
which is his chief attribute, in which he most delights De hac diuina
misericordia lege fusius apud Gregor. Moral. lib. 2. and Bernard. Ser. 88.
, that shines amongst the rest, as the Sun amongst the Planets: that is
eleuate above his truth, as the heavens above the clouds Psalm. 103.11, 12.
: that triumphs and rejoices over Justice: Even this Mercy that is over all
the Lords works, is most resplendent in the sins of his Saints, in pardoning
upon their humiliation sins great for quantity, heinous for quality, many
for number, crying for nature, crimson and bloody in hue and color Esa. 1.16,
17, 18. Ezekiel. 18.21. Mic. 7.18. Joel 2.13. Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 86.111.112.145.
, as many of these formerly enumerated: oh not only the skill, but the good
will of our blessed Physician is wondrously magnified; the virtue of his Balmes
of Gilead, the vigor of his mercies mithridate deservedly extolled, that is
able and willing even with application of his own blood, (as the Pelican
Alciat. in Emblem.
for her young) to cure great ghastly and vlcerous wounds, to pacify and settle
distressed consciences; yea even to revive those that were seemingly dead in
sins and trespasses: And sure if there were no sinners on earth, where should
be the chief exercise of the Lords mercy? Yea, if his Saints should not sin
(for we know the Reprobates never taste of his sealing, assuring, saving,
sanctifying mercy; unless with the out-lip, or the tip of a finger; they
never drink of the fountains of Shiloh, those are only open for Judah
Zachar. 13.1.
and Jerusalem) if there were none wounded, what need were there of any
skillful Surgeon? and if there were none sick and diseased, what occasion were
there either of the practice or praise of the most exquisite Physician? What
should we regard either the knowledge or use of the most excellent drugs and
simples in nature? What reckoning should we make of the most exquisite
extractions, the most vigorous quintessence of herbs, plants, mineralls, etc.
And if there were no sinners, no sins committed by the Saints, the Lord
should want the greatest power and praise of his mercy, which is chiefly
exercised where sinning misery is the object: and therefore as the Lord has
daily exercise of his providence even to this day, and of his wisdom in the
gubernation and government of the world, in disposing of all actions, events,
causes, effects, contraries, contrarieties, evils, good; creatures, animate,
inanimate, reasonable, unreasonable; to excellent ends and uses: as he does
still inuisibly in the souls and consciences; visibly upon the bodies, goods,
good names, and families of Atheists, swearers, drunkards, riotous and profane
persons, exercise his justice: so in pardoning, covering, concealing, passing
by the sins and culpabilities of his servants, upon their confessing, godly
sorrowing, returning, (conditions to which grace is annexed) he does daily
exercise his mercy, and will to the end of the world.

SECT. 2. The Saints much bettered by their sins.
SEcondly, even the Saints themselves are bettered by their sins: for if all
things, according to the Apostles consolation, Romans 8.28.
work together for the good of those that love God, (as all the Planets work
together by their influence, even the malignant as well as good and benign,
for the benefit of these sublunaries Couper in loc,
, as all the simples in some compounded Physic, even bitter Aloes, as well as
Honey, work together for the health of the Patient) then why not sin? Sure,
as an exquisite Physician or Apothecary, that out of venomous Toads, Aspes,
Nutes, Cicutaes, etc. He that reads Gesner de quadrupedibus, and de
Serpentibus, etc. Dioscorides and Dodonius Herbals, shall see there is some
medicinable extractions from the worst of Animals or Vegitables.
extracts an Antidote against poison, and out of stinking despicable
foot-trodden weeds, draws some excellent and sovereign waters, from their
leaves and roots, for very useful cures, in inward and outward diseases; so
the wise God, even out of the worst, the vilest, the most scandalous
transgessions of his servants, can effect his own gracious ends, can both
heal them of all their present sores, prevent their future diseases, and make
them more healthful and stronger then ever: yea, as experience shows in some,
and as the Apostle plainly delineates in the renewed repentance of the
Corinthians 2 Cor. 7.11.
, the Saints come out of the bed of their sins, as Ezekiah out of his sick
bed 2 King. 20. Esaias 38.
, more humble, more holy, more pious, more penitent: as the Eagle that is
wearied comes out of the water, into which she dips her wings Plin.
, with a stronger flight, with a more surging ascent toward heaven then ever:
with greater care to please God, to walk before him; as a wrong wandering
Traveler, with a more heedfull attention, stronger desires to run the right,
the strait, the straight way to Sion; once returning right from his bemoned
wandering, with a greater hatred and indignation against sin; as a man against
an impostor or deceiuer that has deceived him; as Sampson against Dalilah, or
any other penitent person against a harlot that has betrayed him, with greater
fear to offend for hereafter; like the burnt child that dreads the fire, or
fears the water out of which it has been extract and saved from drowning.
Yea, more zealous then ever for God, desirous to restore that glory again to
God by all means, by private or public confessing Josh. 7.19.
, as the nature of the offense shall require, that was taken away by scandalous
sinning: and thus are the Saints bettered by their sins, God perhaps
suffering them once foully to fall, that they may rise for ever Periissemus
nisi periissemus O amici, inquit olim Themostocles post exilium.
: As those that are Bell-founders deal with their old iarring Bells, the Lord
breaks them in pieces, by contrition and godly sorrow, melts them anew in the
furnace of affliction, that they may after ring a more sweet and melodious
peale of his praises: By marring them once, the Lord ever after mends them and
makes them: by pulling them down, he builds them up: by losing their credit
with men, they better their conscience with God: yea above all, as spiritual
pride is the last enemy that grace subdues Cum been pugnaris, cum cuncta
subacta putaris,

Que magis infestat bincendae superbiarestat.


, as holding out the siege the longest: living (like that messenger which came
with news to Job) when the rest of sins are dead, breeding (as Serpents out
of the reins and marrow of a dead man Plin. lib. 10. cap. 66. Vt ex venire
Bubulum. Vespae. Idem. lib. 11. c. 20.
) out of the very death and mortification of other lusts; even this master
Devil is subdued and cast our of his possession, eiectione firma, as it were
by strong hand, by Gods permitting his proud patient whom he means to cure, to
fall into some other sins: for so it is, when the Lord has bestowed
excellent gifts upon some of his children, common or special graces, as the
spirit of prayer, wisdom, learning, eloquution, prophesying, or the like, and
these gifts come to be exercised in some eminent place, in some high and
eminent calling, as in the Ministry, Magistracy, or by the chief in the
Economy, and the subjects of these gifts, besides their too special notice
they take of themselves, Narcissus De Narcisso vide expositionem Ethicam, ex
Textoris Theater lib. 8. page 866.
like, becoming enamoured of themselves for them, be further puffed up (as
bladders with wind) by the daingerous applauses of the admiring multitude
Which applauses once puffed up S. Augustine when he was Rhetoric Lecturer at
Millane: and Demosthenes, when they pointed at him, Hic est Demosthenes.
, so far, that they make these gifts that are Gods, as lent them, their own
by usurpation, yea their Idols by adoration, still looking at their best, as
the Peacocke Plin. lib. 10. cap. 20. and Aelianus lib. 5. c. 19.
at his proud spread train, and the Swan at his fair feathers, in so much that
they forget all duty, all homage to the Doner; The Lord by suffering this
inbred corruption of pride, to break out into some great kibe, and visible
foul ulcer of other sins, conspicuous to the very eyes of the observing
world, and obnoxious to the lash of their whipping tongues, brings them some
pegs lower, lets them down by true and serious humiliation, lets them see
their foul feet, causes them to detest and abhor themselves, makes them
stoop to admonition, makes them weep at his correction, opens their ears to
receive instruction, and every way betters them, in what ever they were (but
did not see) amiss, by a through reformation; and so, as one nail drives out
another, the Lord by other sins drives out this lordly lionly pride, and
self exaltation, and rivers in the place this so much loved and approved
humiliation.

SECT. 3. The good use which those that stand, make of the sins of those that
fall.
THirdly, the permitted fall of some Saint may be a good caveat and caution to
others, that as yet stand firm and fixed in the o^be of grace, according to the
Apostles rule, to take heed lest they fall: it may be to all others, Preachers
and Professors, as Senecharibs Epitaph Luthere Comment. in Genes. cap. 33. page
504.
: In me intuens, pius esto.
In looking upon me.
See holy that thou be.
since, Quod cuiquam contigit, id cuivis: That which happens to any one, may
happen to every one. Hodie mihi, cras tibi: Though that this day it be my lot,
To morrow thou may come to pot.
It sorts as well the funeral of our credit, as of our corpse. Sometimes the
Dogs are beaten, that the Lions may fear; but when the Lions themselves fall
so dejected, their heroicke spirits so far daunted, that every Mouse may
run over them, every Frog friske upon them, the crow of every dunghill Cock
affright them; oh what need have the lesser beasts to fear the hunters Gynn,
and ensnaring trap! When tall Oaks fall, the strong pillars come down, the
one by violent blasts, the other by earthquakes, the little tender striplings
may easily be borne down, the thin dawbed walls may soon be washed away:
oh the example of an eminent man in zeal, place, grace, etc. as it is an
excellent light, set on a beacon, so long as it shines bright, and burns; so
even when the light of his good life and doctrine is eclipsed, and his day
gone, even his darker twinkling may serve as candle in a lantern, to show a
wise passenger the way in the night: yea it may serve perhaps as the light on
some high lantern, at the mouth of the Haven, to the seaman, to avoid the
dangerous rocks, and steare aright into the Port. As in vindictiue justice, so
perhaps in permissiue sins, the Lord propounds good ends: vt poena ad paucos,
exemplum ad omnes perueniat, that some few may fall, that the rest may fear;
that some few may be corrected by the mulct of sin, all bettered and directed
aright, from the consideration of the fearful example of the sinner: Similies.
and indeed who (that has either Art, or heart in Navigations) being in a
little pinnace, will not steare as fast as he can, from some Gulf, in which
he sees some goodly ship before his eyes swallowed: from some Rock on which
he sees her split: from some quickesand on which she is grauelled. Who that
sees a nimble footed man, walking on the ye perhaps with a Pike staff in his
hand, falling for want of heedfull footing, and breaking an arm, or a leg, or
some joint, will not, being to pass the same slippery place, look very
carefully, curiously and circumspectly to every foot he sets, for fear of
falling, and harming; ever poysing the ye, for fear of breaking, and drowning.

Without stretching the Metaphor, it is known, the world is the Sea Illustrat
Reneccius in Claui scripturae.
, the places on which we walk, are full of ye, brittle, slippery: the
Passengers over this glassy sea, these slippery ice, are the Saints: their
slippes, are falls, wounds in their credit and conscience, now he, that sees,
the strongest, the nimblest, the most cautelous of his footings, to slip,
trippe, stumble, yea fall and tumble before him: and is not cautelous and
circumspect over his own station and standing, has little wit, less Grace;
he is worse then the horse and Mule without understanding, for all the
switching and spurring which can be used, will not cause the traveling horse
to enter into the quagmire, into which he sees another plunged before him, nor
all the beating make the sluggish ass, descend the craggie and rockie passage
in which he sees his fellow ass, improvidently fallen before him: Neither will
the bird come into the net, in which she sees another flackering before her;
and therefore the Fouler must kill, or take out those already caught, ere he
catch more: neither will the Rat come into the trap, in which she sees and
hears another squeake, and cry: yea some have thought it a good means to rid
the house of all these vermin, by burning one of them quick: the rest
avoiding as frighted by her cry, and from her smell. But leaving beasts (which
yet as Tutors and Schoolemasters may read many good Moral, yea Theogicall
lessons, to imprudent and improuident men, as they do in many places of
Scripture Prou. 6.6. Prou. 30.24, 25, 26, 27. Job c. 37, 38, 39. Ier. 8.7. Esaias
1.4. Math. 10.18. Math. 23.37. See also Mr. Topsel epistola dedicatoria, before
Gesner translated.
) what man is so unwise that going over a narrow bridge with his fellow and
friend, more youthful perhaps and nimble then himself, seeing him for want of
circumspection fall in the river before him, either to his drowning, or
indangering: will not look more carefully to his own feet, go more softly,
without that precipitate haste, which perhaps was prejudicial to his fellow,
hold him by the railes, or the rope, that is drawn by the side, for the safer
passage: yea what soldier seeing his foole-hardy fellow-souldier, by his
unadvised, unnecessary, presumptuous advauncing of himself upon the besieged
walls, struck pat in the pate, with a bullet, will presently without any need
or warrant, in a rash humor, do the like desperate deed, unless he be weary
of his life? or what servant seeing his fellow servant fall down instantly dead
before him, by the tasting of daingerous and deady poison (mistook perhaps by
the likeness for sweet sugar, Mastick, Olybanum, White Rice, or the like) will
so well love his dead fellow, or so ill love himself, as to ear of his
banefull drugs? or pledge him in his poysonfull dregs? The application is easy
to those that are ocular, and understanding, and consider my scope in enlarging
the point, by these Parables. A word, yea a wincke is enough, to a wise man:
Praemonitus, Praemunitus, he forewarnd, is forearm'd: he sees his face in
another man's Glass, reads lectures to himself out of other men's Tragedies,
grows more wise, by others follies, more learned, as tutored and instructed by
other men's errors, keeps his right course the better by others wanderings: the
righteous will consider and lay to heart his own frailties, by others
failings: as the Princes son, that is any thing intelligent, will see his own
deseruings, when he see^ other Boys bett and bricht, for less irregularities
the^ he has fallen into: whereas on the contrary, bray a fool in a mortar, and
he will not understand: All the examples of the sins or sorrows of the Saints,
preached and pressed to him, are as music to a deaf man Surdo narratur fabula.
Judge. 16.27.
; meats to a distempered sick man; colors to a blind man: they move him as
much either to compassionate the sinner, or his own soul, as the crack of a
fallen Oak moves a rock, or a stone. Scilicet id curet populus: what is that
to them? unless to make sport with, as the Philistines with that despised
Sampson, nay they grow more proud, more presumptuous by it, as the Prologue to
the Tragedy of their ensuing, approaching ruin

SECT. 4. The Reprobates more hardened by the sins of the elect, and their
repentance hindered.
FOurthly and lastly, Gods permission of the falls of his servants, has also
no small relation and reference even to the wicked and reprobate themselves:
for as all things work together for the good of the elect, and for the
furtherance of their salvation Romans 8.28. See with Parr the Scoth Cowper in
locum
; so all things (and so amongst the rest, even the sins of the elect
themselves) co-work together to the furthering and setting forward of the
danation of the reprobate: those that out of their own wicked inclination, and
perverse disposition are so procliue and propense to sin, that they run
headlong into sin, as the horse into the battle, with a vehement
precipitation, haled with the swinge and sway of their unbridled affections and
driven with the whirlewinde of Satan's temptations that they cannot be bridled,
in their outrageous courses, by the bitt and curb of the word, and spirit;
stinted or stayed by mercies, or judgments threatened, felt, or feared, from
running to hell, their center, more then a stone or bowl, or great Millstone,
from running down a hill, till it come to the bottom, drinking up iniquity
with greediness, and sin like water; scorning counsel, hating correction,
snuffing up a^l admonition, as the wild ass does the wind: all the means
that God uses for their reformation being as oil spilt upon the ground, as
plasters spent or misspent on an incurable wound Vulnus insanabile c^se
resecandum.
. It is just with God even to send these packing faster, that make such speed
to their perdition, to lay as it were the Rod and spur to them, and let them
have the head, and the bridle loose, that of their own voluntary thus gallop
and post with speed to destruction: giving them up as the Lord did the morally
wise, really foolish Gentiles Romans 1.21, 24.
, even to the lusts of their own hearts, hardening their hearts further in
justice by the substraction of his grace, and by the scandalous lives of some
professors, when they first harden their own hearts like Pharaoh Exodus 8. et
Ex. 9.
, and will not be softened in mercy: to such, the sins of the Saints are as
stumbling blocks laid in the way, on which they stumble, and fall, and break
their necks: for they, as blind Beetles, and Owls, delighting only in their
dark; seeing clearliest in the night of their sins, but shutting their eyes,
and seeing nothing (or at best, but purblind) in the clearer day and light of
the rest of their good life, and sun of their Graces, as scarabaean fleas
feeding only on the dunghill In stereore viuunt, et semen in Globum ibidem
emittunt, Aelianus, l. 9. c. 16 et Clemens, lib. 5. Stromaton. etc.
, and delighting in the ill sent of their scandal; as swine ever rooting in
their weeds, not regarding their flowers, taking their branne and rejecting
their Wheat; casting away the whole Cup or Plate, for one rent or flaw;
blemishing the whole body (though never so sound) as vlcerous and leprous, for
one wart or some few blisters or blaines that break out; contemning and
condemning the whole life of the most sanctified Christian, as sensual and
sinful, for some few infirmities, and failings in some particulars: their
corruption by this means helped forward, by the devils delusion, is more
quickened, animated, fleshed and encouraged, in all profane and irregular
courses? Yea by the sins of the Saints they are faster chained in their
voluntary prison, further bound prentice to Satan, for the whole term of
life, resolutely contracted and married to their beloved sins, never to
forsake them, till death them depart, made ten fold more the children of the
devil then before: for besides their former prejudice already specified; as
from particulars (like bad Logitians, worse Divines) concluding generals,
condemning all the Disciples for one suspected Judas; all proselites and
professors for one detected Ananias Act. 5.1, 2, 3.
, or Saphira; reuiling and hating all profession, all religion for the
frailties or faults of some professors formerly reputed religious, and held as
holy ones: to their own confusion, they from these false premises make this
conclusion, with outcries, clamours and vociferation: Nay fie upon them all,
these Puritans, these precisians, etc. soul shame take these puritanicall
preachers with their disciples, these holy brethren, these professors, these
Bible-bearers, we may see what they are, vile hypocrites, all birds of a
feather, no barrells of them better Herring, they are all alike: has not such
a one done thus, and thus. etc. nay, and this be their profession, Lord keep
me from being one of them, if this be their religion, etc. And thus from
staring they run stark mad, from being before profane, they turn flat
Atheists, hickscorners of God, of Grace, of all religion: growing by this
means, from something to stark naught; whereas before by some good motions
cast into their hearts, they were houering and wavering, sometimes as a feather
that hangs in the air, whether they should better their lives or no; in some
flashes perhaps at a Sermon, as sermon-sicke (as some are sea-sicke) half
persuaded to be Christians like Agrippa Acts 26.28.
: now by this means, their sparks are quenched, they freeze faster then ever,
like Moab, they are frozen even in their dregs, and purpose to continue in
their sins as they do without any revolution, in a settled resolution: and thus
these sons of Beliall (as spiders from weeds) suck and draine their poison
from the sins, and slips of the best: yea as in the same pasture in which the
ox finds good pasture, the sheep good grass, the Be good flowers for
honey, the Toade finds matter of poison; so in the best, and worst of the
life, and conversation of a professor of religion, whereas a good and a wise
hearted Christian, finds a spur and president of virtue, and an Antidote and
preservative against vice, the wicked man on the contrary finds a Remora, and
an obstacle to any good; an Incendary to his lusts, yea a pleader, and a
proctor for his profaneness; and this comes to pass, by the just judgment of
God, upon the reprobate, that when they will not trace the upright steps of the
godly, and insist in their courses, they should stumble upon their sins, and
frailties, as on so many stones of offense, and rocks of irrecouerable ruins.
The use of this point I should now urge, but the time having overtaken me,
being swifter, then my tongue: I refer them, till the afternnoone.

The second Sermon.
CHAP. V.
SECT. 1. Charitable censuring of our sinning brethren, prescribed and
persuaded.
AS you may remember, besides other points, (which I pretermit) we have lately
seen the Lord permitting the sins of his own Saints, for his own glory
pardoning: for the good of the sinner repenting: for the good of others that
stand sincere, for their cautelous preventing: for the further obduration of
the reprobate stumbling: The uses from the point as obuious, to our selves, are
these:

First, to be charitable in our censures, toward those, 1. Use.
of whose sincerity we have been well persuaded, though in some things we
find them to have failed, though in every thing they have not answered our
expectation, yea though at sometimes, in some temptations, the Lord have far
left them to themselves, and to the farpreuailing of their corruptions: let us
take heed of rash, false and uncharitable judging of our brethren, in respect
of some special sins, or sufferings: the judgment of verity belongs unto
God, Ier. 17.9, 10.
who as the trier of the heart, and searcher of the reins, knows what is in
man, his better, and his worse, his gold, and his dross; his measure of
sanctification and corruption, yea his present, and final estate, to whom he
rises and falls, as to his own master: the judgment of charity belongs unto
us, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
secret things belong unto God, revealed things unto us: It is hard to discern
an hypocrite or hypocrisy, till God do himself discover it, as he did the
hypocrisy of Judas, Demas, Ananias, Saphira, and diverse others: we cannot
attain to that which Momus Apud Valerium Maximum.
wished, to have windows in men's hearts: the heart is the Sanctum Sanctorum,
into which God himself enters, and sometimes his Priests, his Ministers; when
God reueales unto them, the heart of an Hypocrite, as he did Judas to the
Disciples John 13.26.
, Demas to Paul 2 Timothy 4.10.
, Simon Magus and Ananias to Peter Act. 8.21, 22, 23. et Act. 5.3, 4.
, which is rare and extraordinary: but to call or hold a man an hypocrite,
whose general course of life and conversation has been conscionable,
painful, and sincere in his special; zealous, and devout in his general
calling, for some few failings, and aberrations; for some errors in judgment,
or corruptions in life, yea, though perhaps once or twice in his course or race
of Christianity, Similies.
very wide wandering, very offensiuely falling or stumbling; from hence to
conclude that he never had, more then common Grace, or that his heart was never
sincere with God, is as for a man to conclude against both the rules of
Physic and experience, that a man is unfound at heart, in a consumption in
his lungs, or rot at liver, because of some kibes, blames, or carbuncles which
now and then break out in the flesh or skin: or as though a tree were festred
at the root, and rot in the sap, because the bark in some places is pild and
fallen off, the fruits dwined with the eastern wind, blasted or worm eaten:
or that a horse were heart sick, because of some wind gauls, splints, or
spauins he puts our, or because his back is galled, his feet ouer-reacht or
enterfere, or his fetlocks have the scratches? No certainly, one Swallow makes
no Spring, says experience Vna Hirundo non facit ver. Erasm. in Adagiis.
; one act makes no habit, says Philosophy V^a actio non facit habitum. Beda ex
Aristotele.
; a vertigo or megrim in the head, or cramp and convulsion in the sinews, or
scyatica in the hip, or ache in the bone, or gout in the joint, (which is far
enough from the heart) argues not a man heart-sicke, says Physic; and some
failings, though perhaps in some things scandalous, argue no hypocrite, says
Divinity: for if this were a demonstrance of an hypocrite, had our ridged
Catoes, or severe censurers lived in the days of Abraham, Jacob, Judah,
Joseph, Lot, Moses, David, Ely, and the rest of the Patriarchs; of Peter,
Thomas, James, John, and the Apostles; of Augustine, Epiphanius, Tertullian,
Ierom, amongst the Fathers; and so in the best and purest times, in which we
have shown the failings of the best, none being able to say, his heart is
clean; then sure those that were Saints in their times in earth, and now are
Saints in heaven, by the computation of these iudgers (which will needs enter
into a praemunire against God, and take his office out of his hand) even these
had been ranged and rancked in the beadrole and catalogue of Hypocrites, and
in their censure, as sure excluded heaven, as unmerciful rash hypocritical
iudgers must be, without repentance, extruded into hell, Mat. 7.1. James 2.13.

Nay certainly it has been always my opinion, if not judgment, (and perhaps
I have been taught something, as Adam knew good and evil by experience) that
as the very hypocrite and natural man by the help of nature, conversation,
good company, a powerful Ministry, restraining grace, common gifts, may for
the matter perform even the strictest duties of Christianity, public and
private, in the Church and family, which the Orthodoxe Christian does in
sincerity, as appears by Esaus weeping Heb. 12.16.
, Judas his repenting Mat. 27.1, 2.
, Saul's confessing 1 Samuel 15.24.
, the Pharisees praying Luke 18.13.
, Simon Magus his baptism r, Herod's hearing Mark 6.20.
, and reverent respect of the Ministry, Demas his conuersing with Paul 2 Timothy:
4.10.
, and professing, with the like; and yet but all a fair thread, a cobweb
Lawne, spunne by this Spider Hypocrisy: So on the contrary, even the true
sincere servant, the dear child of God, by the strength of temptation, by the
traps and plots of the wicked, by a desertion for a time, God leaving him to
himself (as the Nurse or Mother does the child without hold, or as the
General retires from some fighting Soldier, as Ioab 2 Samuel 11.16, 17.
did from Vrias) he may fall for the matter into the very same sin with the
natural man, he may act the very same material part, and sympathize in very
many grievous circumstances: as for instance, Gehezi lies and dissembles with
his master Elishah 2 King. 5.25.
; Abraham lies and dissembles twice, once with Pharaoh Genesis 12.18, 19.
, another time with Abimelech concerning Sarah Genesis 20.2.
: (for the child of God may fall twice into the very same sin, not only as
Peter did, in one heat, as they say, and one passion Luke 22.58. Vno ictu, vno
actu.
, but even in spaces and times interuenient, in several spaces, places, with
several persons, yea after some caueats and warnings from God, or from man, as
Sampson in his effeminate folly with the harlot of Azzah Judge. 16.1.
, and after his fair escape verse. 2, 3.
, after that with treacherous deluding destroying Dalilah verse. 4, 5, 6.
,) so Herod we know commits incestuous adultery with his brother Philips wife
Mat. 14.4.
, and after that (as the usual fruit of such filth, A malo ad peius, from
evil to worse) being reproved, seals it with the blood of a great Prophet
verse. 10.
, joining murder to uncleanness: did not David 2 Samuel 11.
parallel him as just, (or rather as unjust) in wickedness, for the outward
acts, (we leave the repented effects) as ever Plutarch paralleld the Greeks
and Romans in worthiness: for David defiles the bed of Vrias, in his
adulterizing with his wife, and after in carnal policy to salve all, (Oh the
salve far worse then the sore) defiles his hands and his heart with Vrias his
blood: yea, the child of God may have many failings, yea scandalous fallings,
such as may even exasperate the Lords justice, procure wrath, (at least rods
and scourges in temporary chastisements) after his serious humiliation in some
repented transgression: for leaving what in charity might be urged from Abraham
and Sampson against our Didimists and Sceptiques in this disputable point: did
David's repented lust and bloodshed, so absolutely mortify and kill every lust,
in the root, that it never sprouted into any superfluous sprigs any more: was
he then so washed that he never was further poluted? I say as Samuel 1 Samuel
15.15.
to excusing Saul, What then means the bleating of the sheep? how is it we
hear after of his most unequal partiality, his strange credulity, his
palpable injustice, upon the suggestion and wrong information of a treacherous
flattering Ziba, without examination of circumstances, (a great fault in a
Judge, more in a King) that he gives away half the lands of true, honest,
humble hearted Mephibosheth, the son of that fidus Achates, his dear
Jonathan, unto a perfidious Sycophant 2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc.
; yea, (omitting his dissembling 1 Samuel 21.13, 14.
, and lying 1 Samuel 27.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
in the Court of the King of Achis, his partiality and Ely-like 1 Samuel 3.13.
conniuence at the faults of his cockered children 1 King. 1.6.
, his neglect of Justice upon the house of Saul, for Saul's bloody perfidious
zeal in murdering the Gibeonites, for which even Israel smarted 2 Samuel 21.1, 2
, his rash infringed vow 1 Samuel 25.22.
for bloody revenge upon Nabal, etc.) did he not in the pride of his heart by
his instrument Ioab 2 Samuel 24.1, 2 1 Chronicles. 21.1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11. etc.
number the people of Israel, from Dan to Beershebah, in which, resting more in
the arm of flesh and the strength of Israel, then in the Lord, whom he had
ever found his Rock, his refuge, his Asylum, his Sanctuary, etc. making him
victorious over the Bear, the Lion 1 Samuel, 17.34.
, Goliath, Saul, the Philistines, all his enemies, etc. the Lord was so
displeased, that he sent him as harsh a message by Gad as before he had done by
Nathan, and as terrible in the execution, cutting off by the plague and
pestilence in a trice 70000 of his people 2 Samuel 24.
: so that from these instances, to judge the child of God an hypocrite, for
particular sins, when in the general course of his life he walks with God,
as did Enoch Heb. 11.5.
and Elias; is as though a skillful Lawyer should be esteemed no better then a
Pettifogger, or an Ignoramus, because perhaps he may miss it in some
pleadings, or mistake it some book Cases: as though an expert experimented
Physician should be held a Quacksaluer, because he fails in the symptoms,
causes, or cures of some diseases: as though we should estimate an exquisite
Musician no better then a Fiddler, that by the vntuneablenesse of his
instrument, or the hoarsenesse or ouer-straining of his voice, should miss it
in some strains, in vocal or isntrumental music: yea as though a Laureat
Poet should be held a Poetaster, as a Bavius or a Mevius, because he is not so
obseruant in every quantity of every syllable in an Hexamiter, Saphicke, or
Iambique verse: yea or to conclude it with a homely simily, as though a well
metald nimble footed horse, should be accounted a stumbler, when he stumbles
but very seldom, perhaps but once or twice in a days riding, though he
seldom fall down right, or if he do by accident, upon some stone, or
slip-shod, yet nevertheless speedily recouers himself again, without any
great damage to his master, and looks better to his feet ever after: Sure he
were as the horse without understanding that would make those conclusions.
Saint James makes the application, In many things we sin all James 3.2.
; and says holy Job Job 4.18.
, The Lord has found folly in Angels, how much more in the sons of men: yea
Adam sinned in the state of integrity Genesis 3.
, how much more we in the state of corruption? Oh Lord if thou should be
severe to mark what is done amiss, oh who may abide it! who can answer thee
one for a thousand Job 9.2, 3.
? not I: but abhor my self in sackcloth and ashes Job 42.6. 2 King. 20.
. David, a man after thine own heart, had his frailties; yea Ezekiah, an
excellent instrument of thy glory, after thou had humbled him on the bed of
sickness, raised him, when there was but a step betwixt him and death, did too
soon forget thee and thy mercies, that so mercifully, so mindfully remembered
him: yea and after that wrath came upon him and Judah and Jerusalem for his
pride, and was removed upon his humiliation, as though his sore had been but
skinned over, superficially healed, and ranckling at the bottom, it breaks
out again in the very same place and leaves a second a greater scarre then the
former; for in the same pride of heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.
as the original of another provocation, he shows his treasury to the
Ambassador of the King of Babel: as an unadvised Traveler shows his purse,
or vaunts his gold to a greedy thief. Oh Lord what is man, says David, that
thou art mindful of him Psalm. 8.4.
? Nay Lord, what is man if thou be not mindful of him? what is man when he
is unmindful of thee? forgetful of thy mercies, not fearing thy judgments?
Oh, what is the little Chicken or Goseling, that regardlesse of the clock, or
the wings of the dam, wanders alone, till the Puttocke or the Hen-arrow swaps
and deuoures it? What is the Lamb or silly Sheep, that straggling from the
rest of the flock, or from the eye and rod of the Shepherd, eats Rot-grasse,
falls into the ditch, as leaping into forbidden pastures, or is seized upon by
the fangs of the Dog, or the wiles of the wild Dog-Fox? Oh who is he but may
say, with thy servant David in some particulars? Lord, I have done very
foolishly, now I beseech thee forgive the sin of thy servant 2 Samuel 24.10.
: Oh I am in a great strait, but let me fall into thy hands, not into the
hands of men, not into the mouths of men, for man's mercies are cruelties.

Secondly, from hence also let the Nouations De istis Nouatianis cum eoru^
haresibus, vide fusius apud Funcciu^ fol. 103 Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 43. Epiphanium
Philastrium, Magd. Cent 3. p. 99 586. and in Tom. 2. Council. page 227.
, Catharists, Anabaptists and all perfectists, that dream of any absolute
perfection here in this life in any Church, or in any member of the Church
militant, stay their precipitate haste, and wait Gods leisure, seek it not per
saltum, by such high and hasty leapes, but come to it gradatim, as Graduates to
their Academicall graces, by degrees, they may have golden dreams of
perfection in earth, but never attain it till they be triumphant in heaven.

SECT. 2. Cordials of consolations to be applied to the sorrowful sinner.
THirdly, from hence also let me whet the exhortation of the Apostle, that if
any man sin of frailty, let him be restored with the spirit of meekness Gal.
6.1.
: as we would be willing to improve our best skill to the setting and ioynting
of a bone that is broke, to assuage the pains of the Gout, Stone, Stranguary,
Toothache, of any friend, neighbor, brother, by any oils, unctions,
lenitiues, or any good means we could use; so much more in charity and
Christianity, let us labor the reioyning and reioynting against of a member of
Christ, that by sin is broken for a time from the visible Church, the body of
Christ: Similies.
Oh if we would pluck a horse or an ox out of a ditch Cadit Asinus est qui
subleuat, cadit anima non est qui subleuat. etc.
, or to help up an ouerloaden pack horse from the ouer-whelming pressure of his
load, under which he lies, and groans: how much more mercy should we show to
the soul of our brother, grieuing and groaning under the insupportable burden
of sin, which lies so sadding upon the conscience, as the Liver upon the
Heart in the disease called the Nightmare Ephialtes.
, that the poor patient can neither stir hand nor foot, but lie, and cry,
and dye in the distress of despair, unless help be afforded? Oh that we
were ready (chiefly those that have the tongue of the learned) Esaias 50.4.
to speak a word to the weary in due season, that with that good Samaritan we
would pour in the oil and wine of spiritual consolations, Luke 10.30, 31 32,
33.
into those that are sinne-wounded, falling into the hands of these Thieues and
Pirates of the soul, the Flesh, the World, the Devil. Oh that we were as
willing to improve our best Talents to administer heavenly comforts out of the
Treasury and Fountain of all comforts, the Book of God, as Seneca, Plutarch,
Boethius, our late Lipsius, and others, In libris de Consolatione.
have been ready to prescribe Moral and Philosophical comforts in all humane
crosses.

Oh this mourning with those that mourn Romans 12.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
, this sympathizing with one another miseries, as the members 1 Cor. 12.26. 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3
of one body (the head that feels the grieuance of the foot, the heart that
feels the dolours of the hand) this bearing one another burden, as it is
commanded by the Apostle, so it is an excellent point and part of Christianity;
it is a notable expression and intimation of love, which is the bond of
perfection; the very vigor, and life and soul of a Christian, the exercise
and improuing to the best of every grace; without which a Christian is but
key-cold, or at best but lukewarm; and his gifts and talents of learning,
knowledge, wisdom, zeal, unused, nor employed to the edification and
instruction of the ignorant, the consolation especially of the weak and weary
Christian, the erection and lifting up of the dejected and drooping soul; are
but as candles set under a bushel, as talents wrapped in a napkin, or buried in
the ground; or as Gold, rusty and imprisoned in the Misers purse; yea, but as
tinckling Cymballs.

SECT. 3. The unwarrantable strictness and stearnnesse of some indiscreetly
zealous, censured.
What then shall we say to those that think themselves something, that hold
their penny good silver, as they say; that have a name like the Church of
Sardis, to be alive Reu. 3.1.
, yet show as much love as there is fire in a dead coal. How many be there,
that after their brethren be fallen through frailty in any sin, (though once
whilst they stood, more eminent in place and grace then themselves,) yet when
their Sun is something clouded and eclipst, they stand aloof off them, as
Jobs friends did from distressed Job Job 2.12, 13.
; they keep a distance from them, as the proud Pharisee Luke 18.11.
in the Temple from the penitent Publican; they say as it is in the Prophet,
Come not near me, for I am holier then ye: they wonder at them, as at Arabian
monsters, they look at, gaze at them as an amazed Dear, they view them
wistly, as a man looks through his fingers at something: they look at them
with astonishment, as men look at the Sun or the Moon when it is eclipsed,
or at a fair house when it is set on fire; and how ever perhaps they are not
so graceless as the Babylonians, to triumph over captiued Israel Psalm. 137.3.
, and to say as the Edomites, and as David's enemies, There, there, so would we
have it, there goes the game; as the profaner sort iubilize and rejoice; yet
they will howt and showt in detestation, not only of the sin which is
tolerable, but of the person Odi peccatum non personam, vitium non vitum.
, which is unwarrantable and uncharitable: As the lesser birds fly and cry
after the hated Hawke and Owl; (they will not come in his company, though he
be both willing and desirous to give all satisfaction possible to the
scandalized Church, both public and private,) they fly his house, his abode,
his presence, as if he had the plague sore; nay as some have tried the stearne
inhumanity, and almost Scythian and barbarous cruelty of some indiscreet
austere zealists, as though they were hewn our of Caucasus, and had drunk the
milk of Tigers, they are as wonderously grieved and exasperated, that any good
man or great man of place, give them countenance, good look, or good word, or
houseroome, as the Pharisees were grieved and vexed that our Savior Christ
feasted with Matthew the Tole-gatherer Mat. 9.11.
, and lodged with Zacheus Luke 19 7.
, and eat and drunk with Publicanes and Sinners: yea, if he be such an one,
that has been employed in the Ministry, and has any way transgressed As the
Darby Minister, who wrote The vnburthening of a laden soul.
, (though never so seriously repented) they marvel how he dare be so bold and
impudent as to be seens in a Pulpit, though his zeal and desire to do good,
and to bring glory to God, after his peace made with God, be more fervent then
ever it was: as though David's practice were no president, either for a penitent
preacher or professor, where he desires the Lord to restore unto him the joy
of his salvation, and then would he teach Gods ways unto the wicked, and
sinners should be converted unto him Psalm. 51.12, 13.
, though it seems they either know not, or acknowledge not any such Text; but
especially for any comfort or consolation by word, writing, conuersing,
conference, that a distressed soul gets now a days from most men, chiefly
from some that would be counted most strict; in some places, it is as oil got
out of a stone, or water out of a flint: it is such as Judas got of the Scribes
and Pharisees Mat. 27.3, 4.
, unless this be all the cold comfort, grauatis addere grauamina, to add
burden to burden, grief to grief, affliction to affliction: when one is
down, as the Italian proverb and practice is Prescribed by the Florentin^
Matchauill.
, to set their foot upon their necks: too many alas know where the shoe
pincheth and wrings them in this kind, that too justly may complain of their
Swallow friends, that fly from them in the winter of affliction, and as David
said of his kinsfolks and acquaintance, stand a loofe off from them; as he in
the heathen cries, Oh friends, no friends (...)
: to expostulate a little this case, with those that I here justly tax, in
this culpable carriage toward some that are fallen.

SECT. 4. The restitution and restoration, of the repenting sinner persuaded.
FIrst, Is here any expression, and demonstration of love, which who wants, is
destitute of every saving grace? can there be a fire without heat, a Sun
without light, a living soul without motion, or love without action, motion,
or manifestation, if it be at all? this love says one, it is active, or else
it is not Amor si sit magna operatur. Greg.
.

Secondly, is this according to the precept of the Apostle, that commands the
incestuous Corinthian to be comforted after his deiection, least he be
swallowed up too much of sorrow 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.
?

Thirdly, is it any thing consonant to the Apostles practice, who himself
comforted, commended and encouraged the Corinthians by a Consolatory letter,
after their godly sorrowing, with enumerated effects? 2 Cor. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.

Fourthly, is this consonant to the precept of Christ himself, that we should
be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful Luke 6.36.
, threatening judgment merciless, to them that show no mercy Iam. 2. v. 13.
? Now are nor the chief and principal mercies spiritual? is not a
sinne-burthened-soule, a greater object of mercy to be relieved, then the
feeding of a hungry, clothing of a naked, visiting of a diseased body Multo
misericordius operatur, qui circa animas infirmoru^, quam erga corporum
agrotantium: qui panem esurientibus tribuit. Augustine. et Bern. sermon. 4.
?

Fifthly, did not our Savior Christ himself not only inuit and excite Mat.
11.28.
, but every where receive and graciously entertain repenting sinners Luke 15.1.
, even publicans and harlots Mat. 8.11. Luke 7.
, when they came unto him, as appears in many passages in the Gospel? Now
shall he entertain such upon their humiliation, and shall we disdain them?
shall he accept them as the head, and shall the Church his body reject them?
shall he open his arms to embrace thm, and shall his members shut their hands
and their hearts too against them? and open their mouths to deiect them, to
disgrace them? Strange to see the head move one way, and the body another.

Sixthly, is it not Christ's precept, I will not say an Evangelical counsel,
but an express command to Peter, and so consequently to every Peter, every
Pastor, to forgive his offending brother upon confessing and acknowledging, not
only until seven times, but until seventy times seven times Mat. 18.21, 22.
? and if every member is bound to this, much more the whole Church.

Seventhly, as Christ himself with his own mouth exhorted, and dismissed Ioh.
8.10, 11.
the woman taken in the act of Adultery, and comforted the weeping, washing
penitent woman Luke 7.48.
, so he sent Ananias with his own commission to comfort even whilome bloody
persecuting Saul, now three days mourning disconsolate Acts 9.111 12, 13, etc.
: how much more ought those to be comforted of the Church that have mourned
not only three days with Paul, but thirty times three, as a Dove in the
Desert, or a Pelican in the wilderness, that have eaten the bread of
affliction longer then Daniel, more then twenty one days Dan. 10.3.
, and that every night do water their bed with weeping, and their couch with
tears Psalm 6.6.
?

Eighthly, if God himself turn away even deserved wrath from his children,
upon their humiliation, as here from Ezekiah and Judah in my Text: shall the
Church continue her wrath against repentant sinners, where God stints his? will
not the Church wade after, where God breaks the ye?

Ninthly, has not the Church always even from the beginning, as a merciful
mother opened her arms, yea her breast and bowels to receive her repenting,
returning sons, as that merciful Father in the Gospel Luke 15.20.
, did his humbled prodigal? Was not the Incestuous Corinthian received in
Paul's Time 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.
? The Emperor Theodosius after his Thessalonian massacre received in St.
Ambrose his time Le^c historiam apud Theodor. l. 6. c. 18 et Sozom. lib. 7 c.
24.
? and other penitents admitted, first as penitentiaries after as communicants
in all the Primitive times Eccles. hist. passim ex Socrate, Eusebio et Zozomeno.
? and shall our Church now degenerate from a loving mother, to an unjust
stepmother? God forbid.

Tenthly, is not the heresy of Novatus and his strict, stearne Nouatians
plucked up by the roots long since by Augustine, and Epiphanius Cyprianus etiam
concilium congregauit, damnans Nouatianos vt constat l. 1. epist. Cypr. 2 apud
Eusebius. lib. 6 c. 43 et Magd. cent. 3. p. 192. et page 205.
, that there is no sprigs remaining in our days? have we any so rough and
rigorous as to deny ever admission to the Communion, or fellowship to those
that have publikelie, scandalously sinned: if there be any such leauened yet
with this leaven, I wish him as a zealous Emperor once wished to one of these
Nouations Tu scalam erige, et ad coelum solus asconde.
, even to make himself a ladder and to climb up to heaven alone, for I know
none that can follow him.

Eleuenthly, besides is this stearnnesse strangeness and heartedness against
remorsefull sinners (for of such I still speak, and for such as the mouth of
the rest I still plead) agreeable to the law of nature? is it consonant to that
epitome of all moral equity, which Alexander Senerus so much esteemed? namely
that which thou would not have another do to thee, do not to another Quod
tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feoeris.
: Do as thou would be done unto, says the natural Countryman, by the
instinct of nature: Now would thou lie languishing all alone on the sick
bed, much less in the briars and pricks and stings of a sinne-guilty
conscience, unvisited, vnvalued, nay dejected, rejected, and more and more
discouraged? would thou have more weight laid upon thy back, when thou art
almost pressed to death already? would thou have thy wound deeper pierced, and
more blood exhaust, when thou have almost bled to death already? Make the case
thine own: mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur Tantale, would thou have God
severe against thee for every sin? etc Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina
mittat Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit.
.

Object. But it may be, I shall be answered, that in this case I fight with
mine own shadow, and contest where there is no enemy: All these arguments and
expostulations will be granted as Achillaean, and unanswerable in the behalf
of the repenting sinner; but sub Iudice lis est: here is the question, how the
Church should know, that a scandalizing sinner, which has scandalized even
profession (which the Ciuilians say, is the greatest scandal) is truly
humbled, as was here Ezekiah, and is willing to give satisfaction.

Answ. First I say, that the contrite and broken heart is especially known to
the maker and breaker of the heart Ier. 17.9, 10.
. Man knows my sin, but God knows my sorrow, ille vere dolet, qui sine test
dolet, he weeps with a witness that weeps without a witness: it would go
better with many an afflicted soul then it does, if men were but as well
acquainted with their saluing sorrow, as with the sore of their sin.

Secondly, that soul that is willing in every place, in every company, ever in
the fellowship of the Saints, to take that course which Joshua prescribes to
Achan Josh. 7.19.
, to confess his sin, and give glory unto God: nay, to confess and forsake
it, that he may have mercy Pro. 28.13.
, to desire the prayers of Gods Children in his behalf, yea to shame himself
if it were in the publickest places, where God might have glory, and the Church
satisfaction, if it were even by taking the course of Solomon Eccles. 1.1.
, David Psalm 51.
, and Augustine; by writing, and publishing public recantations, etc. this
out-strippes all hypocrisy, Augustine in his books of Confessions and
Recantations.
and is a note and demonstrance of humbled penitencie: this is all that the
Lord does, that man can require, or the strictest Church exact, for
satisfaction, or the humbled heart can do to the utmost for consolation; which
the Lord grant to every burdened conscience for his mercy sake.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1. The same subject that sins, the same must be punished.
ANd so I come now to the second maine point at first propounded, and by the
Text naturally afforded, and that is Ezekiah's castigation: In which we are to
consider, first the primary subject of it, Ezekiah: wrath came upon Ezekiah:
and then secondly, the extent of it: the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, wrath came
upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: thirdly, the castigation it self, here
intimated by this phrase wrath: fourthly, the cause, pride of heart. And first
for the first, the subject of this correction; (for I call it a correction,
rather then a plague or judgment, since what ever is sent to the elect, is a
loue-token from a Father, not a vengeance from a severe Judge) It is briefly
considerable; First, that the party sinning is the party suffering; the very
same individual subject sinning, is the very same that smarts for sin: he
that is an actor willingly, in all the obscene scenes of the pleasing Comoedie
of sin, must act, will he nill he, in the black and dismal Tragedy of
suffering: He that says what he will (the very heathen could tell us) must
hear again, what he would not Qui dicit quod vult, audit quod non vult.
, and he that does what he will, must suffer what he would not: The soul
that sins shall die the death, says Ezekiel Ezekiel. 18. v. 4.
, whether the soul of the father, or the soul of the child, the soul of the
Prince, or the soul of the subject, etc.

Application.
I wish we could lay this to heart, and consider when we are tempted to sin,
that if we will needs be Satan's factors, and agents in sinning, we must
whether we will or no, be the Lords Patients, in suffering: if we will not
do according to the Lords own heart, he will make us to feel his hand: if
like truantly boys we will not be lored and tutored by his doctrine, we must
be instructed by his discipline: if as straggling sheep we will not be
fetched in by his whistle, we must be compelled by his dog or sheepe-crooke: the
rod of bands must effect that, as here with Ezekiah, which the rod of beauty
could not: look as we sow, Zach 11.7.
so we shall reap Gal. 6.7.
, our crop shall answer our seed time, as we bake so we shall eat, and as we
brew so we shall drink. The very heathen could see and sing in their numbers,
that pleasure and pain are lincked together in one chain; and so I say it is
with sin and sorrow; if sin he at the one end, sorrow is at the other, the
last linkes depend on the first, draw the first the last will follow, as Jacob
followed after Esau Genesis 25.26. Hos. 12.3.
and supplanted him.

SECT. 2. God spares not the great ones when they sin.
SEcondly, see Ezekiah a great man, nay the greatest man upon earth, a
terrestrial God, Gods Vicegerent, Gods Leiutenant over his people Israel, is
not spared: if he sin God spares him not: No, Gods Justice can encounter with
Scepters and Crowns Sceptra ligonibus aequat.
, as well as with spades and mattocks, and sheep crooks: Gods justice, like
death Gods purseuant, or summoner, is as impartial as imperial: it is not to
be bribed, not to be corrupted, prevented it may be by repentance (as in the
case of the Jonas 3.10.
Ninevites) perverted it cannot be: Pauperum Tubernas regumque turres aequo
pulsat pede.

With equal foot, with equal rate,
It knockes the poor, rich, regal Gate.
In man's Laws and strictest Statutes, either from ignorance in enacting, or
negligence in executing, the little flies (the meaner sort transgressing) are
caught, but the greater personages, the stronger flies, more potent in friends,
favor, means, break from the intangling webs Similitude Anacharsis apud
Stobaeum.
: but this imputation can never be fastened justly upon Gods laws, or the
execution of them in remuneratiue justice, they fasten upon one as well as upon
another; upon Kings as upon Merchants; upon Princes, as upon Pesants; upon
great Caesar, as upon poor Conon. Pharaohs first borne is no more spared in
the destroying Pestilence Exodus 12.29.
, then the child of the meanest subject: the plague rages in the Kings Court,
as in the Country: Iabin and Sisera are swept away by the river Kishon, yea
that ancient river the river Kishon Judge. 5.21.
, as Deborah sings, as were his common soldiers. God spares Senacherib no more
then his ordinary subjects, nay as he sinned more, his judgment was greater,
he was unnaturally murdered by his own sons even in the midst of his
superstitious Orizons 2 King. 19.37.
: the Lord has a muzzle for the mouth of black Cerberus, reuiling Rabsakah,
as he has a hook for the nose of his master ver. 7. v. 28.
. God spared not Se^on King of the Amorites, nor Og King of Basan, nor the five
Kings which Joshua killed in the Cave Josh. 10.22.
, nor Agag, whom Samuel hewed in pieces 1 Samuel 15.33.
, nor the rest of the Kings of Canaan, more then he did the country Canaanites
themselves whom in his wrath he caused the land to spue out as the sea casts
out her froth 2 Chro. 33.2.
. In that universal conflagration of Sodom, (a type of the burning of the
world and worldlings in the last Judgment Luke 17, 28, 29.
,) the flesh and bones of the aged burning first with lust, escaped the sulphur
and brimstone no more then the riotous youth Genesis 19.24.
: in the deluge of the old world, Noah might have been a doleful spectator of
the reverent aged, the lordly great ones, the proud potentates, the stately
dames, floating in the waters Genesis 7.23.
, as so many drowned rats or cats, as well as the numerous multitudes of the
Plebeians: In Isreal's effeminate folly with the daughters of Moah, joining (as
sin seldom goes alone to hell) Idolatry to adultery, by the pestilent plot
of Balaam Numb. 31.16
, Zimri and Cosbe, an Israelitish Prince, and a Moabitish Princess led the
dance to destruction Number. 25.7, 8.
: yea a thousand of the Peers and Princes were hanged up before the Lord ver.
4.
, and they had Gods martial Law, as severe if not more severe, then the common
people: yea afterward Balaam for all the hope of preferment he had swallowed
and gulped down by complotting with Balack against Israel (that the Lord may
show to all posterity that he detests the plotters of any mischief more then
the actors, the spinners of spiders webbs more then the weauers) his plot
brings him to the pot Numb. 31.8.
, with that brand of infamy upon his covetousness 2 Pet. 2.15.
, as was upon Cain for his murder Jude ver. 11.
: and so it were easy to run through the whole body of Scripture, of Divinity,
of History, for the illustration of this very particular: that there is no
respect of persons with God Acts 10.34.
, no partiality, no such conniuence of his Justice, as may be in some Civil and
Ecclesiastical Courts: he spares neither Ezekiah for his regality, nor Herod
for his pomp, nor Senacherib for his power, nor Nebuchadnezzar for his pride,
nor Nabal for his wealth, nor Goliath for his strength, nor Absalom for his
beauty, nor Achitophel for his policy, nor Solomon for his wisdom, etc. nay,
potentes potenter, etc. the mighty shall be mightily tormented, unless their
great and crying sins be repented: The Lord has gynnes for Nimrodian
hunters, that bloodily hunt others; whips and rods in steep for those that
whip and scourge his people, the enemies to his Son, to his Sion, will he
break with a rod of iron, and crush them in pieces as a Potters vessel, Psalm.
2.9.

SECT. 3. Let the meaner fear, when the great ones are not spared.
LEt every soul be wiser by Gods severity: does not God spare Kings in his
wrath, but vex them in his sore displeasure Psalm. 2.5.
? (more then Gideon Judge. 8.16, 17, 18.
did the Princes of Succoth and Zalmunna) nay, will not God spare Ezekiah here
a great King, but whips him in himself, in his people, as he did also David,
for the pride of their hearts? alas then what sinner can hope for immunity,
impunity? What shall become of such as Christ calls Dogs Mat. 7.6.
, and Swine, despising and despiting holiness and holy things, when even these
Lions are whipped, from whose line lineally descended even the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, Christ, the Savior of sinners? Oh if the fierce winds of wrath
blast and blow and shake such strong oaks, what shall become of the
underwood, the unprofitable rubbish, the briars and thorns, mean men in
gifts and grace, nay silly ignorant beasts, as many of the common people are in
the things of God, and yet profane vicious varlets in all abominable courses,
what can they expect without better fruits, but deserved burning, even to be
fuel to the fire of that wrath, which burns to the very bottom of Hell. Oh
let men of all sorts imagine with themselves, that (as a zealous man wished to
hear Augustine wished to see Christum in carne, and to hear Paulum tonitruantem.
Paul thundering) they hear Christ's forerunner thundering, that now is the axe
laid to the roots of the trees, (the Ministry of the Word laid to men's
hearts) and that every tree which brings nor forth good fruit is cast into the
fire Mat. 3.10.
: is cast; the word is to be marked, is cast already into the fire: for
judgment is begun here with the impenitent and unbeliever, as heaven is
begun here in grace to the believer: he that believes not is condemned
already John 3.18.
: already? in Gods decree for ought he knows; already in the Ministry of the
Word, that binds on earth what is bound in heaven Mat 18.18.
; already in his own conscience 1 John 3.20.
, (God being a thousand times greater then his conscience) and the extent of
the commination is further considerable: every tree that is unfruitful shall
be cut down, every ground that receives the first and latter rain, and
brings not forth fruit, is near unto cursing Heb 6.7.8.
: every ground? every tree? the Lord spares not any tree, neither the Oak for
his strength, nor the Ash for his sap, nor the Cedar for his tallness, nor the
Laurel for his greenness, nor the Olive for his fatness, etc. neither the
aged man for his age, nor the learned for his learning, nor the Scribe for his
knowledge, nor the Pharisee for his long Phylactery, nor the Lawyer for his
pleading, nor Saul for his Magistracy, nor Judas for his Ministry, nor Tully
nor Tertullus for their oratory, nor the strong man for his strength, nor the
wise man for his wisdom, etc. nor any man, of Jew and Gentile, for any other
moral part, for any common gift, for any privilege of birth, nature,
production, education, place; nay not for the most glorious outside of
Religion, for the most formal profession Mat. 7.22, 23. Mat. 8.11.
, if he want the salt, the soul, the seasoning of saving grace; if this tree
want the true sap of the Spirit, that comes from the root of Iesse, if it be
not transplanted out of the barren soil of nature, and planted in the true
Vine John 15.1.2. See M. Hierons Sermon on Mat. 3.10. also the Sermon called
The doom of the barren tree.
, and as a Tree of righteousness brings not fruits worthy of repentance and
amendment of life, shall be for all his fair leaves cut down and thrown into
the fire: neither shall blossoms, and buds, and leaves, and seeming fruit, as
had that cursed Fig Tree Mark 11.13, 14.
, or long standing in the Garden Luke 13.7.
pruned, dunged, watered, by a powerful Ministry, be any plea that it should
stand: neither shall the former fruits that it whilom has brought forth, stand
it in any stead, if for the present it be dead at the root, in the sap, and
barren in the boughs; according to that fearful and terrible threatening in
Ezekiel Ezekiel. 18.24.
, that when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and does according to all the abominations of the wicked, all his
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned: in his sin that he
has sinned shall he die. His former seeming holiness shall no more avail for
the salvation of the hypocrite, then the real impiety, be it what it will be
or can be, of the truly convert sinner, shall be prejudicial to his
destruction, Ezekiel 18.27, 28.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. 1. God scourges his own children when they transgress.
THirdly, see further the strictness of Gods severity against sin and
sinners, in Ezekiah, as in a clear and Crystal glass. God brings wrath upon
Ezekiah, a King, a great man, nay on Ezekiah a good man, a gracious man, a holy
man, a zealous man, a sincere servant, a strict worshipper of the true God: Oh
observe it, and let it be for ever engraven on the tablets of every memory,
that is willing to treasure up any thing that is physical and wholesome for
the souls health. That God as a Father spares not the sins of his own
children, but as he said of Solomon 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. Psalm. 89.31, 32.
, and verifies it further on Ezekiah, if they sin against him, though his
mercy and loving kindness he will not take from them, though he will not
deprive them of their inheritance in heaven, their part and portion in the
spiritual Canaan, where their lot is fallen unto them in a fair ground: yet
he will visit their offenses with rods, and their sins with scourges: he
will not wink at the frailties and follies of any of his children, (as is
sometime the fault of some cockering parents, as was seen in old Ely 1 Samuel
3.13.
and in good David 1 King. 1.6.
;) neither will he be partial in making, as they say, fish of one, and flesh
of another; curbing one in some ill course, and cherishing another; but as
Jacob is strict against all his sinning sons, even against incestuous Reuben
his eldest, and against cruel perfidious Simeon and Leui his next eldest, in
his prophetical sick bed Gen 49.3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
, so is the Father of Spirits zealous against the sins of all his children,
(be otherwise their graces and indowments never so great,) yea it is very
obseruable, that how ever the child of God, after the perpetration of some
great and grievous sin, (such as the Schools call peccatum vastans
conscientiam, a sin making great hackes and gashes and slashes in the
conscience) may upon his repentance and sincere humiliation, make so far his
peace with God, (whose grace is able and willing to pardon every sin, except
that sin unto death, that unpardonable (because unrepented) sin against the
Holy Ghost, See Sonnius in Thesibus: and Kymnitius in locis, de peccato in
Spiritum Sanctum: as also M. Deuison his Sermon.
) that he may redeem his soul from death, and his darling Dove from the power
of the Lion, the Lord sealing to his heart so far his love, that he smelling
the sacrifice of a broken spirit, a bleeding and a believing heart, he shall
not dye the second death: nevertheless, howsoever the guilt and punishment of
sin may so far be removed by Christ, that the soul shall be freed from
everlasting damnation, and saved in the day of Christ: yet the dear child of
God, even for some scandalous lamented repented sin, in temporary rods and
castigations may have Gods hand upon him even to his dying day: he may by
sickness on his body, reproach upon his good name, or other domestique
personal crosses, yea sometimes by trouble of mind and grievous perplexities
in conscience, he may wear a strait and a pinching shoe, even to his very
grave: this is plain here in Ezekiah; no doubt his repentance had made his
atonement with God, through faith in his expected Messiah, his humiliation had
made up the breach so far, and procured his peace in the Court of heaven,
that there is no progress nor proceeding against his salvation; he has his
Quietus est for that, yet notwithstanding wrath comes upon him, and upon Judah:
(either in some sickness and infirmity on his body, or some grief and trouble
of his mind, or in some death and cuttings off of his people, or the like, was
this wrath expressed, (though here it be not revealed in the manner:) but more
perspicuous is the example of David, who upon the confession and
acknowledgement of his sin to Nathan, heard the pardon instantly from the
Prophet, as from the mouth and oracle of God 2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 11, 12, etc.
, yet nevertheless we know what was both threatened and executed in rods
proportioned to his offense: as he had smit unlawfully with the sword, in
killing Vriah, so the sword never departed from his house: Absalom kills his
incestuous brother Amnon 2 Samuel 13.29.
, Ioab the Kings great friend, his instrument in the blood of Vrias 2 Samuel
11.13.
, even this Ioab (oh just Nemesis) whether the King will or no 2 Samuel 18.5.
, kills his darling, how ever then his rebel Absalom verse. 14.
, and Adoniah, (Gallinae filius albae, another of his fair sons) is cut
shorter by the head, in being too heady against his King-brother Solomon 1
King. 2.25.
. So as David was polluted by adultery, adultery and uncleanness, together
with the sword, did cleave to his house and seed, like Gehezies leprosy: the
spurious offspring of his lust dyed in the infancy 2 Samuel 12.18.
, Amnon his own son commits incestuous fornication, aggrauated by all
circumstances of treachery and tyranny, with his own fair sister, David's own
daughter Tamar 2 Samuel 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
; Absalom himself, as a filthy Bird defiling his own nest, (his fathers blood
in his thoughts,) his bed in his acts, lies with his fathers Concubines, (so
shameless, impudent, and imprudent is lust) in the sight of all Israel 2 Samuel
16.22.
. Other instances may be given; and no doubt of it, the bleeding too
deare-bought experience of many of Gods children, which for some momentany sin
are pursued and prosecuted justly in themselves, or their blood, by the hand of
God or man, in perpetuated sorrows, too truly prove this assertion.

SECT. 2. The reasons of the former Doctrine.
NOw leaving secret and inscrutable judgments unto God, which though they may
be hidden and abstruse from us, yet can never be unjust S^creta esse possunt
iudicia Dei, iniusta esse non possunt. Augustinus.
. The reasons of these thus proceedings of God with his children, may be these,
besides others: (that we may not intermeddle or reflect in the least measure
upon any Popish satisfactions, which we only with the Scriptures include and
conclude in Christ: as though, according as they dream, (and but dream) that
these continuated castigations were humane satisfactions Against Popish
satisfactions, read Kymnitius his Examen Concilii Tridentini: and Pelargus his
Iesuitismus: with D. Willets Synopsis of this controuerted subject, etc.
to Gods justice.)

First, the repentance of Gods servants reiterated and renewed after some great
and scandalous sin, is neue^ so true and sincere for the quality of it, so
great and vehement for, the quantity, (either in that attrition or contrition
which the Schools speak of) or so extensiue in degrees, or so constant and
permanent in the continuance* but the Lords pure eyes sees it in many
particulars defective and heteroclite, either in the matter, manner, measure,
means; grounds, or ends: for which cause he may still continue his rod upon
the shoulders of his children, to make their repentance more perfect and exact
in all the true and requisite qualifications.

Secondly, our nature is soon weary of well-doing, we would feign have ease,
though by carnal means, (as Saul by David's Harp 1 Samuel 16.23.
) when the Lord has wounded our consciences with spiritual weapons; we are
prone too soon to cast off the Lords yoke, and to throw down his burden,
ere we be thoroughly tamed, and our rebellions subdued, and therefore the Lord
knowing our flitting and fugitive natures, our false and fickle hearts, by
continuated crosses still holds us to it, and keeps us still strict and strait
to the tackling and task of true penitents.

Thirdly, we are subject, as stall-fed Oxen, to grow too fat and lazy; as
pampered horses, to grow too skittish; as that Iesurum Deuteronomy. 32.15.
, to kick against the rider; by too much ease, as Moab, to freeze in our
dregs, and as standing pooles to grow corrupt without motion and stirring:
yea as gross and corrupt bodies, to abound with bad humors, the originalls of
diseases, without continuated physic and purging: yea to return perhaps even
to our former sickness and distemperature, unless the Lord keep us strait
laced, in continual exercise and diet, by his successiue castigations.

Fourthly, by these after-corrections, as by so many stakes and railes and
pales, the Lord would keep us in, within the parkes of obedience; as Sheep,
impale and bar us within his fold, from after-wandrings: as by curbing bits,
hold in our rebellious natures, ever subjected without these restraints to
continuated apostasies, tergiuersations, relapses again, more daingerous then
ever, even to the sins so seriously, as we think, already repented. Even as
a man without careful looking to himself, is subject to relapse into the same
Tertian, Quartan, or Quotidian Fever, out of which he is with much dainger and
difficulty recovered.

Fifthly, the Lord as it were by continual phlebotomizing and blood-letting,
will preserve us from this daingerous plurifie of pride: for as it is the Lords
merciful and gracious dealing usually with his children after their serious
humiliation, to shine upon them again with the light of his countenance, to
restore unto them the joy of his salvation: so he gives them renewed graces,
(as we may see plainly in the example of Zacharias Luke 1.20. and 64.
, Jonas Jonas 2.9, 10.
, the Corinthians 2 Cor. 7.11.
, Martha Luke 10.41. compared with John 11.20, 21.
, and some say Peter Fidelior factus est Petrus postquam fidem perdidisse se
defleuit, etc.
) more then ever they had before; even as gifts are given betwixt once
disagreeing, perfectly reconciled lovers, as pledges and tokens of more pure
and perfect love then ever: as the bone that is broke, and once knit, often
proves stronger then ever: now as by the new flux of blood in the body at the
Spring of the year, there is often an occasion and original of a new Ague; so
by a new addition and increment of grace, corruption helped forward by Satan,
is exceeding prone to be proud; for the prevention of which abhorred and
hateful humor, the Lord still administers his castigations: he leaves
something ever as the buffettings of Satan, (that prick in the flesh to his
inspired Apostle 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
) to hold us low, and keep us under, from being superbient, and too high
exalted in our selves: he stygmatizeth us in our flesh or spirits, which as the
scarre in the body of a soldier, may continually put us in mind and memory
both of the great wound of our sin, to keep us still more humbled, as also of
the skill and good will of our heavenly Physician, in curing that which once
we despaired as incurable, to make us truly continually thankful.

SECT. 3. God is more strict with his own Children in this life, then with the
reprobates.
Sixthly and lastly, the Lord has also by these corrections of his repenting
Saints, an aim and an end, at the conviction and instruction of vnhumbled
impenitent sinners: First for their conviction, the Lord by this means puts a
muzzell upon their blasphemous mouths, when they are ready as Egyptian dogs,
to bark against the Moon, as their father the devil Ioh. 8.44.
, to accuse God Genesis 3.4, 5.
of partiality, that he lightly passes by, and slightly passes over the
sins of some, as an accepter of persons; but lays load on others: that he
touches some hardly with a finger, others he crusheth with his whole hand:
wags not the rod at his own, but whips the wicked with cords of iron, etc.
that the Lord may be true when he is judged, and righteous when he is
condemned Psalm. 51.4.
, he makes it plain and perspicuous to the whole world, that he is as strict
and severe with his elected ones, as any natural father is with his own
children; nay, that he often is rather more resolute, and vehement against the
sins of his Saints in temporary proceedings, then against the reprobates
themselves: for whereas, the wicked and impious often escape for a time
scot-free, as repriued like fellons, till the Assizes of the General
Judgment, walking in the mean space under the bond of a guilty conscience, to
do, say and think what they please; living as libertines, and voluptuaries,
wallowing as swine in the mire, fatted as Bulls of Basan against the day of
slaughter Psalm. 73.17, 18 Job. 20.5.5, 6. Job 21.16, 17.
: his own sheep in the interim he sheares, and shaues, keeps them in a
narrow fold, salues their fores, gives them Potions to prevent their rotts: his
own children upon her least misdemeanors, he whips and corrects, humbles here
the pride of Ezekiah; as after, David's for the numbering of the people; reproues
Asa 2 Chr. 16.12.
, for seeking first to the corporal before the spiritual Physician in his
sickness; brings Iehosophat into a great strait, to the in dangering of his
life, for his taking part with wicked Ahab in his unwarrantable war 1 King.
22.32.
; shamed Noah's drunkenness with the flouts and scoffs of his own son Ge^.
19.36, 37. The Moabites and Ammon^ts being after pricks in their eyes, and
goads in their sides.
, (as the folly of some Pastor is scourged by his own hearers, as some man is
wounded with his own weapons;) makes Lot infamous by the two incestuous
bastards which he had by his own daughters b, Moab and Ammon, whose
offspring were after the plagues to Israel *; depriues Sampson of his
strength, his good name, his bodily lights, yea his life, by the intemperancie
of his lusts Judge. 16. v. 21.30.
; casts Jonas into the Sea, and imprisons him in the bowels of the Whale, for
his disobedience Jonas 1.15.
; depriues Josias of his life by the sword of Pharaoh Necho 2 Chr. 35.22, 23.
, for rejecting of Counsel; tears in pieces his own Prophet by a Lion 1
King. 13.24.
, for being disobedient in one particular command (though tempted and seduced;)
excludes Moses out of temporary Canaan so much desired Deuteronomy. 32.50.
, for his once distrustful diffidence Numb. 20.23, 24.
; reproues Aaron Number. 12.5, 6.
; makes Miriam leprous ver. 12.
, for their emulation and muttering against Moses; strikes Zachary dumb, for
his incredulity Luke 1.19, 20.
; yea, excludes Adam and Eve out of Paradise Genesis 3.23, 24.
, for their too much credulity to Satan, and their infidelity in distrusting
the threat joined with rebellious disobedience in so small an iniunction, as
the forbearance of one Fruit. Thus God keeps corrections for his own, and as
the Apostle speaks, Judgments begin (and have begun you see ever since the
beginning) at the house of God 1. Pet. 4.17.
: yea, rather at the house of God at Bethel, then at Bethauen the house of
vanity, rather at Shiloh, at Sion, then at Sodom: The Father of Spirits herein
imitating an earthly father, who if his son be robbing an Orchard Similitude
Stellae in Lucam.
, or playing waggish tricks in the street, with other straying children, he
takes home his own child, reproues him, corrects him, admonishes him to
remember for ever doing the like, he lays on a Memorandum to cause him to
remember for ever afterward: seems to be very rigorous and severe with him;
whereas a strange child, his neighbors son, culpable in the same fault, he
never so much as intermeddles with him, never once opens his mouth to reprove
him, but passes by heedlesse, and regardlesse of him: why so? because he loves
his own better then the other, the one is part of himself, therefore his love
descends, so is not the other; he purposes to bestow on his son, all his
lands, his livings, his inheritance, so does he not intend toward the other;
therefore he is more jealous, more zealous and careful of the good of the
one, then of the other. Thus the Lord when his own sons, and the sons of
Beliall, the righteous, and the reprobate, commit perhaps materially one and
the self same sin, (as David and Herod iumped in the same sins of Lust,
and Murder; David and Augustus Caesar Luke 2.1.
iumped in the same sin of numbering their subjects, etc. He corrects his own
whom he loves, and chastises every son whom he receives: he brayes them as
pepper or spice in a mortar, for it makes them fitter for use; he softens
their hearts as wax* and purges out their dross and tin Esaias 4.7. by the
spirit of burning.
by the fire of affliction; he fit^ them by this means in purging and
purifying their corruptions, for that inheritance he has predestined them
unto Romans 8.30. Esphes. 1.4.
, and reserved for them in the heavens 1 Ioh. 3.2, 3.
: whereas for the subjects of Satan's kingdom v. 8. et 2 Timothy 2.26.
; he passes by them for a time, seems to conniue at their sins, paues their
way to hell with oil, and butter, suffers them to play with the waspe and
hornets nest, till they be stung to death; to dally with the flame, till they
be scorcht; lets them run their races with full carcere, till they come to
the end of their journey Psalm. 9.17. Prou. 9.18. Esaias 5.13, 14^. et Esaias 30.33.
; permits them to freeze in their dregs, and settle on their lees without
removing: they have perhaps all things that their hearts desire, riches,
wealth, ease, etc. Yet as Israel had a King, with a curse 1 Samuel 8.11, 12.
, and as they had quails in wrath Number. 11.31, 22, 23, etc.
, all these, they have as nets and snares to them: God bestows little Physic
on them, he sees they are incurable, like Babel; he plowes them not up with
the plough of affliction: he sees they are reprobate ground, he sees they are
flints, cobble stones, knotty timber, such as will fit no place in the
spiritual building, therefore he never troubles himself with them, never
uses the axe or hammer of affliction to them, as to the living stones in Sion
1 Pet. 2.5.
. In a word, he purposes no good unto them, has no heaven for them:
therefore suffers them to friske and run for a time in all excess of Riot 1
Pet. 4.4.
toward their Center, as merrily as the fools goes to the stocks, and as
senslessely as the Ox goes to the slaughter.

SECT. 4. If God be strict and severe with his own, how daingerous is the
estate and condition of the wicked.
YEt nevertheless I would not have wicked and godless men to triumph before
the victory, to say with Agag, surely the bitterness of death is past 1 Samuel
15.32.
, when it is but appraoching, I would not have those that put on their armor,
to boast, as when they put it off 1 King. 20.11
, to think that the end of sin shall be as sweet as the beginning Prou.
9.17. et Prou. 23.33.
, that the egresse out of the devils service, will be as easy as the ingresse:
that the harvest will be as pleasant as their seed time; no, no, there will be
a time of audit, of reckoning for sinners, as was for that wicked steward, and
that unprofitable servant Matthew. 25.25, 26.
; a time of coming of the bridegroom ver. 6.
, when, as Ioab said to Abner 2 Samuel 2.26.
of the young men's play, the end of sin will be bitterness at the last, the
tail of sin like the tail of a Dragon will sting: and from these former
premises, let every man that has the least dram of either wisdom or grace,
extract this conclusion, and treasure it up in his soul as an excellent
Antidote, and preservative against sin: and as the Apostles Peter 2 Pet. 2.4,
5, 6.
and Jude Jude v. 6, 7.
reasoned. If the Lord spared not the Angels that fell, nor the old world, nor
Sodom and Gommorrah, but burned her Cities with fire: how much less (which
was their scope) would he spare the licentious men of their time. So let every
man argue with his own soul, if the Lord have not in the severity of his
Justice against sin, spared the righteous, Oh where shall the reprobate
appear! If he have purged his gold, what shall become of the dross? if he
have winnowed the corn, shall not the chafe be burned with unquenchable
fire? If Jerusalem be searched Si in Jerusalem scrutinium, quid f^ciet Babylon.
with lantern and candle light, what shall become of Sodom, of Egypt, of
Babylon, of Edom, of Damascus? etc. If the Doves tremble Cum tremunt Columbae
quid facient corui.
, what shall become of Crows, of Kites, of Kestrels? If the sheep be shorn,
what shall become of the unclean Goats? If the trees of righteousness be
lopped, and pruned, for what use are Thorns and Briars and Tares, but for the
fire? If the vessels of honor be thus scoured and rubbed, what shall become of
the vessels of wrath? If judgment begin at the house of God, if the righteous
shall hardly be saved, Oh where shall the unrighteous and reprobate 1 Pet. 4.18.
appear? If the Lord whip his own sons though with cords of love, Oh what
will he do to Satan's slaves, Athiests, belly gods, libertines, drunkards,
swearers, covetous persons, that neglect the day of Grace, and blaspheme God
daily The doom^ of such is, 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.19. Colos. 3.5. Rev. 21.8.
? Oh if the Lord here have visited as you see he has, with Temporary rods, the
sins of an Ezekiah, a David, a Josias, a Jonas, a Moses, a Sampson, a
Solomon, a Zacharias, with many more of his dear servants, Oh how can the
unrighteous, the profane, the in religious who scorn and contemn the Lord
daily, and blaspheme all his ordnances appointed for their life, escape
endless wrath, everlasting death, without repentance? though here for a time
they be reprieued, the Lord giving unto them as he did to Iezabel g, space to
repent, Revel. 2.19.
which they neglecting, treasure up to themselves wrath, against the day of
wrath, and the just declaration of the vengeance of God Romans 2 5, 6.
.

The third Sermon.
CHAP. VIII.
SECT. 1. How the subjects smart for the sins of Princes, Children for the
sins of Parents.
NOt to give Cramba biscocta, Coalworts twice sod, in repeating former points;
The next thing, that in order, offers it self to our prosecution, is the
extension of this castigation, this wrath, that came upon Ezekiah for the pride
of his heart, came also upon Judah and Jerusalem, or the inhabitants of Judah
(by a Metonomy the continent being put for the contained Continens pro contento.
) the subjects of this King: in which it may seem strange to some, and
occasion their doubt as desirous of resolution; how we can well clear God of
injustice that punishes the people for the fault of their Prince: Ezekiahs
subjects for the sin of Ezekiah. Might not Ezekiah say as David almost in the
like case; Oh it is I that have sinned 2 Samuel 24.71
, those sheep what evil have they done? let thine hand be upon me, and upon
my fathers house: or as he in the Poet, I am he that have done the deed, ( in
me conuertite ferrum o Rutili Virgil of Nisus and Eurialus.
,) Oh you Rutilians, let him smart that did the fact. Could not the Orator
blame this injustice, fecit Emilius, plectitur Rutilius etc. when one suffers,
for that in which another man sins, without being accessory any way? Nay, does
not the Lord himself say, That the soul that sins shall dye the death,
whether it be the soul of the father, or the soul of the child Ezekiel 18.4.
, the soul of the Prince, or of the Peer, or of the Plebeian, etc. every one
bear their own burden, every one in this life (as in the great Judgment)
stands on his own legs, every bushel on his own bottom, Prouerbialia.
every saddle as they say, set on the right horse, every man answer for
himself, every herring (according to our proverbs) hang by it own neck: how
can these things stand with that which the Lord threatens, that he will visit
the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation
Exodus 20.5.
: that the bastard shall not enter into the congregation, unto the tenth
generation; which yet it self sins not actually, as it is a bastard, but the
Parents, etc. How stands this with Gods executions, that Cham scoffs his father
Noah Genesis 9.22.
, and his son Canaan is cursed for his fathers fact verse. 15.
, and here Ezekiah the King transgresses, yet his subjects feel smart, for
wrath comes upon Judah and Jerusalem. This knot seems hard to lose, being as
Gordian: this riddle needs an Oedipus: yet I think, thus we may give
satisfaction.

SECT. 2. The reasons and resolutions of the point.
FIrst, that the Lord when he purposes to inflict just and deserved
punishment upon the creature, is his own caruer, as free and independent, may
effect his ends, by what means it pleases him, whether immediately upon the
individual party transgressing, or mediatly upon those that are his: even as
we count it no injustice, when a young Prince offends to whip his play fellow
or companion in his room, which he takes perhaps as grievously as if he were
beat himself: so the Lord in punishing a people, which is the glory and the
strength of a King, for the sins of a King, in punishing a father in his
children, which are webs spun out of his own bowels Of the admirable love of
parents to their children, chiefly to sons, read Examples and Testimonies in
Bodin, lib. 1. de Rep. c. 4. p. 33. Nicander in Postillis part. 3 page 357. and
Pezelius in Genesis cap. 4. page 85. 86.
, collups, as they say, cut out of his own flesh; comes as near to the heart
of good Princes and loving Parents, by this means, as if they were afflicted
in their own persons: for Rachel mournes for her sons Ier. 31.15. Mat 2.18.
The like condoling made Rizpah. 2 Samuel 21.10.
as for her self, and will not be comforted: and Jacob is resolved to go
mourning to the grave Gen 37.35.
, for his supposedly lost Joseph.

Secondly, in these cases the Lord does as a Physician, who if a man be sick
or distempered in one part, applies perhaps his medicines to another part,
where it works as kindly a cure, as if it were laid on the part that is ill
affected. As for instance, If a man be pained with an ill blood in the head,
or be in danger of a plurifie of blood throughout the whole body, he lets him
blood perhaps in the arm In the vein called Humeralis or Cephalica^ Barlow
Method of Physic, lib. 1. cap. 5. p. 7.
or elsewhere: So if a Prince and Potentate sin, to let him blood as it were
in his people In what particulars and wherefore God plagues the sins of Princes
in their subjects, read diuersified examples in the plagued Sichemites,
Sabarites, Trojans, Israelites, Jews, for the sins of their Princes, Sichem,
Pari, David, Ahas, and some Sabaritish Magistrates, etc. read Luther in Genesis
cap. 34. page 518. Philippus in locis. Manlii page 325. 412. Strigellius in 2 Chronicles. 28. and Aelianus lib. 3.
, in s^nding upon them plague, famine, or the sword: If a father sin, to let
him blood in his children and posterity, his blood or consanguinity, who can
blame the curing skill of the all-wise Physician?

Thirdly, but yet there is a third answer, That as children are usually not so
much punished for their parents sins as for their own, chiefly when they
insist in their parents steps Quod peiores plerunque posterior aetas tulit
praecipue in Heroum filii^: in plurimis instant Tholosan. lib. 4. de Rep. cap.
2. page 149. Cytraeus in Genesis cap. 35. page 432. Philippus lib 3. Cron. page
155. p. 157. and Brentius in Lucam cap. 15. Hom. 10. page 475. etc.
, and do evil or worse then their forefathers, seeing perhaps the judgments
inflicted on their parents, yet they will take no warning, as Baltazar was
nothing bettered by that great judgment upon his proud and profane father
Nabuchadnezzar Dan. 5.21, 22.
, then in justice the Lord visits upon the children both their own sins and
their fathers, as he did on the house of Ahab 2 King. 10.11.
, Saul 2 Samuel 21.5.6
, Jeroboam 1 King. 13.34.
, and other idolatrous bloody families, whom he rooted out, both for their own
sins and the abominations of their fathers. So Ezekiahs people here, as also
David's people (through whose sides even these two good Kings are whipped) are
not so much punished for the sins of their Kings, as for their own sins:
the just God, without offering them any wrong, might justly find matter enough
of exception against them, and cause them to smart for their own
transgressions: their ingratitude for the restoration of the health of their
good King, in whose safety they were all interested, and shared deeply; the
abuse of their peace and plenty, evil and noisome lusts (as now in our Land)
like Gnats and Summer-flyes, ingendring and increasing in the long heat and
Sunshine of their prosperity, with other such sins, might justly occasion
Gods hand both against David's people, in cutting off 70000, as also against
Ezekiahs, in bringing wrath upon the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem: Oh the
Lords pure eyes Hab. 1.13.
penetrate further then man's, and see beams, where man cannot nor will not spy
moates; the Lords strict justice condemns those sins as mortal, which
blinded man holds less then venial.

Fourthly, as a man by one stone may hit two birds, or by one bullet kill or
wound two men, so God in and by one castigation may effect two ends, both the
humiliation of Ezekiah and of his people: even as the Lord by permitting Satan
to blow down the house upon Jobs feasting sons Job 1.18.
, both punished the childrens intemperate riot, and exercised the fathers
patience, and so with one pencil, as the phrase is, whited two walls.

Lastly, if all these answers satisfy not, as they may, yet let us most safely
and satisfactorily conclude, that this wrath here mentioned that came upon
Judah, was but some temporary castigation, external, and exercised upon the
outward man, nothing prejudicial to the salvation of the Elect, on whom it
seized: it pierced but the outward caske Tunde Anaxarchi vasculum, Anaxarchum
non laedis.
of the body, it hurt not the pure wine, the precious soul within: it might
exercise and afflict the flesh for this life, but extended not to the life to
come: and we know that for these temporary things, whether good or evil, they
come all alike to the good and the bad, to him that fears an oath, and to him
that swears: they seize upon the Doves for trial, as well as on the Kites for
trouble: they are but as fierce blustering winds, Similitudo Philippi de Diez
in Postillis.
that beat on the outside of the house, the wall of this flesh: they cannot
disturb the calm of the house within, they cannot hurt nor hinder the
tranquillity and the felicity of the blessed inmate, the sanctified soul.

SECT. 3. Useful application of the point.
But as the best part of profitable preaching, to bring that home as useful
for our selves, which we observe either helpful or hurtful to others: this
lets us see the vile venom, contagion, pest and pollution that is in sin,
what a deadly aconite it is, that poisons all that touch it: a deadly Basilisk,
a devouring Crocodile, that kills whomsoever it fixes on: a Serpent, that
stings who ever embrace it: Pitch that pollutes who ever but finger it: a
plague that infects who ever comes within sight or sent of it: a Leaven and
Leprosy that spreads far and near, even from Dan to Beershebah, from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, over the whole body Oeconomicall,
Ecclesiastical, Political Sepe propter vnum malum ciuem tota luit ciuitas:
propter paucerum petulantiam, tota gentes delenter, etc. Instant Peucerus de
diuinatione, p. 31. Lutherus Tom. 1. p. 176. Philippus in locis, page 412 and
Pez^lius in Genesis cap. 20 p. 359.
, spreading as poison from vein to vein, till it come to close with the
heart, the strongest castle of life: we see here, the venom of ingratitude and
pride of heart, fastens upon Ezekiah, and runs like Ill-report from man to
man, as wild fire in a train of powder from bag to bag, from barrel to
barrel, even throrowout Ezekiahs Kingdom, and as a bloody enemy upon a
conquered country, brings wrath upon all; some temporary judgment, (though
here not specially expressed) upon Judah and Jerusalem.

Oh that all of us could be warned from having any intermedling with sin:
from courting this Curtizan, from attending the songs of this Siren, lest we be
turned into beasts, yea the worst of beasts, Hogs and Swine Huc tendunt
fictiones in Metam. Ouidii: in Grillo Plutarch. and Asino Aureo Apulei.
; that we could foresee the hook of every sins bait, espy the net of
destruction spread under the chafe of temptation; that Ezekiah and his
subjects, scorcht with this fire of wrath, might inlighten us by their flame:
that their example might be to all as stakes stuck in a quagmire, as sea marks
near some sands or rocks, to forewarne and prevent the peril of traveling
or sailing passengers; chiefly, that to all Gods servants, professed
proselites, it might be (as the corrupt Judges skin, caused to be hung up over
the judgment seat by Cambyses Ex Herodito, Strigellius in orat de Iosophat and
Gorlicius in axiom. politicis. page 773.
, as a terror to all successors: or as fellons hung in chains, reading a dead
lecture of caution to all robbers and murderers) an admonition to all that are
eminent in gifts or place, to take heed of ingratitude to the doner, and of
pride of heart, the deuillish dam of this ungrateful Viper; lest this Viper
sting the breast that bred it, the dam that fed it, as here we see in Ezekiah.
I give as strict caution against these sins, as Solomon against the traps of
the Harlot Prou. 2.16. Chap. 5, 6, 7. per totum.
: Harbor not these Serpents in thy bosom, lest they sting thee: let not these
fires kindle within thee, as Job said of lust, they will burn to Job 31.12.
destruction: Oh come not nigh them, lest thou perish by them Ne sedeas, sed
eas; ne pereas, sed per eas, etc. Sphinx Philosophica, etc.
; they have been the perdition of many. A father by sinning may plague all his
seed and posterity, chiefly if they succeed him in his sins Propter parentum
scaelera, grassari paenas in totas familias, multis interdum seculis, instant
in posteris Achabi, Senacharib, Saulis, Pekeiae, Paridis, Tarquinii, Oedipi,
Dionysi^, Artaxerxis, Craesi, and aliorum: Melanct. lib 4. Cron. page 475 and
456 lib. 2. page 53. In locis Manlii p. 320. Strigellius in 2 Samuel 9. and in 2
Reg. 15. and in orat. de Iacobo. and orat. de Ionatha.
.

Lastly, men of eminence, of place in the Ministry or Magistracy, chiefly
great Princes and Potentates, need look well to their ways, and walk
strictly with God, and keep their peace with their Creator: for alas much
detriment and damage (besides the sins of their own souls) they bring upon
their subjects: their sins trouble Israel, as we see in David and Ezekiah: the false and sins of great persons, like the fall of some great Oak or Cedar,
breaks down many underlings, many lesser boughs. Oh the head cannot be broke,
but the heart aches: the Shepherd cannot be smit, but the sheep will be
scattered: the Pastor falls not, but the poor people will be scandalized and
discouraged: the hearers are often punished in the sins and for the sins of a
Preacher: and so on the contrary, the Preacher for the sins of a people: so
the subjects sympathize in the sins and punishments of Princes. The Heathen
saw it, how in the fatal wars of Troy, both Trojans and Grecians smarted for
the lusts of their Princes.

Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur achiui,
Intra Ilaicos peccatur muros and extra.
What Paris Horatius and Dyctin. Cretens. lib. 5.
, Priamus, and Menelaus do,
Greeks, Trojans pay for all, their lusts, their woe.
CHAP. IX.
SECT. 1. Gods wrath against sin and sinners explained and expressed.
THirdly, for the phrase here used, as subjected to our examination; whereas it
is said, wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem, we must so conceive it: that as
the Schools speak, there are no passions incident to God Passiones non
incidunt in Deu^. Aquinas.
, neither love, joy, fear, zeal, or any other affections: much less these
passions that are held culpable and sinful, even by Philosophy it self, as
anger, hatred, wrath, etc. far be it from us to think (as these heretical
Anthropomorphites) that these are natural in God, as they are humane in man;
or that we should attribute them unto God, who is an immortal immateriall
Spirit, without any mixture or composition: that in any proper locution we
should ascribe to him any humane members, corporeal parts, outward or inward
senses, or sinful affections, whether irascible or concupiscible Largius hae^
omnia exprimuntur per Zanchium de tribus Elohim: and de attributis Dei: and per
Polanum in Syntag. part. 1
, but only by these improper locutions and figurative phrases he speaks ad
caeptum sensumque nostrum, to our sense and understanding, and for the
expressing of himself unto us, condiscends to our Infirmities and capacities,
that as a man when he is wroth or angry, shows the effects and symptoms of
his passion, by his looks, words, gestures, actions, so the Lord when he is
said to be wroth or angry, manifests himself after the manner and fashion of a
man, in threatening and executing judgments proportionable to the demerits of a
sinner.

But leaving the Logical term, the Theological conclusion naturally arises;
that sin makes the Lord wroth and angry: The text here plainly speaks the
point: Ezekiahs ingratitude, proceeding as an ill Crow from a worse egg, from
the pride of his heart, brought wrath upon Judah and Jerusalem: so it is said
of David's adultery and murder, and of his numbering of the people by his organ
that he used Ioab, in two several places 2 Samuel 11.27. and 1 Chro. 21.7
, That the thing which David did, angered or displeased the Lord: so it is said
often in the Book of Exodus, and in Deuteronomie a Commentary upon Exodus, and
in the Psalms the Epitome and Abridgement of all, that the people of Israel by
their mutterings, murmurings, and rebellions, angered the Lord Number. 14.22. Number.
20.13. Exodus 17.7. and verse. 2. and Psalm. 95.8, 9, 10. and Psalm. 106 14, 16,
17, 18, 19, etc.
, so that a fire was kindled in his wrath, and he burnt up the congregations of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: yea it is said that he was displeased with Moses for
their sake. Infinite are the places and passages in holy Writ where the Lord
has revealed and executed his anger against sin and sinners: yea verily the
casting of the Angels out of heaven Job 4.18. and Jude v. 6.
, the eiection (though not final reiection) of Adam and Eve Genesis 3 23.
out of Eden: the deuastation Genesis 7.23.
and drowning of the old world: the conflagration and burning of Sodom Genesis
19.24.
: the successiue plagues upon Pharaoh Exodus ch 7, 8, 9, 10, per totum.
, and his Egyptians: the casting out of the unclean Canaanites Judge. 1. per
totum.
: the smiting of the Philistims with emerods 1 Samuel 5 6.
: the burning of Achan Josh 7.25.
, with his stuff and family: the stinging of the Israelites with fiery
Serpents Number 21.6.
, smiting them at the graves of Lust Number. 11.33, 34.
: cutting them off in the wilderness Number. 26.65.
, depriving them of the promised Canaan Heb. 3.11.
: rebuking of Kings for his peoples sake Psalm. 105.14.
: killing the lustful sons of Ely 1 Samuel 2.22. and 4.17.
with the sword of the Philistines: destroying the two sons of Aaron with fire
from heaven Leuit. 10.2.
: burning up the two Captains with their fifties 2 King. 1.9.12
, that came to take Elias: smiting the Assyrians with blindness 2 King. 6.18.
that came against Elishah: the Sodomites with blindness Genesis 19.11.
, that came against Lot and his harbored Angels: Elimas the Sorcerer with
blindness, contradicting Paul Acts 13.11.
: striking Herod with death in all his pomp Acts 12.23.
: Nebuchadnezzar with madness in his vaunted pride Dan. 4.29, 30.
: Baltazar with terrors Dan. 5.6.
and trembling in his abominable profaneness: yea, to wade into Histories,
the smiting of Antiochus Epiphanes 1 Match. 2. and 6.1. De quibus Eusebius. lib. 8.
Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 6. c. 22. Vincentius lib. 10. cap. 56.
, Maxentius, and other truculent Tyrants, with intolerable gripings and
convulsions in their bowels u, with all other grievous, strange, and
remarkable judgments upon Anastasius Fulmine ictus. Melancton lib. 3. Cren.
, Arrius Theod. lib. 1. cap. 11. Magd. Cent. 3. cap. 11.
, Manes y, Michael Seruetus Apud Aretium in fine locorum communium.
, and other Heretics Read Gods judgments on Montanus apud Niceph. lib. 4.
c. 22 on Olimpius, apud Sabellicum, lib. 5. c. 4. on Nestorius, apud Niceph.
lib. 14. c. 30 with others in fine Zegedini in Tabulis.
: on Nero Suetonius in vita.
, Decius Eusebius lib. 7. c. 1.
, Caligula, etc. Constantius Socrates lib. 2 c. 47.
, Valens Ruffinus lib 2. c. 13.
, and other Heathenish Popish, and Of all which read Eusebius. lib 5 c. 15. lib.
7. c. 21 22. lib. 8. c. 7. Niceph. lib. 3. c. 23. Theod. lib. 3. c. 7. and lib.
4. c. 4. etc. and apud Modernos: lege Zonaram Tom. 3. Phil. Cron. lib. 3. and
4. and 5. Diaconum lib. 3. c. 12. and. c. 18. Fulgosum lib. 9. c. 5. Greg. Tur.
lib. 2. c. 3. Antoninum lib. 15. c. 15. Bonfinium Helmoldum c. 24 Fox in
Martyrol.
Arrian persecutors, with these examples that have at this day filled Books
and extant Volumes both in Latin and English, with Tragical Histories of
observed, collected, and recorded judgments upon Atheists, profane persons,
persecutors, tyrants, idolaters, murderers, adulterers, blasphemers Of all
which read the Theater of Gods judgment, chiefly Lonicer his Theatrum
Historicum, etc.
, and the rest: these, and all these, with many more which might be enumerated,
are merely the fruits and effects of the constant wrath and anger of God upon
sin and sinners, in all times, places, ages, and generations.

The most profitable use we can make of this point to our selves, is
cautelously and wisely to beware of sin that makes God wroth; lest we drink
too deep of the cup of his vengeance: Oh that we were wise by the light and
infusion of grace (as the very bruits, beasts, and birds, by the guidance and
instinct of nature) to avoid what is prejudicial and hurtful unto us, and
that is sin, the Colloquintida in our pottage, the poisoned bullet in our
flesh, the consumption in our marrow, the poison of our graces, the destruction
of our natures, the reproach of our names, and the damnation of our souls:
sin, the fuel that kindles the fire of Gods wrath against us, (which
unless quenched with the tears of true repentance) burns to the very bottom
of hell: sin, so abhorring to the nature of God, whose pure eyes cannot
endure impurity, that he hates nothing more: sin, betwixt which and God there
is a greater contrariety and repugnancie, then betwixt light and darkness,
good and evil, the Wolf and Lamb, or any other the greatest Antipathies in
nature.

SECT. 2. The folly of sinners in fearing the creature more then the wrath of
the Creator.
ANd here I cannot but expostulate with the follies or rather frenzies of
wicked and impenitent sinners, as indeed I have still with the scriptures,
thought greatest sinners greatest fools Psalm. 14.1. Pro. 7.7. Chap. 8.5. Chap.
9.4. Luke 12.20 Gal. 3.1. Vide etiam Peraldum in summis de stultitia auari.
Tom. 2. p. 49. Prodigi p. 123. otiosi p. 130. superbi p. 186. and 196. See also
the French Academy, and Adam his world of mad men.
, bad man, mad men i, wicked men, unwise men, who by a natural well-wishing to
their bodies, seeking the preservation and conservation of themselves,
cautelously avoid the force or fraud, might or malignitie, that is in any of
the creatures, as the burning of the fire, the choking of the water, the
infection of the plague, the sword of the enemy, the famine of dearth, the
sacking of our cities, the racking of our joints: yea that seek the auoydance
of the venom of the Toad, the poison of the spider, the biting of the Aspe,
the sting of the Serpents, the sight of the Bassiliske, the tooth of the dog,
tuske of the Bore, horns of the Bull, horn of the Unicorn, paw of the Bear,
fury of the Tiger, with the malignity which is in any other creature, when it
is incensed against us, and armed with fury, force, or fraud to do us a
mischief; and yet nevertheless have no care, no circumspection to serve and
please the Lord, but negligently, inconsiderately, yea oft-times wittingly,
willingly, presumptuously, if not maliciously, displease that Majesty, incense
that wrath, anger that great God, that Lord of hosts, who indeed as a General
his soldiers, has all these enumerated creatures sublunary, the worst in the
natures of beasts, birds, herbs, plants, together with the malignity of the
worst planets, the influence of the heavens, yea even all the legions of his
Angels, and even the devil and the damned spirits at his beck and command,
as the instruments of his wrath, to be revenged on the rebellious and
presumptuous, even in a trice, in the twinkling of an eye. Oh what a pittious
thing it is, what a dotage, what a delusion, to fear the creature, to fear a
mortal man whose breath is in his nostrils, who can but at furthest torture or
torment the body, this out-cask, this carrion flesh: and not to fear by a
continuated course of sinning, the anger and displeasure of the Almighty
Creator; who besides his judgments here (the prologues of the future) is able
to cast both body and soul into hell fire. Oh how every creature observes
that, on which it has an immediate dependence, and is able being offended to do
it a displeasure, as the horse his rider, the ox his driuer, the dog his
master: yea we see how all that are honest (out of conscience) or that are
wise (out of fear) reverence and respect those to whom they have that
relation; that being observed and pleased they may do them a pleasure; or
being neglected in duty, or provoked by misdemeanour, they may do them a
displeasure: as all the respect the servants, pages, or prentises give their
masters; retainers, and followers, their Lords, scholars their teachers,
maids their mistresses; and wives their husbands? yea, we see how seruilie
and slauishly men will crouch and kneel, and make friends to those, in whose
dainger they are (as the Sidonians made Blastus the Chamberlane Act. 12.20.
to Herod) whose wrathful displeasures they fear: and yet alas, the Lord God,
in whom we live, move, and have our being Act. 17.28.
, to whom we are daily Tenants at will, for our life, health, liberty, goods,
good name, callings, functions, wives, children, bodies, and souls, to be
turned out at pleasure, even out of all, upon our great landlords displeasure,
and to be with that wicked unprofitable servant Mat 25.28.
casheird, as a thriftlesse child disinherited, as a whorish woman divorced,
etc. and as reprobates cast into hell: this God that in an instant can pour on
us all the violls of his wrath, and vessels of his vengeance, turn his favors
into frowns, his blessings into curses: as we turn his graces into
wantonness: even this God we care not how we anger, how we displease, yea
plainly provoke by sin, (as we do a Bull by blood, an Unicorn by ^ed
Gesner de quadrupedibus.
, and a spirited man by disgraceful words) and even dare him as the Crow the
Eagle in the Fable, to our irrecouerable destruction. Yea it is strange,
sometimes how partly out of sordid and servile desire of gaining this filthy
lucre; partly out of a base Gnatonicall humor, to flatter: but out of a more
servile fear to anger, and displease those who have it in their power, to
displease them: we shall see in every place, in City and Country, what a rout
and rabble of Parasites, Sycophants, Ieasters, Iuglers, Rimers, Bardes,
Buffons, Fiddlers, artificial fools, idle and vain persons, observe, and
humor, great men, tell them tales, break ieasts, claw them in their sins,
sing them filthy songs, to make their worships laugh, tickle their itching
curiosity with all the news stirring in the Country (for want of old,
inuenting and forging new:) rail upon Preachers, revile professors, make sport
with precisians (as they term them) rhyme on Puritans: and like apes perform
many other tricks, all to humor and please those, whom they dare not anger,
and displease: and yet the most of these, yea the most men of all ranks and
sorts (unless only those into whose hearts made of better mould Ex meliori
luto sinxit praecordia Titan, etc.
, the Lord has put his fear, that ( Joseph like) they dare not sin Genesis 39.9.
) make as much conscience, and have as small care by following diverse lusts,
of displeasing God, though he have power in vitam and necem, to save or
destroy them: as an ape makes conscience (as they say) to crack nuts, a dog to
tror, or the Fox to eat desired Grapes. Pilot himself herein being a
President to all natural men, speaking their thoughts, desires, dispositions
and practice, who for the pleasing of the importunate Jews, but chiefly for
preventing the feared anger and displeasure of Caesar: (which nevertheless
justly and deservedly fell upon him, in his exile and banishment Historia extat
apud Eusebium, l. 2. c. 7. Eutro. l. 7 Nauclerum part 2. gener. 2. and Niceph.
l. 2. c. 10.
afterward) he unjustly condemns Christ, and lets loose Mark 15.15.
murdering Barabas, for fear not to be counted Caesar's friend, he proves at
last after many fair shows to the contrary, Christ's real enemy: So Foelix
for no other cause, when he left his Deputiship, left innocent Paul bound, but
to curry favor with the Jews; Acts 24.27.
though such partiality and injustice did set God himself against him, and
against all such corrupt Judges as he was.

SECT. 3. Gods wrath kindled, by repentance should be quenched.
But herein I more marvel at the folly and stupiditie of all natural and
unregenerate men, that by the ministry of the word, knowing in what estate they
stand by nature, as branches from the root of old Adam, being no better in
their best pedigrees, then children of wrath, vessels of wrath Ephesians. 2.3. and
Chap. 4.18.
, heirs of hell, by their very natural birth as left them hereditary from
their parents and progenitors, bringing their Charter and title to their
inheritance, even from the very wombes of their sinning mothers, yet seek not
to come out of this estate, to be drawn out of this pit, to get a better
assurance for heaven then from Adam, and every way to better their accursed
condition by regeneration, as the only prescribed remedy for their misery John
3.6.
. Yea more I marvel not only at the children of darkness as yet in the power
of the devil Acts 26.18. 2 Timothy 2.26.
, but also at the children of light, whose eyes are opened, and their feet in
some measure set at liberty, who after their failings in some duties (as here
Ezekiah in one) of commission of some sin, of which perhaps their judgments
are truly informed, yet are so lethargical and drowsy, and heauie-headed, yea
and heauie-hearted too, that procrastinating and deferring their repentance, as
the Jews did the building of their Temple Haggai 1.3.
, going big with their sins, some months (as David did in two sins 2 Samuel
11. and Chap. 24.
,) as a woman goes big with child, till this blessed Grace wife repentance,
do deliver them: they make small have to meet the Lord, to have recourse to
the throne of Grace, to make up the breach by godly sorrow; but go on still,
perhaps in the performance of some good duties, as it seems David did, ere
Nathan and Gad came to him, though heavily and lumpishly, as a man walks with
a lame leg, or a bird flies with a hanging drouping wing. Oh what a spur were
this to accelerate and hasten repentance with posting, yea, with winged speed,
to mend our snailes pace, and to turn it into an Eagles flight, even the
consideration of this, that sin causes wrath, yea that it makes the Lord
angry, even with his own children, as with Ezekiah here, and these of Judah,
etc. Now who rightly knowing and laying to heart the force and fury of the fire
of Gods wrath, would not seek to quench it presently?

Oh who is so unwise, that when his house, or study of books, or counting
house is on fire, in which are all his writings and Evidences, will not
instantly cast on water, call for help, bestirre himself with speed, not
delaying a minute or moment of time? who withal being in danger of his life,
by fire, water, pirates, thieves, enemies, etc. does not instantly,
importunately, cry out for help, as the disciples in the tossed ship Mat. 8.25.
, and Iehosophat 1 King. 21.3^*
in the battle? yea who apprehended and in peril to be executed upon his
evident fellonies, upon any hope of a pardon, makes not all possible speed,
sets not all his friends a work for the procuring it, without procrastination?
Oh that we should be so sensible to seek so present redress in our humane
miseries, to salve our greatest extremities; and yet upon our fellonious
sinning against our God, convicted and condemned by the infallible witness,
and verdict of our own conscience, in dainger of the fearfullest execution in
hell: yet as men sleeping on the top of the Mast of the Pro. 23.34.
ship, or before the very mouth of a discharging Cannon senseless of the
dainger, we make such asse-like sluggish pace for prevention. The fire of our
lusts already kindling another fire, even the fire of Gods wrath, and that
kindling a third, even the fire of hell, in tormenting Tophet Esa. 30.33.
, to which sin and sinners are fuel; that we should not be so slow, to quench
this fire with our tears extracted from a penitential heart, or to smother it
with the sighs and sobs of a throbbing soul: Oh that we could as soon as
ever we perceive wrath gone from the Almighty, prostrate our selves before
the Lord as Moses and Aaron Numb. 16.46.
, and with the golden censer and incense of our fervent prayers, entreat and
intercede the good God for pardon, and remission: that we could appeal from
the Kings Bench of Justice, to the Checker or Chancery of his Mercy, a Deo
irato, ad Deum placatum Augustinus in Psalmum 74.
, from a wrathful and angry God, as incensed by our sins, to a God appeased,
reconciled and well pleased with us, in the mediation of his Christ, whose
blood Colos. 1.14.
has already made the atonement.

Lastly, that we may make a narrow search and scrutiny into the cause or
occasion of Ezekiahs castigation, and so consequently of his humiliation, that
is the pride of his heart, for so the holy Text says, that Ezekiah humbled
himself for the pride of his heart, and wrath ceased etc. We should do wrong
to the Text, wrong to the purpose and scope of the Spirit inditing, wrong to
many a proud heart, who perhaps from hence may be curbed; wrong to many a
humbled dejected heart, who perhaps may be erected and comforted, if we should
pretermit from this ground, this remarkable observation: that pride brings
judgments, humiliation remoues them: pride kindles Gods wrath, humility
quenches it: pride casts on oil and fuel, humiliation casts on water: pride
casts the soul down, humiliation lifts it up again: prides bring the soul
into a snare, humiliation vnlooseth and rescues it: pride displeases God,
humiliation appeaseth him: Oh the plague and pest of pride, oh the helps and
honors of humility. Oh here were two Theames in laudem, and vituperium, etc.
in praise and dispraise of this virtue, that vice so opposed: worthy the
Oratory, not only of a Tully, Demosthenes, or Hortensius that could go no
further but morality, but even of a Basil, a Nazianzens Oration; worthy of a
Prudentius, Vide Prudentiu^ ^e pugna humilitatis and superbiae.
a Christian Theologue to express the combat, the conquest of humility over
pride. Oh how Ezekiahs own particular vereties that scripture so often inculcate
by our Savior Christ himself Luke 14.11.
, by Solomon Prou. 3.34.
, by the Apostles Iam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
, that the Lord resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble: resists the
proud indeed as his special enemies, casts down their vain imaginations Luke
1.51.
, pulls down their Babels buildings, brings low their lofty looks, makes
their high and haughty hearts stoop ver. 52.
, will they ^^ll they, takes them down many pegges lower, when they are
exalted, brings them down with a witness, yea some with a vengeance, when
they perke aloft and soar too high; makes them to know themselves that they
are men, not Gods, yea dust and ashes, base and miserable men, when ( Lucifer
like) they have made themselves like the most high Esa. 14.12, 13.
, and have foolishly affected a Deity amongst the sons of men: thus has the
Lord humbled the proud, in the imaginations of their hearts, and cast down the
mighty from their seats: has blown down the strong Oaks, and cut down the
lofty Cedars, whilst the lower shrubs, the humbled souls have stood in safety:
the cloud topping advanced hills, and sky threatening mountains have been
exposed to storms and tempests of wrath and vengeance, whilst the lower days,
the humble hearts have been fruitful in grass, abundant in Grace: thus God
resists proud Nebuchadnezzar, and by the strength of his own imagination To
this force of imagination D. Willet in his Hexapla in Danielem, Agrippa in
occulta Philosophia l. 1. c. 64 Wic^us lib. 3. de Lamijs cap. 10. Ficnus de
viribus imaginationis in tribus libris, Et Malleus malific. fol 77. attribute
witchcrafts, diseases, transformations.
turns him into a beast: resists proud Herod, in his usurped praise, and as
the canker the Rose, eats his pride with worms Act. 12.23.
: resists proud Rabsakah, prouder Senacharib his master, and puts his hook in
both their nostrils 2 king. 19.28.
: resists proud Valens the Arrian Theatrum Historicum, in 3. Praeceptum. fol.
255.
, and burns his pride to ashes, in a shepherds cottage: resists proud
Alexander, vrbis and orbis domitor, the worlds Monarch yea the conqueror of more
worlds then one Vnus peleo iuueni non sufficit orbis.
in his ambitious desires, the son of Jupiter Curtius lib. 5. Str^gellius in
ethic. l. 1. page 39. Melancton Cren. l. 2. and in eius vita Plutarch.
, as his pride terms himself, cut off in the midst of his years Anno ante
natum Christum 323. anno aetatis suae 32 die Iunij 28. Gorlic p. 378 axiom.
polit.
by the hand of the just God, was learned to know that a few feet in the earth
could contain that body which was the cell and receptacle of that mind, which
many worlds could no more satisfy then the air does the Cammell: resists
proud Anastasius the Arrian Emperor Melancton lib. 3. Cron.
, and strikes him as Jupiter in the fable the Centaures, with a thunderbolt
from heaven: resists proud Arrius himself, and extracts out his bowels with
his excrements where he was uncovering his feet vt supra.
: resists proud and ambitious Caesar and stabs him in the Senate house, by the
hands of his imagined friends Ex Plutarcho Bucholcherus in Cron. p. 137.
: resists proud Pompey, his swelling rival, and lays his honor in the dust
De quo praeter Liuium Cicero l. 7. epist. Amb. lib. 5. epist. 31.
, with his head on the Egyptian shore: resists proud Tarquin and by
disgraceful banishment Bodimos lib. 4. cap. 5. p. 180.
both pulls down his pride, and cooles and schools his lust: resists proud and
peremptory Pharaoh, and lays his lofty head and haughty heart, together with
all his force and fame as low as the hollowest bottom of the devouring Ocean,
nec in caeteris contrarium est videre: all other proud persons in Church and
common wealth, in all ages and times have tasted the like sauce, as subjects of
Gods wrath, the Lord has contested and contended with them as with his most
intestine resolved and professed enemies, he has crushed their devices as
Cockatrice eggs: opposed their enterprises, and pulled down the Babylonian
buildings of their inventions, and made them mere Babels confusions: dealt
with them as the Eagle with the shellfish, carried them up aloft, vt moleruant
grauiori, that he might crush them down with the greater fall Superbi^m
semper comitem f^isse ruinam in multis exemplis instant Tolos. de repub. lib.
3. page 1388. 1389 139^. and Strigellius lib. 1. ethic. page 309. 419. and lib.
7. page 528 cum Philippo, in locis Manlij page 177. 178. et in lib. 2. Cron.
page 101. et in* Cordiali Bucholc. page 21. et page 170.
.

But on the contrary, he has given grace to the humble, they (as was said of
Christ their master Luke 2.52.
, that humble Lamb) do grow in Grace and favor with God and man: in grace
with man Genesis 41.41.
, was humble Joseph (despised of his brethren Genesis 37.19.
, disgraced by his Mistress chap. 39.14.
, despited by his Master verse 20.
) at last advanced the greatest save Pharaoh, in the Egyptian Court: so the
Lord exalted humble, honest-hearted, penitent Mardocheus Esther 6.11.
, as the greatest favorite in the eyes of Assuerus: humble Daniel to be
esteemed delicias Domini, etc. the very Darling and Jewel of King Darius Dan.
6 3.
: humble David, the son of a Countriman, to be son in law to a King 1 Samuel
18.23.
, yea to be the King of Israel; brought him from a Sheep-hook to a Scepter ^
Sam. 12.7.
: the humble Virgin Mary Luke 1.48.
, a withered branch of the root of Iesse, to be the mother of the promised
exhibited Messiah: restored humbled Manasses, after his eiection out of his
Kingdom, to his Regal place, and adorned his dejected soul with saving grace
2 Chr. 33 11, 12.
: healed the servant of the humbled Centurion Mat. 8.8, 9.
: cleansed the humbled Lepers Luke 17.13.
: pardoned the humbled Thief on the Cross Luke 23.42, 43
, and promised him paradise: heard and accepted the prayers of the humbled
brest-smiting Luke 18.13.
Publican: cast not only the crumbs but the bread of his bounty and mercy to
that Canaanitish dog Mat. 15.28.
, that humbled Syrophinessean: was entreated for sinning Israel Exodus 32.32.
: yea for plagued Pharaoh Exodus 9.29.
, at the intercessions of humbled Moses: was contented to have spared even
Sodom her self, and to have pardoned her pollutions, if any conditions could
have been performed Gen* 18.24. ad verse 32.
, at the mediation of humbled Abraham: cast out seven Devils, remitted many
evils In his and aliis inuebunt in superbiam, Augustinus in Ps. 19. Gregor. in
Moralibus. Chrysostom. Hom 59. in Mat. Cassiodor. in Ps. 18. Bernard. ser. 3. de
Resur. Isiodor. lib. 3. de Su^mo bono, apud Neotericos, in lib. 2. Ethic.
Strigell. p. 528. in Prou. 16. page 78. Philippus lib. 2. cron. p. 101. lib. 5
page 557. and in Posti^^is part. 1. p. 654. and part 4. page 624. praecipue
Perald. in summi^. tom. 2. part. 2, 3, 4.
, and sanctified with many saving graces the humbled soul of Mary Magdalen
Luke 7.47, 48.
: yea here we see the humiliation of Ezekiah remoues that curse or cross from
himself and his subjects, which the pride of his heart procured: pride kindles
incensed wrath, humiliation quenches it.

Oh who would not hate this hateful monster of pride, so hateful to God In
his and aliis inuebunt in superbiam, Augustinus in Ps. 19. Gregor. in
Moralibus. Chrysostom. Hom 59. in Mat. Cassiodor. in Ps. 18. Bernard. ser. 3. de
Resur. Isiodor. lib. 3. de Su^mo bono, apud Neotericos, in lib. 2. Ethic.
Strigell. p. 528. in Prou. 16. page 78. Philippus lib. 2. cron. p. 101. lib. 5
page 557. and in Posti^^is part. 1. p. 654. and part 4. page 624. praecipue
Perald. in summi^. tom. 2. part. 2, 3, 4.
, so hurtful to man, so consonant to corrupt nature, so repugnant from grace,
so near sympathizing with the Devil, so good an agent for hell, so
prejudicial both to sanctification and salvation? Who on the contrary would
not love and admire this heauen-bred humiliation, such a preservative against
pride, such a purger of pollutions, such a depresser of corrupt nature, such a
keeper in of grace, as the ashes of the imbers, such a curber of corruption,
such a plea against the cry of sin, such a Proctor against the guilt of
sin, such a favorite in the Court of heaven, yea such a pleader and
preuailer before the throne of Grace De his and aliis laudibus humilitatis,
lege ipsum Paraldum tom. 1. page 367, 368, 369. and Spinaeum de Tranq. lib. 2.
page 63.
? Oh, as Plato says of virtue, I say of this virtue, of this grace, (which one
of the Ancients calls the first, the second, and the third grace, as one called
pronunciation the first, second, and third part of Ora^ory) if it could be
seen and discerned in the luster and beauty of it, with mortal eyes, it would
stir up love and admiration in the dullest spectator: more would be enamoured
of this Christian, then of that Grecian Helena. Take the marrow of all that is
said, in one word, he that would with Herod, Pharaoh, Rabsakah, Senacharib,
Holofernes, Nimrod, Nabuchadnezzar, the Gospels Pharisee, Herodians Pharisees,
be dejected and made to stoop by the rod of wrath, yea eiected as unsavory
salt, from place and grace with God and man; let him exalt himself in the
pride of his heart: God has ways and means enough to pull him down, as
experience verifies our proverb, his pride will have a fall, it owes and waits
him an ill turn Adrastia vel Nemesi^^on sinit insolentiam abire impunitam,
etc. Philippus in Cordial. Bucholch. page 122. Hinc Aesopus asserit, Deum in
caelis frangere magnas ollas, and exfrustis alias nouas componere. apud
Philippum, in locis Man^^i, p. 182.
, as we say of cording and dicing, it is a false plough to hold; it has
brought some to the Gallows, as it did Achitophel 2 Samuel 17.23.
, and Absalom chap. 18.14.
; some to the block and the scaffold, as many proud rebellious Traitors
Exempla lege, apud Valerium l^b. 6 lib 9 Liu. lib. 1. lib. 24. Munsterum lib.
3. praecipue in Theatro Histori^o. fol. 320. and 570, etc.
in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths: He that looks too hye, some moate or
other will fall in his eye, to blemish or eclipse him. On the contrary, he that
would be respected and exalted in grace and favor, with God and man, in
heaven and earth, with humble Joseph, humble Mary, humble Manasses, humble
Mardocheus, humble David, humble Daniel, humble Ezekiah, let him be truly,
soundly, sincerely humbled; let him fall low, that for ever he may be truly
advanced high: for the proud Pharisee is rejected, the Publican accepted.

CHAP. X.
SECT. 1. Though the righteous fall, they shall rise again.
THe third maine point comes now to be prosecuted, as first it was propounded,
and that is Ezekiahs humiliation: for the Text says, notwithstanding Ezekiah
humbled himself for the pride of his heart. In which, as in his sin and
transgression, we have seen man's humane frailty, as in himself considered; in
Gods castigation and chastizing of him for his sin, we have seen both the
affection of a father, in correcting him as a son, and the severity of a Judge,
in visiting him as a sinner: so here as most obuious to our consideration, we
have his repentance, an image and demonstration of Gods free mercy and saving
grace to the vessels of mercy: in that though they be for reasons and causes,
as we have heard, permitted to sin, by him who could exempt and free them
here on earth from all sin, as they shall be freed in heaven, (and make elect
men as inculpable as elect Angels, and their bodies as pure as the glorified
Spirits of the just) yet nevertheless he frees them as from the reign and
dominion Plurima in hanc rem lege apud Augustine. lib. 1. de Nuptiis et
Concupisc. cap. 25. and tract. 41. in Johan. and lib. 1. de peccat. meritis and
remissione. c. 23. and lib. 6. aduersus Iulianum cap 7.
, so from the ruin and damnation of sin Per merita Christi, vt vrget
Bernard. Ser. 3. in natin. Domin. Ser. 78. in Canticis, and Sermon. 91. Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 50 Hom. 2. and August. in Enchirid. cap. 23.
; though they fall yet they rise again, as here we may see in Ezekiah, that
fell by pride, as did Angels and Man, but rose again by repentance and
humiliation, as the reprobate Angels did not, nor ever shall.

Oh it is a point for ever to be preached and pressed to the comfort and
consolation of the elect, and to the praise and glory of his grace, who is the
author and giver of grace, that though the righteous fall seven times a day,
that is, often either into sin (or as some interpret, into crosses and
afflictions, the fruits of sin) yet nevertheless they shall rise again:
though they slumber a while in sin, and take a short nap, as luld with the
sweet allurements of the flesh, and charmed a while with that Witch the World,
yet they waken again: they sleep not in death, their sin is not mortiferous
and unto death; fall they may, as we instanced in the wisest, the strongest,
the holiest, the humblest Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Preachers, Professors, that have been from the beginning, in whom follies,
frailties, weaknesses, infirmities, have appeared, showing them to be but men,
subjected to a sinning condition, but yet (as the Schools well distinguish)
they cannot fall away totally and finally, as old Pelagianisme Confuted by
Austine, Jerome, Prosper, Bradwarden, and by the three Councils of Meleuitan,
Affricke, and Orange.
and new Arminianisme seem to auerre against the Scriptures Psalm. 37.23, 24
Psalm 94.18. and 145.14. Pro. 3.26. Esaias 26.3. Esaias 40.11. and 46.3.10. 2 These.
3.3. Phil. 4.7. John 10.28. 1 Pet. 1.5. 2 Timothy 4 18. etc.
, and Orthodoxe Lege in hanc rem apud Patres, Justin. q. 23. q. 98 Jreneum lib.
5. adue^sus haereses, page 550. ad page 558. 564. and lib. 2. cap. 47. Clement.
Paedog. lib. 1. c. 5. fol. 19. c. 6. folio 20, 23. lib 3 c 6 p. 48. Tertul. de
Praescrip. c. 2. page 161, 162 and de Corona c. 9. p 156 Hilarium in Ps. 120
page 287 in Psalm. 128 p. 301 and Can. 6. in Matthew. page 155. Ambr. in Ps. 50.
and in Romans 8. v. 29, 30 apud modernos: Marlorat. in Ps. 51.125. in Ioh. 4.14.
Aret in 2 Timothy 2.19. Zanchium de perseu. tom. 7. page 91. ad page 174. and
Kymidont. de praedest. p. 318. to. 333.
Divinity: they may indeed fall fearfully, who are elected unto life, not only
before their conversion, as Paul, Manasses, Mary Magdalen, etc. Augustine,
Cyprian, Luther, etc. with others, who laid long in persecution, bloodshed,
uncleanness, Necromancy, idolatry, etc. and other sins: but even after their
conversion they may have fearful relapses, as had David, Peter, Sampson,
Solomon, this our Ezekiah, but yet they cannot fall finally and irrecouerably:
they may indeed in their fall be sore crushed, as perplexed in soul, in
conscience, in spirit, they may break an arm or a joint, (lose their credit
for a time, and estimation, not only with the world with whom they war, but
with the Church too; which is as their vnioynting from the communion of Saints,
the members of Christ, till they be knit and right set and ioynted again by
repentance) but yet their fall is not to precipitation, to neck-breake, as are
the falls of the reprobate: they wander indeed out of the way, and go astray
like lost sheep, yet they return home again to the Bishop of their souls,
their good Shepherd that has given his life for them, and bought them with a
price, even his own blood, he seeks them as the woman did the lost groat,
he finds them, and brings them home on his shoulders to the sheepfold of his
Church: and this he does many ways, to prosecute the Metaphor.

1. Either he whistles and speaks to them in the more secret voice and
inspiration of his Spirit, Means which the Lord uses as a spiritual
Shepherd, to call home his sheep by repenting, which have wandered by sinning.
or else in the audible voice of his word he sends some Gad, some Nathan to cry
some harsh message in their ears, or to blow a Trumpet, set up a flag of
defiance against their sins, denounce wrath; so wakening them out of their
warm nests, rousing and raising them out of their pleasing dreams and
slumbers, as he did David 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 24.
, etc.

2. Or else he sends his dogs after them, to fetch them in, to bring them home:
and these Shepherds dogs are either outward crosses and afflictions, as
poverty, sickness, diseases, as we may see in the return of the Prodigal
Child, whipped home to his Fathers house, by outward miseries Luke 15.15,
, etc. or above all, by infamy, ignominy, calumnies, reproaches, which are as
it were the barkings and bitings of the Doegs Vt Doeg in Dauidem, 1 Samuel 12.
, the dogs of the world; he brings many straggling sheep apace, even running
home to the flock: these dogs are to the elect in respect of their sins, as
the dogs of that rich Churl to Lazarus, though sore against their wills they
lick whole their sores Luke 16.21.
, they heal their sins.

Or else there is another dog, which is more bloody fangd then the rest, with a
more hideous barking and more daingerous biting, sets upon the sheep; and that
is this dog of Conscience: which how ere when the elect sin, this Mastiue
seems to be muzzled, or lie quietly asleep at the door Of this lethargicall
quiet Conscience see the B. Abrenethy his Book called The Physic of the
Soul, chap. 8. p. 103.
, or the pleasant sop of present pleasure or profit be given to this Cerberus,
that he may be quiet and fawn for a time: yet when the sin is committed,
and the eyes of the sinner opened, the nature, quality, fruits and effects of
the sin discerned, then this Mastiue seems to be vnmuzzled, he awakes out
of his charmed sleep, as a mad dog indeed, bawles and barks at the sinner,
as at a fellonious thief, gnawes and mangles the very inwards of his soul, as
the Wolf that eats within the flesh De stimulis and furiis Conscientiae
plurima exempla and testimonia lege apud Ambros. lib. 7. ep. 44. and in
epistola ad Constantinum. August. in Psalm. 31. Pezelium in Genesis cap. 37. page
714. cap. 42. page 794. Luther in Genesis cap. 43. p. 652. and in* cap. 45. p.
671. and Patritium lib. 5. de Regno, tit. 8. p. 313. cum Strigellio in Ethicis
Aristot. lib. 1. page 794. and cap. 45. page 835.
, pursues him as the slouth-hound, sometimes more closely, yet continually,
sometimes more furiously with open mouth Hinc vulpina conscientia apud Hugon.
lib. 2. de anima. cap. 15. Hinc etiam illud Isodori lib. 2. Soliloq. nunquam
s^curus reus animus. Plura lege apud Senecam Epistola 43. and Epistola 88.
Tacitum 4. Annalium: Ciceron. pro Client. pro Milon. and Lipsium in politicis,
lib. 1. cap. 5.
, as the Hound does the Dear or Hare, from thicket to thicket; lets him have
no rest, like that Acteon in the fable; till the distressed sinner fly to the
true shelter and sanctuary, the mercy of God in Jesus Christ; till like the
pursued Dear he take soil in the troubled Poole of Bethasda, the Lauer of
true repentance; till he there lose and shake off this Cerberus; till he be
athirst after the living God Psalm. 42.1, 2.
, and after his mercy; as the Dear that is imbost thirsts after the rivers of
water; yea, till the poor soul entreat the great Master of the family to take
up and take off this Mastiue, and chain him up, there is no rest to the soul
of this sinner: and this Dog the Lord sets instantly upon David, when after the
numbering of his people, at the return of Ioab, his heart smote him 2 Samuel
24.10.
: and this smiting of the heart, like the smiting of Moses on the Rock Exodus
17.6.
, that brought out waters, produced these excellent parts of repentance,
contrition Psalm. 6.6.
, confession Psalm. 51.4.
, aggrauation of his sin, deprecation for mercy in the pardon and remission
of it: as also more furiously this Dog set on him after his murder and
adultery, as appears by his grievous complaints, in some of his Penitential
Psalms Psalm. 38.2, 3, 4, etc.
: This Dog gnawes and snarles at Jonas when he was in the Whales belly, and
makes him cry, as he there complains, even out of Hell Jonas 2.1.
, as he calls his close prison: Yea not the least sin can be committed by the
child of God, but at one time or other, either in general or special, this
Dog barks against it, either more or less; as we may see in the same David,
who but touching the hem of Saul's garment (though his pursuing enemy, and a
bloody Tyrant) not imbrewing his hands in the blood of the Lords Anointed, (as
the Jesuits and Friars, by their positions See them extant by the learned D.
Morton.
and practices use to do) but even touching his garment, a sin (if any)
venial; or (as the Papists call some) even less then venial Affirmed by
Coccius in These. Catholico, tom. 1.
: yet even for this, this waking wacker Dog barks, this Conscience curbs his
heart, smote him 1 Samuel 24.10 See also in my Origens repentance, and Suida
Nicephoro, and Eusebio lib. 6. how Origin was afflicted in soul after his
idolatrizing.
, (as indeed a little moate troubles a tender eye, a little pibble stone
pincheth in a strait shoe, and a little sin troubles a tender conscience.)

3. Besides, this Shepherd uses also to fetch home his straggling sheep, by
his rod or sheep-hooke: not only the rod of bands, which are crosses and
afflictions, menaces and terrors, which as sharp winds drive soon the ships
of sin-burthened souls to the desired haven of saving grace, to the shore of
safety, the port of Penitence; but also the rod of beauty, even the
consideration of the Lords love, and his blessings, and his mercies in Christ,
temporal and spiritual, leads and draws many to repentance, as it did David,
who no sooner heard by Nathan the enumeration of Gods mercies to him in their
particulars, but his heart melts as the wax, with that Sun his spirit thawes,
dissolues, and loosens, as Ice before the fire; and as one wholly broken in
heart, he sighs or breathes out, I have sinned Vt supra 2 Samuel 12.
: confounded and ashamed of his unworthy walking, not answering these mercies,
as one planet-strucke, grief stopping the further passage of his speech, (as a
watercourse damm'd up, it gets but a little vent, as the smoke out at some
cranny) he speaks shortly and laconically, what his heart largely dilates
inwardly; I have sinned: after enlarging that short Text in seven Penitential
Psalms. And indeed though I will not deny that sometimes in the repentance of
the elect (as always in the hypocritical howlings and repentant rorings of
the Reprobate) there is a work of conscience, who has a terrifying voice, an
affrighting cry, like the sudden invasion of an enemy, by fire and sword to
drive them (further then the reprobate ever come) to their strongest Castle,
their chief Rock Psalm. 18.1. Mat. 16.18.
, that Vthiel and Vcal Prou. 30.1.
, the mercies of God in Jesus Christ: yet the most kindly, and (if I may use
the word) the most natural humiliation of the child of God, is that which
has the original from filial love, when the love of God is shed abroad in
the heart, when that love which was never extinct, no not in the act of sin,
but (as in Peter Hilar. in Psalm. 52.4. Bernard. de natura and dignit. amoris
Diu. cap. 6 and Leo Sermon. 9. de de passione Dom. cum aliis, asserunt, Petrum
magis peccasse in veritatem quam in charitatem, ore potius quam cord. Bellar.
inquit de Romans Pont. lib. 3. c. 8. and de Eccl. milit lib 3. c. 17.
, even when he denied) is kept hidden, as fire under the ashes; when that
spark of love is blown up again by the bellows or breath of the Spirit of
grace, as also by the mouth of the Minister, as Gods organ in the Ministry,
till it flame so hot, that it thaw the formerly frozen and congealed heart, and
melt it into tears; when this love of God reflects on the cloud of our sins,
and showers them down in the dissolved waters of Marah: when this love of God,
that we have offended so good and gracious a God, rewarding him evil for
good, dishonours for mercies, in a viperous ingratitude, more works upon our
hearts, then all legal terrors, accusations of conscience, fear of hell: when
this love sweetly leads the dance, and is that primus motor the first mouer to
repentance: Oh then repentance is sincere, then the heart is as Nathaniels John
1.47.
without guile; then the sorrow is godly sorrow 2 Cor. ^.10, 11.
, this repentance is a faithful and trusty friend to the soul, as Jonathan
was to David.

4. Lastly, this shepherd draws his wandering sheep to to him, not only by
his whistle, his voice, his dog, his crook, but even by his hook: not only
in their first drawing, as when he looked upon Matthew Math. 9.8, 9.
, sitting at the receipt of custom, and, as the Adamant De cuius vi lege
Plinium l. 36. c. 16 26. and l. 34. c. 14. and l. 20. c. 7
the Iron, with that look drew him to be a disciple; as with the like look
upon Zacheus Luke 19.8, 9.
, he drew him out of the Sycamour Tree, from a sinner to be a Saint: but even
after their aberrations and wanderings, their straglings and their strayings,
the Lord lends them a look, as he did to denying Peter Luke 22.61.
, and draws them out after him into a solitary place, where by the inward
voice of his Grace and Spirit, in private soliloquies in the ear of their
souls, he talks and expostulates with them, conuicts and conuinces their
consciences, makes them pass an indictment against themselves, prompts them to
cry for mercy, assists them in crying and bleating, with sighs and groans Rom
8.26.
, and upon their cry seals their pardon Esaias 1.18. Micha 7.19.
, admits them into Grace and favor, leads them into green pastures Psalm. 23.
, and to the rivers of mercy, as here he did with Ezekiah.

SECT. 2. Gods children restored to grace with God, and in their Graces renewed
by their repentance.
THe mercies of the good God, in giving unto his sinning children, both the
first Grace of repentance, and the second Grace of remission of sins upon
their repentance, with the means of both, from this very metaphor of a
mindful merciful Pastor, being thus laid open, in the Uses Iaenus like looks
both ways: It is a double flaggon, or bottle, that on the one side has wine
to drink for children, on the other side, vinegar or veriuyce for slaves. It
has both bread for the children, and stripes for the backs of fools: For
these that are the Lords that have the marks of their Election, the signs of
Sanctification, and are sealed up to the day of their Redemption; here is an
Anchor for them in the midst of their fluctuations, here is some day-hole to be
spied for them, some glimpses of comfort break out even in the darkest night
of their sins, namely, that though by their sins the Sun of Gods favor
toward them, seem to be eclipsed, the light of his countenance abated, his
wrath kindled, as here against Ezekiah; their souls wounded, their spirits
perplexed, their consciences disquieted Psalm. 32:4, 5. and Psalm. 28.
, their hearts oppressed with the guilt and grief of sin; their inward peace
interrupted, yea disioynted; their former joys perished Psalm* ^ ^2.
, their feelings abated, or quite lost; their graces soiled, decayed, weakened
in the luster, power, and exercise of them; their faith infirm, their
assurance weak, their hopes languishing, their love and zeal cooled, their
prayers dull and heavy, their spirits lumpish and drowsy: yea even in that
relation that they have to man, though in respect of the world and her
worldlings, their sins (chiefly if they be published in Gath and Askalon)
expose them to the exprobration, vituperation, yea derision of the
uncircumcised, as Sampsom Judge. 16.
was to the Philistines, and in respect of the Church, subject them to her
censure, yea perhaps her greatest censure, excommunication Grounded on 1 Cor.
5.5. practiced by the Primitive times, authorized by Councils, vide decreta
Gratiani 11. de concilio Arausicano, apud Osiandrum, Cent. 5. lib. 2.6.28. p.
300
; and to the censure, frowns and browbeatings of her strictest children, till
satisfaction be given; yet nevertheless even in this case, as David once in a
great distress, they may comfort themselves in the Lord their God 1 Samuel 30.6.
, that their storms shall have a calm, their candle, that seems to be put
out shall be lighted again, their former joys shall be restored, their Sun
shall shine, Gods face and favor shall be toward them, they shall have the
arguments of his love, the feelings of his spirit, the lively stirrings and
motions of his Grace; their unquiet consciences shall be appeased, these
blustering waves and winds of accusations, temptations shall be commanded,
their heavy hearts shall be comforted, their sadded souls shall be gladded,
their feelings shall come again, as a man out of a dead swound, their peace
with God shall be assured, their assurance like a bone that is broke, shall
again be knit; their seemingly lost Charter shall be again renewed; their
weakened decayed Graces shall be strengthened, their faith increased, their dull
and dead prayers quickened, their credit and estimation with Gods people so far
as it stands with Gods glory, and their further good, again recovered; and the
mouths of the wicked and blasphemous by their futu^e holy and inoffensiue
life, shall be justly stopped: yea all the breaches and ruins which the
hostility of Satan has made, shall be made up again, all the demolitions and
deuastations that sin has made in the soul, spirit, conscience, name, etc.
of the sons of Sion, shall at last be reedifyed and repaired, and every
detriment repayed, in these spiritual buildings: repentance in one word, shall
rightly knit and joint again, what ever in the outward or the inward man,
sin has unloosed and disioynted, and the Lord from whom comes every good
gift Iam. 1.17.
, as the light from the Sun, which gives repentance unto Israel Act. 5.31.
, shall give it unto them: they shall have freely given them after their
sinning, at one time or other, the grace of repentance, and after serious
repenting, the after-grace of pardon and remission; though they fall, they
shall not long lie wallowing in their sins as the drunkard in the streets
disgorging his vomit, or as the swine in the mire, but they get up again,
stand on their feet, like men, wash, rub and brush off the blots and myry
spots which by their fall cleave to the garment of their holy profession, with
many tears, and much strictness and austeritie of life; for the present and
future, take more heed to their ways for ever afterward, as the burnt child
that dreads the fire; they follow no more these pleasing baits, these golden
balls of sin, which the world as he once before Atalanta, throws before them,
to turn them out of the way: but loath and detest all the causes and occasions
of sin, as the pained surcharged stomach loathes that meat, on which it has
daingerously surfetted, yea though they fall as weakling children, not able to
rise by their own power and strength; the Lord himself as a loving mother or
nurse, lends them the helping hand of Grace, pulls them up, and after their
trickling tears and cries for their hurt, cheares and cherishes them, takes
them in the arms of his mercy, and puts them in the bosom of his love Read of
this point M. Pryn his Book of the perpetuity of a regenerate man's estate, per
totum.
; though they be wounded by sin, yet there is a balm in Gilead, a
Mithridate of mercy, that heales them again: as the beasts by an instinct of
nature have recourse to their healing physic (as the blinded Swallow to
Celidine, the Toad to Plantan, the Heart to Dictanny Of the Medicines which
every creature uses by natures instinct, read Pliny, l. 8. c. 27: chiefly
Greg. Tholosanus in Syntaxi artis Mirab. l. 28. c. 38 p. 541.
, etc.) So by the instinct of Grace, they have recourse to that all-saluing,
all-sauing Panacea Grineum in problematibus de Panacea Christianorum lege.
the blood of the Lamb of God effused in his passive veins, applied to
themselves by the hand of faith Rom 4. John 3.16. Gal. 2.^0. Hab. 2.
; they seek in their sickness to their Physician Math. 9.12.
, or rather the Physician to them, as that good Samaritan to him that was
wounded Luke 10.33, 34
, traveling to Ierico from Jerusalem, from the vision of peace, to the worlds
vanity, as every sinner does; stung once with this fiery serpent sin, with
the Eagles eye of all-penetrating, all-preuailing faith, they look up to him
that was exalted on the cross John 3.14.
, whom their sins have pierced Zach. 12.10.
, prefigured by the Brazen serpent Number 21.9.
. In a word, there is a seed of Grace in all the Elect, the seed of God
remains in them says Saint John 1 John 3.9.
, that they cannot sin to death: we may say of their sins, as our Savior
said of Lazarus his sickness John 11.4.
, they are not unto death; but that the Lord may be glorified, even in his
power and mercy, in raising up again their seeming dead souls, even out of
the bed and grave of corruption: yea though they seem to lie long in this
grave, even 4 days, like that Lazarus ver. 29.
, till they stink and be corrupted The raising of Iarus daughter newly dead of
the widows son longer dead, of Lazarus dead and buried: Augustine applies to
three sorts of sinners spiritually raised.
, yet that does not prejudice the power of God in their resuscitation, and
spiritual resurrection: though David after his bloody murder and filthy
adultery, yea and after his proud presumption in numbering of his subjects, go
as long burdened with his sin as a woman man with child even nine months,
as is plain by the Text: yet Gods grace like the souls true Grace wife or
midwife indeed, delivers him of this uncomfortable burden by repentance; he
was not indeed so active and lively of himself by his own natural powers and
strength (to which our Pelagian Papists, like the old Philosophers, attribute
so much Vide positiones papisticas refutatas per Pelargum in Iesuitismo, de
libero arbitrio.
) to deliver himself as the Hebrew women, without the Egyptian Midwiues Exodus
1.19.
without the help of this Grace; but the Lord sends Nathan and Gad to him to
help him by the message of their ministration; and indeed at one time or
other, the Lord will waken all his out of their doting dreams and pleasing
slumbers, he will pluck them as he did Lot our of Sodom Genesis 19.16.
, even by violence, rather then they shall perish in any flames of lust: they
shall be pulled out of their pit, out of their prison, as inthralled Joseph
Genesis 41.14.
, in Gods good time, and set at liberty; yea perhaps exalted more then ever. In
a word, the Saints sin, but they shall not dye in their sins sickness Lege
promissiones Hos. 14.4. Mal. 4.2. Psalm. 41.2, 3. John 6.51.58. c. 10.18.
, they shall repent, and recover in their souls Mich. 7.18, 19 Ier. 3.33. Romans
8.1.
.

SECT. 3. The repentance of the reprobate either nothing, at all for the
matter, or as nothing for the manner.
But this is a privilege and prerogative peculiar only to the Elect; proprium
quarto modo, as they say, proper to them, and only to them: It is not a
Nouerint vniuersi if I may so allude, it is not communicable to all, belongs
omnibus Christi fidelibus, to all that are Christ's, all true Christian people,
all bleeding believers have interest in this mercy; to the reprobate and
ungodly ones that are sold to sin, as yet it is a mystery; as Peter said to
Simon Magus Acts 8.21.
in another case, they have no part nor fellowship in this ministration: herein
are they clearly shed and distinguished as Goats from sheep, as they shall
be at the last judgment Mat. 25.32.
, in their sufferings, so now in their sinnings: for alas they sin, but they
sorrow not: they either repent not at all, but harden their hearts as the
nether millstone, as did Pharaoh Exodus 7.13.
, or else they repent hypocritically and superficially, as did Judas Math. 27.3.
, Saul 1 Samuel 15.24.
, Ahab 1 Kings 21.29
, with others: their tears are as the Crocodiles Hominibus maxim infesti,
homine rapto, vi lachrymarum dissoluunt cerebrum, Vincent. lib. 17. cap. 606.
l. 30. c 91. and Aelian lib. 9. cap. 3.
, their confessions as the Traitors on the rack; their repentance is for the
punishment of sin which they feel, not for the sin it self which they
ought to hate: and so all they say, and do, and weep, and cry, and confess, is
but as the howling of an hungry wolf, and pleases God as the cutting off a
dogs neck Esaias 66.3.
, their repentance is an hypocrite like to themselves, as good never a whit the
titter as they say, as never a whit the better: they ever fail in the matter,
or manner and form of repentance: either they repent nothing, or as good as
nothing: they are daily deadly stung with this serpent sin, yet though there
be balm in Gilead Ier. 8.22.
, they are incurable Ier. 13.23.27. and Romans 2.5.
; or if they use any means for cure, it is so slightly and vneffectually,
that their wound only skinned over for a time, ranckles and festers at the
bottom, and breaks out again even in outward ulcers and putrifactions, to
the scandal and detestation of the spectators: they sleep in their sin so
deadly, rockt in the cradle of security so daingerously, as having drunk Poppy
or Oppium, that like the sluggish Indian asses Gesner de Asino inter
quadrupedes.
, nothing will awake them, not the whips and goads of the Law, not Aar^ns bells,
the golden promises of the Gospel: not John Baptists voice Math 3.3.
, not Christ's cry Ioh. 7.28.37.
, not Esayes Trumpet Esaias 58.1.
, not Paul's thundering Augustines desire was to see Christum in carne, and to
hear Paul an tonitruantem.
, no not the thunderbolts themselves of feared, or threatened judgments, have
power to awake them; or if they awake for a time, so strong are their sleepy
drugs, so powerful sins charms, so pleasing and bewitching the worlds
Music, that like a heavy headed drowsy drunkard, by pinching and nipping of
some outward cross or inward terror, they look up with one eye, shrug
themselves, a little turn themselves as Salomons sluggard Prou. 6 10:
, as the door on the hinges, then sleep again more securely then ever. Thus
both the Elect and reprobate fall into sin, yea perhaps the same sin, as Jacob
Genesis 31.4.
, and Lamech Genesis 4.19.
, into Polygamie; Peter and Judas both disciples, both sin against Christ, the
one in betraying him John 13.
, the other in denying him Luke 26.
, but here is the difference (and let every one lay it to heart that would know
their estate, and work out their salvation with fear and trembling) the one
fall by sinning, but they rise again by repenting, they are wounded and
healed: they sleep and are awakened, they sleep not long, for like the
Nightingale Traditione creditur.
there is some prick under or in their breast; some sting of conscience, or
some wounding of love, that makes them awake, yea, and keeps them waking: And
hence it is, that as we read of the sins of David, Peter, Jonas Jonas 2.
, here our Ezekiah, so we read of their repentance; as of their sores, so of
their salve, the prescribed remedy Esaias 1.16. Ier. 3.14.
for sins malady: Yea, and though the repentance of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph,
Noah, Lot, Gideon, Sampson, be not expressly recorded as are their sins, yet
besides the judgment of charity, which hopes the best, even in the judgment
of verity, their repentance may be gathered and concluded: for besides
Sampsons prayer, so fervent, so effectual Judge. 16.28.
, conjoined with repentance, he and the rest being recorded in the book of God
for believers Hebr. 11. per totum: see Mr. Perkins his Commentating Sermons in
locu^
, approved as just and righteous men, commended for their effectual justifying
faith; this mother Faith being ever fruitful Gal. 5.6. Iam. 2.26:
, could not want her eldest daughter Repentance.

But it is otherwise with the reprobate, and the whole cloud of unbelievers,
they daily fall, but like the Elephant overthrown with the Rinoceros De pugna
and ruina amborum, lege Aelian l. 17. c. 40. Surium Comment. anno 15.5, and
Nicolaum de comitibus.
, they with their lusts, lie still, never rise; their joints are so stiff,
they cannot bow, their hearts so hard, they cannot relent, but going on from
sin to sin, from thirst to drunkenness, etc, they treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath Romans 2.5, 6.
, as the thief adds fellonies to fellonies, against the great day of Assize
in the just declaration of the judgments of God. Their falls are as if a man
fall precipitate from a Rock or promontory, even to the neck break of their
souls; they cast themselves down headlong to hell, as willingly as that
Curtius De quo Liuius lib. 17. Propertius l. 3. ex Ovid. in Ibyn.
cast himself into that devouring gulf, or lake, that swallowed him
inuisibly: they like a man that is unweildy and stumbles, once tripping never
leave till they came down for altogether, and once down like these heavy
birds called bustards, or some fat swans, never get wing, never rise again to
any height, till that fowler of hell ceize upon them: for the Lord neither puts
under his hand to keep them from falling, neither lends them any help of
Grace to raise them up, but lets them lie wallowing (as once that Amasa 2 S^^.
20.12.
) wounded by sin (that treacherous Ioab) even in their own blood: these
wander continually like blinded men, or as a man in a dark night gone wrong,
ever the longer the further off; their reduction and return is per
impossible: it is impossible they should return Heb. 6.4.
and convert, but like that Cain Genesis 4.10.
, fly still from God, unless the Lord himself convert them and turn them
into the right, straight, and narrow way that leads unto life: I conclude this
with one of the Fathers, David sinned, which Kings and great men are wont to
do Peccauit David quod solent reges, peccauit and penituit, quod non solent
reges, Ambrose.
, David sinned and repented, which great men are not wont to do: so the
righteous sin as the reprobates do, but the righteous sin and repent,
which the reprobates are not wont to do. The wicked imitate the godly as it
were by warrant, in the sins which Satan works, but not in their repentance
which God works.

SECT. 4. The improbabilitie, yea impossibility of a sinners repentance, till
God give the grace.
THerefore as a further Use, in enlarging the application of this point, let it
be as exhortatory, so comminatory, to deter al wicked and ungodly persons from
presumptuous sins, that are most prejudicial to their souls, these
presumptuous sins I call such, as are wrought with a hye hand, in hope of
immunity and freedom either from the eye of God Job 22.13.
, that he cannot know them; or from the power and justice of God, that he
cannot or will not punish them; or from the long suffering of God that he will
tolerate and forbear them; or from the clemency and mercy of God, that he will
pass by them and pardon the^: not to insist in any of the former branches, but
only in the last: that God will pardon any sin without repentance, is an
Atheistical lie, dissonant from the Scriptures Esaias 5.11, 12, 13. Esaias 30.33.
Psalm. 6.11. Ps. 9.17. Reu. 21.8. chap. 12.15. etc
, from all examples and testimonies in the Book of God: God never did this,
never will do it, nay I say cannot do it, unless he deny himself 2 Timothy
2.13.
and his revealed truth, which were blasphemy once to speak or think. Now
then see on what tickle ground a wicked man stands, on what sandy foundations
he builds, which is wholly given over to wicked and sinful courses, for
repentance is proper and peculiar only to the elect, even as faith is, which
is the fountain and the mother of it: proper to an Ezekiah, as here, and to
others such as he: whereas a wicked man that is sold to sin, as was said of
Ahab 1 King. 21.20
, has an evil heart of incredulity Heb. 3.12.
, and an obdurate heart in impenitency: there is a stone in his heart, says
the Prophet Ezekiel. 36.26.
, till the Lord take it out: yea, (as we read of some fellons, stearne men,
that were opened after hanging Goulart. in his admirable Histories translated
to this purpose. Muret. lib. 12. de diuersis lect. cap. 10. Columbus lib. 15.
anatom. Beneuenius de abditis causis, cap. 83. Amatus in cent. 6. and Cornelius
Gemma lib. 2. Cyclognomiae page 75. allege diverse examples. etc.
) there were bones growing through their heart, or hair. Oh such as he are
Deucalions offspring: a stony generation, flinty, adamantine, hard hearted,
that cannot repent, says the Apostle: it is no more in their own power to
repent, then to create a new world, to turn the course of the Sea, as once
Jordan, backward: yea when they would fainest repent in terrors of Conscience,
under the hand of wrath, in the time of sickness, in the fearful summons of
death, and the more fearful apprehension of judgment: (as experience speaks
to the observing eye of those that are wise to mark the passages in the lives
and deaths of the wicked) they can no more repent then they can remove
mountains or millstones, their hearts are as dry as once Gideons fleece Judge
6.40.
, without any dew of grace; they are as the bulrush in Summer, without any mire
Job 8.11.
or moisture; as it was said of drunken dying Nabal 1 Samuel 25.37.
, their hearts are as a stone within them, as heavy as Lead, as impenetrable as
Steel, as vnyeelding to any exhortations, comminations, as the Adamant Apud
Theophrastum lib. de lapidibus.
to the stroke of the Iron; as incapable of any comforts, excepting carnal, as
mad men are of reason; sometimes grinning like Dogs, howling as hungry Wolves,
roaring as Lions To these beasts they are compared, Zephan. 3.3. Mat. 7.6. and
so God shows himself to them, Hos. 5.14. and chap. 13. verse. 7, 8.
, they lie and cry and dye, distracted, yea desperate in the anxiety of their
souls Examples are in Bomelius, Latomus, Gerlach, D. Krans the Germane, with
many more, recorded by Sleidan, Belonius, Lonicer, and our Book of Martyrs.
; or else, which is as ill, with cauterized consciences, insensible of any
guilt of sin, as dead flesh is of pricking, as they live so they dye, like very
bruit beasts: this is all the show of the repentance of the reprobates, of
those which God has given over to a reprobate sense.

Oh what madness is it then to sin upon hope of immunity, upon presumption
of repentance, or of Gods merciful acceptance of thy lame and halting
humiliation when thou offers it! For alas, who can repent of himself till God
give him grace? he can as well see without eyes, and speak easilier (as some
Ventriloquists And Pythonists recorded Lorinus comment. in Actis Apostol. cap.
16 Congeries Similium.
) without a tongue: Nay, nay, a wicked man can sin of himself, but he
cannot godlily sorrow of himself: a man may wound himself without any other
agent, but he cannot so easily heal himself without a Surgeon: one may of
himself leap into a pit, but he cannot come forth again when he will without
a roape or a ladder, or some such external means: a man of himself and from
his sinful corrupt nature may sin; it is as natural for him to sin, as for
the fire to burn, the sea to flow, the Sun to shine; it is as the running
down the hill, as the swimming or sailing with the stream: facilis descensus
Auerni, oh the passage to Hell is easy, easily traveling in the broad way
Mat. 7.13.
: but to repent of sin, to turn from sin unto God, the sovereign good, from
the creature to the Creator; this is more difficult, this is to swim against
the stream, to sail against the tide, to contend against the hill, as
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, to get up to the Rock 1 Samuel 14.13.
with hands and knees; hoc opus, hic ^^bor; this is a work supernatural; this
is from the inspiration of the Almighty, not from the spirit of man, which can
make no sound this way, no more then the Organ-pipe without wind from the
bellows. Non cuivis contigit, etc. This is not common to all, but to such
whose hearts are renewed and changed from their native and natural condition,
and molded aright by the spirit of grace. What a madness is this then to sin,
or continue in sin presumptuously, only upon this conceit (indeed deuillish
deceit) that repentance is in their power, and God will give it at their
pleasure, as a free man his alms, even for asking; or as some debtor his
debts, for calling for: whereas every man sinning, (much more the wicked) are
in their sins as the clay in the hand of the Potter Ier. 18.6. Romans 9.21.
; as the wood in the hand of the Carpenter; as the iron in the hand of the
Smith; as the fellon in the power of the Judge; as the traitor in the power of
the King; ^s Pharaohs Buttler and Baker, offending, were in the power of
Pharaoh Genesis 40.20, 21
, to pardon or punish them, to forgive or to execute them; as it was in the
power of Christ's mercy to give repentance and Paradise to one of the Thieues
upon the Cross Luke 23.39, 40, 41, 42.
, in the power of his justice to obdurate and harden the other Thief: And
besides, to sin presumptuously because God is merciful to his children upon
their humiliation, as here he was to Ezakiah, is as though a slave should
wilfully abuse and offend his Master upon hope of impunity, because a son is
pardoned upon his petitioning, offending his father of weakness; as though a
man should make ropes of sand, because others make cables of suitable matter; as
though a man should presume to commit wilful murder, because another man is
pardoned his chance-medley: nay, to try and experiment by wilful sinning and
presumptuous continuance in sin, whether God will be merciful or no; is as if
a man should wilfully surfeit and make himself sick, to see whether the
Physician will or can make him well or no: or for a man willingly to cut and
lance himself in some parts of his body, to try whether his Surgeon will or
can cure him or no: As I saw once an Italian wound his own sides with a
Rapier, to try the conclusions of his healing Baulmes Once in the Schools in
Cambridge: yet Histories show, some Mountebanks have killed themselves by ^uch
tricks.
: Or it is as if a man should wilfully leap into a coale-pit, to try the
charity of his neighbors, whether they will drag and draw him out or no: such
a presumptuous murderer in all probability may come to be hanged, such a self
wounder may bleed to death, and such a pit-diuer may haps as il speed, as that
Jew in Teucksbury, who according to our Chronicles, refusing to be pulled out
of a pit, in his superstition, on our Saturday, his Sabbath day, when help was
offered, the next day which was our Sabbath and as his Monday, could have no
help offered or afforded, but was found dead on the third day, helped forward
by hunger or stink. So let thy enemies perish O Lord: for whom thou do not
convert, thou will confound.

SECT. 5. God in all his dealings with his children, does inflict crosses, but
never curses.
LAstly, here from Ezekiahs humiliation we may see the nature and quality of
that wrath which the Context says came upon Ezekiah for the pride of his
heart; for what ever it was in the particulars, it was not a curse, but only a
cross, because it was sent though upon a meriting cause, yet for a good end,
and wrought a good end an excellent fruit grew upon this bitter tree, even his
repentance never to be repented of 2 Cor. 7.10.
: this his Physician (as his use is to all his sick sinning patients) sent
this bitter potion to a good use, and it wrought a good effect, it purged his
ungrateful humor, and phlebotomized his pride: This his father, as he does to
all his sinning sons, correct him in mercy, not in wrath Ier. 10.24.
; visits his sins with rods, and his offenses with scourges, but depriues him
not of his mercies and loving kindness, according to his promise to his father
David 2 Samuel 7.14.
: and indeed all things working together for the good of the elect Romans 8.28.
Vide Couper in locum.
, what ever comes to them, comes as a loue-token from a Loner Revel. 3.19. Heb.
12.7.
, an admonition or redargution (at most a correction) from a Father; as a
prescription from a Physician, not as a condemnatory sentence of execution from
a severe Judge: this wrath was only a rod of whips gently to correct a son;
not a whip of wires and iron, severely and rigorously to afflict a slave: and
indeed as what ever comes to the wicked and reprobate comes to them in Justice
and vengeance, their very tables, their wives, their children, their
prosperity, their friends, etc. being as traps and snares unto them, God giving
them these things (as he gave desired quails Number. 11.31, 32.
, and a King to Israel 1 Samuel 8.11, 12, 13.
, and life to murtherous Cain Genesis 4.15.
) even in wrath, and anger; so the bitterest and worst things, even the
corrections for sins come to his own children as mercies. We read indeed of
the plagues of Egypt Exodus 7. Exodus 8. Chap 9, 10.
, of Sodom Hos. 11.8. and Amos 4.11.
, of Moab Amos 1. and Chap. 2. per totum.
, of Edom, of Damascus, and of the burdens of other sinful nations and
people, but never of the plagues of David, Ezekiah, Josiah, etc. the botches of
Egypt Exodus 9 10.
, the Emerods 1 Samuel 5.
of the Philistines, the death of Pharaohs first borne Exodus 12.29.
, the murren of his cattle Exodus 9.19.
, the frogs in his chamber Exodus 8 6.
, were indeed real Plagues; prologues and proems were these externalls, to
plagues eternal: but the gout 2 Ch^ 16.12.
in Asaes seet, Jacobs touch in the hollow of his (...) Gen 32.25.
Ezekiahs sickness 2 Kings 20.
, and here the occasion of his (...) ^on, was only a paternall castigation. Oh
that we with patience and contentation could drink the bitterest cup which the
Lord brewes for us, and sends to us for our souls safety, in our haughty
hearts humiliation.

SECT. 6. Mercy mixed with Justice.
BEsides, in searching the point narrower, we see further in this castigation,
that the Lord even in Justice remembers Mercy; yea his mercy triumphs over
justice, as the oil swimmes above the water; as we see here that this wrath
upon Ezekiah was the just desert of his ungrateful pride, or proud
ingratitude, here was Justice inflicting: yet this correction as it tended, so
it ended in his humiliation, which was physical to his endangered soul; here
was Mercy. So to add more instances, Manasses the son of this Ezekiah, for
his many and manifold prouocations of the Almighty by his idolatries,
witchcrafts, charmings, sorceries, murders, massacres of the Saints, was
justly deprived of his Crown, imprisoned by the King of Ashur, iron fetters
put upon his feet, manacles on his hands, here was Justice: yet this sharp
physic, so bitter to the flesh, was wholesome and medicionable to his soul,
for in his tribulation he prayed to the Lord, and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his fathers, and the Lord was entreated of him; here was
Mercy. So in the first sin that ever was committed Adam eating of the Tree
prohibited, was questioned, strictly examined, convicted, sentenced, to eat
his bread in the sweat of his brows, till he returned to his dust Genesis 3.19.
, including all miseries in life, and mortality in death Pezelius and Rimgius
in locum.
, here wa^ Justice: but yet even then, though his flesh was corrected, the
instrument of sin, ye^ his soul was secured of salvation in the promised
Messiah* the seed of the woman should break and bruise the head of the Serpent
verse. 15.
, here was Mercy: So the woman being first in the transgression, was deepest in
affliction, for her sorrows were threatened to be great v. 16.
in the production of Children, and now by all the propagating daughters of Eve
are tried so great, that Imagination can no more but express them, here was
Justice, for her fact: yet says our Savior himself the eternal Truth, as
soon as ever a man-child is borne into the world she forgets (in a manner)
her former griefs; their delights swallow up their dolors, here was Mercy. Oh
wondrous mixture of Mercy and Justice, none knows the pains of a childbearing
woman, but she that is perturient, here is Justice to that sinning sex: yet
withal none knows the love of a mother, as she that is a mother, here is
Mercy. This course the Lord holds still; God crosses us in our sinful, and for
our sinful courses, as the Angel withstands Balaam Numb. 22.26.
in his poasting for preferment; yet these crosses (like that scabbe in the
breast which the Roman received by his fighting enemy, in stead of killing Apud
Plutarchum as that Surgeon who breaking a Gentleman's head, cured him of the
headachs D. Cotta against Emperickes.
curing his Impostume) curbing, crossing, yea curing our corruptions,
demo^strate as plainly a Mercy in the use and end, as Justice in inflicting our
deserved crosses. Oh that we could with our hearts and tongues, from our words
and works bless and praise the Lord as in all the rest of his glorious
attributes, so especially that we could glorify him in his Mercy and Justice,
his two attributes in which he most delights, and most exercises amongst the
sons of men, and to which all things in heaven and earth do tend as to their
Center. Oh that with David's heart and spirit, we could resolve to sing of Mercy
and Justice, (not political and oeconomicall as he in that Psalm Psalm. 101.1.
, but) as they are Attributes in God essential, in which he is most glorified
of Angels and men. Oh that we could see with spiritual eyes, how not only in
the redemption of the world by Christ, but even in the gubernation and
government of the world, yea even in proceeding with several individual men,
which philosophy calls so many Microcosmes See the allusions twixt man this
Microcosme, and the world this Megacosme apud Alliedium in Theol. natural*
, or little worlds, but chiefly in his dealings with his elected ones: Justice
and Mercy meet together; righteousness and truth embrace and kiss each other.

CHAP. XI.
NOw from sailing thus long in Ezekiahs sorrows, launcing into that Ocean of
matter, his deep and serious humiliation, we now at last bring the Penitent to
his port and haven, to enjoy his calm, and reap the fruit of his renewed
repentance never to be repented of; in coming you see by degrees, as we at
first laid them down, to this fourth and last maine and material point, which
the Text affords, (omitting all the circumstantiall) and that is the remouall
of wrath, or the repriuall of Ezekiah and the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem, from the wrath that in some measure begun to be exercised upon
them, but upon their humiliations stinted and ceased, so that it came not fully
upon them in the days of Ezekiah, for so indeed may (as I think) the Text and
Context be reconciled: the one saying, that wrath was upon Ezekiah and upon
Judah and Jerusalem; the other, that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them
in the days of Ezekiah: humiliation being interuenient betwixt wrath
denounced, and in part kindled, and the full flaming or execution of wrath that
was threatened, Number. 16.
humiliation, like Moses and Aaron in the behalf of Israel, standing in the
way, or stopping in the gap betwixt wrath in part begun, that it should not
be wholly and fully executed. In which memorable and worthy act and effect of
sound and saving humiliation, so worthily performed by Ezekiah and his
subjects, we may as men on the quiet and calm shore, stand still and admire
many particulars in the means and manner, how and by what ways some
distressed passengers in a tempestuous storm escaped shipwreck and drowning;
helped at a dead lift, as they say, by some speedy Boat or Pinnace coming to
them; which Pinnace fraughted with so many rescued and saved distressed wights
as Ezekiah and his Israelites, is Humiliation; to this they fly, in this they
are safe and secure from all the winds and waves of surging wrath. To make
some use to our selves of this happy Barge, still offered as at hand to us, to
save us in the like cases and straits, which we are or may be in, by our
ouer-burthening sins, indaingering daily the drowning of our souls in the
floods of wrath: we might (following the Card and Compass of our Text,
hoisting up sails in this souls ship, this strong and low-deckt Humiliation)
touch upon two points further: Ezekiahs act, effect.
the Penitents practice, and his comforts. etc.



But because in this great sea of matter obuious before us, in which we purpose
(God willing) to discover and discourse of (as so many Islands and Countries)
from the grounds laid down, the nature, quality, parts, fruits and effects of
this humiliation: our spiritual navigations is like to be long, tedious, as it
has been now already, desiring in our next setting forth, the sweet Fauonian
winds and gentle gales of the Spirit upon our sails, we will for this time,
as a breathing space from our former, and a preparatiue to a future labor,
(deliberating by renewed meditations upon our intended course, as may be most
for Gods glory, and the poor penitents peace) as here victualling a while, and
taking in fresh water, we conclude our first part; referring and reserving (as
the best wine last) a second intended part of this penitential project, in
further and fuller prescribing the precepts and practice of renewed repentance.

The second Part. THE HAVGHTIE heart humbled, OR, The Penitents Practice: with,
The Penitents Peace. The fourth Sermon.
The Text. 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Notwithstanding Ezekias humbled himself for the
pride of his heart, (he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of
the Lord came not upon them in the days of Ezekiah.


CHAP. I.
SECT. 1. When Gods wrath is either feared or felt, humiliation of all, and
every one is to be practiced.
I Will use no repetitions: for our natures are so desirous of novelties, that
we say not of old matter repeated again, as of old wine in respect of new,
the old is better: but we would be fed with variety Certa prodest, varia
delectat.
, yea sometimes with quails in our curiosity rather then Manna, otherwise I
could be content to reflect on things formerly delivered, and give you at
least the abstract of all in a brief Epitomie: Only as a ground work of our
further intended fabric (which is, as in other material buildings to pull
down, and to raise up, to pull down the haughty proud some pegs lower, and
to lift up the humbled penitent, some strains and notes higher.) I desire you
to remember thus much in the last propounded point, (pretermitting purposely
all the rest) that Ezekiah for the remouall of that wrath which was upon him,
and his people, humbles himself, as also the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem: from whose president, according to my purpose and promise, I first
prescribe my Penitents practice. That a whole Nation, and every particular man,
yea every particular family, and every soul, which is of years of discretion,
capable of godly sorrow for sin, ought to humble themselves before the Lord in
fasting, weeping, mourning, etc. in the Church, the family, the Oeconomie,
when the wrath of God is either threatened, or feared or felt, according to the
proportion of this wrath in the extension or the limitation of it: for if it
hold this humiliation in a whole nation, then much more in a family, in a
particular person, sinning or punished for sin: neither indeed is this
precept, calling for practice, any paradox, but such as is propt with the
pillars of truth, and wants not reasons Theological, to confirm it; beside
many more even from Gods own command, and the practice of his Church from time
to time, with her members. First for Gods command, Joel as the mouth and
message of God, summons all of all sorts, all sinners to this humiliation,
enumerating the judgments of God upon their lands and fields by the devouring
Palmerworme, Locust, Cankerworme and Caterpiller: he inuites the drunkards to
weep and howl Joel Chap. 1. v. 5, 6, 7.15, 16. and Chap. 2. ver. 12, 13.
like a virgin girded with sackcloth, for the husband of her youth, he inuites
the husbandmen to be ashamed, and the vinedressers to howl; yea he inuites the
Priests and Ministers of the Altar to lament and lie all night in sackcloath,
to sanctify a Fast, and call a solemn assembly: yea he commands the Elders and
the Inhabitants of the land to be gathered into the house of the Lord and to
cry unto the Lord: yea with more vehemence, as redoubling his iniunction, he
would have all and every one from the highest to the lowest, Prince, Priest and
people, even elders and youngers, to turn to the Lord in fasting, weeping and
mourning, to rent their hearts and not their garments, etc. yea he spares not
the very bride and and bridegroom, but brings them out of their chamber, and
closet, to weep and mourn before the Lord. This constant note sung all the
rest of the Prophets, as Esaias before him, anatomizing the corruptions of
Israel, that from the crown of the head to the soale of the foot there was
nothing but wounds and blaines and corruptions and putrifactions Esaias 1.6*
, the very heads and rulers, like the heads of great fishes stinking, and the
whole body of the Communaltie smelling ill, calling (for their vncleanness^^
their Princes, Princes of Sodom ver. 10.
, and the people a ^^^^^n of Gomorrah, prescribing the clensing and purging
(...) ^edy for these pollutions, even their serious humiliation, he excites
them to wash themselves, to make themse^ues clean, to cease to do evil verse.
16.
, learn to do well; to seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow: he prescribes them special parts of
humiliation, branches of repentance, auersion from evil, conversion unto God,
praeterita plangere, to bewail what is past, to wash and wipe clean, and
plangenda non committere, not to commit again former sins bewailed Haec vera
penitentia, cum quis sic confitetur vt crimen non repetat, Ambrose.
: so Jeremy as Gods Herald proclaims in this north, that which is the very
maine soul of humiliation, without which it is dead and rotten, and that is
reuersion or true turning unto God. Return, return, O backsliding Israel Ier.
3.14.
: So on this hearts string of humiliation touch also the Apostles, and John the
Baptist, Oh generation of Vipers, cries the voice of that Crier, who has
fornewarned you to avoid the wrath or the vengeance to come Math. 3.7.
: Every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be cut down, and thrown
into the fire. Bring forth fruits therefore worthy of repentance and amendment
of life ver. 10.
. So S. Peter in his canonical Epistle to the dispersed Jews in Asia,
Bythiniae, Capadocea 1 Pet. 1.1.
, prescribing a humble and submisse carriage one toward another, giving his
reason, because God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble, by an
excellent climax and gradation goes from humility toward man, to humiliation
to wards God: from the premises inferring this conclusion, humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God Chapter 5, 6.
, and the Lord in due time will lift you up. The very same point of
humiliation, from the very same grounds, even in the same words, is urged by
the Apostle James, Chapter 4 v. 10. though pressed also in more words in the verse
precedent, be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned
into mourning, and your joy into heaviness James 4.9.
.

Consonant to this precept has been from time to time the practice of the
Saints of God, not only in a constant and conscionable course (omitted now by
too many) humbling themselves for their daily slips and transgressions, but
more peculiarly in extraordinary humiliations, meeting the Lord, as did here
Ezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, when his judgments were but
threatened, when the brandished sword of his wrath was only drawn and
flourished, as we may see in the example of the Ninevites, at the threatening of
Jonas, Ion. 3.8, 9. In the example of the Israelites, terrified from the Lord
by Samuel at Mizpah, 1 Samuel 7.6. and affrighted of the Philistines ver. 7 8.
and menaced by the Angel or messenger of the Lord which came from Gilgal to
Bochim; Judge. 2.3, 4, 5.
but more especially when they have either been smit or wounded, or more
immediately in danger of wounding by this brandished sword, whether weilded in
the hand of God by plague or pestilence, or in the hand of man in war or bloody
persecution, the striking hand has been assayed to be stayed by humiliation:
as many instances may be given in holy writ, as in David whose pride of heart
in numbering his people, being curbed with the death of seventy thousand of them
swept away by the plague 2 Samuel 24.16.
, as dust with a Beesome; he and the elders of Israel seeing the Angel of the
Lord stand betwixt the earth and heaven with a drawn sword 1 Chro. 21.16
, fell upon their faces, clothed with sackcloth, and upon David's humble
prayer, (as once before when Phineas Psalm. 106.30.
prayed) the plague ceased; so Iehosophat being wonderfully straightened 2 Chro.
20.3.
when the children of Moab and Ammon with their mighty martial troops, came
against him, from beyond the sea on this side Syria, (as our Ezekiah was in the
like exigents when the strong and numerous powers of Senacherib besieged
Jerusalem) he having no power, nor strength to resist them, betakes himself to
the strong God, the tower of the righteous, the Lord of hosts, and in the most
serious humiliation that ever I read of, he and all Judah standing before the
Lord, with their wives, their children and their little ones ver. 13.
, crying, weeping, fasting, and importuning the Lord with most fervent and
effectual prayers, there was the most excellent effect in the discomfiture of
their enemies, in the most miraculous manner, most glorious to God, most
aduantageous to Israel, that ever was instanced in any age, before or since: so
when Joshua and the men of Israel fled before the men of Ai, and turned their
backs of the Canaanites, to the loss of 36 me^, Joshua rent his clothes, fell
to the earth upon his face, before the Ark of the Lord, Joshua 7.
until the evening, he and the Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their
heads, Josh. 7, 6, 7. here was humiliation; so when the rest of the Tribes in a
good and righteous cause, in which victory was promised, were twice put to the
foil, with loss and damage, by the insulting Beniamites: the Israelites
wondrously humbled themselves, wept and fasted before the Lord a whole day,
until evening, offering peace offerings, and burnt offerings before the Lord,
and upon that were victorious, Judge. 20. ver. 23.26. So we know the practice of
Mardocheus and Esther, and the distressed Jews at Sushan, when their lives and
bloods were sold by that wicked serpentine Hamman: what Ezra and the Elders and
people of Israel did Ezra 10.1, 2
, when the Lord was provoked and angered by their taking of strange wives of the
Canaanites: what Nehemiah did when he heard of the great affliction and
reproach of them, that were left of the captivity, and the breaking down of
the wall of Jerusalem, and burning the Gates thereof with fire: namely, that in
all these afflictions, these fears, these sins, these sufferings: they
humbled their souls as here our Ezekiah, under the mighty hand of God, and had
a blessed issue, a gracious answer, an excellent harvest, upon their deep
plowing, and wet sowing: I say briefly to all and every one of us, (contenting
my self with these reasons at this time) as our Savior to him in the Gospel,
vade and tu fac similiter Luke 10.37.
, Oh thou sinning soul, who ere thou art, that lie open till thy humiliation
have made thy peace, to all the gunshot Cannons of Gods judgment, the force
and fury of all the creatures; or thou that art threatened by the rod shaken at
thee; or the sword drawn as against Adam by the Cherubin, and Balaam by the
Angel; or have felt or do feel the smarting rod of wrath upon thy shoulders
already, go thou and do the like as did here Ezekiah, David, those Nineuites,
those Israelites, those Tribes, Joshua, Iehosophat, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther,
Mardocheus: humble thy self before the Lord, cast down thy soul before his
footstool, fast and pray and weep and lament, suffer affliction and sorrows,
as St. James exhorts, James 4.9.
eat no pleasing meats as Daniel Dan. 10.2, 3.
, for many days, let thy sighing come unto thee before thy eating, as it did
to Job, cry mightily to the Lord as did Niniuie Jonas 3.4.
, abhor thy self in sackcloth and ashes Job 42, 6.
, loath thy sins, and thy self for thy sin, that the Lord may love thee,
and may again look favorably upon thee, and show thee the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto thee Psalm. 87.1.
, that thy flesh may come unto thee again, like the flesh of a child, that
thy sad soul may be solaced, that the tears may be wiped from thine eyes,
that thy dejected spirit may be comforted, may rejoice in God thy Savior, and
be made joyful in the joys of the Lords salvation.

SECT. 2. The Ministers must principally be humbled, and seek to humble others.
But because our nature is ready to post off duties, and to take that which is
said in general to all, as if it belonged to none in particular; like some
master that has often his work neglected, when he speaks to all his servants
at once, because he inioynes not every one his task: I therefore subdiuide
this duty into several Branches, and cut and carue every one his part and
portion.

First then, we that are Ministers we must be ringleaders in the dance of
this duty, we must tread out first these humble modest measures, we must
prologue and begin the first Act in these penitential parts; not only for
our own personal private sins, which commonly come to be public and
published, as daingerously scandalous to the weak, exemplary to the wicked,
offensive to the godly, and a stumbling-blocke to all; must we be humbled even
to the very dust, beat as it were even to powder, weeping if it were possible
more bitterly then Peter, more abundantly then Mary Magdalen, confessing more
then Augustine In libris Confessionam.
, to God and his scandalized Church, till we have washed and wiped away all
these aspersions and blots which a sinning life has cast upon sound and
sincere doctrine; but even for the sins of the times must we be humbled, yea
the sins of the Land in general, of the places where, and of the people
amongst whom we live, must be unto us as they were to Noah 2 Pet. 2.5.
, Lot Genesis 19. and 2 Pet. ^. 7.
, David Psalm. 119.
, Jeremy Ier. 9.1.
, in their times, no small cause of humiliation: chiefly when there is wrath
threatened or feared to come upon the Land and Nation wherein we live, or that
we see the fire already kindled in some begun judgment temporal or
spiritual, and we see the crying sins of the times calling for, prologuing
and heralding still greater; then are w^ in a special manner above the rest,
to humble our selves: the Lord calls upon us, as Joel upon the Ministers in his
time, to weep betwixt the Porch and the Altar Joel 2.17.
, and to cry to the Lord to spare his people: we should take unto us words Osee
14.3.
, and say to the Lord, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: we
should as Job for his sons Job 1.5.
, rise up early and offer sacrifices for the sins of our people: we should
like Aaron, take the Censer Number. 16.46, 47.
of a clean and upright heart, and put thereon the fire of zeal, and offer up
the incense of faithful and fervent prayer, and make an a^onement for our
Congregations, as soon as ever we perceive that wrath is gone out from the
Lord, and the plague is begun: we must with Moses and Aaron often feru^n^^^
intercede for our people, as they did with great importun^ty Number 16.22. Deuteronomy.
9.25, 26, 27. Exodus 32.10. and v. ^2. Psalm. 106.23.30.
: yea our prayers must often with Moses even stand as it were in the gap, betwixt
the Lords justice and the peoples sins: we must pray even for hard hearted
Pharaohs yea as did Abraham, we must intercede for such as Abimelech Genesis 20.17.
, and Ismael Genesis 17.18.
, wicked and paganish men, yea even such as the unclean Sodomites, both to
turn them from their sins, and to keep and remove judgments from them,
that their souls may live: or if we see there is no other remedy but they will
needs lie and dye in their sins, our souls must yet with Jeremy weep in
secret for them we must mourn for them, and bewail as it were their souls
funerals, as Samuel mourned 1 Samuel 16.1.
for reprobate Saul. And as we must thus humble our selves above all others
that are the inhabitants of that Jerusalem in which we live, when wrath in any
measure is come upon the times, so we must by all means preach and press and
procure the humiliation of our people: we must as the Cock Gallus
praedicatori^ symbolum apud Reusnerum.
clap our own wings to awaken our own hearts, and then crow aloud, lifting up
our voices like Trumpets, to awaken others: we must show Jacob his sins, and
Israel his transgressions Esaias 58.1.
, together with the judgments hanging over their heads by reason of sin: we
must cry unto them with Esaias. Esaias 1.19. Ier. 3.14.
Wash you, make you clean: with Jeremy, Return O disobedient and rebellious
children: we must desire them to return from their evil way, and repent, that
the Lord may repent of the evil he purposes unto them, because of their evil
doings, Ier. 18.8. Ier. 26.1.2.3. We must tell them, their iniquities separate
betwixt God and them, and that their sins hide his face from them Esaias 59.2.
: we must tell them, that the reason of all former felt judgments, which call
for new, whether blasting, mildew, cleanness of teeth, pestilence of Egypt,
or what ever Deuteronomy. 28. and Leuit. 26.
, is because they have not turned to the Lord, nor prepared themselves to meet
their God, Amos 4.9.10. We must expostulate with them, as Moses with Pharaoh,
how long they will stand out in their rebellions, how long it will be ere they
humble themselves Exodus 10.3.
: We must tell them that all their outward sacrifices and services without this
serious humiliation, are but abominations before the Lord Esaias 1.11.
, and that the only thing the Lord requires above all burnt offerings, is the
sacrifice of a broken and humbled heart Ps. 51.16 17.
, above the offering of the firstborn: We must tell the hypocrite, the Lord
requires he should walk humbly before him, Micah 6.6. We must stand upon the
Watchtower, with Habakkuk, and wait for the vision, and tell the proud
Peacockes of our time, that the soul which is lifted up, is not upright within
him Hab. 2.4.
: We must exhort all with Zachary, to turn unto the Lord, that the Lord may
turn unto them, Zach. 1.3. We must cry to the rich and proud extortioners, as
Daniel to Nabuchadnezzar, to break off their sins by repentance, and to
redeem them by almesdeeds, Dan. 4.24. We must exhort all to search themselves,
to try and examine their ways, before the decree come forth Zeph. 2.2.
, and they be as chafe before the fire of the fierce wrath and anger of the
Lord: We must exhort all to afflict their souls Leuit. 23.27.
; to put off their costly raiment Exodus 33.5.
, and to turn to the Lord in fasting, weeping, and mourning, etc. We must
preach to a sinful people, as John the Baptist to the Jews Mat. 3.1.
, as Peter Acts 2.38.
to Christ's crucifiers, and to Simon Magus Acts 8.22.
, to repent of their wickedness, and to amend their lives, else we must tell
them as our Savior Christ the Pharisees Luke 13.3.
, except they repent they shall perish, and iniquity shall be their
destruction: the soul that sins shall dye the death Ezekiel. 18.1.
: We must cry to all to judge and examine themselves, else they shall be
judged of the Lord 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. Psalm. 4.4. and Lament. 3.40.
. By thus preaching and accordingly humble walking, we shall save our selves
and them that hear us; we shall bring some perhaps out of the power of
darkness Acts 26.18.
, pluck them out of the snares of the Devil 2 Timothy 2.26.
, pull them as brands out of the fire, as the Angels did Lot out of Sodom; we
shall cause them by repentance, as here the inhabitants of Judah, to turn away
the fierce wrath of the Lord from our Nation: at least we shall deliver our
own souls Ezekiel 33.
, wash our hands in innocence, and be free from the blood of all, as was good
Paul, an excellent pattern in all these duties, Acts 20.26.

SECT. 3. Those reproved who are neither humbled themselves, nor seek to
humble others.
ANd here ere I go to any further subject of this humiliation, if I may be so
bold to expostulate a while with those who seem to be much defective in this
duty, failing in acting the parts of humiliates themselves, or to effect
humiliation in others.

Uses of redargution.
First, here those are justly reprehensible, that are insensible of the sins
of the times, such as being euerywhere taxed by the Prophets for their
covetousness, pride, excess of riot, and the like, see no sins either in
themselves or others, as matter of this mournful humiliation, but by their
own lies and bad lives so strengthen the hands of the wicked, that none do
turn from their evil ways: these of all others the Lord threatens shall
smart, when judgment begins at the Sanctuary, because both by their lives
and doctrine they feed the people with gall and wormwood, with froth and vanity
Ier. 23.14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 32. Esaias 29, 10. Esaias 6.6, 7. Esaias 29 11. Esaias 28.7.
.

Secondly, those also are in the same predicament, whose eyes are so shut that
they cannot discern of the plagues that are threatened in the Book of God,
such as on whom the Lord has poured the spirit of deep sleep and slumber,
and has closed their eyes as well as the peoples, that seeing they see not,
nor understand not; such as to whom the vision is as a sealed book; such as
err through Wine, and are out of the way through strong drink, erring in
vision and stumbling in judgment: such as are either doltishly ignorant, blind
leaders of the blind, or self conceited of their knowledge, as were some in
Ieremies time, which had only a superficial swimming braine-knowledge,
(though indeed disioyned from sanctification, there was no wisdom in them)
cannot discern either of the cause of plagues and wrath, or of the curse or
cure of sin, to avoid sin, or to fear the effects of sin either in
themselves or others, are here justly reprehensible.

Thirdly, these are yet more culpable, who when according their place and
calling they should sharply reprove the sins of a people over whom they are
placed as Pastors, and show them the annexed judgments to deter and affright
them from it, (as the pricks do hinder the hardy child from plucking of the
canker-rose) revealing to them all these plagues (as sparks from the fire of
wrath) that are Pedissequae, as handmaids or attendants on sin, recorded by
Moses and the Prophets, as did Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel, and the rest of the
Prophets before alleged; they on the contrary, as did their predecessors in
former times, (which every where are declaimed against) as temporizing for
their own ends, sow pillowes under their elbowes, to make them take a deeper
and deadlier nap in sin, they heal the hurts of the people with fair words,
they cry peace, peace, and all is well, when indeed there is no peace to the
wicked, says my God Esaias 57.19.
; they prophecy lies in the name of the Lord, and to every one that walks
after the stubbornness of his own heart, they say, no evil shall come; when
indeed Hannibal ad portas, Hannibal is even at Romes gates, the Palladian horse
is ready to enter Troy, sin lies even at the door Gen 4.7.
: Thus they dawbe with untempered mortar Ezekiel. 13.10, 15.
, dawbing up the consciences of poor people; or as the Prophet Osee terms
them, they are Fowlers, who both by their flattery catch for themselves Hos.
5.2.8.8.
, and by their fraudulency bring the people into the net and snare of Gods
wrath, even unawares. Such as these were they in Ieremies time, who when they
should have prevented the captivity, by turning the people from their wicked
ways, and from the evil of their inventions, which they might have done, had
they stood in Gods counsel, Ier. 23.22.
and declared his ways unto his people: They on the contrary, Lament. 2.14.
by not discovering the iniquity, helped forward the Captivity. Oh these
soothers, Ier. 23 14.
these flatterers the Lord professes are unto him as Sodom, he professes he
never sent them, that they prophecy only a lie in his name; but that they
sent themselves, that both they and the deluded people might perish.

Fourthly, yet worse, if worse can be, are those that neither forewarne of the
wrath and vengeance to come, as sins due desert, neither with patience will
permit others what they ought to do themselves; such as these were the
Pseudo-prophets, false Prophets, and false Apostles, who always opposed the
true: Such an one was Pashur, who smit Jeremy, and put him in prison Ier. 20.1,
2.
, as also other of the Priests and Prophets, bitter against him to the very
death Ier. 26.
, because he prophesied against the Temple, and against the City and Shiloh:
who had indeed prevailed in their purposes, notwithstanding all his apologies,
had he not been delivered by a Nobleman Ahikan and others, which stood for him
verse. 16, 17, 18,
. The like practice used Shemiah the Neholamite against this mournful Jeremy
Ier. 29.24, 25.
: the like did Amasiah the high Priest of Bethel, in stirring up Jeroboam
against Amos Amos 7.10.
, as though he had been a turbulent fellow, and had conspired against the
King: This success had Christ himself amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, his
emulators of that credit he had with the people, even to the death John 9.24.29.
: Such success had his Apostles after him, sent among them as Sheep among
Wolves, Mat. 23.34. such as these are so far from turning away judgment from
a people, by bringing them to humiliation, that indeed they bring judgments
upon themselves, their houses, and bloods, as did Pashur, and Amaziah, and
Zidkiah, etc. these must bear the iniquity of the people, and be removed by
judgment, since set as Sentinels and Watchmen, they would not awaken others.

SECT. 3. Magistrates and great ones must be humbled.
NOw as the Ministers must both be humbled themselves, and be the means to
humble others; so the Magistrates also, whether superior or inferior, must move
in the next place, according to their motion: Moses falls flat on his face
groueling before the Lord for the sins and rebellions of the people, as well
as Aaron Number. 16.45.
: not only Ezra the Scribe, but Zerubbabel, Iohecaniah, and the rest of the
Princes and Fathers of the Families, were humbled before the Lord Ezra 9.1.
, because the people of Israel, the Priests and the Levites had not separated
themselves from the people of the lands, Ezra 10.2, 3.
doing according to the abominations of the Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites,
Iebusites, etc. so (as we have heard) when Israel was smit before the men of
Ai, Ioshuah rent his clothes, and the Elders of Israel, Josh. 7.6. So in that
exigent Iehosophat was put unto by the Ammonites and Moabites, he himself
first proclaims a fast throughout all Judah, and personally See my Irelands
Iubilee in David's practice these exemplified.
, primarily, purposely sets himself to seek the Lord: So at the dedication of
the Temple, Solomon himself humbles himself more then all the people, in the
presence of all the Congregations of Israel, spreading forth his hands and
praying before the Altar of the Lord 1 King. 8.23.
. So Esther a great Princess, is as forward as her handmaids to humble her
self in fasting and prayer, for the prevention of the common intended
destruction, Esth. 4.16. But above all, the King of Niniuy is a most excellent
president in this practice to all Princes, and his Nobles to all Magistrates,
for he and they not only decreed and proclaimed a fast for the people, yea for
man and beasts, but themselves as breaking the ice to the rest by their good
example, laid by their Robes, covered themselves with sackcloth, and sat in
ashes, Jonas 3.6, 7. other great Peers have done the like As Theodosius,
before his battle with Eugenius, apud Orosiu^ l. 7. c. 35. Ruffin. lib. 2. c
23.

Charles King of France warring against the Saracens, Casp. Hedion lib 6. cap
15 Arcadius apud Diacorum lib. 15 Clodoucus a French King, in his war with
Alaricus the Goth, apud Turonensem Hist. lib. 2. cap. 37. Lewis of France
against the Su^uians, apud Auentinum lib. 3. and O^ias the high Priest, apud
Iosephum lib. 14 cap. 1.2.3 Antiq. cum aliis.


. And indeed, that I might by Gods blessing be as a spur or goade to all
Princes, Potentates, Rulers, Magistrates, Governors in war, Elders in peace,
to do the like, upon the like occasion: to imitate the noble and princely
patterns of these great Princes and Peers, Ezekiah, Ioshuah, Iehosophat,
David, Schecaniah, Solomon, the King of Niniuy, and others, as they are
desirous to imitate their fame-worthy heroicke acts in other particulars; as
also that all Empresses, Queens, Duchesses, Ladies, etc. would not think
themselves too good to lay off their gorgeous attire, their costly raiment, to
remit their revels, and restrain their Court delights; after the example of
Queen Esther, (the goodliest, godliest, greatest Lady one of them that the
world ever had:) and in any common or particular great cross and calamity, to
turn music and maskes into mourning, singing into sighing, delights into
dolours, feastings into fasts, etc. Me thinks there be reasons and inducements
(besides these presidents and exemplary patterns, which man is naturally apt
to imitate in the worst things) to persuade and enforce this best of duties.

As first, because by this means they may bring a great deal of glory to God,
which being the end of every Christians creation, preservation, vocation,
redemption, yea even of salvation it self, reserved in the heavens, this
glorifying of God ought to be the end and aim and scope of the actions and
affections of the meanest and the greatest, the very mark that all should
shoot at and desire to hit; much more the greatest, who placed in a higher orb
above the rest, and adorned with more privileges, the more that they for a time
when Gods hand is upon them, stoop low before the Lord, remit their height and
their greatness, abate and bring down their high spirits, vnplume and
disroabe themselves of their gorgeous attire, abstain from their sumptuous and
superfluous dishes, and every way by their looks, words, gestures, attires,
meats, outwardly; as in their hearts and spirits inwardly, cast down
themselves before the God of all spirits, and fall low before the throne of the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, acknowledging (with humbled Nabuchadnezzar
Dan. 3.28.
, and that Darius Dan 6.25, 26.
,) his rule and sovereignty over all flesh, and so consequently over them,
throwing down their rods, their Scepters, yea with the Angels and Elders Reu.
7.11. and chap. ^.8.
in the Revelation, even their very Crowns before the Throne of the Lamb,
giving all honor, glory, power, praise, sovereignty and dominion, from
themselves to him that sits on the Throne, etc. Oh this brings wondrous honor
and glory unto God, even as when petty tributary Kings, as once amongst the
Romans Reguli, or Deputies, as our Viceroy in Ireland, or Presidents of York
or Wales.
, and sometimes here in England See Lanquets or Coupers Chronicle.
, exceedingly honor the great King that rules over them, and their Provinces,
when they at set and certain times come to acknowledge their homage, Fealty,
subordination and subjection unto him: and indeed as the greater the person is
that sins, the more God is dishonored: so the greater the person is that is
humbled, the more is the Lord honored; even as in the Irish wars, if a great
Earl, a head Rebel had come in, and submitted himself to an offended
Princess, it had been more honor to a Maiden Queen, then if this had been
done by an ordinary Kearne: so the humiliation of a great Peer, brings more
glory to God then of an inferior person.

Besides, as a further fuel to this motive, let this be as a Nouerint
vniuersi, known unto all, to high and low, mighty men, and mean men, that who
ever have taken away glory from God by sinning, as indeed all flesh have by
deprauing themselves in original and actual sins, deprived God of that
glory he requires of men and Angels, even the very same individual men, or
women, in their own persons, by their own Penitence, without any substitute
for them, even here in this life, in unfeigned humiliation, confession and
contrition, must again restore glory unto God Joshua 7.19.
, or else they shall never be glorified in heaven, (let Canonists dispute what
they will about vsuries terrestrial) I am sure without this spiritual
restitution Nisi restituatur ablaetum, non demittitur peccatum. Canonistae ex
patribus.
, there is no salvation f, vide Maldonatum in Lucam, cap. 19.

Secondly, by this means of humiliation, all great personages show their
gratitude, and thankfulness unto God, in thus honoring him, who has honored
them: yea they take the wisest and the safest course, to continue and
perpetuate their honors to themselves, and their houses and posterity: for as
pride has been the ruin and demolition of many great families Vide exempla
supra allegata.
, so humiliation has been their proppe and vpholder, in withholding and
diuerting from them such Judgments as their sins, or the sins of their
predecessors have deserved.

Thirdly, as they by their humiliation bring glory unto God, and good to
themselves, so they bring much good to others, much benefit accrewes to the
soul of an inferior by the humiliation of a superior, and that both by their
example for imitation Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
, as also in Gods acceptance. First for imitation, the example of great ones
as it is forceable in vtramque partem, both toward the better, and toward the
worse: as their ill example confirms the inferiors in sin, so their good
example conformes them to good: their example says to the common people
(chiefly to their dependants, their families and obseruers) as Abimelec Judge.
9.48.
and Gideon in another case to their soldiers, as ye see me do, so do you;
or as S. Paul once to those he writes unto, Be ye followers of me, nay they
will follow: If Joshua serve the Lord, he can give that same testimony of his
house Joshua 24.15.
; if the Centurion be a religious man one that fears God, his servants and
soldiers will be obsequious and obedient both to God and him Man. 8.8.9.
; if Esther fast and pray, her handmaides will be found joining with her Ester
4.16.
; yea if the King of Niniuie humble himself, then his nobles will be humbled
too; if his Nobles, then the common people; if the common people, then the very
beasts Jonas 3.7.
: yea if (as it is in my Text) that Ezekiah the King be humbled, then not
only his Peers, and the Elders of his people, (who conjoined in such a case
with David) but even the inhabitants, the vulgar sort, the commons of Judah and
Jerusalem are humbled likewise? Oh the Adamantine force of example! the blessed
president of great persons, is as the first mouer in the heavens, or as the
first wheel in a clock, after whose motion all the rest move: it is as the
Captain that precedes his following soldiers, and gives the first onset; as
the bell-weather that goes before the flock; as the hen that clocks the
chickens after her. Secondly, great good it brings in Gods acceptance; for as
the Lord visits the sins of great ones, sometime even upon their seed, as
Saul's sons were hanged up for the sin of Saul; and Ieroboams Idolatry, as
also Gideons moulten image were the ruins of their house Propter parentum.
scelera grassantur poena publicae, in totas familias, in multis instant, Simon
Pauli Domin. 2 post Trinit and Strig. in 2 Samuel 9. 1 Reg 20. and 2 Reg 1^. in
vno peccato periurij: Jnslat Pencerus in Lect. Cron. die 6 Feb. an. 1574. cum
Aeliano, lib. 14. and Diodoro Siculo l. 6. antiq. in posteritate Saulis,
Iasonis, Zedechiae, Senacharebi, Philippi Macedonis, and aliorum.
: sometimes upon the whole land or nation, as wrath came upon Judah, etc. both
in the days of David, and in the days of Ezekiah, for the sins of their
Kings: so Ezekiah is no sooner humbled, but wrath is removed. David and the
Elders of Israel no sooner fall down before the Lord in sackcloth and ashes,
but the destroying Angel set a work by God, at the command of the Lord of
Angels, puts up his sword; the devouring plague sweepes not a man away more; as
indeed when we make an end of sinning, God makes an end of smiting; when the
child is whipped, cries and asks pardon, and promises amendment, the rod is
thrown away, or broken or burnt, the child is taken up in the fathers arms,
set on his knee, and kissed, and the tears wiped away from his eyes.

Fourthly, great ones usually live in great sins, either as they have greater
temptations, (Satan shooting ever at the fairest marks) or more allurements
and prouocations, for the pleasing of corrupted nature, and delighting the
flesh; more objects of vanity, greater means to effect their ends how ever
sinister: more Sycophants and Parasites to charm and lull them a sleep in
security That flattery has ever been the bane of Kings, read Camerar. in oper.
Succisivis, c. 90. p. 448. Patritium de regno, l. 7. tit. 8. page 458. and l.
5. tit. 5. p. 229. Instant in Caligula, Galba, Alexandro, Tiberio, Dionysio.
, few by redargution, or admonition, that will or dare offer to shake them, to
awake them, so they had need (since their sins are also scored and chalked up
as the rest) of a greater measure of humiliation for sin, their salve had
need answer their sore; else they are like at last to smart, Reu. 6.16.

Lastly, the example of David is remarkable, when the Lord in a merciful
Justice, or Just mercy, sends to David after he had numbered the people, this
option or choice, that he should choose him whether he would fly before his
enemies in war, or endure the famine for 3. three years, or the plague and
pestilence for 3. days, he makes choice of the last: why so? not only for the
maine cause as he reueales, because the mercies of God are great, but as some
note, because as he had been an occasion of evil to the people, by his
sin, he would bear part of the burden: for in war though his subjects had
smarted, it is likely he would have escaped by flight, or by strong holds in
some castles or fortifications; or in dearth and famine had there been one
pecke of corn in the land, it is likely he should have had part; his part like
the Lions part in the Fable Apud Aesopum
, in all probability, should have been best: but from the plague there was no
evasion, the arrow of the Almighty might have hit him, as soon as the meanest
in his Kingdom. Besides in this choice he aimed also at the good of his
people: for had war come upon them, they would have trusted in their shield and
target, in their sword and bow, and the strength of Israel: had famine been
sent, the poorer sort and Mechanickes perhaps had felt the chiefest smart: the
richer sort and monied men would either have sent for corn into other
Countries, as Jacob into Egypt Act. 7.12.
, or fled thither, as Naomi into the Land of Moab Ruth 1.6.
, they would have changed their places as did Abraham Genesis 12.10.
, and Isaac Genesis 26.1.
in the like cases: but now in the plague and pestilence there is no evasion,
no escape, no flying from God, (as experience has shown Non obstante regula,
ci^o, long, tarde.
, in those that bootlesly have changed airs) whither the plague cannot follow,
as the storm did Jonas: but their only refuge is (at which David aims) that
he and all his people by true and serious humiliation, fly speedily even into
the very arms of God, who wounding can only heal Hos. 6.1.
. Oh a president in David worthy of every great man's meditation, contemplation;
desiring by all means, as this Patriarch in this option, his own and others
humiliation.

SECT. 4. Several families, and particular persons must be humbled.
AS the Lord requires this humilation in his Ministers, in his Magistrates, in
Princes and Prophets, in the heads and eyes of the Church, and of the
Commonwealth: so it is requisite also in every family of the faithful, who as
in the Scriptures they are called Churches Epist. ad Philemon v. 2.
, and have in them representations of a Monarchy (the master being as King,
Priest and Prophet, the wife as Queen the children as Nobles, the servants as
subjects, etc.) so as sin is propagated even from families into the whole
body of the land, the Lord will have humiliation even in particular houses, as
well as in the Church or Commonwealth: chiefly, when any judgment is upon a
nation, as here in the times of Ezekiah: for in that great mourning of the
people of Israel compared by the Prophet, unto the mourning of one that mourns
for his only son, or as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon, it is prophesied that even every family shall mourn apart Zach.
12.11, 12, 13.
, the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of
the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of
Leui apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shemei apart, and their wives
apart; all the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives
apart, chiefly when the Lord gives occasion of mourning to a family, not only
by his hand in general on a land, but in particular upon the family, whether
by plague, or famine, or sickness, or death of some remarkable person, some
member of the family, then as we may see in the practice of David in the
sickness of the child, 2 Samuel 12.
and of Bathsheba too conioyning with him in humiliation (in probability) as
they sinned together:) the family is in a special and peculiar manner to humble
themselves. Yea in conclusion, this duty of humiliation, is to be performed of
all and every one; Joel as we heard, summons even the new married Bride and
Bridegroom to it Joel 2.16.
, upon occasion, to leave even their lawful conuersing, (as Vriah 2 Samuel 11.
did in a special cause of afflicting himself) and if these must pretermit
the very rites and rights of marriage Vide Pareum in 1 Cor. 7.5
, and all earthly delights; then the duty concerns al and ouery one of us, not
only the wise, and the learned, and the honorable, but even the Mechanics,
the husbandman, the vinedresser on whom Joel calls; yea the drunkard, the
dicer, the riotous person, yea the tender virgins, and the delicious women that
be at case in Sion: every one in our places, Prince, Priest and people, high
and low, rich and poor, one with another, must be humbled, for general and
particular sins, under the mighty hand of God: there is none exempted (except
children at nonage, wanting the act of ripe reason, having it only in
disposition; or naturalls, and fools, and lunaticke madmen, that have neither
habit, nor act of reason to distinguish good from evil) all else must be
humbled.

Reasons why all must be humbled.
First, for the Lord calls upon all, as he called upon Zerubbabel and Joshua the
son of Iosedech the high Priest, and upon all the people of the land to build
the second Temple Hag. 2.4, 5.
, so he calls upon all to be strong and valiant to build and reedifie this same
spiritual Temple; which is, by pulling down sin and corruption by humiliation.

Secondly, all have sinned, all are corrupted and have perverted their ways,
there is not one that does good, no not one, says the Prophet Psalm. 14: 1, 2,
3.
, alleged by the Apostle Romans 3.10, 11 12.
, sin like a gangreene has run over all as a leprosy, has defiled all as a
general plague, has run through all, no place, no person free, who can say,
his heart is clean? Oh how many windings and preuarications are in the heart
of man Quam multae latebrae multique recessus Cicero.
, more in his works, most of all in his words. Now there is not any sin but
stands need of repentance, not only are we to be humbled for great, gross,
crying, crimson, scandalous sins, such sins as send up a cry against the soul,
as the sins of Sodom; such as murder, adultery, extortion, oppression Peccata
clamantia.
, blasphemy in the highest degree, pollutions of soul and body, maine
prophanations of the Sabbath, and such sins as look with an ugly hew, even in
the eye of nature, as against the light of nature and grace: but even such
sins, as the bleare-eyd world sees not, as the civil and morrall men of our
time, discern not to be sins, but rather applaud and approve as touching
Splendida peccata.
upon virtues, as vain words, unprofitable iangling, idle words, worldly
discourse upon the Sabbath, free and promiscuous conuersing, yea Tauernizing,
Tobacconizing, with good and bad, using familiar recreations, with Papists,
profane persons, without any discrepance: swearing by faith and troth Against
which lege Mat. 5.34. and James 5.12.

See M Gibbins Sermon against vain oaths.


, and the creatures, wasting and misspending of precious time: besides these
secret and hidden sins of unbelief, profaneness of heart, hypocrisy,
formality in Gods worship, idle thoughts, lustful cogitations, doubtings,
prevailing passions, secret anger, impatiency, murmurings against God in
crosses, secret grudgings, emulations, repinings at the places or gifts of our
brethren: even these, and such as these, besides our will worship, coldness in
prayer, sluggishnes in good duties, flarnesse of spirit, dulnes in our
devotions, with the like, must be exceeding matter of our daily, sound, and
serious humiliation: for even such negligence, and failings and infirmities as
these, and slacknesses in good duties, in good actions, have been occasions of
humiliation to some sincere servants of God, as may appear by the letters of
these zealous martyrs, Ridley, Latimer, and Bradford, recorded in the
Martyrologi^: little moats have troubled these tender eyes, as David was
troubled for touching Saul's garment. Augustine repents in his Confessions, of
his time idly spent in seeing a spider how she caught a fly: of which yet
me thinks he might have made a good use, if he had conceited the spider to be
the devil, the web his temptations, the fly the credulous soul of a sinner;
or the spider the harlot Prou. 5. and Prou. 7.
, the web her whorish looks, songs, gestures, plots, allurements; the fly
the deluded young fool: or the spider, Dalilah, Judge. 14.15:
her deceits and delusious the web; the fly strong-womanish weak Sampson:
like as that famous Husse also is reported by Mr. Fox Martyrol. in Epist.
Husse.
, in his imprisonment, to have repented his loss of time in playing at Chesse,
occasioning withal his impatiencie, and anger. Oh if these small omissions,
pretermissions, troubled the tender hearts of these humbled souls, how much
more occasion have we to weep even tears of blood if it could be, for our
great and grievous abominations? yea even the very best of us, for our daily
aberrations and wanderings: first, our coldness in good duties; secondly, our
lukewarmenesse, ^epiditie Reu. 3.16.
, and timiditie in our profession; thirdly, our unwise walking in many things
unworthy of our holy calling; fourthly, our leaving like the Church of Ephesus
Reu. 2.4, 5.
our first love; fifthly, our manifold relapses and Apostasies; sixthly, our
manifest breaches of our many vows and covenants with the Lord; seventhly, our
inordinate use of the creatures; eighthly, the abuse of our Christian liberty
even in things lawful; ninthly, our manifold scandals and offenses which we
justly give in things not expedient; tenthly, our stumbling blocks we cast
before the weak brethren; eleuenthly, our want of love to the Lord, and the
Saints; twelfthly, our omissions or slight performances of many duties, of
piety and charity to God and man; 13. our little reverence and estimation of,
and love to the ordinances; 14. our rash judging Mat. 7.1. vt olim Phar^sei.
Mat. 9.11. Luke 19.7.
, uncharitable, preposterous, ungrounded censures and surmises of the actions
or affections of our brethren; 15. our strangeness and hangings off from the
fellowship of the Saints; 16. our selfe-conceits and opinions we have of our
selves and our gifts, with too proud and peremptory undervaluing of others; 17.
our favoring of our selves in some lesser and smaller sins of our natures or
callings As once Naaman, 2 King. 5.18.
, which we do not or list not discern; 18. our barrenness and
unfruitfulness in grace, not answering the excellent means, we do enjoy; 19.
our unthankfulness for so many excellent blessings See D. Carlton his book of
Gods mercies to England* See also my Irelands Iubilee in fine.
, temporal, spiritual, general, special, public, private, domesticke; 20.
our little simpathizing with the afflictions of the Saints; our not remembering
of poor distressed Joseph in France, and elsewhere; our not mourning with
those that mourn, alas, might justly cause us with other failings in this
nature, to mourn more then Doves in the desert, and Pellicans in the
wilderness, yea to be humbled even the very best of us, lower then the lowest
dust, etc.

Lastly, how much occasion have all of us to be humbled, not only for our own
sins, but even for the sins and sufferings of others; (for omitting our own
several crosses, which every one of us bear and must bear with Simon
Cyrenaeus Luke 23.26.
, if we be Christ's Disciples: as every one knows where the shoe wrings him,
some being occasioned to mourn for the diseases and infirmities of his body,
for Jobs Biles, Asaes Gout; some for his crookednes and deformity, lame like
Mephibosheth 2 Samuel 9.3.
; some for loss of their children, as Jacob for his Joseph, Rachel mourning
for her sons Mat. 2. ex Ier.
, as the Nightingale for her young; some for the barrenness of a wife, as
Isaac Genesis 25.21.
; or her perverseness, as Moses for his Zipporab Exodus 4.25.
; some for wicked and bad children, as Aaron Leuit. 10.1.
, Ely 1 Samuel 3.13.
, Samuel 1 Samuel 8.3.
, for their sons; some for the untimely death of a friend, as David 2 Samuel
3.23.
for Abner; some in one case, some in another:) I say, leaving these (though
daily occasioning our humilation every one of us in our places, if we be not
sensual, feared, cautherized and as senseless stoicall stocks and fools in
Israel) if we but cast our eye and reflect on these externalls, even the
sins, infirmities, and miseries of others, unless we be hewne out of
Caucasus, and be without all bowels of compassion, we cannot but be exceedingly
humbled and dejected.

To hear the oaths and blasphemies of the multitude, yea of men of all sorts,
stares, and places See M. Downam in one of his 4 Treatises against Swearing.
, in City and Country, tearing Christ with their tongues and teeth, and renting
his humanity as a company of wide mouthed Hounds rend a silly Kid or Hare: one
blaspheming his blood, another his heart, another wounding his wounds, another
Iewishly setting thorns upon his head, not sparing his very feet, no not his
guts, ungracious children shooting thus their inuenomed arrows at their
Fathers heart and breast, vile Serpents hissing thus against him that was
exalted on the Cross, as the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, for to cure
their souls: to see others as drunk as Apes See M. Harris his Cup of Drunkards.
, as filthy as Swine, mere Hermophrodites, having the faces of men, yet mere
womanish, effeminate in their looks, their dangling locks, amorous loves,
luxurious lusts: Others as profane as very Pagans, having not so much show of
true Religion as Turks, Tartars, Virginians, in their superstition; keeping
their Sabbaths in Tauernes more then Temples, serving their lusts, their belly,
for their God Philip. 3.17.
, and Venus for their Goddess; walking in Cathedrals and public places, even
in time of Sermons and religious worship, as though it were in the Royal
Exchange, or in some public Fair, or at Franckfurt Mart: others grinding the
faces of the poor, eating them up as bread, the great ones devouring the
poor, as the great fishes the small, preying upon them as Beasts and Birds of
prey; getting and retaining they care not from whom, nor how, perfas, and
nefas, by hook or crook, right or wrong Non refert quomodo sed oportet habere.
: others plotting and complotting, like Haman and Achitophel, how to rise by
another ruin: more studious in Machiauel then in Moses: others again leaving
their first love, falling from their holy profession, as Stars from Heaven As
that Apostate Julian. apud Theod. lib. 3
, give too much occasion to any that love God and hate sin, in the least
sincere measure, to mourn for all these abominations, like those marked
mourners in Ezekiel Ezekiel. 9.4.
; yea, as Samuel mourned for rejected Saul; and to vex their hearts as did
Lot, for the unrighteous conversation of ungodly ones and graceless ones, that
every where swarm as Egyptian Locusts, now in the times and days of grace.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1. The Penitents practice in all the parts.
THus have we proved the point propounded, that all of all sorts ought to be
humbled, we have instanced in the Magistracy, the Ministry, the Commonalty,
all in general, and might go through all persons and professions in
particular, Statists, Lawyers, Physicians, Students, Practitioners in every
faculty; but this course would be too laborious, too special, too punctual,
perhaps subject to exception, construction, etc. I would avoid offense. Yet
because the whole world lies in iniquity Totus mundus in maligno positus.
, slumbring in a lethargicall security, drowned in sensuality, frozen in their
dregs, like Moab; careless and at ease like the people of Laish Judge. 18.10.27.
, least suspicious of danger, like Sodom and the old worldlings, even when they
are nearest to destruction Luke 17.26, 27, 28, 29.
, singing to the Violl and the Harp, never considering the calamities to which
their poor souls are obnoxious: few knowing the doctrine, fewer practicing
the duties of true repentance and unfeigned humiliation, which is the only
physic of the sick soul, the medicine to sins malady, the freer from sins
slavery, the awakener out of sins lethargy, the port and haven to the
endaingered soul in the greatest shipwreck Secunda tabula post naufragium.
. I might further dilate and enlarge this profitable point, and from the
grounds of Ezekiahs blessed and pious practice I might labor to build up a
perfect penitent, a humbled Publican, every way squared for the spiritual
building, as a living stone for Sion: in which persuasion I would bring him, as
I aim, to that true Jerusalem, the vision of perfect peace, etc.

And in the forming and framing of this my true Humiliate, which I would have
not an Vtopian and imaginary Penitent, (like Tullies Orator, or Aristotle's
happy man) but a true, express, and lively Idaea of a thoroughly humbled heart,
lest I lose my self in this maine Champian and large field of matter, I might
keep my self within the hedges and enclosures of these propounded particulars.

1. First, I might show wherein this humiliation consists, with the parts and
adjuncts of it.

2. Secondly, examine our own practice according to these parts.

3. Thirdly, press the performance wherein we are deficient.

4. Fourthly, examine the sincerity of all, to shed from hypocrisy.

5. Fifthly, by motives persuade all in the general and special.

6. Sixthly, prescribe the means by which it is attained.

7. Seventhly, remove the obstacles and letts by which it is hindered.

8. Eighthly, express the signs by which it is shown and known.

9. Ninthly, set down the times in which it is to be practiced.

To make only for this time an entrance into these, because I have been
already too tedious. For the first, (...) true humiliation: as both the body
and the soul have sinned, so both should be humbled; as both are subjects o^
sin, so both should be subjects of this humiliation. I may therefore be
distinguished into External, and Internal.


Some parts of it must be performed in the outward some in the inward man: the
outward being but as the expression of the inward, the inward (as we say of
the prayer of the heart without the voice) being always effectual and
available with God, without the outward, but the outward without the inward,
as was that of Ahabs, being ever counterfeit and hypocritical, as the body
without a soul, even the very out-shell, the out-barke, the out-rinde and
slough of Repentance, without any inward sap, or marrow, or kernel of
sincerity: yet as the body and the soul make a perfect man, so the casting
down both of the body and soul before the Lord, make an humbled man: Or as we
may distinguish it, in a further division; in humiliation something is to be
performed in respect of 1. God. 2. Our selves. 3. Our Neighbors. 4. The
Creatures. 5. Our demeanor in the outward man.


Again, concerning man something is to be performed, respecting 1. All in
general. 2. Those with whom we have sinned. 3. Those against whom we have
sinned. 4. Those whom we have in special wronged. 5. Our Enemies. 6. Our
Equals. 7. The Poor.


Thus have I laid down the particulars of Humiliation, both the substantial
and circumstantiall requisites of this excellent Grace, as the chief and
choice ingredients to this best physic of the soul, if I had not incroached
too much upon the hour, and borrowed some quarter now, and more in the
forenoone, which I must repay again when I can, in a more resolved breuity: if
your attentions were not as well tired, as my strength and spirits exhausted,
this day, to the body of these merely proposed points, I should add as it
were the very soul, by doctrinall explication, and further useful
application: but God is the God of order, and not of confusion: Often times both
in hearing and speaking, as Christ said of his Disciples watching, the spirit
is willing, the flesh is weak: and I have often thought, that as too much rain
rather drownes then fructifies the earth, and as too much meat rather
exonerates the stomach (as ouer-weight ouer-ballanceth the ship) then turns
into good nutriment, when more is received then the natural heat does concoct:
so too long and tedious Sermons rather dull and dead the attention, then turn
to Christian edification: therefore though I hope you have found Honey from
Ezekiahs bitter affliction and castigation, (as Sampson once out of the Lions
belly) yet according to Salomons caveat, lest eating too much at once you
surfeit, lest out of preposterous prolixitie I rather ^edifie then edify, I
refer the further prosecution of these points, till God give again desired
opportunity to bring to a full period and consummation, what now has only an
inchoation.

FINIS.

