The Triumph of Faith.

A VERY GODLY, fruitful and comfortable Treatise on ROMANS 8. verse 37.

Penned by Daniel Ienkinson Master in Arts, late of EMMANVEL Coll. in
Cambridge, and found in his Study at the time of his death.

1. JOHN 5.4. This is that victory that has overcome this world, even our
faith.

LONDON Printed by Edw. Griffin for Sam. Macham, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1613.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
GEntle Reader, as it was bountiful love to his lovely Jonathan, that moved
the sweet Singer of Israel, King David, to show such kindness to Mephibosheth,
Ionathans son, as to cause him to eat continually at the Kings Table, 2. Sam.
9.13. so it is Christian love to my deceased (love worthy) Jonathan, that has
moved me to give this his obscured fatherless Orphan, falling into my hands,
the best preferment I was able, vz. to live (as I hope) continually in the
houses, and sometimes hands (and if God bless my wish) even in the hearts of
true Christians; as yielding a lively sent and fragrant smell of those great
Graces which abounded plentifully in the godly Parent: and which too soon were
nipped in the bud, and by untimely death restrained from the use of the Church,
if it may so be said without offense to the highest Providence, under
correction and condition of his most righteous will. If this poor Orphan
Infant the legitimate issue of a child in years, but of a man for gifts, and
an old Christian, may chance to please, and grow acceptable for his fathers
sake, or his own sake, where he may converse; there is some hope, that in due
time (the Lord permitting) some of his Germane brothers may bear him company,
on this fashion, as good companions for all true Christians, in this weary
pilgrimage toward the celestial Canaan, whereunto both this and the rest do
give true aim, if I take not my aim amiss. And so hoping, that after the
reading hereof, thou will confess thy self the abundant reaper of my Loves
fruit, I leave thee in his watchful protection, who alone sanctifies all
means of saving knowledge and graces unto his children, craving but thy
prayers for my pains, and resting

one that desires thy true good unfeignedly I. A.

THE TRIVMPH of Faith.
Romans Chap. 8. Ver. 37. Nevertheless, in all these things we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us.


THese words may not unfitly be termed The triumph of Faith, and the glorious
vaunt of a resolved Christian, grounded upon the lively apprehension of Grace,
and the infallible expectance of Glory. Both which the Apo. having euinced in
the foregoing Treatise, by instances and reasons above exception, he steps in,
in the thirty and one verse with an holy challenge, daring defiance to any
encounter, disdain to any Combatant or resolved Champion, that dare enter the
lists with him and accept his challenge. What then shall we say to these
things, if God be on our side who can be against us? yea Paul indeed it is
somewhat that ye say, if God be on our side who can be against us? or if they
be against us what hurt can they do us? what skills their prowes and
opposition, though it were the plotting of Achitophel, or Rabshekahs
resolution; when as God plays our part, the Lord himself maintains our
quarrel, against whom there is neither wisdom nor counsel, neither bodily
puissance nor courage in the day of battle? But how can ye make us believe that
God is on our side? how may we be persuaded that we have such an approved
Captain, of so tried a strength, for prowess so puissant? how says the
Apostle? why I will tell you, he spared not his only Son, but -- how shall he
not with him give us all things also; yea even himself which is all in all? he
that has given us his Son, the heir of all things, is it likely that he
will deny us matters of any value, of any consequence? he that has given us
his Son, his joy, and delight, how is it possible that he should deny us
himself? nay in that he has given us his Son which is his delight, he has
given us himself. For where a man's treasure is, there his heart is, and where
his heart is there himself is. Now Christ being Gods treasure, and this
treasure given to us, we may well with David challenge the Lord as our own
possession: especially since our Christ is the tresure-house of divine
benediction; of whose fulness we have al received: the worker of atonement and
reconciliation, that has made God to be on our side, that to fore was auerted
from us. We may well therefore exult, and chaunt out those cheerful notes of
Isreal's sweet singer that divine Musician. The Lord is our light and our
salvation, whom shall we fear? the Lord is the strength of our life, of whom
shall we be afraid? Hereupon the Apostle throws down his gauntlet with a
challenge to our spiritual enemies, to see if any of them dare appear in
their likeness or admit of his proffer. But when it will not be, he prouokes
them to judgment. Then, who says he, shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? no body answers. It Is God that Justifies, who shall condemn? who dare
appear in judgment against us? If they will go that way to work, all is
hushed, no body peeps out. And why I pray you, because we have such a Captain as
none dare meet in the field: such an Advocate as none dare oppose: such a
friend in the court as none dare look in the face: Christ Jesus, who was dead
but is risen again with Triumph, over the powers of death and of damnation,
who now sitting at the right hand of God, makes request for us? Yea says the
Apostle, will none of them apeare? shall we have none answer in this kind?
we will even to our former challenge, call them out by their names, and see what
they will say to us. Ho, says he, who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? who dare be so bold as to undertake that encounter? what tribulation,
or anguish, or persecution? etc. Will you say any thing to us? dare you put in
a foot here, yea, I promise you Paul now you have met with your match, these
fellows will say somewhat to you, they will put you to your shifts I tell you,
for here we go to the wall, These will not grieve and annoy and pursue us, but
deprive us also of life, and spirits, and leave us breathless and liuelesse
and soulelesse: and yet this peril is so inevitable, that besides woeful
experience, it is the verdict and doom of the divine spirit, that for thy sake
are we killed all the day long, we are even counted as sheep to the slaughter.
What say you to this Paul? Do not these cool your courage, do not these make
you to pull in the head? Do you not think that these will abalienate you from
Christ? lay your honor in the dust, and your hopes in oblivion? Never a whit
says the Apostle, for why should they? why! I will tell you what: All these
that ye have named, let them bandy themselves together, with their best
forces: let the Devil be their leader, and be their warrior: all come
rushing against us with the extremity of their malice, why they hurt us not an
hair, they get never a foot of ground from us, neither is our spiritual
estate in any hazard by all their stratagems, though they spew out the very
gall of their bitterness, the height of their malice, though they strike
straight down without any remorse, and make even a lane before them as they
go, yet nevertheless this is our rejoicing, this is our triumph, and our
crown of glory, that the day is ours, the field is won, ours is the conquest,
for in these, yea in all these things we are more than conquerors, through him
that loved us. Which words (as you see) by the Apostles Reioynder to the
foregoing challenge upon a supposed acceptance, who shall separate us from the
love of Christ; Tribulation and anguish, etc. they take upon them the combat,
they will be the men that shall do it? The Apostle hereupon replies, and
returns his speech in a disiunct proposition to this purpose, Well says he,
suppose that all these fellows, you tribulation, etc. do seize upon us, as
we know they may, and do us the worst that they can, as we are sure they
will: for, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are even counted as
sheep to the slaughter: nevertheless we have no cause of discomfort: for though
we be afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress, though we be in
poverty, yet not thereby overcome, though we be persecuted, yet are we not
forsaken, in a word, though we be cast down we perish not, yea we are so far
from the foil, that in all these things we are more than conquerors through
him that loved us. As if the Apostle had said, Suppose we be in tribulation,
yet tribulation yields experience, and experience hope, and hope makes us not
ashamed, nay it gives us confidence and access with boldness. Say we be in
persecution, and that the butchers of Gods Saints get us into their fingers,
yet so, that we rejoice under the cross and count it a crown, we are joyful
in bonds, and deem them freedom, yea our very stripes are the marks of the
Lord Jesus. o glorious lashes! Say we be in anguish, that that bitter fellow
has laid hold on us: yet so, that though heaviness lodge for a night, and
will not let us feel the softness of the pillow, yet joy comes in the
morning, the Lord renewing his mercies. Say we be in nakedness, that we have
never a rag on our backs, nor so much as an old sack to creep into, yet this
is our comfort, that one day we shall have heavenly vestures, rich robes, and
long white garments, scarlet with pleasures and golden abiliments. Say we be in
peril, in the extremity of hazard, yet so that in the greatest dangers we
expect the Lords deliverance: with David ready to be slain, we comfort our
selves in our God: with Jonas we seem to be cast out of his sight, yet with
the same Prophet we remember his holy temple, his former mercies. In a word,
say, we be under the sword, even in the jaws and fanges of death, yet this
is our rejoycement, that even in death there is life, death it self is great
gain, the grave is hie advantage. For blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord, well therefore may we be said to be Conquerors, yea more then conquerors
through him that loved us. So that to come to our purpose, we have in this Text
two things obseruable, the Triumph of a Christian, the victory of faith; the
ground of that triumph, the love of Christ, The victory of faith makes us more
the conquerors, we obtain that victory through him that loved us. Our
observation shall be none other than the Apostles own assertion: That the
elect of God his own peculiar, have this prerogative (a matter of special
esteem) that howsoever they be encompassed with many afflictions and
grieuances, yet in all exigences, they win the day, they atchieue the
conquest, they are more than conquerors. Or in a word what present enemies
soever they have waging war against them for the heavenly inheritance, they
bring them under, they do more than overcome them. This is the verdict of the
divine spirit uttered from the Oracle of truth, in this text. To the explaning
whereof two things are to be unfolded. First, who be our worldly enemies here
intimated, next, how we may be said to be more than conquerors. The Apostle
aims at both: at our enemies in that he says, In all these things: at our
conquest, in that he says, We do more than overcome. Our enemies included in
the former words, are recited in the verse foregoing, and marshalled as it were
in battle array, Tribulation, etc. A great troop, I promise you; a terrible
army. So that I may well say of their number with Iehorams watchman, I see a
company, and of their coming, it is like Iehu the son of Nimshi, for they
march furiously. And to give you a view of their several forces and prowess,
in the forefront is placed tribulation, (...), and it does properly note out
unto us, all such bodily grieuances and afflictions, as do offer violence unto
our outward man, and put it to pressure and torture. The next is anguish (...),
in which rank do march all such inward vexations, as do even hem in and
strayten the soul and bring it into a narrow room, that it wants the use of
it self and is brought to it wits end. In the third place is persecution
(...), which is as it were a seconding of the former forces, by a continual
supply of might and malice to aggrauate our grieuance, and to continue our
vexation. The next is famine, want of food necessary, an enemy that the
Wiseman prays against Prou. 30. of which kind is Nakedness, likewise, Want of
vesture to cover our shame, and keep us from annoyance, the one being an enemy
to the back, the other to the belly. Upon these two bands follows Peril, and
therein all the dangers that do or may betide us in this present life, and put
our state in hazard. And the last the sorest enemy, is the Sword, all kind of
violent death which the godly are put unto, for the profession of the Lord
Jesus, and the testimony of a good conscience. These are our enemies which
here are mustred against us: and infinite more of the like kind, unto all
which the Devil is the chief leader, the general of the army, that great
commander, who puts in ure, the best of his policy, and the proof of his
strength to give us the foil. And that we may see by his manner of ordering
them, how that he leaves the sorest till the last, even the sword to divide
asunder the life and the spirits, that if all the former, tribulation, anguish,
etc. will not bring us on our knees, yet that may be sure to speed: and rather
than loose that, we will undergo hard conditions. I but may some man say unto
us, how is it that Satan himself is not here set against us, seeing he is
that great Muster-master, the commander of so many Legions, he it is that owes
us all the spite, and sets all these a work: but for him all their blows were
but fleabytings, easily awarded; all their plots but like Sampsons bonds easily
broken. The answer is that Satan is not here excluded. He is not like those
careless Kings that will lie at home, and send their Leiuetenants; not like
David gazing upon his Palace, when as Ioab is in the brunt of the battle;
nor like Senacherib in his Temple at home, when his Captains be marching
abroad: he is always at hand in the forefront, and in the rereward, in the
midst, and at either wing, but the reason as I take it, why he is not here
expressed, is, because his warfare is spiritual, and not so easily discerned in
it self, but is manifest unto us, in these his soldiers, and 2. in regard of
our meannesse and foolish disposition, who do usually stand in more dread, of
these his attendants, then of Satan himself. Whereas on the contrary, we
should learn this spiritual wisdom, a special point of military discipline,
not so much to look at these things as punishments of sin, for so the sting of
them is taken away in Christ, but especially as they are Satan's Ianizaries, his
accomplices in whom he seeks to work our ruin, to deprive us of the hope that
we have here in God, and of the happiness that hereafter we expect in heaven.
And thus you see beloved, what fellows they be, that we are to grapple
withal, we had need to be no children that must go to this gear, if these be
they whom we must conquer. Why but you will say, is it possible that ever we
should deal with such as these? is there any hope that ever we should get the
victory of such adversaries? who cannot be hurt themselus? they are
impenetrable, all the danger lights upon us: if any body go to the wall, it is
we, if any body catch the foil, it must needs be we. yea, indeed are ye at
that point? nay but by your leave S. Paul telleh us an other tale, the divine
spirit will give us better hartning, for he says here that we are conquerors
already. Conquerors? yea more then conquerors, through him that loved us. yea
will you say, and you can prove us that point, it is some thing, it is a matter
worth the talking of, if you could assure us of the victory, before we go
into the field, you would put some life and and spirit into us. Well (beloved)
me thinks you may easily be persuaded of this, if we had no more surety but
the promise of the divine Spirit, the warrant of this Scripture, it is sufficient
to give us encouragement. Suppose that two men were going into the field to
revenge their private wrongs, and a third man that had the mastry and command
of them both, in so much that he could bid them give over when he will, hold
their hands at his own pleasure, so that neither of them could strike a stroke
beyond his designement, and this man should say to one of them, be not dismayed,
but have a good heart, for I will stand by thee, and he shall not give thee a
blow to do thee hurt, nor strike a stroke but as I think good, but as for thee
I will give thee thy free scope to do thy best, thou shall assuredly give him
the foil, would this man now doubt of the victory? would he be afraid to
meet his foe in the very face? O, fie, no, he would go with courage and
resolution, and why? why? because the victory is promised him. Why (beloved)
the Lord has Satan in his power, he is at his beck, all these his follwers
are at the Lords command. Further then he permits they can neither strike nor
stir, but as he says to the Sea, stay thy proud waves, and to the devouring
Angel hold thine hand, it is enough, so if he but speak the word, these have
done, not a word, nor a blow. Now this Lord here of this power and
commandment, he promises he will stand by us, he assures us we shall have
the conquest, he sends us word so from heaven by his spirit, speaking in the
Apostle. Why? shall we doubt now? shall we distrust the issue and event?
undoubtedly, if we believe not we do, for as he that believes has sealed
that God is true, so he that denies credence to the promise, denies credit
to God. O then let our faith embrace this promise, and we are sure. All things
are possible to him that belieueth. When the people of God were to wage war
with their enemies, and came to God for counsel, if he said but once go up,
they were presently all in arms, yea so resolute were they upon this
assurance, that when they were to fight against their brethren of Benjamin, for
the revenge of a notorious villainy, Iud. 20.28. and two days before had had
the foil throw their own rashness in ill handling a good cause: yet the
third day when the Lord bad them go up with hope of victory, they readily
obeyed and sutably overcame them. Would they put their affiance in God for
bodily victory, and shall not we rely upon him for a spiritual conquest? Was
he then a God of his word in meaner affairs, and shall he not now be trusted
in greater employments? Far be it from us beloved, the Lord being the same in
power, in love, in fidelity: being able by his power, willing by his love, and
faithful in his promise, that we should either deny his power, disclaim his
love, or call his fidelity into question, seeing he has here affirmed, we
shall be conquerors; else where assured, that hell gates shall not prevail
against us, and daily gives us experiment of his special aid and assistance,
and of the victory of faith, which brings underfoot all worldly
encumbrances* But that we may give more evidence to this truth, let us take a
view of it in the experiment of Gods Saints, and let us see how in closing with
these our enemies we get the victory, and all the Apostle here tells us, we
do more than conquer. It were well, if we might but overcome, and that we are
sure of, for our faith ouercomes the world, and it quenches all the fiery
darts of the devil, gives them a recoyle, and him a retraite. For if we stand
to it, he runs away, if we resist him, he flies from us, and when the Captain
is gone, these fellows are like the Philistims, they will either run after
him, or turn to our side and help us to war against him. But that we should
not overcome only, but be more than conquerors, this is the pre-eminence of a
Christian soldier above all other warriors. But may that be, may some say? I
answer, we may be said, to be more than conquerors in 4. respects, which I wish
you to take notice of as worthy observation. 1. In that before we enter into
the lists, we are sure of the victory: worldly conquerors we know, are not
sure of the day, before they go to the field, they are not sure of the
victory, till they see the end: and therefore if Achab threaten Mica, it must
be but with yffs and ands: if I return in peace, then Mica must pay for the
pinnes. If Rabshake will needs dominere over Gods inheritance, and sound the
retraite before the Alarm, he shall be taught to know, that his tongue was a
little more hasty then his wit, for the issue of war is doubtful, and he that
puts on his armor, may not exult, as he that puts it off. But we (beloved)
that march under Christ's banner, have this privilege above al worldly
Martialists, that we are sure of the victory, before the fight, we are sure to
return with Triumph and Renown at least for the final Conquest. Insomuch
that that which the old Israelites had sometime assured by divine verdict, we
have always assured by the virtue of the promise and the current of the
covenant of Grace. The truth whereof is most apparent, In that Christ our Capt:
has subdued their forces, he our head has led them in Triumph, this conquest
is appropriated to us, the like victory according to our Model is merited for
us. The power of his strength is daily at hand to give us strength, to afford
us assistance, to infuse courage, and add dexterity, how we may handle our
spiritual armor, how we may take our foes at advantage, and how we may best
give them recoyle. So that, that which is counted mere folly amongst men, in
Christianity is held a point of wise resolution, vz. to triumph before the
victory: for before the victory, we are sure to be conquerors, and in this
surely more than conquerors. 2. We are more than conquerors in this, that we
who every way are so silly and simple, of so mean forces, and so little power,
do obtain the victory. In earthly conquests, we know the victory is usually
obtained by valiant and resolute Spirits, great Commanders, and experienced
soldiers, as the worthies of David, the sons of Zeruiah, but here it is far
otherwise. We that are very earth-wormes, the outcast of the world, in the
hands of all these grievous adversaries, Tribulation, anguish, etc. even as
Lambs before the ravenous creatures, as little David before that Gyant-like
Goliath: we, I say, that are so unequal matches, we break through all their
forces like the three mighty men through the host of the Philistims: they be
all subdued unto us, death it self the last enemy is turned into life,
Bethmaueth into Bethel, the door of death into the gate of heaven. So that a
Christian lying in the agony and anguish thereof, and finding small solace in
regard of the exigent, when it pleases the Lord to open the eyes of his soul,
by delivering it from the prison of his body, as he did Jacob from his dream,
lying in the field, he may well say with that holy man, This is the house of
God, and I was not aware, this is none other then the very gate of heaven. But
to our purpose (beloved) If you should see a little boy, bicker with a mighty
Giant, of great strength and puissance, and that he should bring him under,
give him the overthrow and quite vanquish him, would ye not say, the child were
more than a conqueror? Surely the Israelites thought so of David, and sutably
they gave him an eminent and superlatiue applause in their triumphant
gratulation, Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand. Why even
so it is with us, we that are thus weak and feeble and unwieldy to see too,
that have neither form nor beauty in us, nor any thing to be desired, we
obtain the victory. And that God, who does by the foolishness of preaching
confound the wisdom of the wise, by the weak and despised things of the
world, make the strong to stoop and lay their honor in the dust, and their
port in oblivion, that God (I say) perfits his own strength in our weakness,
and assists us so with the sufficiency of his grace, that we may well be said
to be more then conquerors. Again we are more then conquerors, in that by
every victory we grow the stronger, yea by every foil we grow the more
puissant. Worldly conquerors (we know) tho they win the victory, yet it is
usually with the loss of much blood, their forces are long time after much
weak, and therefore the less unable to bicker again. But we (beloved) get the
better by all these brunts, we get more strength by all our incounters, not in
experiment only, but likewise in ability, if not sometimes for the present yet
always in time convenient. If we be in tribulation, why Peter tells us it
brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope
makes us to lay faster hold upon God, and to hold up our heads with comfort.
So that for one affliction we get four virtues, for one enemy four asociats;
for tribulation, namely, we are armed with the buckler of patienc, the
brestplate of experience the helmet of hope, and the shield of faith, and what
loosers then are we by the bargain? are we in affliction, why David will tell
us it was good for him that he was afflicted, for thereby he learned to keep
Gods law. Did not he get good strength? before he could not make straight steps
to Gods statutes. But he was fetting byasses and compasses, he went limping
and ill fauouredly in the way to heaven, but now, now he had learned to go
upright, and to run with cheerfulness, and so shall we do (beloved) if our
afflictions be sanctified unto us. Are we reviled and persecuted for the name
of Christ and the profession of his truth? why Christ tells us we are happy
and blessed. The Apostles thought they were highly dignified, yea strangely
preferred, that they were thought worthy to suffer any thing for the name of
Christ. And surely it is an high dignity, to be a Captain as it were against
Satan, and to break a spear, in the cause of Christ. For this encouragement
we get by it, that whereas before we were ashamed of the name of Christ, we
were afraid to profess the truth, now we are as bold as Lions, and as resolute
as may be in the cause of God. Peter that before durst not look a silly wench
in the face, but would swear and lie, rather than he would take notice of
Christ, is now of so courageous a spirit, that he dare even stand for him to
the very face of the high Priest and the Elders. Is Paul in bonds and
imprisonment for the Gospel? why that gains freedom to the Gospel, and
makes it famous even in Neroes court. Is Lazarus ready to starve for hunger,
and in the faintness of his spirit does he give up the ghost? I, but what
loses he by that? what loses he? nay he is a great gainer, for he comes so
much the sooner to heaven, for death the Lord of our enemies is swallowed up in
victory. I, it is made a passage of life, being past it, we are out of all
gunshot, for then for ever we are conquerors, our triumph shall be celebrated
to eternity, the greater danger the more glorious victory, thus we are
likewise more than conquerors. Lastly, we may be said to be more than
Conquerors, in that, when we seem to be overcome, and all men deem we have
the foil, why then have we the day, then do we celebrate the Triumph, then
we may sing with Deborah, O my soul thou have marched valiantly. This is
especially seen in death, when as that fearful Combatant, that ghastly
Adversary, assailes us, and sets upon us, and therefore we will instance only
in that, and show you, how even in death, when we are laid full low, why then
is our Triumph at the highest, our Conquest is most supereminent. A strange
conclusion to humane reason, but an evident truth to the eye of faith. For when
as the godly are brought once to this pass, that the wicked have bereaved them
of their lives, O, then they think all is well, they are rid of them, they
have now brought them under. So the Devil thought, and he could get Christ
nailed to the cross once, all was well, nay, but and if he be laid in the
grave once, and the stone sealed up, all is sure, there will be no more talking
of him, unless it be in disgrace, to call him a deceiuer, who said, he would
rise within three days, but could not, and therefore there would be no more
doings, unless his Disciples should come and steal him away by night, to gull
the people. But they would watch them for that, they would set soldiers to
keep the Tomb, and see who durst be so bold, as to come and stir it. Thus
the Devil and his impes did even dance as it were upon the grave of Christ,
and fetch their friskes and Moriscoes as it were, singing as it is in the
Psalm: Surely he is now so low, he can never rise again. Thus they trampled
upon him, as upon a dead Lion, but the mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah, rose
valiantly from the dead, grappled with that mighty Dragon and overthrew him:
and like that valiant Sampson carried the gates of Azzah, the gates of death
upon his back in triumph, so that they are now no more the gates of death, but
the gates of life, whereby all the godly enter into glory. So that if the
Devil come unto Gods children and tell them, skin for skin, and all that a man
has will he give for his life, they may tell him he lies, for if it so pleased
God, they had rather give all they have to be rid of their life. If I should
here enlarge my speech, to relate the valor, and confidence, and reioycement
that the constant Martyrs and faithful witnesses of the Lord Jesus have had,
in suffering for his truth, I might lively paint out unto you, more than a
conquest. Steven under the stones sees heaven open, and Christ at his Fathers
right hand, ready to receive him: the apprehension whereof did even so solace
his Soul, that he laid down his life with solace, showing greater valor in
bearing the blows, then they cruelty, in their enraged malice. We read in the
stories of the Church, of a young man that was put to the rack, for the
profession of Christ, and being kept upon it with much torture from morning to
noone, he lay all the while quietly, with a sweet smiling countenance, as one
that had been in a pleasant slumber: which being much admired, when he was
delivered from the rack, it was demanded of him, whether he felt no pain all
the while, because his countenance was so cheerful, he answered indeed that
he did feel some pain, but all the while (as he thought) there stood by him
a beautiful young man, who wyped the sweat off his face always, and
besprinkled him with cold water, insomuch that the pain was greatly allaied,
and it was not so much, when he was on the Rack, as after he was taken off.
How ever all the godly have not such extraordinary apparitions; yet they have
the power of Christ supporting their weakness, and the presence of the spirit,
giving them courage and ability, to bear all with courage that is laid upon
them, for the name of Christ. I might give many instances of rare constancy in
this our Land, in the time of Queen Mary, in which the Lords people did even
after a sort seem lavish of their blood, to shed it for the witnessing of the
Lord Jesus, who had not spared to shed his hearts blood for them. Who all being
aided by Gods special assistance, did break through all difficulties, and
freely gave their lives for the Gospel, and therein became more than
conquerors, in that being conquered, they conquered, yea in that they seemed to
be overcome, therein stood the very glory of their victory: for that same
Christian valor the Lord had put into them, it made them resolve to cleave to
Christ in life and in death, to make him their portion. To which purpose
excellent is that speech of that Reverend Hooper, laying out unto us the combat
between the frailty of the flesh, and the resolution of the spirit: and
letting us see how the grace of God preuailes, against the disgraces and
greeuances of the world.

Imprisonment (says he) is painful, but yet liberty upon bad conditions is
more painful. The prisons stink: I but not so much as sweet houses, where the
fear of God is wanting. I but we must be alone and solitary: why it is better
to be so, and have God with thee, then to be in company with the wicked. Loss
of goods is great: But the loss of Gods favor and grace is greater. I, but I
am a poor simple creature and cannot tell how to answer, before such a great
sort of noble, learned, and wise: It is better to make answer before the pomp
and pride of wicked men, then to stand naked in the sight of all heaven and
earth, before the just God at the latter day. Why, but I shall die then by the
hands of the cruel man? Why he is blessed, yea a thousand times happy, that
loses this life full of mortal miseries, and finds the life full of
eternal Joys. Thus (beloved) the holy ones of God have resolved to lay down
their lives for the Lord Jesus, and in loosing their lives, they have found
them, for they have found Christ the life of their souls, according to his
promise, He that loses his life for my sake shall find it, and have they not
then been valiant conquerors? yes undoubtedly more than conquerors. The use of
all this that has been said, is, to let us see the excellency of a Christian,
and what a privilege it is to be the child of God, for every state is
sanctified unto us, and we thereby are brought nearer unto God, and therefore
always to rejoice, continually to solace our selves in the Lord, and in him to
cheer up our spirits in every condition, knowing, that the most grievous
estate we can be in, is sanctified unto us, and that when God lets any crosses
betide us, why it is because he has some good to work unto us out of them,
either that he may thereby curb some sin, and so drive the Cananites out of
his own Inheritance, or else that he may give us scope to exercise the graces
we have received, and so to make us more nimble and active, more politic and
experienced against a greater encounter. And therefore we should not be so
timorous and faint-hearted, as we be, at the very hearing of any affliction
coming toward us, like the Israelites running away at the very sight of
Goliath, no, we should pluck up our hearts, and cheer up our spirits, knowing
that the greatest of our adversaries is but an object for us to show out valor
upon, and to make proof of our spiritual puissance. Why, what care I how
stout mine adversary be? what do I fear how strong an arm he has, or what
a big leg or how well appointed he come, when as I know I shall overcome him?
The stouter he is, and the better weaponed he comes, the more shall be my
glory, for I know (relying upon God) I shall give him the foil, and therefore
the better he is appointed, the gladder I am. Thus should our hearts rise
within us, and even leap for joy, that we may have an opportunity to show our
love to Christ, and to bear a stroke for his sake. And therefore if God should
call any of us to greater trial, even to loose our lives for his truth, yet
still we should rejoice, knowing, that the greater the outward greeuance is,
the more near it brings us to God: and that God unto whom it brings us, is so
gracious, that where our trial and combat is the greater, he supplies and
seconds, yea and doubles his strength the power of his spirit. And again it is a
special prerogative, and an high grace for a Christian, that God shall choose
him out before many others, as a special man, to be a Captain as it were, and
one of the worthies of Israel, to venture further for the Lord, than a great
many other shall do, and to combat and bicker with the Devil, even at his
own weapon, his own life. And it is the Cup likewise our blessed Savior
begun to us of, why who would not be glad to pledge him? me thinks he should
think himself highly graced, that may have the first and the fullest draught,
for this is a true drinking of an holy health, a special potion for the health
of our souls. And lastly, what a blessing is it, to have those things which
are punishments of sin, turned into witnessings and testifications of the
truth of God, to be a grace and a glory and an ornament to the Gospel of
Christ? And for the hurt, that afflictions can do us, why we must know they
are but like the furnace of Babylon, which burnt not the three children, no,
not so much as scorched not the hair of their heads, but only loosed their
bands. So all the hurt that afflictions do us, is, but to loose the bands of
our corruption, to purge and purify us from our sins, a most happy loss. A
child seeing his Father cut a grape from the vine, looks at it, and it seems
very pretty unto him, he thinks it were pity it should be pressed; for then it is
spoild: but the wise Father knows that stamped it is the best, for if it
should be let alone, it would not presently: but being pressed it will yield it
own blood, that comfortable liquor which cheares the heart of man. Such
children and fools are we, we think if we might serve God in peace and
quietness, without any (...), all were well, whereas God our wise Father
knows if we were let alone, we would be naught, we would rot in our
corruptions, and therefore in his wisdom he lets us be stamped in the wine
press of afflictions, that we may be made according to his mind, such as may
even cheat his heart, and such examples of constancy, as may even draw us on
to the embracing of the truth. For the blood of Martyrs has been the seed of
the Church, and never did the Church flourish so much as in time of
persecution. But alas poor silly souls that we are, what cowardly hearts
have we? if a man give us but a disgraceful term, we are ready with those
Disciples, Ioh. 6. to leave Christ, to follow him no more. What a dastardly
part is this to cast away our weapons before we have any blow? why we should
rejoice we are counted worthy to suffer any thing for Christ, and we should
persuade our selves, that he that gives us power to bear that, he will
afterward give us courage to endure an harder brunt. And as for the wicked that
delight in the persecuting and disgracing of the Saints of God, let them learn
hence what fools they are, for whereas they think, they do the worst that can
be to Gods children, in mocking them, in disgracing them, the truth is, they
could not do them a greater pleasure, for by this means, they make them more
than conquerors: by this means they make them atcheiue a most glorious
victory, for let them know, that howsoever they can discern nothing in the
Saints of God but misery and baseness, and a life worthy to be lothed, yet
the truth is that when they seem to them to be at the lowest ebb, then are
they indeed in the sight of God, and in the feeling of their own souls most
glorious conquerors: insomuch that, (as one says well) Contraries may even be
predicated of them at the same instant, and that they may well be said to be,
the foulest, and the fairest, the poorest and the richest, the foolishest and
the wisest, the highest and the lowest, the basest and yet the noblest, the
weakest and the strongest. They are the foulest in that to the worlds eye,
there is neither form nor beauty in them: and yet the fairest, for they are the
spouse of Christ, his fair one, his love, his dove, his beloved, the Kings
daughter that is all glorious within. The poorest they be, for they use this
world as though they used it not, and yet the richest, for they have laid up
treasure in heaven. The foolishest, for such God chooses to confound the wisdom
of the wise, and yet the wisest, for the fear of the Lord is true wisdom, and
to flee from evil the chief understanding. They be the basest, as being
deemed, the very refuse and offscouring of the world: and yet the noblest
being the sons of God, the heyrs of heaven. They are the weakest as being
continually exercised with tribulation, anguish, persecution, peril and sword:
and yet the strongest, for in all these we are more than conquerors, through
him that loved us. So that me thinks, if it were for nothing else, then this,
the wicked should cease to persecute Gods children, namely, because by this
means, they greatly advance them, they make them most glorious victors. I know
there is never a wicked persecuting man, but he would be loath to do any good to
Gods children: if he knew any thing that would further their preferment, he
would be sure to reap it from them, if it lay in his power: why then what a
fool art thou to persecute them? thou do by this means, make the graces of
Gods spirit to shine more eminent in them thou give them occasions to master
their corruptions, so that they are conquerors both over thee and themselves,
and get more strength and puissance daily, fight more courageously under the
banner of Christ, and shall have more garlands and wreaths of renown set upon
their heads, then if they had not gone through those brunts. So that in steed
of doing them hurt, thou do them a great pleasure, making them here to grow
in grace like the Palm, which the more it is pressed, the faster it rises,
and hereafter to expect a greater glory, for he that ouercomes with courage
shall be crowned with Triumph, and have those special preheminences that ensue
such a conquest. What hurt therefore can thou do unto us? who ever thou art,
that delights to be doing with the Saints of God. What hurt? nay thou do us
much good, for thy curses are turned into blessings, there is neither sorcerie
nor witchcraft against Jacob, and as Solomon says, the very mercies of the
wicked are cruelty; so we may well inuert the speech, and say, that the
cruelty of the wicked is mercy, through his mercy who has loved us, for we
are only conquerors through him that loved us. A word of which and so an end.
The power of this victory is from Christ, all our sufficiency is from him, by
faith it is that we receive it, his spirit infusing that courage into us, that
makes us play the men, and win the field. His love was the cause of all this
good, for his love to us made him leave heaven, the seat of his glory, and to
descend to the earth, the footstool of misery, and there to fight that same
first bloody field, and to give Satan the foil, since which time Satan could
never finally overcome any of his chosen. Well then beloved did Christ come
into the world to make us conquerors? Did he descend from heaven, that he
might give us the victory over all these enemies, Tribulation, Persecution,
etc. I that he did, our text says so. And do we now celebrate the memorial
of that coming, the remembrance of his Nativity? I that we do, for now is
the time of that solemnity. Why then my beloved we must remember, so to keep
this time of solemnity, that we still retayn our victory, that we still keep
the conquest that Christ has purchased, for else it were a right mock-holy-day
indeed, to celebrate the time of Chr: coming into the world, and to bereave
our selves of the end wherefore he came, of the benefit we reap by his coming.
His end was, says my text to make us conquerors of all these our enemies,
Tribul: Anguish, etc. this was his end. We must then take heed, that we do not
again beslaue our selves, to the commission, to the entertainment of such
sins, as may bring all these enemies in upon us again, justly for our sin,
and subject us unto them. If a Town or a City should keep a festival day in
the memory of some great victory, their King had got, in the overthrow of
their enemies, and should in the mean time send for those enemies that the
King had put to flight, and bring them into the City, and not only so, but urge
the^ to the banquet, and rejoice with them, and in them, and bid them welcome,
and make them good cheer, and let them take possession of it again, would the
King take this well think ye? would he think it were a good remembrance of
his venturing of his life for the safety of that city? well quoth he; why it
would so incense and enrage his spirits against them, that he could not hold
his hands, but presently as it is in the Gospel: he would send forth his
warriors, to slay those traitors and burn up their city. Why thus the case
stands with us beloved. Christ our King the King of peace and glory, came down
from heaven to deliver us from the power of hell, from all our enemies, he got
the victory with valor, we now celebrate the time of his coming to conquer,
if we shall now celebrate it in passing the time, and solacing our selves with
those sins, that he has conquered, as intemperance, idleness wanton pastims,
if we send for the enemies, that he has subdued, and give them possession
again, why what do we else but lose the victory, cashiere Christ's conquest and
mock his bloodshed? And what may we then look for but the fearful doom before
named, that as we have equalled those traitors in sin, so we may drink as
deep of the punishment? O therefore beloved, let us be wise, let our rejoicing
be such as we may fit the time, spiritual rejoicing, let our mirth be such as
may stand with our victory, spiritual mirth, not foolish laughter, which is
madness or worse, not jesting and iybing which becomes not Saints, not unclean
speeches, which should not once be named among Christians, not winter tales,
and foolish stories, the devils chronicles, which never need printing we can so
well remember them. Wherefore let us rather beloved, cheer up our souls in
the spiritual memory of Christ's victory, of the victory of faith that
ouercomes the world. In the prerogatives of Christianity, which are most
singular, yet so that we always refer them to him that loved us, for we only
enjoy them through him that loved us. Let us pray. etc.

FINIS.

