MAGNETICALL Aduertisements: OR

DIVERSE PERTINENT observations, and approved experiments, concerning the
natures and properties of the Lodestone.

Uery pleasant for knowledge, and most needful for practice, of traveling, or
framing of Instruments fit for Travelers both by Sea and Land.

Whereunto is annexed a breife Discovery of the idle Animaduersions of MARK
RIDLEY Dr. in Physic, upon this Treatise entitled Magneticall Aduertisements.

ACTS 17. 26. He has made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on the
face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, etc. The second
Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Timothy Barlow, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of Time. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, DIScreet, and learned Gentleman, Sir DVDLEY DIGGES
Knight.
SIR, the nature, powerfulness, and strange properties of the loadstone are
such, that the more they are known, the more they are justly admired in their
most lively expressing that infinite power, and goodness of our God, who has
created so precious a Jewel for the profitable use of man, and for the
enlarging, and setting forth of his own glory. Into the search of which
admirable and secret virtues my self by the space of these forty years, have
somewhat entered (as my leisure and occasions would serve, and at by times)
partly by reading other men's writings, and partly by my own industry and
practice: Whereby what I have collected, and found, this little Treatise will
show. Which, whether it be any thing, or nothing, I do refer unto the
judicious Readers consideration, but in special to your favorable construction,
and good acceptance.

Many years since diverse of my good friends, and among them some honorable
persons, were very desirous that I should publish such observations as I had
collected, both before, and also after the setting forth of D. Gilberts book:
And none more earnest herein then D. Gilbert himself, unto whom I communicated
what I had observed of my self, and what I had built upon his foundation of
the Magnetisme of the earth. Both which he liked well and wished me to publish
them, as I remember at the time of our private conference, as may further
appear by letters that I received from him; which I have to show under his
own hand.

But above all others, the persuasions of that learned honorable Gentleman,
Sir Thomas Challenor, late Chamberlain unto the Mirror of honor Prince Henry
prevailed most with me. Unto whom I was all the time that I attended that
Prince his highness, for his love and courtesy, much beholding. Whereupon
about seven years since I delivered unto him this Treatise, finished almost
as now it is, saving some few additions upon necessary occasions. But that
Copy was either mislaied or embeseled, that he lost it; About three years
since he sent earnestly unto me for an other Copy: which also he received,
promising me by his letters, that within three months he would put that to the
press, and that it should be carefully and correctly performed: But what is
become even of that also I know not: Only this I am sure of that I have met
with many portraitures of my Magneticall implements, and diverse of my
propositions set abroad in print in another man's name, and yet some of them not
rightly understood by the party usurping them.

Now that it has pleased God to take Sir Thomas Challenor and that upon
inquiry I can hear no tidings of those my lost labors, and knowing that
diverse are very desirous to see them, I have once again revived my scattered
papers, collected them together, and made choice of your self to whom to
entitle (according unto our usual courtesies) these magneticals; your worthy
self I say in many respects: First, because your rare learning ioin'd with so
great piety, accompanied with so pleasing a carriage of your self toward
every man is such, as causes all good men which know you, to love you, by
force of a natural sympathy not unlike the appetite of concourse and
conjunction whereby our very Magnets do affect their proper objects. And this
was very conspicuous in our renowned judicious Prince Henry, who loved you
singularly well for your virtues, and delighted no less to confer with you
for your knowledge in matters appertaining unto Discoueries and Cosmographicall
learnings, in the which his highness was more then vulgarly skillful.

Another is, the glorious favor which I see reflected upon you from that most
reverend and singular ornament of our Church and State, rejoicing in Gods
blessing of his labors in your education: like as God has hitherto blessed him
in all things, and not only my prayers and such as I am who are so much
bounden unto him, but the prayers of many thousands that never saw him, will
not cease to beseech the Almighty long to preserve him. and always to prosper
him in his godly proceedings: Wherefore this extraordinary respect which he
has unto you, both is and must be a commanding motive unto me to show my good
will by the best poor means that I can toward you.

Yet one more I have, which is this: That whereas a worthy society of
Gentlemen and Merchants is very highly and justly commended and honored of all
men, for their great charges in their constant and indefatigable proceedings,
for discoueries of unknown passages to new Countries and Nations, for the
further advancement of Gods glory, the honor of our King, and principal
benefit of the whole Kingdom; In remembering of those honorable attempts, you
must in no wise be forgotten, and especially in a Treatise mentioning the
virtues, and properties of the Loadstone, being the leader and guide to these
admirable exploits, who besides your souud knowledge herein, do with great
constancy join both your purse and counsel for the atcheiuing of them, yea
and that without expectation, or hope of private gain, but only of your noble
genorositie, knowing full well, that the advancement of Gods glory is
absolutely of it self the greatest gain with a contented mind; Wherewith, he
that only is all-and selfe-sufficient, enrich you more and more in this world,
and to your eternal happiness, most abundantly and perfectly satisfy you, by
making you drink of the river of his pleasures in the world to come; Amen.

Yours with all hearty affection

WILLIAM BARLOWE.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
THat wonderful property of the body of the whole earth, called the
Magneticall virtue (most admirably found out, and as learnedly demonstrated by
Doctor Gilbert Physician unto our late renowned Sovereign Queen Elizabeth of
happy memory) is the very true fountain of all Magneticall knowledge. So that
although certain properties of the Loadstone were known before, yet all the
reasons of those properties were utterly unknown, and never before revealed
(as I take it) unto the sons of men. And although as yet many do doubt and
mistrust that the earth it self has no such virtue, I do nothing wonder at
it, because before I read his learned works, and had tried many of his
experiments with mine own hands, and had conferred with great Travelers, and
perused the observations of our chiefest Nauigators both for their variations,
and declinations, I never believed it my self. But this I may truly affirm
that searching with diligence his first five books, and making trial of all
those propositions which I judged to be of importance, I always found the
maine drift, touching this point, certain, constant, and agreeable to the
diligent obsernations of diverse men of experience; although in some other
matters of the Loadstone his experiments and mine did sometimes disagree, as I
signified to himself in his life time, which he did take in very good part, as
I have yet his own letters to show. But concerning his sixth Book entreating
of the motion of the earth, I think there is no man living farther from
believing it, than my self, being nothing at all persuaded there unto, by the
reasons of other men, which he alleges, and as little or less (if it were
possible) by those his inventions, endeavoring to prove the motion of the earth
by the earthes Magneticall force and virtue.

Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas is the only cause why
I do embrace his judgment, in the one, and refuse it in the other, in matters
of this nature following this Rule:

Nullius addictus iurare in verba Magistri. But to return to the Magnetisme of
the whole earth, I do hold it to be one of the rarest, and excellent est
inventions, and the best followed by him, with evident proofs and of the
greatest consequence for the admirable art of Navigations that ever was found
out since the Creation of the world, so that it may well be said of him
touching that point.

Exegit monumentum aere perennius
Regalique situ pyramidu^ altius,
in respect of the manifold use and commodity thereof in the doings of this
life. The properties of the Magnet serving not only for Sea-affaires, but also
for traveling by Land in vaste and solitary deserts, for moveable Sun-dyalls
in all places of the world, for the more ready and exact Chorographie of any
Country, or the true plotting of any ground, and for the following of any
Mineral vein that is void of Iron under the earth, for Pioners and diggers
in Mines. And in all this appears the wonderful power and goodness of God who
has vouchsafed to reveal unto the weak knowledge of man now toward the end
of the world, his admirable treasure, before unknown, of his powerful
Creation, by effect so plain unto the mean est capacity: And that out of a
base, contemptible and dead creature, as it seems to be, and yet filled with
such excellent and wonderful virtue, that all the Gemms of the world, have not
the like; neither if it were wanting could supply the want thereof, or counter
veil the benefit that it brings to the life of man.

Claudianus (a famous Poet) well nere twelve hundred years since, says as
much in commendation of the Magnete, when as yet the Serediticall or
Iron-drawing property thereof was only known.

-- Lapis est cognomine Magnes
Decolor, obscurus, vilis etc.
And again,

Sed noua si nigri videas miracula saxi,
Tunc superat pulchros cultus, and quicquid Eois
Indus littoribus rubra scrutatur in alga.
But what would he not have said, had he seen the true closset indeed of all
Magneticall miracles unlocked, and in glorious manner set wide open as now it
is at this day.

Many of our Nation both Gentlemen and others of excellent wits and lovers of
these knowledges, not able to read Doctor Gilberts Book in Latin, have bin
(ever since the first publishing thereof) exceeding desirous to have it
translated into English, but hitherto no man has done it, neither (to my
knowledge) as yet goes about any such matter, whereof one principal cause is
that there are very few that understand his Book, because they have not
Loadstones of diverse forms, but especially round ones: Also such versory
needles fitly framed, and artificially placed upon their pins, and other such
implements, as he does there prescribe, wherewith being furnished, as they read
his propositions in words, they might still see the truth of them in the things
themselves, according as himself forewarneth that these skills must be learned
Ex rebus ipsis non solum ex libris, out of the things themselves and not only
out of Books. A second cause may be for that there are diverse words of Art in
the whole course of this book proper to this subject, and fit to the
explanation of his figures and diagrammes which cannot be understood but by the
help of the Mathematics, and good traveling in the Magneticall practice.

Moreover his alleging of other men's erroneous opinions concerning this
Argument, and his confutations thereof, may seem at the first to a young
beginner somewhat harsh and tedious. Both which I suppose in the English
translation (if any were) might well be omitted: like as in this my Treatise I
think it not altogether so pertinent to handle them all.

And a sport it is to behold diverse of smart wits, and such as ween
themselves to be so great Clerks, that they will adventure boldly to dispute
de omni scibili, how miserably they run their wits on ground, when only by
a slender reading over of his book, or most commonly some part thereof, they
will take upon them to define, control, and discourse of those matters
fearing nothing more than that of the Poet,

-- mihi turpe relinqui est
Et quod non didici sane nescire fateri.
For being urged by diverse of our Gentlemen (among whom these knowledges are
had now a days in some request) somewhat they must speak, which must be
either superciliously to scorn such things, as vanities, because themselves
understand them not, or else with slender ostentation to blunder out their
masked ignorance, supposing it to be enough for them to say that they have read
Dr. Gilberts Book, and so to use that for a Supersedeas to acquit them of any
farther inquiry. But many, being now at length weary to take such counterfeit
shows for good payment, do seriously seek to have some sound knowledge of
the things themselves, and not to depend upon other men's extravagant disputes,
but to be their own judges in matters that concern themselves, and are
subject to their own senses and reasons, and especially because some of them
must adventure their whole estates, yea and also their lives upon the right
understanding of some Magneticall conclusions.

Wherefore upon the earnest longing of certain mine Honorable and Worshipful
friends, and for the singular love that I bear to the lovers and practizers of
the worthy Art of Navigations, and to satisfy the commendable desires of such
as like to have some insight (though themselves be not praectizers in these
matters of admirable knowledge, and great utility) I have undertaken to
contriue all the chiefest points of this most necessary skill, and the use of
them in this short Treatise.

Not meaning to translate Doctor Gilberts book, but to take those thing out of
it which I shall think fit for this purpose, which are only the Magnetisme of
the whole earth, and some of the consequents thereof, and to add the rest of
mine own industry: Wherein I may be bold after asort to challenge a right, as
having endeavored to get some insight in this argument (a matter well known to
diverse) above the space of twenty years ere Doctor Gilberts book saw light.
And in very deed I communicated many of my observations with him, above one
whole year before he put it out in print. To be short, of all that I shall set
down in this Treatise my request is, that the Reader will admit nothing but
that which shall be confirmed by good reason, or undoubted experiments. And I
purpose (God willing) to tie my self, as strictly unto this rule as ever any
man did that has written of the like argument, making it even a matter of
conscienae to deliver any thing herein for certainty, that my self shall not
know to be sound. And so by this means shall I neither abuse the Reader with
any untrue assertion, nor injury so certain and so excellent a knowledge with
any doubtful or vnapproueable conclusions.

Contents of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. OF the Magneticall power of the whole Globe of the Earth. CHAP. II.
Of the ambiguitie of the North and Sooth ends of Magnets and Magneticall bodies
explained, and Doctor Gilbert therein defended. CHAP. III. Certain general
observations of the nature and properties of the Loadstone. CHAP. IIII. By what
means the chiefest points of any Magnet of what form soever may easily be
found out. CHAP. V. The manner of Capping both with single and double Capps,
and the nature of them. CHAP. VI. Of cementing and peicing of Loadstones CHAP.
VII. Of the variation of the Magneticall Needle with the Appurtenances thereto
belonging. CHAP. VIII. A discovery of Errors committed in the making and
touching Magneticall Needs and Wiars of sailing Compasses, with an advise for
the true and right making and touching of them. CHAP. IX. Of the touching with
a Loadstone capped and without the Cappe. CHAP. X. Of the fashioning of the
Compass Needle. CHAP. XI. A Sailing Compass fitted for observing at Sea the
variation, amplitude of either Sun, or Stars, Capes, or trendings, etc.
CHAP. XII. A comparison of the several uses of the Horizontall, and
Inclinatory Magneticall Needles.
A true copy of one of D. Gilberts letters written to the Author, concerning
his Magneticall Experiments.

MAGNETICALL Aduertisements.
CHAP. I. Of the magneticall power and force of the whole Globe of the Earth.
COncerning the Magneticall force of the whole body of the Earth, I have
selected these experiments to prove it.

Take any piece of solid earth that has some toughness to hold together, and
will abide the fire, as any sort of clay, or brick (which sometimes was clay)
fashion it in such manner that it be uniformly extended toward both ends
(the Ouall or long figure is fittest for our purpose) put it into a fire of
charcoles, increasing the heat by little and little, and at the length with
often blowing, make it thoroughly as red hot as you can: let it remain so for
the space of half an hour, or more, that thereby all superfluous moisture may
be consumed, and adverse qualities separated from it, then take it forth, and
let it cool of it self, being first set North and South, with either end
answerable to the variation of the place, not parallel unto the Horizon, but
elevated answerable to the Latitude as nere as you can. Certain it is that
this piece of earth thus ordered, will sensibly show you that it has true
Magneticall virtue. But here before I proceed any farther I must deliver unto
you a necessary observation: There are two kinds of Attractions (as they are
commonly called) the one Magneticall, the other Electricall. The Magneticall
has always special respect unto the North and South points of the Magnete or
Magneticall body. The Electricall body has no manner of respect unto any one
point of the Electricall body, more than another: And by this difference these
two kinds of Attractions are easily discerned; As also by this, look what end
of the Magneticall needle the one end of the Magnet does draw, the other will
chase away; but the Electricall body draws alike at all ends. And thirdly
after this sort, lapp this Electricall body in a paper and it will draw nothing
at all, but interposition of brass or of a stone wall within the orb of the
Magnets virtue, does nothing weaken the same, or hinder his effect toward his
peculiar object. Notwithstanding (to speak properly) Attraction pertains
only to Electricall bodies, because the whole attractiue virtue is only in
the Electricall body it self, and nothing at all in the thing that is
attracted. The Attraction (commonly so called) of the Loadstone is rightly to
be termed, Concursion, Confluence, or Coition, because it is the running or
vigorous meeting together of two Magneticall bodies having a mutual
inclination the one to join with the other, or by any other name, bearing like
sense. For the true knowledge thereof, being but lately as a stranger arrived
amongst us, common use

( Quempenes arbitrium est, and ius and normal loquendi.) has as yet scant
suited it, with a convenient name to express this property; So that Magneticall
Concursion is never but between two bodies, such as both of them are
Magneticall; As of one Loadstone with another, or of a Loadstone with iron or
steel, or iron oar if it be prepared, or between two pieces of iron or
steel that are revived with a Loadstone; for indeed the Loadstone can but
revive, and multiply Magneticall force in a body that naturally has it in some
measure before: but cannot infuse it into any thing, that before is utterly
void of it, as of metals, in iron or steel, and not in gold, silver, brass,
etc. Electrum in this argument is named that which is either Amber in
substance, or at the least of the quality, and that Amber, being rubbed, has,
to take up moats, feathers, strawes, sticks, and other small things. The which
property is also in ieate, brimstome, hard wax, (if it be smooth) and in
infinite other things both natural and compound; all which because of that
quality in this argument are termed Electricall bodies, and their taking up of
things is called Electricall attraction, having only a slender resemblance,
and no truth of the Magneticall quality. But that aboue-mentioned piece of
earth, prepared in such sort as is before prescribed, will by Magneticall
concursion show it self to be a true Magneticall body. For the one end of the
Magneticall needle will covet toward the one of the prepared masle, and fly
from the other. And contrariwise also, though it will do both but weakly, not
with power comparable to a natural Loadstone, yet as truly as that. That end
which cooled toward the South, will draw the true North end of the needle, and
that end which cooled toward the North will draw the true South end of the
needle. If so be as yet you will have another infallible argument, do thus:
Mark what end draws the North end of the needle, afterward put the new made
Magnet into the fire again, and when it has been glowing for the space of
half a quarter of an hour, take it out and cool it being placed with that
marked end toward the North, most assuredly that end now will draw the South
end of the needle, and the North end of the needle will shun it, which before
approached unto it. The reason here of is, because the fire having abolished
all the former Magneticall quality of that mass wherewith it was in a
contrary position affected in the former cooling, now leaves it apt and fit to
receive any other new impression: which presently it takes again either
regularly, if in the cooling it be placed with the ends to the North and South,
or (if it be placed otherwise) confusedly, by the Magneticall force and virtue
of the whole body of the earth, by regular and confused, this is the meaning.
Take any lump of earth, or any brick-bat ordered in this sort, certain it is
that this lump of earth or bricke-bat has some magneticall virtue therein,
yet so feeble and weak, that our sense cannot discern it, because of the
unfitness of the form, and the confused dispersion of that weak force,
through the whole body thereof. Then suppose you will bring either of these
into an extended ovall form, which is most apt (as before I said) for any body
magneticall to show his force, yet this will help it nothing at all of it
self, as you may easily make experience in every Loadstone. For if you take a
loadstone of a confused form, it is not enough to bring it into a convenient
ovall, except with diligence you reserve the points of the North and South in
the two ends thereof, for if you leave the points in the sides you mar it
with this ovall form. For the stone will not lightly be of one quarter of the
force, it was ofbefore; For the ovall form gives it no virtue, but is the
fittest for it to show the uttermost of that strength, which of it self it had
before, if you observe the due points, and not otherwise. But in this earth and
brick it is not possible to find the due points in such sort as you may in a
Loadstone, because of the weakness of the magneticall force therein contained.
And therefore you cannot bring that into a regular ovall form, to have the due
points in the very ends. But if you first make it into an ovall form, and by
the fire take away the confused magneticall force, and all other perverse
qualities thereof, that being by nature a magneticall body in his cooling
before specified, receives presently by that irresistable power of the earth,
his magneticall virtue, according unto that form, and will regularly have his
due points precisely in the ends, without any confusion. Johannes
Baptista-Porta Neapolitanus, writes that he did make trial of the way that
Paracelsus has set down for to increase the virtue of a magnet, namely to
heat him red hot in the fire, and to quench him in the oil of Crocus Martis:
And Baptista Porta says, that he found it a detestable falsehood. For says
he, he is so far from increasing his virtue, as that (being once red hot) he
loses all his own, past all recovery. But for all this that he says, I
doubt whether Paracelsus be justly reproved or not, for by mine own
experience I know that the heating of a Loadstone until he be red hot does
weaken a loadstone, but takes not away all his force, and in my trial here of
I found a very manifest proof of the magnetisme of the earth, which I thought
necessary for to insert in this place. I have made this trial of Fragments of
magnets of diverse kinds, and also of diverse kinds of Iron Mines which are
next in degree unto magnets, namely after this sort. Heat him in the fire by
little and little (for fear of breaking) until he be red hot, then take him
out and let him cool, then mark (with chalk or what you please) those parts
that respect the North and South and you shall find those marked places, the
North, and South Poles of the Magnet: put him into the fire again, until he
be red hot, and cool him contrarily, and you shall have the contrary effect.
Therefore if Baptista Porta did make his trial with a Loadstone very long in
form, and chanced (for Master D. Gilberts mystery of the Earths magnetisme,
was not then revealed) for to cool him in his oil of Crocus Martis with his
ends East and West, the axis of the stone being then ouerth wart in the middle,
it were no marvel if he found no force in the ends. And I do not think it
improbable, but that Paracelsus way may do some good rightly used. Doctor
Gilbert writech that some Iron mine, will affect a magneticall needle, as it is
of it self, being unprepared by fire: but as yet I never could find any such,
but this I have often tried, that it being of no manner of magneticall virtue
of it self no more then a flintstone unprepared by fire, being made red hott,
and cooled, is presently impregnated with very apparent magneticall virtue,
according to the situation that he is cooled in, and although you heat and
cool him often, and diverse ways, he will still keep his virtue, according to
the scituations, of his cooling. And some Iron Mines I have found, which being
but in this sort prepared have had as strong force as some natural magnets
have had. It is the goodness of the Loadstone joined with a fit form that
will show great force. For as a very good form with base substance can do but
very little, so the substance of the Loadstone be it never so excellent, except
it have some convenient form, is not available. For example, an excellent
loadstone of a pound weight and of a good fashion, being used artificially, may
take up four pounds of Iron; beat it into small powder, and it shall be of
no force to take up one ounce of Iron; yea I am very well assured that half an
ounce of a Loadstone of good fashion, and of like virtue will take up more then
that pound will do being beaten into powder. Whence, (to add this by the way)
it appears manifestly, that it is a great error of those Physicians and
Surgeons, which to remedy ruptures, do prescribe unto their Patients to take
the powder of a Loadstone inwardly, and the small filing of iron mingled in
some plaster outwardly: supposing that herein the magneticall drawing should
do great wonders. Whereas they consider not that the stone being dissolved
into powder, every little particle of the dust has two points contrary, the
one drawing to, the other repelling and putting from: and so being thus
confounded by a contrary working does much more harm, then good with his
magneticall quality. As for the astringent, and drying properties of the
Loadstone I leave them to the diligent observation and judgment of the skillful
in physic. But to return to our purpose, and to allege this also, besides
the former manifest proof, if the earth were not by nature a magneticall body,
the before mentioned piece of earth could not receive from a Loadstone any
magneticall power: But most certain it is, and by many undoubted experiments
confirmed, that it will evidently receive magneticall power, from a Loadstone:
therefore it is manifest that the earth is by nature a magneticall body.
Furthermore, as among all the metals iron does incomparably more resemble the
earth in substance then any other does, it likewise does more participate with
the earth in quality, and principally in the magneticall peculiar property
hereof, as notorious experience declares, yea every piece of iron Oar, being
naturally (as D. Gilbert shows) a magnet, although of feeble force, and all
magnets being a kind of iron Oar, is the very cause, that only iron or
steel, and no other metal is capable of that virtue, namely to have that
revived, and multiplied by the vicinity of a magnet, which at the first in some
measure, was original in it self, as it is aforesaid; It is also well known,
that the magnet is a Stone most commonly of invincible hardness, nothing
inferior to any iron or steel of the excellentest sort, notwithstanding
sometimes we see of them that are nothing, but a dry lump of earth, and yet
of those also some stronger in virtue, then diverse of the hard stony ones are:
Which earthly magnets if a man assay to bring it into a fashion by grinding on
a grinding stone (according to the common use) they will consume into very
mudde in the water. Now (to draw toward an end of this matter) albeit the
magneticall virtue be most eminent in the magnet, as in the precise and perfect
subject thereof: yet is the self same quality, in a meaner degree, evidently
to be discerned in every piece of earth, prepared and ordered (as is aforesaid)
yea although it be not cooled with his ends North and South, that it may take
his magneticall force from the virtue of the earth, for if you cool it with
his ends but East and West and set two Loadstones in the cooling, the one at
one end and the other at the other end, it will receive a sensible and apparent
magneticall virtue according to those points of the Loadstone that were applied
unto it, namely that end which was next the South point of the Loadstone will
have a North properly, and that end that was next the North point, will have a
South property: yea if you set the North part of two loadstones unto each end,
both ends of this new made magnet will have a South property; And contrariwise
if you apply the South ends of two magnets, both his ends will have a North
property; And those properties before mentioned will show themselves to be
magneticall, because whether end of this new magnet draws any one end of a
magneticall needle, the same will chase away the other: which is proper only
unto magnets, and magnetical bodies. After the like sort, only by application
of two strong loadstones by the space of 24. hours you may alter the points of
any base loadstone, which you would, and make them both North or South as you
please: so that the loadstone which you would alter be but base in quality,
and not great in substance, and that the other be of a reasonable bigness, and
good strength. And this virtue by such application of two loadstones I have
often found effectual in new brick lately taken from the kill without any
farther putting into the fire at all; And although it be against the nature of
a loadstone to have both his ends naturally of one virtue, that is to say, both
of them of a North property, or both of them of a South property: yet here it
is to be understood, that it is the forcible violence of the strong ones, being
applied jointly unto each end of the weak, that do chase the contrary
property of the weak one into the middle thereof: And therefore if you divide
this weak one in the middle, then both those ends, which being joined together
were the middle, (where no loadstone can show any virtue) being now disioyned,
and become ends, will presently show a contrary property (according unto
magneticall nature) unto the other two ends.

CHAP. II. The ambiguity of the North and South ends of Magnets and Magneticall
bodies explained, and Doctor Gilbert therein defended.
THere is not any one error that breeds a greater confusion in magneticall
knowledge, then the mistaking of the right understanding of the true North and
South ends, as well in magnets themselves, as also in magneticall bodies, who
soever therefore that will take a little pains in the beginning for to
understand this well, shall free himself from many intricate difficulties in
this argument, which otherwise must needs befall him; wherein some having
limed themselves, have fallen into many errors, every one still begetting
another worse then himself. All those which did write before Doctor Gilbert
did name that end of a magnet which being placed in a wooden dish, and set to
swim in water, would turn and settle it self toward the North, the North
end of the magnet; and the other the South end. And even so did they of all
Dial-needles, Compasses and magneticall bodies. But Doctor Gilbert, not for
any newfangled innovation, or selfeconceit, but upon good reason and firm
demonstration avouches and proves the contrary, and clearly shows, that
the former vulgar assertion seriously defended, tends unto the overthrow of
all magneticall Philosophy, by undermining (as it were) the whole frame
thereof; and yet in common speech the old rule may hold, Loquendum cum vulgo
sentiendum cum sapientibus. For it would seem a strange speech unto a Mariner
to tell him that his Flower de luce were become the South point of his
compass, and yet this assertion is most true, and certain that it is the
North end of every magnet and magneticall body, that being placed in a thin
wodden dish in water, or any magneticall needle upon his pin, which sets
it self and points unto the South, and it is the South end which points
unto the North. For proof hereof, take these words of North and South in
whether of the two former significations you please, and make trial thereof in
any two magnets, or any two magneticall bodies, so placed that they may freely
turn according unto their natures, and you shall always see a natural
inclination of the contrary ends of the one unto the contrary ends of the
other, as of the North end of the one unto the South end of the other, and
reciprocated of the South of the one to the North of the other; But the ends in
the one and the other will always fly from those of like denomination, as the
North end of the one from the North end of the other, and the South end of the
one from the South end of the other.

For as much then as all magnets themselves, and all magneticall bodies (being
so placed as they may have their free motion) compose themselves magnetically
toward the Poles of the earth, it must needs be that it is the true natural
South end of the Magnet or Magneticall needle, that points toward the North
of the Earth: and it is the true natural North end of the Magnet or
Magneticall needle that points toward the South of the Earth, because the
contrary ends do affect one an other, and each of them do naturally fly, the
one end of the one, from that end of the other, which is of like denomination
unto it self: for example, In this following Diagram of the whole Magnet, E.
A, is supposed to note the true natural North end thereof, and B. the South
end.



This Magnet being placed in a wooden dish, swimming in water, freely must,
and will, of Magneticall necessity, with his true North end, A. settle himself
so, that A. must point toward the South of the Earth. And the South end, B.
toward the North of the Earth: Because all Magnets and all Magneticall bodies,
do naturally affect, the one the contrary end of the other, and do avoid and
fly from their ends of like denomination.

Now for a further consideration of these properties suppose that you will cut
of a piece of this Magnet meridionally, viz. C. D: manifest experience will
show, that C, which did in nature participate with A. in the entire Magnet, E:
(as being both of the true North part thereof) now being separated, will not
abide it. In like manner D, of the other end of the little one, will not abide,
B: of the great one, with whom being entire in nature he did participate, as
being both true Southerly parts of the entire Magnet, E: And that because the
ends of like denomination of any two Magnets, do naturally fly the one from
the other.

But here you must beware of an error, which some unhappily have entangled
themselves withal: who beholding the aforementioned discord (as between A:
and C:) wrongfully supposed, that, if both these Magnets the greater and the
less, were conveniently placed to swim in water the little one would not with
his end C, point unto the South of the earth, as it did in the Magnet being
entire; where it was a part of the true North end, but would point quite
contrarily. There is no manner of any such alteration, but that both the great
one and the little one (and all the like, that are cut meridionally one from
another) will absolutely point the very same way which the entire one did, only
you must know, that the meridian Line will somewhat be removed in each of them
from the division, as you may guess by the two prieked lines, parallel unto the
meridian (or axis) A: B: of E. the entire one, and the disagreing of their ends
is only within the Orb of their forces, both their general dispositions
toward the Earth ever continuing one and the selfsame that it was at the
first. Yea moreover, place them so that they may freely swim within the orb of
their own force, and they will (with very little help or none at all)
conform themselves in such sort that the one of them will join it self
endlong unto the other, at their contrary ends, and point the same way both of
them, the which they did at the first in the entire one. If you touch the end
of any Magneticall needle upon A, being the true North end of that Magnet, that
end of the needle will become a true South end, and will point unto the North
of the Horizon: if you touch it upon B, that will become a true North end, and
will point unto the South of the Horizon. And the like will it do, if you
touch it upon, C: as when you touched it upon, A, and upon, D, as when you
touched it upon B, although in both these not so strongly; so that Doct:
Gilberts assertion does not gainsay the Mariners opinion, that his Flower de
Luce should not still remain the North point of his Compass, only he
shows which end of the Magnet it is, which does give him that virtue, namely,
that it is the true North end; so that if you hold the true North end of the
Magnet near unto the Flower de Luce it will come unto him: if you take away
the Magnet, it will come unto the North of the Horizon. If you will divide a
Magnet not meridionally as in the former example, but aequinoctially, as in
this by the pricked line, C: D. A. being still the true North end, and B: the
true South end, and A: B: being the Meridian line, or axis of the stone: if you
set these divided several pieces a sunder, that they may swim within the Orb
of their forces, they will affect to join themselves in the very place where
they were divided, as also in the ends, A: unto B: by the former reasons of
contrary denomination. And if you place them a swimming without the Orb of
their forces, A: and B: will still yet retain their former natures, and even
so will it fall out, if you make your division in any other place of the Magnet
toward either end parallel unto aequinoctiall of the Magnet.

CHAP. III. Certain general observations of the nature and properties of the
Loadstone.
LOadstones of diverse and sundry parts of the world as of Norway, Elva,
Bengala, etc. have one and the selfsame property directive, I mean of
showing the North and South, and also the selfsame points respective
declining or dipping under the Horizon. They do likewise agree in their
variations, and each one will draw iron, and likewise one another. Every
Loadstone, of what form soever he be, has either actually or potentially two
points, the one Northern, the other Southern. Actually, if either by casualty
(if it so fall out) or by industry the stone be so fashioned, that those two
opposite points be eminent or perspicuous therein: Potentially, if that either
the stone be flat and but thin in the dimension of North and South though broad
otherwise, for so shall the virtue of the stone be dispersed to the extreme
parts thereof, in the edges round about; or if it have the two opposite points
in any concauitie, then will the stone show in the eminent border or edge of
that concauitie only a confused dull force, and in the concauitie it self
very little or nothing at all. That stone is well proportioned for touching
which resembles an Ouall form, and has his due points in his ends, and is
void of any bunch or concauitie. For the general form of a stone being good,
every concauitie is a diminishing of his force, and every bunch is but a
superfluous burden; Insomuch that my self have made experience of a stone that
of substance was very good, and of weight was upon a three and twenty ounces,
but of a disordered form, I therefore took away twelve ounces from him, and
yet diminished not one jot of his force. And this did I in a stone that was
all of like substance. But if it be one that is intermingled of diverse
substances (as many such there are and those easily discerned by their color)
you may sometimes take away three quarters and more of his substance without
diminishing any thing at all of his virtue. For colors, most commonly the
Iron-like is best: very black or whitish seldom proves good; gray,
indifferent; the more white in any stone, so much the worse. There are certain
that are of an iron color, mingled with red, of which some be very good, some
but indifferent. By three ways you may prove whether a Magnet be good or not;
the one is, by taking up iron with the bare stone: The other by giving more or
less virtue unto a knife, or any such thing to lift iron: The third if it will
with good strength move a Magneticall needle a pretty good distance of, and
readily alter the ends of the needle without touching of them, making the North
South, and the South North: The two latter of these do never fail, but the
first does diverse times. And very certain it is, that whatsoever stone does
most strongly impart his force unto a knife, or move a needle with quicknes,
the power of lifting up iron in such a one, will mightily be increased with a
Cap. For this is generally the nature of all Magnets, that if there be 2. of
different quantities, and equal strength in lifting up iron, the greater will
give the stronger touch, and move a Magneticall needle farther of, although the
lesser will take up as much iron, or somewhat more, than the greater. And
again suppose there be a Magnet of a pound weight, that being fitly armed,
will take up four pounds of iron, and not above, if you divide him into very
small pieces, you shall find of them being orderly used that will lift up 20
times, yea 40 times his own weight and a great deal more, if they be made
very small, as of three or four grains weight; And yet where the great one
will give a touch unto a knife for to take up four ounces of iron, and will
move a Magneticall needle three foot of; this little one will not give a touch
unto a knife to take up a needle, nor move a Magneticall needle four inches
of; that as a Magnet is diminished in substance (I mean a Magnet of a regular
form) so does he loose in his virtue of touching, and increases for his small
quantity in lifting of iron, whereby it is manifest that these two properties
go not always jointly together in the same proportion and degree. And here
hence it is, that many seeing little Magnets artificially set in rings for to
take up (for their quantity) a great piece of iron, do wrongfully imagine
that the great one (whose particles they are) or any other great one, should
do the like, namely to take up so many times their own weights. Also very
often it is seen, that Magnets being of like form and weight, but of diverse
kinds, the one will take up more iron of himself without the capp, and yet the
other give a far stronger touch; but then, if you do fit both of them
accordingly with caps, he which gave the stronger touch, will take up more iron
than the other. The principal force of the Loadstone well proportioned,
passes in a direct line, from the middle of his substance, being (as it were)
a Center, through his two ends or points, which are the imaginary lines of his
chiefest force, from which Center, there issue infinite others also through all
parts of the Superficies of the stone, on either side, between the two
extreme points and the middle, all which on either side of the middle, being
of one nature and property in respect of their touch are exceedingly different
in strength. For that still waxes less and less, as it approaches
continually nearer and nearer the middle, where at length in the middle,
between the two ends, it utterly faints and comes to nothing. The
Loadstone communicates his property to the iron or steel that is touched with
it, so far forth, as the iron, or steel, which is touched, has ability to
receive, and so that good skill in the touching be observed, steel is far
better than iron, and receives a far stronger touch, and much more
effectual. The purer steel, so much the better; and if it be iron, the purer
likewise, the better, always regarding that both of them be very smooth, and
clean, and have their due temper. The principal property in common use is the
showing of North and South in the Horizon, with the appendants thereunto
belonging, which is much more apparent, more strong, and more commodious in the
iron and steel, that is touched, than it is in the stone it self, because the
substance of them may be filed and cut away, and drawn into any form, that we
like or list our selves, which the substance of the stone will not permit. The
Magnet is of such nature, that every piece broken of and separated from the
whole, has all the properties of the whole, the same several points of North
and South, and ability also for the touch, like in kind, though not of
equal power, according to the quantity and proportion of the piece, and the
part of the stone that it is taken from, and this property in a meaner sort
has the touched needle and wyar of a Compass also.

CHAP. IIII. By what means the chief points of any Magnet of what form
soever may easily be found out.
MAke a respective or declinatorie needle, of an inch or thereabouts in length
and giving him his touch, fasten him by his Axis upon a little forked stick,
or any such thing, that the needle may have free scope, then offer the stone
near the needle, turning it round about, and immediately you shall see the
North of the needle (as it is as yet commonly called, because it points unto
the North) point directly unto the true North end of the stone as soon as it
comes near unto it, and as you turn away the end of the stone the needle
will point still somewhat toward it, till the South end of the stone
approaches, for then will the needle wheel about upon his Axis, and point
directly with his South, and to the true South of the stone. But if you hold
the needle near the stone, in such sort that it cannot turn about at liberty
then the force of the stone may soon change the properties of the ends of the
needle, that the one point which was North shall become South, and that the
other which was South shall become North, yet the thing it self is easily
discerned: For the Northerly end will always hang lower.



And wheresoever the needle, being held nearer unto the stone does stand
parrallell unto it not inclining with either end, toward the stone there
directly, under the middle of the needle, the North and South properties of the
stone do divide and part themselves. This matter is much better performed,
with a small narrow loadstone of half an inch (more or less) in length, having
in the ends his due points of North and South and wrought over with silk of
two colors from the middle to each end; as for example yellow and white; That
part which points to the North let it be wrought over with white, and the
other with yellow. Then if you hang that in the middle by a fine silk thread,
and apply it unto any other loadstone, the South end of the one will readily
find out the North end of the other; and contrariwise. In like manner, with
this magneticall instrument you may see two pretty conclusions. The one if you
touch a knife with the end of a forcible loadstone, whether it be North or
South, and hang this wrought one by a silk thread in the middle, that it may
hang freely, the one end will crave toward the point of the knife, and the
other will not abide it. The other is, if you hang it end-long, with the true
North end right over the North end of a forcible loadstone or with the South
end over the South end of the other, you shall see that it will in no wise
(being let down) come unto the North point of that loadstone, but will
(contrary to philosophical principles that heavy things should tend directly
downwards) by the means of the silk thread, swim or wheel about the end
of the loadstone in the air: yea and lift it self somewhat upward, rather
then perpendicularly light down upon it, yea this it will do although you
place a plate of silver, lattin, or any such thing, between the stone and it
self.

The second way.
Thread a common sowing needle, and touch the point of it with the North end of
any loadstone, then offer it unto that stone whose points you would find out,
holding the needle by the thread about an inch therefrom, and in turning the
stone about, you shall presently see the needle point unto the North end of
this stone, and fly from the other end, when by your turning it comes near.
The contrary effect ensues, if you touch the point of the Needle with the
other end of the stone, wherein you may behold that ancient conceived, and of
late years maintained error of the contrariety of Magnes and Theamedes to be
nothing else but a contrary property of one and the self same Magnes.

The third way.
Break off the point of a sowing needle, half an inch long or longer (if the
stone be good) but not above a quarter of an inch, (if it be a base stone) lay
it upon the stone, and move it to and fro upon the Superficies thereof (being
smooth) with the needles point forwards, and as it comes near any of the two
points of force, it will raise it self more and more: but being brought unto
the point it self, it will stand there straight upright; If the stone be
ragged this cannot well be practiced, otherwise of all other it is the most
certain way. Now whether it be your North or South end the effect will soon
declare.

The fourth way.
Having an ordinary Dial with a magneticall needle, or a sailing compass, or
any magneticall needle standing on a sharp pin, hold near thereunto the
stone turning it in your hand, then will the north end of the needle (I mean
the end that points to the North) respect the true North point of the stone.

The fifth way.
Also if you touch a common sowing needle (the longer the better) and put ti
through a little piece of cork, not bigger then may well bear it up, so that
by the means thereof, it may swim in a basin of water, the same if you offer
the stone unto it, will show the like effect. And here it is to be remembered,
that none other way whatsoever will more readily or truly define the
magneticall Meridian, then this of the needle with corcke in the water. And
therefore as it is very requisite for many purposes that every Traveler either
by land or especially by sea should always have (if he may) an aequinoctiall
Dial with him, so would I not wish that any of them should be without some
sowing needles touched with a good stone which will both serve the proper uses
of sowing without impairing their touch (for it is open air and rust that are
the greatest enemies thereof) And at any time with a piece of corcke, or a dry
stick in the water will show the magneticall meridian; a matter though mean
and triuiall in show, yet between whiles of so great importance that it may
serve to save very many men's lives.

A sixth way.
Also if you prepare a little round Loadstone of a quarter of an inch diameter
or there about (but it must be a very good one) having his two poles marked and
fitted in such manner that it easily turn about in a little frame according
unto this picture. The like also in his sort will come to pass, if you hang a
small declinatorie Needle in a frame in this manner.



Then by moving it in his frame all over the stone, the North pole of this will
find the South of the other; And likewise will the South, the North of the
great one; For it is not in outward show between one magnet and another, as it
is between a magnet and a magneticall needle, the contrary ends of the magnet
will covet in their motion to meet together, but the end of the needle which
turns North, will come unto the North of the stone: For in very truth it is
the South point of the needle, even as the magnet it self being placed in a
wooden dish in water will turn with his North end unto the South, and with
his South end, dish and all, toward the North, as it is largely declared in
the second Chapter of this book. The like effect will also follow if you hang
as aforesaid a small magnet in the middle by a small silk thread, that it may
freely turn without impediment according unto his own nature. But this
property it will show quicker, or slower according unto the goodness of the
substance, and fitness of the form. The best form for this purpose is the
extended ovall, having his poles precisely in his ends. If his poles be some
pretty distance, the one end toward the East of the stone, and the other
as much toward the West, this stone in his length will not point unto the
magneticall North and South (as otherwise he would) but unto some other point
of the Horizon; yea following this experiment in this sort, you may make him
stand unto any point of the Compass: only you ought to abridge the stone in
his length that he may come somewhat nearer unto a circuler form, that so his
diameter of North and South (being through the magnetisme of the earth, the
cause of this motion) may be so much the longer in comparison of the Mass of
the stone, and consequently more effectual. After the like manner you may so
touch the wiers of a Compass, that the Flower de luce of the fly, shall stand
unto what point of the Horizon you please, although the Diameter of the wiers
do still remain fixed under the Flower de luce, and the South point of the
Card.

Finally to conclude this point with a magneticall delight, if you touch two
sowing needles in a contrary sort, that is, the point of the one northerly and
of the other Southerly, and set them with their corckes the one at the one side
of a basin of water and the other at the other, you shall see them, as quickened
with vital spirit, even so to move the one end toward the other, at the first
fair and softly, but when they draw near they will rush together (as it were)
with a kind of violence, the point of the one striking precisely at the point
of the other, you must place the needle, whose point is touched for the North
on the South side of of the basin, and the other on the other side: Otherwise
the heads and not the points will run together, a thing far more worthy of
admiration, then all the self moouers of any Daedalus or Architas Tarentinus,
and more strange to behold then the connection of Iron rings combined by virtue
magneticall, whereat S. Augustine so much, and that justly, did wonder.

CHAP. V. The manner of capping both with single and double cappes and the
nature of them.
THe stone being brought unto his perfect form you must have a mould made of
Iron of the very same proportion in every respect and equal in all his
dimensions, then setting the stone aside, let your workman frame and fashion
his cappes and fit them upon this mould as if it were the stone, thus shall you
be sure to preserve your magnet from many dangers, very incident unto rude
handling: And having so done you may set them on the stone it self, amending
any small faults, without endangering the stone, either with bruisings, or
knocks; For the thickness and largeness of the cappes, there can be no
general rule prescribed, but it must be left unto the trial and ingenious
dexterity of the workman: as also for the handsome fastening either by
soadering, or riuetting of them with lattin plates to the Caps to keep them in
their places firm and steady, according as you see in this picture of a stone,
armed with single Cappes.



The double Cappes are nothing but two square or round knobs prominent and
issuing out of the single Cappes (as near as may be) at right angles with the
Axis of the stone, agreeable to this form, which was fashioned by a very
skillful workman of Winchester, one that for all manner fashioning, cutting,
soadering, peecing, and capping of Loadstones, is the most exquisite that I
have known, as Doctor Gilbert would also confess, who had his best fashioned
and capped by him; and so some Noblemen and diverse Gentlemen, to their great
contentment, have had the like. I find not as yet any profitable use of the
double capping, but only for admiration, in taking up a greater quantity, more
by the one half, then the two several ends could do each by it self: as if
each end will take up half a pound, being capped in this sort, that each
prominent end may lay hold upon the iron fitted for it in this manner, it ought
to take up a pound and a half and more: The reason whereof is this, because
the Magnet, in touching any one end of a fitting piece of iron or steel, does
not only infuse the virtue of that end, which touches the iron, into that
touched end, but also the contrary virtue into the other end.

Now therefore in this position, both ends of the Magnet being applied unto the
two ends of the iron, these two contrary forces strive in this piece of iron,
the North to repel the South, and the South the North: so that each force is
driven nearer his own end, and becomes there so much the stronger then
otherwise it would be. For proof whereof, take a little narrow square piece of
iron, of the length of the capped stone, and joined in the midst with Copper
after this sort:



A. is supposed to be a long square, or a square-like piece of iron, in length
fitting the two double caps of a Loadstone.

B. a long square piece, the ends iron, the middle copper. C. has a less
space of copper, and D. least of all.

If you apply the Loadstone unto A, he will hold A very strongly; but if you
put any of the other three pieces under A, that it may touch any of them, he
will not by any means lift it up. If you apply the Loadstone unto B, he will
take it up very weakly, and C somewhat more strongly, but D strongest of all
these three, yet not comparable to the strength wherewith he takes up A.
Again, although the Loadstone takes up B but weakly, yet if you place B upon
A, he will take them both very strongly; yea more, place B upon C, these two
upon D, all three upon A, apply the Loadstone unto B, being the uppermost, and
he will lift them all up very easily.

The cause hereof is, when a Loadstone with his double cappe is placed upon A,
the force of both ends striving in that piece of iron paralel-wise unto the
Axis of the stone, the North and South forces are driven more closely unto
their proper ends. But in B, (because of the intermediate copper) there can be
no such close driving of his forces into their proper ends, as was in A: and
therefore the Loadstone lifts up B, but only as if his two ends were two
little loose pieces of iron, hanging in the air, and the intermediate copper a
burden upon them. But placing B upon A, A in the manner (as it were) of a
bridge, joins the two ends together into their former combats, and the two
ends of B, forasmuch as they are but (as it were) two loose pieces of iron
hanging in the air, the two forces of the Loadstone North and South,
distinctly and severally pass through them downwards into A, which it could not
do, if it had been one entire piece of iron: and so all those four pieces,
being placed one upon another, so that A be undermost, whether directly or
sidewise, the Loadstone will easily lift them all up, and not otherwise.

When a Loadstone lifts up iron at one end only, the virtue of the stone is
infused into the whole body downward of that iron, if it be not very long.

But when by the means of the double cappes, both ends do lift iron jointly
together, he infuseth very small force downward into the body of the iron that
it lifts up for the forces of the both ends are so striving in a collateral
line of the iron, parallel unto the Axis of the stone, that whereas a good
Magnet lifting up at one end, will extend his virtue downwards twelve or
fourteen inches, in applying both ends unto the iron, by the means of the
double caps, he will not extend his force downward the distance of one inch,
nor with any strength the distance of half an inch, as in this former example.

If a Magnet will lift at one end a pound of iron, fasten you half an ounce of
iron unto four ounces of wood, or any other substance saving iron, and he will
never take it up, because his virtue can pierce but only that half ounce, and
has no power to enter into the other substance; and that small portion of
virtue, contained in the half ounce, cannot hold up the other strange
substance. But this very same Magnet, by the means of double caps laying hold
of a piece of iron fitted for the purpose, and of this fashion, being but half
an ounce, may very well and readily take up three pounds of any other substance
whatsoever that is fastened unto it, because that the whole force of the stone
being employed in the strife of the contrary ends, in the iron paralell-wise,
unto the Axis of the stone, each end apprehends and lifts up this piece of
iron and a great portion of any other substance that is fastened unto it, and
his whole force being employed herein, all his former vigor, upward,
downward, or endlong, is as it were fettered and imprisoned, that until you
loose him of these fetters, he is not able at either end to take up one
quarter of that which he did before.

Pliny in his natural history writes, that Dinocrates that famous Architect
builder of Alexandria, at Ptolemies commandment began to vault a Temple with
Magnets, that there might seem to hang in the air the image of his sister
Arsinoe, made of iron for that purpose: but both Dinocrates and Ptolemie dying
in the mean space, that enterprise ceased. Neither indeed (if they both had
lived) could it ever have come to pass by that means, by reason of two
impossibilities: The one is, that by the force of the Loadstones, nothing can
so hang in the air, but that it either must touch the stone it self, or some
other intermediate substance between it and the stone, that barreth it from
coming to the stone it self. For example, lay two or three needles upon a
smooth table, put a silver or pewter plate upon them, and upon the plate a
Loadstone, then lift up the plate aloft with the Loadstone lying still upon it,
and you shall see the needles hanging indeed in the air endlong, and if you
move the stone about the plate, following still underneath, but evermore
touching the plate, which is the intermediate body, that keeps them from
coming to touch the stone, which otherwise by their natural inclination very
speedily they would do. But as for that image of Arsinoe; how had it been
possible for it to have touched at once, mediately or immediately, so great a
number of Magnets, whereof the pretended vault must needs have consisted? The
other is, that such a multitude of Magnets would nothing but confound the one
the others forces, so that one of them alone being solitary and severed from
his company, might show more force then all that insociable society could do,
each one hindering the efficacy of the other. Much like a teeme of many
horses, where every one drawing his sundry way, might soon with disordered
stretching tire himself and his fellows, but never move the load one jot
from the place. Insomuch as one (and possibly the worst) would do more good
alone, where he might orderly and freely use his own strength, then he and
all the many of them could do being joined together in vicinitie of bodies,
but extremely distracted through contrariety of courses.

The only way to perform such a matter (if it were worth a doing) would be to
prepare one mighty great Loadstone of excellent goodness: which having his
due proportion, after an extended ouall form, should be sitted with double
cappes, and so placed in the roof of a building, that his Axis be parallel to
the Horizon: in this sort (out of all doubt) a fair large image might be held
up very strongly by such a Magnet, let the stuff or substance thereof be
whatsoever, (howbeit the lighter the better) so that there be fastened unto the
uppermost part of the Image a small piece of iron accordingly prepared and
placed for the two prominent ends of the double cappes of the stone, to lay
hold thereon. But enough hereof.

In the capping of Magnets, this general rule is to be observed, that they
ought to be made of the finest and softest iron, and not of steel: the weight
also, which the Magnet takes up, should be of the like iron, and not of
steel, as aforesaid. For although steel retains at the least ten times as
much virtue as iron, when it is once separated from the stone, can do; yet as
long as there is any contiguitie between the stone and them, he holds iron
more strongly then steel. Both which differences in either of them by manifest
experience are certain, and seem to proceed of notable fastness or
closeness in the steel above the iron; by means whereof the magneticall
virtue does longer and more forcibly continue in that then in this: even as
fire more mightily possesses, and for a greater space abides in stone, or any
such firm or solid matter, then in wood, or straw, or the like thin and
hollow substances: and therefore those compasse-makers, that make the wiers of
their flies for sailing compasses of mere iron, ought not by any means to be
suffered: for to gain two pence in a compass (and scarcely that) they
intollerably abuse those that travel by sea, to their great danger and
mischief.

CHAP. VI. Of cementing and peecing of Loadstones.
FOr your Simmon, do thus: Take the fine powder of a Loadstone, half so much
powder of new brick made very small and subtle, one part of Burgundy pitch,
half so much Rossen, a small portion of unwrought wax: mingle all these
together very well upon a soft fire, and make the whole mass in little roules.
Now when you will cement a stone, do thus: heat the two pieces of the stone
very hot, and likewise the simmon, then struck the places that you will soder,
over with the simmon very thinly, and join them somewhat hard together,
letting them so stand until they be cold, and you shall have it fully as
strong, as if it were an entire stone of it self, and not to be severed but by
great heat of fire. In peecing of the Loadstones, there must diligent heed be
taken to the nature of the Loadstone in general, and also to those particular
pieces which you would join together. The Loadstone in general (as it is
showed before) that his force issues (as it were) from a center in the middle
of the stone, to all the superficies thereof universally, but most strongly
unto the Poles from the middle, one way the stone is all of a Northerly nature,
and all of it Southerly the other way. For example.



A. is the North end, B. the South end of a Loadstone, D. the middle. Suppose
you cut off a piece at C, then shall D. be no more the middle, but it shall be
a part of the North of the stone, and the middle is removed nearer B, and the
virtue of North and South does not now divide it self at D (as it did before)
but D. is now become a part of the North end of the stone, which it was not
before. In this example following let there be two Loadstones, the one longer
then the other, the North of both noted with A, the South with B, the middle of
the shorter, where the North and South properties do part, is C. Suppose you
will fasten these two with simmon, the end B. of the shorter unto the end A. of
the longer, so shall these two become one Loadstone, and not only C, which was
the middle (where the North and South properties did part) in the little one,
is now become a part of the North end in this conjoined Loadstone, but also
even B. it self, which was in the short one the very South Pole, is now in
this become part of the North portion, the middle of this (where the North and
South properties do part) being in E, and these two Magnets, which had each of
them two points, the one North and the other South, being joined together, have
but only two points in all, the one North, the other South. Moreover, if you
have two Loadstones (for example) of like goodness, about four inches a piece
in length, having their North and South points duly at their ends, if you cut
off at either of their ends half an inch, and conioyne them with the contrary
of the great ones, they will presently have contrary properties unto that which
they had before; so that a needle touched before that would turn North, being
now touched in the self same place will turn South, showing that the virtue
of the two ends does always proceed and extend it self from the body of the
whole Loadstone, and from the whole, shows it self most forcible (as
aforesaid) in the ends; and either of the Loadstones will be in his perfect
goodness, as at the first. If you think good to set two Loadstones together
in such sort, that you would have the augmentation only in thickness, and not
in length, then do thus: If they be both of one length, grind them so that
they may join close, the broad side of the one agreeing with the broad side of
the other, having North upon North, and South upon South, as in this example.



A. must be joined upon A, and B. upon B: but if you join the two so, that A.
lights upon B, you mar the new Magnet, by confounding his forces.
Notwithstanding if you like to join them in length only, not in thickness,
then indeed must you combine B. and A, and not A. and A, nor B. and B, lest
here also you incur the former inconvenience, of confusion of forces. Take
another example: Suppose a Loadstone to be long and somewhat round, smaller at
one end then at the other, the smaller end to be North signed with A, the other
South signed with B: let this Magnet be divided long-wayes into two equal
parts, through both the Poles, A. and B.



And let one of these halfes be placed upon a piece of glass or a smooth
Table; certain it is, that if you do offer to touch A, of this, with A, of the
other, this A will turn away from that, which (the stone being entire) it did
join with before: Or if you offer B, unto B, it will do the like. And no
marvel, for in this case of touching A, with A, or B, with B: what else in
effect do you, but attempt to join the two halfes in length and that at like
ends? A thing directly repugnant to the principles of Magneticall Philosophy.
But let me admonish you, to put the rounder side of the stone downwards, next
unto the glass, that it may turn the quicker: yet if the stone be excellent
it will do the same also upon the flat side. Moreover if you place this two
halfes, the one upon the other precisely as they were at the first, they will
agree very well: because they are as one, and the selfsame Magnet. But if you
place them the one swaruing from the other, at either end, then will A, of the
one, turn about unto B, of the other; because they are now as two several and
diverse Magnets. For the better conceiving hereof, you are to remember, that
every part of a Loadstone (be it an half or any other) being once divided from
the whole, is (as Schoolmen call it) Totum integrale, a whole Loadstone by it
self, utterly diverse and estranged from that whole, whose part before it was,
and therefore reteineth distinctly in it self, all the properties of a
Loadstone, though not so strong, as the whole had when this was joined
thereunto.

In Loadstones there is a part truly said to be divided from the whole, when
the points of that part, or ends, or Poles (and so, by necessary consequence,
the Axis and Equator, in which the universal frame of Magneticall power
consists, have a position diverse from the Poles or points of the whole. For
this cause, in the last example the one half A: B: being supposed to swerve
from the other half B: A: at either end, must needs presently be divided from
it, and now cannot be pars integri, but is of necessity Totum integrale, a
several and absolute Magnet of it self, and so by an essential property
common to all Magnets, coueteth with his point A, the contrary B: of that which
is under it. Wherefore like as exact agreement is between two Mathematical
figures when being applied together, the extremes of the one, do precisely
fall upon the extremes of the other, each upon his correspondent extreme, and
is made one therewith: even such is the perfect composition or setting together
of the parts of a Magneticall body, and namely of those two equal parts before
exemplified, you must so join one upon another, that the two extremes, or
ends, be always of the same nature Northerly, or Southerly, in both parts: And
that by due application of the parts, the two Northerly ends be united, and
become one, as also the two Southerly ends after the same manner. But if these
parts, being of equal length be joined longwise, the North of the one, unto
the South of the other; those two ends that were (being now no ends but the
just middle of one Magnet) have lost their properties which they had, when they
were ends. For those properties, by this unition, are abolished: but their
other ends still reserve their former and stronger virtues of North and South:
And so, according unto Magneticall nature, one Magnet shall have but two Poles,
the one North, the other South. Again, if you will piece two Loadstones
together in thicknes, the one of the^ being longer, than the other; then you
must either cut the longer, that it may be fit in length, unto the shorter; or
else piece the shorter in such sort as is before described that he be equal in
length to the longer, and what soever disorderly parts perhaps shall be in any
of them, they may, even after they are cemented, very well be ground away. Also
if there be holes or dents, with little pieces of Loadstones cemented (their
points being observed) they may be filled up, without any manner of damage or
deformity, no more than there had not been any such at all. And after this
method you may (with labor and industry) of many Magnets, make one as huge,
and of what form you please. And although the Magnets of this body,
magnetically compact (as I have here showed) were never so many in number, yet
the whole will have but two principal points, the one North, the other South,
even as if it were one natural Loadstone: and all of them will contribute
their forces, unto those two points; So that if there were twenty of them,
being after this order cemented together into one body, the whole would have
but two points, but if you will place them in a vault, according to a Masons
trade they will have 40 points, twenty North, and as many South, and will work
the like effect in drawing iron, as (to use the former gross similitude) if a
teeme of horses were set in their traces contrary the one to the other, the one
to pull one way, the other another. As for the Turks Mahomet, hanging in the
air with his iron chest it is a most gross untruth, and utterly impossible is
it for any thing so to hang in the air by any Magneticall power, but that
either it must touch the stone it self, or else some intermediate body, that
hinders it from coming to the stone (like as before I have showed) or else
some stay below to keep it from ascending, as some small wier that may scantly
be seen or perceived.

CHAP. VII. Of the variation of the Magneticall Needle with the Appurtenances
thereunto belonging.
THE variation of the Magneticall Needle, being aptly fitted and placed upon
his pin, is nothing else, but the swaruing of the pointing thereof in the
Horizon, from the meridian line there, the portion of the Horizon intercepted
between the true Meridian line and this pointing, shows of what quantity
the variation is, and gives it his name, to wit, which way it lies, either
Easterly, or Westerly, and it is observed by either end of the needle as you
please.

In times past men observed only by the North end of the needle, because they
understood not that the Loadstone has a South virtue, as well as a North; And
therefore did touch their needles and wyars of their compasses always for the
North only, leaving those ends of the wyars bare, that they might be refreshed
with a new touch at any time afterward: but the other ends they covered, not
knowing that they were also apt to receive as forcible a virtue from the
Loadstone for the South, as the other for the North. For the right
understanding of the variation, with his necessary dependants, we must use the
means of two circles: The one of them I will call the Magneticall Almicanter;
The other is already known by the name of the Magneticall Meridian.

This Magneticall Almicanter is a circle parallel unto the Horizon, whose
center is the vertical point, and is described by the distance between the
vertical point, and the nearer Pole of the earth. The true Magneticall Pole is
the pole of the earth; The magneticall respective Pole, or (which is all one)
the Pole of the Magneticall Meridian, is a point in the Magneticall almicanter,
distant Easterly or Westerly from the true pole as many degrees in that
almicanter, as the variation of that place contains in the Horizon, but
always it is in the contrary part of the true Meridian, that is, if the
variation of the South point of the needle be Easterly the respective pole is
Westerly: but if you observe with the North end of the needle, the respective
pole and the variation are both one way in all our Northern Climates. If the
variation of the South point of the needle be Westerly, then is the respective
pole so many degrees in the said almicanter Easterly, and therefore always of
the same height with the true pole above the Horizon. For since all great
Circles of the globe do necessarily cut one another in two points into two
equal parts: these two therefore must needs do even so in the Zenith and
Nadir, by their very definitions; So that these two points (the Zenith and
Nadir) are always alike common unto them both, as well unto the true, as unto
the Magneticall Meridian.

Where-hence it follows necessarily, that always the one half of the
magneticall meridian is on the East Side, and the other on the West side of the
true meridian, the common Zenith and Nadir evermore keeping their equal
distances from the Poles* of the one of them, as they do from the other. For
example: Suppose the common Zenith to be in the Equator, you sailing East or
West, as long as there is no variation, there is no magneticall meridian, there
are no magneticall Poles, but those of the world. But as soon as, sailing
still under the line you do find a variation it is the magneticall meridian,
that by his swaruing from the true meridian of the world in the Horizon shows
the quantity of the variation, and gives it also the denomination of Easterly
or Westerly, and his axis is the line of variation. But supposing the common
Zenith, to be in any parallel, between the Equator and the Pole, then is it
not the axis, but some other Diameter of the magneticall meridian, which
shows the variation in the Horizon; And the magneticall meridian evermore
cutteth just so many degrees of the magneticall almicanter on the one side of
the true meridian, as the same Magneticall Pole is distant in the same
almicanter, on the other side of the true Meridian from the Pole of the World.
And this is to be understood in correspondent manner, as well of the South
Hemisphere, as of the North.

The respective Magneticall meridian (where any variation is) is a circle that
passes by the vertical point and the Nadir, and both the respective Poles,
crossing the Horizon at right angles in the points of variation, of which
circle the line of variation is a Diameter, but where there is no variation the
true and Magneticall meridian are both one and the self same, and so in like
manner are their Diameters. Those circles and poles are termed respective
because that in every place where any variation is, the Magneticall needle does
respect them, as well in the property of direction, as in that of declination,
or inclination. For thus also very well it may be termed. By the property of
direction, I do mean, with Doctor Gilbert, the Horizontall motion of the
Magneticall needle: By the declination, or inclination, I mean the descending,
and (as it were) the sinking motion of the need under the Horizon, in his
proper Azimath, or Magneticall meridian; But if there be no variation, the
needle always points unto the true Meridian of the earth, and toward the
Poles thereof, in both those properties. The true Poles of the earth (which are
those two points equally distant from each part of the Aequinoctiall of the
earth are always the self same. The respective Poles alter with every
Horizon, where there is any variation, but never out of the aforenamed
almicanter of that place. The causes of the differences of the respective Poles
and Meridians from the true Poles and meridians, and so of all variations, are
only two; The chief and most general is the vastenesse of the Ocean sea, by
moistness whereof the Magneticall collateral force of so much earth as it
covers, is much hindered and dulled. And by that means the next great
Continent has more power over the correspondent end of the Magneticall needle,
then otherwise it could have if all were alike one entire Continent: and
therefore causes the directive property of the needle somewhat to swerve
toward that way, which is that, which we call variation; but yet the
vastenesse of the Ocean does not hinder the declination of the Magneticall
needle; Because his hangings consists but in length and breadth, and not in
depth. For although in comparison of a pond or river, the sea is said to be of
a wonderful depth, yet if this depth be compared with a Semidiameter of the
earth, it bears a very exceeding small proportion, nothing at all to hinder
the mighty magneticall declinatory force of the whole earth; For the greatest
depth that ever any man of skill esteemed it at, was not above two English
mile, at the uttermost, when as daily experience makes it manifest, that a
great Continent will show his Magneticall collateral force, by causing a
variation, above two hundred miles of from the place, and therefore Doctor
Gilberts fear in that point I take to be needless, supposing a variation of
declination. The second cause of variation, is any great mountainous region not
far of, when a man is in some great Latitude toward either of the Poles: if
that mountainous region lie Easterly or Westerly from you, it will cause the
needle somewhat to swerve that way. But variations of this sort are of small
continuance, and in sailing subject unto sudaine alterations, yea many times
quite contrary from Westerly to Easterly and afterward back again within
short space: as our first famous Pilote Steven Borough found by his experience
in the discovery of the Scythian seacoast between the north Cape of Finmarke
and Vaygates. The reason whereof ought heedfully to be regarded which is that
the Magneticall force of the whole earth, does (as in all Magnets) show it
self most strongely in the two Poles thereof, and in those places which are
near unto them: but always it must be remembered, that all the force they have
does issue out of the whole terrestrial body, as it does likewise in all
Magnets out of the body of the Magnet: and therefore in any part of the
superficies of the whole terrestrial body, it is impossible that any variation
be above 90. degrees, because the virtue of the whole can never be ouerswaied
by the imperfection of a part, and especially of so small a part as any one
portion of the Ocean is in his very superficies, in respect of the body of the
whole earth: yea I am thoroughly persuaded, that there never was nor ever will
be any variation, by any good observation found for to be so much as ninety;
neither any show of so great variation any where, except it be very near unto
either of the Poles, where there is small credit to be given to the observing
of any variation: for the variation being (as aforesaid) the difference of the
pointing of the magneticall Needle in the Horizon from the true Meridian, for
as much as in places near the Pole, there is no manner of certainty of either
of these, it is not possible to find the variation, if there be any. The
reason whereof is this, no man may travel those Seas, but whiles the Sun
abides on that side of the Equator, whereby they have continual day, and by
that means are secluded from any help of the stars, neither if they might
be seen, would they bring any great help. For the difference of height in
many hours is so small, that by a very large instrument a diligent obseruer
with great pains will hardly find the Meridian Line, all the Meridians
themselves coming so near one to another, and meeting in the Pole, and their
Horizon being in a manner parallel unto the Aequinoctiall. And as for the
horizontall magneticall Needles, to show their pointing in the Horizon as they
were wont to do, they coming into this climate may say, Fuimus Troes. Their
direction is as it were giddy and uncertain, and when their center comes
unto the Pole it self, it is quite vanished away; for from thence all the
points of the Horizon are only South, if it be at the North Pole, and North
from the South Pole, and therefore in that place the instrument of declination
is far more sure then the Horizontall Compass. And as in the Poles
themselves there is no direction at all, so of necessity near unto them it
must be a very confused direction. Those two places, that are called the
Poles, have no strength of themselves (as aforesaid) but as it is contributed
unto them of the whole. As in a Magnet, if you break off a piece of the
contrary end, the end that is left will be according unto that proportion
diminished in his strength, and the polar piece, that was broken off (be it
never so little) will have two poles as well as the great: so that the two
parts will have four Poles, two of them North, and two South. Put this little
piece that was broken off, in his place again, and then each piece will lose
one of his Poles in the same very instant, and the whole will have but two
Poles, the one North, the other South, as at the first. Again, if you cut off
a piece of one side of a Loadstone, that is brought into a round or an ovall
form, having his Poles marked in their due places at each end, presently both
end will be abridged of part of the force they had, and the Poles themselves
will be removed unto the other side, from the places that were marked, and
those marks will stand but for idle ciphers in comparison of that they were
before. Again, take a Magnet of a round or an extended ovall form, (I do
still exemplify in these, because they are of all others, as I have often
admonished, for all magneticall proofs the most excellent forms) and set
marks on the two Poles, take a fine needle, or any straight small wier, and
set it on the aequinoctiall, (I mean thereby the middle between the two ends
of the stone) then will it point directly toward each Pole, if the stone be
sound without any flawes, or any other gross substance (as may be)
intermingled with it: and if you thrust this needle toward either end,
according unto his own direction he will trace you a circle right over both of
these marked Poles, which is the true Meridian of the stone. But if this stone
has in either of the sides any imperfection, when the needle comes unto the
edge or brinke thereof, it will swerve somewhat toward the sounder side, and
will point to neither of the true Poles. And if a circle be drawn according
to his pointing, as he stands still in that place, this shall be a
respective Meridian of that stone, proper unto that place: and the Poles. the
respective Poles, differing from the true Meridian of the stone and his Poles.
Now if you thrust the needle further toward the end, upon the brinke of this
imperfection, it will not point (as before) but either further off, or nearer
toward the true Poles* and will give his direction for a new respective
Meridian; and new respective Poles, And in such manner infinitely, if you place
the needle in the middle of this imperfection, equally distant from the sound
parts, then will it indeed point toward the true Poles of the stone, And the
Consequence hereof is the maine reason, that toward the midst of the Ocean;
and likewise of any great continent there is no variation. Thus may you
especially in a round Loadstone (as in a lively example) see the true causes of
all the variations that are in the whole world, reckoning as much space as the
Ocean covers, to be some imperfection in the body of the whole, in respect
of the Horizontall motion of the Compass. For the evidence of the truth
hereof, let a man examine generally the variations of our most expert
Nauigators (Although by reason of their diversities of the sets of their
Compasses, and unfitness and unapt handling of their instruments, they very
seldom times agree among themselves) observed in the Atlanticke Ocean, from
the Equator unto the parts of Norway, all along the East coast from the
Meridian of the Azores: And in like manner from the Equator to the parts of
New Foundland and upwards, all along the Western Coast from the Azores, as
far North, as heereunto has been discovered, and he shall find the
ordinary practice to testify the truth hereof, as also after the same sort
from the Equator Southward unto the straights of Magellan, and all along the
backeside of America in the South Sea: and on the East Coast unto the Cape of
Bona speranza, and he shall perceive the like agreement: But in sailing from
the Cape of Bona speranza, farther Eastward, that sometime they do find it
otherwise, the cause is the different manner of the situation of the South, as
yet undiscovered Continent. And whereas in the midst of the Atlanticke Ocean,
about 30. leagues Westwards from the Azores, they find no variation at all, no
marvel thereof: For it is about the middle distance between the two great
Continents of America and ours.

Wherefore the round Loadstone is significantly termed by Doct. Gilbert
Terrella, that is, a little, or rather a very little Earth: For it represents
in an exceeding small model (as it were) the admirable properties magneticall
of the huge Globe of the earth. Herein also we may behold the reason why,
the magneticall needle varieth least in the Aequinoctiall, and most toward the
Pole, and in the Poles themselves gives no direction at all: For proof
hereof, take a needle and place it upon the Aequinoctial of the stone, there
you shall see him stand equally balanced and very strongly, so that if you
turn him from his direction, as soon as you let him go, he will presently
turn unto it again. The reason is, because each Pole does equally strengthen
his correspondent end of the needle. Move this needle toward either of the
Poles, then does the nearer Pole strengthen his end of the needle; but the
farther (because of the distance) cannot do the like unto his, but very
weakly, and this needle will not stand any more equally balanced (as it did in
the Aequinoctiall) but that end next the Pole will couch down, and the other
will rise up. For on the North side of the Equator, the true South end is
predominant, and on the other the North end has the mastery. And that this is
also in the earth it self, all our late Travelers confirm unto us by their
daily experience, and all the very Artizans and needlediall-makers in the world
must needs be daily witnesses of it. As for example: Let any workman in our
Climate make a needle for a dial, when he has fitted it and placed it on the
pin, that it may stand thereon equally balanced and parallel to the Horizon
touch it with the Magnet, then presently that which points toward the North
will hang down (yea, although you touch only with the South end) and will not
stand, as before the touch equally balanced and parallel to the Horizon:
except you cut or file somewhat from that end, that hangs down; or else add
a piece of wax or some other thing unto the other end of the needle to
counterpoise it, and make it stand equidistant as it did at the first setting
on: and this is a thing very certain, that this Northerly descent of the
needle, will be more or less in all places of Northerly Latitude: In the
greater Latitude the more, and in the lesser Latitude the less. But if any
traveler carry this needle beyond the Equator in the like Latitude Southerly,
that end which tends downwards in the Northerly, will rise up in the
Southerly, and the other sincke down, even as much: and the nearer you
travail toward either Pole, the more, that end which points toward the
Pole, will tend downwards: This is most certain in every Diall-needle: but a
great deal more apparent it is in a long one, then it is in a short one. We
cannot find that the property of direction by the Magnetical needle has been
vulgarly practiced (for sailing) much above 200. years. And as for the
property of declination under the Horizon, thereby to show the Latitude by the
Instrument thereunto belonging, it is as yet a very new-come guest into the
world, borne and bred with us in England, and (except it be in exceeding few
men's hands) not yet in use, much less come unto his perfection. But this it
not to be marvelled at: because it is scantly sixteen years old; neither is
it to be wondered if any Critical fellows do contemn and deride it.
Forasmuch as either their want of knowledge, or of patience, will not give them
leave truly to consider of it. But what Nauigator, or rather Nugator soever
contemns it, shall be sure to repent it if ever he come to his right wits
to consider what it is that he has contemned. And although the needles for
direction and declination do differ much in their shapes, each from other; yet
the properties are both one and the self same. For the needles for direction
do decline (as aforesaid) as far as the unfitness of their form and
placing will permit them: and the declining needle will not work, but only in
his Magneticall Meridian, which himself will find out, if you turn the
Instrument about, until the needle show his least declination under the
Horizon, and there do play up and down and stop in the end in the same place
again. But if you would have a needle fitted to show both properties, do thus,
cause a needle to be made a bout six inches long, even and smooth, saving
that he must be a little bigger in the middle, then instead of an Axis (which
declinatory needles have) let him have a small hole drilled precisely in the
midst, and this hole being very small, let it be somewhat wider outward on
each side then in the midst, (which our workmen call sinckboared) where it
must be left very sharp, even almost as the edge of a knife: put through this
hole a small verginall lattine wiar, and fit the needle so that it hang
precisely even upon this wiar, instead of an Axletree: then touch him with the
Loadstone, and you shall presently see the end that should point toward the
North, decline or bend down to his due place of declination, if he be placed
in the Magneticall Meridian; set a little piece of wax or any other thing upon
the contrary part for a counterpoyse that the needle may stand parallel with
the Horizon, then if it stand at right angles with that verginall wiar, it is
certainly in the Magneticall Meridian: otherwise it will never stand at right
angles, but will make his sharper angle always toward the Magneticall
Meridian. So that hanging in this counterpoise if you turn about the wiar
until the needle do make right Angles with it, then does the needle by his
directive virtue point unto the Magneticall Meridian line. Take off the
counterpoise, then it shows the declination for that place, and by consequent
the Latitude, if you in that manner place him in the Instrument of declination;
so that one and the self same needle in the same place only, by taking off,
and putting on a little piece of wax, shows plainly both those properties of
directions and declinations, as in like manner every inclinatory needle will
do, if the points of his Axis be sharp, and held in his box parallel unto
the Horizon, he will show both those properties of direction and declination: A
fine piece of corcke or leather, or any tough snbstance may serve this needle
for a counterpoyse in all Latitudes by thrusting it toward the center in less
Latitudes, and toward the end in the greater, and I think it not impossible,
but that a skillful Geometrician may so graduate the one half of such a
needle, that it alone with his counterpoyse, may be a means to give a
probable conjecture for the Latitude of any place whatsoever.

CHAP. VIII. A discovery of errors committed in making and touching
Magneticall Needles and Wyars of sailing Compasses, with an advise for the true
and right making and touching of them.
FIrst the wyars that are commonly made both with us, and in foreign
countries, are of so base and drossie iron, not apt nor sufficient to receive
the tenth part of the virtue that fine steel wyar could do.

Secondly, the ends of the wiars be for the most part not filed smooth nor
fitted even together upon the Axis of the fly; By means whereof the touch of
the stone is more dully received, and the standing of the fly, the more
uncertain, the magneticall force not being in the true axis thereof.

Thirdly, their manner of touching the wiars is altogether pitiful and
ridiculous. For with a Magnet having a point (for seldom times they have a
stone so well fashioned, that both points are eminent) that touches to the
North (And such an one, though he be but weak is preferred among them before
another, though much stronger that touches to the South) they rub to and fro
those ends of the wiars, which they would have stand Northerly. Wherein what
do they else, but play (as it were) fast and loose, not considering (as the
truth is indeed) that every touch from the ends of the wairs toward the Center
of the fly with-draweth backeagain that force, which the contrary touch did
give them, and therefore seldom give they above one quarter of that strength,
and sometimes not so much, which otherwise with the very same stone they might
do, if they ordered all things as they should: yea, I am infallibly assured
(for I have had certain experience of it) that with the self same stone, you
may give fully as much, and rather more force, touching in such sort, as
immediately shall be declared on the upper face of the fly: over against the
wiars (the card being between) then they do by touching the very end of the
wiars themselves after their wonted fashion: whenever therefore a needle is
to be touched, besides the goodness and quantity, you must have a regard to
the form of your stone, namely, whether it has both the North and South
points eminent and forcible, or only the one. For if it has both, begin
your touching near unto the middle pressing the true North point, before
specified of the stone all along from thence, unto the North pointing end of
the needle; iterating those touches four or five times, always making some
stay with the stone at the end of the needle. The like also must you do from
the middle with the other end of the stone unto the other end of the needle.
But if the stone have but one forcible point, then if it be the true North,
begin your touching at the South pointing end of the needle, pressing it all
along to the North, end, itterating this four or five trmes, and then once or
twice only from the middle unto that end, If the stone has but the South
point, touch the needle accordingly from the other end; For even as the virtue
of the stone it self is a Semidiameter (having his beginnning (as before is
mentioned) in the center of the stone, even so the force which he imparteth
unto the needle, is in the nature of a Semidiameter from the middle of the
needle. Insomuch that a needle being touched from the middle, but to one end
with the North of a stone, it does not only cause that end to turn North, but
it transmitteth also a contrary force from the middle into the other end of the
needle, so that the stone be good, and the needle but of a reasonable
convenient size, as you may evidently try in every knife of ordinary goodness
and length. But a plate of steel made at both ends alike, according unto the
form here above described, is much better to show this effect. For when the
blade of a knife is of fine metal, the haft being of course iron, and also of
a diverse form and temper, it is not any way capable of the like force as the
blade is, which is the reason that if you touch the blade of an iron-hafted
knife from the haft unto the point with a Magnet, it will at the point take up
his competent weight, touch it back again unto the uttermost end of the haft
it will take up little or nothing: Try the like with such a plate or steel, and
you shall find it take up fully as much at the one end as it did at the other:
but if you will bring his touch unto the middle, it will take up little or
nothing at any end, and nothing at all in the middle it self:



The reason here of is this, the Magnet gives his force (Secundum mensuram
recipientis) according to the capacity of that which receives it, and that
ever more after his own nature, which is to have his force strong in his ends,
and none at all in the middle, if you touch the blade from the middle, with
either end of the stone, the other end of the haft will immediate receive and
show the contrary quality: even so also will it come to pass, if you make
proof with any Magneticall needle, although that his force will be faint and
weak in comparison of the other. And in your touching you must observe, that
in pressing with the stone from the middle of the needle unto the end, as you
bring your hand backward to iterate the touch, you must lift your hand somewhat
high, and not bring it backward, close to the needle. For that would diminish
the strength of the touch. But if that end of the needle be also touched with
the other end of the stone, in manner as above I have rehearsed, then shall he
at each end be a great deal the more strong, and the contrary fainter forces
shall recoile and settle in the middle of the needle, where they can nothing at
all disturb the motion thereof.

CHAP. IX. Of the touching with a Laadstone capped and without the cappe.
BY capping, is meant the placing of two pieces of iron handsomely fitted and
fastened upon the two points of the stone, for iron for this purpose is better
then steel. And likewise concerning the the weight that is to be lifted up,
it is better to be made of soft iron then of steel, and the stone will lift
more thereof, as long as there is contiguity: but if if the iron and steel be
separated from the contiguity of the stone, the steel will always carry at
the least ten times more virtue then the iron, as is before mentioned. Now
whether it were best to touch the wiers with a Magnet being thus capped, or
with the bare stone it self, some there be that make a question. I have been
told by one of great skill and practice, that he found by experience, the
Compass touched with a capped stone, not to receive his force so well, as the
other, and the party coming unto me, when he was to undertake a long voyage,
to have his compass touched, requested me in any wise to do it with the bare
stone: But yet I think it were good, that this be confirmed by more then one
man's experience, before it be believed, because by some error he might possibly
mistake the matter. Sure I am that the capped stone gives somewhat more virtue
in his touch, and by all experience that I have made, I find it to continue as
firmly and as long. Howbeit I refer me herein to the ttiall of others
also. A man may therefore touch the wiars first with the bare stone, and then
with the same being capped, or contrariwise to be surer of the greater force,
and yet if any shall imagine the difference of the strength of the touch, to be
according to the taking up of iron with the cap or without it, he is very
greatly deceived. For I have osten tried them both, but never could see the
touching strength in the needle to be increased half a quarter more with the
cap then without it; whereas I have always (especially if the stone were very
good) found that the stone will lift at the least ten times as much iron: yea, a
great deal more, (and sometimes twenty times) with the cap (if it be
artificially fitted) then he is able to do without it.

Some, who would seem to be of great skill, have imagined, that the best way
to add strength to a needle, is with a hammer to give some forcible strokes to
one point of the stone, thereby causing litragges (as it were) or beard, to
hang down from it, and that the needle in his touching, taking some part of
that with him, should have the stronger touch. But they that so suppose deceive
themselves therein: for that beard is nothing else, but the fine dust of the
stone, hanging together by virtue thereof: which being separated from the stone
(although it were a right good one) is not able any whit at all to turn a
needle of it self. The trial is soon made by this means, let them take of
that beard from the stone with a stick, and lay it upon the end of a needle
not touched, and they shall find in it no force at all, nay it is a hurt unto
the needle. For it gives a superfluous burden for a small time, and cannot
but incumber his action, by reason that every one of those little parcels of
dust (though beaten out at one end) has also for his small quantity both a
North and South virtue. And therefore marreth as much as it makes at either
end of the needle. The proof hereof is manifest, if you put off that dust or
beard upon a paper, and hold a Magnet therunder, for as you turn toward the
paper the North or South of the stone, so will every one of those particles in
like sort turn it self, showing thereby a double nature.

CHAP. X. Of the fashioning of the compass needle.
THe Compass needle, being the most admirable and useful instrument of the
whole world, is both amongst ours and other nations for the most part, so
bungerly and absurdly contrived, as nothing more. And therefore entreating now
of the nature and use of the Magnet. I have thought good, also, to employ my
best endeavor, to advance this noblle instrument toward his highest
perfection, being the principal thing, by which the worthy effect of the
Magnet, is made most profitable unto mankind. Herein five things are to be
considered, the substance that it is made of, the form, the weight, the
capitell, and the pin it stands upon: The substance in any wise ought to be
pure steel, and not iron. For most assuredly steel will take at the least
ten times more virtue then iron can do, but especially if it has his right
temper. And that is this: Heat it in the fire until it be past red hot, that
it be whitish hot and qnench it in cold water suddenly: So is it brickle in a
manner as glass it self, and is at that time incapable of the virtue of the
Loadstone. Then must you, laying it upon a plain table, warily rub with fine
sand all the black color from it, if before you put it into the fire, you
annoint it with soape, it will scale white of it self, then heat a bar of
iron well near red hot, and holding one end of the needle with a small pair
of tongs, lay the other end upon the hot bar, and presently you shall see
that end turn from white to a yellowish, and after to a bluish color, then
take that end with your tongs, and do thlike unto the other, thrusting it
forward upon the bar until the color of the whole needle become bluish:
then throw it on a table, and let cool of it self: and so is he of the
excellentest temper, and most capable to receive the greatest power from the
Magnet. If this seem too curious especially for some fashions of needles, then
use but the hammer hardening (as workmen call it) which is well near as good.
As concerning the form, diverse men are of diverse minds, some use a kind of
square one, others a loop (I mean an extended ouall form) and this is most
common. But now a days, a narrow straight place (being somewhat broader in the
middle) is in great request: Of these three I hold the loope or ouall form
(if it be well made) to be the best, which is, that if it be of steel, his
ends be welded together, having a lattin narrow plate, issuing from the
capitell unto the middle of the two sides of the Loope, and there riuetted, and
riuetting, if it be handsomely shouldered in by the workman, is better then
soadering: because, having fitted the lattin plate bearing the capitell unto
the Loope, you may first put your Loope into his temper, and then riuet this
unto him afterward, which otherwise would be marred in the fire, and the wide
Loope is better then the narrow or the straight plate, and that for two
reasons. The one is, hecause, as in a Magnet it self, the force that is in the
whole body, shows it self most strongly in his two poles, even so this being
a Magneticall body, does the like in his ends which are his poles: and the
sides of a wide compassed Loope (being longer, then of a narrower) of the same
length, in the Axis, must needs contain so much the more virtue; the other
reason is, because it supposes the fly in his circular motion more equally
balanced then the other: and therefore were it not for some other
inconveniences, a true circle were best of all, which is that except you mark
the two places, that you would have for the North and Souch, very curiously,
you shall never give him the right touch: yea, very exceeding hardly, although
you do mark them; and also the lattin stay, that holds the capitell, would
be exceeding long and a superfluous burden: but the very best form of all (as
I take it) in all respects is this, a true circle, having his Axis going out
beyond the circle, at each end narrow and narrower, unto a reasonable sharp
point, and being pure steel as the circle it self is, haning in the midst,
a convenient receptacle to place the capitell in.

This circle must have four very small holes drilled through it, equally
distant each from other, for the four cardinal points, and in both the two
points, that issue without the circle, being for North and South of equal
distance between the circle and the end of the point two more, if it be a large
one, otherwise one is enough, according unto this picture following. And this
needle is most fit to be used for the observation of the variation alone
without any fly, as I will show at the latter end of this Treatise.



Whenever you will set this needle unto the fly, you must put the capitell
through the center of the fly very precisely, and placing the points of the
Diameter where you will have them, thrust little small pins through the upper
face of the fly, and those small holes in the needle, the heads of the pinnes
will show you (if the fly be larger then your needle) at what point your
needle stands, and bowing the body of your pinnes (being thrust through those
little holes) close to the card below, will keep it steady at that place, and
from warping also. And so four pins at the four cardinal points will serve
the turn.

Again, if you please for to place this needle upon the upper face of the Card
according unto Steuinius. it is no more but to have the capitell loose, thrust
thorough the center in the bottom of the fly, and the needle placed and
fastened on the top, or upper face of the card.

But if you will have a Magneticall needle to serve only for one size of a
fly, the best way is, instead of the two pinnes in the ends of the Axis, to
have a couple of little half staples and a Flower de luce on one of them, as
you see in the Loope, riuetted there. That in turning about the needle, they
may still keep the fly close unto it, and so fasten it with a skrew upon the
capitell wheresoever you please.

As for his weight it must be according unto his largeness, and the weight is
one principal cause, that very large compasses are unprofitable. For the
weight of the large card, and heavy needle, pressing upon the pin, will
cause the motion of the fly to be dull and uncertain, and therefore let the
pastboard be no heavier then you must needs; and for the size of six inches
Diameter of your past-board, and a needle of that length. I know that a needle
of half an ounce weight, and half a quarterne at the uttermost (if a good
workman have it in hand) will be very fully sufficient, of what form soever.

The capitell ought to be lattin, and hammer hardened, well and truly boared,
not too shallow, but of a good convenient depth and wideness at the bottom,
fitting the pin it stands upon at the top. The pin ought to be either of
lattin, or copper, and not of iron or steel, as some use; for they are very
subject to rust: and the steel, especially by long use, will wear a little
hole in the top of the capitell, and by that means the Compass becomes
dull, and they hardly (if ever) will find the reason of it; for the hole will
be passing small, and entering an exceeding little way in, and yet disturbeth
all. Moreover, in any wise there must be always an especial diligent care had
of fitness between the capitell and the pin. Oteerwise, all things else
appertaining unto the compass are nothing worth. This pin must be very
firmly fixed in the just center of the box, and the bottom marked, that
whenever you take it off to sharpen the pin (which use will make blunt) you
may set him in the same place again.

As I have said that in a Magnet it self, the virtue is in the whole body, and
shows it self most forcible in his poles; even so likewise our
Compasseneedle, being a Magneticall body, shows his force in his ends, which
are his poles, although that force does proceed out of the whole body of the
Needle. Which now I thought good to make apparent by an evident demonstration:
I caused my workman to make a needle of a Loop fashion, 8. inches long, or
ouall form in all respects fitted to be set unto a fly, saving that there was
but one inch or a little more at each end of steel, all the intermediate part
between the two ends, being of brass: These two ends I did touch with the
North and South ends of a very good Magnet: And whereas in a true Magneticall
Needle, I should have had but two points, the one North and the other South,
this Mongrell yielded me six, the two ends adjoining unto the brass of
contrary natures unto the sharp points, and would no more do the office of a
Magneticall needle then a wooden stick, because the virtue was not in the
whole, and so communicated unto the two ends, but each end was a total of
himself, being separated, and (as it were) divorced, the one from all
community with the other by that intermediate brass: the which being taken
away, and the two forkes joined together for that length, presently they became
one perfect true Magneticall Needle, and the virtue of those four confused
points, which ere while was was lost in the forkes, will presently be found in
the two sharp ends, and now his natural seats: Both these ends of steel were
fastened unto the brass, and then that needle had no Magneticall motion; but
being taken off, and joined together, they presently (without any further
touching of them) became a true Magneticall Needle.





To conclude this chapter of the Compasse-needle, The needle that is still
working upon his pin continually will keep his force better, then that which
is otherwise laid up, although there be no doubt of the other, for a man's
whole age, or longer, if it be of good metal, and kept from open air and
rust, and from too near vicinity of iron, but especially of any Loadstone. No
better keeping from rust, then by varnishing him, although it be but with a
drop or two of Linseed oil alone; the needle that is continually upon his
pin, is still strengthened by the Magneticall power of the earth, setting
himself always toward the Poles thereof (which the other cannot do) and
needs only to have his pin sharpened now and then: The which of all the
faults incident unto the Compass, is most easily and safely amended. And yet,
if it be not very well looked unto, it disturbeth all the operation of the
Compass more then any other. And diverse wrong themselves in being too busy in
often touching of their Compasses, the fault being in this which no touching
can amend.

CHAP. XI. A Sailing Compass fitted for observing at Sea the variation,
amplitude of either sun or stars, capes or trendings, etc.
I Have thought good to conclude this short Treatise of Magneticall
aduertisements, with a little additament unto the ordinary sailing Compass,
fitting him thereby to be answerable unto the title here prefixed, as also
with a comparison of the several uses, of the Horizontall and inclinatory
needles: Let the glass of the inner box of the Compass be of good
thickness and strength (but yet clear) and even, those that come from Venice
for looking glasses before the foil be set on are the best, if a man may have
them large enough. Let this glass be very well fitted unto the box, and
simmond underneath upon the shouldring that bears up the glass, with a
mixture of wax, turpentine, sallet oil and rosin mingled together: or with
any other simmon as you shall think good, above upon the glass let there be a
ring of thin pastboard, of the breadth of the shouldring underneath, in like
manner simmoned on: then must you have a circle of lattin about the breadth of
the pastboard ring, of convenient thick nesse for strength: which must be
divided into degrees: This circle must have a plate of latten, of half an inch
broad or broader, according unto the largeness of the circle for strength,
that must cross over the midst of the circle, cut out of the same place with
the circle, or else so adered with silver so ader: this must have a line all
along the midst of it, and a little loope at each end cut through the two
ends of the loopes being precisely in that line. Last of all, you must have a
moveable ruler with two long folding sights, of about the length of the
Semidiameter of the circle in breadth about half an inch: the one of them must
have a slit through the length thereof, of about a quarter of an inch broad, as
you shall think convenient, and two little holes, the one in the top, and the
orher in the bottom, just in the middle of it, to fasten a string, having a
very little bead to slide up and down upon it. And this sight must be of the
thicker stuff then the other. For otherwise, because of that which is cut out,
it would be ouerpaised by the other, and so the box would swerve toward the
other; and the sights must each of them have a little notch in the midst of
the top of them: this ruler must be fastened (but yet so that he may turn
about) in the middle of the cross plate most precisely in the center of the
circle, his ends cut, that he may show the Fiduciall line in the divisions of
the circle, the other sight needs to be but a a plain plate, having a line
in the middle, from the top to the bottom. The description follows, being
the very same in substance with that, which in the Nauigators Supply, I call
the Compass of variation; although all things easier performed with this, then
with that,

The Picture.


The Uses.
The Compass being thus fitted, place the circular needle described in the
sixth chapter, upon his pin alone without any fly. For being disburdened of
the card, he will show his virtue the more strongly, and being of that for me
he will balance himself sufficiently.

Place the circle upon the glass and pastboard, in such sort that you may
turn the circle round about, very close and even, within the brim of the box.

When you will set the same unto the Compass, turn the circle about, until
thorough the Loopes of the middle stay or plate, you see the Axis of the needle
right under the Fiduciall line of the middle stay, then holding the circle so,
turn the mooueable ruler with the stringed sight toward the sun, until the
shadow of the string fall upon the fiduciall line of the moveable ruler, for
then does the end of the ruler, among the degrees, show the true place or
Azimuth of the sun from the Magneticall Meridian, so that two observations,
the one in the forenoone, the other in the afternoon, thus made, with the
several heights of the Sun, being one and the very same, halle the
differences of those places of the sun, from the Magneticall needle is the
variation.

As for example, if the ends of the ruler did cut forty in the forenoone, and
fifty in the afternoon, the difference is then, the half thereof five: so much
must the variation be Westward.

If a man have no exact instrument to take the height of the sun, he may
make some reasonable shift, by setting the little bead toward the top of the
string, that it may in the forenoone cast a shadow upon the Fiduciall line of
the ruler; and marking that place with any thing (as ink or black lead) in
the afternoon attend, until the shadow of the bead (the bead remaining still
where it was) fall upon that place. For then shall you have that same height,
if you will take the amplitude of the suns rising or setting, set the circle,
and turn the ruler, as before, until the shadow of the string do fall upon
the middle line of the other sight. Then does the end of the ruler show, how
far the sun rises or sets from the magneticall Meridian.

When you will take the amplitude of the rising or setting of any star, you
must use the help of another, to hold the circle over the needle (as before)
and so you turning the ruler, until you see the star in his rising or
setting, through the two Notches on the tops of the sights, then does the end
of the ruler show your desire, The like is to be done in observing any cape, or
the trendings of any land for the dedescription of any Coast.

CHAP. XII. A comparison of the several uses of the Horizontall and
inclinatory Magneticall Needles.
THe Horizontall and inclinatory motions of Magneticall needles are both of
them but one and the self same effect of the Magnet or Loadstone, the making
of the Horizontall or Diall-needle, is among our artificers very well known and
triuiall, only they are to be put in mind that they do always make them of
pure steel and not of iron. But as for the making of the inclinatory needles,
it is a very curious piece of work: It must be of pure steel, and in his
right temper, the needle and his axis must be at right angles the one with the
other, and must be so hanged on the two ends of his axis that he be very
pliant for his motion, and that (before he have his touch) he be so equally
balanced, that the one end be not one jot heavier then the other, for if it
be, all the rest is in vain.

When you will use the inclinatory instrument, thus you must do, hanging him
by his little ring, turn him about until he make his least declination (or
inclination) under the Horizon of the instrument: for then is he just in his
Magneticall Meridian, and there shows his due point, the which otherwise he
can never do. But here I must admonish you of two very great errors published
in the contriuing of this noble instrument. The one is, that he would have a
little box with an Horizontall Needle fastened unto the bottom of the
inclinatory instrument: for to direct the instrument unto the Magneticall
Meridian: and by his picture of the Instrument, the distance should be but a
little more then an inch, where it is impossible but that the one needle must
needs disturb the other, so that neither of them can show aright, yea,
although they were six inches asunder, and more, where the little box will give
little direction for that purpose? and besides that, it is altogether
unnecessary, because the instrument will find the Magneticall Meridian, by the
least declination of the needle (as is showed before) under the Horizon,
without the help of any other. The other error is this, that he would have
that end of the needle prepared to hang toward the North, to be framed
somewhat higher then the other, as is usual in Horizontall needles: what
workman soever observes this direction, I will assure him, that he shall lose
his labor, and as soon he may wash a Blackemoore white, as to make such a
needle serve that turn. The reason is, because it is only the magneticall
virtue that works this effect, the which ouerwaight, in either end of the
needle (in this motion) does utterly overthrow.

For Horizontall needles in our Northern Climates, it is necessary: but for
inclinatory needles, it is utterly untrue in all Climates of the whole world
wheresoever. The motion of the Horizontall needle, is naturally stronger then
the inclinatory for two causes, The one is because his motion is only
sidewaies, the which is easier for the Magneticall motion to work in, then
that which is up and down, and that there is no difference which way you place
the box wherein he stands, so that it be parallel unto the Horizon; whereas
the inclinatory motion is in a vertical circle up and down, and must stand
only in his Magneticall Meridian to perform his office. The other cause is
because of the diversity of their placing in their boxes: for the Horizontal
needle stands more fitter for his motion, being placed with his capitell upon
the point of his sharp pin, than the inclinatory can do, being placed upon
the two ends of his axis, although never so near the points: But yet he will
do very well, if he be rightly fitted: And for Navigations under either Pole
(if there be any passage that way) it is the only Instrument of the world. For
where the Horizontall needle (or compass) fails, he is strongest, for the
nearer the Pole, the stronger he is in his Motion, contrariwise, it is with the
Horizontall needle or compass, for he is strongest at the Aequinoctial, and of
no force under the Pole.

The reason whereof is this, under the Aequinoctiall the Horizontall needle
stands parallel unto the Axis of the earth, and is equally strengthened for
his motion with the two poles of the earth: but under the poles, he stands
crosse-wise, at right angles with the Axis, his center representing the very
pole of the earth it self; so that the Aequinoctiall, and the Horizon being
there all one, if the needle should have any Horizontall motion there, it must
needs be an East or West motion parallel unto the Aequinoctiall, directly
contrary unto nature, and to all Magneticall doctrine.

Yet at the pole, the inclinatory needle is in his cheifest strength, framing
himself to be in the same direct line with the Axis of the earth it self: so
that the vicinity of the nearest pole of the earth, holds his convenient end
of the needle most strongly, being nothing at all hindered by the adverse pole,
to affect the upper (or other) end of the needle. The which in all other
scituations either more or less it does, and especially under the
Aequinoctiall, where each pole affecting his convenient end of the inclinatory
needle, it must stand very goglingly and vnsteddily for that motion: although
most strongly for the Horizontall, if you place him accordingly.

Where hence it follows, that near the Aequinoctiall large compasses, and
small inclinatories are fittest; and near the poles large inclinatories, and
small compasses are best, for look unto what motion the Magneticall force is
weakest, the smaller instruments ought for to be applied.

And moreover, for as much as the Magneticall revolution of the inclinatory
needle, about the globe of the earth makes his motion for the difference of
every alteration of Latitude near unto the Aequinoctiall, far more large and
easier to be discerned, then it can be near the poles, therefore a less
Instrument will serve the turn there: And because that near the pole, his
motion for differences of Latitudes are exceeding small, and hard to be
discerned. Therefore very large instruments inclinatory are there to be used,
especially because the Magneticall strength of the needle for that motion, is
there so strong and steady, that it makes some recompense for the slowuesse of
his moving. And therefore I suppose that three in Diameter, will serve near
the Aequinoctiall, and fifteen near the Pole.

And because this great one may be the less cumbersome, you may cut off the
circle at forty and five degrees of each side of the Zenith and Nadir of the
Instruments, and yet leave the needle scope enough, for all Latitudes between
sixty Degrees and the Pole: and for the the steady standing of the inclinatory
instrument at the sea, you may do thus: about the middle of the instrument (or
rather somewhat above the middle) let there be two round pins of brass, about
three quarters of an inch long, issue out; and in a box of a sailing Compass,
the inner circle being taken away, make of each side two half round notches in
the outer circle, there place the Instrument upon those two pins, the which
must have toward their ends, littles circles cut in, that they slip not out of
their rings that they are placed in: then will this Instrument stand as steady,
even at sea, as the sailing compass will do: for the motion of the inner
circle is performed by the turning of those two pins in their notches, and the
outer circle is common unto them both, always remembering that you hang some
pretty weight in the bottom of the instrument, to make his motion more
certain: If the shaddowing of the box hinder your sight from discerning the
point, that the needle stands at, it is soon helped with the light of a
little wax candle put down unto it: and yet this you ought to understand as
aforesaid, that the Horizontal and inclinatory motions are but one and the
self same effect of the touch of the Loadstone, and one and the self same
needle will very well perform both motions, namely, the inclinatory needle,
not the Horizontall, because his placing upon the pin makes him very unfit
for the inclining motion. But the inclinatory needle resting with one point of
his Axis (the points of his Axis being very sharp) in his little hole, his
box being placed parallel unto the Horizon, will perform the Horizontall
motion very well. For being placed with the sharp point of his axis in that
hole, it is all one in effect, as the Horizontal is with his capitel on the
sharp point of his pin, but that the one is upward and the other downward, and
yet either of them being as fit for that motion, as the other. Upon the
consideration hereof, my workman of Winchester minding to present Prince Henry
with a rare Instrument, contrived an Aequinoctiall Dial and an Inclinatory
Instrument both in one, and one needle to serve very well both those turns.
Herein now appears the wonderful wisdom of our God, in limitting his times
and seasons for the revealing of these wonderful properties for the use of
men, in this poor stone; namely that above 2000. years after that it was
known and wondered at in the world, for lifting up of iron (for it was an
antiquity in Platoes time) the use of the Horizontall needle was known, in
common use, scant 200. years agone; and very few years since (yea scant as
yet) the inclinatory is in any common use: and who is there that can behold and
consider both these uses, viz. both to show the quarters of the world (as East,
West, North and South, etc.) and also the Latitude of the place: to know both
these in any place of the world, be the heavens never so much ouercast with
clouds, who is he, I say, that can behold these two admirable and precious
uses performed, even with the turning of an hand, the which neither the Grecian
Philosophers, nor the fine-witted Romans, nor the Persian Magi, nor the Indian
Gymnosophists could find out with all their skill and cunning, but he must
needs say with that Kingly Prophet, O Lord, our Lord, how great is thy name
through all the Earth, who have set thy glory above the Heavens?

To the Worshipful my good friend, Mr. William Barlow at Easton by Winchester.
REcommendations with many thanks for all your pains and courtesies, for your
diligence and enquiring, and finding diverse good secrets, I pray proceed with
double capping your Loadstone you speak of, I shall be glad to see you, as
you write, as any man. I will have any leisure, if it were a month, to
confer with you, you have showed me more, and brought more light than any
man has done. Sir, I will commend you to my L. of Effingham, there is here a
wise learned man, a Secretary of Venice, he came sent by that State, and was
honorably received by her Majesty, he brought me a lattin letter from a
Gentleman of Venice that is very well learned, whose name is Johannes
Franciscus Sagredus, he is a great Magneticall man, and writes that he has
conserred with diverse learned men of Venice, and with the Readers of Padua, and
reports wonderful liking of my book, you shall have a copy of he letter:
Sir, I purpose to adioyne an appeudix of tx or eight sheets of paper tu my
book, after a while I am in hand with it of some new inventions, and I would
have some of your experiments, in your name and invention put into it, if you
please, that you may be known for an augmenter of that act. So for this time
in haste I take my leave the xiiijth of February,

Your very loving friend, W. Cilbert.

Faults escaped.
IN the Preface speaking of Claudianus: serediticall for sideriticall. fol. 12.
lin. 22. reciprocated for riciprocally. fol. 50. lin. 21. hangings for hugenes.
fol. 53. lin. 16. as may be, for as many be. fol. 57. lin. 10. but this is not:
for this is not. fol. 68. lin. 19. supposes the fly, for supporteth the fly.
fol: 79. lin. 11. set the same: for set the Sun. item lin. 27. the difference
is then: for, the difference is ten. fol. 82. lin. 8. higher: for, heuier. fol.
84. lin. 26. three in Diameter: for, three inches in Diameter. fol. 85. lin.
10. littles circles: for, little circles. The last line save one of D. Gilberts
letter, act: for, art.

A BREIFE DISCOVERY OF THE IDLE ANIMADVERSIONS OF MARK RIDLEY Doctor in
PHYSIC upon a Treatise entitled, Magneticall Aduertisements.

-- moueat Cornicula risum
Furtiuis nudata coloribus --
LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Timothy Barlow, at the sign of Time in
Paul's Churchyard. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND WORthy minded industrious Gentlemen, and others who are
any way addicted unto MAGNETICALL Knowledge.
SO it is that for a long time I have bin greatly delighted in the
contemplation of the properties and virtues of this admirable creature of God
which we call the Magnet, or Loadstone. And as my leisure and occasions have
served by conference from time to time, with the skilfullest Nauigators of our
age, by reading all the Treatises (as came unto my knowledge) of such as had
written thereof, and therewithal trying by practice the truth of those things
which I doubted of, and lastly finding some things by my own experience of
good importance by others not at all mentioned. The chief of these which I
judged profitable for common use I did set forth in a small Treatise entitled
Magneticall Aduertisements. And although of mine own loving affection toward
such (as ye are) I have bin always ready to further you in these knowledges
the best I could, yet I do assure you faithfully, that diverse of good
judgment, learning, and eminent place, (unto whom I communicated my
experiments) very vehemently urged my publishing of them.

A copy of this Treatise being by stealth written out of my Manuscript, by one
that understood it not, and by that means committed diverse errors, this Doctor
Ridley devoured some of them, and by his endeavoring to square my propositions
according to his own conceits, and so superciliously to control (and censure
the things which he understood not) he has missed of the truth very far and
wide, and has herein wronged both himself, and me, and his readers, but most
of all his believers; and yet such is his kind disposition, that he has
purloyned out of the scambled copy of my Treatise, for to adorn his own
Treatise of Magneticall bodies and Motions all these that follow; as in his
Treatise, Fol. 7. The hilly knobbes, and angulous parts etc. for 17 lines. Fol.
8. The greater stones etc. 5 lines. Fol. 9. Steel and iron etc. 4 lines. Fol.
10. The 14. 17. 18. 19. figures are mine. Fol. 18. 19. The 1. 2. 3. 7. ways
are mine, the 4. Doctor Gilberts. Fol. 22. Every part and piece of a Loadstone,
etc. 7 lines. Fol. 27. If a wire be touched etc. 5 lines. Fol. 30. and 31. It
is to be observed in the fashion of a Magnet etc. 16 lines. Fol. 36. For
although that naturally etc. 9 lines. Fol. 51. and 52. Also if a Magnet be
fastened etc. 4 lines. This practice is profitable for Travelers etc. 14 lines
more. Fol. 63. 64. The best way to touch etc. 11 lines. And some have thought it
better etc. 14 lines. Fol. 66. Set two Loadstones etc. 3 lines. Fol. 71. An
Adamant does loose much of his virtue etc. 3 lines. Fol. 72. That 20. Chapter
(only a few words chopped and changed) is whole mine. Fol. 83. And for this
cause the Adamant etc. 3 lines. Fol. 89. A piece of Steel well tempered etc. 2
lines. The two next are his own, and very absurd. Fol. 90. Now it is to be
observed etc. 10 lines. Fol. 95. The needles and compasses etc. 14. lines.
So that it cannot but seem to any indifferent person very strange, that
Doctor Ridley would publicly so traduce me, and that by name, and so
contemptuously in his frivolous Animaduersions, and could never hit upon my
name, no not so much as once to acknowledge it in all these things which he
has by stealth learned of me, and inserted into his Magneticall Motions for
his own, the which with their consequents if you withdraw from his Treatise,
you will leave his motions very dull. For except this Ridley, had ploughed with
my Heifor, he had not known my Riddle. Sic vos non vobis.

In my aduertisements indeed, I made mention that some body had in this manner
dealt euilly with me, and I reproved certain faults that some body had
committed, especially in the fundamental Magneticall heare-sayes of misnaming
of the true North and South, in Magnets and Magneticall bodies, and in making
the Inclinatory needle with the one end heavier than the other, and some
others: But these two especially, for because they do draw on many others, as
they do both in his Book, and wheresoever they shall be admitted, they will
increase like a snow-ball, waxing still greater as they go, and all his
dawbing of them with his untempered mortar in his silly Animaduersions do amend
the matter nothing at all, but make it far worse than before. For the common
good, I might not let them pass unreproved, and yet I would not publicly name
him, but used this word somebody. The like himself has, viz. Some say, some
labor to clear, some think etc. in his book meaning me, being not
contented only to usurp that which was properly mine for his own (as
aforesaid) but also he took upon him (although very ignorantly) to confute
some of mine under these terms, and this only out of a stolen Manuscript.
Whereas all men know that Manu-scripts ought to be uncontrolled until the
Author has published them, who may alter and change things in the mean space
as he thinks good.

He styles himself principal Physician unto the Emperor of Russia, the which
many men wonder at, being so young as he than was, and supposed that he went
over only as Physician unto our Merchants there, that he should in so short a
time become that Emperors principal Physician. If he were, he sped better then
Bomelius did, who is said to have died there in that cold climat of the
extremest hot kind of Calenture.

Out of all question, somewhat it is more then ordinary, that makes him of so
hauty a spirit, so to brave the world with such prodigious assertions of his
Magneticals, in, and above the Moon; the earths Magneticall circular Motions,
and his paltry abusing of the holy scriptures to support his lunaticke fictions
under the name of Magneticall Philosophy.

There are yet two texts of Scripture, which it is a wonder how they escaped
him; the one is in Iosuah 10. ver. 12. and the other is in Esaias 38. ver. 8. In
the one: That the Sun and the Moon stood still the space of a whole day: The
other, that the shadow in Achas dial went back 10 degrees, and the Sun in
the sky returned 10 degrees by the which he was descended.

For it is his guise to make contrary conclusions unto that which the
Scriptures affirm, and therefore blame him not, if he do so despise
Aristotle, who never taught any such Logic.

Now therefore that ye may in few words understand the untruth of the earths
Magneticall Motion, that is so mainely emblazoned by him, and the weakness of my
Animaduersors Magneticall skill, you must know, that the Magneticall Motion is
a natural inclination of two Magnets or Magneticall bodies, that may freely
move, respecting the one the other within the Orb of their forces with their
convenient ends, that is to say, the North end of the one always respecting
the South of the other.

If the two Magnets or Magneticall bodies be of like quantity, form, and
goodness, their Motions will be of like quicknes of the one toward the other;
but if they differ in any of these, their Motions will be so much the slower.

Now forasmuch as all Magneticall motions are always respective of the one
Magnet or Magneticall body toward another, it follows by necessary
consequent, that no Magnet or Magneticall body, can either move, or be moved of
it self, but is utterly void of all intrinsecall or selfe-Motion, the true
and only cause of his Motion being evermore without it self.

And therefore mine Animaduersors selfe-motion of the Globe of the earth
circularly, by Magneticall vigor, in the which he does so gallantly triumph;
is but an idle figment, and a mere Chimaera: but his definition of Magneticall
bodies is very suitable unto it; viz. very monstrous; namely, That we define to
be a Magneticall body, which does remain and place it self in one place, or
kind of situation natural, not alterable, as all stars do, and the great
Regent globes of Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, the Sun and the Earth do: or such,
as with respect and attendance follow other globes, as the two stars which
support Saturn; the four attendants upon Jupiter, lately discovered by the
truncke-spectacle; the two trauersers about the Sun, called Venus and
Mercury; and the Moon, which does follow or go about the earth, and
respects the same always with one Pole, and therefore has a peculiar
Magneticall virtue, that guides her in this kind of situation.

Auditum admissi, risum teneatis amici, Any man that considers this goodly
definition, being the foundation and ground of his Magneticall discourse, and
the very first sentence of his book, and many the like fancies in his Motions
and and Animaduesions will easily discern what his Magneticall skill is, and
what a vanity it were for me, to spend any precious time to confute in
particular such unreasonable and senseless opinions, which have more need of
Helleborus to purge them out of his head, then Arguments to confute them in his
book. And in his frivolous animaduersions seeking to maintain his former
errors, and he being so snappish to have them amended, he makes them ten
times worse then they were before, and far more palpable: But my tetricall
Animaduersor must be ruled by reason, and afford all those his patience that
do believe the holy Scriptures, which flatly do deny the Earths motion, and
affirm the motion of the Sun, Moon and Stars, in the whole current thereof,
as Psalm. 19. 6. 104. 5. Joshua 10. 12. 13. 14. Esaias 38. 8. etc.

Also that he will give men leave to credit their senses, in matters subject
unto sense, and not repugnant unto reason; and that he will not be offended
with those who do pitifully laugh at his Magneticall Astronomy, with those
topsituruy motions, like

Voluitur lxion, and se sequiturque fugitque. For although some great learned
men in those Sciences, have used the supposed motion of the earth, for an
Hypothesis, serving their ready calculations; as they have done also their
supposed Epicycles, for the motions of the Planets and their courses: yet that
is no reason for to avouch them for to be in themselves true and real things,
according unto some men's vain fancies, who do argue after this sort.

It is an easier matter, and more (as they say) agreeable unto nature, for so
small a body as the globe of the Earth is in comparison of the heavens, to
move circularly in the space of four and twenty hours, then it is for the
huge Universe so to do; and that which is done with less hazard, is to be
preferred before the like, which may not be performed without fear of a
greater danger, with diverse other reasons like unto these.

But although such as these are, may go current in a mechanical Tradesman
shop, yet they are very insufficient to be allowed for good, by men of
learning, and Christians by profession, who know right well, that it is great
folly for to oppose that which we call difficult, unto an omnipotent power, Who
stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to
dwell in, Esaias 40. ve. 22. He stretches out the North over the empty, and
hangs the earth upon nothing, etc. Job 26. ver. 7.

And that which we call Nature, it being nothing else but Gods ordinance; there
can be nothing contrary, but all things agreeable unto nature, which God has
ordained. But God has ordained the motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars (as
aforesaid) and the vnmooueablenesse of the earth; therefore this is more easy,
and more agreeable unto nature; which is preserved only by obeying Gods
ordinance, and herein only that consists, and has her being. And that the
earths magneticall virtue has no power at all to perform or help any such
motion, as is also before made manifest.

But that mine Animaduersors magneticall skill is ascended up into our Moon it
self; yea, and yet higher, far beyond the Moon, unto the other Planets and
Stars, and into every one of them, this is such a point of his Magneticall
Philosophy, that would make Stupidity it self astonished to hear of it.

There was (as the Poets feign) a certain King of Phrygia, that had a gift
given him of the Gods, at his own request, that whatsoever he touched with his
body should be gold, but by that means being ready to starve, because his
victuals were also turned to gold, he entreated earnestly that he might
surrender his gift.

It seems that mine Animaduersor endeavors for to make show, that he has
a stranger gift; namely, that by his very looks (for his looks, with his
Truncke-spectacle, are his means) he can turn all things to be Magneticall,
that he does earnestly behold; He has scowred the Heavens already, even from
the one end unto the other, that both Planets and Stars are become magneticall
in his head; what tumultuous stir may they breed there, no man can tell, it
is his safest way to confine his Magnetismes unto the earth, as their natural
seat, and not suffer them to clamber up into the skies, where they have nothing
to do, lest that infinite dispersion of his magneticall knowledge, do in the
end ouercharge his brain, and make him magnetically mad, or at the least to
incur the censure of him that said,

Delphinum siluis appingit, fluctibus aprum. As therefore whilst his wits are
yet his own, it is his surest way (like the King of Phrygia) to surrender that
gift again, to leave his trifling with the holy Scriptures, and to be no more
a censuring Animaduersor in matters that he has but small skill in: and that
he will hereafter learn to be wise unto sobriety, Metirise quemque suo modulo
ac pede verum est. And forasmuch as his animaduersions contain nothing at all,
of any truth and importance against mine Aduertisements, but only many
ignorant, many wilful mistakings, contradictions and cauillings, and
maintainings of his former absurdities, the which the more they are stirred by
him, the more they stink. I will content my self with this brief discovery
of this Animaduersor, and his animaduersions, and so to leave him for this time
peeping in his truncke-spectacle at his celestial magneticall regent globes,
with his proud motto: Non sufficit orbis. To try whether he can yet find us
here hence any more new glorious dreams, whereby he may either increase the
number of the hundred of merry tales, or else augment the noble history of Huyn
of Burgis.

And whereas he charge me opprobriously for to have in my Treatise nothing of
mine own, but all of other men's, and some of his: mine answer is, that he
knows in his own conscience (if he have any) that he speaks a manifest
untruth, contrary unto his own knowledge in both. Yea, I am verily persuaded,
that if he would but give his own conscience, leave to speak out, it would
ring him a tale in his ear unto this effect: That he himself knows right
well, that where my knowledge (even such as it is) in these matters fails:
all the store of skill that he has, cannot advance it, no not so much as one
strawes breadth, notwithstanding all the great countenance he sets on it,
with his swelling titles of his Magneticall bodies and motions, and his
Aristarchicall censuring of my Aduertisements. Nil dignum tanto feret hic
promissor hiatu. And for my just defense, I will rehearse but these few things
(yet such as are of principal importance in this Art) whereas I could name
diverse other.

I was the first that made the inclinatory instrument transparant, and to be
used pendant, with a glass on both sides, and a ring on the top, whereas
Doctor Gilberts has but of one side, and to be set on a foot. And moreover, I
hanged him in a compass box, where with two ounces weight he will be fit for
use at sea.

Another is, that I was the first that found out and showed the difference
between iron and steel, and their tempers for magneticall uses, which has
given life and quickening, universally to all magneticall instruments whatsoever.

I was also the first that showed the right way of touching magneticall needles.

I was the first that found out and showed the peecing and cementing of
Loadstones.

I was the first that found out and showed the reasons why a Loadstone being
double capped, must take up so great weight.

These things (ye worthy Gentlemen) have I mentioned only to give you
content and satisfaction: For although my magneticall knowledge be no manner of
way gainefull unto me, as all that are acquainted with me, know how little I
do esteem of it in any such respect, yet forasmuch as I have published my
Magneticall Aduertisements of my very earnest affection toward such as ye
are, and dedicated them unto one right worthy Gentleman of your Society in
steed of all, even for your sakes I could not suffer my pains and good will
toward you, to be so scornfully trampled under foot (without some
gaine-saying) and pratled out of conceit with cauilling only, and multiplicity
of vain words and peevish brauadoes, The Lord prosper you in all laudable
knowledge and vetuous practice.

Yours in all hearty affection* W. BARLOW.


