LVCTA IACOBI: OR, A BONEFIRE FOR HIS Majesty's Double Delivery, from the
Deluge in PERTH, the 5. of August, 1600. And the Doomesday of BRITAIN, the 5.
of November. 1605.

ECCLES. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, etc: for the foul
of the heaven shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare
the matter.

Sero sed serio.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Gray-hound. 1607.

TO THE MOST happy Prince, JAMES the first, by the grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
YOur Majesty's most blessed delivery by the power of God from that bloody
Diluge of PERTH, and this Fiery Doomesday of BRITAIN, being to all your
people a cause of Gods everlasting praise, and their present joy, as the
multitude made show by their Bonefires, whose earthly smokes in great measure
ascended the heavenly regions. It has kindled such a Bonefire in the furnace
of my breast, as must needs be known to your Majesty; whose Builder is an
inward worker, whose Fuel is Affection, whose flames may well warm, but
never harm you: and the more you anneere them, the more temperate shall you
find them, comforting such as love you, and consuming such as hate you: whose
gleames I have made first to glance on your Majesty's self, secretly and
vnsigned; as being unworthy (though they should even please you) to present
them; much less to come in your presence, if they should offend: leaving to
your Majesty's most royal and upright judgment, as you find my Fire well
built, to set it where you will have it seen: or being fallen from his
grounds, more formally to reedifie it: or if of too gross materials, to purge
the drossie errors of it: or if nothing of it like you, by a breath of your
Majesty's mouth utterly to extinguish it. Do as you please (Sir) for so long
as I live shall I ever love you. Your Deliverer be always with you. From
toward the confines of your Majesty's Canaan, Tuesday, Doomesday 5. November.
1605.

Your Majesty's most loyal and loving subject, without any Acquiuocation.
Vniuoce-catholicus.

TO BOTH SORTS, as well Vniuo-catholique, as Aequiuo- catholic Readers.
NO man lights a candle to put it under a Bushel; and no man builds a fire
of public joy, and shuts it up in private chimnies. Those Reasons have
overcome my private resolutions: and howsoever the just fear of my own
infirmities did awe me; yet, seeing my betters persuade me, my duty binds
me to let it go: And since the royal eyes both of Clemency and Knowledge have
once looked upon it, what care who pass by it?

That it was not then so early as others, take it not to have been my
slownesse in beginning: for mine ears no sooner heard, then my heart rejoiced,
and my hand set it self a work. Neither was it my long somenesse in building
it: for my whole body is but a chest of such fuel. Nor yet was it my fear
it should quickly die; for until the memory of the fact die, my Fire shall
always live. But thus it is, whilst upon the point of such a practice, all
men's tongs wagged, most pens walked, and the whole world wondered, it was not
then necessary my Fire should have appeared, being fitter to awake men now from
the slumber of forgetfulness, then to have accompanied the triumphs of their
joys.

That it goes out thus namelesse, do not impute it to any fear of party
bloody, or fiery; howsoever, I must confess my self much younger in
Treatises then years: for who shall fear to defend his Country, so gracious a
King, so glorious a cause? No, my Fire has no fear, and in this could I
willingly say, Meme adsum qui feci, etc. But thus it is; I find that as the
gravity and greatness of Authors, bring often credit to bad causes, and make
Paradoxes pass for probable: so, mean and obscure instruments darken most
grave and true arguments; then while as no man knows the Author, all men will
take them to the matter. Would thou then have me leave my Treatises? I
beseech thee leave thy Treasons: fire not our Parliament, and I shall not foil
thy profession.

To you then of the Vnivoque sort, true Christians, loyal subjects: let my
fire serve to quicken your memories, comfort your hearts, confirm your hopes,
and increase your thankfulness; calling back your minds to those Parliament
mines: so that that day which was once thought so admirable, may be held ever
memorable. Forget never then these two restless Arch-aequiuocators, the
Diuelin an Oracle, and a Jesuit in an Oath.

As for you of the vocation of Aequiuocation, half tongued, hollow hearted,
and disloyal Subjects (for what serve fair words in so foul wars, where no
quarters are kept?) To you, I say, could I wish my fire as a flame of your
dreamed Purgatory, to divide (not your souls from your bodies, as you do with
us) but that seed of Sedition from your souls; that as you are the natural
breed of our soil; so ye might prove the loyal subjects of our Sovereign.

Let your submissiue Parere, meet his sacred Imperare, and not dress a Perire
for him, his posterity, and whole state, by a Popish, Antichristian,
Aequiuocating Conspiracy. But what talk I of Antichrist? seeing the Jews and
Jesuits iumpe in one: the Jews looking still for Christ's coming, have lost
Christ come: And the Jesuits (as all Romish Catholics) looking for
Antichrists coming; hanging him on the horns of their Altars, and harboring
him in their hearts, yet are lost by their over looking him.

God almighty either separate that Religion from you, or else both you and
your Religion from our Region. Amen: without Acquiuocation.

Yours as free as his Fire is, Vnivo-catholicus.

Errata.
Page 47. Aetnian, read Aetnaean.

Page 49. penult. In, read I.

Page 52. 18. here it is no, read here is no.

Page l. 22. them, read their.

LVCTA IACOBI: OR, Jacobs Wrestling.
Having both often and earnestly craved of the eternal God, that some happy
occasion should present it self, whereby I might testify to the world a part
of such graces as he has bestowed on me, ( Not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, Genesis 32.10.
which he has showed unto me) to the glory of his name who created me, and
for the weal of my King and Country: to both which, both by my birth and
benefits he has bound me.

The two miraculous deliueries of our sovereign Lord King JAMES, from those
late (we hope last) and most of all foul, and fearful attempts, have
occurred: which, as they are to all, a matter full of endless praise: so do
they draw me to a more deep meditation, then to be smothered under the bushel
of my only breast. And therefore have I (though hardily, yet) most humbly
published the same under the title of the VVrastling of Jacob; with which, as
they have many dissimilitudes; and of these not a few fit for this purpose: so
are they in many things much like, both in the preparation and action; and many
good lessons likewise resulting upon the applying of the sequels in Jacobs
victory, to that which we justly expect in this of our victorious Prince, as
in the discourse following shall apeare.

GENESIS 32. verse. 24, 25. When Jacob was left himself alone, there wrastled a
man with him unto the breaking of the day.

And he saw that he could not prevail against him: therefore he touched the
hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacobs thigh was loosed, as he wrestled
with him.

Let no man think it presumption to compare these two Jacobs, a great
Patriarch with a great Prince, a Father of the faithful, with the defender of
the faith, and a wrastler in the shadows of that heavenly Canaan, with a
wrastler for the substance of our heavenly Jerusalem.

Before we enter then to the description of these wrastlings, we have first to
speak of the person: then of the preparation to it.

In the person is to be considered: first, his name: then, his quality and
course of life.

Protasis, or Proposition.
His name (Jacob) has two significations; one by the first imposer, his father
Isaac; an other from his wrestling, imposed by God* In the first it signified a
Supplanter, because he held his brother Esau by the heel at their birth,
being twins. The other signification is a VVrastler, although different, yet
not disagreeing from the former: for even from that same holding him by the
heel, yea before it, begun their wrestling, by the oracle of God, in the
belly of their mother Rebecca. Genesis 25.23.


Apodosis, or Application.
Our first comparison then is from a similitude: for so has our sovereign
Lord for his name Jacob in that language. The significations, though not so
fully agreeing in his person, may yet apparently be thus far derived.

First, although his Majesty be not half a birth, as was Jacob, but one and
only son, cutting short thereby all dispute of titles and birthrights with
elder Esaues; yet, as God said to Rebecca, Two nations are in thy womb, Genesis
25.23.
and the one shall be mightier then the other, and the elder shall serve the
younger: so in the person of our princely Jacob, were two nations borne, to wit,
Scotland, and his Canaan, England: whereof the elder may be said to serve the
younger; in so far as England, etc. being justly mayor or melior, is now come
under his Majesty's government, being then of only Scotland, and so merito
minor. Thus begun he also (as did Jacob) his wrestling even in his Rebeccaes
belly; to wit, with that old Esau, the root of those ravenous Ruthuens,
grandfather to this Italian Edomit the late Earl of Gowrie, who preased to
divide his Highness in and from his mothers womb, as is more then manifest:
whom God of his eternal providence brought forth in this world, to the
inheritance of his birthright, and preservation of this nation: and so is he
justly called a Jacob, a Supplanter, or a VVrastler, not a deceiuer, nor
usurper.

As to the second signification, how far he has proved a VVrastler indeed,
shall be showed in the own room. And thus for the name.

The quality and course of life, has two points, before his wrestling, or
after. Before, either unmarried, or married: unmarried, first, in getting the
birth, right, then the blessing.

Protasis, or Proposition.
When that rough and red Esau was come out, Jen. 25.25, 26, 27.
that cunning hunter, fit for the fields, Jacob was a plain man, and dwelt in
tents. Here in the course of their lives are opposed, plainness to cunning,
simplicity to fraud, and indwelling in tents, to a wild barbarite. For both
the divine oracles and their performances must teach us, that these notes are
good in Jacob, and bad in Esau. Jacob was a plain man, not that he was
doltish, no, for as he was a Dove, he was also a Serpent, according to the
saying of Christ and so he proved a plain man, in his walking uprightly
before God: a Serpent in his wise carriage at his encounter with Esau. Now,
cunning hunting in an other then Esau (who postponed his birthright to his
pottage) is no opprobrie. Again, Jacob dwelt in tents; which some apply to the
tents of Melchisedec or Sem, that Priest of the most high God, and so
discharged dutifully that law of the first borne, in the sacrifices and serving
of God, and was therefore found worthy of the birthright, which Esau set at
naught, by his running astray in the Wilderness, and selling it for a mess of
pottage.

Apodosis, or Application.
When those blood-red and rough Esaues who strove with our princely Jacob, were
overcome first by his birth: then grew he (and indeed greatly has he
grown) in the plainness of Jacob, and his indwelling in tents, as a Dove and
as a Serpent: plain in all his ways and upright: else, let such charge him as
have been frustrate by his fraud. But lacks he either worldly wit, or
heavenly wisdom with Jacob? witness all such as have either conferred with
his Majesty mouth to mouth, or yet read his manifold Treatises by himself
done: and doubtless then shall they not ask, if he be learned, but how he
has learned? or rather, what has he not learned? either in the Natural
works, or Supernatural word of Cod. Surely he dwells in Jacobs tents, and
has suffered tentations with Jacob, and been, almost from his infancy, ever
a making pottage with Jacob, to pleasure a world of wild Esaues. A second King
of Salem bringing peace to all his people. Has he not been led, as it were,
in the wilderness of tentations by cunning Hunters, and cunny-catching Esaues?
who have sometimes persecuted his own person, sometimes the tents of Jacob,
Religion it self both publicly and under pretext. Have not golden hills been
promised him to leave Jacobs tents? yet did his Majesty ever resist in that
same strength by which he now lately prevailed: and said not with Caesar and
others, Si (si) iusiurandum violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est.

But here me thinks I do even hear some obiecting against certain
breaches, slippes and errors, escaped in the course of our Jacobs government.
True, else he were not a Jacob, Genesis 35.2.
but a Iah, that is, a God. And were there not even in that Patriarchs house
strange errors, when he bad them remove their strange gods? But such were then
our sottish, scottish humors; and such are now our brutish, british humors,
to be ever loose tongued, rather imputing, or imping (as it were) faults in
our Prince, whereof he is free; then either supplying his infirmities, or
praising his virtues: as if all were then repaired, when the Prince is
reproached, but of this afterward. This one thing avouch I only here, that
our Jacob has (I will not say of all men, fearing flattery) but of all
Princes, Monarchs, both most and best mixed knowledge in maniest and worthiest
matters. One word then, God increase and sanctify.

This for the Birthright: follows the Blessing.

Protasis, or Proposition.
Jacob thus enjoying worthily the Birthright, must needs have also the
Blessing belonging thereunto, which his mother Rebecca brings also to pass.
Genesis 27.5.


Apodosis, or Application.
Our Jacob, (having since his birth, for both his parents, but his only mother
as parens partus aut sanguinis, and her late Majesty of England, as parens
possessionis seu haereditatis, and so justly his mother) has (I say) in spite
of all repining Esaues, borne away the blessing proper to his birthright, in
both his mothers. For as to his own natural mother, howsoever such Esaues as
strove with him in her belly, went about by all means to frustrate him of her
blessing, by throwing her from her throne, and inuesting him in the kingdom
before he was ripe, putting the scepter in his hand before he was able to bear
it, and the sword before he could sway it; yet, he growing in years, and more
in grace, his obedient behavior, together with his innocence, so sweetly
smelled in her nose ( Genesis 27.27, 28.
as did Jacob to his father) that she proved both a loving Rebeccah, and a
blessing Isaac to her Princely Jacob.

As to his other Rebeccah Haereditatis, whom our Jacob in end only had for
all, and did use as all; the world did see, how little all such Esaus as strove
in title with our Jacob, did prevail at her hand; yea, and kept under by her
hand; and the full blessing reserved to her own Jacob; howsoever she relented
the publication of it, partly looking to her self, whom she must first love;
partly like a loving mother, sometimes frowning on that child she best
loves. But as her Majesty waxed old, and became full of days, and dim
eyed with Genesis 27.1.
Isaac, she then called for her Jacob, and so fully blessed him.

Thus far, both of the Birthright and Blessing. Follows the Marriage.

Protasis, or Proposition.
Next is Jacob set on his Marriage, Genesis 28.1.
and sent to his own kindred, forbidden by his father to match with the
Cananites. Whereby is shortly meant, not only the carnal alliance, but also
and more, the spiritual conjunction to be respected.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Jacob being now without father or mother natural, is by that
all-sufficient God of Jacob instructed, conducted and restrained from matching
with the kindred of Cham, promising him golden hills, and Canaan before the
fullness of time, if so be he would leave the tents of Jacob, Religion: and so
is he moved to go: even to his own kindred, with whom his predecessors had
happily matched before, and nearer to the tents of Jacob.

This point of the Marriage has also two parts. First, Jacobs Journey.
Secondly, his success in his Marriage. The Journey again two things. First,
the course of his passage. Secondly, his vision in his passage.

Protasis, or Proposition.
Jacobs passing was toward the East, his travails long and wearisome.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Jacob held also Eastward, and (beside the ordinary custom of Princes)
past in his own person per mare, per terras, per tot discrimina rerum.
Follows the Vision.

Protasis, or Proposition.
Jacob saw a Ladder reaching to heaven; Genesis 28.12.
Christ with Angels on the Ladder going up and down: God above it, promising
two things. First, to be his God, and bring him back again. Secondly, to
give him that same Land of Canaan that he promised to his Fathers, Abraham and
Isaac, etc.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Jacob well instructed in that Vision of the Ladder, Christ our Savior;
he found the fruits and performance of the first part of the promise of those
ministering Angels, who walked (as it were) upon the very Ship-ladders for his
safety, against these droues of devilish Witches, as he twice crossed the
seas: here was he our Jacobs God; thus brought he him safely home.

As to the second part. The correspondence may be thus applied (without
offense) speaking of Canaan, not as it was a type of the Kingdom of heaven.
Canaan was thrice to three several persons promised, to Abraham, Isaac, and
now here to Jacob: So is our Jacob (now enjoying his Canaan) even the third
person from his grandfather, who first issued out of the loins of King Henry
the seventh, whose line expired in the person of that renowned Lady, the late
Queen Elizabeth, who contented to live continent, and so wedded to Virginity
in her choice of Chastity, full 43. years in peace and piety governed her
people; a mirror to her sex, a miracle to her age, and a pattern to all
princely posterity: who as at her departing, she did part her people with a
great blessing; so did she impart to them a greater, in the person of her and
our Jacob; a Solomon, 1. King. 5.4.
setting all his subjects at rest on all sides from all their enemies, of whom
she might justly say, Si non peperi, salte^ reperi quem peperisse volui:
delighting ever since his entry (most Salomon-like) in the works of Unity, by
knitting in one the hearts of his Kingdoms, already seated in one Continent,
a cause to make us coalesce in one: and both by sea divided from Princes
adjacent; proclaiming hereby, that no forrainer should bear rule in this
Island: whereof that Law, Nemo transmarinus, etc. was a prophecy: both of one
language, telling us that we are not to build up a Babylon by division, Genesis
11.6.7.
but reedifie a Jerusalem through power of that Unity, which has for the most
infallible bond of our Union, joined us already in one Religion: only impeded
by the common enemy, both of his title, and life, Dolmans, Persons, traitor
Catholics, devouring all under color of Religion.

But if these Doomeseday Priests had ever said Mess upon this Altar, of the
old Testament, Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors march: then had they no more
transferred the right of a Crown for Religion, then Religion for a Crown. No,
Genesis 31.53.
Jacob and Laban when they parted at Mizpa, were of diverse Religions, and swore
by diverse gods, that they should not come over that march for others evil. Or
if the Popes in this point were as good now, as was Numa Pompilius that Roman
King, who placed that stone Abaddir, as the God of Marches in their Capitole,
punishing the transgressors by death; then (I say) the Popes priests had
preached with Pompilius the god of Marches, more then the God of Messes: the
first being plainer in the Scripture then the other, and not to stir up
such Esaues. to quarrel Jacob in his Birthright. But let that Ethnicke teach
those Catholics. Only has this corner of my Bonefire delited to sport it
self, with these two delightful Princes, Rebecca and her Jacob. Follows the
success of Jacobs Marriage.

Protasis, or Proposition.
The cheifest blessing here recounted, is, the beautiful children that God
gave to Jacob.

Apodosis, or Application.
So has our Jacob more Olive plants about his table, Psalm. 128 4.
then most part of christian Princes. And thus far for the Comparison of our
two Jacobs, in name and life a Simili.

Their Dissimilitudes.
Protasis, or Proposition.
The Patriarch Jacob had but one Esau.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our princely Jacob had many Esaues; a diluge of Esaues, a Doomesday of Esaues.

The Preperation to the VVrastling.
Protasis, or Proposition.
Now Jacob takes his Journey at Gods command to make for his own Country, Genesis
31.3.27, 42, 43.
where Esau was before him, whose terrors began again to touch him: which he
had hitherto escaped by his mothers means.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Jacob, being about some fourteen years of age, takes the fields and the
authority in his own hands; and so is by the son of that old Esau, who
wrastled with him in his mothers womb, the second time assailed. Ruthuenrode.
Thus are the mother and the son, Princes; by the father and the son,
traitors; twice persecuted: for the which this second Esau afterward lost his
head.

The Dissimilitudes of of those Jacobs in their Preparation.
Protasis, or Proposition. 1.
Jacob the Patriarch feared his brother Esau, because he had prevented him,
both in his Birthright and Blessing: and so the less danger being foreseen.

Apodosis, or Application. 1.
Jacob our Prince, had no fear, because no fault: and so the less fear, the
more danger: for Esau Gowrie had his Birthright preserved to him of our
Jacob, which old Esau his father had justly forfeited. And those Catholic
firebrarnds held most of their honors of our Jacob: Many odds.

Protasis, or Proposition. 2.
Jacob goes to his brothers rooms, to possess himself in Esaues
Birthright, and thence is his fear.

Apodosis, or Application. 2.
Our Jacob is bidden by Esau, and so looked to be welcome: so, that Jacob
doubted; our Jacob trusted Esau.

Protasis, or Proposition. 3.
Again, Genesis 32.13, 14, etc.
Jacob sent gifts to assuage Esau.

Apodosis, or Application. 3.
Our Jacob is propined by Esau, promised great wealth, heaps of gold.

And thus for the preparation.

Follows the Comparison of the Esaues. First, a Simili.
Protasis, or Proposition. 1.
Esau was red.

Apodosis, or Application. 1.
So are our Jacobs Esaues, blood-red, and fire-red.

Protasis, or Proposition. 2.
Esau was a cunning Hunter, and dwelt in the fields.

Apodosis, or Application. 2.
Esau Gowrie was (as we call it) a cunning Realm-raker, a hunter, able to
catch the Devil. And our Roman Esaus, cunning Pharisees, Mat. 23.15.
compassing Sea and land, to make one of their profession, and so make them
seuen-fold more the son of Satan then before.

Similitudes of our Jacobs, Esaus amongst themselves.
They have first one general cause. Thou killedst old Esau my father (said
bloody Esau to Jacob) and Roman Esau, thou killest our father the Pope. an
honorable quarrel for Jacob.

Answers for Jacob.
1 Esau Gowrie thy father, was a Traitor to the King; and so the law killed
him. But as I was then Minor: so by my own clemency have I put thee in better
case then I found thee.

2 Roman Esaues, your father was, and is still, a Traitor both to God and
Kings, whom God by his breath has and shall abolish: which as it began ere I
was borne, so have I never yet put you in worse case then I found you.

Secondly, they had all one end, destruction of Prince and people, sword and
fire, body and soul.

Follow the Dissimilitudes of the Esaus of those two Jacobs.

Protasis, or Proposition.
That Esau was elder Brother of that Jacob, and so by law of nature might
challenge a pre-eminence.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Jacobs Esaues were all younger, no brothers, but subjects bound to Jacobs
obedience.

Protasis, or Proposition.
That Esau denounced a fair war, by open convocation.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Esaues pronounced a false peace, by lurking Aequiuocation.

Protasis, or Proposition.
Esau and Jacob met and were agreed, Genesis 33.1.
and so peace.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our Esaus also met our Jacob, and were agreed, and so perfide. For first, Esau
Gowrie (as my self was both ear and eye witness) at his first reencounter with
our Jacob at Falkland, was thus by his Highness entreated; That as he had seen
more the^ others his fellows, and (as his Majesty had heard) made good
fruits of his travails: so he would pray him to give proofs and presidents
of it in the parts of his preferment, for reformation of such enormities as
his Majesty was then about. All was accepted and promised. But he was
hollow-hearted, as he quickly proved: for he aequiuocated.

Again, Roman Esaus met (among others) our Jacob, both at his entry to
England, and at the Parliament: yea some of them received to inward services.
In this they all agree, that from, and in the same place they agreed with
Jacob, the one invited, the other devoted him to his death. A bloody banquet!
Afirie Religion! The first sacked bodies, the second sacrificed souls: 2.
Chro. 7.5.
not a Salomons sacrifice to dedicate houses, but to sacrifice both Solomon and
his houses: not with fire from above, but from the bowels of the earth below:
nothing of God, but all of the Devil their deviser: a fine holocaust, a
Catholic sacrifice, a faith! as Catholic, as the whore that hatched it, ever
either purging by the force of her powder, or Reu. 17.2.
poisoning with the cup of her fornication, all the Princes of the earth.

Thus for the Comparison of Esaus. Follows now the Wrestling it self.

And when Jacob was left alone, etc. Genesis 32.24.

When Man is weakest and most solitary, then are all sorts of assaults most
forcible. Jacob was now alone, not so much as the daylight to bear him
witness. But as to the similitudes of these wrastlings, are not that Jacobs
recorded in Genesis? And our Jacobs, yet scarce past our eyes, much less our
memories; and are also fully recorded according to the truth to the posterity:
so that I (who will neither add nor pair) can nothing mend them. Only I do
observe here, how the almighty God did furnish our Jacob with weapons fitting
each conflict: against bloody Esau, with Force and Eloquence. Force, in
clasping (as he did) with him. Eloquence, as with stratagems to compass him.

Eloquence, a rare virtue, and rarest in this Prince, in whose tongue, so many
good languages dwell, as in their natural soil.

Against fiery Esau, with more subtle weapons, Judgment and Providence:
Judgment, in construing that Letter to Monteagle: Providence, in ripping up
the danger. O here did mount an Eagle in the heavenly sky of our Jacobs
judgment, else both Prince and people had flowen as fiery Eagles in the air.
Here became our Jacob, from a mild Dove, a wise Serpent: else both Prince and
people had been stung with fiery Scorpions. And here our noble hunting Jacob,
out-hunted those Romish Esaues, else both Prince and people had tasted a pipe
of Catholic Tobacco.

The differences of the VVrastlings.
Protasis, or Proposition. 1.
God wrastled with Jacob, in shape of a man.

Apodosis, or Application. 1.
Men possessed, or Satan in shape of men wrastled with our Jacob.

Protasis, or Proposition. 2.
God wrastled with Jacob for assurance of his safety from his brother Esau.

Apodosis, or Application. 2.
Our Jacob wrastled with his deadly enemy, fights before he fears, and
triumphs before he be known in the field.

Protasis, or Proposition. 3.
God wrastled with Jacob for confirmation of his faith.

Apodosis, or Application. 3.
Our Doomesday priests blow up our Jacob, because he will not renounce his
faith: a marvelous Religion, all standing by miracles, dead men's bones,
relics for exorcismes; new found Virgo Hallensis, and aspers collis. Lypsius.
Ladies for all old diseases. And now, hell it self, a fire for kindling of a
Catholic Religion. En hic, illic, and esthic est Christus Rome.

And he saw that he could not prevail against him; therefore he touched the
hollow of his thigh. Genesis 32.25.

Protasis, or Proposition.
God wrestling with Jacob, could not, that is, would not prevail; for so was
his purpose; yet he touched the hollow of his thigh, to witness unto him that
he was a mighty Wrastler, and for a remembrance to seek for his help in the
day of affliction.

Apodosis, or Application.
Our wrastlers could not, because God would not suffer them preuail; yet had
they power to touch the hollow of our Jacobs thigh, by reason so much blood was
shed for his safety, which is justly comprehended under the person of Jacob;
yea, one indeed thrust through the very thigh: teaching thereby our Jacob, that
this conflict should not pass (as no more did it) without a memorial for his
amendment. And so, howsoever he escaped in his own person, Vicounts Fenton,
and Hadaington.
yet looking on those whose blood bled as in his own body: of which, two yet
alive and linked to Jacob, as out of divine providence for two witnesses of
Gods mercy, and two wakeners of their Masters memory for a perpetual
thankfulness of this delivery.

And the man (or God in the form of man) said, Let me go, for the day
appears: Genesis 22.26.
but he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.
Protasis, or Proposition. 1.
The day thus appearing, and Jacob being victorious, the Angel then would have
bin gone. But Jacob fearing more and great wrastlings, would first have a
further blessing.

Apodosis, or Application. 1.
Thus also did appear the day to our Jacob, as well from our Diluge, as our
Doomesday Papists, who wrastled indeed most in the night. And God grant a
fully clear day for clearing the clouds of this last wrestling: for which my
Bone-fire kindles two lights from two corners. The one, to let us thoroughly
see and examine the causes given out by these Esaus against our Jacob. The
other, for a devouring death to al such as have wrongfully wrastled.

The causes (as the Esaus) were two fold; Blood and Fire; Blood in the Parthian
Esau of Perth, falsely charged (as said is) and truly removed both by law and
minority. But now turn it over, Jacob is Mayor and victorious; then purge the
land from blood, else what excuse against the next bloody wrestling: for
though Gowrie falsely alleged blood, yet did God at that time justly wrestle
with Jacob for blood: Genesis 7.
yea, blood had then most like a flood of Noah drowned the land: so that whilst
your Highness was on the top of all Gowries house, yet were you in blood to
your gorge. But since it pleased our good God to make eue^ Gowries own house
your Arc of Noah in the midst of that diluge, and also to settle since, the
great Arc of your royal estate so pleasantly upon these sweet Mount of
Armenia it follows then (Sir) that like a faithful Noah you send out still
some to spy, how the diluge of blood decreaseth in your land, not
Corbie-messengers (for we have too many such in trust already) but Doves, Or
Rauen-messengers. Genesis 8.7, 8, 9
more near to Noah's own nature.

Now (Sir) these be my most temperate flames I spoke of at the beginning. A
base affection will (even in your presence) proclaim your praise, and perhaps,
a part again disclaim his colors, and aequiuocate; so have I here made you a
Jacob: but it must be a mighty love dare speak once of a Prince his escapes;
and this dare I, knowing I deal not with a proud Pope, non possu^ errare; but
with a most christian king, knowing Quis sit qui non erret. And therefore, lest
I be met with the Philosophers reply, who being asked, which of all beasts he
held for most cruel, answered thus, Exferis, Tyrannis, exmitibus adulator,
will I (I say) be about to be as free (if it be possible) from flattery, as
they have found your Majesty from tyranny; telling them (and most truly) that
as those bloody escapes were not the faults of your person, but of your Time,
not of Nature, but necessity, from customs tyranny, not your authority, born
before you, and buried by you: So has your Highness already well begun to give
us (as with Noah) a new generation, both by according our barbarous feeds, or
enmities, and crying down our cut-throte pistolls; wherein your Majesty had
even a new wrestling and small assistance. Only rests then, that as you
are a Jacob and a noble Hunter (not forgetting your calling with Esau) you out
hunt still all such bloody Hunters as brought you to those bloody bathes you
then escaped. So noble hunting Jacob, since your Horn is already blown, the
Forest your own, the Foxes a foot, your loving subjects your Hounds, God the
Master Huntsman; go on in this happy Hunts-vp, whose hollowings are so well
heard by that holy one of Israel. And thus for the causes of our Diluge.

The causes of our Doomes-day are more subtle and quintessented. Religion
grounded on traditions, the chief foundament of all Treasons, whose principles
are Fire and Brimstone, whose ground is from the decay of Kings and Countries,
and whose end shall be Sodom and Gomorrah. Here (as Esau Gowrie falsely urged
blood) do Roman Esaues falsely urge fiery persecution, whereof our Jacob is
most, (if not too much) innocent and free: yet God justly wrastleth here with
Jacob for fire, that is, a fiery trial, too long neglected for purging this
Land, from such fiery breathed Catholics, increased by his Majesty's too much
clemencic.

This error (Sir) as the former, we know to be no ways of your nature,
howsoever of negligence: for as Princes are said to have many and long ears,
yet hear they (for the most part) but what their subjects bring to them. And
we know this Catholic cause has been often disputed (and perhaps to your
own face) under est, and non est; both touching their growth, and your danger:
and the Negative rather prevailing, because Runnagates were cropen in credit
that could aequiuocate; till now your Majesty has had so lively a
demonstration of it: so do I here (as a man of his masters own Religion)
avouch that Ita est; yea, much better have we seen it go since we knew your
Majesty never better minded then now. Then (Sir) est, you have escaped it,
erit, beware with it, unless in time you see too it. Alas, that sacred ears
should be concredited to Syrene tongues.

The other corner of my Fire, was for a light to search out and punish this
late Catholic Treason. Away then (Sir) with too much of your old clemency:
Clemency, the most dangerous companion that ever your Majesty carried about
with you, howsoever a part desiderated in many Princes. For of all the
rebellio^s your Highness has been exercised with from your cradle, this of
Doomesday is the only perfection.

Some seemed in your life (though unlawfully) to redress their own
particulars. The diluge, by your death, a general desolutio^: but this
Doomesday (as said Winter) struck at the root, In hu Confession. Basilicon
Doron.
and so fell all the branches. The^ (Sir) howsoever you refer the * punishment
of treason to the discretion of the Prince, willing thereby in some cases to
mitigate the severity of some merciles Monarchs, yet in this point, pardon us
your people, who must be a chief party, even to tell your Majesty, that none
guilty can escape correction.

As a husband (Sir) you are but a private man; and as a father, but private;
then if your own half, or own bowels, could have thus offended, Correction
only as a Prince are you a public person, and in that case, are we alterum
Relatum: whose nature is, (as your Majesty well knows) that the one being
taken out of the way, the other quite perishes: we have been coupled thus
with your Majesty near some forty years, and if our head now should be so
untimely cut off, our old body, with a young head, (howsoever of highest
expectation) might be feared to produce monstrous effects.

Then he said (to Jacob) what is thy name? Genesis 32.26, 27, 28.
who answered, Jacob. And he said, thou shall be called Jacob no more, but
Israel: for since thou have had power with God, thou shall also prevail
amongst men.
Protasis, or Proposition.
Here Jacob receives of God to the former benefit, that future blessing
whereof that was a type, sealed up now with a most forcible sacrament in
changing of his name; and was fully performed in his posterities enjoying of
Canaan.

Apodosis, or Application.
We have here also on both sides ( Jacobs, and his Esaus) certain sacraments,
signs and prodigies. One difference is, that our Jacob now enjoys his
Canaan, which that Patriarch had here, but in expectation: wherein our Jacob
has had also a change in some sort of his name from Sixth to First, from
Scotland and England, to Great Britain, thereby uniting, as it were, so many
Tribes under one title of Israel.

Our signs were, those strange and extraordinary workings of the firmament
above, preceding the blast.

Our prodigies were, these strange generations of Lions in the Tower, whilst
the Traitors build in the Town. Some thought mala omina, because we were too
near mala omnia; but I construe it rather as a mercy of God, who, as he had
given his Majesty by true descent from one hundred and six grandfathers, a
Lion to his Arms, and planted in his heart that true Lion of the Tribe of
Judah: so would he seal up unto him, how strongly he would stand for him
in this wrestling, by making rather a Creation then Generation of Lions, to
carry, as it were, his Majesty's own word In defense against all such as shall
fight against the Lamb. Ren. 17.14.


On the part of our Esaues, were also changed names, for changing of Kings and
Nations, as was in Faulkes, that Cotholique Falcon.

Then they took (their) blessed sacrament, Winters confession.
only fit for sealing up so bloody a sacrifice. Now qualis pater, talis
proles, the Pope and his Pack, their Primar their Pattent; their Sacrament,
their Seal; the Pope their head; Good Lord who was Priest? Of Conscience I
might be persuaded it was the Devil in his Pontificalibus; all good
Aequiuocators.

But alas, for a little of our Jacobs serpentine wisdom here, to examine this
subternaturall operation of this their Sacrament, as whether there was in it a
perfect Transubstantiation or not. And if a perfect Transubstantiation, tantus,
quantus, totus, quotus, talis, qualis, and caetera, reliqua, omnia, nihil,
conform to their fictions, then what did it seal up in these receivers?
Salvation or Damnation? If Salvation, then farewell heaven for my part: for
such a villainy was never heard of since first the execrated Pope was
ex-screated. Damnation? who dare judge, lest he be judged? for it may be (and
God grant) they die penitent, and so be saved. I have known the blessed
Sacrament work in men, both a sorrow and abstinence from smaller sins: but
to swallow their God, for sealing up a resolution in so many hearts, to
sacrifice their own sovereign Lord, with so many souls; nine Pater Nosters,
that is plain Popery.

True Religion is like true coin; it has always on the one side God, in some
word, and the King on the other: whatsoever is not so, is counterfeited. This
miserable age is too much exercised, under pretext of Religion, aut in delendis
aut declinandis regibus.

God says, Eccle. 10.20
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: Popery says, Curse him not in thy
thought, but ere ever he be able to know thy thought, give him a blast,
aequiuocate: and then if the blast hold not, hang him that missed him, but if
it hold, canonize him that hit him. Hang all Aequiuocators. But leaving to
eternize my Fire from the quantity, but rather the quality of my fuel, I go
about to that corner of our great expectation of your Majesty, after the
example of Jacob, in a thankful memory of so great and gracious a delivery.

And Jacob, called the name of the place Peniel: Genesis 32.30.
for (said he) I have seen God.
Protasis, or Proposition.
One thing does Jacob here immediately after his delivery, and an other
afterward. chap. 35. 2.

Apodosis, or Application.
So did our Jacob, immediately after his delivery, go to Bethel; that is,
Gods house; and there solemnly praised the mighty one of Israel, as the only
author of his delivery, to which all his people said Amen. And this Tuesday
being as it were Tuyce-day for his wrestling: first, dies Martis by blood: and
now Vulcan by fire: so has his Majesty turned the same days for ever in
days of Gods divine service, in perpetuam and religioam reimemoriam.

Then Jacob said unto his household, Genesis 35.2.
and unto all that were with him: Put away the strange gods that are among you.
Now (Sir) have we done with words of praise, and come to works of praise. We
see even in our Patriarchs house and followers a deformity, strange gods. The
like sees your Majesty both in your Court and Country. We see also in Jacob a
constant and courageous zeal to reform both, without exception of persons;
yea, he suffered not so much as his own Rahel to keep the stolen gods of her
father Laban: Genesis 31.19.
what less can we look for of your Majesty? No, what less do your beginnings
already promise unto us? Basilicon Doron.
Then (Sir) conform to your own grounds; begin your reformation even at your
elbow, and so to the extremities of your kingdom. So this corner of my
Bonefire for your house, the next for your people. For both one general.

No trusting a Princes person to servants; nor the keys of the Common wealth
to Governors, divided from their Master in religion: chiefly professing that
religion, which only of all, maintains for a Maxim, to cut off Maximos, for
a Principle to kill Principes: a practice without any president, whereupon has
ensued this late, little treason. Ironia.


Antitheses for the people.
Jacob came not to his Canaan by conformities: neither shall your Majesty ever
enjoy long your Canaan by them.

Jacobs posterity had a great many mighty Nations to cast out of his Canaan,
Ios. 5.1.
differing from the true service of God: and your Majesty has but one, who
will neither serve God nor you.

Jacob his posterity made (but rashly) a covenant with the Gibeonites in
Canaan: Ios. 9, 3.
your Majesty's covenant was craved by Romish catholics, refused by you;
further the^ every particular man's behauior and dutiful obedience might
demerite, whereof my self was a witness; too much grace for so much
ingratitude.

The Gibeonites were contented to draw water and hew wood for the house of
Jacobs God. The Romish Catholics will kindle fire and burn wood to blow you
up; because ye do not suffer them serve their own god. Then (Sir) away with
them: and as after your Diluge, you purged your Land of blood: so after this
Doomesday, purge us from strange gods.

At that Diluge your Highness made a law, In the Parliament next following.
that no man should bear the name (much less the nature) of Esau Gowrie: let
also your laws now abolish both the name and nature of Romish Esaues.

Trust not their Oaths for Non est fides sake; nor their subscription, for
they admit interpretation by way of Aequiuocatio^, they breed Distinguoes,
which draw on your Extinguoes. The only vniuoque way is, Away with them.

But this were hot. No wonder seeing it is the breath of a fire: can my fire,
in a fiery subject, against false fiery subjects, speak other then a fiery
language? My Fire burns only for King and Country, and yet quick with both:
shall it be cold with those that would burn both?

All would not so, therefore all must not away. Resp. God knows how many do,
or how long they shall think so. Yet all Popery away, seeing al sorts of
Papists have thought so. Mark my Induction.

Ecclesiastiques and Laics have thought so: of Eccles. Jesuits and Secular
Priests have thought so. Of Jesuits, Priests, and Prouincials have thought so.
Of Laics, Subjects against any Prince, and even against their own Prince have
thought so: Subjects Servants, against both their own Prince and Master have
thought so. Of late, all these Disciples, and Children thought so: and of old,
Papa pater, and Roma matter, both thought and taught so. And J pray, if this
Pope-religious blast had not been, what Jesuits, Priests, Subjects, or
Servants of that sort could give more espera^ce of duty, then these same that
were in? None, then still away withal Popery. And since Rebel-religion is all the riches we have from Rome, his Ma: may better say to father Pope, then the
King of Genesis 14, 21.
Sodom to father Abraham, Da mihi animas, bona cape tibi. Let the Pope take
home both his goods and his Gods, let the souls be our Sovereigns: Souls in
Ciuilibus properly and peculiarly; in Sacris, to follow their Moses, leading
them from Pharoas slavery to Gods service, and if this cannot be, let Gods,
goods, and good men, all go.

Then, though we trust none, there is no fiery trial; blowing over Sea, is not
blowing out of the World. Trust them: No. J have seen (not so long since)
Papo-Catholiques, subscribe once, swear and subscribe twice; Communicate,
swear, and subscribe thrice; and fall back four times: yea some of the^ come
to that height, as to bear some office in our Church, and yet remain Romish.
Good Lord: But seeing I conceal my own name, I will not reveal theirs,
howsoever ready to give proof of all, to such as both know me, and have
authority to call me to my answer, in truth without Acquinocation for all are
yet alive. So, Non est fides sera anda hereticis, that Is to say, Nulla est
fides his Catholicis.

But here the pity of bewitching Popery, that Gentlemen, who in their civil
society, make conscience to break their smalest promises; yet by a position of
Romish Religion, are so far coosened, as to conceyte, not only a
lawfulness, but even a merit, to break all the bonds of Nature, God, and
Man. Blow up all. Then, shall the safety of King and State depend upon their
dispositions in their Religion? Or rather dispose of them and their Religion
for their own safety?

Mild ones (so says our late Libeller) some fiery, some dipassionat
Catholics. Against the Earl of Salisbury.
Answer.

The first he concludes on himself: The second, the blessed Sacrament (says
he) is once more taken to kill his Ma. Counselor, the Earl of Salisbury;
five good men of the dispassionat sort, yet all go on fire: a blast for the
King, a Shot for his Counsel; and I dare avouch that whatsoever he be, dare
call that a Blessed Sacrament, which is only taken for binding men to such
bloody attemptes, is a Traitor, not only to the King, but even to Christ
himself. Is Christ a King himself, the Savior of the world, become nowadaies
a common cutthroat of Kings? Swearing to kill all such as Traitor-Catholiques
conspire against? No, he will still make such Sacraments prove (as before)
but as bloody Excrements against their own heads.

But because our To the Earl of Salisbury.
Libeller is come to Fannes, able to sever the fault of the professor from the
prefession it self, which he complains we have not. To show them plainly,
we can distinguish Distinguenda, and so not confound Professorem and
Professionem Thus it goes.

Professor, is Traitor Doctus, Professio is Traitor Docens. Professor is the
Vessel apt to receive any liquor at the first, Professio is the poison
infecting every Vessel which receives it. Now Master Fanner, where say you
the fault is? Is it not in the Profession? And such as once suck the milk of
it, and become at first (as you call them) but Mild ones, are easily made to
receive stronger food, and become fiery ones for a blast, or good men for a
Shot. Nemo nascitur artifex; and so nemo nascitur, sed fit, Catholicus
carnifex: if it were the fault of the people or the Professors; why then should
we not find some Brownistes or such other fects, Cutthroats, Religionis
caus'a, as well as Catholics? No, each sect has his own errors, Omni, foli,
and semper.
but it is only Quarto modo proprium to Catholi-schisme, To cut down Kings.

Then (Sir) if there be no means to separate Treason from the profession, nor
the Profession from the Professors, of force must you Ma: either separate both
from you, or let them separate you from the world: you must either be
converted, or euerted. No king shall be sure of his Crown, till they be sure of
his soul.

For first, Spain, because he is wholly the Popes, he is secure of his Crown:
giving harbory to none that the Pope-hunteth. And what more liberty ought we
to Romish Idolaters, then they to us? They will obey none but Catholic
Kings; Then (Sir) accept you of none, but true Chistian Subjects. True, they
cannot be, for although they will follow the Leopard of England or Lion of
Scotland in Ciuilibus, yet so soon as your Ma. shall display the Lion of Judah,
there they leave you disclaiming your colors, they aequiuocate. Since they
will obey but in tanto, let them go beyond Seas in toto. France, though he be
turned too good Catholic, yet must he go to heaven toothlesse, because he had
not fire enough in his Religion, but harbors such as his holiness hunteth.
And ere he come thither must he pass perpontem amentium, as in that late
treason of the mad man on the bridget for it is well said; Est Papa pater
Pontifex,
Non pontifex, sed potifex,
Non potifex, sed panifex,
Non panifex, sed carnifex,
And because of his Vbiquitarie holiness, it increases thus: Hic Carnifex,
infernifex,
Est Papapater Pontifex.


But Britain only, Britain, because he uses calm and christian
medicaments for quenching their Aetnian consciences, as the Oil of Lenity, the
Balm of Mercy, the mouth of Prophecy, works without arroga^cy (the only
Physic for queasie stomachs ouercharged with the Dregs of that whorish cup.)
Therefore must his Ma. go to Heaven by a blast, and in the works of his
Supererogation, his whole posterity, and almost his people with him. And so by
way of Aequiuocation. The libeller aforesaid.
(They wish him to be as great a Saint in heanen, as he is a king on earth) so
should he be no more a King on earth. And we wish them vniuoce, and vna voce,
that they were all presently as true Saints in Heaven, as they be false
Traitors on Earth: So shall they be as great Saints as the King; for they
are as false as he is great. But herein prove they that old speech true.
Perniciosa Lenitas, salutaris seueritas.

Three sorts of Catholics have I ever remarked, one youthly; Lecherous
Catholics.
leaning most to that Law which gave most liberty to their lusts: Wounds and
passions, Tavern, and Brothel-house, fast so many fridaies, and all is well.

Another, Ignorant Catholics.
Ignorant; de profundis, and cor mundum, knowing as little what they say, as
what they do. Ignorantiamater pietatis.

A third, Treacherous Catholics.
purified Catholics; the Popes first borne, and those are only for shauing
of Kings Crowns.

For the first, good laws may bridle liberties, and correction breed
knowledge. For the second, some exorcismes would be used to, banish this
spirit of darkness, or else they sent to Rome for exercise of their Religion.
For the third, wheresoever they be found, Exalt Haman.

Thus far has my Bonefire played upon these two points, Professor and
Profession; apparaling each point, not according to the own merit, but my own
means, all in Truth.

Now begins my fire from that corner to die (as it were) for a doleful show,
even pitying, (though it be afire) that Seeming piety should make any Princes
Subjects so alienated from any Prince, much more such a princes subjects, by a
catholic co^tractio^, Italienated against such a Prince. A Prince (J say) to
who^ God has given (and so giue^to us) such qualities, as are not to be
expected, but when the courses of David and Solomon come about: for every King
is no more a David, then each David a King. Yet must he have a blast. And
whenever (but O (...)) so shall be, their miserable, (but vnremediable)
posterity shall worship him in his Tomb, with whom they wrastled in his Throne.

Neither is this the only misery of our Kingdoms, but even of all
Christiandome; Hence is it that the Turk to whom the very name of Christ is
odious, goes out conquering Christendom, not so much by his own force, as
sought unto, for fear of such Catholic fire, as, where the Turk often
contenteth himself with Bodies.
Somata, they will have both Souls and bodies.
Somata Psychas: for the Turk has not yet learned to equivocate, nor cannot,
until he turn Catholic: neither know In so much odds as men talk of,
between an ignorant, pitiful, Jnfidell Turk, and a wilful, cruel,
Jdolatrous Catholic; beside, that the Turk comes in Subiugans, the other
Subditus, and yet will subdue all.

But leaving that Pitiless Turk, to teach these pitiless Catholics, we
return to our Jacob, both ready and able to hold out the one, and throw out
the other in his new conquering word: Put away your strange Gods from amongst
you; Yea, astranger God then was either that Calfe of the Israelites, or the
Philistimes Dagon, is this Catholic Dragon; who will never talk with Jacob
in other terms, then Blow up King, till he Throw out Catholic, at leastwise
Catholi-schisme: for no Apelles shall ever so perfectly paint out Popery, as it
has pictured it self in this little blast, not in Name but in Nature, not his
visage only but his works, Powder the true picture of Popery.
Powder, pourtraying as well the Mild as fiery Catholics. Thus.

Powder kindled, blows up all: bot Popery. Powder applied cold, eats up
all, Jron or steel; Mild Popery.

Powder, must always be vpmost, and so may it be fiered on the palm of the
hand: but if undermost, it blows up all; So stood our Parliament House on
the very Pillars of Popery, Barrels of powder: Because they would keep Popery
under, they should have all gone up. But place once the Pope above Prince and
Parliament, and so sleep in safety.

Then (Sir) use powder, as Powder; either set it by it self apart, where you
may be sure of it both from Fiery blowing or Mild rousting; or if there be no
lodging for it, send it beyond Seas to the Netherlandes whence it came; they
have both more use of mines and shot, then we. And being beyond Seas, I will
become surety it shall never blow up any on this side, make sure within who
list.

Otherwise the Carte of Phoebus Lucifer, ruled by Pope Phaeton, drawn by Wild
Jesuits, and attended by Catesby, Persie, Digbies, all good Catholics,
falling once more on the land, will burn up Jacob with his Rahell, his Ruben,
and his Leuits, the whole Princes and people of Israel. Gather it the^
altogether, leave not here and there a sparkle, lest either Aeolus blow, or
Vulcane beat; and so we have a new blast: for the Pope and the Devil are
sildome at wrath, they be both cunning Aequiuocators. Gather them, not (as they
did you) to an unknown destruction, but either to a hopeless conjunction, or
a happy separation. Let Majesty seat it self on the Throne of authority,
assisted both with Justice and Mercy, and so give them one Ite, missa est, for
all.

And surely it is a sore persecution, where the seed of Rebellion blowing up
Prince and all, for religion is sent (for prevention sake) in peace, to the
soil of their own Religion: here it is no fire (J hope.) What craved the
Isralites, but Exodus 5, 3.
leave to go worship in the wilderness? What crave our poor Brethren often
burning in Spain (but for not yielding to them Religion) more then leave to
retire? But such Pharaos Ethnicke and Catholic (like that Luke 16, 8
Steward, wise his own generation) may teach us more providence in our
profession.

Since this I Will was accursed of the Pope, in our Princes, and so cast in
Christ's hands, Popery has never prospered here. It takes more false and
artificial fire to foster it then do Oranges, and yet is even rotten before it
be ripe. Else where can be Ladies found that can give the blind their Legs,
Virgo Hallensis, and Aspricollis Lipsius.
and the lame their eyes; in every street corner, a Christ, and toward Rome is
Religion so ripe, that from every tree they may pull a Pope-granat, a
Pater-garnet: So Ite, missa est, is the only best both for their souls and our
bodies.

But my fire being build for joy, and now near spent, time it were that our
mirthfull Chorus went once about it in this order. Our Jacob, holding in his
one hand the Princes of Israel, the Nobility in the other, his Leuits and
Clergy follows, or rather chaseth them, the whole body of Israel crying, O
Jacob Prince of Israel, proclaim not, but practice a reformation unto us:
preserve us from fire. Jacob answers, Put away these strange Gods that be
amongst you, and sets them a work to see to their own safety in all time
coming. Then Princes of Jsraell, make no more covenants with such Gibeonites,
whom nothing can bind to Jacobs god, nor from whose fire nothing can deliver
Jacobs self.

All lies on Jacob, for except he prevail among men, no hope of reformation:
for both in Church and Nobility are a kind of strange Gods.

The Church here is twofold (and so farewell one-foldnesse) one sort is, who
can neither be known by Coat nor carriage, to be Churchmen, but like a pack
of wild Mulets) whose nature is, the more they are laden, the lighter to go)
charged with church livings, can never be ouerburthned with benefices: taking
it for the cheef mark of their Christianity, that they have divided Christ's
coat, and parted his patrimony amongst them: Ios. 7, 11.
Churchmen, not of calling, but so called: Sacrilegious Achans, who have not
only stolen (in the minority of our gracious King) from the house of God
things consecrated, but even the execrated also, the Babilonish garment, and
the tongue of gold, and the portion of Leui, thereby tying the golden tongue of
Christ's Gospel; but have also made such Laws, and have clothed themselves
with such offices, as may be able to maintain them. These Achans can say in
time of need, Let the King live of his own, and puram eleemosinam to the
preachour. But, praised be GOD, our Jacob has appointed (as did Joshua) a to
morrow to them, to sanctify the people, that the execrable thing may be taken
away, and so this their strange God not only put from them, but maintenance
given for planting the true God amongst them.

The other sort is, the Preaching, but not fully privileged Church, being
abridged of the former, both of livings and liberties: True Leuits, but a
Strange GOD has also cropen in amongst them, a sparkle of the Powder of
division: Genesis 49, 7. Deuteronomy. 10, 8.
For where God at first divided them among the rest of the People, for their
instruction, they be now divided and at odds among themselves, to their own
destruction; all busied about white and black, while Catholics carry away
souls and bodies, in ceremonies more then substance, disputing anent
Discipline, while the other overthrows the Doctrine.

Here would our Jacob feign have the strange God away, and restore the Leuits
to there former state, only yet impeded by Leui, his disputes and Achans
difficulties. God accord the one, and remove the other; that, as Leui first
issued out of Jacobs loins; so, our Leuits having their libertyes restored by
our Jacobs laws, may with their Jacob so soundly iumpe and join in the cause
of religion, that in all his Kingdoms the only Genesis 31.53.
God of Abraham be sworn by; and not with Laban, the God of Abraham and Nahor;
that is, a Papist, a Puritan, etc. And his Leuits again (being an estate of
all others seated most in the hearts of the multitude, able in one day, yea, all
in one hour weekly, to speak to all the people, which Jacob cannot do, may
be made the mouth of Jacob to his Subjects for knitting their hearts unto him.
Here is both piety and pious Policy, Loyalty, and Religion, God and Caesar.

The Nobility too much given to nouilty; almost running over strange Realms,
and so bring home strange Gods. Some, such reformations as begin at the Kings
throat; so did Gowry: others, and too many, a little Catholic powder, too
ready for a Blasts, Shot. And howsoever no man will hold, that so soon as a
man is turned Catholic, he is straight turned Traitor (God forbid) yet (I
say) has he so soon planted in him, that powerful seed of Treason, which
seconded by smooth Seminaries, does by degrees draw him unto the depth of many
desperate sins, to which of his own nature he should never have inclined:
first persuading that sin is venial; then that sin is not sin, and last
that hugest sins are highest meritorious.

And though each spirit be not alike desperate in daring (because perhaps not
alike labored) yet, if the Moon had changed on us comforme to their Catholic
Calender, as the fieryones should have executed; so the Mild ones would have
accepted the common benifit, counting it bonum, though not been factum. They
had all stood for Nouations, a new world, a new King and a new Religion. The
Mild ones serve to harbor the fiery ones; one Missa, is Mistress to both, both
have one general end, Tolerations, Alterations, or (if al fail) Exterpations.
Away then with all Popery, hot or cold; and God strengthen our Jacob to go on
in his beginnings The last assembly assisted by the K. at Haly Rudehouse
before he entered his Canaan for order taking with the Education of the young
Nobles of his land; chrifly such as should be sent beyond Seas, left by such
Romish Regeneration from Traditions, the treasure of Treasons; and unwritten
Verity, masked with a counterfeited charity, Princes be not brought again to
the sha^mbles, and the people as Beues for sacrifices. Thus (sir) my fire
having spent much of his endless fuel Affection, gives out this one glimps (as
his last breath) on your own sacred person. That, seeing you are found to be in
Name and life a Jacob; in Birth right and blessings a Jacob; in Esaus and
Enemies a Jacob; in Tentations and Wrastlings a Jacob; and in strength and
preuailinges a Jacob: so in dutiful thankfulness you be also a Jacob. Genesis
35, 1
God then bids you (as he bad Jacob) arise, go up to Bethel and (...) unrip
in Gods house. Then with Jacob take with you your household and all that are
with you: and so many as will not go with you to Bethel Gods house, send them
to Bethauen the House of vanity, the land of their Jdols.

Doubtless, the most part will quite their Idols,* and give Jacob their
earings, the cause of their errings, which then your H. may hide (as did Jacob)
under a Oak of ever lasting oblivion. Danger on success, are neither to be
feared; the fear is on their side: for no strength in strange Gods. You see how
small a circle can exercise their minds; how little a mark raketh up whole five
Romish Musketters; even your Ma. most faithful The letter to the Earl of
Salisbury.
Salisbury; but alas, it is Virtutem viri non personam they aim at. But
howsoever, better it were to leave co^quering, then dye yielding; better to
repair Religion decaying, then restore it once lost; better die martyred then
only murdered; and better Vindicate in time our Jacobs life; then to revenge
his untimely death. What if none were to assist, but he that fought for him at
Perth? That informed his mind at our late Parliaament? In the first, Jacob
expected a Banquet, not a Reformation: in the last he intended an Union, not a
Separation. Sword and fire have assailed, but never prevailed, and shall that
God distitute Jacob now wrestling for his glory? Besides, the whole body of his
Subjects, ready (as feet) to carry him; numbers of his Nobles, as arms to
defend him: his Leuits, as the Trumpets of his mouth, at whose sounding the
Walls of Rome shall fall down before Jacob, as did Jericho before Joshua. 6.20
Joshua. And among many things forspoken of old of our Jacob (from whatsoever
spirit they breathed) having now their full performances; this al, so was one,
That he shall pull down the Wales of Rome; which spiritually understood, may
prove (in the power of God) that as in Rome Ethnic:

Scaliger.
Imperij fuerat Romani Scotia limes:
So in Rome Catholic
Romanae fuerit Scot' Anglus origoruing.
Amen, without Acquiuocation.
FINIS.

