A brief discovery of the damages that happen to this Realm by disordered and
unlawful diet. THE BENEFITS AND COMMODIties that otherways might ensue. With
a persuasion of the people: for a better maintenance to the Navy. Briefly
compiled, by Edward Ieninges.

ROMANS. XIIII. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. And let
not him which eats not judge him that eats. For the kingdom of God is not
meat nor drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Imprinted at London by Roger Ward, dwelling upon Lambart Hill, near old
Fish-streete. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Charles Haward, Lord high admiral of England,
knight of the most honorable order of the Garter, and one of her highness
privy Counsel. Edward Ienings wishes long and prosperous health, with increase
of all happiness.
RIght honorable and my good Lord, after long consideration had of the sundry
and great discommodities that happens to this Realm by the misdemeanour of
diverse disordered persons contrary to many good and commendable laws
carefully ordained, heaping harms on our own heads through wilful
disobedience. As a poor member amongst the rest lamenting this careless
contempt, I pondred earnestly in my mind, what way to employ my labor and
small skill for some redress herein to the benefit of my country: and
considering amongst many other things, the great harms that happen to this
realm sundry ways by the contempt of fish, and inordinate or unlawful
expense of flesh, growing as may be supposed through want of true
understanding, to what end the law in that behalf made is ordained, as one
amongst many much unable effectually to discharge so great a work, of a
zealous mind I have compiled this small treatise for the persvvasion of such
as herein will be persuaded. And aduenturing to proceed with all humbleness
I have made bold, for the better publishing thereof to shroud my self for
defense under the protection and favor of your good honor, as a special and
careful magistrate for such things as concern the commonwealth of this
realm, ordained of God under her Majesty to have the oversight and
government in these affairs which concerns most chiefly a maintenance to
her highness Navy: besides the sundry and great commodities othervvaies
growing to the whole commonwealth. Not only needful to be published, but
most carefully also considered and remembered, as by the discourse follovving
shall manifestly appear. But the common sort of people to avoid the
ceremonicall abuse heretofore used by observation of fish days,
notvvithstanding the pains and penalties by the law threatened, not only
neglects, but utterly contemns the same: nothing remembering the harms that
to them thereby may happen. And some reason is for that no matter has
heretofore bin showed, so largely explained to persuade them as in this my
small work is rudely compiled. Most humbly craving your honors favorable
patience in considering the contents thereof, not respecting the rude still but
my affectioned heart and mind for the benefit and safety of my Prince, and
country then as unworthy of such acceptance, I shall find my self for this
small pains, most bountifully satisfied, and according to duty pray for your
honorable and prosperous estate long to continue.

To the gentle Reader.
Gentle Reader have patience to peruse
The rude contents which in me are contained:
My authors faults very feign I would excuse,
But that they are so manifestly explayned.
Judge therefore the best, let rigor be restrained,
Accept his heart, his hand, and willing mind:
Then all is well what fault soever you find.
For well he meant, and well he hopes it will prove,
Well to persuade such as well will be content:
But those that well nor ill their affection can remove,
My author forces little, he does him not repent
Of any thing here done which he has said or meant:
Hoping the wise of his willing mind will conceive,
To whose judgments he, that his small works does leave.
Much more there might by arguments be aleag'd
Then are here set down for proof sundry ways,
But by few things the wise will be persuaded,
Considering the contents, he seeks no further praise,
But good acceptance, grant therefore no denayes,
And his small pain, and travel he has spent,
He will right well accept and find himself content.
FINIS.
CONCERNING OBEDIENCE TO THE polliticke laws ordained by Princes. Their care
for the commodity of the people. The disobedient are to be punished, some
laws are more earnestlier to be cared for then other some.
AS it has pleased almighty God to ordain Princes to rule and govern. So
has he also commanded that the subjects should obey. For confirmation
whereof S. Paul in his 13. chap. to the Romans says. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God. The powers
says he that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists that
power resists the ordinance of God. He says further, that Princes are not
feared for good works but for eu^ill. If therefore thou will be without fear,
do well: so shall thou have praise of the same, for he is the minister of God
for thy wealth. But if thou do evil fear, for he bears not the sword for
naught, but is the minister of God to take vengeance on them that do evil.
Further he says obey your Magistrates not for fear of vengeance only, but
for conscience sake.

If this lessen of S. Paul were perfectly remembered there should be little
cause to put so many pennall statutes in execution as at this day there be.
But we consider not besides this good lesson of S. Paul, what great care,
study and labor our Prince and Magistrates accompanied with the most learned
of the land, not only has, but daily does by their earnest labor, practice
and devise by sundry godly and polliticke laws for the maintenance,
preservation and continuance of ye whole commonwealth, like as careful
parents cease not to study and labor for the education or bringing up of
their children, Gently admonishing and earnestly commanding to observe and
keep the said good laws and ordinances, which for our own benefits by them
are so made and ordained.

But we like careless children little regarding the careful travel that
herein by them for us is taken: look only to the time present, satisfieng our
sensual lust and desire, not remembering the dangers and damages that thereby
may unto us afterward ensue and so run headlong negligently and through
disobedienee into our own decay, contemning the princes commandment which is
Gods ordinance. Wherefore diverse pennalties and punishments are by virtue of
those laws appointed to be laid upon the disobedient, which being executed,
seem grievous and painful and the informer greatly abhorred and evil
thought on whereas in truth, such as give information to the magistrate of
offenses with an earnest desire of reformation, and not only for covetousness,
ought of good men rather to be loved and commended: for the life of the law is
execution. Therefore a law made and not executed lies dead, and small
avails to the intent for which it was made.

And as all pennall laws at this day enforce, appear very needful to be
observed yet are some of them more requisite to be looked into, for the
universal benefit of a commonwealth then some other, for that by proof they
import matters of greater weight, yet the effect not considered of, they seem
of little value.

Amongst which there is one a most necessary and polliticke law, not so much
esteemed as the effect does importe, for diverse benefits that thereby may
grow unto the realm, ordain most specially for better maintenance of the
Navy, a thing earnestly to be regarded, which concerns the expense of fish
and sparing of flesh. And the same not only ordained for the sparing of flesh
whereof through the great goodness of almighty God we are sufficiently
furnished. But for diverse and sundry discommodities, dangers, and damages
which through neglecting the times and seasons for expense of fish not only
has, but daily does and will bring upon our realm and the whole common wealth
thereof, except earnest reformation be had and used amongst the common people:
for whose commodity the said law was made with a great penalty upon the
offender.

And for that the greatest number of people, does not perfectly understand the
commodities, that may grow unto them by observation hereof, nor the
discommodities that may happen by neglecting the same, neither yet the certain
cause wherefore this law of abstinence is ordained: For the better instruction
and pesrwasion of such persons hereafter follows certain arguments which
concern a reason and cause, that this law amongst others ought most carefully
to be observed: That although fear of the penalty will not force them or
forgetfulness of dutiful obedience has caused a neglegence, or ye ceremonicall
abuse which in times past thereby was used, does persuade a contempt, yet a
consideration had of the commodities that may thereby grow, and the
discommodities that may happen, will happily persuade such persons as bear a
christian and brotherly love to their country, after the counsel of Saint
Paul, to obey even for conscience sake, considering the same does concern not
only their own benefit, but the benefit of their children that shall come
after them.

Great numbers of ships have been maintained by the certain expense of fish.
The cause of their decay. A remedy sought to repair them again.

TO this realm of England in times past belonged a strong navy of ships
maintained chiefly by fishing, wherewith the Prince and country were compassed
for their defense, as with a forcible wall, the repair whereof was very well
supplied by the certain utterance and expense of such fish as was taken and
provided which grew by the observation of such days as was appointed for the
abstinence from flesh and eating of fish, and thus was this wall or navy kept
in a sufficient repair as a redye defense for the Prince, and this Realm
against all foreign assaults, whenever or howsoever the same should
happen, until the superstitious abuse thereby used, caused some few to omit
the observation of fish days according to the accustomed order, which at the
first appeared no harm. Then some more did the like, and yet little harm
appeared. But in continuance of time, in manner the whole multitude by ensample
of others, did break that order: some in part, and some in the whole, whereby
the accustomed buying and expense of fish, whereupon the continual maintenance
of the said Navy grew, became so small, that there appeared a great decay in
the Navy: nevertheless every man proceeded from time to time in breach of
the said accustomed order, which before was certainly observed: and so in few
years the Navy was abated from five ships to two in diverse parts of this
realm, whereupon the force thereof touching that matter was weakened much, to
the great peril of this realm, and encouragement of the enemy.

In avoiding whereof with earnest consideration had by the nobles and commons
of the whole realm, considering the danger that thereby might ensue, it was by
them thought necessary to devise some means how the navy might be repaired
again, and being assembled in the parliament holden at Westminster the fifth
year of the Queens highness most gracious reign, a law was there made and
ordained, that the accustomed order for fish days should be observed in
abstaining from flesh, that fish might be the more plentifullier spent.

Which law for a time of great numbers was observed: but from thence grew not
sufficient contribution to repair and maintain the Navy, for that the
universal multitude had little regard thereunto, whose ensample diverse other
followed: and so many of the greater sort joining with the lesser sort, became
more careless (for want of due execution) then any time before they had bin:
And thus the trade of fishing and provision of fish out of which exceeding
great maintenance grew unto ye Navy, was brought from great to greater decay,
which decay increseth.

For which cause her Majesty with the nobles and commons of the realm
considering the disordered behauior concerning breach of ye said law most
commonly used in many common Iunes, tauerns, tabling-houses, cooks houses, and
other common vitlers, in which place a wonderful number of fish might be spent
if the said law by them were duly observed. In a parliament holden at
Westminster, the 27. year of her most gracious reign a law for the better
observation of the said days and times was further ordained against them, with
a greater penalty then before had bin set down for the other, that
reformation therein might be had, if by any means it were possible. But
thereof in like case so little care of obedience is used, that the offense in
most places rather increases then decreaseth, to the wonderful great damage
of this realm, as by the arguments following may well be considered.

Certain arguments concerning unlawful diet. Reasons alleged for the expense
of flesh, with the answers to the^. The Navy may be maintained by other trades
then fishing, but not without peril, the commodity of fishing.

IF the realm in defense thereof be furnished with five hundred ships, and
that we should suffer the enemy by policy or open force to consume or
destroy three hundred of them, were it not a great and a reprooueable
negligence. But if the natural subjects of this realm by their negligent
manners, shall consume or destroy three hundred of them, is not their so doing
worthy grievous punishment: But if they shall obstinately or wilfully do the
same, what punishment such ought to have, I leave to the judgment of those
that have a wisdom to consider thereof.

In as much therefore as by our diet we abate the Navy by proportion from five
ships to two, is it not to be accounted great negligence, and worthy of
punishment. But after we have espied this negligence we do wilfully continue
the the same, can it be in truth any other, then a practice to overthrow our
own country by weakening the force thereof, to lay it so much the more open
to the enemy.

Further when the Queens Majesty has occasion to send forth, and maintain
her Navy at the seas, must she not be constrained either at the first setting
forth, or in the supply to furnishe and man the same for lack of seafaring
men, with wherrimen and bargemen from the Thames and other Rivers? who although
many of them be tall and lusty men sufficient and able, to do good service in
such affairs, Yet the most part of them in respect of such service may be
accounted but fresh watered soldiers not able to do such service at the
first as shall be necessary, for want of skill, nor able to abide the Seas in
such labor for want of use, and therefore wanting sufficient Seafaring men
amongst them, their service is in danger to turn rather to the carrying and
keeping forth of ships to deliver unto the enemy to increase his force,
then to resist or diminishe the same. We therefore bring this to pass by our
diet, what other thing then do we but by our said diet, seek to strengthen
the enemy, and weaken our selves?

Furthermore let us make another allegation or argument and sa, The Queens
Majesty is head of ye commo^-wealth, which the Lord for his mercies sake long
continue. The common wealth is the seat that she sits on and rules the
legs that bear up this seat, are the forces of the same, if any one of
these legs fail or decay, it weakeneth the rest, and puts all in danger,
like a disioynted frame which reeleth, and is in no certain safety longer
then the joints hold soundly together. And so when any of the principal
joints decay, the whole rest are in perrill, till that joint be repaired and
made sure again.

Therefore forasmuch as the Navy is one of the principal forces or legs
that this commonwealth stands on, which is the Queens Majesty's seat, and
that the people do with their teeth, hale or draw that leg asunder which with
their teeth they are wont to draw and knit together, fast joined to the rest of
the legs. What other thing do they but with their own teeth undermine the seat
of the Prince, putting that in peril to fall to their destruction, which
standing upright and fast, would be their tecture and defense.

But many there be that perhaps will judge this argument very vain and
friuilous to persuade them, remembering the abuse which in times past has been
used in the observation of fish days. And for that abuse, sack utterly
contemn the same without remembering the polliticke device for the benefit of
the Realm, whereunto at the first invention or ordinance thereof in this
land, it was in some part (in my judgment) ordained, as now it is in the
whole: our country being an Island environed with the seas as our walls.

Othersome taking hold on the words of our savior Christ in the xv. of
Matthew, where he says, That which enters into the mouth does not defile the
man, but that which proccedeth out of the mouth. And by that means take
liberty to offend. But they consider not further, where S. Paul says, all
things indeed are pure, but it is evil for the man that eats with offense.
And who thinks not but that is eaten with offense which is eaten contrary to
the Princes laws, and to the hurt of a common wealth. Neither does our Savior
give any warrants by these words, that the thing which enters into the mouth
with offense does not defile ye man: but his meaning in that place is to be
constred off, according to the words in the text specified, where (in my my
judgment) the argument grew about the washing of hands, thorough the
scribulite of the Scribes and Pharisees.

We have also another note to consider off, when the wife of Tobias had
provided a Kidde, and brought to her husband, saying, she would make ready
the same for him to eat: he caused her to stay, and would not suffer her so to
do, until he had examined whether she came truly by the same or not, fearing
it had been stolen, or in such like case come by, and should so eat of it
unlawfully, which he esteemed to be an offense to God. Many other places of
holy scripture may be alleged in this case, which I will at this time omit,
and leave the interpretation thereof to the learned divines, whose office my
simpleness cannot attain unto, but return to the matter which I have taken
in hand to prove by argument in temporal causes as follows.

Others perhaps do think and some in truth will say that concerning a
maintenance for the Navy with mariners, besides the trade of fishing, there
be diverse ways to increase and maintain a sufficient number of Mariners for
service, whenever occasion shall require by other trades and traffickes of
merchandise: as for ensample, was the Realm ever heretofore so well furnished
with serviceable ships, as at this time it is maintained only by trades of
merchandise, wherein also are increased great numbers of mariners, more apter
men in such service.

Unto which it may be answered that many such mariners indeed are increased,
but yet not such a sufficient number as wars if they have any continuance
will require, wherein very many such persons are to be employed, as well in
other ships of this Realm, as in her majesty's own ships.

And if it should be granted that these trafickes should increase mariners
sufficiently for the supply aforesaid, yet if we should depend thereon, we
should express our selves more to lean to things that bring and breed damage,
then to things that bring and breed profit.

For in truth a great part of our merchandise are rather superfluous then
needful, and more damageable then profitable, for example: is not the one
half of our sugars and other groserie wares, rather daintely consumed then
necessarily spent? Again, are not four parts of five of those silks and
veluets that are brought into this realm, rather superfluously used by men of
mean estate, then conveniently worn by such as are of higher estate?

Further, are not three parts of five of the Wines that are brought into this
Realm, rather wastfully consumed to the decaie and destruction of men's
healthes, then necessarily s^ent for the sustentation of men's bodies, to
continue or increase their healthes? And for the transporting of torn and
diverse kinds of merchandise out of this Realm, by reason of those trades, if
they be done at sometimes commoodiously for the benefit of the Realm, they
are done at some other ^imes discommodiously to the damage of the Realm, which
hing is well known to many.

Now when all these trafickes and trades are compared together, and their
commodities with their discommodities, it will appear that the treasure and
strength of this Realm is by the superfluity of them rather consumed and
abated, then increased or continued: notwithstanding I speak not this that it
were necessary for such trades to be left off or extinguished, for thereby
grows great benefits to the Realm sundry ways, not only for sufficient
and serviceable shipping, but other necessary commodities also. But
contrariewise, concerning the trade of fishing, it is all ways commodious and
no ways discommodious, it increases wealth and provision of sustenance, but
abateth none. And the more for that fish is always spent for the necessary
sustentation of men's bodies, and not for superfluity.

There is yet another thing to be considered off concerning the trade of
merchandise, that in all manner of trafickes where merchants must come within
the Dominions of other Princes, much danger and peril may happen, for that it
is in the wills of those Princes, within whose dominions they are to stay such
ships as there be, and employ them at their pleasures in their service. And
so England with great peril may increase mariners and shipping to serve other
Princes, which may happen sometimes to be against our selves. Also in diverse
traficke many mariners travel far iournies, by means whereof it may be that
the Realwe shall want them when it should be needful that they were at home to
be employed for the defense of ye realm.

Therefore it may plainly appear that the trade of merchandise only for
breeding and maintenance of mariners, though it be necessary and needful to
the realm, yet ye same is not without great doubts and perils. Whereas
contrariwise by the trade of fishing, if such fish might be certainly spent
wtin this realm as might be taken and proved a sufficient number of mariners
and other seafaringme^ for ye supply of those ye then may want, might be much
more profitabler, and saflier bredde and maintained at home, all times in a
readiness to be employed for the necessary service and defense of the Realm,
how suddenly so ever the same should require.

Fishing is the greatest Nurse for to increase Mariners: the dear prises of
fish, how it may become cheap.

THere is yet further to be considered, that the trade of fishing is a
wonderful great Nurse for the breeding or bringing up of Marrineas, for
whereas a Merchants ship using the traficke with merchandise, being furnished
for the voyage with twenty men, there is amongst them not past two or three
boys which in that trade is brought up and instructed. And if it be so the
danger of the voyage considered, that these children can, and commonly do
endeavor to be brought up and instructed herein, yet the increase of them will
not be sufficient to furnish the Navy, especially in the time of wars.

But the Fisherman going to the sea, or upon other waters in great or small
vessels, for every one man there is of them commonly two boys, who being
trained up therein, are so accustomed with the hardness and painful toil
which in that exercise they are used to, that they are not only able to
sustain al labor to a seafaring man belonging, but in short time become a
sufficient sailor, master, or Pilot, as well for service in her majesty's
ships as in the merchants ships. They are also acquainted and know the
rocks, sands and other dangers upon the seacostes: where they lie, and how
to avoid them by reason of their accustomed haunting the seas in the trade of
fishing. And by means of their travel from one port to another for the sale
or utterance of the said fish, and other things wherein at unseasonable fishing
times they are employed.

These and diverse other arguments before rehearsed might be a sufficient
occation to cause us without penalty or pennall law for the benefit of our
country, to restrain and bridle our selves from our accustomed and unlawful
diet, but many there be that will and may truly say, the vtterers of fish sell
the same at such excessive prises, diverse and sundry times, that it
discourageth men to buy thereof. And the more for that they can a great deal
better cheap make their provision with flesh as well for their family, as
themselves.

Many arguments are to be made that will be sufficient to answer this matter.
And first we are to consider the times and seasons of the year that it serves
not always alike, for sufficient provision of freshfish, at which time little
store being taken by reason of contagious and contrary weather, wherein the
fisherman aduentureth both life and goods, and not only himself but many
other has their livings thereon depending, great reason is that the same be
sold the dearer: for besides his said adventure, he has been at no less
charge then though he had taken great quantities. And for remedy hereof, that
me^ might have in such a scarsitie some other good sorts of fish, not commonly
used. To satisfy their diet in times past there has been provided for the
markets these sorts of fish, that is to say, Puffens, Tunney, Porpus, Seall,
Holibut finnes, Holibut heads, and many other things, whereof was made fine and
delicate dishes, which now for lack of use is not only left unprovided, but
also utterly forgotten, how or in what sort it should be used, dressed, or
served: and worst of all, how it should be eaten, and disgested, for that the
proportion and substance of them is by many forgotten, and the use and taste
forgotten of all. There were also the sounds and heads of the Cods, which in
fishing time were salted and preserved to be a diet, in such scarsitie for the
poorer sort: all these things being by Gods creation ordained for our
sustenance, ought rather to be thankefully received the^ contemtiously cast off
and refused.

Besides this, that wind and wether being contrary for fishing, is a great
cause that fish is many times very scarce and dear yet the chiefest thing that
generally causes the same, is lack of certain utterance, as by these few
arguments following does plainly appear, wherein it may be said.

As utterance increases, or abateth in any trade, so the trade will increase
or abate.

The trade being abated, the commodity therein used, will wax scant and less
provision thereof made.

The less provision that thereof is made, the dearer the commodity is.

The cause of small provision is the uncertainty of sale or utterance: certain
sale or utterance encourages many prouiders to buy of the commodity.

Which in the beginning though it be chargeable to ye buyer or spender, it will
by certainty of utterance become cheaper.

For the dearness thereof will cause many prouiders of the same to increase.

The increase of the^ will make plenty of the commodity.

The plentifulnes whereof does make cheapnesse.

When there was spent in this realm more fish in one year then there is at
this day in five year, they might have had for one shilling that which now we
pay twain.

God is the only nurse or heardsman to feed and cherish that kind of victual,
without any help of man, he blesses and multiplieth the^, according to his
good pleasure and will. The contempt of whose blessings may be cause of the
scarsitie that now is in taking of fish, more then in then in times past has
bin, and no doubt but the embracing thereof with thankfulness for the same, God
may and will cause it again to multiply.

The harms that happen to the realm by the unlawful expense of flesh, what
numbers of people are thereby put from their livings, the discommodity thereof,
the remedy.

FVrther and greater matters then yet has been spoken off are to be
considered, that by the usual and unlawful eating of flesh, the vttrance of
fi^h being small and uncertain, has caused a great number to forsake the
accustomed haunting of ye seas, for taking of fish, whereby three things does
happen.

The Navy decayed, a multitude of persons are put out of work, and the
provision of sustenance for the people greatly abated, from which other three
evils do spring.

The strength of the realm decaieth, much idleness and many Rogues and thieves
are bred, and famine and distres, the rather happens amongst the people.

These are such evils as bring decay and danger unto the commonwealth: and
therefore it may be said that the usual and unlawful eating of flesh, brings
decay and danger unto the commonwealth.

It may further be said, that by the small utterance of fish the accustomed
haunting of the seas for taking of fish is abated from five parts to one,

By the abating whereof we may make account that ten thousand persons which
heretofore have and might still live by fishing on the seas, are thereby put
out of work and living.

Also there were very many besides fisherme^, that by means of fishing lived
upon the land. As shipwrites, cowpars, smithes weauers, sailemakers, netmakers,
dressars, vtterars, and cariars of fish, with such like, which may be accounted
to extend in number to other ten thousand: these are hereby in like case put
from their living and maintenance, and so in number they are together twenty
thousand persons, their wives, women-seruants and children, whose livings did
depend on them, and now by their want made destitute of maintenance are thirty
thousand at the least, these in the whole extend to fifty thousand persons,
whose livings depended on fishing, and is now abated.

Besides the vallew of the fish that was yearly taken and spent, more then
there is now toward the sustentation of the people, which by estimation was
worth three hundred thousand pounds at the least, for there may be very
probable reasons given that there has been the vallue of so much fish spent
yearly in this realm more then now there is.

Hereby we may understand that a great number of able me^ for service in time
of war, as masters, pilates, mariners, and sailers are greatly decayed and
abated, by means whereof ye strength of ye realm must needs be much weakened and
made of less force to encounter or resist ye enemy upon ye seas, which, is and
has been great part of defense and service to ye realm, by abating ye taking
of fish and vttrance thereof, ye trade and maintenance of the people on ye sea
costs, must needs abate also, amongst al sorts of people especially
artificers, whereby port towns has and dally does fall in decaie, waxing
depopulated and so daily grow of less and less ability to resist the enemy
when necessity shall require. Also it is to be understood, that by the usual
and unlawful eating of flesh, the same victual grows or becomes the
dearer.

The dearenes of the said flesh victual causes great gains to be raised by
the fatting of cattle.

The rasing of such gains causes men to convert their grounds and farms from
tillage to pasture.

By that means a multitude of people are put out of work and from their
livings.

Thereby a great number of them are constrained to become idle Roges or to
practice other superfluous and vain things that breed diverse other great
vices.

These be things that bring great detriment and decay unto the common-welth:
and therefore, as before has been said, the usual and unlawful eating of
flesh brings great detriment and decay unto the common-welth.

Hereby it may also be understood, that by the decaie of tillage, twenty
thousand persons which have and might still live thereby, are put from their
accustomed work and livings.

Their wives, women servants and children, whose maintenance did on them
depend, are in number thirty thousand, at the least, these in the whole
extend to fifty thousand, beside the increase of a great number of sundry
fortes of victual which in a farm house is increased toward the sustentation
of the people.

For a farm containing sixscore Acres of ground, being employed to pasture
only, for the breeding and feeding of cattle, there does come no further
increase of victual but Biefes and Muttons only, and yt may be proved that
the yearly increase thereof will not find yearly above ten persons of those
that make their common and only food of flesh.

But let this farm be employed into tillage, and there will be a reasonable
increase of Biefe and Muttons: then is there account to be made of al kind of
grain, as well for bread as drink which is the chiefest victual for
maintenance of the people.

Further there is in the said farm, raised and increased, Veale, Porke, Bacon,
Pigges, Geese, Ducks, Hens, Chickens, Capons, Milk, Butter, Cheese, Eggs,
and Fruit. Draw all these together in account or comparison, and they will
sustain and find yearly twenty persons at the least, I mean not those
only that are kept in the farm, but such as are sustained with the victuals
that be sold out of the farm at the markets: whereby it appears, that ten
persons that are fed and nourished with those victuals that are increased of
the farm in pasture does eat up ten of those persons, that should have been
fed with such victual as might have been increased of the same farm if it
were in tillage. This is a wonderful decay in a commonwealth: and ought with
christian charity of all men to be lamented. That for the satisfieng of our
lust contrary to a good and commendable law for a commonwealth ordained, we
seek our own hurt, and the utter decay of our poor christian brethren, may
not this be called the eating up of Gods people like bread against whom the
Psalmist earnestly cries. Psalm. 14.35.

Thus we are to consider, that by the unlawful eating of flesh, three special
damages fall upon us.

The realm is weakened, and made of less force to encounter and resist the
enemy, both on the sea, and seacoastes.

An hundred thousand persons are put from their work and maintenance.

And of the victualles which heretofore has been and still might be
increased: there is the vallew of three hundred thousand pounds yearly
abated, by reason whereof, three greater damages and dangers proceeds, that is
to say.

By abating the force of the realm on the sea and seacoastes, it is in the
greater danger of the enemy.

Also by putting of an hundred thousand persons out of work and maintenance,
there must needs grow the greater increase of idleness, roges, and thieves,
with which sort of people, it greeueth them to be indamaged and endangered
that breeds them, for we would have no ashes and yet still increase the fire.
Also we would sail in safety, and yet bore holes through the bottom of the
ship.

Further by the yearly abating of three hundred thousand poundes-worth of
victualles there must of necessity grow a great want of sufficient
sustenance, especially for the common sort of people. The misery whereof,
although it be not felt by the rich, yet the same grievously lights amongst
the poor, for ponderous things fall to the bottom, and they that strike
others, feel not the smart themselves.

For remedy herein, there has been diverse devises and plots made, and set
down how fishermen might be set a work, fish might be taken, brought in, and
provided for service of the realm, and straight laws made for the expense and
utterance thereof, but little is said or done, that the said law might be
certainly executed and observed, for as before has been said that it is
utterance that maintains the trade of any thing, and as utterance increases
or abateth, so the trade will increase and abate.

For ensample, the great increase and utterance of flesh that has grown by
the unlawful eating of flesh, has so increased the trade for grasing and
fatting of cattle to be spent and uttered, that thereby has grown all such
detriments as before has bin set down to happen by the decay of tillage.

Also thereby (as before has been said) the utterance of fish is become so
small and uncertain, and the trade of fishing, and the buying and selling of
fish by the same so abated, that all the rest of such dangers and damages as
before are set down, have by that means grown and happened.

Therefore as the increase of the utterance of flesh, and the abating of the
utterance of fish has been cause of the evils aforesaid.

So the increase of the utterance of fish, and the abating of the utterance of
flesh must be cause of the remedy.

What flesh may be spared in a year by one days abstinence in a week. For
what cause there ought to be certain days and times appointed for the expense
of fish.

ANd for that it may the more plainlier appear what great numbers of Biefes,
Muttons, and other kinds of flesh victual may be spared in the realm
yearly, by one days abstinence in a week, to the wonderful great increase
of the said victual and comfort of the whole commonwealth, I have thought
good to set down an estimate of the same supposed to be spent within the city
of London, and the suburbs of the same to be considered of with patience of
the gentle Reader,

First it is to be considered, that in the year are 52. weeks and in every
week, seven days, which are in all for the year 364. days.

The lent with friday and saturday in every week, and the the other
accustomed fish days, appointed by the laws of the realm to be observed,
being collected together: extend to 153. So in the year there is 153. fish
days and 211. flesh days, which amounts unto 58. flesh days more then fish
days.

Now touching the expense of flesh in London, and the Suburbs thereof, and
what may be spared in those places only by one days abstinence in a week.
First the year being 52. weeks: let seven of them be excepted, for the time
of lent, wherein no Biefes ought to be killed, and then remains but 45.
weeks, wherein butchers do kill cattle.

Then let us say there be threescore butchers, freemen of the city of London,
that commonly kill Biefes, and every butcher to kill weekly one with the
other, five Biefes, which is for 45. weeks, in the whole 300. Biefes: which
amounts for the said 45. weeks, to 13500. killed by the said freemen.

The forrenners dwelling in the suburbs of London, and such as come out of the
country to serve the markets of the city, on the market days, kill and utter
there, as the butchers of London affirm, four times so much as the freemen of
the city, which amounts yearly to 54000. Biefes, and so joining the biefes,
killed and uttered by the freemen of London and the forrenners together, ^hey
extend in all for ye year to 67500. biefes.

It is herein to be noted yt the account by this estimat is but for five days
in the week, for ye friday and saturday are days of abstinence from flesh,
and therefore out of the said five days we must suppose to take one, and the
account aforesaid is so to be made, for that in them flesh is certainly spent
otherwise there can no certain account be made.

Now if we would know what number of Biefes might be spared as before is said,
let us say there be in the week five flesh days, accustomably served with
the expense of flesh whereof one being taken away, there rests but four.

In like sort let us divide the proportion of Biefes that are killed for
London and the suburbs for a year into five parts. And the fifth part
supposed to be saved by the fifth days abstinence is 13500. the just number
killed for a year by the freemen of the City.

It is also reported and well known, that for every Biefe killed, there is
killed ten sheep at the least. Then if there might be spared yearly in the
places aforesaid by one days abstinence, 13500. beasts, there will by that
reckning be spared 135000. sheep, besides lambs, calves, and hogs, whereof
like proportion is to be made according to the times of the year wherein they
be spent or should be spent. But the abuse therein is great by killing them at
unlawful times contrary to good laws and ordinances carefully made and
provided for the increase of cattle, whereby wonderful great damages
grows unto the realm, as by sundry probable arguments might be expressed.

Moreover there is like account to be made of such fine flesh victual as is
uttered by the poultars, which on the fastingdaies is most commonly spent. By
this estimate, concerning the City of London and the suburbs, it may be
easily decerned of, what might be spared through the whole realm, which being
well considered may happily persuade some men the more to the observation of
such good laws and ordinances as for observation of fishdaies is provided.

But concerning this the expense of fish, many there be, that perhaps will
say, we agree that the taking, uttering and spending of fish is laudable and
well to be liked of: but wherefore should we make choice of days or times,
seeing there is no prescribed rule from God, for the choice of meats at any
one day more then another, and that it has pleased almighty God to give us
his blessings with multitudes of the same in the seas, confessing the same
also to be given us from God, for our sustenance, which being taken and
provided, may be brought or carried unto cities, towns, and markets, and there
sold and uttered to such as will buy on every day in the week, and at all
times and seasons when it is taken.

Herein we must consider, that if it should so be observed the uncertainty of
sale would cause the prouiders of fish, to forsake their trades and the
fisherman his fishing in a short time: first, for that most men by nature in
these days are affectioned from fish for diverse causes, by them conceived:
secondly, when the same is sold at a dear price, so that their provision may
be made of flesh a great deal better cheap.

But we must consider, that although wind and weather serves well at some
times, that there is great plenty of fish taken, and by reason thereof sold
reasonable good cheap, yet other sometimes either the wind and weather, or
the time and season serves not, so that little store of fish is taken.
Nevertheless as before has been said, the fishermans living depending only
thereupon must have a sufficient maintenance to live, for him and his family,
being continued therein with great charges diverse ways, and therefore if he
be not certain to sell that small store of fish which he has taken in such a
time of scarsitie and that also at some good round price to recompense the
travel and charge which with the adventure of his life and goods he has
obtained, he neither would nor could continue his said trade, and this has
been, and is the only cause that many seafaring men do leave the trade of
fishing, and settle themselves to other exercises, rather hurtful then
beneficial to the commonwealth.

Further it is to be considered concerning the vncertantie of time in providing
salted fish, to be by the fishmonger ready seasoned for the peoples diet. As
Samon, Lings, Haberdines, Greenefish, Heringes and such like: if there should
not be a certain time for the spending, the prouiders could in no case season
or make the same ready to be sufficient for the eater or spender when it
should be eaten or spent, which being seasoned for one day, will scarce serve
for another: Especially when the weather is warm, and therefore being
uncertain of his sale although he make some provision of fish to sell dry,
or in the salt, yet he will not season any with water, fit to be eaten, for
the uncertainty of his sale, by reason he knows not when the people are
minded to eat fish except a day or a time be appointed certain for the same.

Also it is a victual, not to be had, as biefes, muttons, veales, and such
like in the pastures feeding, at al times in a readiness to be spent, but is
at liberty in the wide and large seas, upon the taking and providing whereof,
diligent attendance must be given, and also some sorts or kinds of fish must
be taken and provided long time before, it will be sufficient to be spent, so
that if there be not certain days and times appointed for the certain
expense of fish, The fisherman shall be uncertain to sell as he may be a
gainer thereby when the same is taken, the merchant or vtterer of fish,
unwilling and discouraged, to buy and provide for the markets, and thereby a
more scarsitie of fish, and a greater decay of fishing will daily increase to
the wonderful decay of the Navy, and damage of the whole realm sundry
ways.

It may well be thought therefore, that this thing many years since was
carefully considered of, with the commodities and discommodities that would
grow by the uncertainty of the utterance of fish, that certain days and
times might be appointed for the fish to be uttered and eaten, whereby a
certain and sufficient provision might be also made or provided, and although
as before has been said, abuse in continuance of time did grow, by
observation of the said days and times so appointed, yet the necessary use
thereof considered, it is not for the same to be refused, especially for that
by the assent and consent of her Majesty's learned and wise counselors, it
has been not only thought good for special cause that the accustomed times
and seasons should be observed, But by her highness also straight
commandment and earnest charge given from time to time for the due
observation thereof.

Concerning abstinence from flesh, there is a conscience to be made in
transgressing the law, for what cause obedience herein ought to be showed: the
judgment of some men which answer thereto.

NOw for that I would not any man should mistake me concerning my opinion,
and true meaning in the premises, I have thought good (under correction of the
better learned) to set down the same, as follows. Wherein I do pronounce
that the eating of flesh or forbearing to eat flesh, is not any matter or
thing concerning salvation of man, or that it is the service of God otherways
then all other polliticke laws are, and be: for it is not the abstinence from
flesh, that pleases God, nor the eating thereof, that offends him: But it is
the obedience which God requires to be yielded, and borne unto the Prince, and
the care of the benefit of his people that pleases him, and it is
disobedience to the Prince and the neglecting of his peoples benefit that
displeases him.

I do also affirm that there is no conscience to be made in eating of flesh
at any time, as touching the flesh that is eaten, but there is conscience to
be made in that the Prince is disobeyed, which is a contempt of Gods
ordinance, and the peoples benefit neglected, which God requires to be
earnestly sought: and therefore a disobedience of the Princes laws, cannot be
done without offense to God, for as God has ordained that Princes should
govern, so has he in sundry places of the Scriptures commanded that
subjects should obey, and the offense in every transgression is the more by
how much the damage unto the people thereby grows greater.

For we are taught to obey the necessary laws and commandments of Princes
and not to neglect and contemn them to labor and seek for public wealth, and
the universal commodity of others, with carefulnes and not to be wilful
ouerthrowers and destroyers of the same: whereby we may gather that a man
without offense may do all things which by ye scriptures are not forbidden,
until they are forbidden by lawful authority. Likewise what is commanded by
lawful authority, and not by the scriptures forbidden, a man is bound to obey
and cannot without offense omit the same.

We must also consider that God has disposed things so by creation, that the
increase of the earth does not suffice for the sustentation of the people: but
such things as he has created in the seas and waters must also be provided,
and it may be remembered but few years past, that fish did well nigh as much
sustentation to the people of this realm as the flesh, and therefore to omit
this relief, must needs increase a scarsitie of victual diverse and sundry
ways.

Furthermore some men more rash then true in their judgment, will not only
think but say, he that thus earnestly persuades for an abstinence from flesh,
is either one of these three that follows, or all: that is to say, a
superstitious person, an hypocrite, or a Papist.

And first he is accounted a superstitious person for that he is a forbidder of
meats, persuading the people thereunto, and makes conscience where no cause
of conscience is, esteeming that unlawful which is not by God forbidden.

Herein such rash giuers of judgment are greatly deceived for in truth he is a
forbidder of meats that forbids it at all times, and in all respects like
as in the Apostles time some superstitious Jews persuaded the Christians, but
forbidding of the use at certain times appointed by lawful authority done
for a common-welth, is not an utter forbidding of the thing, the cause and
reason being considered, and therefore no conscience to be made in the kind or
nature of the meat, but for the commodity of those, for whose cause it is
forborne or forbidden, and so the meat is not unlawful but the use unlawful,
being eaten at a time forbidden by such as have authority from God to forbid
it, done for the benefit of his people: for although it be lawful for a man
to spend or use the things that he comes lawfully by, it is unlawful to
spend or use the things that he comes unlawfully by, for then the
commandment is transgressed so, although it be lawful to eat flesh at all
times, as the creatures of God given for the sustenance of man, it is unlawful
to eat the same at times forbidden by lawful authority, for therein Gods
ordinance is contemned and the benefit of his people neglected.

Secondly, some perhaps may name him to be an hypocrite, because he will not
eat flesh on such days that he might seem holy, and one that more cares for
his salvation then other people, as thinking to obtain the same by abstaining
from eating flesh on a few prescribed days and times: but of wise men this is
to be considered, that hypocrisy is privy sin, couched in the mind and
intention of man, and although judgment may be given in or by the dealings of
some persons, yet in truth the thing cannot be generally discerned in any man
but by the wisdom of God only.

For what virtue soever any person uses, if it be done for the praise of man,
and not in consideration of the duty which God requires, is none other but
flat hypocrisy: For example, who so accustometh to read or hear the holy
scriptures preached and taught with a show of holiness, thereby to be praised of
men, and not learn to live or bring forth fruits according to the same, he
may be accounted a mere hypocrite, nevertheless the reading and hearing of
the scriptures is not hypocrisy, but being unfeignedly and rightly done, is the
lively nourishment and food of man's soul. So abstinence from flesh is not to
be accounted hypocrisy, when it is done for obedience to the law and in
respect of that law and duty which God requires of every man to be borne
toward his neighbor.

Thirdly he is called a Papist, for that says some, also he thinks it is
necessary to abstain from eating of flesh, and does like and allow of those
laws and devices made and used in the time of Papistrie, and by ancient
authority of the Pope, who^ we should not in any thing imitate, but rather in
all things be contrary.

Here may be said is zeal without knowledge, understanding blinded, and a
great want of true judgment: for ensample, mine enemy teaches me two things,
the one I find evil by experience, the other good, and because I will not
follow the counsel of my adversary, shall I cast away the good for the evils
sake.

Or thus, it may be said I am taught by mine adversary to run into the fire
and escape the water, but because contrary to the mind or teaching of mine
adversary I have escaped the fire, shall I therefore of mine own will run
into the water and drown my self: many good laws and ordinances in the time
of papistrie was by them made and ordained, but the same is not therefore to be
contemned or neglected, for that their devise in many things for the benefit
of a commonwealth cannot be amended.

Much more might be said concerning this matter, but few words are sufficient
to satisfy such as are wise and discreet, whose wisdom can sufficiently
conceive by this small treatise what thing of the author is intended, whose
heart and mind is known to God, that for the benefit of his country he has
taken this small pains, craving patience of the gentle Reader for his rudenes,
being in respect of many others, but simply trained up in learning, requires
herein of the wise to be accepted. And that these his simple persuasions might
be an occasion without the pain and penalties of the law, to persuade an
obedience in the premises, amongst his native countrymen, both for themselves
and their families. Then the author shall think himself recompensed: and such
as live but few years both see and feel the great benefits to them thereby
growing, not only for increase of victual and better maintenance of the
people, but great strength to the Navy for the more service and defense of
this Realm.

FINIS.

