A RETRAYT SOVNDED TO Certain brethren, lately seduced by the Schismatic
Brownists to forsake the Church.

Written by Edward James, Master in the Arts, and Minister of Gods word.

Printed at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in the Cloth-Fayre, near the
red Lion. 1607.

A RETRAIT SOVNDED to certain brethren, lately seduced by the Schismatic
Brownists, to forsake the Church.
THE Philosophers in old time did account it humanum errare, in matters
Philosophical, a thing incident to man to err: but in errore perseuerare,
belluinum, a beastly thing to persevere in error. And Divines may judge it
humanum, a thing incident to man, to err in matters Theological: but in
errore perseuerare perniciosum, to persevere in error, that in matters
Theological must needs be deadly: especially if a man does so cleave to error,
that he chooses rather to forsake the Church, then to forgo his error: for
seeing the Church is the mother of the faithful, whosoever does cut himself
therefrom, he must needs be faithless: and therefore what goodly shows
soever he does make, yet if the Apostles words be true, he cannot please God:
Every man therefore that would be acceptable unto God, had need to get himself
into the bosom of the Church, and being once gotten thither, not to suffer
himself in any wise, to be removed therefrom. For as none could be delivered
from the deluge, but such as were contained in Noabs Arc: so can none be saved
from eternal death, but only those who keep themselves within the Church of
God. These are common principles, which no man that accounts himself a
Christian, can or will deny.

But the controversy which does trouble seduced brains, is of the Church it
self: what it is, and where it should be sought for. Papists would tie the
Church to Rome: so that if we credit them, then must we confess, that as many
as made a separation from the Roman Bishop, have likewise made a separation
from the Church of God. And all other Sectaries do tie the Church unto their
sects: whereas it were far fitter for every man to tie himself unto the
Church: which that we may with ease perform, it is very fit and meet, first,
to define the universal Church, that we may know what it is: secondly, to
express and lay down the true notes and marks, whereby true particular
Churches (which are very members of that universal Church) may be known from
other congregations: which when we have once found out, then may we cleave unto
the Church with great security.

The word Ecclesia, in English, Church, is a Greek word, and does properly
signify a congregation: and yet every congregation is not the Church of God;
but that congregation only, which Saint Paul does term Ephe. 4. ^er. 12. ^.
Cor. 12.12.
Christ's body, of the which Christ himself is head. And as the soul of man
gives life unto man's body: so Christ's spirit gives life unto this body of
Christ; according unto Christ's words: ^ohn 6. v. 6. ^. Cor. 12. ^er. 13.
It is the spirit which gives life, etc.

Neither is there any thing which does maintain, and join in one, the members
of this body, besides this spirit, according unto that of Paul, For by one
spirit, says he, are we all baptized into one body, whether we be jews, or
Grecians, bond, or free, etc. Even as therefore a dead body, whose soul is
already departed, can receive neither fruit, nor comfort from any meat, or
drink: so that congregation, which is destitute of Gods spirit, can receive
from Gods word, which is the true spiritual meat, neither fruit nor comfort:
and therefore it is, that the Apostle tells us: Though 1. Cor. 3. ^er. 6.
Paul plans, and Apollo water, yet that it is God which does give the increase.

As therefore it is evident, that every member of man's body is lively, wherein
the soul remains: so every congregation, in the which Gods spirit works,
must needs be a true and lively member of Christ's body: so that God is tied to
no one part of the world, more then unto another, because he is God of all the
world: even so the Church of God is tied to no part of the world, because it
contains in it, all the believers, who are seattered over all the world.

This Church being one, yet may it be considered diversely: either as it is
hidden from, and invisible unto men, and known only unto him, from whom
nothing can be hidden: or as it is visible, conspicuous, and apparent unto men:
as it is invisible, and hidden from the sight of men, it contains only
those, who appertain unto Gods free election, and shall most certainly be
saved. And the reason why in this respect the Church is said to be hidden from
men, is, because God only knows who are his: neither can man know them,
whilst he lives here upon the earth: but the Church, as it is visible,
apparent, and conspicuous unto men, does contain all those, who in their
outward behavior worship one God, embrace one Christ, profess one Gospel,
hearken unto one word, and use the same Sacraments: many of these may be
ravening wolves, and wicked reprobates, and yet they may be so close in
carriage, and their sins may be so secret, that the Church cannot discern
them, and therefore cannot discarde them, until God does make them manifest.
Hence it is, that the Church thus considered, is compared by our Savior Christ
unto a Mat. 3. ver. 12.
threshing floor, where the wheat and chafe are so mixed together, that they
cannot be severed, before he with his fan does sever them: unto a Mat. 13
ver. 15.
field, where do grow both corn and weeds together, which cannot be
separated before the harvest: unto a Ibid. (...) 47.
net, in the which fish both good and bad are contained, which cannot be
sundred, until both be brought unto the shore. And as this is the estate of
the general and universal Church, militant here in earth, so is it the estate
of every branch, or member thereof, I mean, of every particular Church or
congregation: whether it be contained within one Realm, Province, or Diocese,
or do consist of thousands, hundreds, more or fewer, it has ever some lewd
and wicked men amongst the good and godly Saints of God. Neither does these
men's wickedness make it to cease to be a Church, although they are suffered to
live within it. Would you have it proved by examples, it may be done with ease:
I will let pass the ancient Jewish Church, and come unto Christ his time.

Paul writes unto the Galathians, as unto the Gala. 1 ver. 2.
Church of God: and yet he says, that they are Verse. 6
removed unto another Gospel: that they were Gal. 3. ver. 1.
foolish, bewitched, and disobedient unto the truth. Lo then, behold men
foolish, men bewitched, men disobedient unto the truth, and removed to another
Gospel, and yet a Church. Amongst the Corinthians there were sects, envy,
strife, discension, and such incest, as was not once named amongst the
Gentiles: they abused the Lords supper, and many of them denied the
resurrection of the dead; and yet Paul writes unto this by the name of the 1.
Cor. 1. Verse. 2.
Church of God which was at Corinth. Nay, cast your eyes upon Christ's own
Disciples, and there you shall find a Judas: and yet his wickedness was not so
forcible, but that Christ's Disciples were still a Church.

So then it follows, that there may be in a congregation, not only wicked
men, but even wicked Ministers; and yet that congregation may be a true part,
or parcel, of that general, catholic, and universal Church, which
comprehends all Gods chosen: so that although that, which Christ says, that
by their fruits, men shall know true, from false seducing Prophets, be very
true, and certain, (for that those who preach the truth unfeignedly, setting
only Gods glory, and the salvation of their brethrens souls before their eyes,
are only to be termed true Prophets, and these do ever live uprightly, as
far forth as flesh and blood will suffer them) yet notwithstanding it
follows not, but that amongst these faithful and unfeigned Pastors, there may
be other, who teach for a time the truth, and yet be deceitful workmen, and
ravening wolves, who do but watch fit opportunity to prey upon Gods people, as
Judas watched his opportunity to betray Christ Jesus. Of this sort, were
those, of whom Saint John speaks 1. John ^. ver. 19.
They went from us, but they were not of us, etc. Such be the close Atheists,
and Neuters of the world, which live in every age, and almost in every
congregation, who have two faces under one hood with Ianus, and with the
Cameleon can turn themselves unto any color: such do live and teach in many
faithful congregations, and hardly can they be certainly discerned from
faithful Pastors, until the time of persecution: for that is like Christ his
fan, wherewith he seperateth the wheat from chafe; the wheat remains,
the chafe is carried with that wind, from the threshing floor, which is
Christ his Church: for whilst the Church enjoys peace and quietness, it is
governed with discipline, and ruled with laws, and Canons, whereof some
prohibit the broaching of untrue doctrine, and not only admit into no
dignities, but withal punish such as broach it. Others correct the manners, and
behavior of lewd livers, profane persons, and all their wicked actions: and
therefore fear, and ambition, do make those hypocritish cormorants, to teach
but truth; and at leastwise to seem to live within their lists: but when the
Churches peace is turned into persecution, when, for executing laws, it be
driven to suffer violence, and that all dignities and preferments are taken
from it: then, though their ambition still remains, yet their hope of
preferments by the Church, is quite cut off: and though then they fear such
tyrants, as usurp authority; yet the fear they had to offend the Churches
laws, is departed from them: and therefore then, and not before, they show
what they were before: they embrue their hands in the Churches dearest blood,
who lately seemed to be their dearest mother: and they endeavor to wound her to
death, who would have nourished them to everlasting life. It is not to be
doubted, as wily as these Foxes are, but that in the time, that the Church does
flourish, they do often commit such wickedness, as is not to be once named: yet
for that their actions are sometimes so secret, that they come not to the
knowledge of those, in whose hands it is to cut men off from Gods assemblies:
and sometimes, when they are conuented for their enormities, they said such
penitencie, that for the hope men have of their amendments, they are suffered to
live within the Church: and sometimes, as well through the negligence of those
who should inform the governors, as of the governors themselves, many of their
iniquities are winked at, and they are never called into question for them:

I conclude therefore, that the lewd manners of men, living in any congregation,
is no certain note, whereby that congregation may be judged to be no Church:
especially, if the notes whereby a Church may be discerned, be to be found
therein: and these notes are two: Truth of doctrine, and the right use of the
sacred Sacraments. This truth must be grounded upon Gods word; and these
Sacraments must be the very same, which Christ did institute to be most
certain seals of our delivery, and most undoubted pledges of our Union with
Christ Jesus, Where the former is truly taught, and the later rightly
ministered, it cannot be, but that that assembly is assembled in Christ his
name: and therefore it cannot be, but that there Christ is present: and
undoubtedly, that assembly where Christ is present, must needs be Christ his
Church.

Again, this word of God, wheresoever it be truly taught, does work
effectually, in some unto salvation, and in some unto the contrary: and who
knows not, but that where the salvation of men is wrought, there is a Church,
seeing that out of the Church there is no salvation: But seeing that unto
others it works perdition, in the same assembly; unto whom as the Apostle
speaks, It is a savor of death, unto death, (though it be said before, that
truth of doctrine, and right use of Sacraments, be undoubted notes of Christ
his Church) yet hereby we may perceine, that, that is not to be so strictly
understood, but that in the Church, there may happen in doctrine some error,
and in the administration of the Sacraments some abuses: for that it is
impossible, that Gods enemies, whose hearts are hardened in the hearing of Gods
word, should be altogether faithful teachers, or obedient hearers. And hence
it is, that in the Galathian Church, men were bewitched, and turned from the
truth of Gods word, unto another Gospel: and hence it is, that some in the
Corinthian Church 1. Cor. 15.
denied the resurrection of the dead: and others 1. Cor. 11.
abused the Lords Supper, most pernitiously: and yet there ceased not to be a
Church, in the one or other of them. So that in a true Church, there may be in
doctrine error, and in Sacraments abuses: a true Church, I say, as long as it
does but suffer, and not maintain these errors, and abuses: and therefore
whosoever does separate himself from such a Church, he separateth himself
from the true Arc, from the holy congregation, and from Gods favor, neither
can he be saved, unless he does return again into the same. Nay, there may
be in doctrine errors, and in Sacraments abuses, so tolerable, that though the
Church does teach and maintain them openly: yet as long as they are not in
matters necessary unto salvation, it is intolerable for a man for these
errors and abuses, to cut himself off from the Church. Such are the errors
which may happen, concerning things, not as yet fully revealed unto men; As for
example: One congregation may teach, that hell is in the center of the earth:
another, that it is upon the earth: a third, that it stands in the air: a
fourth, that it is compassed with fire, that highest element: and all these
congregations may teach these opposite doctrines publicly: and yet all of them
may be Churches, and true parts and parcels of the Catholic and Universal
Church.

The like may be said of the souls of Saints departed: One congregation may
maintain, that they be already in their full and perfect bliss: another may
be persuaded, that they have not as yet received the fullness of their joy: and
a third may think it a point of rashness, to define with the one, or with the
other: and yet all three may be Gods assemblies: yea, in distant Churches there
may be diverse and disagreeing ceremonies in the administration of Baptism,
and the Lords Supper: yet as long as these are not contentiously maintained, or
enjoined to be observed, as things necessary unto salvation, God forbid, that
any Christian should for these, sever himself from any of them.

Seeing then, my dear friends, these things be thus: and that you have severed
your selves from our assemblies, it stands you upon, to show in doctrine some
grievous and pernicious errors, and in the ministration of the Sacraments, some
dangerous and damnable abuses, which are maintained, and publicly defended by
us: or at least, some small errors or abuses, contentiously defended, and
violently thrust upon men, to be by them firmly believed, and received as
things necessary unto salvation: (which you cannot do) or else you must
acknowledge, that your estate is dangerous, as indeed it is: as must needs be
the estate of them, that have wilfully made a separation from that body,
whereof Christ is head: out of the which there is no salvation: which if once
you could be induced to believe, I doubt not, but you would with as great
alacrity join your selves unto us, as ever you went out from us: for I know
full well, that zeal has made this separation, but it was not a zeal
grounded upon knowledge: and therefore, if now you would receive true
instructions, and to join knowledge unto your zeal: then that very zeal,
which unadvisedly did thrust you out, would now, being guided with
understanding, bring you back again, unto the bosom of Christ his body
mystical; which may be a joy unto men and Angels, and a comfort unto your very
souls: out of the which, as long as obstinately you stand, (pardon me, truth
is truth, and must be plainly told) you cannot but vainly hope for the
salvation of your souls: it does as much grieve me to utter it, as it greeueth
any of you to hear it: you may through your conuersions, convert, and turn
these grieves to joy.

If you will stand in your own defense, and tell me, that you live within the
bosom of that Catholic and universal Church, whereof Christ is head,
although you will not communicate with the members of the Church of England; I
must tell you, that this defense does mightily offend the Church of God, God
himself, and you very souls; for that the conjunction is so near, between
the Catholic Church, and all the parts, and parcels thereof, (I mean
particular Churches) that whosoever does sever himself from any of these
branches, he is become thereby no branch of Christ his Church.

If you say, that our English Church is no Church at all, and so no part of
Christ his Church: and therefore that you may, and must sever your self
therefrom: it is soon said, but hardly proved, my good brethren: neither can
you ever prove it, until you prove, that this Church maintains some
pernicious doctrine, which overthrows the foundation of the faith: or that it
does so wickedly abuse the Sacraments, or either of them, that their force and
efficacy is altogether weakened, and become of no validity. If these things
could be proved, then might you (peradventure) justify your doings: but if all
the world would join in one, and bend themselves against us, I know, and
therefore I speak it, these things could not be proved, no not by all the
world.

Be you not therefore obstinate, neither hinder you your own salvation: nor yet
object that, which by men of your sect is commonly objected; That the whole
face of our Church is so overwhelmed with vices, that in outward show, it
seems rather to be the Synagogue of Satan, then the Church of God; and
therefore that it is impiety, in any Christian, to join himself unto it.
Surely I must needs confess unto you, that our lives are not answerable unto
our calling, and that from the highest to the lowest, we have in many things
offended: yet I would have you to confess, 2. Sam. 13. and 24. Matt. 16. v 22.
and 26. ver. 70, 72 74.
that the very worthiest members of Christ's Church, have often most grievously
offended: and therefore, that in our Church, there may be many, even great
offenders, who are true members of Christ his body: neither should you doubt,
but that of those, whom the contagion of sin has mightily infected, there
are very many, who are grieved with the burden of their iniquities, and being
struck with true remorse of conscience, aspire unto innocence of life and
conversation.

I confess indeed, that, that general iniquity, which covers, in a manner,
the whole earth, has often grieved me, and troubled my conscience greatly, and
had almost thrust me rasbly into those men's company, with whose company alone
you seem to be delighted: but I thank my God, he opened the eyes of mine
understanding, and I did in good time perceive, that there is greater
efficacy, in Gods word truly taught, and his Sacraments rightly administered,
to beget children unto God, then can be disanulled, by the wickedness of
rebellious and disobedient children: and therefore far be it from me, from
ever seuering of my self from that company, wherein this word is truly
taught, and these Sacraments rightly administered, as in our assemblies I know
they are. Our sins are great indeed, and our iniquities are many in number:
yet compare our Church, with the old assemblies of the Israelites, before
Christ's birth, and you shall find, that we are not gone beyond them; nay, as
whicked as we are, if you vouchsafe to read Gods book with a single eye, you
shall find assuredly, that they had gone beyond us in iniquities: Their Princes
are called by the name of the Esaias. 1 verse 9.
Princes of Sodom: and the people are called the people of Gomorha.

How says he, is Ver. 21 23.
the faithful City, become an harlot? it was full of judgment, and justice
lodged therein: but now they are murderers; thy silver is become dross, thy
wine is mixed with water, thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards; they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the widows cause come before them: the Priests
and Prophets of Ephraim, are said to Esaias. 28 ^.7, 8.
have erred through strong drink, etc. to have failed in vision, and to have
stumbled in judgment: all, says he, their tables are full of filthy vomiting,
and there is no place clean amongst them: Esaias. 29 ^.10, 13.
the eyes of the Seers and Prophets are shut up with a spirit of slumber, so
that they cannot see, and the people are said to come near him with their
lips, and to have removed their hearts far from him: Esaias. 56 ^trs. 10.
their watchmen are said to be all blind, to have no knowledge, to be dumme
dogs, which cannot bark, to be such as lie and sleep, and delight in
sleeping.

How say you, my brethren, are our Princes like the Princes of Sodom? are they
rebellious and companions of thieves? do all of them love gifts, and follow
after rewards? judge they not the fatherless, and comes not the widows
cause before them? what? have our Priests and Prophets erred, through strong
drink? have they failed in vision, and stumbled in their judgments? are their
eyes covered and shut up with a spirit of slumber? are our watchmen blind? have
they no knowledge? be they dumb dogs which cannot bark? are they such as lie
and sleep, and delight in sleeping? are our people like the people of Gomorha?
are our assemblies become harlots, and our congregations thieves? is our silver
become dross, and our wine mixed with water? are our tables full of filthy
vomiting? and are all places amongst us unclean? do our people with their
lips, come near unto the Lord, and are their hearts far from him? Surely it
were very hard, to give so hard a censure, against all our Magistrates, all our
Ministers, and all our people.

Yet admit, that our Magistrates, Ministers, and people, were such as I have
here described, were it fit, that therefore we should make a separation from
them, having his word truly taught, and his Sacraments rightly administered
amongst them? Surely no (my beloved brethren) for I have already proved, that
in the time of Esaias, such were the Magistrates, Ministers, and people of
Jerusalem: and yet Esaias, though he sharply reproved them for their iniquities,
yet did he not sever himself from their assemblies, nor erect another Church,
other Altars, other sacrifices, or other ceremonies: but in the midst of a
perverse and froward generation, he lifted up pure hands unto the Lord.

Neither was that ancient Church thus generally corrupted, in the time of Esaias
only: peruse the other Prophets, and you shall find the very same, or the
like descriptions, in their volumes: it were in a manner infinite, to lay down
all their words; Ier. 4. v. 22. and 5. v. 1.7, 8, 26. and 28. and 7, v. 11.17,
18, 19, 30, 31. and 8, v. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, and 9. v. 4.5, 6, 7. and 10. v. 21. and
11, verse. 9, 10.13, and 19. verse. 4, 5. Ezech. 1. v. 4, 5, 6. and 8, from v. 5.
to the end. and 14. v. 3. and 16. from v. 15. unto 36. and from 45 unto 57. and
22, throughout. Hos. 2. verse. 5. and 4. verse. 1, 2, 11.12, 13, and 7,
thoroughout. and 8, v. 11, 7, and 13, v. 1, 2, and 3. v. 10. and 6, v. 3, 4, 5,
6, and 8. v. 4, 5, 6. Micah. 1, v. 5, and 2, v. 8, and 3, v. 2.3, and 7, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Zeph. 3. v. 2, 3, 4. Mal. 1. verse. 8, 12, 13, and 2, verse. 7, 8, 11.
view the places quoted in the margent, and you shall find what I say, most
certain and undoubted: and yet show me amongst all these godly Prophets, any
one, which did ever sever himself from the Church wherein he lived: or name
any of them, that did refuse to communicate with the wicked of their time, in
the word, sacrifices, or ceremonies, which the Lord had appointed them to use.
Assuredly you cannot name me one. How then? what, are we wiser then they were?
or do we exceed them in holiness? I would to God we were endued with the
tenth part of their wisdom, or of their holiness.

How is it then, that any of us should be so presumptuous, as to sever himself
from those congregations, which most assuredly are not so wicked, as those
assemblies were, with the which they were contented to assemble themselves and
to communicate? Doubtless, had they been persuaded, that those men's
wickedness, with whom they did communicate, must of necessity infect their
integrity, they would have suffered a thousand deaths, rather then to have
resorted with such unto the Synagogues.

Does the example of these men nothing move you? Open then your eyes, and look
upon John Baptist, look upon Christ's Disciples, and upon Christ himself. John
Baptist terms the Matthew. 3. v. 7.
Scribes and Pharisees, generations of vipers: and yet Ephesians. 8, 9, 10.
he preaches the word unto them. Matthew. 10. v. 6. Luke 10. v. 3.
Christ his Disciples preached among wolves: and although the Scribes and
Pharisees were most wicked men, yet Christ exhorts not his Disciples to make
a separation from them: but he rather willed them to do that which they
commanded: adding this reason; For that they sit in Moses his chair: which is
as much by the interpretation of the learned, as if he should have said, For
they teach the law of God, which was delivered by the hands of Moses.

I beseech you, tell me (my loving brethren) was it an offense, in a man
regenerated, amongst that viperous brood, to hear John's preaching? Or was it
a thing to be reproved in Gods chosen, to harken unto Christ's disciples, in
the company of those wolves, unto whom they preached? Or think you, that we
shall be rebuked, for hearing of Gods word, from the mouths of those, whom we
know to be wicked men, seeing Christ's disciples are by Christ himself enjoined
to yield obedience unto such precepts, as the wicked Scribes and Pharisees
gave them? If you doubt, whether in Christ his time, the Scribes and Pharisees,
Doctors of the law, and people of the Jews, were as wicked as this generation
is; note John 8. ver. 13, 40, 59. and 6. verse. 26, 41. Luke 23. verse. 18.
but their behavior toward Christ, Mat. 3. v. 22. and 9. v. 34. and 12 verse
47.
their blasphemy against him, Luk 11. from verse 42. unto 53 Matt. 20. v. 46.
Mar. 12 from v. 38. unto 44. John. 8. v. 2. Luke 2. v. 46 Mar. 6. v. 2.
and his judgment of them: and doubtless you will confess, that if they were
not our superiors, yet that they were our equals in iniquity: and yet Christ
himself was contented, in these men's assemblies to preach, and to hear Gods
word.

How say you (my brethren) is not Christ his life a fit rule for us to square
our actions by? If it be, why should then the fall of those, who are present in
any assembly, deter us from preaching, or from hearing Gods word, in that
assembly, seeing the universally, (as I may term it) ouerflowing iniquity of
that age, could not hinder Christ, from hearing, and preaching the word amongst
them?

I could here add the general wickedness of the Corinthians and Galathians,
which I touched already: whom though Saint Paul does earnestly reprove, yet
notwithstanding, he exhorts none to sever himself from their societies. Yea,
but you doubt, lest that your communicating with us, should argue, that you
allow our wickedness, and assent unto our ceremonies: for I remember once, one
of you told me some such thing. But surely you deceive your selves: for were
our ceremonies abominable, as indeed they are not, and our sins manifold, as
indeed they are: yet considering what has been already proved, you should
confess, that the Jews used as wicked ceremonies as we do; and were as lewd
in their behavior as we are: and yet it has been already proved unto you,
that the ancient Prophets, John Baptist, Christ's Disciples, and Christ
himself, feared no such matter; they doubted not, that communicating with
these men, should argue, that they did allow their wickedness, or assent unto
their ceremonies. And here another objection, usually framed by men of that
sect you follow, falls to the ground: The Apostle Paul (say they) does
straightly warn us, that if 1. Cor. 5. ver. 11.
there be one called a brother, that is a fornicator, or covetous, or an
Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, that with such we
should not eat. I say, this reason falls to the ground, for that the
premises considered, it clearly appears, that only private accompanying,
and association, and not public communicating, is here prohibited: for that
otherwise, the ancient Prophets, John the Baptist, Christ his Disciples, and
Christ himself, had offended against this precept: which to affirm, can be no
less then blasphemy.

And surely, every Christian may be a Judge unto himself, to discern, and
judge, who are fit, and who are unfit for him privately, to frequent their
company: but who are fit, or unfit with him, in public assemblies, to hear
Gods word, and to be partakers of his blessed Sacraments, this private men must
not wade unto: it must be left unto the judgment of the Church: and therefore
Saint Paul in the same Epistle, directing us, how to come unto the Lords Table,
does not command us, to prye one into another actions, or to make search,
whether there be wicked men amongst us: but he wills us to 1. Cor. 11. ver.
28.
examine our own selves, and so without any further circumstances, he
permits us to eat of that bread, and to drink of that cup. The like he
has in the second unto the Corinths 2. Cor. 13. ver. 5.
Prove, says he: whom? your selves, whether you are in the faith: examine:
whom? one another, no: examine your selves; know you not your own selves, that
Jesus Christ is in you: except, what? your fellow-communicants? no: but except
your selves be reprobates.

For the love of God peruse these places, consider them, and think upon them;
follow S. Paul's directions, and assure your selves, that though al were
reprobates, besides your selves which are in place, where you hear Gods word,
or receive his Sacraments: yet that Christ shall dwell in you, unless your
selves be reprobates. Detest sin, and spare not, both in your selves, and in
others also, yea, detest it with a perfect detestation; yet let not this
detestation cut you off from the Church of God: but even as you tender Gods
glory, your own salvation, and souls health, and as you desire to be made the
member of Gods triumphant Church in Heaven, unite and join your selves unto
his militant Church in earth. So God shall take pleasure in your doings, your
souls shall be saved from destruction, and on the last dreadful day, ye
shall stand securely before Gods throne, and shall hear that more then sweet
sounding voice, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive that kingdom, which was
prepared for you, before the beginning of the world. The which voice, God of
his infinite, and euer-abounding mercies grant, that both you, and I, and all
faithful Christians may hear, unto our exceeding comfort, for his son
Christ Jesus sake, Amen.

One which thirsts for the salvation of your souls, EDWARD JAMES.

FINIS.

