A TRVE REPORT of the gainefull, prosperous and speedy voyage to Iaua in the
East Indies, performed by a fleet of eight ships of Amsterdam: WHICH SET FORTH
FROM Texell in Holland, the first of May 1598. Stilo Nouo. Whereof four
returned again the 19. of July Anno 1599. in less then 15. months, the other
four went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.

ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA


AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for W. Aspley, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Tigers head in Paul's Churchyard.

A True report of the gainful, prosperous, and speedy voyage to Iaua in the
East Indies, performed by a fleet of 8. ships of Amsterdam: which set forth
from Texell in Holland the first of May 1598. Stilo Nouo. Whereof four
returned again the 19. of July Anno 1599. in less then 15. months: the other
four went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.
WHEREAS in the year of our Lord 1595. a certain company of substantial
merchants of Amsterdam in Holland did build and set forth for the East Indies
four well appointed ships, whereof three came home An. 1597. with small
profit (as already in sundry languages is declared) Yet nevertheless the
aforesaid company, in hope of better success, made out the last year 1598.
for a second voyage, a fleet of eight gallant ships, to wit, The ship called
the Mauritius, lately returned from that former voyage, 1. Mauritius.
being of burden two hundredth and thirty last, or four hundredth and sixty
tons, or thereabouts. This ship was Admiral of the fleet. The Master
whereof was Godevart Johnson, the Commissarie or Factor Cornelius Heemskerck,
and the Pilot Kees Collen.

The second ship called the Amsterdam, was of the 2. Amsterdam.
burden of four hundredth and sixty tuns. The masters name was Claes Johnson
Melcknap; The Factor or commissarie Jacob Heemskerck.

The third was named Hollandia, about the burden 3. Hollandia.
of six hundredth tuns: which had likewise been in the former voyage. The
Master was Simon Lambertson or Mawe, the Factor Mast. Wit Nijn, who died in
the voyage before Bantam, and in his room succeeded John Johnson smith.

The name of the fourth ship was Gelderland, of 4. Gelderland.
burden about four hundredth tuns. Master whereof was John Brown, Factor or
commissarie Hans Hendrickson.

The fifth was called Zeelandia, of the burden of 5. Zeelandia.
three hundredth and sixty tuns. The master was John Cornelison, the Commissary
or Factor N. Brewer.

The sixth ship named Vtrecht of the burden of 6. Vtrecht.
two hundredth and sixty tuns. The Master was John Martsen, the Factor or
commissary Adrian Veen.

The seventh, a pinnas called Frisland, of burden 7. Frisland.
about seventy tuns. The Master Jacob Cornelison. The Factor Walter Willekens.

The eighth, a pinnas that had been in the former 8. Ouerissell.
voyage, called the Pidgeon, now ye Oueriissel, of the burden of fifty tuns.
The Master Simon Johnson. The Factor Arent Hermanson.

Of this fleet was General and Admiral Master Jacob Neck: Viceadmirall
Wybrand van Warwick: and Rereadmirall Jacob Heemskerck.

With this fleet of eight ships we made sail from Texell the first of May
1598. Stilo Nouo, being the 21. of April, after the account of England, and
sailed with good speed unto the Cabo de bona speranza: as further shall appear
by a Iournal annexed unto the end of this discourse.

Being past the Cape, the 7. and 8. of August, by a stonne of weather five
ships were separated from the Admiral, who afterward came together again
before Bantam.

The 26. of August with three ships we came within the view of Madagascar,
and the 29 we They meet with a ship of Zeland.
met with a ship of Zeeland called the Long-barke, which had put to sea before
us, and now kept aloof from us, supposing we were enemies: but at length
perceiving by our flagges what we were, they sent their Pinnas aboard us,
rejoicing greatly to have met with us, because that diverse of their men were
sick, and ten were already dead: and they had in all but seven men aboard the
ship that were meatwhole, and eleven mariners to guide the ship. We
agreed to relieve them with some supply of men: but through darkness and
great wind we lost them again.

After this, we the Admiral Mauritius, the Hollandia, and the pinnas
Oueriissell keeping together, came to the Island of Santa Maria, before the The
Isle of Santa Maria.
great bay of Antogil in Madagascar: where we got a small quantity of Rice. We
took the King prisoner, who paid for his Ransom a Cow and a fat calfe.

In this Island we found no great commodity: for being the month of September,
the season was not for any fruits: the Oranges had but flowers: Lemons were
scant: of Sugarcanes and Hens there was some store, but the Inhabitants were
not very forward in bringing them out.

Here we saw the hunting of the Whale (a strange pastime) certain Indians
in a Canoa, or Killing of the Whale.
boat following a great Whale, and with a harping Iron, which they cast forth,
piercing the whals body, which iron was fastened to a long rope made of the
barks of trees, and so tied fast to their Canoa. All this while pricking and
wounding the Whale so much as they could, they made him furiously to strive too
and fro, swiftly swimming in the sea, plucking the canoa after him: sometimes
tossing it up and down, as lightly as if it had been a straw: the Indians in
the mean time being cunning swimmers taking small care though they were cast
ouerboord, took fast hold by the boat still, and so after some continuance of
this sport the whale wearied and waxing faint, and staining the sea red with
his blood, they haled him toward the shore, and when they had gotten him so
near shore on the shallowe that the most part of him appeared above water,
they drew him aland and he wed him in pieces, every one taking thereof what
pleased them, which was to us a strange sight. It is reported that the Indians
of Terra Florida use the like fishing for the Whale. Our men might have taken
some part thereof, but refused it: the pieces thereof were so like larde or fat
bacon.

From thence we made toward the great Bay of The Bay of Antogill.
Antogill and ancored under the Island, where we took in fresh water.

Our Indians that were brought from thence by them of the former voyage (the
names of whom were Madagascar the one, and the other Laurence) we offered to
set there on land, but they refused, choosing rather to tarry with us and to be
apparelled, then to go naked in their own country: working and moyling for a
miserable living, opposing their bare skins to the vehemence of the sun and
weather: and their excuse was, that in that place they were strangers and had
none acquaintance. How long their beer continued good.


Our beer continued good until we were passed the Cape de bona speranza. From
thence we began to mingle it with water having a portion of wine allowed us
twice a day, and this allowance continued until our return into Holland.

We went with our boats up the river seeking refreshing: but the Inhabitants
gave us to understand by signs that we might return, for there was nothing
to be had. We rowed into the river about three leagues, and found their report
to be true. The cause was, that the Kings made war there one against an
other, and so all the victuals were in manner destroyed, insomuch that the
Inhabitants themselves many of them perished for hunger, and in one of these
battles one of their Kings was lately slain. Wherefore after five days abode
and no longer, we departed, and in Gods name made to sea again, directing our
course the sixteenth of September for Iaua. About the ninteenth of November we
came within sight of Sumatra, and the 26. of the same month 1598. we in the
three ships aforesaid, to wit, the Mauritius our Admiral, the Hollandia, and
the Ouerissell, arrived They arrive at Bantam.
before the city of Bantam in Iaua. Presently upon this our arrival, our
Admiral and General Master Jacob van Neck, sought with all friendship to
traffic with the people of the said town of Bantam, sending Master Cornelis
Heemskerck on land to show them what we were, for they thought us to be the
very same men that had been there the year before, and all that while guarded
the sea-cost, as being assuredly persuaded that we were pirates and sea rouers.
But we, to make them understand the contrary, sent on land one Abdoll of China
a captive of theirs, whom we brought from them in our first voyage; by whose
means we got audience They present their letters and gifts.
and credit: and so we presented our gifts and presents to the King, which was
but a child: and the chief governor called Cephat, having the kingly
authority, most thankfully received the same in the name of his King. The said
presents were a fair covered cup of silver and gilt, certain veluets and
clothes of silk, with very fine drinking glasses and excellent looking
glasses, and such other gifts more. Likewise we presented our letters sealed
very costly with the great seal of the noble and mighty lords the Estates
general of the united Provinces, and of prince Mauritz, whom they termed
their Prince. Which letters were by them received with great reverence,
creeping upon their knees: and (the same being well perused, read, and
examined) they found thereby our honest intent and determination for traffike:
insomuch that a mutual league of friendship and alliance was concluded, and we
were freely licensed to trade and traffike in such wise, that even Trade
licensed
the fourth day of our arriual we began to lade; and within four or five
weeks all our four ships having taken in their full freight, were ready to
depart.

When our three ships aforesaid had remained there welnigh a month, about
Newyears-tide arrived the other five ships of our company before mentioned in
very good manner, and well conditioned. And so our whole fleet of eight ships
joyfully The whole fleet meet before Bantam.
met together, and had none or very few sick persons among them, having lost
by death in the whole fleet but 35 men in all, of which number some perished
through their own negligence. Upon this happy meeting we displaied our flags,
streamers, and ensigns after the brauest manner, honoring and greeting one
one another with volleies of shot, making good cheer, and (which was no small
matter) growing more deeply in favor with the townsmen of Bantam. Unto us were
daily brought aboard in Prauwes or Indian boats great quantity of hens, eggs,
Cocos, bonanes, sugarcanes, cakes made of rice, and a certain kind of good
drink which is there made by the men of China. Thus the people daily bartered
with us for pewter and other wares, giving so much virtuals for a pewter
spoone, as might well suffice one man for an whole week. We trucked likewise
for diverse other things, as for porcellan dishes and such like. Howbe it that
which our Indian Abdoll declared (namely, that more ships were coming besides
the three aforesaid, and that others beside them also were sent out of Zeland)
little tended to our commodity: for thereupon the Iauans took occasion to
inhanse The price of pepperinhansed.
the price of their pepper; insomuch that we were forced to pay for 55 pounds
of pepper first three, and afterward four Reals of eight: neither did they
demand or call for any thing so much as for the said Reals of eight. Mercery
or haberdashers wares were in no such request as money. Also we much marueiled
how the Iauans should tell us of more ships to come, making signs with their
four fingers and thumb, that four Lyma (which word in their language
signifies ships) were coming.

And here you are to understand, that our General Master Van Neck, together
with the commissaries or factors, thought good, besides the three forsaid Four
ships laden.
ships that came first, to lade one other, to wit, the greater pinnasse called
Frisland, whereof was Master Jacob Cornelison, and Factor Walter Willekens.
These four ships having received their full freight, and given notice on land
of their departure (to the end that none of their creditours might be unpaid)
and also having well provided themselves of rice and water, departed the
thirteenth of January 1599. and sailed to Sumatra, where they took Their
departure from Iaua the 13. of January 1599.
in fresh water; for that the water of Bantam first waxes white, and afterward
crawleth full of magots.

Upon the land of Sumatra we bartered knives, spoones, looking-glasses, bells,
needles and such like, for sundry fruits, to wit, melons, cucumbers, onions,
garlike, and pepper though little in quantity, yet exceeding good.

We had to deal with a notable Merchant of Sasemolonke a notable merchant of
Bantam.
Bantam, named ^asemolonke, whose father was a Castilian, which sold us not
much less then an hundredth last of pepper* He was most desirous to have
traueiled with us into Holland: but misdoubting the displeasure and evil will
or the king, and fearing least his goods might have bin confiscated, he durst
not adventure upon the voyage.

Certain days before our departure from Bantam were the other four ships
dispatched to go The four other ships sent to the Moluccas.
for the Moluccas, and over them was appointed as Admiral and General Master
Wybrant van Warwick in the ship called Amsterdam, and Jacob Heemskerck
Viceadmirall in the ship Gelderland, the other two ships in consort with
them being Zeland and Vtrecht before mentioned

These four made sail toward the Moluccas, and parted from us the 8. of
January in the night, and in taking of our leaves both of us together, made
such a terrible thundering noise with our ordinance, that the townsemen were up
in Alarm, until they knew the reason thereof. The people were glad of their
departure, having some mistrust of us, remaining there so strong with 8. ships.
And they asked daily when we should depart, making great speed to help us unto
our lading, and showing themselves most serviceable unto us.

The 11 of January 1599. we in the four ships laden with pepper departed
from Bantam homeward. The 13 we arrived at Sumatra. The 19 we shaped our course
directly for Holland. The 3 of April we had sight of Capo de buona esperanza.
The 8 of April we doubled the said Cape, proceeding on for the Isle of Saint
Helena, whither we came the twenty sixth of the same month, and there refreshed
our selves for the space of eight days.

In this Island we found a church with certain boothes or tents in it, and the
image of Saint Helena, as likewise a holy water-fat, and a sprinkle to cast or
sprinkle ye holy water: but we left all things in as good order as we found
them.

More over here we left behind us some remembrances in writing, in token of
our being there. At this place died of the bloody flixe, the Pilot of our
Admiral Kees Collen of Munickendam, a worthy man, to our great grief.

This Island (as John Huighen van Linschotten describes it) is replenished
with manifold commodities, as namely with goats, wild swine, Turkies,
partriges, pigeons, etc. But by reason that those which arrive there use to
discharge their ordinance, and to hunt and pursue the said beasts and fowls,
they are now grown exceeding wild and hard to be come by. Certain goats
whereat we shot fled up to the high cliffes, so that it was impossible to get
them. Likewise fishes we could not catch so many as we needed; but we took
in fresh water enough to serve us till our arrival in Holland.

Here we left on land as a man banished out of our A man left on land at Saint
Helena.
society, one Peter Gisbrecht the masters mate of the great pinnasse, because
he had stricken the Master.

Very penitent he was and sorry for his misdemeauour, and all of us did our
best endeavor to obtain his pardon: but (the orders and ordinances whereunto
our whole company was sworn being read before us) we were constrained to
surcease our importunate suit, and he for the example of others to undergo the
severe doom that was allotted him.

There was delivered unto him a certain quantity of bread, oil, and rice,
with hooks and instruments to fish withal, as also a hand gun and gunpoulder.

Hereupon we bad him generally farewell, beseeching God to keep and preserve
him from misfortunes, and hoping that at some one time or other he should find
deliverance; for that all ships sailing to the West Indies must there of
necessity refresh themselves.

Not far from this place we descried a sail which we judged to be some
Frenchman, by whom peradventure the said banished party might be delivered.

The fourth of May we set sail from Saint Helena, The Isle of Ascension.
and the tenth of the same month we passed by the Isle of Ascension. The 17
day we passed the line. The 21 we saw the Pole-starre. The 10 and 11 of June
we had sight of the Canaries. About the Azores we stood in fear to meet with
some spanish Armada, because our men were grown faint and feeble by reason of
their long voyage. The 27 of June we entered the Spanish sea. The 29 we found
our selves to be in forty four degrees of northerly latitude. The 6 of July
our Admiral ye Mauritius had two of his mastes blown ouerboord; for which
cause we were constrained to towe him along. The 11 of July we passed the
Sorlings. The 13 we sailed by Falmouth, Dartmouth and the Quasquets. The 17 we
passed by Dover. The 19 meeting with some storms and rainy weather we arrived
at Texell in our own native country, without any great misfortune, save that
the Mauritius once stroke on ground.

Thus having attained to our wished home, we gave God thanks for this our so
happy and prosperous voyage: because there never arrived in Holland any ships
so richly laden.

Of pepper we brought eight hundredth tons, of The particulars of their rich
lading.
Cloves two hundredth, besides great quantity of Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamom, and
other principal commodities. To conclude, this voyage was performed in one
year, two months and nineteen days.

We were sailing outward from Texell to Bantam seven months, we remained there
six weeks to take in our lading, and in six months we returned from Bantam
in Iaua to Holland.

The performance of this long and dangerous voyage in so short time we
ascribed to Gods divine and wonderful providence, having sailed at the least
8000. leagues, that is to say, twenty four thousand English miles.

The joy of the safe arrival of these ships in Holland was exceeding great:
and posts were dispatched to every principal town and city to publish these
acceptable news.

The merchants that were owners of these ships went straight toward Texell for
the refreshing of their men, and for other necessary considerations, The
Commissary or factor master Cornelis Heemskerck together with Cornelis Knick,
hied them with all speed toward the Estates general and prince Mauritz his
excellency, not only to carry the said good news, but withal to present the
letters of the King of Iaua importing mutual alliance, friendship Friendly
letters and presents from the king of Iaua.
and free intercourse of traffike in consideration of their honorable,
liberal, and just dealings: they brought gifts also from the said king of great
price and value.

The 27 of July the Mauritius our Admiral together with the Hollandia came
before Amsterdam: where they were joyfully saluted with the sound of eight
trumpets, with banqueting, with ringing of bells, and with peales of ordinance,
the General and other men of command being honorably received and welcomed
by the city.

The merchants that adventured in these voyages A new supply of four
Hollandish ships sent this last spring 1599. to the East Indies.
being in number sixeteene or seauenteene (notwithstanding the four ships
gone from Iaua to the Moluccas, as is before mentioned) have sent this last
spring 1599. four ships more to continue this their traffic so happily
begun: intending moreover the next spring to send a new supply of other ships.
And diverse other Merchants are likewise An intent of the merchants of Amsterdam
to send more ships the next spring 1600.
determined to enter into the same action.

Of them that departed from Zeland these bring no news, otherwise then is
aforesaid. Neither do they report any thing of the two fleetes or companies,
that went from Roterdam the last summer 1598. shaping their course for the
streites of Magellan

We have before made mention of an Indian called Abdoll, which was brought
from Bantamin the first voyage, and had continued an whole winter or some eight
months at Amsterdam in Holland.

Where during that space (being a man of good observation and experience, and
borne about China) he was well entreated, cherished, and much made of.

This Abdoll upon his return to Iaua being demanded The relation of Abdoll an
Indian, concerning the Netherlands.
concerning the state of the Netherlands, made unto the principal men of
Bantam a full declaration thereof, with all the rarities and singularities
which he had there seen and observed.

Which albeit to the greatest part of readers, who have travailed those
countries may seem nothing strange, and scarce worthy the relation: yet
because the report was made by so mere a stranger, and with the Iauans that
heard it wrought so good effect, I thought it not altogether impertinent here
in this place to make rehearsal thereof.

First therefore he told them (to their great admiration in that hot climate)
That he had seen above a thousand sleds drawn, and great numbers of horsemen
riding upon the frozen water in winter time, and that he had beheld more then
two hundredth thousand people travailing on foot and on horseback upon the ice,
as likewise that the said sleds were by horses drawn so swiftly, that they
made more way in three hours than any man could go on foot in ten. And also
that himself for pleasure had been so drawn, the horses being bravely adorned
with bells and cymbals.

Howbeit they would hardly be induced to believe that those countries should be
so extremely cold, and the waters so mightily frozen, as to bear such an
huge weight.

He told them moreover, that Holland was a free country, and that every man
there was his own Master, and that there was not one slave or captive in the
whole land.

Moreover, that the houses, in regard of their beautiful and lofty building,
resembled stately palaces, their inward rich furniture being altogether
answerable to their outward glorious show.

Also, that the Churches (which he called Mesquitas) were of such bigness and
capacity, as they might receive the people of any pretty town.

He affirmed likewise, that the Hollanders with the assistance of their
confederates and friends, maintained wars against the King of Spain, whose
mighty puissance is feared and redoubted of all the potentates of Europa.

And albeit the said wars had continued above thirty years, yet that during
all that time the said Hollanders increased both in might and wealth.

In like sort he informed them of the strange situation of Holland, as being a
country driving upon the water, the earth or ground whereof, they use instead
of fuel, and that he had often times warmed himself, and had seen meat
dressed with fires made of the same earth.

In brief, that it was a waterish and fenny country, and full of rivers,
channels, and ditches, and that therein was an innume^able multitude of boats
and small ships, as likewise great store of tall and serviceable ships,
wherewith they sailed unto all quarters of the world, etc.

This man Abdoll we found to be a captive or slave, and saw there his wife
and children in very poor estate dwelling in a little cottage not so big as
an hogsty: but by our means he was made free and well rewarded.

Not withstanding he did but evil recompense us: for he was charged to be the
cause why pepper was sold dearer then ordinary unto us by a penny in the
pound: for he told them that certain ships of Zeland and of other places
were coming thitherwardes.

And here the reader is to understand, that some four months before the said
three ships arrived at Bantam, the Portugales came with an Armada The Portugals
go about to hinder the trade of the Hollanders.
of galleys and fustes, being set forth by the Viceroy of Goa and the
governor of Molucca, to intercept the traffic of the Hollanders unto those
parts, and to make them loose all their expenses, labor, and time which they
had bestowed: and also that their great and rich presents which they gave unto
the Iauans the year before, to bring them into utter detestation of the
Hollanders, might not be altogether in vain.

The General of them that came from Goa was Don Luis, and of those that came
from Molucca Don Emanuell: who brought their Armada before Bantam, intending to
surprise the city, under pretense that the same preparation was made to resist
certain pirates that came thither out of Holland the last year, and were
determined this year also to come again. Under these colors they sought to
take the town and to fortify the same, and they built certain sconces in the
country, committing great outrages, rauishing the Women, with many other
villainies. Hereupon the townsemen of Bantam very secretly provided certain
galleys and fustes in great have, and suddenly assailed the Portugales before
they were well aware of them: for which cause finding but small resistance,
they took 3 Portugale galleys with certain ships, and slew about The
Portugals vanquished.
300 of them, taking 150 Portugales prisoners, of which we daily saw some going
up and down the streets of Bantam like slaves and captives. Besides these
they took about 900 galli-slaues prisoners.

Upon this hard success the rest of the Portugals betook themselves to
flight: but whither they be arrived at Goa or Molucca, or what is become of
them since, we are not able to avouch. The foresaid attempt and overthrow,
bred greater enmity between the Portugales and them of Bantam, and gave an
especial occasion for the advancement of our traffic.

The five ships (whereof we have before signified The course which the five
ships took after they were separated from their three consorts about the Cape
of buona esperanza.
that four were dispatched by the whole company for the Moluccas) being
severed beyond the Cape of buona speranza from the other three of their
company, and having quite lost them, came all of them shortly after under an
Island called (as it is thought) by the Portugals Isola de Don Galopes: but
they named it the Island of Mauritius. Here they entered into an haven, calling
the same Warwick, after the name of their Viceadmirall, wherein they found very
good harborow in twenty degrees of southerly latitude.

This Island being situate to the East of Madagascar, The Isle of Mauritius
described.
and containing as much in compass as all Holland, is a very high, goodly, and
pleasant land, full of green and fruitful valleys, and replenished with
Palmito-trees, from the which droppeth wholesome wine. Likewise here are very
many trees of right Great store of Ebenwood.
Ebenwood as black asiet, and as smooth and hard as the very Iuory: and the
quantity of this wood is so exceeding, that many ships may be laden herewith.

For to sail into this haven you must bring the two highest mountains one
over the other, leaving six small Islands on your right hand, and so you may
enter in upon 30 fadomes of water. Lying win the bay, they had 10. 12. and 14.
fadoms. On their left hand was a little Island which they named Hemskerk Island,
and the bay it self they called Warwick bay, as is before mentioned. Here they
tarried 12 days to refresh themselves, finding in this place great quantity of
fowls twice as big as swans, which they called Walghstocks or Wallowbirdes
being very good meat. But finding also abundance of piogeons and popiniayes,
they disdained any more to eat of those great fowls, calling them (as before)
Wallowbirds, that is to say, loathsome or fulsome birds.

Of the said Pigeons and Popiniayes they found great plenty being very fat
and good meat, which they could easily take and kill even with little sticks:
so tame they are by reason yt the Isle is not inhabited, neither be the living
creatures therein accustomed to the sight of men.

Here they found ravens also, and such abundance of fish, that two men were
able to catch enough for all five ships.

Tortoises they found so huge, that ten men Huge Tortoises.
might sit and dine in one of their shelles, and one of them would creep away,
while two men stood upon the back thereof.

Here was found wax also whiter then any of ours, lying about the strande,
bleached (as it is like) by the sun: and in some of this wax there were
Arabian letters or characters printed: whereby it is probable, that some Arabian
ship might be cast away thereabout, out of which the said wax might be driven
on land.

They found like wise Coral on this land, and many Coral.
trees which we call Palmitos, whereout droppeth Palmitos.
wine as out of the Coco-tree: which wine being kept, has his operation as our
new pressed wine, but after some time it comes unto the tul virtue and
perfection.

The said Palmitos they esteemed to be a kind of wild date-trees.

We sought all the Island over for men, but could find none, for that it was
wholly destitute of Inhabitants.

Upon this Island we built an house with a pulpit therein, and left behind us
certain writings as a token and remembrance of our being there, and upon the
pulpit we left a Bible and a psalter lying.

Thus after 12 days abode at this Island, being well refreshed, they took in
excellent fresh water being A good watering place.
easy to get, and very sweet and sauory to drink, and then set sail, meeting
the three other ships their consorts at the time and place before mentioned.

A brief description of the voyage be fore handled, in manner of a Iournall.
MAY.
THE first of May 1598. with the eight ships before mentioned, we set sail
in the name of God from Texell in Holland.

The third of May we passed along the coast of England, descrying some of her
Majesty's ships, and they us, whom we honored with discharge of our artillery.

The fourteenth, we had sight of the Isle of Porto Santo lying in thirty two
degrees.

The sixteenth, we came within sight of the Canaries.

The twenty two, we first saw flying fishes.

The twenty three, we passed by the Isle Dell Sall.

The thirty one, we had a great storm, so that we lost sight one of another:
but by night we came together again.

JUNE.
The eighth of June we crossed the Equinoctial line.

The twenty four we sailed by the sholdes of Brasile lying under eighteen
degrees of Southerly Latitude.

IVLIE.
The twenty one of July we got to the height of the Cape of buona esperanza.

From the thirtith of July till the second of August, we continually sailed in
sight of the land of the foresaid Cape.

AUGUST.
The seventh and eighth of August we had such foul and stormy weather, that
five ships of our company were separated from us, whom we saw no more until
they came to us before Bantam.

The Twenty sixth we descryed the Island of Madagascar.

The twenty nine came by us the ship called the Long bark of Zeland, having in
her but nine sound men, ten dead, and the rest all sick: but the same night
we lost the sight of her again.

SEPTEMBER.
The seventh of September, we came before the Island of Santa Maria, and
afterward we put into the great bay of Antogill.

The sixteenth of September, we set sail from thence, directing our course
for Iaua.

OCTOBER.
The first of October, we got to the height of Bantam.

The fifteenth, died the first man in our Admiral.

NOVEMBER.
THe nineteenth of November, we came within sight of Sumatra.

The twenty ninth, we road before the city of Bantam: And the thirtith, we
paid our toll to the governor.

IANVARIE.
ANd upon Newyeares date 1599. Stilo Nouo, we began to take in ourlading.

Then came unto us before Bantam, with great idie and triumph, our five
separated ships, all the people standing upon the shore gazing, and
suspecting some harm intended against them.

The eighth of January, four of the said 5 newcome ships (God send them a
prosperous voyage) set sail toward the Moluccas.

Moreover our four ships being well and richly laden at Bantam made sail
homewarde the eleventh of January, and the thirteenth, we were shot as far
as the Isles of Sumatra.

The nineteenth, we proceeded thence on our voyage, and the same day, to the
great grief of us all, died the Pilot of our Admiral.

APRIL.
THe third of April, we descried the land of Capo de buona esperanza.

The eighth, we doubled the same Cape, thence shaping our course for the
Island of Saint Helena, where the twenty sixth we happily arrived, and departed
from thence upon the fourth of May.

MAY.
THe tenth of May, we sailed by the Isle of Ascension.

The seventeenth, we passed the Equinoctial line.

The twenty one, we saw the North star.

JUNE.
THe ninth and tenth of June, we had sight of the Canaries.

The twenty seven, we sailed upon the Spanish Sea.

The twenty nine, we were in forty four degrees.

IVLIE.
THe fourth of July, we saw behind us two sails, one before the other, which
were the first that we had seen of a long time.

The sixth of July our Admiral had both his Foremast and Maine-mast blown over
board.

The eleventh, we passed the Sorlings, the thirteenth, Falmouth, Plimmouth, and
the Quasquets.

The seventeenth, we came before Dover.

The nineteenth, we had foul and stormy weather, at what time by Gods good
blessing we arrived in our native country at Texell in Holland, having
performed in the short space of one year, two months and nineteen days,
almost as long a voyage, as if we should have compassed the globe of the earth,
and bringing home with us our full straight of rich and gainful Merchandise.

FINIS.

