AN EXPLANATION OR ENLAR^ING OF the ten Articles (...) Supplication (...)
Doctor IAM^S, lately exhibited to the Clergy of England.

OR A manifest proof that they are both reasonable and faisible within the
time mentioned.

Our Law condemns no man before he be heard.

OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM TVRNER, Printers to the famous
University. Anno Dom. 1625.

FIRST CONCERNING THE FIRST POINT OF THE Latin Fathers.
The first Point
THat the Latin Fathers works, (whereof diverse are already done) the books of
Councels, and the body of the Canon Law, may be diligently reviewed, and
compared with the best Manuscripts; and the Collections and needful
observations thence-from arising, printed; together with the pieces and
fragments of the Fathers works (if any shall be found.)
Explained.
THat all these ten points are necessary and fi^ to be enquired into, I take as
granted by the confession of all: that they are doubted by some, and plainly
affirmed by others, whether within the time mentioned they may be performed, I
know: and therefore I as much in me lies) endeavor to satisfy the one, and
take away all manner of doubting from the other, with breuity and perspicuity;
grounding my self upon good experience for some, and very probable reasons for
the rest; following the order prescribed.

Concerning the Latin Fathers therefore (the Greek Fathers being reasonably
well done already, Ignatius by Geneua. 1623
Vedelius, Chrysos^ opera G^. cu^n annot. Etonae 1612.
Chrysostom by that learned and judicious Knight, Ath^na^ij opera Graec. and
Lat. 1600.
Athanasius by some, and Clem. Alexandrini opera Graece cum annot. 1542.
Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. by others) which do in a manner implore our best
help, and as the controversies are moved in Relion, do enforce our labor.
There is not only profession made by Lanfrancus Manuscri^ta SS. Patrum
secundum Orthodoxam fidem correx^t, and immutauit, Boston. in Catalogo and Io.
Anglicus in hist aurea.

Observed by Master Rich. James, of C. C. C. a kinsman of mine.


Lanfranke of old, but by diverse of late; Gregory of the Rome Print, and
Augustine of Paris, do fully prove the same; that sundry things are purposely
changed, whether for the better or the worse? who knows not that we have just
cause given us to suspect the worst? I will instance only in one place, and
that a principal one, concerning Transubstantiation, a chief pillar of the
Popish doctrine. The place is in S. Ambros. l 4. de sacram ^. 4. See Paraeus in
1 Cor. Lyd. in annal. p. 172. Hospin. de sacrament. l. 2. p. 69. Juel. in
defens p. 249.
Ambrose de Sacramentis, the words, Vt sint quae erant, and in aliud mutentur:
this corruption is above 500 years old: but yet not received till of late into
the Ambr. opera Romae. 1580.
Roman Edition, and from thence derived into the Paris, and it may be in the
Lye-on Edition, and others: and yet these words now suppressed and dashed
clean out of the Text, are plainly to be found in all our MSS. of what
Library, from what Monastery soever. Add hereunto, what sh^ffling and cutting
there is between the Master of the sacred Palace, and the Printer; both hired
to reform say they, (no doubt) I refer the Reader to my Vindicia G^e^orianae*
^ow printing at Geneua.
to deforme and corrupt the fathers works. I know it, and can prove it by
Romae 1564.
Manutius Cyprian, and S. Gregorij operu Romae to^ 6. 1588. Veterum exem lari^m
collatione (no copy named, no^ whence taken) and pristino suo spendori
restituta, aucta and illustrata. In praef. to. 4.
Dominicus Basaes Gregory, and Ambrose of There are six or seven copies in my
Ecloga, I appeal to them all.
Rome. I can make an ocular demonstration of the manifold and manifest
corruptions of these Authors: we may easily guess at the rest, for all their
Accipietis Aug. nostratiu^ opera, hoc est Ge^manorum Theol. studio illustratu^,
ad ^ima^ and incudem reuocatum: nec solum infinitis p^ope numero erroribus
liberati^, sed etiam magna rerum accessione exornatum Ep.

Thom. Gozaeu^ Apostolicus ac regius lib. censor per Belgium ope^am nauanit in
restit. Aug. ex varijs Bibliothecis: exemplaria plusqua 200. MSS. conquisierat.
Concilia edita per Iac. Meclinum 1524. per P. Crabb 1530. and 1531. Col. and
Ib. 1531. and Ib. 1538. per Surium 1567. Ven. 1585. per Zllettum. per B^n^um
1606 et 1618. and Pauli 5. auctoritate 1608. and postremo Par. 1623.

See one or two MSS. in the New College. Vide Indicem librorum, qui varij: ex
locis sunt habiti. Vide ea^de qui^^^ ie^torem, in principio (...) est
^^^onere.. de nomine Paleae Corpus Iuris Canon* Rome 1582.


glorious pretense of two hundred copies, used in ^h^ ^ollation of Saint
Augustine, and many in Gregory and Ambrose, I know not how many; nor do I, nor
any man living worcester, how many Copies, or from whence taken, they have used in
this their double diligence. As for the Councels, I can (I suppose) produce, or
there may be produced twenty several Editions, all differing from themselves,
and from the truth: and (if there be any one true) I do guess it is that,
whereof I do hear tidings in a Book of the Acts of the Council of Trent,
printed by Arnold Brickman, 1565. this was of likelihood a good ^dition. One
Celaunus had travailed far and near, to gather all that could be gotten: but
either this was never printed, or being printed, was purposely suppressed by
them.

For the Canon Law the sink of all Popery, and fountain, or puddle rather,
of all kind of Popish corruption, to found the Primaci^, and by necessary
consequence, all points of Popery, out of blind Councels, and bastard, false,
or falsified Fathers: Yet as bad as it is, neither Text nor Gloss is so bad as
they have made it. I speak upon knowledge, Semeca has not in the old MSS.
Statuimus, id est, abrogamus; or Dic Romano, id est, Constantinopolitano: these
fooleries are of a later stamp, and stamped or printed they are, but I suppose
hardly to be found in the written Copies; for Gratian, questionless they have
used him ( Nec enim lex iustior vlla est) as he is known to have used others;
they have chopped and changed, curtailed and clipped his words, and works;
notwithstanding Gregory the thirteenths pretense, of I know not how many
copies, besides the labors of Faber and Acontius: I will instance only in
their Palea. They have first played with the word, making it a Cardinal, or a
man for chafe, and long for short; else should it be Palaea, from (...), and
not Pal^a: they have herein done us a double wrong; they have made that Palea
which is not so, because it makes against them: and on the contrary side, they
have omitted to put the true stamp of Paleaes upon that, which makes for
them, though they be invisible and innominable in the old MSS.

We have examples store, in both kinds: The right of Emperors in making Laws,
Gratian corrupted about taking away kingly right.

About Priests marriage.

About Appeals to Rome.

About the Supremacy.

About worshipping of relics.

About Transubstantiation, besides infinite other deprauations.

Locuple tatum est caput hoc, ex orig^nali and caeteris collectoribas, prater
Anselmu^ qui habet vt antea Gratianus habebat in Annot.

See my answer against A. C. and A. B. etc. when it shall come forth.


and commandments for the Church, is casheered because it likes them not: nor
that of their married Popes, Did. 96. cap. 2. Osius Papa, Item Decret. Part.
2. cap. 27. q. 2. c. 18. against Priests marriage.

Of the second sort are these: for drawing causes to Rome. Causa 3. q. 6. c.
16. Neminem exhiberi, nisi praelatus sit qui accusetur, is forged, and came in
not the right way, to prove appeals to Rome. Causa 24. q. 1. cap. 15. Rogamus
vos fratres: we read these words for to estabblish the Supremacy: Nulla est
(seeds) quae cius (i. Romanae) non sit subiecta ditioni. Again, Quanto magis
non potest (faemina) imperare, as it were to strengthen the Salicke Law, Causa
33. Quaest. 5. cap. 17. Mulierem constat, was thrust into the Text by some
French man. The solemn swearing upon the Gospel, and by the Relics of the
Saints, Causa 3 3. Quaest. 6. cap. 9. are found in some blind Charnel house, or
Reliquiarie, not in the written Gratian. In de Consecrat. Did. 2. cap. 1. In
Sacramentorum oblationibus, for assuring of their impossible doctrine of
Transubstantiation; we use it (say the Papists) Vt a Patribus accepimus, and
ipsa ratio docet, which they have thrust into the Text violently: Habemus
confitentes reos. I could be large in this point, but I must but point at, and
not treat de industria of their wilful corruptions, and make whole Iliads, or
Chiliads of them: but that which is expected of me now I have proved, that
there is good reason, and high time to employ some to perfect that work, which
was happily begun, and left off (which I shame to speak of) for want of
payment. I was, My Lord of Canterbury promised and gave 10l. My Lord of York
10l. My Lord of Winchester Bilson 10l. The Bishop of Durham, Doctor James, 10l.
and sundry others did willingly promise and pay: others did willingly promise,
but failed in payment, whose names I conceal.

All the books that were hitherto used in our collation, were either at, or
according to the Rome print.

See hereafter amongst the Critical these. these. 22.

At that time was (troubled, I cannot say,) but subject to the stone: since
that, I have been afflicted both with the stone and the Palsy, but recovered
by Doctor C^aitons means, my worthy friend, and learned brother, Master of
Pembroke College, and our public Professor of Physic, and Reader of the
Anatomy Lecture.


and am willing to be employed in the painful reuision of the rest; but how
shall I be able to imbarque others in that business? But. non si male nunc and
olu^sic erit: we had then, and I trust shall have now in some proportion, men
as willing and as able to do the work; and I am sure that the world will
bear me witness, that my labor was treble to any ones: and yet in a year
and little more, we suruaied all Gregory, and Cyprian, and all Ambrose of the
Rome print: noting both the differences in the Margent, whether material, or
immateriall; what Copy each man used, when we began, and when we ended, and how
far we proceeded every day; never ceasing our six hours a day, (Sundaies
and Holy days excepted) God giving me a body able, and a mind willing to fit
it out: and that I may be thankful to the Divine majesty, my body, as if it
had a dispensation for the time, was free from any known disease, that did, or
might impeach the work. My body (I must confess) is much impaired since, by
much sickness; but on the contrary, my willingness and experience in these
businesses, are much increased: and therefore I am persuaded, that if Ambrose,
Gregory, and Cyprian, may be, and have been done within a year and something
more: Augustine may be done in another, and Hierome in a third, and all the
rest of the Fathers in less then a year, and the Councels and Gratian in a
fifth; whereof one, as I have said, is happily passed already: I do purpose to
employ only six persons, four to the MSS, one to the last of the
Protestants, the sixth to the last of the Papists Edition; which both shall be
noted in the Margent, and I will take upon me as before, to be both Notarie,
and Actuarie to the Company, concluding (as Bellarmine does) if he be as true
as his word: Si semel inueniar mentitus in uita, omnem mihi in posterum fidem
derogent.

The second Point
That the Latin Translation of the Greek Fathers may be collationed by able
and fit persons, by reason of diverse Christophorsons and Jesuits, that have
too-too much abused the ignorant of the tongue.
Explained.
TOuching the second Point, for the comparing of the Latin Translation of the
Greek Fathers: I purpose not (unless it shall be thought fit by my
Superiors) to compare it with MSS. Copies in Greek: we are left destitute of
Copies, especially now we are wholly bereft of all hope of help from the great
Palatine Library: but (as I have said) Vedelius, For a need I can give them the
places to be considered of, that are any ways controuerted: almost all of the^
before hand.
and that worthy and thrice honored Knight and others, have partly prevented,
and partly supplied us herein: that which I intend, is only to suruay the
Translations in places controuerted only, whether they be fitting and proper.
A work that may well be done, being divided amongst our Sages of the Greek,
whether in, or out of the University, within a year: though if they list to
follow Vedelius in noting the corrupt Translations, sundring the Bastard
Treatises from the true a part by themselves, and answering the places objected
out of the Fathers, with Critical observations, they shall deserve well of the
Fathers; it may, and shall be done for the Latin Fathers: as we may follow
Vedelius in the Greek, so if no other will undertake the work in the Latin
Fathers, I will do the like in them, as Master Crompton has done before in
Saint Augustine.

The third Point
That the Jndices Expurgatory may be likewise perused, all of them, as many as
can be gotten, the places forbidden to be transcribed, of which labor is a
third part at the least already taken by me, or my procurement.
Explained.
THe third Point concerns the Indices Expurgatory, The first, Index
Exporgatrious that we have, is the known one of Junius, printed according to
that of Antwerp, Lug^. 1586.

The second, of Madrill, 2582. The third, called Greg. Cappuccini E^chiridion
Ecclesiasticum Ven. 1588.

The fourth, by Ge^. Dalme^da, Lat. and Portugal^^ce, Olyss. 1581. The fifth,
per Io. M^riam Bruschelle^s. 1601. Tom. 1. The sixth and last, by Bern. de
Sando^al. Madr. 1612.


which no doubt are many, but all are not to be gotten, and of those we cannot
get the Editions mentioned in their books, without the which it cannot be
done. Nevertheless, to facilitate this work, I have in a readiness an
Alphabeticall note of all the Editions that are forbidden (...) corrigantur:
that those that have them may send them unto us. I say only that I, by my
self, and others, have already done a third part of the whole, perhaps it will
amount to a second of all the Books and Editions that be found, and that men
may know how far I have proceeded already, these Authors following, with
their several books, are reseued out of the Papists hands, and restored by me.

The reprinting of that which they commanded to be left out, and in some books
de facto left out, will keep one Press going a year.
Abulensis or Thostatus P. Aerodius. Leo Bapt. Alb^rti. Amatus Lusitanus. Lud.
Ariosto. The Annotations upon S. Aug. Albertus Argentinensis. Iac. Philippi
Berg^mensis. Laurentius Beyerlincke. Biblia Rob. Stephani. Biblia cum duplici
Translatione. Bibliotheca SS. Patrum. Io. Bodinus. P. de Boll^. Henr. Breulaus.
Guil. Budeus. Ambros. Calepinus. Barth. Cassnaus. Greg. Cappacinu^. Io.
Campensis. Index in Ioh. Chrysostomum. Nic. Cle^ardus. Isid. Clarius. P.
Crinitus Cyprianus Mon^^hus Cistere. Notae marginales Index and textus Cyrilli
Alex. Dantes. I mondi del Doni. Fr. Duarenus. Andr. Eborensis. Notae in
Engelbertum. Enchiridion Christianae institutionis. Erasmi opera, almost.
Claud. Espencaeus. Eucherius. Iac. Faber Stapulensis. Barth. Ferrariensis. Io.
Ferus. Barth. Fumus. Gilb. Genebrardus. Germanicarum rerum scriptores. Tomis
varijs. Lilius Greg. Gyraldus. Ant de Gueuara. Claud. Guilliaudus. Adamus
Kel^erus. Albertus Krantzius. Iustus Lipsius. Josephus Luqui^^. Andr. Masius.
Christ. Maffaeus. Iac. a S. Mearia. Ianotius de Ma^^^tis. Lucius Marineus
siculu^* Marcus Marull^^. Iac. Menochius. Papyrius Massonius. Ben. Arias
Montanus. Tho. Marus, Miles. Ioh. N^viza^us. Annot. in Nicephorum. Hieron. ab
Oleastre. P. Opm^erus. Claud. Paradinus. Fr. Petrarcha. Fr. Polygranus. Io.
Iou. Pontanus. Procopius Gazaeus. Ant. de Rampengolis. Guil. Ranchinus. P.
Rebuffus. Eman. Rodericus. Alph. Salmeron. Eman. Sa. Io. de Salas. Iac.
Shoepperus. Iul. Caesar Scalig^r. Dimas Serpe. Laur. Schraderus. Raynerus
Suoygoudanus. Rob. Stephanus. Did. Stella. Fr. Suuertius. Ale^^ Tartagni. Iac.
Aug. Thuanus. Benjamin Tudelensis. Tuccius T^ccius. Fr. Vallesius. Laur. Valla.
Dan Venatorius. Diego de la Vega. Polyd. Virgilius. Alphonsus Viu^ldus. Lud.
Viues. Geo. Wicelius. Theodorus Zuingerus.
All these forenamed Authors, (unless it be Zuinger and Erasmus works) are
(if I may say) repurged and restored unto their former integrity, the rest
that remain may be well transcribed in half a year: As master Casaubon and
Master D^usius works, and Sir Adolphus M^^kerch^ book are done already: but
for the rest I think we may save our labors.
for I can set at one time a hundred several persons on work; it it is a
business of labor, Et quis ad haec non id^neus. I intend not (unless it be
by commandment of my Superiors) to meddle with the Expurgation of our
Protestant Writers, which they have vainly attempted; nor of the Thalmud of
the Jews, or Rabbinicall Writers: but Popish Writers of what sect, sort,
language, nation, or faculty whatsoever, tag and rag, are the subiectum
ad^quatum of this business: And so I come unto the fourth Point, of collation
of books.

The fourth Point
That Lyra and the Gloss, the Great Bibliotheca sanctorum Patrum, Platina,
Caietan, Alphonsusde Castro, and sundry others of all sorts of Authors, may be
compared with former Editions, and Manuscripts (if need be to meet with their
secret Jndices Expurgatorii, which are the more dangerous, because they print,
and leave our what they list, at pleasure, and yet make no words of it, neither
have any Commission known for to do it.
Explained.
Qui Lyrani opent ^um Glossa ordinaria, etc Lugd. 1589. ab infinitis me^dis
p^^gata, etc. per. Fr. Fewardentium ^rd. Minorum, Job. Dadraeum, and Iac. de
Cucilly, Theol. Doctores. The book dedicated to Sixtus S. Patrum interpre^at.
ad ipsos fontes reuocatis, ipsis per doctum Lyra^um pestilli^ D. Lyrani ad
ipsum Autographum, exconuentis Canobij Vermoliensi diligenter collat^s. Biblia
SS cum Glossa ordinaria, etc. to. 6. compre^^usa Duaci, 1617. Quid in hac edit.
prestitum fit vltra omnes alias editiones* etiam illam quam Parisienses.
Theologi exbibuerum quam multa correcta, restituta, sup^leta, quam multa
vtiliter ad ecta, opera and studio Theologorum Duace^sum, diligenter eme^data.
TOuching this fourth Point, herein give me leave to explain my self out of my
own and others observations, especially of the learned Bishop of Meth: Lyra
and the Gl^sse were reviewed and reuised by Dadr^n^, Cucilly, and Fewardentius:
and now lately by three Benedictines: if their former did their best, what
needed the second Edition? if they did not, why do they pretend such
exactness, so great pains? But the truth is, Lyra is somewhat touchy against
them, and the Gloss does thwart their Expositions: and therefore though
closely, the three D^wists do make profession, They confess they have put
forth the testimonies of the Rabb^u^s and others. Posseuine excuses the former
Edition by haste of the Printer, and civil wars. (...).

Col* Agr. 1613. to. 14* and Bibliotheca vet. Patrum sen. Edit. Paris. 1609.
to. 8. ex prescripto Indicis Expurgatorij Romae vulgati emendata.

If we compar^ Io. Baconthorpes works in sent. Cremona, 1618. with the former
Mad. 1511 Blesensis of M^gunce 1600. put forth by Busaeus, with the ^ormer,
1519 and the MS^. whereof we have store in the Library. Aquinas of Rome 1570.
o^ Antwerp 1612. with fomer Editions and MSS. Scotu^ works, Ven. 1597. with
that of Nurembergi. 481. as also Bed^s history I know to be ver^ corruptly
printed, being a leading Author to all ou^ late Historians. Alph de Castro
aduersu^ haer^ses, is far different from the latter Editions about the Popes
authority, we have all his Editions. O^^phrius the old does infinitely disagree
with the latter, especially in Julius the third his life.


that they have mended diverse things, wherein the former Edition was wanting,
according to the prescript of the MSS, and some things they say, they have
thought good to expunge in Thoringis about Lyra: where he is thought delirare
from their Trent faith, or common Tenets: a great labor, undertaken, I am
afraid, rather to suppress the truth, than to express any good meaning.
Epicharmus precept will here serve, as Doctor Rainold shows us, to distrust
their works of what kind soever; especially if the Jesuits have a finger in
the setting forth of them: as you may see their notes infarced almost in every
Tome of the Bibliotheca Probabilium Patrum, which has been reprinted four
times within these few years, and twice within these two or three years: Think
yon that it was for nothing? Was not the Roman correction sufficient to purge
it, according unto whose correction it was printed carefully at Pa^is? If the
Master of the Sacred Palace be not wise enough to mead it, we are like to have
it well amended. But who knows what harm is done in the middle aged Writers?
Bacon or Ba^onthorpius, (I am persuaded) is corrupted in the late Editions,
Aquinas, and Scotus, Blesensis and others; Doubt less, by that little that I
have seen, they carry the mark of the Beast, and the print of their fingers:
but if I may have my will, no book of note or worth shall go vncompared: the
work is very easy, the parties are very many that may well be imploid in this
work, if they have corrupted them under color of correcting them. There has
been reprinted of late, A phonsus de Castro, Onuphrius, Sixtus Se^ensis, and
last of all, M^^cus de Guadalaiara in Spanish, of the lives of the latter
Popes, with the occurrences of those times: Touching the former, the learned
have spoken enough to stir us up to the diligent reuising and comparing of
them. See ^ilson de obed. p. 294. In lib. de haeres. inscript. Paris. ^n fol^o
a Iod. Bad. excus^ anno 1534. L^el. lat. part. 2. p. 128. Quarta pa^te de la
historia P^ntifical Gen^ al^y Catholica compuesta (...) ordenada por Fr. Marco
de Guadalaiara (...) Xauier de la Re^igion obseruante de nuestra Sennora del
Carmen de Aragon, d^rigida al may alto y poderoso monarca de Espanna Filip^^
Tertero Rey y Se^^or nuestro, Anno 1612. Con ^cencia y priuilegio J^^gr^ssa en
Carago^. por Iuan de Lanai^ y Quartane^. Conform a^^ que be^eydo en Gotardo
Dantiscano y otros auctores, vna troycion intentada contra el Rey Iacobo, sus
huo^ y muger, y contra todos les nobles y estado, del ^^yno: y descubierta
mibagrosamente per lo que dios sabe, Part. a. lib. 14 cap. 8. This book is
called Vando y l^yes del Rey Iacobo contra la Fe Catholica, consu respuesta, y
aduertentia al Letor para la auerigu^cion e intellige^ i^ de^te caso prouecho^a
para el mismo Rey y para ^odos por el D. B. de Cleremond: a book in the hands
of Master Boswell Parson of Saint Laurence in London, they have craftily
concealed the time and year wherein it is printed.
For Alphonsus de Castro, I leave you to consider of that which has been
struck out of him in latter Editions, in verbo Papa, concerning the Popes
infallible authority, which true Castro does deny to be so great as it is
made; or that his person is inerrable, he thinks no Parasite of the Popes, or
flatterer of the world, will dare to avouch. For Onuphrius and others, I know
what the learned judgment is of that Author and others, and I know and all the
world shall know how this Guadalaiara is used, or rather abused by the Papists,
and forced to say, and unsay, for servile fear of the Spanish Sandouall, both
against his will, and the truth: it is the latest, clearest instance of their
cunning dealing, to their no small advantage, to settle a wrong opinion in men's
minds about the powder Treason. In the former Edition, which is but an
addition unto Illes^^^ of the Popes lives, he has truly reported the story
of the Gunpowder treason, out of Gothardus Arthus, and others: laying (as we
say) the saddle upon the right horse, the fault upon certain Popish
malcontents; but it seems in a latter Edition, now extant in the public
Library, they have mis-reported the treason, and put it as D. B. Clermond had
done before upon the Puritanes; casting foul aspersions upon our State, as if
they had plotted that which the Papists had acted out of a Ragionamento del
Stato, or Trigo del Estado, or as Cleremond says, to get their goods and lands
confisked unto the Exchequer, to enrich the Kings cofers.

That which I infer out of these premises, are the injury done unto the
estate of books, and sometimes unto books of Estate, The very same book is
reprinted thus as if it had been comp^sed by Dr. Lewys de Bauia capell^^ del
Rey ^. S. en ^^ Real capilla de Gra^^ da Con priuilegio de Madrid, po^ Luy^
Sanchez Impressor del Rey nuestro senior. anno de 1613. Both Editions dedicated
to the King, made and published within one year, the first approved by Maestro
Pedro Geronymo Cassiu^n. e, Iuan Perez de Artieda offi^y reg^^te del Vicari^do,
Padre Fray Esteua^ de Th^us prouincial de los Carnelitas etc. F. Miguel Ripol
(...), ^uan Munnoz. The latter is published, (...) del Rey nuestro senior:
su^scribed Iorge de Toua^, supe^uise^ p^^ Pedro de Valentia Miguel Vazquez de
(...) Granaca, and Fra^ Pedro de Granada. What a change is there here? (...) as
it were by a M^te^ psychos^s changed into Leuys de Bauia, and five censors
turned into four, as it were four Kings warring against five. Por el mandad^
del Rey, as is said.
inuoluing our King and Counselors within their secret censures. This book is
reprinted as I say, within few years, composed by a man of great note,
dedicated to Philip the third, printed at the first with license and
privilege, approved by diverse kinds of Religious persons, no mention is made
of any alterations in the second edition: and it is turned clean cham. The
fact is notorious, the fault inexcusable, say what can be objected in his
defense. He is perhaps living, and living men* as they may alter their wills,
so they may change their words. I admit it, so do our Masters of Trent: but
conditionally, so it be in matters of faith, and not of fact* or if it be in
matter of faith, so the Author be convinced, and his error showed: but in
questions of fact, volat irreuocabile verbum, the rule must hold, quod scripsi
scrips^, all the world cannot help it, it cannot be, as Aeneas Syluius
sometimes said. But to come to Guad^laia^a was that true that he had written in
his former edition, why is it altered in this latter? if it be not, why is not
the contrary showed? howsoever it be, they should have told us so much in the
frontisp^ce or first page, that upon better advise, and ^ruer rela^ions, Leuys
de Bauia, has altered some things: but I do verily believe, it was not done
by him, but mandato Superiorum, by those that do ^yranni^e over m^^s books, and
lod^ it over men's consciences: this latter book is now in the hands of a
friend of mine ad facti fidem asserendam, and cannot possibly be denied, do
they what they can, or el^e I am much deceived. You see by that which has bin
spoke* how needful it is that all sorts of books as well of Estate, as
Religion, should be diligently compared with former Editions: it is to be
presumed that all sorts of books are depraved by them, especially that come
forth with glorious Titles, fair Paper, and chiefly with Jesuitical
Annotations: They know every p^ny Divine would shun such Editions that have
this skarcrow title in the forefront of the book.
although they come not forth Iuxta mandatum Indicis expurgatory, or S.
Inquisitionis, whether of Spain or of Rome, Multa Latent, quae non patent; the
truth of this will easily appear by our labor, the labor will be far more
easy then the former, and if I have causelessly suspected them, I will cry them
mercy, and subscribe unto the truth; we may set not a hundred, but a thousand
on work (if need require) but I have unto the fifth Article.

The fifth Point
That the Authors of the middle age, that wrote in the defense of that
Religion, which is now (thanks be to God) publicly established in the Church
of England, for the substance thereof, may be faithfully transcribed,
diligently collated, and distributed into volumes, whereof many may be made of
orthodoxe writers; if not so many as of their Bibliotheca Patrum Probabilium:
adding hereunto such Writers, as being bred and brought up in the bosom of the
Roman Church saw the disorders, discovered their abuses both in doctrine and
manners, and wished almost for the same reformation, that was afterward most
happily wrought and brought to pass by Martin Luther and his companions: of
the first sort are Wickliffe, Peacocke, Gu^de S. Amore, Jo. P. Minorita,
Normannus Anon, Nic. Orem and sundry others: of the Later kind, Wesselus,
Wicelius, P. de Alliaco, Faber, Gerson, Cusanus, and such like.
Explained.
THe fifth Article concerns the transcribing Authors of the middle age, a
point wherein (if in any) we may seem to be defective. But quaedam videntur
and non sunt, store is no sore; we have (thanked be God) store of these
Writers, that have witnessed the truth of our Religion, both in their worthy
and solid writings, and by their glorious deaths. If they failed in any point
(as seldom they do) it was the fault and darkene se of those times, the fault
and number of those bastardly and beggarly Treatises, which ever since
Vincentius Lirine^isis time corrupted the lump and body of the true writers:
here was no Erasmus then living to hold the candle unto them, no Cooks or
Riuets living, to unmask or vnuaile them. Hence it is that our Magdeburg
Writers have found so many naeuos and errors in the Fathers: but all of them
of whom they spoke and so sharply inueigh against are not Fathers, nor true
sons, but bastard impes, it were well they were well rooted out all, both
branch and bowgh, as Spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas. Would it not
trow we be a glorious sight, Of Wi^liffes works and Peacocks, we have th^se
MSS in Oxford and Cambridge.

1 Io. W^clishes Triangle transcribed.

2 His Exposition upon the Epistles and Gospels.

3 Of the seven Commendaments.

4 Of the ruins of the Church.

5 Of the Church, and the members thereof.

6 Of the lives of the Priests, and his confession of the Sacrament.

7 Against the Friars Minors. 8 His Com. on the Psalms* and diverse other
works. In Latin these* 1 De v^ritate Scri^turae almost transcribed. 2 De ^o
Mandatis. 3 Ded^mini^ civilly contra vnum M^n. in defense of Kingly power,
proving the unlawfulness of K. John's Donation (if any such were) see the rest
in my Ecloga. of Peacocke his Donate of Christian life, and Repressor of over
much blaming the Clergy, MSS. Gro. Wicelius works are printed in diverse
years, from 153^. to 1559 He wrote almost as much as S. Aug and would, if he
had lived, have reduced the^ into Tomes. Wesselus works are printed at Fas.
1524 and reprinted lately at Marpurg. 1617. Mr. Harding would feign persuade Mr
I^ell to recant and apostate from the faith, because one Staphylus, Baldwinus,
and Wicelius, had done the like. Iu^ll in his answer to M. Hardings
conclusion. Ia^ Gretserus in excerptis de vita and moribus Lutheranorum ex Geo.
Wicelij libello qui inscribitur. Retectio Lutherismi, etc Lips. 1538. Haec
Wicelius olim Lutherus praedicans. Papa lux venit in mundum: fed dilexerunt
homines tenebras magis quam lucem: Omnis qui male agit, odit lucem; Et non
venit adlucem vt non arguantur o^ era eius i. quia mala sunt, Oration Cornelij
Episcopi Bipontini in Conc. Trid. sub Paulo 3. p. 16. Conc. Trid. Lovan. 1567.
The University of Oxford in an Epistle to Io. P. 22. about provisions, have the
very same words in effect, as if Cor. Musse had there read them cut of a MSS.
of Mr. Allens before Turgots book of the Bishops of Duresine.


to see Wicleph and Peacocke revived again out of the dust of their graves,
and our Libraries, and to write in defense an Apology of our Religion, as
valiantly and pertinently as Iuel or Morton have done, both Bishops and
glorious Lamps and Ornaments of this Church of England; and for want of others,
we will be bold to crave aid of the Papists, they have given us a good hent in
their several books of Prohibition, and Expurgation, and so directed us, that
we need not far to seek for witnesses: they though Papists will bear
witness unto the Protestant faith and orthodoxe doctrine, or else I do much
mistake their writings, or our own Tenets; and let Wicelius or Wesselus
answer for us. Wicelius works are printed, but I suppose his works are in
the hands of few: Wesselus are extant and to be read of all. Wicelius (as shall
be showed ere long) was almost wholly ours; it will not serve their turns to
say as Harding does, that he was first of our Religion, or as Gretser (that
never told lie in his life) sometimes a Lutheran preacher. I do not absolutely
deny it, it may be so, there is little written of, much by him: but in all his
writings that I have seen till of late, there ca^ be nothing gathered whereon
they may ground this improbable conceit. But what the? as for Wesselus, he was
not unworthily called lux mundi, not blasphemously, as certain of their
Parasites have said of some Popes; Papa lux venit in mundum, etc. But I will
call him as the Scripture calls the righteous, as bright a Star as any
shined in their Horizon. Whose works are set sorth and published as well by
their own men, as ours, and his death greatly lamented of all.

But why dwell I so long upon this point? the work is as easy and faisible as
the two last. We may employ as many hands as we please, and Authority shall
think fit. Two Dutchmen of the Palatinate have tra^elled for me in this
business, and are able and willing to write out a quire of Paper in a week,
which would come to an hundred quire in the year, able to set two presses or
work. Their hand is legible, though not fair. I have paid them xx s. for a
quire (their ingenuitie being Scholars, craves no less at my hands.) Some
things I have of Wicleph both in English and Latin ready for the Press:
especially I have imploide them in writing out his De verit ^te Scripturae, or
his Aletheia (as Zuinger calls it) and I have begun the rather with this
book, because it was his Masterpiece, and (as was said) a good means of
con^erting the Bobemian Nation, next under God. It is not that which is
printed. De periculi^ nouissim^um temporum, which it seems Mr. Fox had seen,
where are 25. signs, but a book with this Title, Collecti^ Catholicae and
Canonicae Scripturae, dinstructione^ and praeparatione^ simplicium fidelium
Christi, contra pericula inuminetia Ecclesiae Generali per hypocritas, Pseudo
praedicatores, and penetrantes domes, and otiosos and curios^s and gy^^vagos,
which is ready for the Press upon a weeks warning.
I have likewise ready done the great and famous work of Guil. de S. Amore:
not that which is printed, but that which exceedet that far, both in
greatness and goodness: it is or shall be ready for the Press, and I will
account no book ready till it have a good Concordance in the Margent, a Table
of the Auctors cited, and matter contained therein, after he most exactest
manner of an Alphabet.

The sixth Point
That the Catalogus testium veritatis, compiled by Illyricus, may be rectified
out of the originals, quoting Book, Chapter, and Edition; and supplied out of
the unprinted Manuscripts.
Explained:
TOuching Illyricus, the Books printed, whose authorities are vouched, may be
reuiewed by many; but for the Manuscrips (as I would wish that all that are in
Oxford and Cambridge, or elsewhere, may be viewed, qu^ad hoc) I have much in
this kind gathered to the hand, much more has an industrious kinsman of mine:
Of C.C.C.
If I had no other employment but this, we two would undertake that business,
and to do it as it should be done, to no small profit of the Church, and
increase of Illyricus Catalogue of witnesses of the truth.

The seventh Point
That out of all these an Anticoccius may be framed out of Fathers, and
middle-aged Writers, that were in their times esteemed of the Church of Rome,
and out of them only: nothing doubting but we shall be able to match, if not
exceed, his two large Volumes, both in greatness and goodness; quoting as
before, precisely, our Editions, and doing all fide optima and antiqua,
religiously and impartially, as becomes Divines.
Explained.
FOr the Anticoccius, it is already performed in a manner: I have all the
testimonies before Luther, and before or since of Papists, that proved each
Point material of our Religion, disposed after a double method: the first of
time, descending downewardes from Christ and his Apostles: the second
Alphabeticall, that I may know and supply what is wanting, there wants: but
comparing of the testimonies with the Original: though I mis-doubt them not,
See Jewels defense and reply against Harding, and Mornayes resp. a l' Euesque
d' Eureux Sal^^^. 1602.
being all taken out of the worthies amongst our Writers: Namely, Bilson, and
Morton, and Abbot, Bishops; Field, and Francis White, Deanes; John White, and
Beard, Doctors of Divinity: as also Jewel and Mornay, and who dares suspect? I
know some have challenged them, but the best is, they have made their own
Apologies.

The eighth Point
That the supposititious and Bastard Works of the Fathers, noted by Doctor
Rivet, or Master Cook, or any other, may be re-examined; their exceptions
scanned or weighed with indifferency, and other reasons added to their
challenge, if any shall be found.
Explained.
COncerning the eighth Point of the bastard Fathers: Some are challenged by
Protestants, In my ^nchi i^^ion Theologicu^ MSS. apud me, taken out of the most
eminent amongst the Popish or Protestant writers, with quotations of book, and
Chapters.
some by Papists, some by both; by whom, and the places where, I have a
reasonable good direction: the places may be seen, their reasons weighed, and
accordingly on Gods name let judgment be given. I know some that are tainted
of corruption, which will appear upon better judgment, to be truly their
proper works; I spare to speak my mind, or to instance and exemplify in
this point, for that it concerns some greater and wiser men then my self:
but thought is free, vincat melior sententia, and let that which is spoken by
me, be spoken with due submission, and under correction, Donec predeant
censurae aliorum. The work doubtless is of good moment, the doing of it will
be no great labor, nor unpleasant work: so much I say before hand, for their
and mine own encouragement.

The ninth Point
That the suspected places may be viewed in the true Fathers, which are justly
challenged of corruption, either by our own men, or the adversary; with the
like indifferency of minds, and vnpartialitie of judgments* being compared
with the touchstone of the old Manuscripts, and printed books, which are quasi
Manuscripts.
Explained.
AS concerning the ninth Point, I have most of the places gathered together in
numerate.
a matter as worthy as any of our best considerations; there are a thousand
places challenged of corruption, (I speak within compass) most by
Protestants, mostly in the question of the Supremacy, and judge of
controversies, the carrying question: all which may be once well decided,
either iudiciously out of the MSS, or coniecturally out of the strength of wit
or reason, and there is no third way allowed us by the Critics, all that I
have seen, and some of the best, it has been Gods providence that I have
seen in my time, which may appear by that, which here follows; gathered
together and disposed into Theses, for the better guiding of me and others,
that shall busy themselves in examining or re examining these 1000. places, or
more; suspected or corrupted in the true Fathers.

Theses or Rules concerning the Art Critic.
1 A Critic is a man naturally inclined to those kind of studies, of a
sincere judgment, approved honesty, versed in all kind of good literature, as
a man would Non. Steph. l. 1. dissert. de Criticis p. 24.
say, a most exquisite and absolute Grammarian.

2. The Art Critic, is an Art of inquiring into the truth, Ib. p. 43.
and faith of such as have written and put forth books, according to certain
rules, examining and reading all manner of books, in what faculty soever:
(...), Critically, H. Steph. dissert. de Criticis p. 247.
upon Conjecture, or upon Judgment.

3. Our Conjectures are uncertain, for the most part grounded only upon
circumstances: Judgment proceeds from the MSS, and is for the most part solid
and certain.

4. There are certain rules and precepts to be observed in both.

5. Our Conjectures must be made sparingly, discreetly, and warily, Parc^
Prudenter, Pudenter.
and fortified with as many reasons as may be well brought together.

6. And this is a most certain rule, that we Mar. Victor. Annot. in Hieron.
Ep. p. 593.
must never change a reading upon a bare conjecture only, against the constant
and received reading of all the MSS.

Lucas Fruterus lib. verisi^^ l. p. ^0.
7. In defect and want of MSS* (which happens too often, God knows, and the
Critics know it to their grief) The next and best help we have, is from
conjecture, it has the second room; but the H. Steph l 1. dissert de Criti^^
p. 22.
first place does by droict du Canon in the judgment of our most approved
Critics, begin, proceed, and end with the MSS, more or less.

Lucas Brugen. Nouantiq. lect. p. 171.
8. It is a rule in Criticisme, that caeteris paribus, the older the copy is,
the better it is.

Fr. Luc. Brug. Nouantiq. lect p. 304.
9. There is another rule, that if the copy be old, it has seldom its
explicit, or time noted wherein it was written.

10. Nevertheless, there are means and ways left unto us, to difference and
discern old copies from new, former from latter, by the Character.

11. Books written in the Longobard Character, Mar. Victor. Annot. in Com. p.
1.
are esteemed to be of great antiquity, and so are books written with a bigger
letter, or (as our Antiquaries call it) Lirera formata, with a set hand, and
both these as it has been iudiciously observed, Angel. Posit. p. 69.
have few or no abbreuiations.

12. Books that have been transcribed within these 500 or 900 years, have
come into our hands very corrupt and false, as rightly observed Lud. Viues, and
others: the corruptions came in, partly by the unskillfulness and multiplied
abbreuiations of those that usually copied out books; partly by the boldness
and presumption of certain scioli; or lastly by the carelessness of Writers.

13. All which must be understood with this one exception, unless the said
books were diligently copied out and collated with the old and best MSS; for
so being carefully done, they may be well nigh of as good credit, and stand us
in as good stead as the old MSS. themselves, whereout they were transcribed.

14. This is to be known by these few marks: First, you have it in some
books in express terms, explicit such or such a book, copied out such a
year, and collationed the same year, or another.

Secondly, you shall find it blotted and blu^red in certain places, where the
wrong words are put forth, and the right set down, most commonly in the
Margent, or written over head.

Thirdly and lastly, by certain pricks or points under so many letters or
words as are to be expunged: a quaint devise to preserve the beauty of their
books, but very subject to error and mis-interpretation.

15. Books that were printed long since, or at the first, when printing came
in (such as Cyprian 1471. or 1478.) are sometime in stead, and aequalled with
some MSS.

16. In collationing and comparing of old books with new, printed with the
MSS, (a work only of industry, and properly belonging to our Critics) as the
antiquity of the books must be regarded, so the number of the copies is to be
well considered, and weighed in the libration of books.

17. As it is a sure and received rule, that there Goulart. Annot. in Cypr. p.
582. Fr. Brug. Nouant. lect. p. 124
lies a kind of impossibility to mend a book without any MSS: so to attempt
to do the same, without the aid of two copies at the least, may perchance
prove but a fruitless, or bootlesse labor.

18. As the elder copies are to be preferred before the latter, so are the more
to be regarded before the fewer.

19. If we find a current and constant reading in all the MSS, without any
varying, no man may be so bold as to change the same, be it never so contrary
to sense, or repugnant to reason: All that we can do in such a case, i^ to
gloss or expound it in the side of the book, or in the end of the same, by
way of Annotation.

20. In variety of MSS, Mer Victor. Annot in Com. p. 1.
the Reader is left free to choose what copy or reading likes him best; no one
man's judgment must prejudice another man's opinion, because neither one man
alone, nor all jointly together, do know all things.

21. There is Hen. Steph. lib. schediasm. p. 147.
no assurance or infallibility in the Art Critic: who dares absolutely to take
upon him to mend a book, so as there shall be no fault or wrinckle in him? we
cannot, we dare not say it: it is sufficient for a Critic, to do all that he
may, or can, according unto the rules of his Art, and to use his best industry,
that is to say, if he have good MSS, to use them; if he have them not (because
they also do fail us sometimes) to use the best that can be gotten, and when
they cannot be gotten, to follow the thread of Conjectures and likelihoods,
which sometimes, and in some cases, (though seldom) are Lu^as
Fruteru^verisimilium, l. 7. p. 44.
as good as some MSS.

22. The readings in the MSS, Luc. Fruter. verisimil. p. 127.
whether right or wrong, sound or unsound, must be needfully, and heedfully
preserved, and observed.

24. Sometimes the H. Steph. dissert. de Ca^i^. p. 53: and 65.
inuersion or peruersion of a letter, the mis-pointing, false colon, or comma
in a sentence, may overthrow the true meaning thereof, and draw it to a clean
contrary sense.

25. There is no fault so small, but must be mended, if it may, but noted it
must be howsoever: these are but seeming trifles I must confess, H. Steph.
dissert. de Criticis p, 71. Luc. Fruter veris. l. 7. p. 20.23.
yet such as with draw men from the true reading, and draw great consequences
with them.

26. Therefore our Critic must approve his honest and faithful dealing unto
the world, dealing with the MSS, as the MSS dealt with him; making choice of
some good readings rather then other, Angel. Poli^. p. 69.
but noting both unto the Reader; for a false reading many times, has some
footsteps of a truer lection, and what one cannot, another may observe: These
are the Rules which we intend to follow, till we know any cause to the
contrary.

And for the practice of them, Bilson of obedience p. 583. whereupon Dor.
Norrice gives us this wise note. Master Bilson and Master Field in append. 2.
^7. have no other shift to trauerse the evidence of this place, then by
accusing it of some secret corruption. D.N. p. 47. How truly, the Reader may
judge by that which follows.
I will exemplify them in two places, taken from one of the profoundest
Scholars, and of deepest judgment that ever England yielded. The first
consists upon judgment, the other upon conjecture, the two legs whereupon
the Art Critic stands: My Author is the famous Bilson Bishop of Winton,
whose learning was too great, and himself too good, (as foolishly Norrice said
of him) to be a Protestant, and therefore he prayed for his conversion after
the time of his dissolution, I know not how he will answer this, he is not
wont to be so charitable to others. My place (as I said) the one out of Aug. de
Genesis ad lit. lib. 10. cap. 23. the other taken out of Chrysostomes Ep. ad
Innocent. The Papists prove Tradition out of the one, and Norrice following
Bellarmine, the Supremacy out of the other, but the Papists fail in both: the
Bishops conjectures in neither, and my confirmations (if any be needful, or
possible after him) are partly out of the MSS, and partly out of conjecture.
Touching the first place, thus we read, Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae in
baptizandis parvulis non credenda, nisi Ecclesiae traditio esset: Whereupon the
judicious Bishop has these words following, they being objected to him in the
person of the Papists by his Philander. The meaning of the Speaker in this
place, and the likeness of the same speech in other places, makes me think
that a letter too much is crept into these words, as through the injury of
times, and variety of Scribes, many thousand deprauations, and diverse Le^tions
were, and yet are in the works of Saint-Augustine and other Fathers, not only
by the judgment of the learned, but by the very sight of the Mangines: Cited by
him about the place Deu. 17. where the Papists in their vulgar Bible read ex
for et. My Ecolga Oxonio-Cantabrig. printed at London 1600 to the benefit of
most Protestant writers, and some Papists, as Poss^uin and Pitsius, that have
partly mangled and curtalled my book. I wonder how they durst keep it being
utterly forbidden by Io. Maria Master of the sacred Palace. So Costerius and
others.

See Bilson. de o^^d. p. 53. Iun. to. 2. p. 730.


Nifi Apostolica traditio esset for esse, is a escape in writing soon
committed, but a matter of some moment in altering of the sense. I take not
upon me to correct it, but leave it to the indifferent Reader. See here an
evident Argument of the learned Bishops judgment, and modesty: judgment, or
rather conjecture in ghessing it to be corrupted, modesty in not presuming to
alter the reading upon his own conjecture, without furthet warrant from the
MSS: for then he is bold to say, as he does else where; Know ye that there are
six MSS. in the New College that read thus. This place was (that I may
ingeniously profess a truth) it that drew my studies to the contemplations of
the MSS, and made me take a wearisome journey to Cambridge, and elsewhere, to
compile my Ecloga: this five and twenty years at the least, I have been
conversant more or less in these kind of studies, and some small proficient I
have been, nothing repenting me of my pains bestowed, if they may profit my
self and others, to the purpose. Answerable to the Bishops conjectures are
most, if not all of our English MSS: Quos Catholici maiores nostri reliquerunt,
(says Posseuine) and thought to be as good as any are in the world besides.

The second place suspected by the Bishop of corruption, is taken out of
Chrysostomes Ep. ad Innocentium, in these words: The word is printed (...),
obscre vt scribas, which the words precedent and consequent import should be
(...) obscro vt scribatis, and so the other part of the sentence does plainly
convince where he says: (...): i fore is easily ouer-seene, and yet in the
matter the difference is much, though not so much, that it should either help
them, or hurt us. And elsewhere obsecro vt scribas, the print or copy
distrusted, the whole lettter goes on with verbes of the plural number -- the
whole petition made to them all. Now whether obsecro ut scribas, can stand with
these words, libris vestris* firms concedite, or rather obsecro vt scribatis.
A verb of the singular number thrust in amongst verbes of the plural to claw
the Bishop of Rome.

This selfsame place I sent unto a friend of mine, a Bachelor learned in
Divinity, to be farther considered of me, who returned me this note thereupon.
Bell. de Romans Pontif l. 2. c. 15. Septimo Bellarmines observation out of these
words is this. Chrysostom was vniuslly deposed by Theophilus Antiochenus, and
hereupon writes to the Bishop of Rome, that he would be pleased by his
authority to nullify Theophilus sentence, and to proceed both against him and
his fellows. Therefore (says he) Chrysostom did acknowledge the Bishop of
Rome to be chief Judge of Controversies amongst the Graecians. Thus far he
Baronious is ready to dance for joy, that he has found so pregnant a place
for the Popes supremacy, and is of opinion, that God in his Divine providence
suffered this breach to happen between these two famous Bishops, because there
should a Constat as it were remain upon record whether we ought to go upon the
like occasions: but by their leaves, both our Cardinals, have committed many
fraudulent deportements in the carrying of this busisinesse.

1 First S. Chysostome wrote not to Innnocentius alone, but jointly to him and
to his Colleagues: This is proved by the tenor of the whole Epistle, which
never speaks but in the plural number. Domini maxim, venerandi and pij quam
haec ita se habere didiceritis, studium vestru^ ad hibete, quo retundatur haec
impietas] Again, in the very same place above mentioned, obsecro vt scribatis,
non vt scribas] This reading is also well warranted by Binius, in both his
Editions of the Councels, as well of Anno 1^06. as the other of the year 1618.
and in the Greek Text set forth by Sir Henry Sauill, By Pitsius.
not without deserved thanks and commendations of Papists. to. 7. p. 157. We
read (...) ( non (...):) Although some Printed Copies, read corruptly scribas,
and some Greek (if the Jesuit deal with us fide optima and Romana) which the
learned Knight does not dissemble, and once more still in the plural number
literis vestris frui concedite]

2 I was haled and pulled and carried away by maine force, the reason was
because forsooth I had appealed unto the Synode] unto the Synod, not unto the
Bishop of Rome.

3 He desires the charity and favor of the Eastern Bishops almost in every
place, and wishes that he might have the happiness to come to their
goodnesses, and enjoy the benefit thereof:] we have therefore no
acknowledgement of the Popes power of omnipotency.

4 If it shall be lawful for every one to break or rush into another man's
Diocese, though from parts never so far distant, and to determine what they
list of their own authorities, in short time all things will come to nothing]
He does plainly allude unto the Canon of the Council of Nice, wherein each
Patriarch (the Roman and all) have certain bounds and limits, which all men
were bound expressly to keep. Therefore without all peradventure Innocents
authority alone (which he well knew) reached no further then his own Diocese:
Further he could not go extra regiones suburbicarias: that was not the thing
sought after, but the aid of an oecumenicall universal Synod, to determine
this Controversy.

5 Besides, Innocentius himself elsewhere does plainly show, and as it were
demonstrate unto us a way for the composing of such like Controversies, in his
Epistle to the Clergy of Constantinople, as we may read it in Sozomen, l. 8.
cap. 26. Necessaria est inquit, etc.] It is not only expedient but necessary,
that the Bishops should meet in a Synod, about the determining of these
Controversies --, for these storms cannot be quieted, nor these tempests
allaide, but only by a sober and temperate meeting of Bishops in a Synode] by
a Synod only, and not only by the Sea of Rome.

6 In his 2. Ep. to Innocent, thus writes S. Chrysostom else where, -- I must
needs acknowledge, that your Fatherhood has piously, (as much as in you lay)
composed all differences, and removed all scandals. -- But they notwithstanding
cease not to go on in their obstinate and wicked courses.] Therefore
Theophilus and his Accomplices or Copesmates, nothing cared for Innocentius
attempts in this very Controversy: but obstinately went on, and fomented this
Schism; Nathlesse he did intercede and mediate to the contrary.

7 The most and the utmost indeed that Innocent could do, was (which was
common to him with other Bishops according to the ancient custom of that age)
to deny all manner of Communion and fellowship with Theophilus or his
Theophilines: this was not to pronounce him banished from the Catholic Church,
or to inualidate, or make his Acts of none effect by his bare authority and
only command. So here you have a small taste of that fruit in both kinds of
Criticisme, which the world is to expect at our hands, if God give grace and
the Bishops leave: Reasons why we should undertake the 8th. or 9th. Articles
first.
and I should not think it much amiss or far out of the way, if we did
presently go in hand with this eighth and ninth Articles: of all others they
are the most important, else in comparing the Fathers works, we may happily
mistake one for the other, or sons for Fathers: And again, who knows not
but the work of comparing the Latin Fathers works, the Greeks Translation,
are in some sort inuolued and included in one of these two points, and these
(to my seeming) may be well acted and peracted by, or not long after
Michaelmas, only with the help of these twelve and some few voluntaries:
provided that we begin before the next, Easter as motus est in instanti, but I
submit and pray.

The tenth Point
Tenthly and lastly, the perpetual Visibility of the Church, more or less,
and the History of the same Religion that we profess for the substance thereof
throughout all ages, may be showed to the Eye, noting when those Nouelismes and
superadditaments of the Church of Rome, came in as near as may be guessed, the
time when, and parties by whom they were opposed.

All which 10 Propositions, (needful and important as they are) I do
willingly commend unto my dear Mother the Church of England, and from her to
the Clergy and Gentry of this Land, to be proceeded in, as they shall see it
most expedient for the common good; promising nothing but my pains to be
commanded in these public services. And I make no doubt (if God will) but
that all this may be effected, within some few years, if the Almighty give
grace, the rich whom God has blessed with this worldly substance,
encouragement; and the rest their prayers. Of the likelihood hereof I am the
rather persuaded, because already by my own means, and small endeauours,
there is almost a fourth part of the Work done in all these 10 Articles. If
one alone may do so much within such a time, what may a dozen able Scholars
(such as I know and could name) do within 5, 6, 7, or 8 years, which is
the utmost in my conjecture?

The approbation of the Work.
I Approve of the things here proiected, and wish with all my heart they may
take good effect.

IO. PRIDEAVX Vicecanc. S.T.D. Prof. Reg. Theol. ROD. KETTELL Praeses Coll. S.
Trinit. LEON. HVTTEN Aedis Christi Praebend. GVIL. LANGTON Coll. Magd. Praeses.
SEBASTIANVS BENEFIELD Lecturae Margareticae Professor. IO. RAVVLINSON
Principalis Aulae S. Edmundi. IO. PARKEHVRST Magister Coll. Ball. IO. WILKINSON
Aul. Magd. Praep. GVIL. PEIRS Decanus Petriburgensis. RICHARDVS CORBET Aedis
Christi Decanus. SAM. FELL Aedis Christi Praebend. THO. ISLES Aulae Cervinae
Principalis. RIC. ASTELEY Custos Coll. Omnium Animarum. ROB. PINCK Novi Coll.
Custos. GV. SMYTH Coll. Wadham. Guard. IO. TOLSON Coll. Oriel. Praepositus.
PAVLVS HOOD Coll. Lincoln. Rector. GVIL. IVXON Coll. D. Io. Preses.
I Am now at length, happily (as I trust) arrived at the tenth point, which I
will call the Cape of good Hope, because I conceive very good hope that if the
former were done, this with some labor formerly taken by me will suddenly
follow of it self: it is almost done already (thanks be to God) and good Mr.
Fisher he shall have his Butterybooke ere long, Ex malis moribus bonae leges,
his jests may perhaps turn to earnests: we will out-Catalogue his fellow Dr.
Norrice, who is so mighty a Goliath amongst our Philistius, that he has defied
all the host of Israel: as for Field, Shall I here pose Mr. Bilson, shall I
pose M. Raynolds S.N. p. 200. and p. 81.91. and 97.
or Bilson, or Abbots, or Raynolds, they are but dwarfes in his hands, he
makes but a push at their writtings, and seems to be able to set them to
school again, if General Norrice had been no better at his sword, then he
is at his Pen, the Low Countries had been low enough by this time. I say no
more but brag is a good dog: and though I would not willingly fall into the
same crime which I find fault with in another, yet in this place in the vpshot
and conclusion of all, I trust I shall find pardon with the ingenious and
discreet Reader, if I speak somewhat of my self, and for to excuse my
forwardness in pressing this work. As when men shall understand that I was
borne of Honest and Religious Parents, that are (I hope) now blessed Saints in
Heaven, sometimes glorious Confessors here upon earth, and exiles for Religion,
My Father, M, Richard James was in the house when Marsh was taken, and himself
forced with his wife and children to live all Q. Mar^es time beyond the seas.

My petition is printed, and to be seen, that I preferred at that time unto
the Bishops in Convoc^tion. As shall be fully showed ere long in a book now in
the Press, to be printed, if God will.


that I have studied this point more then 25 years, and petitioned, as I do
now, the Bishops in the last Parliament of the late Queen, that I have lived
ever since in a place of some eminency for books; where though I could not
well study them my self, but carried and sometimes broke the bread like
Silenus Ass, for others more then for my self, yet as one that stands upon
an high tower, to discry the enemy, may do good service, though he be not in
the Camp; so I standing upon this Pharos of learning, have seen somewhat that
it greeueth me to see, that books in time will decay if the estate of the Church
or Commonwealth, do not prevent our Papists mischievous plots and complots,
to pull Kings out of their thrones, and the King of Kings out of Heaven, if
they may have their wills, they are cunning Merchants, close workers, all is in
the dark, and in the vaut; I fear more their secret, then their open Indices:
the truth is, I fear all, and believe none of them, I am so taught by D.
Raynold, D. Raynold by Epicharmus: they sow that now, which they mean to reap
perhaps 40 or 50 years hence. I would gladly redeem truth out of their hands,
which is there not to be used, but suppressed, and to preserve Religion entire,
as it has bin left unto us, and to preserve it from the injuries of times and
men, and who knows whether the great City of Rome be not to be assaulted and
battered with these Rams? and the Man of sin, that Antichrist that exalts
himself above God, or all that is called God, be not to be overthrown and
cast down to the ground, by this weak paper-shot of ours: I have in Gods Name
begun the battle in a good time, my bellum papale has made a great and wide
breach in their walls, my book of corruptions has touched them to the quick,
and drawn blood: but I shall re-enforce the battle ere it be long; experience
has taught me to use stronger weapons. I would have them in Print, that the
Adversary should take no exception against them; or rather that he may justly
object what he can, and when it is done, what great mastery is it to conquer a
poor feeble man, whom age has made old, and not sickness, and God with the
means of a learned Physician has made strong, contrary to all humane
expectation. I must die when the appointed time shall come, it is good not to
be found idle, or abroad out of my vocation. Non omnes possunt esse maximi.
Sure I am I have been oftentimes buried in the mouths of some ambitious men.
I have written, spoken, and done somewhat, when I might have taken my pleasure
of the world, (as too many of my coat do) I have (thanked be God) no cure of
souls, and yet am not secure or willing to say to my soul, take thy rest: yet
if my eyes may be so happy as to see the Epilogue and Catastrophe of this great
business, I shall sing my Nunc dimittis with great contentedness of mind,
though I have never a penny for my labor: they deserve not (to my seeming) a
reward for their labors, which labor for a reward. I shall find some respect
amongst my fellow Protestants, and if it be but for my constant and unfeigned
zeal: of the Papists, I look for nothing but contempt and disgrace: I have
tasted of this cup which my blessed Savior began unto me, it is very bitter,
save that the wood of his Cross has sweetened it; I never offended any of them
willingly: all my reading is in their own Authors, are they offended for this?
The proofs of my Religion, Truth and Antiquity are taken from them, is this
that offends them? Nay I am contented, and fully resolved to stand to the
determination of the material controversies by their own rules, and Judges of
their own making, or some of their own appointment.

My books are yet unanswered, those that seemed to be answered; here a
sentence and there a sentence, I have replied and reioyned unto them: I am
neither idle drone, nor wine bibber, or tipler, nor cutter and mangler, forger
or counterfeiter of MSS, I will leave that to the Papists, Hardings, and
Posseuines of those times, I will not offer to take their trade out of their
hands. They think not so meanly of my self, as my self do, yet as Jewel
once said to Harding, by the grace of God I am that I am, From Io. Zamoscius
the Chancellor of Poland, and General of his army sent unto me 23. years ago
from my Lo. Mornay from Amandus Polanus, Iunius, Gruterus, Sch l. tetus,
Keckermanus, Vossius, Riuet, Goulartius, and others, from beyond the Seas. My
small pains have been approved and in some sort commended by my now Lord of
Canterbury, Dr: Sutliffe, Dr. Bull^eley, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Hakewill, Dr. Beard,
Master Perkins and others.

The siege of Troy is said to have lasted 10 years at the utmost. I would not
ask longer time to impugn and expugne this New Troy, or Troynouant, I have it
under their hands, I have made the best choice of the best and most able
scholars that never sued to me: I will bear them witness, but I will attempt
nothing but permissu Superiorum.


and that grace is sufficient for me: if I should depend upon the praise of
(...) I were not the true servant of God, it p^ffeth (...) up, that I have
received private let^ers, and open testimonies from beyond the seas, to
encourage me to go on cheerfully in the course of my studies, and these from
Papists as well as Protestants, some men of eminent learning, as well as
Nobility, from the greatest Bishops within this land, as well as men of fame
and name beyond the Seas: all this (as I say) puffs not me up, and makes not
me neither idle, nor high minded, I thank them for their good wills, and am
thankful to the Almighty, if any thing be praise worthy in me, or bneficiall
to others: but I account all this as nothing, and my self less then nothing,
if I do not religiously pay my vows, which I have solemnly made to God and
the Church in this kind: and for a conclusion of all, to wind up all, as it
were into one clew. If the first Point may be well accomplished in three or
four years, the second in one year, the third and fourth in half a year,
the fifth in a year or two, the 6. by two in two years, the 7. in a manner in
a quarter of a year, the eighth and ninth in half a year, the last within
less then a twelve month: when all is done, Quid stamus hic tota die otiosi.
Once again I am ready my self, and so are twelve more as willing in some
sort, more able then my self, to enter the lists, and upon the work: if we
shall be thereunto required by our Superiors, if our sister University will
join hand in hand with us, we shall march the more confidently, they reuising
our labors, and we interchangeably theirs, the work will the sooner and
better be done, within half the time, by the rule of proportion. Thus I have
labored in this Apology to satisfy others (for if I should not do so much as
in me lies, I should not satisfy my self) satisfy all I cannot, my
Superiors I hope I shall; if by no other, yet by this, that in the end I may
justly sing my Io Poean, all honor, praise, and glory unto God, not dividing
my praise as most Papists do, and Bellarmine is said to divide his soul
betwixt God and the virgin Mary, fowly and shamefully: contradicting his
former position, supping up as it were his own words. Tutissimum est, etc. The
safest way of all is to rely on Gods mercy.

FJNJS.

